Small Animal
Internal Medicine
for Veterinary
Technicians and Nurses
EditedbyLindaMerrill,LVT,VTS(SAIM）
WILEY-BLACKWELL
AIMVT
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Small Animal
Internal Medicine
for Veterinary Technicians
and Nurses
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/merrill
The website includes:
• More than 400 Multiple-Choice Questions
• Powerpoints of all fgures and tables from the book for downloading
· Echocardiography video clips
Small Animal
Internal Medicine
for Veterinary Technicians
and Nurses
Editor
Linda Merrill, LVT, VTS (Small Animal Internal Medicine and Canine/Feline Clinical Practice)
Seattle Veterinary Associates, Seattle, Washington
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
This edition frst published 2012 @ 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientifc,
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Editoriat offces: 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
 For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse thecopyright materialin thisbook please see our website at wwwwiley.com/
wiley-black well.
syiads jo asn jeuosiad io jeuaju au io 'ssn jeuosiad io jeurau iog san adooojoud oj uoeziouimy
clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright
 a i    i       
o sapo g a pauee uaaq s saed po as aeedas e  q asa doud e pa
users of the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-2164-1/2012.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in
regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that thepublisher is not engaged in
rendering professional services.If professional adviceor therexpert assistanceis required,the servicesof a
competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Pubtication Data
 Small animal internal medicine for veterinary technicians and nurses / editor, Linda Merrill.
p.; cm.
Small animal internal medicine for veterinary technicians and nurses
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-2164-1 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Cats-Diseases-Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Dogs-Diseases-Handbooks, manuals, etc. 3. Animal
health technicians-Handbooks, manuals, etc. 4. Veterinary nursing-Handbooks, manuals, etc.
5. Veterinary internal medicine. 6. Veterinary medicine. I. Merrill, Linda (Linda Lee),
1958- Il. Title: Small animal internal medicine for veterinary technicians and nurses.
[DNLM: 1. Animal Diseases. 2. Animal Technicians. 3. Internal Medicine-
methods. 4. Pets. 5. Veterinary Medicine-methods. SF981]
SF981.S627 2012
636.089-dc23
2011052834
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes is books in a variety of lectronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic books.
Set in 10/12 pt Minion Pro by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
Cover images:
lobe collapse showing retraction of the peripheral lung margins from the thoracic wall and presence of
avascular gas opacity (free air) filling the pleural space and compressing the lung lobes. Image courtesy of
Marcella Ridgway
Second image from top: Histoplasma capsulatum in a white blood cell in a dog. Image courtesy of
Stan Krogman.
Middle image: Image of author Ann Wortinger's cat, Cheyenne, enjoying a garden view during a supervised
break from her protective bandage.
Second image from bottom: Focally a myocyte contain onion-cyst (arrow) also note a pyogranuloma (star).
 Image courtesy of Kuldeep Singh.
 Bottom image: Demonstration of the technique to add fenestrations to catheter prior to abdominocentesis.
 Image courtesy of Diane Greene.
Right hand image: Cody, editor's corgi
Disclaimer
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
 completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without
limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
or promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every
situation. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal,
accounting, or other professional services. If professional assistance is required, the services of a competent
 professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages
arising herefrom.hefact thatanorganization orWebsiteisreferredtointhiswork asaitation and/or
potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the
information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers
should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when
this work was written and when it is read.
12012
Dedication
This textbook is dedicated to all those veterinary technicians with a thirst for learning and has been inspired by all the wonderful
 animals that have touched my life. The idea for this textbook was made into a reality by the combined works of a fantastic group
of authors and editors. I hope it inspires you to continue your personal journey in veterinary medicine and provides you with the
means to expand your horizons.
I would like to give a special thank you to the veterinary technicians who have helped me along the way and to the veterinary
 technician specialists of AIMVT and the other academies who continue to motivate me. You are too many to name, but I hope 
you realize how great you all are. I would also like to express
 my sincere appreciation to all the knowledgeable veterinarians and colleagues who have taken their time to answer my thousands
of questions.
 Finally, I wish to acknowledge the love, patience, and support of my husband Jeff.
Linda
ontents
Contributors
xili
Section 5 Pancreas
31
Preface
XV
Feline diabetes mellitus
31
Canine diabetes mellitus
37
Canine diabetic ketoacidosis
40
Insulinomas
41
Glucagonoma
45
Physical Examination
Section 6 Miscellaneous Hormones, Glands,
and Disease
47
Charting
1
Calcitriol
47
Goals of the consultation appointment
2
Erythropoietin
48
Conclusion
9
Gastrin
50
Gastrinoma
51
The kinins
52
Melatonin
53
Natriuretic peptides
55
Endocrinology
11
Renin
57
Somatostatin
59
Section 1 Pituitary Gland
11
Other rare neuroendocrine tumors
60
Growth hormone disorders
11
Bibliography
62
Diabetes insipidus
13
Section 2 Thyroid Glands
14
Canine hypothyroidism
14
Chapter
Feline hyperthyroidism
16
Canine thyroid tumors
20
Musculoskeletal
69
Section 3 Parathyroid Glands
22
Hypoparathyroidism
22
 Section 1 Anatomy and Physiology
69
Hyperparathyroidism
23
The skeletal system
69
Section 4 Adrenal Glands
25
The muscular system
71
Hypoadrenocorticism: Addison's
Section 2 Selected Diagnostics in Musculoskeletal
disease
25
Disease
72
Hyperadrenocorticism: Cushing's disease
26
Arthrocentesis
72
Pheochromocytoma
29
Muscle biopsy
73
vii
Contents
Section 3 Diseases of the Musculoskeletal
System
73
Inflammatory joint disease
73
Respiratory
137
Noninflammatory joint disease
76
Neuromuscular diseases
77
Section 1 Upper Airway Disease
137
 Inflammatory myopathies
78
 Anatomy and physiology
137
Hepatozoonosis
79
Diseases of the upper airway
137
Neoplasia
80
Nutritional considerations
140
Section 4 General Musculoskeletal
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
140
Examination
81
Section 2 Mediastinal Disease
141
Section 5 Musculoskeletal Therapy
82
Anatomy and physiology
141
Veterinary rehabilitation therapy
82
Mediastinitis
141
Palliative radiation therapy
88
Pneumomediastinum
141
Section 6 Musculoskeletal Nutrition
89
Mediastinal masses
141
Nutrients
90
 Section 3 Lower Airway Disease
142
Antioxidants
91
 Anatomy and physiology
142
Energy and growth
91
Clinical signs
142
Osteoarthritis
92
 Diagnostic testing
142
Body condition scoring
92
Specific airway diseases and treatment
143
Body condition score uses
92
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
146
Muscle condition scoring
93
Section 4 Pulmonary Parenchymal Disease
146
Bibliography
96
 Anatomy and physiology
146
Clinical signs
146
Diagnostic testing
147
Treatment
148
Diseases
148
Nutritional considerations
151
The Neurological Examination
99
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
151
Section 5 Pleural Disease
152
Clinical signs and the relevant anatomy
99
Anatomy and physiology
152
Seizures
102
Clinical signs
152
Encephalopathies
103
Diagnostic testing
152
Cerebral neoplasia
105
Treatment
154
Inflammatory/infectious etiologies: encephalitis
105
Nutritional considerations
156
Meningitis
107
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
156
 Cranial nerve syndromes
107
Section 6 Anesthesic and Analgesic Considerations
Spinal diseases
109
 in Respiratory Disease
156
Neuromuscular diseases
113
Premedication
156
Diagnostic testing
114
Induction
157
Pharmacology
119
Maintenance anesthesia
157
Nursing considerations
121
Monitoring
157
 Neurological glossary
122
Recovery
157
 Suggested readings
124
 Section 7 Feeding Considerations for Respiratory
Disease
157
Bibliography
158
Chapter 
Thrombotic Disorders in Small Animal Medicine
127
Hematology
161
Physiology
127
Thrombotic disorders
129
 Section 1 Anatomy and Physiology
161
Diagnosis
130
The circulatory system
161
Therapy
132
The lymphatic system
162
Client education
134
The spleen
162
Suggested readings
134
The coagulation system
163
Contents
Section 2 Red Blood Cell Disorders
163
 Section 5 Feeding Tubes
242
Anemia
163
Feeding tubes
242
Polycythemia
167
Esophagostomy tube placement
243
Transfusion medicine
167
Gastrostomy tube placement
244
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
171
Jejunostomy tube placement
247
Section 3 Leukocyte Disorders
174
Conclusion
247
Methods for determining the leukogram
174
Feeding tube management and complications
247
Disorders of neutrophils
175
 Section 6 Food Intolerance and Food Allergy
251
Disorders of eosinophils
180
Clinical signs
251
Disorders of basophils
180
Causes
251
Disorders of monocytes
180
Diagnostics
251
Disorders of lymphocytes
181
Treatment
251
Section 4 Platelet, Coagulation, and Inherited 
Elimination diets
252
Disorders
182
Proteins
252
Diseases of coagulation
182
Carbohydrates
252
Disorders of platelets
184
Prebiotics and probiotics
253
Breed-related disorders
188
Section 7 Anesthesia and Analgesia Considerations
Bibliography
189
in Gastrointestinal Disease
255
 Premedication
255
Induction
255
 Maintenance anesthesia
256
Monitoring
256
Gastrointestinal
193
Recovery
256
Bibliography
256
Section 1 Clinical Signs and Examination of
the Gl Patient
193
Patient history
193
Physical examination
194
Clinical signs of gastrointestinal disorders
194
Liver
263
Conclusion
197
 Section 2 Selected Diagnostics in Gastrointestinal
Section 1 Hepatic Disease
263
Disease
197
Acute hepatitis
263
Laboratory evaluation
198
Chronic hepatitis
265
Microscopic fecal evaluation
198
 Copper-associated chronic hepatitis
266
Bacteriologic examination
199
Hepatic lipidosis
268
Virologic examination
199
Toxic hepatopathy
270
Occult blood
199
Hepatocutaneous syndrome
272
Alphar-protease inhibitor
200
 Congenital vascular anomaly
274
Imaging
200
Liver neoplasia
275
Special tests
201
Section 2 Posthepatic Disease
276
Conclusion
201
Feline cholangitis complex
276
Section 3 Gastrointestinal Disease
201
Biliary cysts
278
Oral disease
201
Extrahepatic biliary obstruction
279
Esophageal disorders
204
Gallbladder mucocoeles
280
Gastric disease
207
Section 3 Nutrition in Liver Disease
282
 Alimentary tract parasites
213
Protein
283
Diseases of the small intestine
216
Fats
283
Diseases of the large intestine
235
Carbohydrates
283
 Section 4 Pharmacology
238
Fiber
283
Antacids
238
Vitamins and minerals
284
Antiemetics
239
Feeding plan
284
 Anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive drugs
240
Section 4 Anesthesia and Analgesia Considerations
Antibiotics
241
 in Hepatic Disease
284
Gastromucosal protectants
241
Premedication
284
Digestive enzymes
241
Induction
284
Laxatives
241
Maintenance anesthesia
285
Contents
Monitoring
285
ter
Recovery
286
Bibliography
286
Infectious Diseases
349
Section 1 Infectious Bacterial Diseases
349
Bartonella
349
10
hapter
Lyme borreliosis
350
Canine brucellosis
352
Urinary and Renal Diseases
289
Ehrlichiosis
353
Helicobacter-associated disease
355
Section 1 Urinary Anatomy and Physiology
289
Leptospirosis
357
Section 2 Clinical Signs
291
 Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
360
 Section 3 Urinary Diseases
292
Mycobacterial disease
361
Chronic kidney disease
292
Mycoplasmal diseases
363
Acute renal failure
293
Plague
365
Urinary tract infections
294
Section 2 Fungal Diseases
366
Pyelonephritis
295
Histoplasmosis
366
Urolithiasis
295
Aspergillosis
368
Prostatic diseases
298
Coccidioidomycosis
368
Lower urinary tract disease in cats
299
Cryptococcosis
369
Ectopic ureters
299
Blastomycosis
370
 Urethral sphincter mechanism
Section 3 Protozoal Diseases
374
incompetence
300
Amebiasis
374
 Protein-losing nephropathy
301
Babesiosis
374
Urinary neoplasia
301
Giardia
375
 Section 4 Urinary Diagnostics and Therapeutic
Trichomoniasis
375
Implications
302
Leishmaniasis
376
Urinalysis
302
Toxoplasmosis
376
Complete blood count and serum biochemistry
Neosporosis
377
profile
306
Cytauxzoonosis
378
Proteinuria
309
Hepatozoonosis
379
Blood pressure
311
Section 4 Infectious Viral Diseases
381
Urine culture
313
Canine and feline herpesvirus
381
 Section 5 Urinary Tract Biopsy Techniques
315
Influenza
383
Aspiration biopsy
315
Papillomas
384
Biopsy
316
Section 5 Infectious Disease Testing
385
Sample handling
319
 Disease prevention and control in the small
 Postbiopsy nursing care
319
animal hospital
395
Section 6 Urinary Imaging
319
Bibliography
400
Radiology
319
Ultrasound
321
 Cystoscopy and vaginoscopy
323
.hapter
12
Computed tomography
323
Section 7 Renal and Urinary Disease
Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
403
Pharmacology
324
 Fluid therapy and correction of electrolyte
Section 1 The lmmune Response and Cancer
imbalances
327
Immunotherapy
403
Section 8 Anesthetic and Analgesic
Innate and adaptive immune response
403
Considerations
335
Humoral and cell-mediated immunity
404
Anesthesia
335
Immunomodulation
404
 Pain management
336
Cancer vaccines
404
Section 9 Nutritional Considerations
336
Cytokine immunotherapy
405
 Chronic kidney disease
336
Summary
405
Urolithiasis
338
Section 2 Laboratory Diagnostics in Immunology
405
Feline idiopathic cystitis
341
Serology
405
Bibliography
341
Biopsy techniques
407
Contents
Section 3 Immunosuppressive Medications
409
Hazards in the workplace
450
Corticosteroids
409
Chemotherapy safety
452
Immunosuppresives
411
Conclusion
453
Less commonly used immunosuppressives
412
Section 2 Pharmacological Implications in
Novel immunosuppressive medications
412
Internal Medicine
453
Immunomodulating medications
413
Drug calculations, compatibilities, dosing.
Conclusion
413
and administration
453
Section 4 Vaccines and Vaccination
413
Constant rate infusion
453
Vaccination strategies
413
Drug compatibilities
454
Canine vaccines
416
 Drug dosage adjustments in patients
Feline vaccines
422
with heart, renal, and hepatic insufficiency
Vaccinations and adverse reactions
427
or failure
454
Bibliography
429
Oxygen therapy
460
Drug calculations
461
Client education
462
13
Section 3 Nutritional Support
463
Nutritional support
463
Pain and Its Management
433
Energy balance: weight loss versus weight gain
468
Refeeding syndrome
471
Veterinary technician as pain management
 Section 4 Diagnostic Procedures
474
team leader
433
Cystocentesis
474
What is pain?
434
Abdominocentesis
475
 Pathophysiology of pain
434
Thoracocentesis
478
Types of pain
435
Urinary catheters
480
Causes of pain
436
 Bone marrow collection
484
General approach to pain control
436
Section 5 Endoscopy
487
General rules of thumb in managing pain
436
Flexible endoscope
487
Questions to consider
437
Videoendoscope
489
How to be an analgesic advocate for your patient
437
Instrumentation
489
 Clinical signs and means of detection
438
Rigid endoscopes
490
 Pain scoring systems
439
Reprocessing
492
Analgesics
439
 Patient and equipment preparation
495
 Nursing care as analgesic
446
Section 6 Selected Nursing Considerations of
Clinical examples
447
 Internal Medicine Patients
495
Conclusion
448
Thermoregulation
495
Bibliography
448
Fever or hyperthermia?
495
Hypothermia
498
The sepsis syndrome
499
ofer
14
Bibliography
504
Nursing
449
Appendix Accredited State Veterinary Diagnostic
Section 1 Occupational Health and Safety
449
Laboratories
509
449
Abbreviations
515
Making the work place safe
Health and safety committees
449
Index
521
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/merrill
The website includes:
- More than 400 Multiple-Choice Questions
· Powerpoints of all figures and tables from the book for downloading
- Echocardiography video clips
Contributors
Ale Aguirre, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), VETMED, Phoenix,
Lawren Duroche1, DVM, MS, DACVIM (SAIM), Carolina Vet-
Arizona
erinary Specialists, Winston-Salem, NC
Constance Barkey, LVT, LMP, LAMP, Seattle Veterinary Associ-
Heather A. Flaherty, DVM, DACVP, Iowa State University, College
ates, Seattle, Washington
of Veterinary Medicine, Veterinary Medical Center, Ames, Iowa
Shauna Blois, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM (SAIM), Ontario Veteri-
 Marnin Forman, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), Cornell University
nary Collge, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada
Veterinary Specialists, Stamford, CT
Peter J. Bondy, Jr. DVM, MS, DACVIM (SAIM), Central Texas
Jennifer Garcia, DVM, DACVIM, JGMedInk, Houston, Texas
Veterinary Specialty Hospital, Austin and Round Rock, Texas
Michael Goldstein, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), Ontario Veteri
Kara M. Burns, MS, MEd, LVT, Academy of Veterinary Nutri-
nary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada
tion Technicians, Inc., Wamego, KS
Diane Green, RVT, VTS (Oncology), Texas A&M University,
Rosemary Calderon, LVT, VTS (Oncology), Animal Medical
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Vet-
Center, New York, New York
erinary Medical Teaching Hospital, College Station, Texas
Clay A. Calvert, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), University of Georgia
Meri Hall, RVT, RLATG, VTS (SAIM), Colonial Veterinary
College of Veterinary Medicine, Athens, Georgia
Hospital, Ithaca, New York
Marcia Ca1others, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), Akron Veterinary
 Balry Kipperman, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), VetCare, Dublin,
Internal Medical Practice (AVIMP), Norton, Ohio
California
Anthony P. Ca11, Dr. med. vet., DACVIM (SAIM), Western
Amy Kubie1, DVM, University of Illinois, Collge of Veterinary
College of Veterinary Medicine, Saskatoon, Canada
Medicine, Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Urbana, Illinois
Virginia Coyle, DVM, Practice limited to Oncology, Florida
Katrina Lafferty, BFA, CVT, VTS (Anesthesia), University of
Veterinary Specialists, Tampa, Florida
Wisconsin, Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, Madison,
Tanya Crocke1, RVT, VTS (SAIM) Canada West Veterinary Spe-
Wisconsin
cialists, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Ellen I. Lowery, DVM, PhD, Kansas State University (Adjunct),
Tracy Darling, RVT, VTS (SAIM), Anacapa Animal Hospital,
 Manhattan, KS
Ventura, California
Daniel J. MacArthu1, DVM, University of Illinois, College of
Alice Defarges, DVM, MSc, DACVIM (SAIM), Ontario Veteri-
Veterinary Medicine, Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Urbana,
 nary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada
Illinois
Krysta Deitz, DVM, MS, DACVIM (SAIM) Iowa State Univer-
Maureen McMichael, DVM, DACVECC, University of Illinois,
sity, College of Veterinary Medicine, Veterinary Medical
     r 
Center, Ames, Iowa
tal, Urbana, Illinois
xili
xiv
Contributors
Linda Merrill, LVT, VTS (SAIM, CP-CF), Seattle Veterinary
Elisabeth Snead, DVM, BSc, MSc, DACVIM (SAIM), Western
 Associates, Seattle, Washington
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Canada
Jo Ann Morrison, DVM, MS, DACVIM (SAIM), Iowa State
University, College of Veterinary Medicine, Veterinary
Amy Somrak, MBA, DVM, University of Ilinois, College of
Medical Center, Ames, Iowa
Veterinary Medicine, Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Urbana,
Illinois
 Jocelyn Mott, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), Pasadena Veterinary
Specialists, South Pasadena, California
Rhonda South-Bodiford, RVT, VTS (SAIM), Animal Emer-
 gency Clinic of Conroe, Texas
Marcella D. Ridgway, VMD, MS, DACVIM (SAIM), University
of Illinois, College of Veterinary Medicine, Urbana, Illinois
Rachel Sternberg, DVM, University of Illinois, College of Vet-
erinary Medicine, Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Urbana,
Beth Rogers, RVT, VTS (ECC, SAIM) Veterinary Specialty and
Illinois
 Emergency Center, Overland Park, Kansas
Allyson Stewart, CVT, VTS (Oncology), The Veterinary Cancer
Colleen Ruderman, RVT, VTS (SAIM), Georgia Veterinary
Center, Norwalk, Connecticut
Specialists, Atlanta, Georgia
Melissa J. Superno1, AS, BS, CVT, VTS (SAIM), Worcester
Debra Sauberli, DVM, DACT, University of Illinois, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Urbana,
Technical High School, Worcester, Massachusetts
Illinois
Justin D. Thomason, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), University of
Georgia College of Veterinary Medicine, Athens, Georgia
Sallianne Schlacks, DVM, University of Illinois College of Vet-
erinary Medicine, Urbana, Illinois
William Whitehouse, DVM, University of Illinois, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Urbana, Illinois
Thomas Schubert, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology), ABVP
(Canine/Feline), University of Florida, College of Veterinary
Ann Wortinge1, BIS, LVT, VTS (ECC, SAIM), Sanford-Brown
Medicine, Gainesville, Florida
College, Dearborn, Michigan
Robin Sereno, BS, CVT, VTS (SAIM) University of Wisconsin,
Kimm Wuestenberg, CVT, VTS (ECC, SAIM), Phoenix,
Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Madison, Wisconsin
Arizona
Preface
The scope of practice for the veterinary technician is continually
text provide the veterinary technician with the information
progressed to becoming veterinary technician specialists.
welcomed.
Lacking formal pathways to specialization, many veterinary
 The many individuals that contributed to this book by their
technicians are striving to increase knowledge in their area of
 selfless devotion of time, experience, and knowledge have been
interest. Some may question why this degree of information is
 invaluable. The diplomates who contributed to this book, both
being presented to the technician. It is because I am a frm
editors and authors, have demonstrated not only their passion
believer that learning is a lifelong process. Enhancing the techni-
 and knowledge but also their support of the profession of veteri-
cian's knowledge base in internal medicine can lead to improved
 nary technology and of the specialization of veterinary techni
patient care, increased anticipation of the needs of our patients
cians. The veterinary technician specialists who contributed to
and of our doctors, and advance our ability to provide clients
this book, both as editors and authors, continually amaze me
with timely, accurate information on their pets.
with their strength, compassion, and thirst for knowledge. A
The idea behind this textbook is to provide a resource for
special thank you is owed to all contributors for supporting me
the veterinary technician in the area of small animal internal
in my efforts as a first-time editor.
medicine. It is obviously inspired by Drs. Feldman and Ettinger's
 I would also like to acknowledge the animals in all our lives;
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, and I hope that it 
they are what keeps us passionate about our work and are why
is received as the complement it was intended to be. The defini-
 I love working in internal medicine. Thank you to the animals
tion of internal medicine is extremely broad, and as such,
 of my childhood who helped guide me to this profession (Pepi,
this text cannot possibly encompass all aspects we wished to
 Marmaduke, and Christopher Robin), to the animals that have
cover. This textbook is divided into body systems and therefore
Aiem-o jano a pue es) mona pue uea o au padian
some overlap of material naturally occurs in this format. I
 Tobin, and Cody), and finally, to the current tribe who continue
have also included chapters on selected aspects of neurology
to amaze me (Sally, the way too smart rescue dog, Audrey, the
and cardiology as some of these areas, at times, are intimately
 ex practice cat who is a total purr monster, and Raymond, the
related. Some subjects in internal medicine have not been
adorable but clueless Persian).
included in this textbook, either due to page constraints
or choice. I hope the subjects selected and contained in this
Linda Merrill
Chapter 1 physical Examination
Editor: Peter J. Bondy, Jr.
Author: Marcella D. Ridgway
The initial consultation appointment for the internal medicine
helpful to have short referral forms for the RDVM to fill out
patient is vital not only from the standpoint of evaluating the
 online or on paper summarizing the RDVM's impressions about
the case, including suspected diagnoses, and results of diagnostic
tion but also to establish a positive and effective relationship with
tests that have already been completed. This short, simple form
the pet owner. In the setting of a specialty referral practice, it is
 can be tremendously helpful in assuring that the RDVM's reasons
important to recognize that the referring veterinarian (RDVM)
for referral are addressed and that miscommunication of such
is the primary client and should always be included as an essen-
information by the pet owner does not mislead the specialist as
tial component of the relationship with the pet owner that has
to the reason for the visit. The specialist and the RDVM are
been referred. A solid foundation for this relationship with the
p pad  n a isaq a ae on ro a uon p
RDVM and the pet owner can be established even before the
the pet owner.
actual appointment. Many specialty referral practices provide a
Web site where veterinarians can find referral protocols and pet
Charting
owners can readily access information about the hospital. This
information may include how the patient should be managed
The SOAP charting system (subjective, objective, assessment,
before the appointment (e.g., 12-h fast), what to expect during
 and plan) is the standard approach to formulating the medical
the referral appointment, and some biographical material about
record. It is a technique of organizing thoughts so that any
the specialist(s) and the veterinary health-care team that will be
 person picking up the record will understand what the clinician
was and is thinking. The medical record is subpoenable by a
vided to the RDVM, which can be given to the pet owner at the
court of law, and by law, if it is not written in the record, then it
fime of the referral, are also useful. To nurture good relationships
does not exist. Understanding the importance of the medical
with referring veterinarians, it is particularly important to main-
 record is paramount to good medical practice.
tain frequent communications. This can be achieved in several
S (for subjective) includes the history and other data which
ways: prompt follow-up on cases, participation in local veteri-
cannot be measured in a repeatable manner across different
nary medical association activities, hosting continuing educa-
 evaluators, such as physical exam findings of patient attitude.
fion programs, distributing newsletters with updates about the
 This may be recorded and may present documentation in nar-
specialty practice, arranging for new specialists joining the prac-
 rative form. Ask targeted questions and document what the
tice to meet referring veterinarians in person, and, above all, by
 owner says, in their own words, without paraphrasing. The O
supporting the relationship of the RDVM and the pet owner
(for objective) includes information that can be graded or other-
through positive communications and by ensuring that the pet
wise quantifed such as body weight and heart rate and also
 owner's visit is otherwise as positive as possible. It can be quite
includes laboratory data. The A is the assessment, which is a
Smaf Animaf Internaf Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Edited by Linda Merill
@ 2012 John wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John wiley & 5ons, Inc.
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
summary and interpretation of the clinical signs and the diag-
Know the pet and the owner name and greet them both in a
nosis or the differential diagnosis (list of tentative diagnosis).
welcoming manner. Look the client in the eye, greet them profes-
Once the list of differential diagnosis has been established, the
sionally, and introduce yourself by name and position. Invite the
clinician forms the plan (P), or how to prove which of the suspect
client into the exam room, invite them to sit, and ask them to
diseases is the actual perpetrator. The plan is divided into three
place their pet on the floor or on the table as appropriate. In these
components: the treatment plan (Tx), the diagnostic plan (Dx),
initial few minutes, clearly delivered, friendly directions from
and the client education component (CE).
you will help to build confdence.
Unless this is an emergency, avoid immediately examining the
Goals of the consultation
patient. Allow the pet to acclimate to the room while you initiate
conversation with the client. Key pieces of information about the
appointment
patient, such as mentation, respiratory character, ambulation,
 The specific goals of the initial consultation appointment are to
and vision are often best assessed by a hands-of examination,
which can be completed at this time.
1.1
 build trust with the client and with the pet;
2.
establish the client's primary concerns;
Establish the client's primary concerns
 understand the course of events, diagnostic steps, and treat-
 Try to use open-ended questions such as "What made you first
ments prior to referral;
take Fluffy to your local veterinarian?" rather than "What seems
4.
carefully evaluate the patient;
to be the problem?" In the latter situation, the client is tempted
5.
 build a problem list and prioritize problems;
to take on the role of doctor and is likely to paraphrase their
6.
 consider differentials for each problem on the problem list; 
RDVM's assessment rather than their own concerns.
 establish a diagnostic and/or treatment plan, and
8.
communicate patient management plans, associated risks,
Understand the course of events
and costs to the client.
and diagnostic steps prior to referral
The veterinarian and technician/nurse can consider this list
Information from the referring veterinarian should be available
together and determine roles and responsibilities within this
prior to the consultation, but ask the clients for their own chron-
framework These may vary according to the nature of the condi-
ological assessment of the course of events. They may admit to
seeing another veterinarian or they may add important informa-
 technician(s), or relationships among caregivers.
tion omitted from the referred history. It is helpful to work from
a history and physical exam checklist to avoid overlooking any
Build trust with the client and with
details that may eventually prove to be important. After an initial
the patient
relaxed inquiry of the patient's history, the history form should
be checked to ensure that all the details of vaccination, heart-
     n  n    sn 
worm or retrovirus testing, current medications, previous treat-
specialty hospital. They may have already seen several other
ments for the current illness, and prior medical problems have
veterinarians and it is likely their pet has a serious problem.
been recorded.
   ss d a s  o
establish yet another new relationship with veterinary caregivers
History acquisition
and by the fact that their pet is ill and has a complex disease or
 an elusive diagnosis that has prompted the referral visit. Working
History acquisition may be considered to include two phases.
to make the clients feel welcomed and that they are in the hands
 The frst phase is acquisition of a general history, which covers
of capable veterinary professionals is important. This really starts
information that is pertinent to every patient. The second is a
with the receptionist, from the initial phone call to the impres-
targeted history, in which information pertinent to specific prob-
sion as they walk in the door for the frst time. Confidence,
lems of an individual patient is addressed in greater detail (e.g..
consideration, and efficiency on the part of support staff are key
more careful questioning about exposure to stagnant water
 in getting consultation visits off to a positive start.
sources in a patient in which leptospirosis is being considered as
Minimize waiting times—this is a period of uncertainty and
a differential).
discomfort for the client. If they are left with unstructured time
In the general history, it is important to determine the reason
 to worry about their pet and the visit itself, their anxiety levels 
for the clients' visit so that their presenting concerns are always
may be heightened. Provide something for them to do while
 addressed even if more significant problems are identified in the
waiting; let them know what period of time they can expect to
 referral information or subsequently during the referral visit.
wait and be certain to update them if there will be any delays.
Signalment should be determined as a significant factor to be
 Prompt notification of the arrival of the client to the appropriate
 considered in developing appropriate differential diagnoses.
staff can facilitate the timeliness of the appointment process and
Clients should be questioned carefully about preexisting condi-
can reassure the owner that they are being cared for.
tions and current medications, keeping in mind that clients may
Chapter 1  Physical Examination
inadvertently omit information about very chronic or common 
rate can often be determined before beginning a hands-on exam
conditions (e.g., osteoarthritis in an older dog) or medication 
 by observation of thoracic wall motion. Heart rate is determined
that they give so routinely they may fail to consider it a medica-
by thoracic auscultation or direct chest wall palpation, and pulse
tion (e.g., heartworm prevention). It is particularly important
 rate may be determined by digital pressure over the femoral
to determine what treatments, if any, the patient has received
 artery, or the digital artery. Recording both a heart rate and a
for the current illness and what response was noted. Specifc
 pulse rate will determine if a pulse deficit is present.
information (exact date administered and product used) about
vaccinations should be determined as some conditions (e.g..
Head
 immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, immune-mediated throm-
Starting at the nose, the patient's nose and head should be
ciated with vaccination. An accurate travel history helps in
 observed for symmetry and palpated to identify regions of pain,
assessing the risk of exposure to diseases that are regional in
swelling, or muscle wasting. The posture of the head and neck
occurrence (e.g., systemic fungal diseases, tick-borne diseases,
should be observed. Ventroflexion is seen in hypokalemic or
high altitude disease). Complete information about the patient's
thiamine-deficient cats, and patients with neck pain may main-
as well as any supplements or treats that the pet receives, should
 Running the hands firmly over the skin of the head can help iden-
be obtained. It is important to ask open-ended questions that do
tify skin lesions; this should be done over all cutaneous surfaces
not “lead" the client into giving a particular answer and to be
of the patient as part of a complete examination. The nares should
 nonjudgmental when obtaining this information (clients sensing
be examined for patency (e.g., stenotic nares in brachycephalic
criticism of how they care for their pet may not accurately report
 dogs and cats), discoloration (e.g., some immune-mediated skin
historical information) in order to obtain an accurate history.
disease, secondary to chronic nasal discharge), swelling of sur-
rounding soft tissues (e.g., chronic rhinitis, fungal rhinitis, atopy),
Evaluate the patient: physical examination
and evidence of discharge. If nasal discharge is present, it should
be characterized as to relative volume, unilateral/bilateral and
The physical examination begins before ever touching the patient
serous/serosanguinous/mucoid/mucopurulent/hemorrhagic
as
by observing the general demeanor of the animal and how it moves
the nature of the discharge may be helpful in distinguishing dif-
about and interacts with the environment. In fact, hospital recep-
ferentials (e.g., unilateral when associated with unilateral dental
tionists, kennel personnel, and other nontechnical staff can provide
disease, hemorrhagic in ehrlichiosis or anticoagulant rodenticide
observations and should be advised that their input is welcomed
scope slide under and perpendicular to the nares and watching
and valuable in providing the best care for patients. This general
for fogging of the glass by expired air.
assessment of patient attitude contributes to the evaluation of vision,
Auscultation ofthe nose can help localize the source ofrespira-
mentation, and ambulation. It also allows for a general assessment
tory noise. Percussion over the nasal sinuses can provide evi-
of the patients personality, which can lead to an adjustment in tech-
dence of pain or dullness associated with sinus filling with
nique for aggressive or fearful patients. It is important to know what
secretions or tissue. Retropulsion of the globe (gentle pressure
 constitutes a normal physical examination and to recognize breed,
on the eyeball through closed eyelids) evaluates for space-
age, sex, and species variations. The key to consistent performance
 n a      s 
 of a thorough and useful physical examination is establishing a
 some nasal (neoplasia) or paranasal (retrobulbar abscess) dis-
well-organized and systematic approach that is employed routinely
eases. Examination of the oral cavity should be thorough, which
in evaluating patients, whether for their first visit or for reevalua-
 may require sedation or general anesthesia in some patients. Oral
tion. This will safeguard against overlooking some physical abnor-
 mucous membrane color should be assessed (pale in patients
malities because of distractions or focusing too soon on a particular
with anemia or poor perfusion due to dehydration or cardiovas-
area of interest suggested by the client or on a preliminary observa-
 cular disease; cyanotic [blue or purple] in patients with reduced
tion of the patient. A logical system is to work from “nose to tail,'
 oxygen levels in blood supplying the oral cavity). In patients with
although with patients of uncertain temperament, delaying exami-
dark pigmentation of the oral mucous membranes, the conjunc-
nationof the mouth and head until the examiner is better acquainted
tiva and lining of the prepuce or vulva offer alternative sites for
with the patient may be advantageous. Additionally, postponing the
observation of mucous membrane color. Capillary refll time
parts of the physical examination that are likely to be objectionable
(CRT) should be determined by applying digital pressure ade-
quate to blanch the tissue, releasing that pressure and observing
limb, until the end of the examination is advisable. Body tempera-
the length of time for the mucous membrane color to normalize.
ture, respiratory rate, and pulse are best determined when the
CRT reflects perfusion and can be prolonged with dehydration,
patient is the most relaxed, which may be early in the exam for some
cardiovascular disease, or other hypotensive conditions.
patients, especially cats, and later in the exam for others.
Teeth should be examined for fractures, discoloration, or
Body temperature is usually determined via rectal thermom-
disease of the periodontal tissue that may indicate dental disease
eter; although otic devices are available, normal ranges have
as a source of nasal or other facial problems or sepsis. Oral
been routinely established for rectal temperature. Respiratory
fissues should be carefully evaluated for ulceration or erosions
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
(trauma, immune-mediated disease, chemical or electrical
Ears
burns, renal disease, thromboembolic disease, neoplasia), dis-
The ears should be palpated for swelling (inflammation,
coloration (jaundice, petechiation), presence of masses (neopla-
hematoma from trauma, headshaking, or coagulopathy), cool-
 sia, granuloma), and presence of foreign material. The ability to
ness (poor perfusion), or discomfort (otitis). The ear margin
move the tongue and to swallow should also be assessed. A
should be examined for alopecia, thickening, or crusting that can
 technique of pressing upward under the external aspect of the
 intermandibular space allows the examiner to elevate the tongue
be associated with exposure to temperature extremes, excessive
 for examination of the ventral tongue surface and underlying
UV radiation, and microvascular or dermal disease. Visual and
otoscopic inspection of the inner pinna and the external ear
tissues, a potential site for string foreign bodies to lodge. The
canal should be performed to evaluate for inflammation, exu-
hard and soft palates should be examined to ensure that they are
dates, foreign materials, or masses. The pinnae may show
 intact and the palatine tonsils should be checked—-normally, the
tonsils are contained within the crypts and are not readily visible.
petechiation and ecchymosis in patients with abnormal platelet
The patient should be able to open and close the mouth without
numbers or function. Unilateral drooping of an ear may indicate
discomfort, which might indicate osseous disease, temporoman-
 pain or neurological abnormalities. On otoscopic examination,
dibular, retrobulbar or pharyngeal disease, or masticatory
the normal tympanic membrane is a complete thin translucent
 gray structure with a visible manubrium (opaque bone structure
myositis. It is sometimes difficult to distinguish resistance to
 projecting approximately halfway to the center from the periph-
opening the mouth due to patient temperament versus actual
ery). In disease conditions, the tympanic membrane may appear
discomfort.
thickened, opaque, discolored, bulging, or perforated.
Eyes
Neck to thorax
 A thorough examination of the eyelids and eyes, including a
Examination of the cervical region should include general palpa-
fundic examination, should be completed in all patients. Struc-
tion and manipulation to evaluate for pain or masses. In evaluat-
 tural abnormalities of the eyelids (entropion, ectropion) may
ing the neck, the parotid salivary glands should be identifed as
cause secondary ocular problems. Eyelid lesions can be seen in
symmetrical left and right thick disklike structures with their
immunologic diseases, atopy, hereditary dermal diseases, and
cranial aspect positioned medial and caudal to the mandibular
infectious diseases (dermatophytes, demodicosis). Unexpected
 ramus. While these glands may occasionally be diseased (usually
occurrence of conditions like demodicosis in an adult may indi-
unilateral enlargement and discomfort with salivary duct
cate an underlying immunosuppressive condition (hyperadren-
obstruction, uncommon bilateral sialoadenitis in dogs), the
 Ocorticism or use of exogenous corticosteroids). Aberrant
usual significance in identifying the salivary glands is to ascer-
 growth of eyelashes can cause discomfort and corneal injury.
tain that they are not enlarged lymph nodes. The submandibular
Ocular discharge can be associated with systemic infectious dis-
lymph nodes are generally much smaller (even when enlarged),
eases (ehrlichiosis, blastomycosis) as well as local ocular disease.
spherical, and lie caudal to the parotid glands. Retropharyngeal
Conjunctival edema may signify conjunctival inflammation or
masses (lymph node, foreign body granuloma, neoplasm) can
may be associated with generalized peripheral edema due to
sometimes be identified on cervical palpation dorsal to the
vasculitis or hypoalbuminemia. In aged or cachectic animals,
larynx. In dogs with laryngeal paralysis, palpation of the larynx
loss of retrobulbar fat results in a sunken position of the globe,
may reveal asymmetry in patients with unilateral dysfunction,
which may then cause accumulation of secretions and possibly
and some affected dogs will show noticeable worsening of res-
irritants, causing tearing or mucoid ocular discharge, which is
piratory noise or dyspnea with laryngeal palpation. Palpation for
generally benign. Older animals may have iris atrophy with thin-
a thyroid slip is of particular importance in cats, in which hyper
ning, defects and irregular edges to the iris that will also cause
thyroidism due to thyroid hyperplasia or adenomas may cause
non-neurological impairment of pupillary light responses. Yel-
various systemic signs. In dogs with thyroid tumors, the pre-
lowing of the conjunctiva and sclera occurs in animals with
 dominant sign is the presence of a cranial to midcervical mass.
jaundice. Coagulation disorders may manifest as scleral or con-
The trachea should be palpated for structural abnormalities such
junctival hemorrhages, bleeding into the anterior chamber
 as dorsoventral flattening in dogs with tracheal collapse. Tracheal
(hyphema), and iris or retinal lesions. Infltrative disease (inflam-
palpation may readily elicit a cough (increased tracheal sensitiv-
mation, neoplasia) may cause lesions of intraocular vascular
ity) in animals with tracheal inflammation. Caution should be
tissues (iris and retina); retinal granulomatous lesions may be
employed in tracheal collapse patients, in which stimulation of
 evident in feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), systemic fungal
a tracheal cough can trigger paroxysmal coughing and exacerba-
diseases, and lymphoma. Hypertension or other vascular dis-
tion of tracheal collapse and resulting respiratory distress. Aus-
eases may result in tortuosity of the retinal vessels. The optic
cultation of the larynx and trachea can aid in localizing a source
 nerve should be examined for changes consistent with neuropa-
of respiratory noise and can help differentiate cervical collapse
thy or increased intracranial pressure. Pupilary light responses,
(inspiratory click) from intrathoracic collapse (expiratory click)
corneal reflex, position of the globe and eyelid appearance and
 in patients with tracheal collapse. Auscultation of wheezes in the
response to touch, and ocular response to head motion are part
laryngeal region generally indicated airway narrowing (e.g..
of the cranial nerve evaluation.
laryngeal paralysis, everted laryngeal saccules, laryngeal mass).
Chapter 1  Physical Examination
A cervical bulge that is most prominent on the left may be 
placed in the ears facing forward. Both the bell (low frequency
evident in patients with megaesophagus. Patients should be
al jo (spuos Aouanban uaiu) aerudep a pue (spunos
checked for abnormal jugular pulses by elevating the nose and
stethoscope are utilized during auscultation. Adequate time
observing the jugular groove. Normally, the jugular pulse should
 should be spent in listening to all lung fields and in a thorough
not extend more than one-third up the neck Increased jugular
 evaluation of heart sounds. Referred respiratory sounds can
 pulses indicate impaired venous drainage into the right heart
 complicate interpretation of sounds heard on thoracic ausculta-
(e.g., right heart failure, pericardial effusion). This may be dif-
tion. Further evaluation by auscultating the trachea, larynx, and
nasal cavity can help delineate the source of the abnormal sounds
 or long hair coats. Weting and flattening the hair with alcohol
 as their intensity is expected to be greatest over the primary site
may aid visualization of the jugular vein. In the distal cervical
 of disease. Other artifacts that can interfere with auscultation are
region, the superficial cervical (prescapular) lymph nodes should
ambient room noise, purring cats, shivering, and referred upper
 be identified and evaluated for size and consistency.
airway or gastrointestinal noise. Purring cats can be especially
Moving toward the thorax, the axillary lymph nodes can also
 problematic. Distracting the cat by the introduction of a new
be evaluated at this point: The axillary nodes are often not identi-
 sound, odor, or object may break the pur long enough to ade-
fied unless they are enlarged or enveloped in fat and are best
 quately assess heart or lung sounds.
identified as movable disk-shaped structures against the ventro-
Lung auscultation should characterize any abnormal sounds
lateral cranial thorax.
a Aa aiam uiai ai o se paio aq pus Aa pue
 In evaluating the thoracic region, the patient's respiratory
heard. Breath sounds are best heard in a sternal position: stand-
motions and effort should be examined. Animals with pleural
 ing, sitting, or laying. To encourage patients to take deep breaths
space disease usually take rapid, shallow breaths. Those with
(for best evaluation of lung sounds), temporarily holding off the
upper airway obstruction have a slow, deep respiratory pattern
 mouth and nose or covering mouth and nose with an air-inflated
with a prolonged inspiratory phase. Animals with lower airway
bag or exam glove may be effective. In animals that purr, pant,
disease (cats with asthma) may have increased expiratory efort.
or sniff, holding a cotton swab dampened with alcohol may
Animals with pulmonary parenchymal disease and abnormal
interrupt the problematic breathing pattern to allow ausculta-
difusion of inspired gas from the alveolus to the bloodstream
tion. The inspiratory phase of respiration is typically louder and
may show increased effort on both inspiration and expiration.
longer than the expiratory phase (Table 1.1).
With extreme respiratory effort, additional cervical strap muscles
Both sides of the thoracic cavity should be auscultated. In
are recruited to assist in the expansion of the thoracic cavity, and
 addition, both cranial and caudal, and dorsal and ventral lung
animals will show drawing back of the commissures of the
sounds should be evaluated. Careful auscultation can reveal
mouth as a result. As respiratory muscles fail, a paradoxical
reduced or absent lung sounds. If noted, thoracic percussion
 inward motion of the caudal ribs on inspiration occurs.
may aid in further characterization of the pathology. Decreased
Stethoscopes are designed to follow the human ear canal;
 resonance or dullness may indicate pleural fluid or lung consoli-
therefore, for best results, the binaurals (ear pieces) should be
dation, and increased resonance may indicate pneumothorax.
Table 1.1  Pulmonary auscultation
 Sound
Timing
Location
Bronchial
Normal intense harsh sound heard on both inspiration and
Central chest over caudal trachea/large
expiration
bron chi
Bron chovesicular
Normal moderate sound heard on full inspiration and short
 Bilateral bronchial/hilar region
expiration
Vesicular
 Normal soft sound heard better on the slightly longer inspiratory
Peripheral lung fields
phase
Stertor
Abnormal low pitched snoring sound heard mainly on
Larynx or trachea
inspiration; sound radiates
Stridor
Abnormal intense high pitched wheeze heard on inspiration
Larynx or thoracic inlet
Crackles (rales)
Abnormal popping sound heard on inspiration, further classified
Lung fields
as either fine or course
Rhonchi
Abnormal high or low pitched musical sounds heard at the end
lsolated lung fields
(wheezes)
of inspiration/beginning of expiration
Source: Jack CM, Watson, PM. Veterinary Technicians Daily Reference Guide, 2nd edition, p. 32. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2008.
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Auscultation of the heart allows for the assessment of the
entricular (AV) valves (mitral and tricuspid), often referred
heart rate, rhythm and murmurs, or other abnormal heart
to as the lub sound. The second heart sound (Ss) is the closing
sounds. Cardiac sounds are best heard with the patient's heart in
of the semilunar valves (aortic and pulmonary), often referred
its normal position; therefore, if possible, a standing posture is
to as the dub sound. Typically, the third and fourth heart sounds
 preferred. Respiratory noise can mask cardiac sounds; this is
are not heard in a healthy heart. The third heart sound (Ss)
u a  au siop d un ua aas
is a sound produced at the end of rapid blood filling of the
shut and even briefly holding the nostrils closed may facilitate
ventricles. The fourth heart sound (S4) is also a blood flow
 auscultation. A thorough examination includes listening on both
 sound produced by the emptying of the atria and the flling of
the left- and the right-hand sides of the chest from the apex
the ventricles.
of the heart to the heart base. If an abnormality is heard, the
Normal dogs may have a sinus arrhythmia (heart rate increases
point of maximal intensity (PMI) should be defined. The normal
with inspiration and decreases with expiration), while cats do
heart rate for dogs varies by size, age, and physical ftness
not exhibit this same variation with respiration. Normal sinus
level. Puppies and smaller dogs tend to have faster heart rates
arrhythmia should be distinguished from ventricular premature
than larger or physically fit dogs. Cats have less variability in the
contractions (VPCs), which can sound similar in certain situa-
normal range.
tions. Gallop rhythms may be noted, especially in cats and par-
Accurate cardiac auscultation may be diffcult when the
ticularly at higher heart rates. Gallop rhythms are not a true
 patient's heart rate is increased above normal. Allow the patient 
arrhythmia but are actually the auscultation of the third and
to acclimate to the environment and to adjust to having the
fourth heart sounds in addition to the frst and second heart
stethoscope in position on the thorax. Simply waiting for a few
sounds heard normally. Gallop sounds are low frequency sounds
      o n s
best heard with the bell side of the stethoscope.
animal to calm down enough that the heart rate drops. If the
Murmurs, which are sounds generated by turbulent blood
heart rate is elevated because of a cardiac or metabolic abnor-
flow, can be diffcult to detect at faster heart rates, especially in
mality, the rate will remain elevated. Simultaneous ausculta-
cats. For cats, allowing a longer period of time for cardiac aus-
tion of the heart and palpation of the femoral pulse allows
cultation is important for detecting murmurs, and sometimes
for detection of pulse deficits (auscultated heartbeat without
murmurs can be best identifed by auscultation of the paraster-
a corresponding pulse). There are four heart sounds that corre-
nal region in feline patients. Murmurs should be classifed as to
late to the closing of the heart valves and to blood flow in
 fiming, character (pitch, modulation, and quality), intensity, and
the heart. The first heart sound (S,) is the closing of the atriov-
location (Tables 1.2-1.5).
Table 1.2  Cardiac murmurs—timing
Timing
 Systolic
Heard during systole (ejection)—between 
Mitral or tricuspid regurgitation, aortic or pulmonic
s1 and s2
stenosis, ventricular septal defect (vsD)
Diastolic
Heard during diastole (filling)start of S2
Uncommon, aortic regurgitation, endocarditis, vsD
Continuous (pansystolic
Heard throughout the cycle S1 through S2
PDA
or holosystolic)
Table 1.3
Cardiac murmurs—character
Character
Pitch—sound due to velocity
Pitch
Low
Medium
4H
Mixed
 Heard best
Bell head
Either head
Diaphragm head
 Both heads
Modulation—intensity over time
Modulation
 Plateau 
Crescendo-decrescendo
 Decrescendo
Sounds like
Machinery
Diamond shape—soft-loud-soft 
Loud to soft
Quality-unusual characteristics
Blowing
Harsh
Rumbling
Honking
Grunting
Musical
Chapter 1  Physical Examination
Murmurs do not always indicate cardiac disease. Murmurs
suop sq Au uogedred peuupqe sieo pue saop eus un uoed
can arise in patients with changes in blood viscosity due to
 using a one-handed technique in which the examiner cups the
dehydration or anemia. This is especially true in cats. These
hand under the abdomen with the fingers directed toward the
innocent murmurs are low intensity murmurs (grade I or Il) and
patient's spine then palpating with the fngers with gentle but
 are expected to resolve as the inciting condition normalizes (e.g..
P-omi e aban m sd raeT 'anssad aes
normal hydration restored).
 approach where the examiner places one hand on each side of
the lateral abdomen. In large or deep-chested dogs, abdominal
Abdomen
  d a      
The abdomen should be observed for distension or asymmetry.
forelimbs elevated to allow abdominal contents situated under
 Distension can be caused by abdominal masses, organ enlarge-
the caudal rib cage to shift backward where they are more acces-
ment (e.g., hepatomegaly or splenomegaly), intestinal gas or
sible for palpation.
accumulation of feces, obesity, gastric distension (e.g., obstruc-
A large part of successful abdominal palpation is in knowing
tion, GDV, foreign material, food), ascites, free abdominal air, or
the normal anatomy and maintaining the confident expectation
 pregnancy in intact females. Ballottement of the abdomen may
that identifable structures will be identifed. Only with a few
allow for the distinction of fluid accumulation (ballottement
abdominal structures (e.g., the urinary bladder, the kidneys in
 produces fluid wave) from other causes of distension.
cats or lef kidney in dogs) is the examiner able to grasp and
The abdomen should be palpated systematically; working
clearly identify the structure in its entirety. Most of the assess-
from the cranial to the caudal abdomen is a logical approach,
ment of abdominal organs is made by palpating tissue margins
although leaving known or suspected areas of pain until the end
and surfaces (e.g., liver, right kidney) or by feeling structures slip
of the examination is beneficial to maintain patient comfort and
through the fngers or hands as the abdomen is palpated (e.g..
to facilitate palpation. In obese animals, adequate evaluation of
intestines, enlarged uterus). In the cranial abdomen, the stomach
the abdomen by palpation may not be feasible, and the evalua-
is usually not palpated unless it is full of food, fluid, or gas. Food
tion must be made by means of imaging studies. In very fractious
 or fluid distension of the stomach produces a doughy feel in the
or tense animals, starting the abdominal examination by very
left cranial abdomen. The pylorus is sometimes palpable in small
gently placing the hands on the abdomen and moving them
lean patients as a firm mass in the mid- to right cranial abdomen.
slightly or not at all for a period of time may allow the patient
The liver of the cat is not palpable unless it is enlarged. In the
to acclimate to being touched and to relax enough to allow pal-
dog, the caudal margin of the liver is usually palpable if the
fngertips are advanced up under the caudal aspect of the rib
 cage and drawn caudally. An enlarged liver is easily palpated and
rounding of the liver margins may be detectable. The kidneys are
Table 1.4
Cardiac murmurs--intensity
located in the right dorsal and left dorsal to mid-abdomen. The
left kidney sits more caudal than the right kidney. In the cat, the
Intensity—grade
kidneys are usuall readily palpated in the dorsal to mid-
abdomen; the right kidney may be partially hidden by the caudal
I/VI
Very soft, faint, or barely audible murmur, localized,
rib cage. The kidneys should be evaluated for size (small in
only heard after intently listening for a while
 patients with chronic renal disease, large in patients with infltra-
I1/VI
Low intensity murmur (soft), localized but easily
tive disease, acute renal injury, or portosystemic shunts), shape
heard 
(irregular with fbrosis or renal cyst formation) and pain (acute
II/VI
Moderate intensity murmur, more than one location,
renal injury). In the dog, the kidneys are often less identifiable
immediately heard
and often only the lateral surfaces or caudal poles can be evalu-
IV/VI
 Loud intensity murmur, radiates, no precordial thrill
ated. The spleen is not palpable unless enlarged, when it may be
 palpated caudal to the liver and variably flling the mid-abdomen.
v/VI
 Loud intensity murmur with a palpable precordial
thrill
The mesenteric lymph nodes, also located in the mid-abdomen,
are usually not palpable unless greatly enlarged. In lean small
V/VI
Very loud intensity murmur heard even before the
 dogs and cats, the normal cecum/cecocolic junction can some-
stethoscope touches the chest wall, with an easily
 palpable precordial thrill
times be palpated in the mid-abdomen and is an important
differential for a mid-abdominal mass. The intestines should be
Table 1.5
 Cardiac murmurs—-location
Location
Left apex 
Heart base
Apex
Left 2-4
Left 3-5
Left 4-6
Right 6-7
intercostal
intercostal
 intercostal
intercostal
S1
52
s3 and s4
Pulmonic valve
Aortic valve
Mitral valve
Tricuspid valve
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
palpated for any masses (e.g., neoplasia, granuloma, and foreign
character (e.g., blood, foreign material) and to provide a sample
body), distension (e.g., ileus, mechanical obstruction), presence
for subsequent fecal analysis if indicated.
 and character of feces (fluid vs. frm), irregularity (e.g., plication
The external genitalia should be inspected for evidence of
due to intestinal spasm or string foreign body), or changes in
infection, masses, or discharge. The vulva of female patients
wall thickness (generally detected by “slipping" the intestinal
should be examined for structural abnormalities or perivulvar
aq Au uno suus au (sdauy a qno sdom
skin disease. In the male, the prepuce and penis should be exam-
readily palpated as a tubular structure in the caudal dorsal
ined for inflammation, masses, and discoloration. Male cats with
abdomen because of the presence of feces. Feces can be distin-
urethral obstruction may have discoloration of the penile tip and
  sd aa e aq s e  pa
palpable “sand" in the urethra that may be extruded with gentle
 cause feces to yield and change shape or location within the
 palpation of the penile tip. The testicles of intact males should be
colon. The full urinary bladder is easily identifed as a somewhat
palpated for the presence of both testicles in the scrotum and for
spherical or oblong structure in the caudoventral abdomen. If
the identifcation of masses, swelling, or asymmetry. The ventral
the bladder is empty, it can often still be identifed by allowing
abdominal body wall should be palpated for any defects (hernias)
 tissues in the caudal abdomen to slip through the fingers with a
 especially common at the umbilicus and the inguinal ring. Palpa-
caudal to cranial hand motion, which allows the cranial border
tion of the inguinal lymph nodes and evaluation of the mammary
of the bladder to be palpated as it slips through the fingers. Wall
chain for masses, swelling, or discharge should be performed.
thickness and irregularities (e.g., neoplasia, polyp) should be
 noted, and bladder stones will sometimes be palpable. Patients
Musculoskeletal
with bladder inflammation may object to palpation because of
The examination of the musculoskeletal system begins with a
discomfort and often do not maintain much urine volume in the
hands-off observation of the patient's posture and ability to move
inflamed bladder, making it more difficult to identify. In male
about the exam room, noting any stiffness, lameness, or reluc-
dogs, an enlarged prostate may be identifable as a structure
  a ssi oi n u rd e u a oi 
ventral to the colon and caudal to the urinary bladder on palpa-
 closer examination, running the hands over the trunk and limbs
tion of the caudal abdomen. The prostate should be assessed for
ms p e o u rd e  
irregularities of shape (e.g. prostatic cysts, abscesses, and neo-
bony enlargement, or soft tissue swelling or masses and allows
plasia) or pain on palpation (prostatitis). Caution should be
for a general assessment of body condition and muscle mass.
exerted when palpating a potentially infected prostate as subse-
Deeper palpation and/or manipulation of the spine and limbs
quent development of septicemia may occur. In intact female
may be necessary to detect sources of pain. In patients with
 animals, the uterus is not palpable unless it is enlarged (e.g..
lameness, careful examination of the affected limb includes
 pregnancy pyometra) when it may be identifed as a tubular
examination of all cutaneous structures including footpads,
structure extending along the ventral abdomen in a caudal to
interdigital spaces, and the nail beds. Deep palpation and manip-
cranial plane.
ulation proceeds from the distal to the proximal limb with palpa-
 The rectal examination allows palpation of some skeletal
tion and manipulation of joints until pain or dysfunction can be
structures, including examination of the ventral sacral and
localized to direct further diagnostics, such as imaging.
caudal spine to evaluate for spondylosis, the medial aspect of the
For oncological patients, detailed measurements ofany masses
left and right ilia laterally and the dorsal pubis ventrally to evalu-
and the lymph nodes generally follow a thorough physical exam.
ate for pelvic fractures or narrowing of the pelvic canal. Exami-
When you think you have finished the physical exam, refer to
nation ofthe soft tissues of the caudal abdomen is also performed.
the checklist on your exam form to ensure that all details are
 Palpation of the sublumbar lymph nodes evaluates for enlarge-
entered.
ment due to metastatic neoplasia or, less commonly, severe
inflammatory disease. These nodes are dorsal and cranial relative
to the examiner. Further examination of the prostate is possible
Build a problem list
during the rectal examination to evaluate for the size, symmetry,
The next step in the process is to summarize in point form all of
s  so e d a   h a 
the separate problems ascertained from both the history and the
prostatic enlargement, the prostate may move cranially over the
physical examination, always keeping in mind the primary
pelvic brim where it is less accessible on rectal palpation. Evalu-
 owner concern for which they sought veterinary attention. This
ation of the urethra is possible with ventral palpation to assess for
is a task typically associated exclusively with the veterinarian,
thickening, masses, or urethral calculi. The anal sacs are located
although the team members can certainly help to ascertain that
caudally, and careful palpation for masses, especially in hyper-
the list is accurate and complete.
calcemic patients, along with an assessment for impaction and
infection, is recommended. If indicated, the examiner can
Consider differential diagnoses
express an anal sac to collect a sample of secretions as the sacs
may become distended with infection or obstruction of the anal
The clinician will consider all of the possible conditions that
sac duct. A sample of feces should be collected at the time of
could lead to the patient presenting with this combination of
rectal palpation for the determination of fecal consistency and
problems.
Chapter 1  Physical Examination
Establish a diagnostic plan
 are indicated, and what is involved from their pets perspective.
If any shaving of hair is required, obtain permission.
A properly conducted history acquisition and physical examina-
 The examination should close with informed consent for any
tion are critical to the appropriate management of the patient
 forthcoming diagnostic tests. Provide an accurate estimate of
as they form the foundation upon which all diagnostic and treat-
when results should be available and provide the client with a
ment decisions will be based. Historical data and results of the
written estimate of costs. Make sure to establish expectations
physical examination are interpreted and used to help determine
for follow-up communication and to verify preferred contact
what steps need to be taken for further diagnostic testing to
numbers (Should they call you? What time?).
identify the underlying cause of clinical abnormalities or for
 Referring veterinarians truly appreciate a call or a referral
adjustments in therapy in patients with known medical con-
letter at this point in the process to provide an update. Remem-
d  un ns n n si h s
 ber, this is their client and their patient that they are entrusting
examination of the referred patient is thorough with careful
to you. They deserve prompt, professional communication, as
atftention to detail as abnormalities that may provide vital clues
well as thanks!
to the patient's problem may be quite subtle. A good evaluation
of a patient through history acquisition and physical exam-
ination includes thorough, accurate record keeping to docu-
Conclusion
ment findings—multiple individuals should be able to conduct
these evaluations and to communicate and record findings in a
The veterinary technician will be involved in many, but not all,
manner that is consistent, accurate, and understandable to others
aspects of the consultation and physical examination of the
 internal medicine patient. Establishing a good rapport with both
 involved in the patients' care.
Remember, we are not expected to have all the answers at this
the client and the patient and the ability to document a complete
stage, but rather an organized plan to work through the differ-
subjective history are the first steps in the process. The ability to
entials on our list.
perform a complete physical examination, while not the primary
responsibility of the veterinary technician, is very important in
accurately monitoring our patienf's conditions and response to
Communicate this plan to the client
 a  a sn   
One of the best services that can be offered to the patient is to
assessment will help the technician anticipate the needs of the
ensure that the owner understands the thought process behind
 veterinarian and the patient. Finally, knowledge of the treatment
the differential diagnoses and the diagnostic and/or treatment
 and the diagnostic and educational components of the plan will 
plan. Explain to the clients which laboratory and diagnostic tests
help to ensure the optimal outcome for all involved.
Chapter
Endocrinology
Editors: Barry Kipperman and Beth Rogers
Section 1 Pituitary Gland - Jo Ann Morrison 11
Pheochromocytoma - Elisabeth Snead 29
Section 2 Thyroid Glands 14
Section 5 Pancreas 31
Canine hypothyroidism - Beth Rogers 14 
 Feline diabetes mellitus - Alice Defarges and
Feline hyperthyroidism - Beth Rogers 16
Michael Goldstein 31
Canine thyroid Tumors - Krysta Deitz 20
Canine diabetes mellitus - Jocelyn Mott 37
Section 3 Parathyroid Glands - Jo Ann Morrison 22
Canine diabetic ketoacidosis - Jocelyn Mott 40
Section 4 Adrenal Glands 25
Insulinomas - Barry Kipperman 41
Hypoadrenocorticism: Addison's disease - Michael Goldstein
Glucagonoma - Eisabeth Snead 45
 and Alice Defarges 25
Section 6 Miscellaneous Hormones, Glands, and Disease -
Hyperadrenocorticism: Cushing's disease - Michael Goldstein
Elisabeth Snead 47
and Alice Defarges 26
SECTION 1 PITUITARY GLAND
Growth hormone disorders
The pituitary gland lies ventral to the brain, on midline, outside
There are two main clinical diseases associated with GH levels.
of the blood-brain barrier It is a major site of hormone storage,
Growth hormone excess (acromegaly or hypersomatotropism) is
production, and secretion. The pituitary receives vascular and
most commonly associated with a benign functional tumor ofthe
sod o nof soq a o ndu enmu
 feline pituitary gland. It is found most often in senior cats (8-14
include thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), adrenocortico-
 years) and more often in males. Tumors autonomously secrete
tropic hormone (ACTH), antidiuretic hormone (ADH), and
GH. Growth hormone is a natural diabetogenic hormone and
 a  sid  (  
antagonizes the effects of insulin. The most common clinical
organs and are responsible for numerous systemic effects. The
 presentation of acromegaly is insulin-resistant feline diabetes
pituitary may be affected by congenital or acquired diseases. It
mellitus (DM).'2 In dogs, functional pituitary tumors are less
is divided into anterior and posterior portions.
common, and acromegaly is more often associated with natural
Smalf Animal Internar Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Edited by Linda Merrill
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
11
12
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
estrous cycles or exogenous progesterone therapy. Acromegaly
 though normal variation may affect individual results. Serum
has also been associated with various neoplastic processes (e.g,
samples should be collected after a 6- to 12-h fast and sent to the
mammary carcinoma) in the canine.
 University of Minnesota. One milliliter of serum is needed and
GH deficiency (hyposomatotropism) is seen most commonly
samples should be shipped frozen with two ice packs in a Styro-
as a congenital lesion, and affected animals are classified as pitui-
foam container IGF-1 levels can also be measured and may be
tary “dwarfs." German shepherds are overrepresented. It is an
considered the preferred diagnostic test. Serum (0.5 mL) should
autosomal recessive trait.34
be frozen and sent with an ice pack to Michigan State University.
IGF-1 is an indirect measurement of GH excess, and levels are
Clinical signs
 elevated in animals with acromegaly.
For animals suspected of GH deficiency, GH and IGF-1 levels
Acromegaly is most commonly associated with insulin-resistant
may be measured; however, provocative testing of pituitary GH
 DM in the feline, and symptoms are consistent with poorly con-
release is recommended The xylazine response test is considered
trolled diabetes (polyuria [PU], polydipsia [PD], polyphagia,
the gold standard for diagnosis of GH deficiency. The protocol
weight loss, and diabetic neuropathy).12 GH has the effect of
for the xylazine response test is: 100 pg/kg xylazine intravenously
 promoting linear growth, in conjunction with insulin-like
(IV); collect serum samples at baseline (prior to administration),
growth factor-1 (IGF-1), and thus other clinical signs may be
15, 30, 45, 60 min post.
associated with abnormal growth in an adult animal: increasing
Biopsy is not applicable for GH disorders. Conditions of GH
Excess or deficiency are not diagnosed via histopathology.
ing skull size, and so on. In late-stage disease, cardiomegaly may
be noted, which may progress to congestive heart failure (CHF).
maging
Azotemia also develops in the late stages of the disease in -50%
 of acromegalic cats.
Computed tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance
Hyposomatotropism is manifested as poor weight gain,
 imaging (MRI) of the brain can demonstrate pituitary tumors as
unthrifty body condition, and juvenile hair coat. If GH is the
seen with acromegaly. In cases of hyposomatotropism, addi-
only deficient hormone, affected animals are termed “propor-
tional diferential diagnoses for microstature (e.g. portosystemic
tional dwarfs, where body proportions are normal, (but overall
shunt [Pss]) may be ruled out by other imaging techniques (e.g..
size is small)34 (Figure 2.1.1).
abdominal radiographs and ultrasound)
If GH deficiency is seen in conjunction with other hormone
deficiencies (most commonly TSH), then affected animals are
Treatments
 s p a s, n
have larger, wider skulls in comparison to small body size.
Inpatient
For cases of GH excess, radiation therapy (RT) may be con-
Diagnostics
sidered to reduce the size of the pituitary tumor. Acromegalic
Laboratory
feline diabetics that have undergone pituitary radiation have
reduced insulin requirements when compared to pretreat-
For animals suspected of having acromegaly (insulin resistance,
ment insulin dosages.2 Canine cases of acromegaly due to
consistent physical exam findings), GH levels can be measured,
natural estrous cycles may be treated with ovariohysterectomy.
 There are generally no requirements for inpatient treatment of
hyposomatotropism.
Outpatient
For untreated cases of feline acromegaly associated with DM,
increasing doses of insulin are required to control blood glucose
levels. Insulin therapy may be combined with oral hypoglycemic
agents in an attempt to minimize hyperglycemia.
 Animals with hyposomatotropism may be successfully treated
with appropriate hormone supplementation. There are currently
no commercially available canine or feline GH supplements.
Porcine GH is available, with doses for supplementation of
0.1 U (0.05 mg)/kg SQ three times weekly. IGF-1 levels are meas-
ured to assess treatment efficacy. Oversupplementation and
resultant DM and acromegaly are possible. If other hormone
deficiencies (e.g., TSH) are concurrent with GH deficiency
Figure 2.1.1  German shepherd puppy with hyposomatotropism on
the left, with normal, unaffected littermate on the right. Photo
then specifc hormone supplementation (e.g., thyroxine [T4l) is
courtesy of Dr. Jim Noxon.
recommended.
Chapter 2  Endocrinology
13
Pharmacology
Table 2.1.1 Causes of polyuria, polydipsia, and hyposthenuria
 For some cases of acromegaly, therapy may be attempted with
Causes of polyuria and polydipsia
GH inhibitors (e.g., octreotide acetate), though therapy is gener-
ally expensive and side effects may be significant.
Definition 
Causes of isosthenuria
therapy may allow a normal life span and quality of life. It is
USG 1.008-1.030
Chronic renal failure
important that all deficient hormones are identifed and sup-
Diabetes mellitus
 plemented accordingly.
Hyperadren ocorticism
Hypercalcemia
Prognosis and survival times
Hypoadrenocorticism
 Intact female dogs with acromegaly due to estrous cycling may
Hypokalemia
be cured with ovariohysterectomy. Feline acromegaly due to
pituitary tumors cannot be cured, but long-term disease control
Liver disease
may be achieved with RT and aggressive glycemic control. Prog-
 Pyelonephritis
 nosis is often poor despite RT due to the debilitating effects of
Pyometra
malnutrition and weight loss that is usually present at the time
RT is pursued.
 Causes of hyposthenuria
USG < 1.008
 Diabetes insipidus
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
Hyperad renocorticism
 Diabetic felines with acromegaly that are undergoing RT should
receive insulin therapy and glucose monitoring as with any anes-
Hypercalcemia
thetic procedure.
Liver disease
Pyometra
Diabetes insipidus
USG, urine specific gravity.
Clinical signs
There are two main forms of diabetes insipidus (DI), central
(brain origin) and nephrogenic (renal origin), and lesions may
be congenital or acquired. Most nephrogenic cases are secondary
Laboratory
to other diseases (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism [HAC], pyelone-
phritis, hypercalcemia, and others). Primary nephrogenic and
There are no specifc laboratory findings for Dl; however, the
central DI are rare. Abnormalities in the formation (central) or
urinalysis will repeatedly show hyposthenuria (<1.008). Other
activity (nephrogenic) of ADH, also called arginine vasopressin
fndings on the urinalysis or the remainder of the minimum
 H sd    s  )
 database (complete blood count [CBC], serum biochemistry
responsible for the production of concentrated urine, and in the
absence of normal ADH activity, urine remains dilute. The most
 tract infections are common as a result of poor concentrating
common clinical signs are severe polyuria and polydipsia (PU/
ability. Urine cultures are advised.
PD), and some cases are severely affected. PD is defined as water
Water deprivation tests have been used to assess patient ability
consumption in excess of 100 mL/kg/day. PU is defined as urine
to concentrate urine in the face of dehydration. These tests are
production >66mL/kg/day. Animals with congenital disease
seldom advised as severe dehydration and renal damage can
 may present as early as 8-12 weeks of age with complaints of
Occur. Performing the test properly is extremely labor intensive
lifelong PU/PD. Acquired diseases may be seen at any time and
and requires completely emptying the urinary bladder Results
with any signalment of animal. Other clinical symptoms may be
are often inconclusive. More often, DI is diagnosed after exclud-
seen and depend on the etiology of the secondary nephrogenic
ing the more common causes of hyposthenuria.
DI, including HAC, pyelonephritis, hypercalcemia, and numer-
Histopathology is not pursued in the majority of cases.
ous others.
I du yo ssio dde  do i j amo
is considered, precautions should be taken with assessment of
coagulation, hydration status, and the determination of blood
Diagnostics
pressure. Electron microscopy evaluation of renal tissue is rec-
 DI is a diagnosis of exclusion. As with any diagnosis by exclu-
ommended for certain disease conditions, and technicians
sion, clients must be prepared for the diagnostics that may be
should inquire with the histopathology laboratory for special
 needed to work up the PU/PD patient (Table 2.1.1).
tissue submission requirements.
14
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Imaging
(arranged in spheres called thyroid follicles) and parafollicular
or C cels, which secrete calcitonin. The two principal thyroid
There are no specific imaging findings in cases of DI. Animals
hormones are thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), both of
with congenital central disease may show anatomic lesions asso-
which are basically two tyrosines linked together with iodine.
ciated with the pituitary gland on brain CT scan or MRI. There
The thyroid glands are ductless glands that serve only an endo-
are numerous lesions that may be associated with nephrogenic
 disease, related to specifc etiology. Additional imaging fndings
crine function. The thyroid is the only endocrine gland in the
body that can be palpated.
may include hepatomegaly with HAC, pyelectasia with pyelone-
phritis, or sternal lymphadenopathy with hypercalcemia due to
lymphoma.
Canine hypothyroidism
 Hypothyroidism is a disorder that results from inadequate pro-
Treatments
duction of T4 and Ts. It is relatively common in dogs but is rarely
Inpatient
seen in cats.
 Primary hypothyroidism accounts for more than 95% of cases
 Specific inpatient therapy depends upon the underlying etiology
and develops as a result of progressive destruction of the thyroid.
 for the DI.
gland.' Frequently, this occurs either from an immune-mediated
Outpatient
process called lymphocytic thyroiditis in which thyroid tissue is
destroyed and replaced by fibrous connective tissue? or by idio-
Animals may have severe PU/PD, and owners may be tempted
pathic atrophy in which the thyroid tissue atrophies and is replaced
to limit access to water However, client education is crucial as
by adipose tissue. Less common causes of primary hypothyroidism
limiting water may lead to severe dehydration and renal insult
 include follicular cell hyperplasia and infltrative neoplasia.
with possible permanent renal damage. Quality of life may be
negatively impacted in animals with severe PU/PD, and realistic
tary malformation or neoplasia.?
discussions regarding prognosis are important. Select cases of
 Hypothyroidism can arise at any age and in any breed. Most
central Dl may be successfully managed with administration of
commonly affected breeds include Golden retrievers, Doberman
vasopressin (synthetic ADH). The available form is desmo-
pinschers, Irish setters, Great Danes, Airedale terriers, Old
pressin acetate (DDAVP") as oral, intranasal, and ophthalmic
English sheepdogs, dachshunds, miniature schnauzers, cocker
 drops. This medication results in increased urine concentration,
spaniels, poodles, and boxers.4 There is no apparent gender pre-
thus reducing PU/PD.
disposition'; however, spayed females and neutered males are at
increased risk for developing hypothyroidism compared with
Prognosis and survival times
sexually intact animals.
The prognosis for animals with congenital lesions is guarded to
poor. A few exceptions may be seen in animals that can be
Clinical signs
managed with vasopressin. In extreme cases of PU/PD, animals
Thyroid hormone is required for normal cellular metabolic func-
may have to urinate every few hours, including overnight. If
tions; deficiencies can affect the metabolic function of almost all
environmental conditions are favorable (ready access to urinate
and free access to water), the short-term prognosis is favorable.
ciated with hypothyroidism is further testimony to the systemic
Prognosis otherwise depends on the underlying etiology for DI.
impact that thyroid hormone, or the lack thereof, can have on
the entire body.
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
 Signs are often nonspecifc and gradual in onset, with the most
Affected animals are at a risk for dehydration and hypotension.
common being lethargy, weight gain, and alopecia. Owners may
Serum electrolytes and blood pressure should be monitored
attribute many of these signs to aging or overfeeding (Table 2.2.1).
 d pe  n pd go s h
administration given in conjunction with anesthetic events.
Diagnosis
Water restriction prior to anesthesia is contraindicated unless
receiving fluid therapy.
Prior to any diagnostic testing, it is important to take into con-
sideration any concurrent medical therapies the patient may be
receiving. Common drugs including (but not limited to) gluco-
SECTION 2 THYROID GLANDS
corticoids, phenobarbital, sulfa antibiotics, furosemide, some
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), clomipramine,
The thyroid glands are two reddish-brown glands (also called
and radiocontrast agents have been reported to alter thyroid
lobes) located in the neck on either side of the trachea, just below
 concentrations,26 thereby making diagnostic interpretation that
the cricoid cartilage, from approximately the fifth to the sixth
much more diffcult.
rings of the trachea. The microscopic structure consists of
 Another factor that should be considered is that of concurrent
thyroid epithelial cells that synthesize the thyroid hormones
illness causing a reduction in thyroid hormone levels. This phe-
Chapter 2  Endocrinology
15
Table 2.2.1  Clinical manifestations of canine hypothyroidism
Table 2.2.2 Factors causing low T4 values in euthyroid animals
Metabolic
Fa.ctor
Cardiovascular
Example
Lethargy
 Bradycardia
 Con current drug therapy
 Prednisone, phenobarbital
 Mental dullness
 Cardiac arrhythmias
 Nonthyroid al illness 
Hyperadren ocorticism 
Unexplained weight gain
Naturally occurring different 
 Greyhounds, whippets,
Cold intolerance
Ocular
reference ranges for specific
basenjis, sled dogs
breeds 
Corneal lipid deposits
Hourly flu ctu ations
Circadian cycle changes
Dermatologic
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Fasting over 48 h
Anorexia
Alopecia
 Corneal ulceration
Age
An older dog is more likely to
Seborrhea sicca, oleosa,
Uveitis
have lower TT4 values than a
 or dermatitis
younger dog
Dry, brittle hair coat
Gastrointestinal
 Ambient temperature
Car ride on a hot summer
Changes in hair coat color
 Diarrmh ea
day
Pyoderma
Constipation
Stress
Visit to the veterinary hospital
Hyperpigmentation
Hematologic
Sources: Wilford C, DvM (Veterinary News columnist for the AKC Gazette).
 Otitis externa
Anemia
The enigmatic nature of hypothyroidism makes it difficult to distinguish from
other diseases. AKC Gazette November, 1995; pp. 67-71; Neiger R, Prof. Dr.
Myxedema
Hyperlipidemia
med. vet., PhD, DACvIM, DECVIM-CA. Canine hypothyroidism. In: 50*
Coagulopathy
Congresso Nazionaie Muitisaia SCrvAC, Rimini, Italy. Giessen, Germany: Small
Animal Clinic, Justus-Liebig University; 2005.
Neuromuscular
Weakn ess
Urinalysis is often normal in dogs with primary hypothy-
Reproductive
Ataxia
 Female cycle abnormalities
complex glomerulonephritis may result in proteinuria. PU,
 Vestibular signs
Testicular atrophy
hyposthenuria, and urinary tract infections are not typical of
Facial nerve paralysis
Hypo/azoospermia
hypothyroidism.'
Seizures
Endocrine testing
Total T4 values will fall below normal reference range in most
Source: Feldman EC, Nelson Rw. Hypothyroidism/the thyroid gland. In:
 hypothyroid dogs; however, because this test is highly sensitive
Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edition. St. Louis,
 but not as specifc, it is recommended that a free T4 by equilibrium
MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2004, 86+, print.
dialysis (fT4 [ED]) and a TSH level be evaluated. A decreased fT4
(ED) and an increased TSH in a dog with typical hypothyroid
nomenon, known as nonthyroidal illness or euthyroid sick syn-
signs is highly suggestive of a true hypothyroid condition. It
drome, can be brought on by conditions such as HAC, renal
should be emphasized that measuring fT4 (ED) is considered
disease, hepatic disease, heart failure, severe infections, and dia-
more accurate than radioimmunoassay (RIA) and should be
d    r i  )  
specifically requested when submitting samples for testing.
adaptation of the body in an attempt to decrease cellular metabo-
Certain dog breeds such as greyhounds, whippets, basenjis,
lism' and to conserve energy. In general, the relative reduction 
and conditioned sled dogs have been shown to have T4 concen-
in basal T4 levels correlates with the severity of clinical illness.
trations lower than established reference ranges of most other
 For dogs demonstrating signs typical of hypothyroidism, a
dogs. A diagnosis of hypothyroidism can therefore be difficult in
minimum database including a CBC, a chemistry profle with
these breeds and further diagnostic testing is recommended.57.8
electrolytes, urinalysis, and total T4 (TT4) is recommended for
Due to highly variable T; concentrations in both hypothyroid
the initial diagnostic workup.
and euthyroid dogs, this test is of little value in the diagnosis of
Abnormal findings in the CBC that may be consistent with
 canine hypothyroidism.
hypothyroidism are a mild, normocytic, normochromic, nonre-
The TSH stimulation test has been reported as highly accurate
generative anemia, as well as leukocytosis, which could be a
in diagnosing hypothyroidism in dogs; however, cost and avail-
result of any skin infections that are present.
ability of TSH has limited its use in veterinary medicine.
 Common abnormalities found in the serum chemistry profle
 Dogs demonstrating abnormalities in other parameters of
are hypercholesterolemia and/or hypertriglyceridemia despite
 testing should be further evaluated for other conditions that may
the collection of fasted samples. This may be due to the body's
have overlapping diagnostic findings and clinical signs such as
HAC or other nonthyroidal illnesses (Table 2.2.2).
16
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Treatments
Table 2.2.3 Common signs associated with feline hyperthyroidism
 The treatment of choice for hypothyroid dogs with clinical signs
Weight loss
is supplementation of a name brand synthetic levothyroxine
 Polyphagia
Tachycardia
doses are 0.02 mg/kg (0.1 mg/10 1b) twice daily, up to a maximum
of 0.8mg twice daily.? Animal origin and generic synthetic
Heart murmurs
thyroid supplements have historically been criticized for either
 Palpable thyroid 
having variable bioavailability or the potential of having variable,
Increased ALT/SAP
and sometimes considerably less, hormone than what is stated
on the labe1.'2
Polydipsia
It is recommended that a T4 level be reevaluated 4-8 weeks
Polyuria
after starting replacement therapy or after any changes in dose
Vomiting
 or supplement brand. Dosage should then be adjusted according
to test results as well as clinical response. If the patient responds
Diarrhea
well to therapy, once-daily therapy can be tried; however, some
Unkempt appearance of skin and hair coat
patients will require continued twice-daily therapy.* In dogs,
Behavioral changes (i.e., increased vocalization, restlessness,
peak plasma concentrations after oral dosing reportedly occur
irritability)
 4-12h after administration, and the serum half-life is approxi-
mately 12-16 h. Ideally, blood samples should be drawn imme-
diately before the next dose is due (trough level) and then 4-6 h
post pill (peak level). Once a consistent therapeutic dose has
Clinical signs
been achieved, routine monitoring may only require testing of
peak T4 levels every 6-12 months.
Clinical signs of feline hyperthyroidism may vary depending on
Clinical improvement should be observed within 4-6 weeks
the severity of the disease, the duration of occurrence, and indi-
of initiation of therapy, although improvement in mental alert-
vidual eccentricities (Table 2.2.3). Two of the most common
ness and activity level may be seen in as little as 1-2 weeks.4
signs that are reported, and are oftentimes the most distinguish-
Dermatologic and reproductive abnormalities may take several
ing feature of feline hyperthyroidism, are those of unintended
months to completely resolve.? If resolution of symptoms is not
weight loss (in 92% of hyperthyroid cats) coupled with poly-
 noted within this time frame, the diagnosis of hypothyroidism
phagia (in 61% of hyperthyroid cats)." As it pertains to hyper-
should be questioned.
thyroidism, this paradox is believed to be the result of the
hypermetabolic state that is produced when chronically elevated
Prognosis and survival times
levels of circulating thyroid hormone are present. Simply put,
With proper diagnosis, therapy, and monitoring, the prognosis
despite their increased drive to do so, most cats with significant
for canine hypothyroidism is excellent and life expectancy is
hyperthyroidism often cannot consume enough food to com-
a q ae soq  um u ads a n ad
normal.4
sometimes to the point of cachexia. A smaller subset of hyper
thyroid cats,however, becomes anorexic as the disease progresses,
Feline hyperthyroidism
thereby accelerating their rate of weight loss. This condition is
Hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis) is a multisystemic disorder that
referred to as apathetic hyperthyroidism and is seen in approxi-
results from the excessive production and secretion of T4 and T3.
 mately 14% of hyperthyroid cats."1
Overall, it is the most common endocrine disorder of cats'"; it is
Gastrointestinal (GI) signs of the disease may include vomit-
typically only diagnosed in middle age to older cats with a median
ing, caused by stimulation of the chemoreceptor trigger zone
(CRTZ), as well as rapid ingestion of large volumes of food, and
tion, and with the possible exception of the Siamese and the Hima-
diarrhea, which may be caused by a decrease in GI transit times
layan having fewer reported incidences than other breeds, there
and subsequent malabsorption..4
 does not appear to be a significant breed predisposition.l
PU/PD is another clinical feature that has been reported to
Fortunately, 97-99% of cases are histologically characterized
Jo nsan e aq A pu si pioiad jo i%t un 1o
 as benign adenomatous hyperplasia, adenomas, or multinodular 
increased renal perfusion (which subsequently reduces renal
adenomas.12 The remaining 1-3% of hyperthyroid cats, however,
medullary solute concentration),'5 the diuretic effects of T4, an
have malignant thyroid carcinomas. Furthermore, over 70% of
associated renal insufficiency, or compulsive PD.16
hyperthyroid cats are found to have bilateral involvement with
Other common signs include hyperactivity and behavioral
the majority of cats having asymmetrical disease.l
changes such as increased vocalization, irritability, or increased
At this point, the etiology of hyperthyroidism in cats is
socialization. These may be attributable to either an increased
unknown; however, studies suggest that diet, environment, and
stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system or a result of the
 genetics may all play a role in the development of the disease.13
cat's heightened drive to seek out food or water.
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
17
Diagnostics
may be difficult to interpret, expensive, or more labor intensive
to perform in comparison with total and free T4 assays, they
 Although some diagnoses are incidental findings following
should be reserved for occasions when repeated traditional
routine lab work, hyperthyroidism is more often diagnosed by
testing proves nondiagnostic. 0.17
linking history and clinical signs with one or more of the follow-
 The TSH response test is not recommended as it may be dif-
ing: physical examination, abnormal laboratory findings, and
fcult to differentiate mildly hyperthyroid versus euthyroid
thyroid scintigraphy.
results.
Physical examination of hyperthyroid cats often identifies
Furthermore, in cats with clearly elevated TT4 values, the TSH
tachycardia (with heart rates often >220 beats/min), systolic
response test offers no additional diagnostic information.1
heart murmurs, cardiac arrhythmias, weight loss, muscle
wasting, and a poor hair coat.
Additional diagnostics
In addition, a palpable thyroid nodule, which is sometimes
referred to as a thyroid slip or goiter, may also be present. The
A thyroid scan, by means of scintigraphy, is considered both a
term “"thyroid slip" indicates that one or both of the glands are
highly sensitive and specific method of diagnosing feline
enlarged. Initially, the glands are pushed ventral (down) during
hyperthyroidism.
palpation and then “slip" back up into position. The classic
 Because thyroid scintigraphy allows the direct visualization of
 method to palpate the glands is to place the thumb and the index
the functional adenomatous thyroid tissue responsible for the
finger on either side of the trachea. With the cat in a sitting posi-
 development of hyperthyroidism,8 cats diagnosed with the
tion and the legs held still, the neck is extended and the examiner
disease based on clinical signs and laboratory fndings alone
 gently sweeps their digits from the cat's larynx to the thoracic
a   n d aes a 
inlet, feeling for any lumps running under the digits. In the
 diagnosis, as well as to determine the location of the abnormal
alternate technique, the examiner is positioned behind the cat,
 tissue. This is especially important for cats scheduled to undergo
which is either standing or in sternal recumbency. The cat's head
irreversible treatments for hyperthyroidism such as surgical thy-
is elevated and turned 45° to the right or left, and the examiner
 roidectomy or radioactive iodine.
places his or her index finger in the groove formed by the larynx
Thyroid scans are performed by first injecting an intravenous
and moves it downward toward the thoracic inlet.
radionuclide that is actively concentrated by thyroid tissue.
One of the most common abnormalities that may be observed
Although iodine-131 (13'1) and iodine-123 (1231) could also be
 on  si s pr o m q un 
utilized, technetium-9m as pertechnetate (9mTcO4) is the most
elevations in liver enzymes, specifically in the alanine ami-
commonly used compound because it is readily available, rela-
notransferase (ALT) and serum alkaline phosphatase (SAP)
tively inexpensive, has a rapid uptake of as little as 20 min, and
 measurements. Suggested explanations for such abnormalities
has a short half-life of 6h.
have included malnutrition, CHF, infections, hepatic anoxia, and
 Once an appropriate uptake time has lapsed, the cat is imaged
direct toxic effects of thyroid hormones on the liver. 
by a gamma camera, which will detect and display areas where
Erythrocytosis, neutrophilia, and lymphocytosis are also fre-
gamma-emitting radionuclides are concentrated in various
quently observed.
degrees. Pertechnetate concentrates primarily in the thyroid
Elevated total T4 (TT4) serum concentrations are typically the
tissue, salivary glands, and gastric mucosa. A 1:1 uptake ratio
most reliable test in confirming the disease. However, because of
of salivary glands to thyroid lobes is the standard for a normal
naturally occurring thyroid hormone fluctuations, as well as the
 study, whereas the radioactive uptake of the thyroid lobe(s) must
a ss ru o si sss 
 be greater than that of the salivary glands to confrm a diagnosis
roidism cannot be ruled out based on one normal TT4 value; this is
 of hyperthyroidism" (Figures 2.2.1 and 2.2.2).
particularly true when clinical signs and physical examination
suggest otherwise. In instances where the TT4 value is within the
 clinical evidence of heart disease, cardiac screening is also advis-
 normal reference range but hyperthyroidism is still suspected, a
 able. At a minimum, this should include thoracic radiographs;
TT4 should be repeated along with fT4 (ED). Occasional, true
however, an electrocardiogram (ECG) evaluation and echocar-
hyperthyroid cats will have a normal or high normal TT4 but have
diography may also be warranted to further identify the type and
 severity of the heart disease present. Thyrotoxicosis causes
roidal illness than TT4, it is considered a more sensitive test; there-
 cardiac hypertrophy related to a hypermetabolic state, peripheral
fore, when elevated, it may lend supportive evidence of the disease.
vasodilation, and increased demands for cardiac output. In addi-
 Free T4 should not, however, be used as an initial screening tool
 tion, increased sympathetic activity and thyroid hormone levels
  o     si ads st e  h 
may stimulate myocardial hypertrophy. In chronic cases of
 used alone, it has a higher incidence of false positives.l
hyperthyroidism, the left ventricle (LV) becomes thickened.
Other thyroid function tests such as the T; suppression test
Concurrent systemic hypertension probably contributes to this
and the thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) stimulation test
 in many cases. Hypertension in these cats can be multifactorial:
have been described as potential aids in diagnosing mildly
from high cardiac output, aortic stiffness in cats with aortoan-
hyperthyroid cats with vague or borderline resting serum T4
nular ectasia, or related to concurrent renal disease. In advanced
concentrations." However, when considering that these tests
 hyperthyroidism, there will be suffcient cardiac dysfunction and
18
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
fluid retention to cause more generalized cardiomegaly or even
CHF.  Echocardiography will reveal bi-atrial dilatation with
 normal or reduced LV ejection fraction.19
 Because of the high incidence of systemic hypertension in
hyperthyroid cats, measurement of systolic, and if possible
diastolic, blood pressure as well as an ophthalmic examination
should be performed on all hyperthyroid cats. Consequences of 
uncontrolled hypertension include retinopathy, progressive
renal disease, and central nervous system (CNS) hemorrhage.20
Fortunately, hypertension associated with this disease results
 a   s  s 
associated with chronic renal failure.
Concurrent disease
As hyperthyroidism is typically a disease of middle age to older
cats, it is important to recognize the increased likelihood of
existing concurrent disease. Furthermore, as the differentials for
hyperthyroidism oftentimes overlap with those of other illnesses
such as primary GI, renal, hepatic, or cardiac disease, it is
strongly recommended for the overall well-being of the patient
to identify and address, when possible, any concurrent illnesses
while considering therapy options for hyperthyroidism.
Treatments
Figure 2.2.1 Thyroid scintigraphy performed on a hyperthyroid cat
 Failure to institute some kind of therapy for hyperthyroidism
illustrating an increased uptake of 9mTcO4- by functional adenomatous
thyroid tissue. The figure demonstrates bilateral disease.
will result in an insidious progression of emaciation, severe
metabolic and cardiac dysfunction, and, ultimately, death.
However, because of the benign nature of the thyroid lesions, the
disease carries a favorable prognosis with effective therapy.
Standard options for treating hyperthyroid cats consist of one
 or a combination of the following methods: medical manage-
ment, surgical thyroidectomy, radioiodine therapy, and iodine.
restricted diets.
Medical management
 In the United States, medical management of feline hyperthy.
roidism is most commonly achieved with the use of methi-
mazole (trade names Tapazole? or Felimazole?). Elsewhere,
carbimazole, a prodrug to methimazole, may be used with
similar effects. Antithyroid drugs such as methimazole and car-
bimazole inhibit synthesis of thyroid hormones; they are not,
however, cytotoxic. Therefore, thyroid nodules may continue to
grow, necessitating the need for dose adjustments over time. In
humans, the plasma half-life of methimazole is reported as any-
where from 4 to 14h; however, the biological effects of the drug
appear to exceed its plasma half-life." In cats, once- to thrice-
daily administration of antithyroid drugs has been described
with most cats requiring lifelong twice-daily dosing to achieve
stable euthyroidism.
Figure 2.2.2  Thyroid scintigraphy performed on a hyperthyroid cat
Although many cats will respond well to daily methimazole
illustrating an increased uptake of 9mTcO- by functional adenomatous
treatments for the remainder of their lives, others experience
thyroid tissue. The figure demonstrates unilateral disease.
some form of adverse reaction such as inappetence, vomiting.
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
19
lethargy, and dermatologic or hematologic disturbances. In these 
of untreated hyperthyroid cats, they often are poor anesthetic
  s   u s  s
candidates. Therefore, every effort should be made to stabilize
required.
hyperthyroid patients prior to anesthetic events. This may be
Regardless of the long-term means of hyperthyroid treatment,
achieved by initiating methimazole administration several weeks
an initial short-term trial period of methimazole is recom-
 to months prior to the event or, at minimum, by formulating an
mended to assess the possibility of occult renal disease before a
 anesthetic plan that incorporates careful selection of nonadren-
 permanent resolution is sought. Once a euthyroid state has been 
 ergic stimulating drugs and close monitoring.
achieved through administration of either oral or transdermal
 Finally, it should be reiterated that although surgical thyroid-
methimazole, serum chemistry and urinalyses should be 
 ectomy may be convenient and readily accessible, due to a sig-
repeated to determine if renal function remains normal in the 
 nificantly increased risk of life-threatening complications when
face ofthe reduction in renal perfusion induced by the euthyroid
 compared to radioiodine therapy, it is rarely advised.
state.
Methimazole administration may also be a helpful tool in
 preparing a cat for eventual surgical thyroidectomy as it can halt
Radioiodine therapy
 or reverse significant weight loss, as well as decrease cardiac and
Radioiodine therapy has been shown to provide a simple, safe,
metabolic complications," thereby making the patient a better
 and effective means of treating feline hyperthyroidism.22 1311 is
surgical candidate. It is recommended that methimazole be
the therapeutic radionuclide of choice' as it has a >95% success
administered for 6-12 weeks prior to surgery, until the cat is
medically and clinically euthyroid.1
of where it resides, with a single dose. I3'I can be given IV, sub-
cutaneously (SC), or orally; however, because oral administra-
Surgical thyroidectomy
tion may increase the risk of radiation exposure to veterinary
 personnel, it is most often given IV or SC. After administration,
Although radioiodine therapy appears to be the safest, most
up to 60% of 13'I is trapped or concentrated in the thyroid gland
effective,2' and preferred method of treatment by both veterinary
where it selectively destroys hyperfunctional tissue by emitting
surgeons and internal medicine specialists alike, surgical thy-
both gamma rays and beta particles. Eighty percent of the tissue
roidectomy may be an option for hyperthyroid cats that have
destruction is caused by the beta particles; however, because
been determined to have minimal anesthetic risks and do not
they only travel a maximum of 2mm into the tissue, adjacent
have access to, or funding for, radioiodine therapy.
hypoplastic thyroid tissue, parathyroid glands, and other
It should be noted, however, that a significant number of cats
have been found to have ectopic hyperplastic thyroid tissue
thyroid gland is excreted primarily in the urine and, to a lesser
located in their thoracic inlet or anterior mediastinum.' It is
degree, nthe feces2 The halflifof 1l is 8.1 days and requires
therefore advisable that nuclear scintigraphy be utilized to iden-
 patients to be hospitalized while radiation levels decrease. Dura-
fify ectopic tissue and to alter treatment plans if necessary.
 Should surgery proced without identifcation of the ectopic
tion of hospitalization is usually between 3 days and 2 weeks
depending on the dose used and the state or local radiation
tissue via scintigraphy, the hyperthyroid condition will often
regulations.10.23
 persist despite removal of a coexisting hyperfunctional cervical
 In order to reduce human exposure to radioactivity still
thyroid gland. In addition, surgical thyroidectomy can carry det-
present in the cat at the time of discharge, owners should be
rimental risks. Damage to, or the inadvertent removal of, adja-
advised to abide by the following instructions for 1-3 weeks after
 nsan A Andns poo ni no sp prd ju
the cat is discharged from the hospital:
 cemia. Postoperative hypoparathyroidism is rarely a permanent
Keep the cat indoors.
occurrence; however, because calcium regulation is vital to
Minimize close contact with the cat.
proper electrical conduction of the nervous and muscular
 Eliminate all contact with the cat and its waste products for all
systems, serum calcium levels should be evaluated daily for
 children and pregnant women.
up to 7 days and patients should be closely observed for the
 Dispose of all waste products and liter according to state and
onset of hypocalcemic signs." Other potential complications
 local radioactive waste disposal regulations.
include laryngeal paralysis as a result of damage to the recurrent
laryngeal nerve, Horner's syndrome, and permanent hypothy-
Although most cats will have normal thyroid function within 1
roidism. Although some cats undergoing bilateral total thyroid-
- a s sod  r r 
ectomies will retain and grow enough accessory thyroid tissue
mended at 1, 3, and 6 months to assess thyroid levels, serum
to remain clinically euthyroid, others will demonstrate manifes-
 chemistry profles, and the overall health status of the cat.
 tations of hypothyroidism and therefore will require long-term
thyroid supplementation and subsequent dose monitoring
to '3'1 treatment are a higher upfront cost of treatment, the
postoperatively.
limited availability of facilities that are equipped and licensed
As described earlier, due to the high incidence of cardiovas-
to offer the procedure, and quarantine requirements after
 cular and metabolic disturbances and the debilitated condition
 administration.
20
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Treatment with iodine-restricted diets
becoming more common and accessible in the United States. As
such, the veterinary technician should be comfortable in provid-
Most recently, a fourth option for the treatment of feline hyper-
ing client education for this treatment option.
thyroidism has emerged by way of dietary iodine restriction.
Although correlating studies were performed on a relatively
small number of test subjects, abstracts published in the Journa!
The role of the veterinary technician
of Veterinary Internal Medicine demonstrated that hyperthyroid
As with many aspects of veterinary medicine, the role of the
cats fed a diet with iodine levels <0.32 parts per million dry
 matter basis maintained normal T4 concentrations.24
veterinary technician in the care of hyperthyroid cats can be
 The factors to consider if dietary management is elected are
quite extensive. Client knowledge regarding hyperthyroidism
the following:
can range from pet owners who just thought their cat was
"getting old" and are completely unaware that such a disease
Cats on an iodine-restricted diet need to be fed that diet
exists to clients armed with reams of information gleaned from
exclusively, as even small volumes of erroneous food items
the internet. It has been well documented that hyperthyroid cats
can cause unacceptable elevations in thyroid levels
that have been identifed and treated effectively often have favo-
Rechecks including a physical exam, T4, CBC, serum chem-
rable outcomes. Therefore, if hyperthyroidism is suspected or
istry profle, and urinalysis should be conducted indefinitely
diagnosed, technicians can go a long way in providing in-depth
at a minimum of 6-month intervals.
information to the client about the many facets of the disease
 Excluding those that have experienced adverse reactions, cats
and how it relates to their cat so that they can make an informed
receiving antithyroid medication should be down-titrated off
decision about treatment options.
Likewise, technicians play a vital role in the treatment of
medication over a period of several weeks while transitioning
to the iodine-restricted diet.
hyperthyroid cats through their involvement with diagnostic
 testing, assisting in therapeutic procedures, such as surgery or
radioactive iodine, and providing at-home client education.
Prognosis and survival times
Prognosis and survival times for cats with hyperthyroidism are
Canine thyroid tumors
highly variable depending on the age of the cat, concurrent ill-
roidism is a systemic disease that eventually leads to death if
Of these, 70-100% are malignant, with 30-60% of dogs having
untreated.
metastasis at the time of diagnosis.728 Boxers, beagles, and
-e on d as re  e pss si r
ment, one study found that the average survival time for hyper-
middle-aged to older dogs, with an average age of 10 years, with
thyroid cats treated with methimazole alone was 2 years, with a
range of 1.0-3.9 years, whereas cats treated with 131 alone aver-
no sex predilection.28
aged 4-year survival times with a range of 3.0-4.8 years.25
Although few statistical evaluations of prognosis and long-
Clinical signs
term survival times of hyperthyroid cats undergoing surgical
thyroidectomy with or without pretreatment with methimazole
The most common reason for presentation to the veterinarian is
 have been published, most literature agrees that the presurgical
palpation of a ventral neck mass by the owner.28 The mass may
health status of the patient, the location of the tumor(s), the skill
be large and may extend to the thoracic inlet. Other clinical signs
 of the surgeon and the anesthetist, and perioperative monitoring
include trouble swallowing, regurgitation, tachypnea, dyspnea,
loud breathing,coughing, and bark change28.2 Nonspecifc signs
and care are all very important factors in determining outcome.
 In one study, the recurrence rate of hyperthyroidism postopera-
such as lethargy, weight loss, and decreased appetite can occur.29
tively was reported as low. Of those that did recur, most were
Clinical signs due to hyperthyroidism can occur as 10% of
cases that had presurgical scintigraphic evidence of ectopic
thyroid tumors are functional. Functional canine thyroid tumors
hyperplastic thyroid tissue.26
are almost always malignant carcinomas. Clinical signs associ-
ated with hyperthyroidism include weight loss, PD, PU, poly-
phagia, hyperactivity, diarrhea, and vomiting. Thyroid tumors
Conclusion
can be clinically silent if benign, small, noninvasive, and non-
 Hyperthyroidism, the most common endocrine disorder of cats,
functional. Thyroid masses of this nature are often found inci-
dentally on necropsy due to their silent nature.28.29
is frequently encountered by the veterinary technician. As such,
a thorough understanding of this disease process is necessary.
 This knowledge should also include a complete understanding
Diagnostics
 of the diagnostic testing and treatment options. Because radio-
iodine therapy is the superior method for treating most hyper-
Diagnostic testing is used both to defnitively diagnose the
thyroid cats, licensed facilities offering this treatment are
tumor and to clinically stage the tumor.
Chapter 2  Endocrinology
21
Physical exam
A
ISUVet Teaching Hospital
二X
1126
The only physical exam finding may be a mass in the ventral
cervical region272s Other causes of cervical swellings include
Se:2/3
abscess, salivary mucocele, granuloma, and cellulitis. Other
m:37/100
AxS80.0 (COl)
cqTm:09:52:48.000000
physical exam abnormalities can be seen with large, invasive
tumors and are similar to what the owner notes at home as
described in the previous section. The neck should be palpated
512×512
very carefully to determine the size and extent of the mass, as
00000.000000
well as if the mass is freely movable. An immovable mass implies
local invasion and should raise suspicion for a malignant thyroid
tumor. Mandibular lymph nodes should be carefully palpated
and may be enlarged due to tumor spread Physical exam find-
ings associated with hyperthyroidism can be seen with func-
tional thyroid tumors, as described above, and may include
tachycardia and heart murmur.2?9
120.0kV
Laboratory testing
200.0mA
4.0mm/0.0.1
A CBC, serum biochemistry profle, and urinalysis should be
Tilt:0.0
39.45
 performed to assess for concurrent conditions. There are no
Lin:DCM/Lin:DCM/Id:D
specifc findings on these tests to indicate a malignant tumor.
W.350L:70
P
DFOV:25.0x25.0cm
Rarely, hypercalcemia has been reported as a paraneoplastic syn-
Figure 2.2.3  CT scan of invasive thyroid tumor.
drome. Urinalysis is usually unremarkable.29
A basal T4 level, and potentially a TSH concentration, should
be obtained in any dog suspected of having a thyroid tumor.
Fine needle aspiration and biopsy
Thyroid tumors can destroy the thyroid gland leading to hypothy-
Thyroid tumors are typically vascular tumors that hemorrhage
roidism. In addition, 10% of dogs with malignant thyroid tumors
have hyperthyroidism due to a functional tumor.29
when aspirated or biopsied. Fine needle aspiration using a 21- to
23-gauge needle with ultrasound guidance is recommended.30
This can help differentiate thyroid tumors from other masses,
Imaging
such as abscesses, cysts, salivary mucoceles, other tumors (sar-
As a part of staging the tumor, and prior to making a treatment
comas or mast cell tumors), or lymph nodes. Be prepared for
plan, thoracic radiographs (three views) should always be per
postsampling hemorrhage. Firm pressure should be applied to
formed to evaluate for metastatic disease.
s o ae a da  e   s 
Cervical radiographs can be performed to evaluate for dis-
 should be continued until sure of the clotting status of the biopsy
placement of neck structures. Ultrasound of the neck is used to
site. Frequent checks of the area should continue throughout the
determine mass origin, invasiveness, vascularity, and whether
 day. If fine needle aspiration and cytology does not yield a diag-
the tumor is unilateral or bilatera1.29.30
nosis of thyroid malignancy, then biopsy of the mass should be
Abdominal radiographs and ultrasound can also be per-
considered. Incisional biopsy of masses that are fixed to the
formed to look for metastasis to the abdominal organs, such as
 underlying or adjacent tissue may be considered for definitive
the liver. This is also useful as the geriatric dog may have other
 dliagnosis. If the tumor is freely movable and nonfixed to adjacent
disorders that may influence decisions regarding therapy.
 and underlying tissues, surgical excision is recommended.29
CT or MRI of the cervical region can help determine the
invasiveness of the tumor. They are especially recommended if
Treatment
surgical excision or RT is being considered (Figure 2.2.3).
 Treatment options include surgical excision, radiotherapy.
radioiodide therapy (13'1), chemotherapy, or a combination of
Other diagnostic tests
these. The type of treatment chosen depends on the size of the
A cardiac workup is recommended if murmurs or arrhythmias
tumor, invasiveness, metastasis, and availability of treatment
modalities.
Surgical excision
tissue and to determine extent of invasion or lymph node metas-
Surgical excision is especially recommended for smaller, mobile
tasis. It is not useful for pulmonary metastasis.?1 This can also be
masses. Dogs with freely movable thyroid carcinomas without
used to determine if the tumor can be treated with 13'1 (see the
evidence of metastasis have a median survival time (MST) of
section "Treatment").
greater than 36 months.?2 Surgery is not recommended when the
22
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
tumor invades adjacent structures (vasculature, recurrent laryn
an abnormal pattern on thyroid scintigraphy regardless of T4
 geal nerves, parathyroid glands, larynx, or trachea). Tumors that
measurement.38
are bilateral and fixed are difficult to resect without significant
h e pe sied pee ui qo
Chemotherapy
estimated that only 25-50% of thyroid carcinomas are resectable
at the time of diagnosis.3234 MST with surgery is 6-12 months if
Cisplatin or doxorubicin chemotherapy can be used with
the tumor is invasive.2.34
mended following surgery or RT in dogs at high risk for develop-
Anesthetic and anaigesic considerations
ing metastasis (large, fixed, bilateral tumors).Anecdotally,
 Palladia? (toceranib phosphate) or metronomic chemotherapy
 Blood loss during surgery can be signifcant due to the vascular-
protocols may be of benefit in some cases. Anti-inflammatory
ity of the tumor. The surgeon and anesthetist should be prepared
steroid therapy may be helpful in decreasing inflammation and
to administer blood products if necessary. Additionally, dogs
edema associated with the tumor.
with hyperthyroidism due to a functional tumor should have
Prognosis
with large tumors are placed in dorsal recumbency for imaging.
RT, and surgery. Care should be taken to protect the airway as
The prognosis of dogs with thyroid carcinomas is considered
tracheal compression by the tumor can occur in this position.
good to excellent following curative intent treatment. See “ Treat-
Patients may have significant discomfort, especiall if not
ment'? section for prognosis with specifc treatments. The MST
for untreated dogs is only 3 months. The risk of metastasis
treated, as the tumor increases in size. Client education on rec-
ognizing the signs of discomfort along with strong patient advo-
increases when there is >20 cm? tumor volume4 or when the
cacy willensure adequate pain management. Analgesics intended
tumor is bilateral.42 When tumor volume is greater than 100 cm?,
 for use in moderate to severe pain are appropriate.
metastatic potential approaches 100%.41
Radiation therapy
Client education
RT is indicated when complete surgical excision of the tumor is
Clients should receive instruction on home care including the
not possible due to invasion of adjacent structures. Dogs treated
importance of using a harness instead of a neck leash/collar,
with RT have an MST of 24.5 months."5 RT may be attempted
exercise restriction to avoid hypoxic situations, and keeping the
when there is incomplete surgical excision. Palliative RT has also
o pd  s  u nr p
been used as the sole therapy to reduce tumor size or to decrease
Client education should also include information on quality
  o n d   si d  
of life in the terminal phase of the disease proces. These pets
other complications due to the tumor. The option for palliative
have the potential for death from slow asphyxiation and owners
-ues pool pou are 1eq saop 1oy paa 1sai aq pmous Adeiaoipei
 may need instruction on humane care.
didates for surgery or a full course of radiation (e.g., the dog has
  n a s iq s a o si
large thyroid carcinoma).”" Acute side effects of RT include skin
SECTION 3 PARATHYROID
desquamation, hair loss, and mucositis within the treatment
GLANDS
field Side effects usually develop during or shortly after treat-
ment and are generally reversible and are treated with sympto-
matic care (pain management and soft, highly palatable foods).
The two parathyroid glands lie in close approximation to the
Permanent alopecia and skin pigmentation are common after
thyroid gland on either side of the cervical trachea. They release
treatment.37
parathyroid hormone (PTH) with the primary goal of maintain-
ing normal blood calcium levels. In a normal animal, hypocal-
Radioiodide 131 (1311)
cemia stimulates the release of PTH and hypercalcemia will
I3lI can be used as an adjunct to surgery, with an MST of 34
reduce the amount of PTH released from the parathyroid glands,
allowing blood calcium levels to return to normal range. The
months; when used alone, MST is 30 months. In contrast,
three main actions of PTH are the conversion of vitamin D to
dogs that did not receive any treatment at all had an MST of
 3 months.30 131I therapy is recommended when surgery alone
 its active form (vitamin Ds), which increases absorption of
calcium from the GI tract, renal conservation of calcium, and
is not likely to be curative due to metastatic disease or local
calcium release from bony stores. The net effect of PTH is to
 i pe aq  as m n 
increase blood calcium levels back to normal range.
surgical excision has not been achieved.3* Another study showed
 similar results, and reported MSTs similar to RT:8 Three dogs
(out of 39, or 8%) died of radioiodine-associated myelosup-
Hypoparathyroidism
pression in this study.3 Dogs should undergo thyroid scin-
tigraphy with pertechnetate prior to 131 treatment. 131 should
 r s  a  si o
be considered in most dogs that accumulate pertechnetate in
parathyroid tissue. The naturally occurring disease (primary
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
23
hypoparathyroidism) is immune mediated in origin and is more
sis. Rectal temperatures should be monitored in febrile animals.
common in the dog. The toy poodle is overrepresented. Iatro-
External cooling measures are rarely necessary. When animals
are stable and eating, oral supplementation with calcium and
parathyroid removal or damage (as in surgical therapy for feline
vitamin D, (in the form of calcitriol) may be initiated.
hyperthyroidism) or as a temporary or permanent result of
Outpatient treatment
In the immediate period, animals may require therapy with both
Clinical signs
oral calcium and calcitriol. Once calcium levels have stabilized,
animals may be able to be maintained on single-agent calcitriol
The clinical signs of hypoparathyroidism are due to hypocal-
therapy. Additional therapy is not indicated in uncomplicated
 cemia. As blood ionized calcium levels fall, animals present with
cases of primary hypoparathyroidism. In the absence of clinical
primarily neuromuscular symptoms. Clinical signs include
signs, recheck examinations are recommended every 6 months.
weakness, lethargy, and muscle fasciculations, which can become 
These examinations should, at a minimum, include recent
severe enough to resemble tonic clonic seizure activity. Animals
history, physical examination, body weight and body condition
that present with severe fasciculations or seizures may also be
score, and blood ionized calcium levels.
febrile. However, the fever is most commonly due to the increased.
muscle activity and is self-limiting with appropriate therapy for
Pharmacology
hypocalcemia. Facial pruritus, which may be severe, is another
 manifestation of hypocalcemia. Clinical signs may appear
 Oral or parenteral forms of PTH are not available, so therapy
acutely, so additional neurological differentials (e.g., distemper,
consists of supplementation with calcium and vitamin D3.
rabies) should be considered.
Vitamin D; is necessary for absorption of calcium from the GI
tract.
Diagnostics
Calcium levels are measured in animals with consistent clinical
Prognosis and survival times
signs. Ionized calcium levels are recommended, as total calcium
With accurate diagnosis and committed owners, prognosis for
levels do not accurately represent the levels of the ionized form
 primary hypoparathyroidism is good to excellent. Animals may
and may be affected by serum albumin levels. Severe hypocal-
 be expected to have normal survival times with successful
therapy.
mented, supportive measures should be immediately instituted.
Once animals are stable and additional diagnostic testing is
Nutritional considerations
pursued, PTH levels should be measured in animals suspected of
having hypoparathyroidism. The diagnosis is made by demon-
Animals with hypoparathyroidism do not require special diets
strating decreased PTH levels concurrent with hypocalcemia.
 or dietary supplements. An age-appropriate and nutritionally
 In the majority of cases, there is no reason to consider par-
 complete diet is required.
athyroid gland biopsy.
Client education
Imaging
Client education is imperative with hypoparathyroidism. Clients
There are no diagnostic imaging procedures that are specific to
 need to be made aware of signs of hypocalcemia, including
 hypoparathyroidism.
weakness, lethargy, muscle fasciculations, and facial pruritus. It
must be stressed that signs may be noted at any time and that
Treatments
emergency intervention may need to be pursued. Clients must
also be aware that monitoring of blood calcium levels, on a
Inpatient treatment
routine basis or in an emergency situation, requires measure-
 Inpatient treatment centers on identifcation of the hypocal-
 ment of ionized calcium, as opposed to total calcium. Clients
cemic state and emergency stabilization of the patient. Calcium
 should identify veterinary practices that can provide in-house
    a   q 
and accurate ionized calcium measurements. Clients must also
therapy may result in significant cardiac arrhythmias. Therefore,
 be aware of signs of hypercalcemia (PU/PD). Oversupplementa-
concurrent, continuous ECG monitoring is recommended. Once
tion with calcitriol may lead to clinical hypercalcemia, and if
calcium levels have stabilized, additional calcium may be admin-
signs are noted, then dosing adjustments may be necessary.
istered via constant rate infusion (CRl), subcutaneous injection,
and oral therapy. Protocols for subcutaneous injections are avail-
Hyperparathyroidism
able but are controversial. Severe cutaneous lesions have been
reported as a result of subcutaneous calcium administration.
Hyperparathyroidism is characterized by an abnormal increase
Calcium chloride is highly irritating to tissues and calcium glu-
in the amount of functional parathyroid tissue. This can be
conate has been associated with calcinosis cutis and skin necro-
a primary disease (more common in the dog) or can occur
24
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 oids to promote calciuriesis. Animals with primary hyperpar-
roidism). Naturally occurring primary hyperparathyroidism
 athyroidism should be medically managed to minimize anesthetic
is most commonly a benign condition and keeshonds are
risks and reduce complications of parathyroidectomy. Certain
overrepresented.
protocols call for preoperative therapy with calcium and vitamin
D; for 24-72 h to help prevent life-threatening postoperative
Clinical signs
hypocalcemia. Definitive treatment for primary hyperparathy-
 roidism may consist of surgical parathyroidectomy or percuta-
Clinical signs of hyperparathyroidism are due to hypercalcemia.
neous ablation techniques. In either scenario, postoperative
The predominant clinical signs are PU/PD. If signs are chronic,
monitoring of ionized calcium levels is imperative. Depending
weight loss and lethargy may also be reported.
ionized calcium levels may need to be assessed from every 4 to
Diagnostics
12h. Animals also require close monitoring for signs of hypoc-
alcemia (lethargy, weakness, muscle fasciculations, facial pruri-
The most significant finding on laboratory testing is hypercal-
 q    s rg (m
cemia. The total calcium on serum chemistry is elevated and, in
and may require intravenous calcium supplementation. Con-
most cases, ionized calcium will also be increased. Hypercal-
tinuous ECG monitoring is a necessary component of intrave-
cemia may be severe. Phosphate levels are normal to low; this is
 nous calcium therapy.
in contrast to other causes of hypercalcemia (chronic renal
failure [CRF]) in which phosphate levels are elevated. Diagnosis
Anesthetic and anaigesic considerations
is usually suspected by excluding the more common causes of
Anesthetic considerations concentrate on repeated measure-
hypercalcemia (e.g., LSA, anal sac tumors, renal failure). PU/PD
 ment of ionized calcium levels and appropriate supplementation
may contribute to evidence of dehydration, including elevated
of calcium.
blood urea nitrogen, hematocrit, and albumin. Urine specifc
gravity may be in the isosthenuric range, even in the face of
Outpatient treatments
dehydration. Assays for PTH are definitive, documenting either
Long-term supplemental therapy is not required for most cases of
 normal or elevated values, consistent with autonomous hyperse-
primary hyperparathyroidism. In cases of subtotal parathyroid-
cretion of PTH.
ectomy for primary hyperparathyroidism, short-term therapy for
Imaging
hypocalcemia may be indicated. However, once PTH and calcium
levels have equilibrated, long-term supplemental therapy is not
Cervical ultrasound is a recommended imaging modality for
 required in most cases. Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism is
 si d     
maintaining dorsal recumbency and cervical extension, allowing
m a aq  siat Hd de yo d e pisu
for improved imaging of the cervical region. Cervical ultrasound
therapy for renal disease and, in appropriate cases, with calcitriol
aids in the diagnosis and in the therapeutic approach to primary
therapy. See Chapter 10 for more information.
hyperparathyroidism, especially when a solitary parathyroid
nodule is identified. This assists in planning for surgical or
Pharmacology
 the parathyroid gland is more consistent with renal secondary
 In animals with primary hyperparathyroidism, the ability to
hyperparathyroidism.
respond to hypocalcemia is diminished as PTH would normally be
Biopsy
downregulated in response to hypercalcemia. Therefore, in light of
autonomously functioning parathyroid tissue, the compensatory
 In the majority of cases, biopsy of the parathyroid tissue is per-
 formed at the time of surgical parathyroidectomy. Tissue should
 regulated Thus, the animal's ability to compensate for hypocal-
be submitted for histopathologic examination to ensure hyper-
parathyroidism is a benign condition. Malignant parathyroid
parathyroid ablation), by increasing PTH levels and resorbing
disease is rare, but when present, metastatic disease may be seen.
calcium in various sites, is insufficient. Postprocedural ionized
calcium concentration may significantly decrease and can reach
Treatments
life-threatening levels. Therefore, close monitoring of ionized
calcium and appropriate parenteral supplementation is critical.
Inpatient treatments
 n      
Prognosis and survival times
calcium levels. Animals with primary hyperparathyroidism may
present with dangerously elevated blood calcium levels. Therapy
Prognosis for long-term survival is good to excellent with suc-
for hypercalcemia consists of intravenous fluid support with a
cessful therapy and appropriate and intensive perioperative mon-
balanced crystalloid solution (0.9% NaCl), diuretic therapy once
itoring and therapy Incases with malignant disease, the prognosis
yolume status has been normalized, and potentially, corticoster-
is worse and animals may succumb to metastatic disease.
Chapter 2  Endocrinology
25
Nutritional considerations
Classically, dogs presented for an Addisonian crisis are lethar-
gic, dehydrated, and are hyponatremic and hyperkalemic due to
 As with any critical animal, nutritional needs, calculated by basal
the lack of aldosterone.
energy requirement (BER), should be assessed for every patient.
There are no specifc short- or long-term nutritional require-
Diagnostic testing
 ments for patients with primary hyperparathyroidism. Nutri-
tional considerations are more important for cases of renal
 In 95% of dogs with hypoadrenocorticism, the sodium :potas-
secondary hyperparathyroidism.
sium ratio is less than 27:1.? Nonregenerative anemia (21-25%)
and lack of a stress leukogram (92%), (neutrophilia [32%], lym-
2, ad aq  (-1] ada  [ 1 -1] ad
SECTION 4 ADRENAL GLANDS
A serum biochemistry panel may reveal prerenal azotemia due
to hypovolemia in up to 95% of dogs with primary hypoadreno-
The adrenal glands consist of an outer cortex and an inner
corticism.' Other significant clinicopathologic abnormalities can
medulla. There are three layers, or zones, which make up the
 include hypoglycemia, increased liver enzymes, hypercalcemia,
cortex. The outer most layer is the zona glomerulosa (ZG), which
 hypoalbuminemia, and hyperphosphatemia.? A urine specific
 produces aldosterone. Aldosterone's main function is to increase
gravity of <1.030 is noted in 60-88% of Addisonian dogs.
sodium absorbtion and potassium excretion.? The middle layer,
the zona fasciculata (ZF), and the inner most layer, the zona
Imaging
sa e a i e    s
for the production of cortisol and androgens.? Cortisol has a mul-
Thoracic radiographs can reveal microcardia, reduced caudal vena
titude of effects on many body systems including hepatic glucose
cava size, and pulmonary vasculature related to hypovolemia.
production, protein and fat catabolism, as well as maintaining
 Radiographs may reveal a megaesophagus (0.9%).2 Abdominal
normal blood pressure.?The destruction of the three layers leads
 radiographs are often performed to rule out a GI foreign body. An
to inadequate secretion of both mineralocorticoids (primarily
abdominal ultrasound may reveal a significantly smaller adrenal
aldosterone) and glucocorticoids (primarily cortisol).2
gland size on ultrasound compared to normal dogs.
The nickname of this disease is "The Great Pretender" or "The
Hypoadrenocorticism: Addison's
Great Masquerader" because the clinical signs and test results can
resemble those in patients with renal failure, infectious enteritis,
disease
and GI obstruction, to name a few. The veterinary team must
have a high index of suspicion for Addison's disease to pursue this
Hypoadrenocorticism, also known as Addison's disease, is char-
diagnostic route. Measurement of the basal cortisol concentra-
acterized by glucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid deficiency that
 tion can be helpful in ruling out hypoadrenocorticism. A basal
results from a failure of the cortex of the adrenal glands. The
most common cause ofhypoadrenocorticism in dogs is immune-
cortisol concentration of greater then 2μg/dL (55.2 mmol/L) in
 dogs (not on any medications) has a high negative predictive
mediated adrenalitis, also called primary hypoadrenocorticism.
value, meaning that these dogs are unlikely to have hypoadreno-
Less common causes of primary hypoadrenocorticism can
 corticism. The gold standard for diagnosis of hypoadrenocorti-
include granulomatous destruction and hemorrhagic infarction
cism is the ACTH stimulation test to document a decreased
of the adrenal gland, amyloidosis, necrosis, and metastatic neo-
functional adrenal reserve.* Blood samples for measurements of
serum cortisol concentrations are collected prior to and 1h after
can occur with destructive or neoplastic lesions of the hypotha-
administration of synthetic ACTH (Cortrosyn?).? Confirmation
lamus or pituitary gland, postoperative hypophysectomy, or can
of hypoadrenocorticism is made if both the pre- and post-ACTH
be idiopathic.2
cortisol concentrations are less than 2μg/dL (27.6 mmol/L).4
Hypoadrenocorticism has been documented to be inherited
 Endogenous ACTH concentrations and plasma aldosterone con-
in a variety of breeds including standard poodles, Portuguese
water dogs, and Nova Scotia duck tolling retrievers.2 While any
centrations can be measured to support a diagnosis of hypoad-
 renocorticism but are limited by their availability.
dog can be affected, it appears there is a predisposition for young
to middlle-aged female dogs.2
Treatment and pharmacology
Clinical signs
The treatment for hypoadrenocorticism can be divided into
acute and maintenance therapy.
Clinical signs associated with hypoadrenocorticism are nonspe-
cific and can involve many different body systems. Waxing and
Acute
waning lethargy, vomiting, diarrhea, and dehydration are the
An acute Addisonian crisis represents a true medical emergency
signs can include PU/PD, muscle tremors, abdominal pain,
 that requires prompt intervention. The goals of emergency therapy
shock, and collapse.'Since some of these animals have a painful
 include correction of hypovolemia, electrolyte abnormalities,
abdomen, care should be used when picking up these animals.
 and metabolic acidosis. Shock rate (90 mL/kg) administration
26
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
of 0.9% sodium chloride intravenous fluid should be initiated
Client education
immediately upon presentation. If possible, an ACTH stimula-
tion test should be performed and the dog should be adminis-
Client education is pivotal to ensure successful treatment and to
avoid potential life-threatening effects secondary to the therapy
tered a dose of dexamethasone (0.25-1.0 mg/kg IV). This
medication can be started prior to the ACTH stimulation as it
itself. Rapid recognition of clinical signs associated with hypoad-
does not interfere with the test unlike prednisone, but if possible,
renocorticism can possibly prevent acute decompensation and the
need for emergency treatment. Addison's disease requires lifelong
it is best to wait until after the second sample has been drawn.
 Blood pressure, electrocardiography, serum electrolytes, and
therapy with regular monitoring of serum electrolytes and adrenal
acid-base status should be monitored.
functioning. Routine contact with the client provides a noninva-
sive method for monitoring the patient's response to treatment.
Maintenance
Hyperadrenocorticism: Cushing's
Once stabilized and a diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism has
been established, maintenance therapy should be initiated.
disease
 Prednisone (0.1-0.22 mg/kg/day) is the standard of care for glu-
HAC, also known as Cushing's disease or Cushing's syndrome, is
cocorticoid replacement.? The dose should be doubled under
the result of hypersecretion of cortisol by a functional adrenal
any stressful circumstances. Mineralocorticoid supplementation
tumor (FAT)(15-20% of cases) or secondary to increases in ACTH
can be achieved with desoxycorticosterone pivilate (DOCP, Per-
from a pituitary tumor (80-85%).° Iatrogenic HAC can occur sec-
corten) or fludrocortisone (Florinef°). Both drugs can provide
ondary to the administration of glucocorticoid medications. In
good control. Fludrocortisone offers both mineralocorticoid
normal dogs, the pituitary gland secretes ACTH, which stimulates
and glucocorticoid supplementation, whereas DOCP is only a
the adrenal glands to release cortisol. The presence of cortisol
mineralocorticoid. Fludrocortisone may be more attractive for
exerts a negative feedback on the pituitary gland (Figure 2.4.1).
owners because of the low cost of the medication. However,
 In  dogs with  pituitary-dependent  hyperadrenocorticism
most dogs require an increased dose of fludrocortisone
(PDH), this feedback loop is disrupted by the tumor and ACTH
to control the mineralocorticoid defciency, which may induce
is released despite high plasma cortisol concentrations.
PU/PD (secondary to glucocorticoid activity). For this reason,
In dogs with FAT, excessive amounts of glucocorticoids are
the clinician may have to replace the fludrocortisone with
 released, exerting a negative feedback on the pituitary gland,
the DOCP after several weeks. Most dogs receiving DOCP
resulting in low concentrations of ACTH and atrophy of the
require prednisone (0.1 mg/kg/day) to control glucocorticoid
contralateral (normal) adrenal gland (Figure 2.4.2).
deficiency.
Spontaneous HAC occurs more frequently in middle-aged to
older dogs (mean age at diagnosis is 1l years) and is less com-
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
monly recognized in dogs less then 6 years of age. All breeds
can be affected with HAC, but dachshunds, various terrier
Prior to anesthesia, the Addisonian patient should be stabilized
breeds, poodles, and boxers appear to be overrepresented.6
and all electrolyte disturbances should be resolved. It has been
While no sex predilection is evident in dogs with PDH, 60-65%
previously recommended that animals with adrenal insuffciency
of dogs with HAC secondary to an adrenal tumor are female.6
requiring general anesthesia should be treated with intravenous
HAC is one of the most commonly diagnosed endocrine disor-
dexamethasone at 2-4mg/kg at the time of premedication."
ders in dogs; it is very rare in cats with only 70 cases reported
Treatment should be administered immediately prior to surgery
in the veterinary literature.?
and continues until the patients have recovered from surgery
 and are eating and drinking well on their own.
Clinical signs
The clinical signs and laboratory changes are the result of gluco-
Nutritional considerations
corticoid excess. Dogs with HAC are presented to the veterinar-
ian for PU, PD (>90%), and polyphagia." A complete history can
Animals with hypoadrenocorticism should be fed a well-
balanced diet. No special diets are recommended unless there is
help to discriminate a “healthy appetite" from polyphagia. Other
commonly reported clinical signs include weight gain, weakness,
 a concurrent disease that requires a specifc diet.
ally symmetrical hair loss.* Less common clinical signs include
Prognosis
calcinosis cutis and facial paralysis" (Figure 2.4.3).
The same clinical signs are recognized in cats with HAC, as
Once recognized and treated, dogs with hypoadrenocorticism
well as excessively fragile skin.
have an excellent prognosis. Clinical improvement is spectacu-
lar, usually within 12-24h. The MST was 4.7 years in one study
Diagnostic testing
of 205 dogs with hypoadrenocorticism.? Due to the vague clini-
cal signs, hypoadrenocorticism should be considered in any dog
Excessive secretion of glucocorticoids typically results in a *stress
suffering from nonspecific clinical signs.
leukogram" characterized by lymphopenia, eosinopenia, neu-
Chapter 2  Endocrinology
27
Pituitary
 Pituitary
Gland
Gland
ACTH
ACTH
Adrenal Tumor
Adrenal
Atrophied
Glands
 adrenal
gland
CORTISOL
CORTISOL
Figure 2.4.2
Schematic of the pituitary-adrenal axis in dogs with
 adrenal tumor.
Pituitary
Gland
ACTH
+
+
Enlarged Adrenal
Glands
Figure 2.4.3 Dog exhibiting the typical clinical signs of "pot-bellied"
CORTISOL
appearance and truncal, bilaterally symmetrical hair loss associated
Negative feedback cancelled
with HAC.
X
Pituitary adenoma
The urinalysis reveals a specifc gravity of less then 1.020 in
Figure 2.4.1   A schematic of the pituitary-adrenal axis in normal
the majority of the patients, glucosuria (5-10%), and proteinuria
(46%).6 Due to the immunosuppressive effects of high cortisol
dogs and a schematic of dogs with pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism.
 concentrations, 40-50% of dogs with HAC have a urinary tract
infection. However, only a few develop clinical signs related to
 trophilia, and monocytosis.* These changes are nonspecific and can
the lower urinary tract disease.6
occur in any sick dog.′ An increase in alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
activity is noted in 85-90% of dogs with HAC.d It is not uncommon
Endocrine testing
for dogs with HAC to have a mild fasting hyperglycemia, but overt
 DM occurs in only 5-10% of dogs with HAC, whereas 80% ofcats 
 In conjunction with clinical suspicion, endocrine testing plays
affected by Cushing's disease have concurrent DM.9
 an important role in the diagnosis of HAC.
28
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Urine cortisol: creatinine ratio
test and the low dose dexamethasone suppression test (LDDST)
are less reliable than they are in dogs.6
The urine cortisol : creatinine ratio (UCCR) is a rapid, noninva-
sive screening test with high sensitivity (100%) but low specificity
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
(22%). Thus, a normal UC:CR test (<10) rules out HAC, but a
The LDDST evaluates the negative feedback loop of the
high UCCR cannot be used to confrm the diagnosis of HAC.10
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPAA). Dexamethasone
Further tests are required to confrm the diagnosis of HAC.
is administered at 0.01 mg/kg IV and serum cortisol concentra-
ACTH stimulation test
tions are collected prior to and 4 and 8h after administration.
As with the ACTH stimulation test, every effort should be made
The ACTH stimulation test is used to evaluate the adrenal gland's
response to exogenous administration of ACTH and is most
nostic testing, such as ultrasound, during the testing period. In
 useful in diferentiating spontaneous HAC from iatrogenic HAC.
normal dogs, the administration of dexamethasone suppresses
 The test can be performed using an aqueous porcine gel or a
the secretion of ACTH from the pituitary glands, decreasing the
synthetic ACTH. Every effort should be made to minimize
cortisol concentration to less than 1.4μg/dL (38.6 nmol/L) at 8 h.
patient stress during the testing period. Also, these patients may
The administration of dexamethasone has a minimal effect on
bruise easily, so care must be taken with venipuncture. Icterus
dogs with PDH or FATs and the blood cortisol concentrations
and lipemia may adversely affect the results, so fasting blood
remain elevated (equal to or greater than 1.4 μg/dL [38.6 nmol/L])
 draws are recommended. Samples should be centrifuged and
at 8 h The sensitivity of the LDDST is 90-95% in dogs with PDH
refrigerated within 1 h of draw.
and approximately 100% in those with FATs. However, as other
ACTH gel protocol
diseases can affect the HPAA, the specificity is low (40-50%).11
 Blood samples for serum cortisol are obtained prior to, as well as 1
Differentiating PDH and FAT
and/or 2h after, intramuscular (IM) injection (2.2 U/kg) of ACTH
Once HAC has been confirmed, the next step is to differentiate
 gel.° A 1- and/or 2-h sample is recommended due to the variability
between PDH and FATs. Discriminating tests include the
in peak efficacy of different gels. As different gels have maximum
LDDST, High dose dexamethasone suppression tests (HDDSTs)
effects at 60 min and others at 120 min, collection of both samples
and endogenous ACTH concentration. The LDDST can aid in
will ensure a most accurate representation of the adrenal axis.
differentiating PDH and FAT if the 4-h cortisol concentration is
Synthetic ACTH protocol
less than 1.4μg/dL (38.6 nmol/L) or is <50% of the basal cortisol
concentration.° The HDDST (0.1 mg/kg IV) may identify 15%
Blood samples are collected prior to and 1h after intravenous
more dogs with PDH than the LDDST. Additional testing to
administration of synthetic ACTH (Cortrosyn). Previously, the
differentiate between the two diseases can include an abdominal
dose of Cortrosyn was one vial (250 mcg) per patient.° Recently.
ultrasound to screen for the presence of an adrenal tumor and
with supply and cost issues, the dose has been amended to
 measurement of endogenous ACTH levels. However, endog-
5 mcg/kg with a maximum dose of 250 mcg administered IV.
enous ACTH is limited by the fact that dogs with HAC often
Once reconstituted, the remaining solution may be frozen and
have values within normal reference ranges and difficulty in
stored for up to 6 months.
Dogs with spontaneous HAC have an exaggerated response,
test used for the diagnosis of HAC in cats.6
whereas those with hypoadrenocorticism or iatrogenic HAC
have diminished response or normal-to-diminished response,
respectively.? The sensitivity and specifcity of the ACTH stimu-
Treatment and pharmacology
lation as a screening test for HAC are 60-85% and 85-90%,
 The choice of treatment is primarily based on the diagnosis of
respectively”’ (see Table 2.4.1). In cats, the ACTH stimulation
 PDH versus FATs. Medical therapy is the mainstay of treatment
for dogs with PDH. The most common medical treatments are
Table 2.4.1 Sensitivity and specificity of endocrine screening tests in
selective adrenocorticolysis with mitotane (Lysodren? [Bristol-
dogs for the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism
Myers Squibb], Op'-DDD) or by selectively inhibiting the syn-
thesis of adrenal cortex hormones with trilostane (Vetoryl).
Test
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
 Mitotane treatment is usually given at high doses (30-50 mg/kg/
 day) during the induction phase (usually 4-5 days) until the dog
Basal cortisol
100
78.2
has a decrease in appetite or water intake. The owner is contacted
UC: CR
100
20
daily to ensure compliance. If a dog with HAC is being treated
ACTH stimulation
60-85
85-90
with mitotane, an ACTH stimulation test is performed at the
time the owner detects the change in water intake or appetite.
LDDST
96-06
40-50
The goal of the induction phase is to achieve a basal cortisol of
1-4μg/dL (or 25-125 mmol/L) and a post-ACTH stimulation
Source: Modified from Nelson RW, Feldman EC. Chapter 6: canine
hyperadrenocorticism. In: Endocrinoiogy and Reproduction. Philadelphia, PA:
cortisol of <4μg/dL or <125nmol/L.6 Once this is achieved,
Elsevier Science 2004.
mitotane is continued at a dosage of 50mg/kg/week° Adverse
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
29
side effects of mitotane can include lethargy, ataxia, weakness,
while minimizing the side effects of the disease. Treatment of
yomiting, diarrhea, and complete adrenocorticalysis and iatro-
 PDH should only be pursued if the patienf's quality oflife is detri-
mentally affected by the disease. Testing and treatment of HAC
deleterious side effects of the treatment, ACTH stimulation tests
requires a significant commitment in time and expense on the
should be repeated after 3, 6, and every 6 months thereafter.
 part of the owner, lifelong medication, and periodic blood testing.
 Dogs treated with trilostane should be monitored with an ACTH
 A client questionnaire that addresses the clinical signs of HAC
stimulation at 10 days and 1, 3, and every 3 months thereafter.
 can be helpful in a monitoring program. The questionnaire
The ACTH stimulation must be performed 4- to 6-h after trilos-
should inquire about appetite, water consumption, urination
tane administration. No significant difference in survival time
 habits, current dose and frequency of medications, when the last
has been documented with either protocol, but the high propor-
 dose was administered, supply of medication (are refills needed),
tion of side effects and relapses associated with the use of mito-
and any other changes to behavior or health.
tanehasledtothe increased useoftrilostane among veterinarians.12
The educated veterinary technician plays a very important
Other less commonly utilized therapies for PDH include keto-
 role in the successful management of the HAC patient.
conazole, selegiline hydrochloride (l-deprenyl), hypophysec-
Pheochromocytoma
 HAC patient is indicated. The typical monitoring program is for
an ACTH stimulation test assay, initially every 3 months and
A pheochromocytoma is a neuroendocrine tumor of the sympa-
then increasing to every 6 months. One cost-saving measure is
 thetic nervous system capable of secreting catecholamines. The
to only submit the postsample for analysis as the presample level
neoplasm usually arises from chromaffin cells of the adrenal
is typically not neded for monitoring purposes.
medulla (most common) but can also arise from extramedullary
A unilateral adrenalectomy is the treatment of choice for FATs.
chromaffin cells in sympathetic ganglia in other parts of the body
However, a small percentage of patients will have inoperable
(rare). Clinical signs associated with this tumor either result
tumors. In these instances, adrenocorticolysis and necrosis of the
from the sporadic and unpredictable secretion of catecholamines
ZF and ZR with mitotane are recommended. Trilostane has been
(e.g., epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine) or relate to
reported to improve quality of life but has little effect on tumor
 the space occupying nature and locally invasive and metastatic
size.613 The treatment of HAC in cats is more difficult compared
behavior of the tumor. A pheochromocytoma is an example of
with dogs. Unlike dogs, the medical treatment is often not suc-
an APUDoma type of tumor because it is capable of amine pre-
cessful in cats, and adrenalectomy is often the treatment of choice.
cursor uptake and decarboxylation.
 Usually, the tumor is solitary, slow growing, and highly vascular.
Anesthetic and analgesic consideration
The size of the tumor can range from 0.5 to >10.0 cm in diameter.
In rare cases, bilateral adrenal pheochromocytomas or an adrenal
If possible, it is recommended to stabilize a patient with HAC prior
pheochromocytoma with a contralateral adrenocortical tumor
 to anesthesia. Dogs with HAC may have a steroid hepatopathy and,
 has been reported. These tumors are always considered malignant;
as such, an opioid premedication, induction with propofol and
 in one study, 40% of dogs had evidence of local extension/invasion
inhalant anesthesia for maintenance, is often the protocol of choice.
by the tumor In another study, 30% of the dogs had evidence of
distant metastasis at the time of necropsy. Common sites of metas-
Nutritional considerations
tasis include the liver, lung, regional lymph nodes, spleen, heart,
kidney, bone, pancreas, CNS, and spinal cord.
Up to 50% of dogs with HAC can have mild to moderate serum
cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations; therefore, mild fat
Catecholamine secretion by a pheochromocytoma may be
restriction is recommended.4Diet recommendations are often
stimulated by blood flow, direct pressure, or various chemicals
 and drugs; secretion is not neurally mediated. Catecholamines
based on concurrent comorbidities, including DM, that have
exert their physiological effects via interaction with c- and β-
specifc dietary requirements.
adrenergic receptors. Elevated plasma catecholamine concentra-
tions stimulate predominately C,-adrenergic receptors, resulting
Prognosis
in arteriolar vasoconstriction and hypertension, mydriasis,
The MST for animals treated with trilostane was 662 days (range
increased tone on all smooth muscle sphincters, stimulation of
8-1971), and for mitotane, it was 708 days (range 33-1399).12 In
hepatic gluconeogenesis, and glycogenolysis.
the study of 148 dogs with HAC, multivariable analysis revealed
Pheochromocytomas are identified most commonly in older
that only age at the time of diagnosis was negatively associated.
 dogs (mean age 11 years of age, range 1-18 years of age). Rare
with overall survival.12
 ( e s    o   i 
sex or breed predilection exists.
Client education
Clinical symptoms
Client education is important to ensure the goals of treatment, the
risks of therapy, and the frequency of monitoring are understood.
The clinical signs are often vague and intermittent. A hyperten-
The goals of treatment are to improve the animal's quality of life
sive crisis, manifesting as intermittent collapse and generalized
30
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
weakness,is the most common presentation. Other clinical signs
tification of an adrenal mass. About 10% of pheochromocytomas
may include intermittent excessive panting, agitation, a “pound-
show evidence of mineralization.
ing" heart, syncope, PU, PD, lethargy, vomiting, inappetence,
 Specialized radiographic studies including a pneumoperito-
and anxiety. Less common clinical manifestations include cuta-
 neogram (room air insuflated into the abdominal cavity),excre-
neous flushing, sudden blindness from systemic hypertension,
 tory urography, venography, and arteriography can be used to
help visualize the tumor and to assess vascular and renal dis-
epistaxis, neurological signs), and, rarely, sudden death from a
placement or invasion by the tumor. These modalities are
massive sustained release of catecholamines by the tumor. In
s    r i   
cats, PU, PD, lethargy, and anorexia are the most common clini-
of CT.
cal signs seen.
Thoracic radiographs are important as part of the clinical
A positive correlation may exist between the size of the tumor
rd jo aa  s go r e s
and the presence and severity of clinical signs with small tumors
metastasis at the time of initial diagnosis. Evidence of pulmo-
(<1.5 cm in diameter) resulting in minimal fndings, while larger
tumors (>2.0cm in diameter) tend to be associated with severe
may also be seen.
'd d s u sisoid ssom e aeod pue sis e
Abdominal ultrasound performed by a skilled operator accus-
lethargy and anorexia are the most common clinical signs seen.
tomed to locating and assessing adrenal glands plays a critical
 Findings on physical examination are variable. The tumor
role in the diagnosis and is the most reliable screening test
size, its secretory activity, and existence of other concurrent
readily available in private practice. Ultrasound is also helpful
problems will impact the physical fndings. Typically, the physi-
 for detecting intra-abdominal metastasis and, to a limited degree,
cal exam is unremarkable, but findings attributable to excessive
for assessing local invasion into blood vessels or the kidney by
catecholamine release can involve the respiratory (increased
the tumor. The most common fnding is adrenomegaly with a
bronchovesicular or alveolar sounds, crackles), cardiovascular
normal-sized contralateral adrenal gland.
(tachycardia, cardiac arrhythmias, weak femoral pulses, pale
Advanced imaging with CT or MRI of the abdomen is also
mucus membranes), and musculoskeletal systems (weakness,
excellent for tumor detection and is more sensitive than ultra-
muscle atrophy). Mydriasis, retinal hemorrhage, retinal detach-
sound for the detection of metastases, local invasion of the
ment, blindnes, and epistaxis may develop secondary to sys-
kidney, epaxial muscles, and adjacent vessels. Advanced imaging
temic hypertension. Neurological signs that may be attributed to
should be strongly recommended prior to surgery for the pur-
pheochromocytomas include systemic hypertension and CNS
 poses of surgical planning.
hemorrhage or metastasis, which may lead to seizures, head tilt,
nystagmus, and strabismus. A palpable abdominal mass is rarely
Endocrine testing
appreciated but ascites, peripheral edema of the hind limbs, and
abdominal pain may be appreciated if the tumor has invaded or
 Rule-out of an adrenocortical tumor using an ACTH stimulation
is obstructing the caudal vena cava.
test or preferably an LDDST should be performed as an adreno-
cortical tumor can cause clinical signs that are similar to a
 pheochromocytoma.
Diagnostics
-s po x i e sa d e po sis
Hormone assays
picion as signs are usually episodic and vague. Pheochromocy-
Measurement of increased serum and urine catecholamines
toma are often not suspected until an adrenal mass is found
and urinary metabolites of catecholamines is often confirmatory
 using ultrasound or at necropsy.
in humans with a suspected pheochromocytoma; however,
Results of routine blood work are rarely helpful; anemia,
because of limited availability, lack of established reference
erythrocytosis, thrombocytopenia, elevated liver enzymes,
ranges, expense, the inconvenience of 24-h urine collection, and
hypercholesterolemia, azotemia, isosthenuria, and proteinuria
 the requirement to freeze the urine quickly after collection, this
may be seen.
is infrequently used to help confrm the diagnosis in cats
Arterial blood pressure measurement is indicated if a pheo-
and dogs.
chromocytoma is suspected: Multiple measurements should be
taken and averaged. The prevalence of hypertension (sustained
systolic pressure >160mmHg, sustained diastolic pressure
Differential diagnoses
>100bpm) in dogs with a pheochromocytoma varies from 25%
 The differential diagnoses for an adrenal mass include a non-
to 86% in different retrospective studies. Failure to document
functional adrenal mass (incidentaloma) or an adrenocortical
hypertension in a dog with appropriate clinical signs does not
tumor that is functional (cortisol-secreting) or nonfunctional
rule out a pheochromocytoma.
The differential diagnoses for intermittent systemic hyperten-
sion include renal disease, essential or primary hypertension,
Imaging
HAC, primary hyperaldosteronism, hyper- or hypothyroidism,
Survey radiographs may show evidence of a perirenal mass, but
 DM, obesity, liver disease, and tumors that result in inappropri-
radiographs are far less sensitive than ultrasound or CT for iden-
ate ADH secretion.
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
31
Treatment
rapid recognition of hypertensive crises and cardiac arrhythmias
 and immediate intervention. Phentolamine (a short-acting.
 A period of medical therapy to control the effects of excessive
 competitive C-adrenergic antagonist) may be administered as a
adrenergic stimulation followed by surgical resection, when pos-
      n r    s
sible, is the treatment of choice. The chance of cure is enhanced
if the dog does not have significant concurrent disease, metasta-
rhythmias, esmolol, a short-acting Cl-adrenergic antagonist,
sis of the tumor, or evidence of local tissue invasion. If a tumor
can be used. Intraoperative hypotension after tumor removal is
thrombus is identified, evaluation by a skilled surgeon is indi-
managed by decreasing the dose of or discontinuing phen-
 cated as surgical resection (adrenalectomy plus venotomy) may
tolamine, by the administration of a short-acting C-adrenergic
still be possible.
agonist such as phenylephrine, and by the administration of
Outpatient preoperative medical therapy prior to adrenalec-
colloid and crystalloid fluids to expand the ECF volume.
 tomy is recommended in order to control blood pressure, expand
Analgesia postoperatively should be provided. Repeated doses
the extracellular fluid (ECF) volume, and hopefully limit or
 of a short-acting opioid analgesic would be appropriate.
reduce hypertensive episodes intraoperatively. For 1-3 weeks
prior to adrenalectomy, an C-antagonist medication is adminis-
 tered. The drug of choice is phenoxybenzamine, a nonselective,
Prognosis
long-acting, noncompetitive C,-antagonist. The initial dose for
 Prognosis is dependent on a number of factors including the size
phenoxybenzamine is 0.5 mg/kg q 12 h, and this should be grad-
of the mass, the existence of metastasis or local invasion at the
ually increased every 4-5 days until either a maximum dose of
 time of diagnosis, the ability to control perioperative complica-
2.0-2.5 mg/kg q 12 h has been achieved or there are clinical signs
 tions, and the presence and nature of concurrent disease.
Surgicallyresectable tumors carry a guarded to good prognosis.
adverse effects of the drug (e.g., vomiting). This medication is
continued until the day of surgery. Prazosin, a selective, com-
extended survival times of 18 months to 2 years are possible.
 petitive C,-antagonist, can be used as an alternative.
β-Adrenergic blocking drugs (e.g., propranolol) may be used.
to control arrhythmias but only after C,-adrenergic blockade has
SECTION 5 PANCREAS
been initiated. This is a challenging surgery and all cases that are
candidates for adrenalectomy should be referred to a facility
Feline diabetes mellitus
with 24-h intensive care and with a board certified anesthesi-
ologist and surgeon on staff. Postoperative complications are
DM is the second most common endocrinopathy in cats and
common and include hypertension, cardiac arrhythmias, respi-
affects approximately 1 in 50 to 1 in 400, depending on the popula-
ratory distress, and hemorrhage. Most patients become normo-
 tion studied.' DM is a disease that results in persistent hypergly-
tensive within 24-48 h of surgery If the blood pressure fails to
cemia. Traditionally, the classification of DM in cats has been
return to normal or intermittent hypertension continues after
 Extrapolated from the model used in human medicine. The Com-
adrenalectomy, undetected metastasis should be suspected.
mittee on the Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus of
Other treatment options are limited; however, RT can be
 the American Diabetes Association has abandoned the long-used
attempted on inoperable tumors.
terms insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and non-
 For nonresectable tumors or for patients with widespread
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) because they were
 metastasis at the time of initial diagnosis, palliative management
 based on treatment rather than on etiology and were therefore
with phenoxybenzamine is indicated. Alpha-methyltyrosine, a
 regarded as more confusing than helpful. The vast majority of
drug that inhibits the rate-limiting enzyme involved in catecho-
human cases falls into two broad categories now called type 1
lamine synthesis by decreasing the production and secretion of
and type 2 DM. Unlike diabetic dogs, type 1 DM seems to be rare
catecholamines from the tumor, has been used as an adjunct
 in cats.2-4
treatment to an C,-antagonist.
Antibodies against beta cells and insulin have not been dem-
onstrated in cats, and lymphocytic infltration, as a marker of
immune-mediated destruction, has only been described in a
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
small number of diabetic cats.5 Itis asumed that approximately
Anesthetic induction and intraoperative tumor manipulation
 80% of diabetic cats suffer from a type 2-like DM, although
can be associated with life-threatening intraoperative complica-
there is little data to support this. It is a clinical estimate only
tions. Anesthetic drug selection to help limit the potentiation of 
 because differentiation of the two types of DM is clinically very
catecholamine-induced hypertension and arrhythmias during
 challenging in cats. Nevertheless, most endocrinologists would
induction and intraoperatively is very important. Also, excellent 
 agree that a type 2-like DM is the most frequent form in cats.
communication between the surgeon and anesthesiologist com-
-ui e s! Na 7 ad suy 'N z adi uq oi re 
bined with continuous monitoring of the patient's direct arterial
 ous disease attributable to a combination of impaired insulin
blood pressure and ECG during the entire anesthetic period and
 action in liver, muscle, and adipose tissue (insulin resistance)
for the first 24h postoperatively are important. This allows for
 and β-cell failure. Environmental as well as genetic factors are
32
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
thought to play a role in the development of both defects. Genetic
IDDM and NIDDM as severity of insulin resistance and impair-
factors have not been characterized in the cat. The only evidence
 ment of beta-cell function waxes and wanes.23.10
for their existence comes from studies in Australia and in the
United Kingdom, in which the frequency of DM was shown to
Signalment and physical examination
be about four times higher in Burmese cats than in domestic
of cats with DM
cats.78 Management of diabetic cats depends on the stage of
β-cell failure. In most cats, diabetes is usually not diagnosed
Although DM may be diagnosed in cats of any age, most of the
until relatively late in the disease process when extensive β-cell
cats are 9 years old at the time of diagnosis (mean 10). DM can
function has been lost. Diagnosis is typically made once blood
occur in either gender; however, higher incidences have been
concentration is above the renal threshold (e.g., 180-216 mg/dL
reported in neutered male cats." Burmese cats seem to be
[10-12 mmol/L]) and signs of polyuria, polydypsia, and weight
overrepresented. 2
loss are apparent.'
Major risk factors for the development of DM in cats are
increasing age, male gender, being neutered, physical inactivity,
DM etiology in cats
The majority of the cats are presented for PU, PD, polyphagia,
 The cause of beta-cell degeneration is not known. Other diabetic
and weight loss. Potential complications of unregulated DM in
cats have a reduction in the number of pancreatic islets and/or
cats include hypertension (with or without secondary chronic
insulin-containing beta cells on immunohistochemical evalua-
renal failure), hepatic lipidosis, DKA, and the development of a
tion, suggesting additional mechanisms may be involved in
plantigrade posture as a result of peripheral neuropathy. The
the physiopathology of DM in cats. Although lymphoplasmo-
predisposing factors are obesity, steroid or megestrol acetate
cytic infltration of islets, in conjunction with islet amyloidosis
treatment, Cushing's disease, and acromegaly.2
and vacuolation, has been described in diabetic cats, this histo-
The nonketotic diabetic cat may not have any classic clinical
logical finding is very uncommon. Beta cell and insulin autoan-
physical examination findings, although many cats are obese.
tibodies have not been identifed in newly diagnosed diabetic
cats, and the role of genetics remains undetermined. Non-
Diagnosis of DM
insulin-dependent (NIDDM) type 2 diabetes may be identifed
in as many as 50-70% of newly diagnosed diabetic cats. The
Diagnosis is based on persistent hyperglycemia and glucosuria.
majority of owned cats in developed countries that develop dia-
 Transient stress-induced hyperglycemia is common in cats and
betes likely have type 2 diabetes, which is characterized by a
can cause the BGC to increase higher than 300 mg/dL. Glucosu-
 relative lack of insulin secretion and insulin resistance. In type
ria usually does not develop in cats with transient hyperglycemia
2 diabetes, beta cells are damaged by chronically high blood
but can be present if stress is prolonged (ie., hours).?
glucose concentrations (BGCs) suppressing insulin secretions;
this is called glucotoxicity. Other specific types of DM or second-
glycemia from true hyperglycemia, a serum fructosamine con-
ary DM may occur in 10-20% of diabetic cats. Pancreatic lesions
centration can be measured. Fructosamine is a glycated protein
complex found in blood. It results from an irreversible, nonen-
examination of islets.? However, the changes are often mild and
zymatic, insulin-independent binding of glucose to serum pro-
are therefore probably not involved in the initiation of diabetes.
teins. The fructosamine level reflects the mean BGC over the
Severe pancreatitis may be the triggering factor for diabetes and
circulating life span of the protein (2-3 weeks) so it is not affected
DKA. In general, it is diffcult to know which of the two diseases
by acute transient increases in BGC. Documenting an increase
(DM or pancreatitis) is the cause and which is the effect. Gluco-
in serum fructosamine concentration in the upper range of
 corticoids and GH have strong diabetogenic actions because
normal confrms the persistent hyperglycemia.'s The minimal
approximately 80% of cats with hypercortisolism and presuma-
laboratory evaluation in any diabetic cat should include a bio-
bly 100% of cats with hypersomatotropism are diabetic. Gesta-
chemistry profle, a serum T4 concentration, a urinalysis, and
tional diabetes is very unlikely in cats.
urine culture to rule out chronic renal failure, hyperthyroidism,
 Based on data in other species, BGC below the renal threshold
 and urinary tract infection.23.16
but persistently above normal (e.g., 180-216mg/dL [10-
12 mmol/Ll) are likely associated with adverse effects such as
Treatment of DM
glucotoxic damage to beta cells and in cats should be considered
 as diabetes. A small percentage of diabetic cats have other spe-
 The most important goal of therapy is to resolve the clinical signs
cifc types of diabetes resulting from β-cell destruction associ-
while avoiding clinical hypoglycemia, which can be life threaten-
ated with pancreatitis and neoplasia, or have marked insulin
 ing. The best way to resolve clinical signs is to achieve diabetic
resistance from excess GH or corticosteroids. Cats may have
remission. Glycemic control can be maintained in some cats
 IDDM or NIDDM at the time diabetes is diagnosed. Cats with
with dietary changes, oral hypoglycemiant drugs, control of con-
NIDDM may progress to IDDM with time. Cats with apparent
current diseases, discontinuation of insulin antagonist drugs, or
 IDDM may revert to a non-insulin-requiring state after initia-
a combination of these modalities, while some cats will require
tion of treatment, and cats may flip back and forth between
insulin therapy in order to achieve glycemic control.
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
33
Dietary changes
Table 2.5.1 Causes of insulin resistance in cats
The primary goal of dietary therapy is to minimize the impact
Drug administration (progestagens/corticosteroids)
of a meal on postprandial BGC. Current recommendations
Infection (urinary tract/oral cavity/sepsis/bronchopneumonia)
include diets with high protein and low carbohydrate content
 a pu ng i  si p
Hyperthyroidism
content.? Reducing the carbohydrate content of the diet decreases
Acromegaly
the demand on beta cells to secrete insulin. Cats in diabetic
Pancreatic disease (pancreatitis, tumor)
remission likely have reduced β-cell mass, and, from the limited
testing reported, approximately 50% have impaired glucose
Renal disease
intolerance. It is vital that these cats be fed diets that spare β-cell
Hepatic disease
function. Feeding a low carbohydrate diet once diabetic remis-
Cardiac insuffi ciency
sion is achieved will likely prolong remission.' Diet modifica-
tions may need to be introduced gradually in order to enhance
Hyperlipid emia
patient compliance.
Neoplasia
 Severe obesity
Oral hypoglycemiant drugs
 Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Acarbose reduces postprandial BGCs by decreasing intestinal
Hyperad renocorticism
glucose absorption (alpha-glucosidase inhibition). However,
changing to an ultra-low carbohydrate diet has a greater glucose-
Pheochromocytoma
lowering effect than administering acarbose. If a cat needs
reduced-protein diet (high carbohydrate) for control of azo-
Source: Modified from Scott-Montcrieff JC. Insulin resistance in cats. Vet
temia, it might be beneficial to add acarbose at 12-25 mg/cat
Clinics of North Amenica, Smaff Animal Practice 2010;40(2):241-257.
twice daily at the time of eating.
Sulfonylureas (glipizide, glyburide) are the most commonly
in the pars distalis of the pituitary gland. The catabolic effects of
used oral hypoglycemic drugs for the treatment of DM in cats.
GH are mainly due to insulin antagonism and are the reason for
They stimulate insulin secretions by pancreatic cells. Clinical
the DM (Table 2.5.1).
response to these medications in diabetic cats has been variable,
Discontinuation of insulin antagonist drugs
ranging from excellent (ie., BGC lower than 200mg/dL =
11 mmol/L) to partial response (ie., clinical improvement but
Exogenous glucocorticoids and progestagens such as megestrol
failure to resolve hyperglycemia) to no response.23 These oral
hypoglycemiants should not be offered as frst-line treatment
has been identified as an important precipitating factor for DM
because of the poorer control of BGC. However, these drugs may
in cats.′ The use of these drugs in a diagnosed diabetic cat should
 be utilized in select cases of owner compliance or owner need.
 snip asa saiba Aianosqe pud au J papioe aq
concurrent diseases, it is recommended to taper the dose of the
Control of concurrent disease
drug to the minimum that will control the disease process? or to
 use an alternative drug that is not an insulin antagonist (e.g.
Any inflammatory, infectious, neoplastic, and endocrine disor-
 der can cause insulin resistance, as well as obesity and drugs such
such as inhalants steroids for asthma: Fluticasone?).
as glucocorticoids and progestagens (steroid hormones). There
Objectives of insulin therapy
are currently no published prospective or retrospective studies
specifically evaluating the causes of insulin resistance in cats.
1.
 Reversion of a transient diabetic cat to a subclinical diabetic
However, insulin resistance is most commonly caused by severe
if possible
obesity, chronic renal failure, chronic pancreatitis, stomatitis/
2.
 Elimination of owner-observed signs (e.g., polyphagia, poly.
oral infections, HAC, and hypersomatotropism (acromegaly)
dypsia, and weight loss) leading to normal appetite, normal
Hyperthyroidism is often mentioned as a cause of insulin resist-
water consumption, and a stable (if normal weight) or
ance; however, in our cats, the coexistence of the two diseases is
increased body weight (if body condition score was <5/9).
extremely rare. In some cases, the cause of insulin resistance is
Improved quality of life and normalization of body weight 
easy to identify (e.g, obesity, infections, chronic renal failure),
and activity
and in others, a thorough workup is required.
The diseases that have the potential to cause the most severe
 Prevention of diabetic complications (hypoglycemia, weak-
 insulin resistance are HAC and hypersomatotropism (acrome-
ness, chronic infections, neuropathy)
galy), although insulin resistance may also be mild or variable.!
Insulin therapy
Approximately 80% of cats with HAC and nearly all cats with
hypersomatotropism will develop DM." Hypersomatotropism
Insulin therapy is the mainstay of therapy in diabetic cats. Veteri-
in cats is caused by a GH-producing tumor (usually an adenoma)
nary insulin preparations available for maintenance treatment of
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
DM in cats include porcine lente insulin (Caninsulin?/Vetsulin*
treatment. Typically, once the cat has been on insulin glargine for
at 40 U/mL by Intervet Inc.), and protamine zinc insulin (PZI)
7-10 days, the glucose curve willflatten out. The flattening of the
(Insuvet? at 100 U/mL by Schering-Plough and PZI Vet at 40 U/
curve is the result of the long duration of action and the slower
mL by IDEXX Pharmaceuticals). Human insulin preparations
absorption rate of glargine. This may lead to an overlap of effi-
include neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH), glargine, and
cacy occurring with the BID injections. In some cats, the dose
detemir. Human lente and ultralente preparations have been
d si i Ade o jod s ie pna a oi a 
removed from the market in most countries.917.18 The availability
that the dose of insulin is not increased during this time without
of insulin products is rapidly changing; every effort has been
adequate monitoring. Increased insulin administration coupled
made to provide a current list at the time of publication.
with the overlap of efficacy may result in clinical hypoglycemia.
Diabetic cats are totally unpredictable in their glycemic
 It is recommended that close monitoring and adjustment of dose
response to exogenous insulin. There is no single type of insulin
is continued throughout the frst month of treatment because
that will effectively control glycemia in all diabetic cats, even
some cats will achieve diabetic remission within this time.
with twice-daily administration.
The response of diabetic cats to detemir insulin (Levemir)
Current recommendations regarding the initial insulin of
appears to be very similar to glargine, but the pharmacokinetics
choice for treating diabetic cats are based on personal experi-
have not yet been studied in cats and there is no published infor-
ences and vary between clinicians. Some clinicians prefer PZI or
mation on its use.
 glargine insulin, whereas others use lente or NPH as the initial.
 Most insulins are available as 100 U/mL (U-100) preparations
(NPH, lente, insulin glargine). Low dose U-100 (0.3-0.5) syringes
is always unpredictable and that individual cats respond indi-
should be routinely utilized for cats. Note that insulin glargine
S 1 os s nog udand usu e io Aue on Aen
cannot be diluted as dilution alters the pH and, hence, absorp-
important to be conservative when selecting initial insulin doses,
tion characteristic. In general, using low dose syringes to improve
either at the start of therapy or when switching a cat from one
 dosing accuracy is preferable to diluting any insulin preparation.
type of insulin to another.
Label directions state insulin glargine does not require refrigera-
Although porcine lente and NPH insulin are consistently and
tion but that it has a shelf life of 28 days maximum once opened.
rapidly absorbed following subcutaneous administration in cats,
Glargine is commonly being used for 3-6 months with refrigera-
the duration of effect of porcine lente, and especially NPH, can
tion in veterinary medicine. Note that Caninsulin and PZI are
be considerably shorter than 12h. These intermediate duration
 available only in concentrations of 40 U/mL, and it is strongly
insulins can result in inadequate control of glycemia despite
recommended that U40 insulin syringes are utilized in order to
twice-a-day administration. Although these insulins may be
reduce the chance of dosage miscalculation.
adequate in some cats, they usually produce too short a duration
Glargine is the longest-acting commercially available insulin
of action for optimal blood glucose control in cats. This com-
for treatment of DM in humans and is currently a popular initial
Somogyi phenomenon. It must be remembered, however, that
8/8 newly diagnosed diabetic cats treated with glargine and
 the response to porcine lente or NPH insulin is variable. There
 ultralow carbohydrate diet achieved remission compared to 3/8
 may be cats in which these intermediate-acting insulin prepara-
for PZI and 2/8 for porcine lente. However, lower remission rates
tions have a longer action, making one of them suitable for
occur in long-term diabetic cats changed to glargine therapy.
twice-a-day dosing.
Diabetic remission is unlikely in cats that have been diabetic for
In general, long-acting insulin preparations, such as PZI or 
more than 2 years. For this reason, if a cat has been well control-
insulin glargine, have worked the best in diabetic cats. Currently,
led with a different insulin, it is not recommended to change to
the author's preference for the initial treatment of newly diag-
glargine (Tables 2.5.2 and 2.5.3).
nosed DM in cats is glargine administration twice a day.
 During the first 24h of therapy, perform spot blood glucose
Insulin glargine (Lantus by Sanofi Aventis Pharmaceuticals)
 measurement to check for evidence of hypoglycemia (every
is a long-acting, slow-onset, minimal curve insulin analogue in
 3-4h for initial 18h). Whenever insulin therapy is initiated or
cats. It forms some precipitates at the site of injection from which
changed, the cat should be allowed to “equilibrate" at home for
 small amounts of insulin glargine are slowly released. In general,
 3-6 days before response to insulin therapy is assessed.
the duration of effect of insulin glargine appears quite variable,
At each recheck, remember that the goals of therapy are reso-
with the glucose nadir occurring as soon as 4-6 h and as late as
lution of clinical signs and avoidance of hypoglycemia. There-
18-22 h after administration. As with other insulin preparations,
fore, the owner's assessment of thirst and urine production, and
the glycemic response to glargine is always unpredictable, and
accurate weight measurement are very important. A blood
each cat treated with this insulin must be carefully monitored
glucose curve (a series of timed measurement of blood glucose,
and evaluated to determine the cat's response.
such as every 2h for 12h) is recommended every 10-14 days
Glargine has been successfully used in cats with a starting dose
until an appropriate insulin dose is achieved and thereafter as
of 0.25-0.5 U/kg BID. The initial starting dose should not exceed
necessary for monitoring (usually every 2-4 months).
 3 U/cat BID. It is strongly recommended that glargine be admin-
Cats are more prone than dogs to develop the Somogyi phe-
istered BID to maximize glycemic control and diabetic remis-
nomenon (hypoglycemia-induced glucose counter-regulation),
sion. The dose should not be increased during the first week of
even at conservative doses of insulin. The Somogyi phenomenon
Chapter 2  Endocrinology
35
aual buisn uaym stuawanseaw asosnjb pooig uo paseq Kouanbany pue abesop unsui bujbueyp joy sataweied z's'z aqel
or NPH insulin in cats 
 Blood glucose variable
Recommendations
Initial therapy
If blood glucose ≥360mg/dL (>20mmol/L)
Use of an initial dose of 0.5 U/kg of lean body weight BID
If blood glucose <360mg/dL (<20mmol/L)
Use of an initial dose of 0.25 U/kg of lean body weight BID
Nadir response
If nadir blood glucose concentration is <54mg/dL
Dose should be reduced by 50%
(<3mmol/L)
If nadir blood glucose is 54-90 mg/mL (3-5mmol/L)
Dose should be reduced by 1u if poor control of clinical signs of DM,
otherwise no change in dose
=lf nadir blood glucose concentration is 91-180 mg/dL
Dose should remain the same
(6-9mmol/L)
If nadir blood glucose concentration is >180 mg/dL
Dose should be increased by 1U
(>10mmol/L)
If nadir blood glucose concentration occurs at 8h or later
Once-daily administration may be used, although BlD ad ministration
at a reduced dose is preferred
 Baseline response
If blood glucose returns to baseline within 8h
Change to longer-acting insulin (e.g., glargine, detemir, or PZl)
Or if nadir blood glucose concentration occurs within 3h of
insulin ad ministration
Source: Modified from Rand J, Marshall R. Management of feline diabetes melitus: part I. which insulin do I choose and how do I adjust the dose? ACviM
2009 Proceedings, Quebec, Canada, June 3-6.
occurs in response to impending hypoglycemia (<65 mg/dL).
the ear with the end of the glucose test strip,.920 The advantages
The cat's low blood glucose level stimulates the release of cate-
 of the at-home method include minimizing patient transport,
cholamines, glucagon, glucocorticoids, and GH, which causes a
decreasing stress to the cat, and less cost to the client. Disadvan-
rapid release of glucose in the blood. If only a spot check blood
tages include uncertain reliability of the glucose values and
glucose level is performed at the time of hyperglycemia, the
inability to monitor body weight.
insulin dose might be further increased in response to the per-
Which glucometer?
ceived hyperglycemia. This will exacerbate the hypoglycemia.
For this reason, the use of glucose curves to assess the status,
The choice of glucometer is important because an accurate
especially in cats, on high doses of insulin is recommended.
assessment of blood glucose levels is needed to determine if the
 In general, BGC following glargine administration does not
 goal of normoglycemia has been achieved. To avoid clinical
change as quickly as with shorter-acting insulin; therefore, mon-
hypoglycemia or unnecessarily high BGC, it is important to
itoring every 4h is usually adequate. The critical time points to
 recognize and understand whether the meter is calibrated for
  a n  a   
human or cat blood. Meters calibrated for human diabetic
morning and evening).
 patients that report glucose concentrations for whole blood (not
Serum fructosamine concentration may be used every 3-4
plasma equivalent) read cat's blood glucose on average 1.5-
months in lieu of serial glucose profiles as long as history, clinical
 2.0 mmol/L lower than actual BGCs. All the reputable companies
signs, and random blood glucose measurements also suggest
such as Abbott, Bayer, and Roche make precise meters that have
good glycemic control.
close correlation (r ≥ 0.90) with feline BGC measured by a serum
An alternative to hospital generated blood glucose curves is
chemistry analyzer. This means that the results they provide are
 to have the client perform the blood glucose curve at home using
very repeatable. You should recommend a glucometer that is
the marginal ear vein prick technique in cats (the ear or lip prick
user-friendly, requires a microquantity of blood, and utilizes
technique in dogs) and a portable home blood glucose monitor-
readily available test strips. AlphaTRAK glucometer (Abbott)
ing device that allows the client to touch the drop of blood on
 has met all of these criteria and is highly recommended.
36
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 2.5.3 Parameters for changing insulin dosage and frequency based on blood glucose measurements when using glargine insulin in cats
Blood glucose variable
Recommendations
Initial therapy
If blood glucose ≥360 mg/dL (>20 mmol/L)
Use of an initial dose of 0.5 U/kg of ideal body weight BID
If blood glucose ≤360 mg/dL (<20 mmol/L)
Use of an initial dose of 0.25 U/kg of ideal body weight BID
Note: Do not increase the dose in the first week unless minimum response to insulin occurs, but decrease if necessary. Monitor
Preinsulin blood glucose level and nadir response
Preinsulin level
Nadir response
Recommendations
If preinsulin blood glucose concentration is
 Or if nadir blood glucose
Increase by 0.25-1.0U
>216mg/dL (>12 mmol/L) provided nadir is not
concentration is >180mg/dL
in hypoglycemic range
(>10mmol/L)
If preinsulin blood glucose concentration is
Or if nadir blood glucose
Same dose
180-216 mg/dL (10-12mmol/L)
concentration is 90-160mg/dL
(5-9mmol/L)
If preinsulin blood glucose concentration is
 Or if nadir glucose is 54-72mg/dL
Use nadir glucose, water consumption,
198-252 mg/dL (11-14mmol/L)
(3-4mmol/L)
urine glucose, and next preinsulin glucose
concentration to determine if insulin dose
should be decreased or maintained
If preinsulin blood glucose concentration is
Or if nadir blood glucose is
Dose should be reduced by 0.5-1.oU or
<180mg/dL (<10mmol/L)
<54mg/dL (<3mmol/L)
if total dose is 0.5-1.oU SID, stop insulin
and check for diabetic remission 
Note: If clinical signs of hypoglycemia are observed
Reduce by 50%
Source: Modified from Rand J, Marshall R. Management of feline diabetes mellitus: part I. which insulin do I choose and how do I adjust the dose? ACvIM
 2009 Proceedings Quebec Canada June 3-6 .
Continuous glucose monitoring system
to the outside of the patient's cage where readings can easily be
recorded, thereby minimizing patient stress.
A continuous glucose monitoring system (CGMS) has recently
been introduced in veterinary medicine as a method for moni-
Education of clients and the role
toring glucose concentrations in dogs and cats. The technology
of the veterinary technician
of the CGMS is designed to measure subcutaneous interstitial
fluid (ISF) rather than BGCs.? The subcutaneous ISF is ideal for
At the time of discharge of the newly diagnosed diabetic,
glucose concentration measurements because it is easily and
the clients should go back home with a form that reminds
safely accessed, has rapid equilibration with the blood, and has
them of:
 good correlation with BGC. The CGMS measures ISF glucose
 all of the steps of the subcutaneous injection technique for
with a small, flexible sensor inserted through the skin into the
the insulin and the necessity of changing injection sites at
subcutaneous space, secured to the skin, and attached to a
each administration;
 recording device. The ISF glucose is recorded and stored every
the specific recommendations on how to store the insulin
5 min. After the CGMS is removed, the data are downloaded to
(e.g., write the date of expiration on the vial and do not shake 
 a computer for analysis. The CGMS avoids several limitations of
the vial);
the traditional blood glucose curves including intermittent
assessment of BGC, hospitalization, patient restraint, and
the description of the clinical signs of hypoglycemia and
repeated phlebotomy. For this reason, the CGMS is usually used
what to do in case it happens; and
 in referral centers to monitor patients with DKA while avoiding
the specific recommendations regarding the dose of insulin
multiple phlebotomies or placement of a central venous catheter.
p susse, <aadde ou jn Aue aia pou op,) iasue o
 The wireless, real-time CGMS allows the monitor to be attached
you have given the insulin if you do not remember").
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
37
The education of the client is a key role in the success of the 
 reported in another study in which the goal of treatment was to
treatment, thereby improving the quality of life and the life 
 achieve euglycemia.2?3
expectancy of the patient, their pet.
In this study, 84% of cats that were started on a treatment
protocol (insulin glargine and intensive home monitoring of
blood glucose) within 6 months of diagnosis achieved remission,
Remission or not?
while only 35% of cats that were started on the protocol after
 Determining if diabetic remission is present is very important
more than 6 months from diagnosis achieved remission. These
as it is strongly recommended that insulin therapy not be with-
 remission rates are similar to the results of another study in
drawn prematurely. Cats with almost normal β-cell function can
 which cats treated with various insulin formulations other than
tolerate 0.5-1.0 U of insulin SID or BID and rarely develop clini-
 insulin glargine (mostly PZl) had 68% remission rate when fed
 a low carbohydrate diet.24
hyperglycemia recurs, the reinstituted insulin therapy can take
Diabetes had been diagnosed recently (within 45 days) in only
weeks or months to achieve the same level of glycemic control
 11 of 31 cats in this study, but there were no differences in remis-
as was previously obtained. It is not recommended that insulin
 sion rates between those cats and others that had been diabetic
therapy be stopped within a minimum of 2 weeks of initiating
 for more than 45 days.
treatment in order to facilitate β-cell recovery from glucotoxic-
 In a small clinical study in cats, once-a-day insulin glargine
ity. Instead, the insulin dose should be decreased gradually based
was compared with twice-a-day lente in cats fed an ultralow
on dosing guidelines.
carbohydrate diet.In that study, both treatment groups experi-
Once the preinsulin BGC is <10 mmol/L and the total dose of
enced improvement in serum fructosamine concentrations and
insulin is decreased to 0.5-1.0U BID, the dosing frequency
16-h blood glucose curves were improved. Four of the thirteen
should be reduced to SID. If after 1-week preinsulin BGC is still
 cats experienced remission of diabetes (one in the insulin
<10 mmol/L and the nadir BGC is in the normal range (prefer-
glargine-treated group).
ably determined at home) of 4-7 mmol/L, insulin therapy may
 Taken together, these studies suggest that a low carbohydrate
be discontinued and the BGC should be monitored during the 
 diet in combination with glargine or any other insulin formula-
frst day. If BGC rises above 10mmol/L within 12-24h, imme-
 tion is clinically useful in treating diabetes in cats. In newly
diately reinstitute insulin at 1 U SID and wait for a minimum of
 diagnosed diabetic cats, treatment with glargine might be more
2 weeks before again trying to discontinue insulin. If BGC is
 likely to achieve remission.
≤10 mmol/L, continue to withhold insulin, checking BGC every
 The wide range of remission rates reported in the literature
 3-7 days for several weeks. Owners should monitor for the clini-
with insulin glargine treatment reinforces the influence of mul-
cal signs consistent with a relapse such as increased water con-
tiple factors in achieving remission.
sumption, increased appetite, and/or weight loss.
If a patient has been treated for more than 6 months for DM,
it is very unlikely that this patient will go into remission. For this
 reason, we do not recommend changing such patients to another
Does the type of insulin influence
type of insulin if well controlled.
the remission rate?
Based on the studies available, the remission rate depends on
Outcome and prognosis
multiple factors such as the quality of glucose monitoring (inten-
sity, home-generated glucose curve), the diet, the control of the
The majority of the cats will go into remission within 3 months
underlying disease(s), and risk factors (obesity, physical inactiv-
on insulin glargine therapy. If insulin therapy is discontinued, it
ity). The long-acting insulins are more likely to induce remission
is recommended to continue feeding the diabetic with a specific
than the intermediate-acting insulins because they control the
diet.
glucose level fuctuations more tightly and are more likely to
The mean survival time in diabetic cats is 3 years from the
resolve glucose toxicity Because nearly all the studies reporting
time of diagnosis. However, this survival time is skewed because
remissions with insulin types other than porcine insulin zinc
cats are usually 8-12 years old at the time of diagnosis. Concur-
suspension (Vetsulin) also included other diabetes management
rent diseases (e.g., ketoacidosis, pancreatitis, renal failure)
strategies (e.g., dietary control) in their design, simple compari-
increase the mortality rate during the first 6 months. Overall, the
 son of the remission rates can be misleading.
 prognosis of diabetic cats depends on the cooperativeness of the
In one study of newly diagnosed diabetic cats, eight of eight
cat, the compliance of the owners, and the regularity of the
cats became insulin independent when treated with twice-a-day
recheck by the veterinarian.
 insulin glargine and an ultralow carbohydrate diet.2
This remission rate was higher than the remission rate for cats
Canine diabetes mellitus
treated with protamine zinc and PZI (three of eight) and lente
(two of eight) in the same study. The duration of illness before
DM is a common endocrinopathy in dogs with a prevalence of
inclusion in the study was not mentioned and the allocation into
0.005-1.5%. Affected dogs are usually 7 years of age or older.25
treatment groups was not random. Also, treatment protocols
Females are at an increased risk for diabetes. Genetics play a role
were not identical between groups. Lower remission rates were
as some breeds have either an increased or decreased risk of
38
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
developing diabetes. Australian terriers, standard and miniature
type 1 canine diabetes most closely resembles latent autoimmune
schnauzers, Samoyeds, fox terriers, keeshonds, bichon frises,
diabetes of adults (LADA). LADA occurs in middle-aged to older
Finnish spitzes, cairn terriers, miniature and toy poodles, and
humans typified by gradual beta-cell destruction over months to
Siberian huskies are breeds at increased risk of diabetes,?6
years resulting in absolute insulin deficiency and is not associated
whereas German shepherds, golden retrievers, and American pit 
bull terriers are at low risk 25
over 7 years of age with a slow onset of weeks to months and evi-
dence of immune-mediated destruction of beta cells.
Anatomy and physiology
Damage from pancreatitis is another mechanism of beta-cell
destruction that occurs in approximately 30% of diabetic dogs.
The pancreas consists of two lobes that lie in the cranial abdomi-
A congenital form of type 1 canine diabetes with pancreatic islet
nal cavity. The right pancreatic lobe is closely associated with the
   a o s   
duodenum, whereas the left limb extends behind the stomach
with familial diabetes are keeshonds, golden retrievers, Samoyeds,
toward the spleen. The endocrine pancreas is composed of tissue
 and miniature poodles.25
called islets of Langerhans. The islets of Langerhans are com-
Some dogs develop a form of diabetes with a relative insulin
posed of alpha, beta, F, and delta cells. Each cell secretes a dif-
deficiency. In other words, the dogs are still producing insulin,
ferent hormone—alpha cells secrete glucagon in response to low
but it is an inadequate amount because its function is being
blood glucose levels, which stimulates the liver to convert stored
antagonized by other hormones or medications. Endocrinopa-
glycogen into glucose. Beta cells secrete insulin in response to
 thies such as HAC and acromegaly can cause insulin resistance.
high blood glucose levels, which stimulates cells to take up
 Insulin resistance can also occur in intact female dogs during
glucose from the bloodstream and store it as glycogen in the
diestrus or during pregnancy. The latter is known as gestational
liver and muscles. Thus, the alpha cells, by secreting glucagon,
diabetes. Dogs receiving glucocorticoids or synthetic progesta-
 and the beta cells, by secreting insulin, are opposite hormones
gens can also become insulin resistant. The diabetes may or may
of the feedback system that regulates blood glucose levels. The
not be reversible once the underlying disease is treated or the
delta cells secrete somatostatin (SST) (GH-inhibiting hormone)
and F cells secrete pancreatic polypeptide (PP). When each dif-
glycemia that persists for 2 weeks or more, the resulting glucose
ferent cell line is stimulated, it secretes its hormone directly into
 d     s   
the bloodstream.
In normal animals, after a meal, insulin secretion is dramati-
Clinical signs
cally increased in response to increasing BGCs.
Insulin has several metabolic effects: carbohydrate metabo-
PU, PD, polyphagia, and weight loss are the classic signs of DM.
lism, suppressing hepatic glucose production, promoting glucose
A dog that has been housebroken for years may suddenly begin
s  a s ss    a  
glucose uptake into the peripheral tissue. Insulin also decreases
dogs present for lethargy, weakness, decreased vision, or even
the breakdown of fat and prevents the formation of ketones.
 blindness. Dogs in DKA can be very ill systemically and present
When insulin deficiency occurs, glucose production by the
with vomiting, dehydration, and anorexia.31
liver is not suppressed and there is a resultant decreased glucose
uptake in the peripheral tissues. The result is hyperglycemia. As
Diagnostic testing
the BGC continues to increase, it eventually exceeds the renal
threshold (approximately 180-200 mg/dL in dogs and >300 mg/
Persistent hyperglycemia with glucosuria in a dog with PU/PD,
dL in cats).?" Glucosuria results in an osmotic diuresis and PU
polyphagia, and/or weight loss is consistent with DM. The diag-
nosis can be easily achieved with a glucometer and a urine dip-
also occur. Glucosuria results in loss of calories, and weight loss
stick However, further biochemical testing to assess the dog's
 and polyphagia ensue.28
overall health and to evaluate for concurrent diseases is recom-
mended in all newly diagnosed diabetics. A minimum database
is a complete blood cell count (CBC), chemistry panel, urinaly-
Classification of canine diabetes mellitus
sis, and urine culture. In a diabetic patient with subnormal appe-
The most common form of diabetes in dogs is type 1, which is
tite, thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasound are also
characterized by pancreatic beta-cell deficiency or destruction
strongly advised.
resulting in an absolute insulin deficiency. Thus, dogs with type 1
 Complete blood cell counts are often normal but may show a
diabetes lose the ability to secrete insulin. The cause of the beta-
cell deficiency is unknown, but it is thought that more than one
neutrophilia with or without toxic change is often an indication
mechanism is responsible. In approximately 50% of diabetic
of concurrent inflammatory or infectious disease. Chemistry
dogs, immune-mediated destruction of pancreatic beta cells is
panels reveal hyperglycemia with or without additional abnor-
speculated to occur based on the presence of inflammatory cell
malities. Elevated liver enzymes, ALP, and ALT are common,
infltration of pancreatic islets* and circulating antibodies
along with hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia.31
against beta cells in newly diagnosed diabetic dogs.31 This form of
Urinalyses reveals glucosuria with or without proteinuria, bacte-
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
39
riuria, pyuria, and/or ketonuria. Diabetic dogs have an increased
diagnosed dogs. Clients should be instructed on how to gently
incidence of urinary tract infections due their depressed immune
 mix insulin by rolling the bottle between their hands prior to
system and ready supply of glucose in the urine. Inactive urinary
withdrawing the injection. Insulin has a crystalline structure and
sediment does not rule out the presence of a concurrent urinary
 shaking the mixture will break down the medication. For this
tract infection. Thus, all urine samples should be cultured.
 reason, the shelf life of insulin, once opened, is usually rated at
HAC, pancreatitis, and hypothyroidism are a few of the con-
3 months. Clients need to be instructed to change bottles of
current diseases that may be present in a diabetic dog. If concur-
 insulin even if there is still insulin left in the bottle. The insulin
rent pancreatitis is suspected, it can be investigated with canine
 should also be warmed to room temperature prior to adminis
 pancreas-specific lipase. However, adrenal and thyroid testing
 tration. Clients should practice withdrawing the correct dosage
should be delayed until the diabetes has been initially treated.
with an insulin syringe from a bottle of saline. This should be
The uncontrolled diabetes may influence the test results and may
 practiced until the veterinary technician is satisfed that the
interfere with their interpretations.
client is consistently drawing the correct dose. The veterinary
technician can then instruct the client on the administration of
Imaging
the insulin injection. Sometimes, to better facilitate the client's
Imaging can be useful to uncover concurrent diseases in the dia.
understanding, a small patch of hair can be shaved where the
betic dog. Therefore, thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultra-
injection will be given. The injection should be given at a 45°
sound may be indicated to complete the initial workup. However,
 angle to the skin. Administration sites should be rotated along
imaging is not necessary for the diagnosis of uncomplicated
the lateral thorax and abdomen. The client should practice
 DM. The most common finding on abdominal radiographs is
administering several saline injections to their pet in front of the
hepatomegaly. Abdominal ultrasound is useful to identify pan-
veterinary technician. In some cases, multiple sessions may be
creatitis, neoplasia, hepatic abscesses, and/or adrenomegaly.
needed to achieve the goal of ensuring that all family members
Hyperechoic hepatic parenchyma is the most frequent ultra-
who will be administering insulin can do so correctly.
sound abnormality.
 Some veterinarians will work with select patients and clients
 to obtain blood glucose samplings in the home environment.
Pharmacology
This method of monitoring diabetes is less costly, less stressful
to the patient than spending a day in the hospital, and may yield
All dogs with naturally occurring DM require lifelong insulin
more accurate data. The technician may be asked in these situ-
therapy. The goals of insulin therapy are to ameliorate clinical
     s e  n s
signs and to prevent insulin-induced hypoglycemia. Currently, the
blood samples. New on the market are continuous glucose moni-
toring systems that are attached to our patients, allowing us to
Vetsulin (porcine insulin zinc suspension) and human recom-
bypass frequent patient venipuncture.
binant NPH (also known as Humulin-N) insulin administered
It is advised to have a specific form clients can complete when
twice daily. Both insulins are intermediate in the duration of
leaving pets for diabetes evaluation. The technician should
action. NPH insulin is synthetic human recombinant insulin and
 ensure the form is completed by the client. Pertinent informa-
differs from canine insulin by one amino acid. Vetsulin is porcine
tion should include
 insulin and hasthe identical amino acid sequence to canine insulin.
What is the pet's water consumption compared to last time? Is
Insulin is available in two concentrations—-U-100 (100 U/mL)
it increased or decreased?
and U-40 (40 U/mL). Each concentration requires its own type
 of syringe. Vetsulin is U-40 insulin and requires U-40 syringes
How much is the pet urinating compared to last time? Is it
for its administration. U-100 NPH insulin requires U-100
increased or decreased?
 syringes. It is possible to overdose or underdose a patient if the
What is the present dose of insulin? How often is it given? When
wrong concentration type of syringe is used with the opposite
was the last dose given?
insulin. Insulin syringes also are available in 30- and 100-U sizes
What is the current diet? How much are you feeding? How often?
to facilitate all dosages.
When was the last time it was fed? Did it eat? How much?
Vetsulin is the first Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-
Are insulin refills needed? When was the last time the bottle was
approved insulin for dogs. However, currently, there are availa-
replaced?
bility issues with Vetsulin in the United States. The availability
 s na aa  aa si sid u o
Are there any other problems or concerns?
made to provide a current list at the time of publication.
What are your goals for today's visit?
Client education and the role of the
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
veterinary technician
A normal meal and the regular dose and type of insulin are given
 Client education on the administration and handling of insulin
the night before an anesthetic procedure. Food is withheld after
is critical. A veterinary technician can have a crucial role in
10 p.m. the night before and the morning of surgery. On the
facilitating a clear and informative diabetic discharge for newly
morning of surgery, 0.25-0.5 of the regular dose of insulin is
40
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
given dependent on the blood glucose level, the time of surgery,
Diagnostic testing
and the glycemic control of patient. Blood glucose levels need to
be monitored preoperatively and approximately every 30 min
Dogs with DKA require a more thorough workup than healthy
diabetics to uncover concurrent diseases and to assess the
between 150 and 250 mg/dL during surgery with either dextrose
current health status. A minimum database should include a
infusions and/or regular insulin. Diabetic patients are encour-
complete blood cell count (CBC), chemistry panel, urinalysis,
aged to eat as soon as possible after surgery and a subnormal dose
urine culture, canine pancreas-specific lipase, blood gas, tho-
of insulin is reinitiated that evening once the patient is eating.
racic and abdominal radiographs, and abdominal ultrasound.
Complete blood cell counts may be normal or may show a
stress leukogram or an inflammatory neutrophilia. A left shifted
Nutritional considerations
neutrophilia with or without toxic change is often an indication
Diets should be complete and balanced, palatable, and should not
 of concurrent inflammatory or infectious disease.
     id 
at the time of each insulin injection. Each meal should be equal in
 vated liver enzymes, ALP and ALT are common abnormalities,
 size and consistency. Some diabetic dogs will show improved gly-
along with hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia.29
Electrolyte and acid-base abnormalities are very common.
rent diseases, dietary therapy is aimed at the most serious disease
Potassium may be normal, elevated, or low, although there is
and that takes precedence over the DM in regard to nutrition.
 often a total body potassium deficit due to GI losses (vomiting.
 hypocalcemia, and hypomagnesemia frequently occur as wel.4
Canine diabetic ketoacidosis
Azotemia may be present, signaling dehydration or renal failure.
Patients with DKA may be hyperosmolar due to the hyperglyc-
Diabetic ketoacidosis is a complication of decompensated DM.
emia. There is often an increase in anion gap due to ketone
Although this section is written for canine diabetic ketoacidosis,
bodies (beta hydroxybutyric acid and acetoacetic acid) and/or
this information (except dosage information) is generally applica-
ble to feline diabetic ketoacidosis. DKA is associated with signifi-
lactic acidosis. A blood gas analysis often reveals a metabolic
acidosis. The ketone bodies overwhelm the body's buffering
cant morbidity and mortality rates in dogs. DKA occurred in 65%
capabilities and a metabolic acidosis ensues. Electrolytes need to
of newly diagnosed diabetic dogs and approximately 70% of DKA
be monitored closely with treatment (every 4-6 h) as hypokale-
dogs had other concurent diseases at the same time in one study.?2
 DKA is characterized by hyperglycemia, glucosuria, ketonemia
 Urinalysis reveals glucosuria, with or without proteinuria, and
and/or ketonuria, and metabolic acidosis.
ketonuria. The nitroprusside reagent detects acetone and aceto-
acetate but not beta hydroxybutyrate. Thus, a urine dipstick that
Anatomy and physiology
is negative for ketones does not rule out the possibility of ketoac-
When a combination of insulin deficiency and excessive counter-
idosis.?3 All urine samples should be cultured as infection is a
regulatory hormones such as glucagon, cortisol, GH, and epine-
common cause of DKA.
 phrine occurs, hyperglycemia and the generation of ketone
bodies are the end result. Concurrent diseases and/or stress
Imaging
can contribute to an increase in counter-regulatory hormones.
Imaging is critical to help identify any concurrent diseases that
od ssona sdu ps oi p s eada a
p snoa sr ss a e u psi aa ae
tion and decreased glucose uptake by peripheral tissues.
abdominal ultrasound can be used to help identify the most
Increased lipolysis secondary to insulin deficiency and increased
commonly associated diseases with DKA—acute pancreatitis,
counter-regulatory hormones favors ketogenesis. The ketone
urinary tract infection, HAC, neoplasia, pneumonia, pyelone-
bodies cause vomiting and also contribute to osmotic diuresis,
 phritis, and chronic renal disease.34
dehydration, metabolic acidosis, and the resulting peripheral
yasodilatation.
Pharmacology
Clinical signs
The goals of treatment of DKA are to restore hydration and
electrolyte imbalances, to diminish ketogenesis, and to correct
 The most common clinical signs of DKA are depression, ano-
acid-base imbalances. A central line may be helpful, particularly
rexia, and vomiting.2α The spectrum of severity of clinical signs
in small patients to prevent repeated venipunctures for blood
can be quite varied. Some dogs with DKA will present recum-
monitoring and to measure central venous pressures (CVPs). A
bent, severely dehydrated, and weak, while others will still be
  pd aq e  r s d
eating with polyuria and polydipsia as the only clinical signs.
 nous fluids and insulin therapy. Intravenous fluid therapy should
 Clinical presentation also depends on the concurrent diseases.
be initiated for 1-2 h prior to beginning insulin therapy in dehy-
A DKA dog with pancreatitis may be vomiting, whereas another
drated patients.333 Isotonic fluids are recommended for initial
 patient with pneumonia may be predominantly coughing.
fluid therapy and 0.9% sodium chloride is often the frst choice.
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
41
Potassium chloride supplementation is recommended, depend-
therapy, DKA dogs should be fed diets that are complete and
 balanced, palatable, and do not contain simple sugars.29
occurs as a result of fluid and insulin therapy and is a common
cause of morbidity in patients treated for DKA. The amount of
Client education
supplementation may need to be increased once insulin therapy
is started since potassium will move intracellular. Phosphorus
Owners of dogs with DKA should be informed regarding the
should also be supplemented in initial fluids (usually as potas-
following:
sium phosphate) if warranted by serum phosphorus levels.
 1)Prognosis for resolving DKA is guarded, even with intensive
Serum phosphorus levels should also be reevaluated shortly after
care.
 insulin and fluid therapy are initiated as additional phosphorus
 2)  All dogs with DKA will require lifelong insulin treatment
supplementation may be needed.
and periodic checkups in order to maintain an acceptable
 Regular crystalline insulin is administered to dogs with DKA
quality of life.
due to its rapid onset and short duration of effect. There are two
main protocols by which insulin is administered.
 3) All dogs with diabetes will lose their vision from cataracts.
 4)  Most dogs with diabetes can maintain a good quality of life
Constant rate infusion
for many years with the above measures.
 5) Dogs with diabetes are predisposed to pancreatitis; diet
A low dose CRI of regular insulin has been proposed as the
should be consistent.
treatment of choice, but definitive studies are not available. This
 protocol decreases blood glucose levels slowly to reduce the risk
Testing and intensive care for DKA should never be pursued
of neurological signs, hypoglycemia, and electrolyte abnormali-
without informed consent as above.
fies. Blood glucoses are monitored every 1-2 h, and based on the
result, the insulin CRI rate is increased or decreased and fluid
Insulinomas
composition may be changed to maintain blood glucose levels
Etiology
is important to remember that insulin binds to the plastic tubing
in the intravenous set. Thus, with a 250-mL bag of fluids spiked
Tumors arising from the beta cells of the pancreatic islets can
secrete insulin in excessive quantities. Clinical signs are related to
with regular insulin, 50 mL of fluid must be run through the line
and discarded before it is hooked up to a patient.
tion. Insulinomas are uncommon in dogs and are very rare in cats.
Intermittent injections
Pathophysiology
Another protocol is IM injections of regular insulin for DKA dogs.
Glucose homeostasis
An IM injection of insulin is given hourly until blood glucose
levels reach approximately 250 mg/dL. Then the insulin injections
Ingested carbohydrates, fats, and proteins provide a source of
are switched to subcutaneous injections every 6 h. Regular insulin
therapy is usually continued until the dog is eating and drinking.
and then longer-acting insulin can be initiated.36
by the liver (Figure 2.5.1)
Initially, glucose is provided by hepatic breakdown of stored
Anesthetic and analgesic consideration
glycogen (glycogenolysis). Once glycogen is depleted, the main
source of glucose arises from the production of glucose from
DKA dogs are typically metabolically unstable patients. They
 fatty acids, amino acids (supplied by muscle), lactate (supplied
may also have some cardiovascular compromise. Thus, DKA
by blood via glycolysis), and glycerol (supplied by fat)3738
dogs are usually very poor anesthetic candidates. Anesthesia
 The pancreatic beta cells are responsible for regulating blood
should be delayed until the DKA has been stabilized if possible.
 glucose concentrations (BGC). When blood glucose exceeds the
The only exception to this is if the DKA is caused by high pro-
normal range (>l10mg/dL), insulin is secreted and blood
gesterone levels in a female intact patient wherein ovariohyster-
glucose is reduced into the normal range (70-110 mg/dL) via cell
ectomy would be a necessary part of treatment.
blood glucose levels are <60 mg/dL, insulin synthesis and secre-
Nutritional considerations
tion is inhibited.
DKA dogs often present anorexic and vomiting. If the dog has
Response to hypoglycemia
concurrent pancreatitis, oral food may need to be withheld for
The CNS, especially the cerebral cortex, is dependent on normal
necessary. Other DKA dogs may have significant renal impair-
BGCs to maintain normal function. For this reason, in normal
ment or other disease processes that require special nutritional
individuals, mechanisms are in place to counteract any declines
therapy. If there are no concurrent diseases requiring nutritional
 in blood glucose levels (Table 2.5.4).
A2
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Decreased
plasma glucose
Insulin 
and/or
ca loric intake
Increased
Increased
Increased
AA
glucogenolysis &
lipolysis
mobilization
gluconeogenic
enzymes
Increased
Decreased
glucose
glucose
production
utilization
(liver)
(fat, muscle)
Euglycemia
Figure 2.5.1  Hormonal and substrate changes by which euglycemia is maintained (and hypoglycemia is prevented) in normal subjects during a
fast. The fall in the plasma insulin concentration is the key hormonal change resulting in increased glucose production and decreased glucose
utilization. The decline in the plasma insulin concentration is, in tum, a result of a small decrease in the plasma glucose level (5-10mg/dL) and/or
a decrease in caloric intake. AA, amino acid.
Source: Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edition. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2004.
Table 2.5.4
 Homonal response to hypoglycemia
Pathophysiology in dogs with beta-cell tumors
Hormone
Response
 In dogs with insulinomas, autonomous secretion of insulin by
tumor cells results in increased utilization of glucose and
Insulin 
Decreased secretion
hypoglycemia. Normal glucose homeostasis is disturbed with
Glucagon
the result being reduced blood glucose (due to exaggerated tissue
Increased secretion
consumption of glucose) and interference with hepatic produc-
Catecholamines
Increased secretion 
tion of glucose.
ACTH, cortisol, growth hormone
Increased secretion 
Clinical signs
Source: Feldman EC, Nelson Rw. Beta-cell neoplasia: insulinoma. In: Canine
and Feline Endocrinoiogy and Reproduction, 3rd edition, p. 618. St. Louis,
 Insulinomas typically occur in older dogs; there is no apparent
M0: Elsevier Science; 2004.
breed predisposition. Clinical signs are often insidious and are
attributed to old age. The most common signs include seizures,
weakness/ataxia, tremors, and behavior changes (Table 2.5.5).
Hypoglycemia leads to rapid secretion of counter-regulatory
Symptoms often resolve after a few minutes, presumably due
 hormones, which restore an adequate supply of glucose to main-
to the actions of counter-regulatory hormones. Signs may be
tain cerebral function, and suppression of insulin secretion.
precipitated by exercise and excitement, as activity calls for
 Increases in plasma glucagon, epinephrine, and norepine-
increased glucose utilization by muscles.
phrine occur acutely, and increases in GH and cortisol occur
Causes of clinical signs
a po ro Ard a aq on paq si uo ra
body's response to hypoglycemia; this hormone is secreted by
As carbohydrate/energy reserves in the CNS are limited, proper
the alpha cells of the pancreas into the portal circulation and
fissue function relies on a steady supply of glucose. In mam-
results in glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis within minutes.3.40
mals, the cerebral cortex is the first region to be affected.
The adrenal gland also plays a major role in recovery from
Although the entrance of glucose into brain cells is not depend-
hypoglycemia. Epinephrine stimulates hepatic glycogenolysis
ent on, or regulated by, the level of insulin, hypoxia of brain cells
and gluconeogenesis and inhibits glucose utilization by the skel-
still occurs due to hypoglycemia. The presence or absence of
etal muscle.41
clinical signs is dependent on the duration and degree of
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
43
Table 2.5.5 Clinical signs of insulin-secreting tumors in dogs
Diagnostic imaging
Sign
Percentage (%)
 Insulinomas are usually small (<3 cm) nodules within the pan-
creas and are seldom recognized on survey radiographs. Pulmo-
Seizures
56
nary metastases occur late in the course of disease, so thoracic
Weakness
47
radiographs are often unremarkable. Abdominal ultrasonogra-
phy is often viewed as a definitive diagnostic aid for insulin-
Collapse 
30
secreting tumors. While identification of masses/nodules in the
Ataxia
19
 region of the pancreas is supportive of the existence of an insuli-
Muscle tremors
18
noma, failure to identify the lesion in the pancreas is common
and should not be interpreted as evidence that excludes insuli-
Hind end weakness
16
noma from consideration. CT may be a more sensitive means of
Behavior changes
12
 detecting the primary tumor and metastases, but studies have
not evaluated this modality as a diagnostic tool for insulinoma.
Source: Feldman EC, Nelson Rw. Beta-cell neoplasia: insulinoma. In: Canine
and Feline Endocrinoiogy and Reproduction, 3rd edition, p. 621. St. Louis,
MO: Elsevier Science; 2004.
Diagnostic approach
The causes of hypoglycemia can be narowed based on a brief
Table 2.5.6 Causes of hypoglycemia
history, patient signalment, and known breed predispositions to
portosystemic shunts. In puppies, young dogs, and toy breeds,
Insulin-secreting tumor
hypoglycemia, PSS, and Addison's disease would be the most likely
Paraneoplastic
od e  ss  a e  
Hypoadrenocorticism
causes are the most common etiologies. A dog with Addison's
disease would usually have electrolyte abnormalities and azotemia
Hepatic failure-Pss, acquired
Toxic-xylitol
ric dog presenting with appropriate clinical signs and hypoglyc-
Sepsis
emia as the only lab abnormality in the absence of artifact.
 The diagnosis of insulin-secreting tumor can only be con-
 Toy breed/fasting puppy
frmed by evaluating concurrent serum insulin and glucose con-
Sampling artifact
centrations. In a normal dog, hypoglycemia suppresses insulin
secretion; in dogs with insulinoma, this suppressive effect is
minimized due to the semiautonomous release of insulin by the
hypoglycemia and on the success of the counter-regulatory hor-
tumor. Serum should be obtained when blood glucose is <60 mg/
mones in combating hypoglycemia.
 dL, for insulin/glucose evaluations. If blood glucose is higher
than 60 mg/dL, fasting serial samples should be obtained to
determine the degree of glucose decline. If human-specific port-
Lab abnormalities
able glucose meters are used to evaluate blood glucose, hypogly-
The only consistent biochemical abnormality is the presence of
cemia should be <50 mg/dL prior to serum submission as these
mild to marked hypoglycemia. In most dogs with insulinomas,
meters run erroneously low.
blood glucose is <60mg/dL. If other abnormalities are noted,
One of the most common obstacles in confirming a diagnosis
they are usually associated with other concurrent conditions
of insulinoma is premature administration of dextrose. Admin-
(Table 2.5.6).
 istration of dextrose to hypoglycemic patients will elevate serum
 As artifact can be a potential cause of an expensive diagnostic
glucose and insulin levels, thereby interfering with blood testing
evaluation for hypoglycemia, veterinary professionals handlling
relied upon to accrue a diagnosis. Furthermore, in most cases,
laboratory samples must be aware of this in order to minimize
 hypoglycemic signs may resolve with cage rest. As it is very dif-
its occurrence. Delay in the separation of cells from serum
ficult to withdraw therapeutic dextrose once it has been initiated,
results in the utilization of glucose by red blood cells (RBCs) and
d a r    a p  
a reduction in the glucose concentration reported. This occurs
 serum has been collcted and that the sample is handled prop-
most commonly when whole blood sits overnight without being
erly to avoid artifact. Attempts to improve/resolve hypoglycemia
centrifuged and separated prior to lab pickup. Placing samples
can be initiated after these samples have been obtained.
in serum-separator tubes and spinning the sample within an
Past literature has discussed insulin/glucose ratios be used to
hour after collection minimize this artifact.
 Glucose values measured using whole blood portable glucose
 one to two appropriately obtained serum samples are all that is
meters designed for humans often can result in values 10-50 mg/
needed to accrue a diagnosis. If insulin levels are elevated in the
dL lower than actual glucose values, resulting in an artifactual
face of hypoglycemia, this confrms a diagnosis of insulin-
diagnosis of hypoglycemia.
secreting tumor. A common misconception in interpretation
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
occurs if/when insulin concentrations are not elevated but are 
excision can be curative. Despite these data, pancreatectomy
within the normal range. This should be viewed as an abnormal may be declined due to the age of the patient, operative and
sd  iu an s sia  s se n
6 postoperative risks, high rate of metastases and rare surgical
with severe hypoglycemia. Thus, normal insulin levels in a
 cures, cost of surgery and aftercare, and the good success rates
patient with severe hypoglycemia are consistent with a diagnosis 
 of medical management.
 of insulinoma.
 If surgery is declined, medical treatment is advised to palliate
clinical signs (see chronic management). It should be reinforced
Client education and the role
that signs are expected to recur in the future and that metastases
will occur or progress with time. As many dogs have very good
of the veterinary technician
quality of life for months-years without surgery, euthanasia is
Although the veterinary team is usually able to achieve a tenta-
seldom advised if surgery is not elected.
tive diagnosis quickly and alleviate clinical signs in the hospital,
providing useful information to the client is extremely valuable
Pancreatectomy
if the veterinary team is to act on decisions based on informed
 consent. Pivotal data relayed should include the following:
The goal of surgery is to debulk as much cancer burden as pos-
sible and to minimize preventable postoperative complications.
a) Dogs manifesting signs of hypoglycemia are not in pain.
Euthanasia is not advised even in the face of a perceived high
b) This disease cannot be cured and is considered terminal
burden of metastases due to the frequency of benign hepatic
nodules in geriatric dogs and the positive response to medical
c)Symptoms can often be managed and diminished for periods
of months-years with inexpensive measures at home. Medi-
management.
Preoperative administration of glucose as a 5% solution is
cations may have side effects.
continued as during the acute period of stabilization and espe-
d) Signs of hypoglycemia (which may include seizures) will
cially during the period of fasting prior to surgery. A glucose
recur in all patients.
>40 mg/dL is ideal. Placement of a central venous catheter prior
An exhaustive workup for a dog with insulinoma should not
to the procedure is advised to allow for frequent intraoperative
p a  go pse aq s p a r pd aq
and postsurgical glucose monitoring.
 points above.
Insulinomas can occur within any portion of the pancreas,
with no predilections for a particular lobe. It is believed that
Treatment
tumors associated with the body of the pancreas are associated
with much higher risks of pancreatitis after surgery, and excision
Acute/hospitalized patient
in these circumstances must be weighed against these risks.46
 A common misconception in managing hypoglycemic patients
Postoperative care
with suspected insulinoma is that restoring euglycemia should
be an immediate goal of therapy.
Postoperative complications are common and include the
The goal of in-hospital care is to
following.
a) perform appropriate testing to achieve a tentative diagnosis,
Pancreatitis
b) establish whether surgery is to be performed, and
This can be a devastating complication for the postsurgical
 c) minimize clinical signs related to hypoglycemia.
patient as it delays the ability to feed the patient and is associated
The latter goal is generally achieved with intravenous dextrose
with fatal outcomes in select instances. Aggressive intravenous
supplementation. Although no particular protocol has been
fluid therapy is advised (dextrose initiates a polyuric state) and
proven to be most effective, most endocrinologists believe that
food is often withheld for 24-48h after pancreatic surgery to
IV fluids supplemented with 50% dextrose to a 2.5-5.0% solu-
minimize the incidence of this complication.
boluses of dextrose have the potential to create a rebound
Diabetes mellitus
hypoglycemia due to stimulation of the tumor and release of
 insulin.4 In some patients, signs persist despite these measures;
This is a rare complication of aggressive resection of a large
portion of the pancreas in which atrophy of remaining normal
in refractory cases, glucagon can be considered as a CRI at
islet cells results in insufficient insulin secretion. Insulin therapy
 5-10 ng/kg/min.44
is only advised after a few days of persistent hyperglycemia and
glucosuria. In treated cases, hypoglycemia recurs due to tumor
Is surgery reasonable?
regrowth and insulin is discontinued.
Resection of the pancreatic tumor is considered the most
definitive treatment for dogs with insulinoma. In most cases,
Hypoglycemia
surgical removal can improve response to chronic medical man-
Hypoglycemia may persist after surgery due to incomplete
agement, and thereby prolong survival times.4 In rare cases,
tumor resection or due to persistence of functional metastases.
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
45
Chronic medical management
maintain prolonged (months-years) symptom-free periods with
medical and/or surgical management. The owner's willingness
Lifelong medical management is advised only if surgery has been
 to accept the potential for recurrent episodes and to comply with
declined or when clinical signs recur after surgery due to tumor
chronic medical management plays a large role in decision
recurrence and/or metastases. The goals of treatment are to reduce
making and patient survival times.
the frequency and severity of clinical signs and to avoid hospita-
lization if at all possible. Euglycemia may never be achieved.
Glucagonoma
a) Frequent Feedings. It is believed that provision of a constant
source of calories for the elevated blood levels of insulin to
Glucagonoma is a very rare malignant endocrine tumor of the
act on will minimize hypoglycemic symptoms. Feeding
alpha cells of the pancreatic islet of Langerhans. No feline glu-
three to six meals per day is advised.
 cagonoma cases have been reported. This tumor has been associ-
ated with an erosive, crusting skin rash called necrolytic
b)  Minimize Exercise and Excitement. Exercise and excitement
increase glucose utilization and inhibit hepatic release of
migratory erythema (NME) in people and superficial necrolytic
glucose.47
dermatitis (SND) in dogs. Other terms for the skin condition
c) Glucocorticoids. These drugs are advised when the above
 metabolic epidermal necrosis, and glucagonoma syndrome. The
measures no longer control clinical signs adequately. Ster-
term diabetic dermatopathy was coined because some canine
oids are insulin antagonists and stimulate hepatic glycoge-
and human patients with this tumor develop concurrent DM.
nolysis. Prednisone is started at 0.5 mg/kg/day divided BID,
and the dose is increased as needed based on recurrence of
Signalment
symptoms. The limiting factor in dosing is the typical side
effects of PU/PD, lethargy, and panting.
 No breed or sex predilection exists. Middle-aged to older dogs
d) Diazoxide. This is a diuretic that inhibits insulin secretion
 are more commonly affected.
and tissue utilization of glucose, and stimulates hepatic glu-
coneogenesis. The drug is expensive, and GI side effects are
Clinical symptoms
common. Initial dosage is 10 mg/kg/day divided BID. Giving
the drug with food may diminish side effects.
The presenting complaint for most dogs with this condition is
an erosive and crusting dermatitis. The footpads or other pres-
e)SST. Octreotide acetate (Novartis Pharmaceuticals, East
 sure points are most often the first skin areas affected. Often
Hanover, NJ) is an analogue of SST that inhibits synthesis of
these animals have concurrent footpad pain and pruritis. Inter-
insulin by beta cells in the pancreas. Doses of 10-50 μg SC
digital erythema, crusting, and fissuring of the footpads is typical
BID-TID have been reported.2
(Figure 2.5.2).
The skin signs may wax and wane and may also involve other
Monitoring of the insulinoma patient
areas that experience increased trauma—distal limbs, muzzle,
elbows, hocks, and mucocutaneous areas ofthe face. Weight loss
As a general rule, it is not advised to perform random rechecks
ofblood glucose inpatients with insulinoma as at-home therapy is
and PU/PD are other common complaints. Catabolic effects of
 glucagon may contribute to weight loss.
palliative and changes in therapy are based on clinical signs only.
It is advised, however, to check blood glucose levels once the
owner reports recurrence of symptoms. It is possible that, with the
increased use of at-home glucose monitoring, future guidelines
may change.
What to advise for episodes at home
 It is generally advised for owners to always have honey, Karo*
syrup or some form of sugar solution available at home. If the
animal is actively seizuring, advise rubbing the solution on the
gums (counsel properly so the owner does not get bitten). If
the animal is weak or ataxic and is alert enough to eat, offer a
small meal.
Prognosis: biological behavior of insulinoma
All beta-cell carcinomas are considered malignant, and most
dogs have cancer spread at the time of diagnosis. Most common
sites of metastases are the liver, peripancreatic omentum, and
lymph nodes. Despite the extent of malignancy, many dogs can
Figure 2.5.2  Footpad of a dog with superficial necrolytic dermatitis.
46
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Pathogenesis of skin lesions
Laboratory findings
Hyperglucagonemia from autonomous secretion by the tumor is
 Normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia may be
 thought to play an important role in the development of the skin 
seen secondary to chronic disease. Elevated liver enzymes are
lesions; however, the pathogenesis for the skin condition is not
typical in dogs with glucagon-secreting tumors. If these are asso-
well understood and other metabolic and nutritional abnormali-
ciated with elevated bile acid levels, then a primary or secondary
ties including zinc deficiency, liver dysfunction, hypoalbumine-
hepatopathy should be suspected. If serum bile acids are normal,
mia, and deficiencies in essential fatty acids and amino acids also
then primary glucagonoma is most probable.
likely play a role. In addition, this skin rash is not considered
Hypoalbuminemia, low urea, and hypoaminoacidemia may
pathognomonic for a glucagonoma.
be seen in these patients due to advanced muscle catabolism.
Hypoaminoacidemia is very common with glucagonoma cases,
Association with liver disease
and in affected dogs, serum amino acids are reduced by more
than 50%. The molar ratio of branched-chain amino acids to
 e ae si s r  a e s u
aromatic amino acids is also commonly decreased. Serum amino
common cause of this skin condition than a pancreatic gluca-
acids can be measured through only a few laboratories (e.g.
gonoma and would be a major differential diagnosis in suspected
University of California, Davis). Hyperglycemia with glucosuria
cases of a glucagonoma. The hepatopathy linked to SND can be
is expected if the patient has concurrent DM. Elevations in
  s ar rs rs no are
amylase and lipase may occur with concurrent pancreatitis.
linked to ingestion of mycotoxins and to chronic treatment with
An elevated serum glucagon concentration may be seen, but
certain anticonvulsants including phenobarbital, primidone,
this has not been documented in all reported canine cases; the
or phenytoin administration. Hepatocutaneous syndrome is
reference range has not been established, but values <200 pmol/L
another term coined to link the signs of the skin rash with the
are considered normal. This assay is not commonly performed
severe liver disease that occurs in most of the canine cases of
and has limited availability.
SND. See Chapter 9 for more information. A potential case of
 an extrapancreatic tumor-secreting glucagon has also been
reported in a dog, and a pseudoglucagonoma syndrome, in
Diagnosis
which NME occurs in the absence of a pancreatic tumor, has
Histopathology
been reported in association with a number of other conditions
in people including cirrhosis, celiac sprue, pancreatitis, malig-
Skin biopsies are the gold standard for the diagnosis of superfi-
nancies (other than pancreatic), hepatitis, inflammatory bowel
cial necrolytic dermatitis. Multiple punch biopsies from the
disease, generalized malabsorption syndromes, and specifc
edges of early lesions should be submitted. With early or acute
nutritional deficiencies (i.e., zinc and essential fatty acids).
lesions, diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis with vacuolation of
keratinocytes, no edema, and minimal dermal changes are seen.
Association with diabetes mellitus
Biopsies of more chronic lesions show epidermal edema, marked
parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, epidermal hyperplasia, and surface
DM with expected weight loss is also a common finding in
crusting, resulting in the classic red, white, and blue layering
canine and human patients with glucagonomas. Hypergluca-
with standard histopathologic staining.
Differential diagnoses for the skin lesions seen with a gluca-
neogenesis and glycogenolysis and by decreasing hepatic glucose
gonoma include autoimmune skin disorders (e.g., pemphigus
 a  s  sa   
foliaceus, toxic epidermal necrolysis, erythema multiforme),
a potent anti-insulinogenic hormone. The insulin resistance that
nutritional causes (e.g., zinc responsive dermatosis), infectious
m sop aos (ad/nd) a yo suais on peap Ae ssa
causes (e.g, dermatophytosis, bacterial pyoderma), parasitic
hyperglucagonemia associated with liver disease or from a glu-
causes (e.g., demodicosis), and neoplastic causes (e.g., epithelio-
cagonoma also have concurrent pancreatitis, which can further
tropic lymphoma). Defnitive diagnosis requires immunohisto-
impair insulin secretion and contribute to the onset of signs of
chemical staining of the excised pancreatic mass or biopsy for
DM. In adipose tissue, hyperglucagonemia activates hormone-
glucagon.
sensitive lipase and increases the free fatty acid delivery to the
liver, which promotes ketogenesis. At the same time, hyperglu-
Laboratory testing
cagonemia inhibits hepatic lipoprotein production. Enhanced
breakdown of muscle protein is promoted resulting in increased
Serum glucagon concentration has been elevated in most but not
release of the amino acids alanine and glutamine for hepatic
 all of the canine cases with a confrmed glucagonoma.
gluconeogenesis. Ultimately, hyperglucagonemia reduces plasma
A complete plasma amino acid profle should be done to
amino acid concentrations due to enhanced essential amino acid
confrm hypoaminoacidemia in suspected cases of SND as
catabolism. As a consequence of persistent hyperglucagonemia,
amino acid supplementation is often provided as part of the
 DM develops at the expense of tissue, muscle, and fat glycogen
therapy. Monitoring of the serum amino acid profle with therapy
stores.
may also be warranted.
Chapter 2Endocrinology
47
Imaging
Prognosis
Abdominal ultrasound should be done both to look for a pan-
 The prognosis for a pancreatic glucagonoma in dogs is consid-
creatic tumor and for possible metastasis to other abdominal
ered guarded to poor because in most cases, the diagnosis is
organs such as the liver. Abdominal ultrasound is also important
 made late in the course when the tumor has already metasta-
 to rule out a pseudoglucagonoma syndrome due to a hepatopa-
sized. If caught early, complete surgical excision may be
thy. In cases of SND caused by a hepatopathy, the characteristic
possible.
hepatic ultrasonographic appearance is a honeycomb or Swiss
cheese appearance.
Because pancreatic islet tumors are often not visible with
SECTION 6 MISCELLANEOUS
ultrasound, failure to visualize a tumor does not rule out a glu-
cagonoma even if cutaneous signs of SND are present. CT and
HORMONES, GLANDS,
MRI of the abdomen with contrast are both more sensitive
AND DISEASE
 imaging modalities for the detection of pancreatic islet tumors
in dogs. Indium-111-labeled somatostatin/octreotide acetate
  s n       
Calcitriol
cases or to corroborate CT fndings and identify metastatic
Calcitriol, otherwise known as bioactive vitamin D, or 1,25 dihy-
disease. Although not commonly available in veterinary medi-
 droxycholecalciferol (1,25(OH)2Ds), is a steroid hormone that
cine at this time, endoscopic ultrasound is a very sensitive
plays an important role in regulating the concentrations of
method for detection of pancreatic islet tumors in people.
calcium and phosphorous in the blood and in the mineralization
of bone.
Treatment
Pathophysiology of calcitriol
 Complete surgical resection of the pancreatic tumor is the treat-
ment of choice and can be curative for cases of SND induced by
 Production of bioactive vitamin D is a multistep process involy.
a glucagonoma. Any suspicious areas in the liver seen at the time
 ing sequential hydroxylation of the initial precursor, vitamin D3.
of surgery should be biopsied as should local lymph nodes to
 In dogs and cats, vitamin D; is exclusively obtained from the diet
evaluate for possible metastasis. Surgical excision of pancreatic
since they are not capable of synthesizing it in their skin. Vitamin
tumors is associated with a high risk of postoperative pancrea-
D, is frst hydroxylated to form vitamin Dz within the liver.
titis; this can be severe and in rare cases fatal.
Vitamin D, is then released into the bloodstream and is trans-
Chemotherapy (dacarbazine, streptozotocin combined with
 ported to the kidney. In the kidney, vitamin D is hydroxylated
 again, inside the proximal renal tubule cells, by the enzyme 10-
success in people with unresectable or metastatic tumors.
hydroxylase to form bioactive vitamin D. Only the final product
Parenteral (Aminosyn) or oral (ProMod) amino acid solu-
in vitamin D synthesis, calcitriol or 1,25 dihydroxycholecalcif-
tions or total parenteral nutrition (TPN) along with a high
erol, is biologically active; the earlier precursor molecules are not
quality protein diet are used to help resolve the rash signs. Zinc
biologically active.
and essential fatty acid supplementation are often used support-
Three major mechanisms contribute to the regulation of active
ively for the skin lesions. Hydrotherapy and topical glucocorti-
vitamin D production. The first mechanism involves regulation
coids may also be indicated along with treatment of a secondary
 by a multifactorial classic endocrine negative feedback system.
bacterial or fungal pyoderma.
Low calcium, phosphorus, calcitriol, or elevated PTH increases
The administration of octreotide acetate, a synthetic SST ana-
lα-hydroxylase activity; the reverse conditions decrease the
logue that binds with high affinity to somatostatin receptors
(SSTRs) and inhibits the release of several GI hormones includ-
limits its circulating concentration and prevents excessive
  a nn o  q s e 
synthesis.
and appears to be effective in cases where surgery is not an
The second major regulatory mechanism is accomplished
 option (e.g., patients with widespread disseminated metastatic
intracellularly within virtually all target cells. This involves the
disease). Few reports are available in dogs, but in one case, SC
 production of an enzyme (24-hydroxylase) that catalyzes a series
administered octreotide acetate did resolve cutaneous signs and
of oxidation reactions leading to inactivation of calcitriol. This
improve quality of life for the dog in the short term. The drug is
enzyme is regulated in a reciprocal manner to 1o-hydroxylase.
expensive and anorexia is the major adverse effect.
-sd s a  s ae issdxa pe ae s
Hepatic arterial chemoembolization for the treatment of
rus and calcitriol concentrations and reduced by elevations in
hepatic metastasis of pancreatic tumors has been reported in
PTH
 dogs and is a palliative option.
The third major regulatory mechanism is the binding of cal-
Insulin therapy for patients with concurrent DM will be
citriol (99%) to protein (making it inactive). Carrier proteins
required.
help to act as a buffer guarding against vitamin D intoxication.
48
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Biological actions of vitamin D: Calcium
seen in people (type I and II, nutritional rickets, and X-linked
hypophosphatemic rickets) that are caused by mutations in genes
and phosphorus homeostasis
involved in vitamin D synthesis or that affect the sensitivity of
The vitamin D endocrine system is an essential component of
vitamin D receptors, have also been described in cats and dogs.
the complex interactions involving the kidney, bone, parathyroid
 In adult animals, CKD can result in acquired vitamin D defi-
gland, and intestine that maintain extracellular calcium and
ciency due to the reduction in the kidney's ability to produce
phosphorus levels within very narrow limits. Such tight control
bioactive vitamin D. The resulting deficiency is an important
of calcium and phosphorus concentrations in the body is vital
factor promoting the development of renal secondary hyper-
for normal cellular physiology and skeletal integrity. Vitamin D
parathyroidism in CKD because one of calcitriol's important
acts in concert with PTH produced by the parathyroid glands to
functions is to modulate PTH activity. With renal secondary
tightly regulate these minerals in the body. The main site of
hyperparathyroidism, increased secretion of PTH occurs due to
action of vitamin D is the GI tract where it stimulates active
absorption of Ca?+ as well as stimulating absorption of phospho-
very common in cats with CKD. Renal osteodystrophy may
rus and magnesium by enterocytes.
n si s id as en  n
Vitamin D is essential for the development and maintenance
a subclinical syndrome in adult dogs with CKD; however, in
of a mineralized skeleton. Vitamin D deficiency results in rickets
young animals with CKD and in rare cases in older animals with
(softening of bones) in young growing animals and osteomalacia
CKD, it will manifest clinically as skeletal abnormalities such as
in adults.
bone pain, pathologic fractures, loose teeth, and rubber jaw
The vitamin D endocrine system is a potent modulator of
syndrome.
parathyroid function. Vitamin D is important for determining
PTH has been recognized as a uremic toxin, and supplement-
the parathyroid gland responsiveness to calcium. As expected,
ing cats and dogs with calcitriol has been advocated by some
 prolonged calcitriol deficiency (as occurs in chronic kidney
veterinary nephrologists in order to ameliorate the adverse
disease [CKD]) leads to markedlly reduced parathyroid receptors
effects of excessive PTH production in CKD patients. At this
and calcium receptor levels, thereby requiring higher serum
time, current evidence does not support the use of calcitriol in
calcium or 1,25(OH)2D3 doses to suppress PTH synthesis or to
cats with CKD but does support its use in dogs.
arrest growth. The administration of 1,25(OH)2D3 in patients
Hypervitaminosis D toxicity
with CKD inhibits PTH synthesis and parathyroid cell growth
 and has been utilized for the treatment of secondary hyperpar-
Vitamin D toxicity is usually the result of overdosing on vitamin
athyroidism from CKD. Calcitriol also potentiates the effect of
D supplements or of exposure to toxins such as rat bait that
PTH on bone.
contain high concentrations of vitamin D. Certainly, vitamin D
Through all these effects, but especially through its action on
supplements are a valuable treatment for individuals with
the intestine, vitamin D ensures that the blood levels of calcium
vitamin D deficiency or hypocalcemia from hypoparathyroidism,
and phosphorus are sufficient for the normal mineralization of
but overzealous supplementation over a period of weeks or
type I collagen in the skeleton.
months can be severely toxic to humans and animals. Excessive
dietary supplementation of vitamin D by uninformed owners or
inadvertent oversupplementation of feedstuffs from problems
Other nonclassic biological actions
with ration formulations can also lead to severe hypercalcemia,
of vitamin D
renal failure, and possibly death.
Hypervitaminosis D toxicity from cholecalciferol containing
Vitamin D is being increasingly recognized for its role in modu-
rodenticides (Quintox, True Grit Rampage, and Ortho Mouse
lating cell growth and differentiation in a diverse array of tissues.
& Rat-B-Gone) can result in hypercalcemia as soon as 12-18h
Vitamin D has been shown to have potent antiproliferative,
post ingestion. Other causes of hypervitaminosis D toxicity have
prodifferentiative, and immunomodulatory activities. These
also been reported in dogs consuming vitamin D containing
-d ul  ua i au aissd e pasns a su
psoriasis medications (Davionex, Dovenex, and Psorcutan).
venting cancers and in the modulation of the immune system.
If toxicity or deficiency of vitamin D are suspected, then meas-
urement of vitamin D metabolites, 25-hydroxycholecalciferol
Clinical disease states and applications
(calcidiol) and 1,25 dihydroxycholecalciferol (calcitriol), is indi-
cated. A competitive protein binding assay that is not species
involving vitamin D
specifc is available for the measurement of vitamin D. To avoid
Deficiency of vitamin D in young animals leads to rickets, a
handling errors, protect the frozen serum from light.
devastating skeletal disease characterized by undermineralized
bones. In adult animals, vitamin D deficiency leads to osteoma-
Erythropoietin
lacia. Nutritional rickets results from a dietary deficiency of
vitamin D or phosphorus; this is very rare in humans, but cases
have been reported in young cats and dogs fed with a nutrition-
 RBC production (erythropoiesis); it is produced by peritubular
ally incomplete and unbalanced diet. Other forms of rickets
 interstitial cells in the kidneys in the adult animal and in hepa-
Chapter 2Endocrinology
49
tocytes in the fetus. Small amounts of extrarenal EPO are also
decrease EPO secretion in response to increased red cell produc-
 produced by the liver in humans and potentially in other species.
tion. This process helps to ensure that there is a normal red cell
circulating mass to prevent hypoxia while preventing overpro-
Pathophysiology of erythropoietin
duction of RBCs, which could lead to a dangerous increase in
 blood viscosity. Other factors that increase secretion of EPO
  as o rrd pia u oi s o
 include other hormones such as androgens, T4, GH, prolactin,
 regulate bone marrow erythroid cell proliferation, differentia-
ACTH, and adrenocortical steroids. Products released from pre-
fion, and survival. The highest number of EPO receptors is
mature RBC destruction (hemolysates) have also been shown to
located on the colony-forming unit-erythroid (CFU-E) cells,
enhance EPO secretion. Drugs that cause marked vasoconstric-
which are considered the primary target cells for EPO. When
tion and result in renal hypoxia can also stimulate EPO produc-
 EPO binds to the receptors on the colony-forming unit (CFU)
 tion. Adenosine and estrogens are factors other than polycythemia
progenitor cells the end result is to rescue these progenitor cells
that decrease EPO secretion by the kidneys.
from undergoing apoptosis (programmed cell death). This leads
to an increase in the number of progenitor cells that survive to
differentiate into mature RBCs that can be released from the
Clinical disease states and therapeutic uses
bone marrow.
 Following the cloning of the EPO gene and the characterization
 EPO is not the only growth factor involved in erythropoiesis.
 of the selective hematopoietic action of EPO on erythroid CFU
Other growth factors that act synergistically with EPO in this
 cells, recombinant EPO forms (epoetin-alfa, epoetin-beta, and
role include granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF),
the long-acting analogue darbepoetin-alfa) were produced for
interleukin (IL)-6, stem cell factor (SCF), IL-1, IL-3, IL-4, IL-9,
therapeutic use. Today, these products are widely used in people
 IL-1l, granulocyte-macrophage (GM)-CSF, and IGF-1.
for the treatment of anemia in patients with CKD, aplastic
Ubiquitous EPO receptor expression in nonerythroid cells has
anemia, and chemotherapy-induced anemia. Human recom-
been associated with the discovery of diverse biological functions
binant erythropoietin (rHuEPO; Epogen", Amgen, Thousand
for EPO in nonhematopoietic tissues. During development, EPO-
 Oaks, CA) and darbepoetin (Aranesp?, Amgen, Thousand Oaks,
a       si  o
CA) have also been used in dogs and cats to treat the anemia of
but also for embryonic angiogenesis and brain development. A
 advanced CKD and chemotherapy-induced anemia.
series of recent studies suggest that endogenous EPO-EpoR sign-
The principal cause for the anemia associated with advanced
aling contributes to wound healing responses, physiological and
 chronic renal failure is erythroid hypoplasia in the bone marrow
pathological angiogenesis, and the body's innate response to
secondary to inadequate renal production of EPO. Hormone
injury in the brain and heart. EPO and its novel derivatives
 replacement therapy using recombinant human EPO has been
 have emerged as major tissue-protective cytokines. Other effects
 shown to be effective in correcting anemia of CKD in dogs.
 of EPO include a hematocrit-independent vasoconstriction-
Uncontrolled clinical trials in cats with CKD have also shown
dependent hypertension, increased endothelin production,
   s    n  
upregulation of tissue renin, change in vascular tissue prostaglan-
appetite and improved quality of life. Unfortunately, the develop-
din production, stimulation of angiogenesis, and stimulation of
ment of antibodies directed against rHuEPO has limited the
endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation.
     so  n   s
development of anti-EPO antibodies may result in failure of
Erythropoietin secretion
drug efficacy, progressive anemia in spite of therapy, and the
The intrarenal physiology and pharmacology of EPO production 
need for blood transfusion. This has led to the recommendation
is highly complex. To maintain a stable hemoglobin (Hb) con-
 to withhold the use of rHuEPO until the patient's packed cell
centration, the erythroid precursor cell compartment (or eryth-
 volume is less than 20% and clinical signs are seen attributable
 01 Aiaiedodde pue Anduond puodsai oi aqe aq isnu (uo1
to the anemia. The serious nature of these complications requires
 increased oxygen demands caused by acute (e.g., blood loss) or
 a thorough discussion with the pet owner so that risks and ben-
chronic (e.g., infection) conditions. The primary means by which
 efits of therapy can be weighed prior to proceeding with therapy.
the body regulates RBC production in response to such demands
Darbepoetin, when compared with rHuEPO, has a longer
ss o ss a  do  e  s
 plasma half-life, so it requires less frequent dosing and has been
Tissue hypoxia prompts renal tubular epithelial cells to secrete
 reported to be just as effective at maintaining Hb levels in human
EPO, while an increase in tissue oxygenation causes a decrease
 patients with CKD as rHuEPO. Although unproven, darbepoi-
in EPO secretion to basal levels. A certain basal level of EPO is 
 etin alpha may be less immunogenic in dogs and in cats than
necessary for a normal rate of erythropoiesis, but when there is
 EPO. However, studies on the clinical effectiveness and safety of
a decrease in the number of RBCs (e.g., after hemorrhage or with 
 this productin dogs and cats with CKD have not been published,
hemolytic anemia) leading to hypoxia, renal peritubular cells
 and evidence regarding its effectiveness and recommendations
detect this and increase their secretion of EPO. The concentra-
 for its use in dogs and in cats with CKD is limited to expert
tion of EPO will vary with the degree of hypoxia or severity of 
 opinion. Usage of rHuEPO or darbepoetin requires an express
the anemia. The degree of oxygenation and the number of RBCs
 consent form as these are not approved for use in dogs and cats.
 in circulation act as a feedback mechanism to either increase or
 Nevertheless, rHuEPO has been in use since approximately
50
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
1990, and nephrologists have been using darbepoetin for the
mal duodenum, various parts of the CNS (pituitary gland, the
past few years on clinical patients.
hypothalamus, and the medulla oblongata) as well as in the
Recombinant forms of both canine and feline EPO have been
vagus and sciatic nerves.
synthesized and have been shown to be effective and safe when
used to treat the anemia of CKD in dogs and in cats, respectively.
Pathophysiology of gastrin
The immunogenicity problems observed with rHuEPO admin-
istration to dogs were not observed with the use of this canine
Gastrin has many functions, but its two major effects on the GI
recombinant EPO. Recombinant canine and feline EPO are not,
tract are stimulation of gastric acid secretion by parietal cells and
however, currently available commercially.
promotion of gastric mucosal growth.
Regardless of the underlying disease process for which human
Gastrin receptors are found on parietal cells, and binding of
or species-specifc recombinant EPO is being administered, iron
gastrin, along with binding of the other two major ligands that
promote gastric acid secretion (histamine and acetylcholine), is
development of iron deficiency due to the increased rate of
required for maximal gastric acid secretion by parietal cells.
erythropoiesis.
Histamine
produced
1  by  neighboring  histamine-secreting
Systemic hypertension is a recognized complication of EPO
enterchromaffin-like cells and acetylcholine released from post-
therapy in human beings receiving rHuEPO.
ganglionic parasympathetic neurons bind to H2 and M3 recep-
tors, respectively, located on parietal cells. Binding of gastrin
Measurement of plasma EPO
to cholecystokinin (CCK)-2 receptors on enterchromaffin-like
Various methods are available for the measurement of EPO in
cells stimulates histamine release, and histamine then is free to
plasma and serum; however, in clinical medicine, immunoassays
bind to H2 receptors on parietal cells to promote gastric acid
are the most commonly used. The concentration of EPO in the
secretion.
Gastrin has also been shown to stimulate many aspects of
mined by calibration against a reference standard. The availabil-
gastric mucosal development and growth. Gastrin has trophic
ity of this test is variable at the time of print; check with your
actions on the gastric mucosa by stimulating the production of
reference laboratory. When serum EPO is measured, 5 mL of
members of the epidermal growth factor family, which in turn
blood should be collected into tubes containing no additive;
stimulate growth and hypertrophy of surface epithelial cells in
once clotted, the samples should be centrifuged immediately and
the stomach and intestine.
dn iog .s-z ie pei sseld e u paiois pue paieredas unias a
Gastrin is secreted in response to chemical (e.g., elevated pH
to 24h. For longer storage, up to 18 months, serum or plasma
and protein) and mechanical (e.g., stomach distension) stimuli
can be frozen at -20°C. Samples with gross hemolysis or lipemia
that act directly on the G cell and/or indirectly via adjacent
are unsuitable for analysis. A same-day Hb or hematocrit meas-
neuroendocrine cells and neurons. The primary stimulus for
urement from the patient along with other relevant clinical
secretion of gastrin by gastric G cells is the presence of certain
information should be provided to the laboratory to aid with
foodstuffs (especially peptides, certain amino acids and calcium)
accurate interpretation of the serum EPO concentration. Sex and
in the gastric lumen. Secretion of gastrin is inhibited when the
age do not affect serum EPO levels in healthy cats and dogs.
gastric luminal pH becomes too acidic (pH < 3) through a
The primary indications for the measurement of serum or
classic negative feedback loop. Circulating gastrin in the blood
 plasma EPO is as a diagnostic tool to differentiate between the two
is inactivated by the kidney, liver, and small intestine.
major causes for absolute polycythemia—-primary polycythemia
(polycythemia vera [PCVl) and secondary polycythemia. See
Disease states that involve excessive
 Chapter 7 for more information on polycythemia.
gastrin secretion
Abuse potential
 Excessive secretion of gastrin, also referred to as hypergastrine-
mia, is a well-recognized cause of a rare but severe disease known
 The use of rHuEPO and darbepoetin to enhance athletic per-
as Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, which has been reported in dogs,
formance is officially banned by most sports-governing bodies
cats, and human beings. The hallmark of this disorder is gastric
because the resulting excessive erythrocytosis can lead to
and duodenal ulceration resulting from excessive and unregu-
increased thrombogenicity and can cause deep vein, coronary,
lated secretion of gastric acid. Most commonly, this is the result
and cerebral thromboses. Veterinarians need to be aware of the
 of a gastrin-secreting tumor (gastrinoma) arising in either the
abuse potential for recombinant EPO if this drug is not carefully
pancreas or the duodenum.
prescribed.
A gastrinoma tumor is an example of an APUDoma-type GI
tumor. While a gastrinoma is the most serious and potentially
life-threatening cause for hypergastrinemia, other causes for
Gastrin
elevations in serum gastrin include collection of a postprandial
Gastrin is a GI hormone that is produced by G cells located
blood sample, renal failure, gastric obstruction, pyloric stenosis,
primarily in the antral portion of the stomach. Smaller numbers
gastric dilatation and volvulus, atrophic gastritis, prior small
of gastrin-secreting cells are also located in the pancreas, proxi-
intestinal resection leading to short bowel syndrome, and
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
51
administration of certain antacid drugs (H2 blockers, proton 
 abnormalities (hypokalemia, hypochloridemia) secondary to
pump inhibitors). Because the liver is responsible for the break-
 yomiting, and elevations in liver enzymes from inflammatory
down of gastrin, diffuse and severe liver disease can also lead to
 disease or from tumor metastasis. Hyperbilirubinemia, from
hypergastrinemia due to the resulting prolonged half-life of the
 compression of the bile duct by the pancreatic or duodenal
hormone.
mass, has also been reported. A metabolic alkalosis, with or
without aciduria, may occur if the tumor causes an upper GI
Gastrinoma
obstruction.
A gastrinoma is a rare, malignant, neuroendocrine tumor arising
Imaging
from either delta islet pancreatic cells or from G cells within the
duodenum. In dogs and in cats, the majority of reported cases
 Abdominal radiographs are usually unremarkable; however, a
have had a pancreatic mass.
In 1955, Zollinger and Ellison were the frst to describe a triad
 of serosal detail and free abdominal air. A radiographic upper
 of gastric acid hypersecretion, a non-beta-cell pancreatic islet 
 GI contrast study may reveal gastric wall thickening and gas-
cell tumor, and GI ulceration that has come to be called the
 troduodenal ulceration. Abdominal ultrasound may reveal a
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. As in dogs, gastrinomas in people
 thickened gastric wall or pylorus, evidence of metastatic disease
resulting in clinical symptoms compatible with the Zollinger-
 to the liver, spleen, regional lymph nodes, and other organs, and
Ellison syndrome can arise from either the pancreas or an
 in rare cases, the primary tumor in the pancreas or duodenum
extrapancreatic (renal, duodenum) site In people, duodenal gas-
 trinomas are the most common form of this tumor. Rare cases
 tumor using ultrasound does not rule out a gastrinoma. CT or
of gastrinomas arising within a lymph node or the kidney have
MRI with intravenous contrast administration should be per-
 also been reported in people.
formed if a gastrinoma is suspected as these imaging modalities
have a higher sensitivity than ultrasound for the detection of
Signalment
pancreatic tumors and metastases.
Thoracic radiographs with three views to check for evidence
 Most dogs diagnosed with gastrinoma are middle-aged (mean
of pulmonary metastasis are indicated but rarely will show evi-
8.2 years; range 3.5-12.0 years of age). Only a few feline cases
dence of visible metastasis.
have been reported; affected cats were middle-aged (mean age
Upper GI endoscopy may show evidence of rugal and pyloric
10-12 years). No breed predilection for this tumor exists.
 antrum hypertrophy, gastric or duodenal ulceration and hemor-
rhage, and possibly, evidence of reflux esophagitis (erythema,
Clinical signs
 erosions, and ulceration). Endoscopic ultrasound, which is cur-
rently not readily available in veterinary medicine, is highly
Clinical signs seen with gastrinoma result from an excessive
useful for localizing these tumors within the pancreas and duo-
secretion of gastrin by the tumor, which leads to gastric acid
denum in humans.
hypersecretion, gastric mucosal hypertrophy, Gl ulceration,
melena, and malassimilation secondary to digestive enzyme
Diagnosis
inactivation and bile salt precipitation.
The most common clinical signs are vomiting and weight loss.
Most commonly, the diagnosis of a gastrinoma is made based
Other signs include depression, lethargy, anorexia, hematemesis,
 on the presence of elevated levels of serum gastrin in a fasted
 hematochezia, melena, and abdominal pain. Collapse and signs
patient (fasting hypergastrinemia), detection of a pancreatic
of shock have been reported with acute perforation of a gastric
 mass using imaging, signs consistent with gastroduodenal ulcer-
 ation, and subsequent confrmation using immunohistochemis-
vary from being unremarkable to findings compatible with
 try to stain for gastrin in the excised tumor.
shock Pale mucus membranes, tachycardia, abdominal pain,
 An elevated fasting serum gastrin concentration is expected,
emaciation, and fever are other signs that have been reported.
but in some dogs with confrmed gastrinomas, gastrin levels
 In one feline case, an abdominal mass was palpated, but gener-
have been low or normal. Other causes for elevated gastrin levels
ally, these tumors are too small to be detected on physical
need to be ruled out or considered, including collection of a
examination.
postprandial blood sample, renal failure, gastric obstruction,
pyloric stenosis, gastric dilatation and volvulus, atrophic gastri-
Laboratory findings
tis, prior small intestinal resection leading to short bowel syn-
drome, hepatic disease, and administration of certain antacid
Anemia (regenerative or nonregenerative), secondary to GI
(s dd d so z) sin
bleeding, may be seen on the CBC. In addition, neutrophilia
 Provocative testing involves the measurement of gastrin levels
may be seen due to the inflammation associated with GI ulcera-
before and after administration of secretin or calcium to stimu-
tion. Findings on a serum biochemistry profle can include pan-
 late gastrin secretion. This test is performed in people with sus-
52
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
animals. Provocative testing by injecting secretin or calcium into an
Long-acting SST analogues such as octreotide acetate have also
artery supplying the viscera can be combined with hepatic venous
been effective for controlling symptoms in dogs and in people
sampling to help locate some tumors that are not visible with
with metastatic disease. These drugs reduce gastric hyperacidity
 advanced imaging and that are not visible at the time of surgery.
by directly inhibiting tumor cell secretion of gastrin and indi-
rectly by binding to high affinity SST receptors on gastric parietal
octide (SST analogue) to bind to receptors expressed on gastri-
cells. Addition of alpha interferon to the somatostatin analogue
nomas has facilitated localization of tumors and metastatic
has been shown in one human study to be beneficial. The use of
lesions in people. Such diagnostic techniques are not widely used
these drugs in nonfunctioning gastrinomas is controversial.
in veterinary medicine at the current time.
A range of different chemotherapeutic agents have also
Definitive confirmation relies on immunohistochemical stain-
been used to treat metastatic disease with limited short-term
ing of surgical biopsies for gastrin.
survival beneft. Streptozotocin as a sole agent or in combination
Differential diagnoses for GI ulceration include drug admin-
s       
istration (NSAIDs, steroids), ingestion of toxic chemical irri-
to be effective for palliative therapy for metastatic disease in
tants, stress associated with shock, sepsis, multiple organ
people.
dysfunction syndrome (MODS), strenuous exercise, neurologi-
cal disease (head trauma, intervertebral disk disease), metabolic
Prognosis
disease (liver, kidney pancreatitis, hypoadrenocorticism),
 inflammatory bowel disease or GI neoplasia, systemic mastocy-
Long-term prognosis for dogs diagnosed with a gastrinoma at
tosis, other APUDoms, and GI motility disorders.
the current time is grave with survival times following diagnosis
ranging from 1 to 18 months in one study (n = 4). The primary
determinants of long-term survival in people are tumor size at
Treatment
diagnosis and liver metastasis.
The treatment of choice for a gastrinoma involves surgical exci-
sion; however, the cure rate with surgery is low because the
The kinins
metastatic rate in dogs, as in people, is high at the time of initial
diagnosis. In addition to excision of the primary tumor, surgery
The kininogen-kallikrein-kinin (KKK) system, is a complex
 may also permit resection of deep or perforated ulcers and
multiprotein system that is a metabolic cascade that, when acti-
visible metastatic lesions.
vated, triggers the release of vasoactive polypeptides called
Chemoembolization, hepatic transplantation, radiofrequency
kinins. The kinins that are produced by the activation of the
ablation, and hepatic cryosurgery are other treatment modalities
KKK system participate in the acute phase inflammatory
used in people to relieve symptoms and to reduce tumor burdens.
response and in the intrinsic coagulation system. In addition,
Tumor-targeted radioactive treatment, also called receptor-
there is mounting evidence that the KKK system is also involved
mediated radiotherapy, using a radionucleotide-labeled somato-
in the regulation of blood pressure and plays a role in renal and
statin analogue is an option in the selected group of patients with
cardiac function.
(OctreoScan) documented with scintigraphy.
Pathophysiology of kinins
 For nonresectable tumors, a combination of medical manage-
ment plus or minus surgical debulking of the tumor is the best
There are two main pathways by which kinins are generated. The
option.
plasma KKK system, by far the more complex, initiates activa-
 Medical management involves the use of antacids, gastropro-
tion of the intrinsic coagulation pathway and is involved in the
 tectants, and possibly, other adjunctive therapies (chemotherapy
acute inflammatory response through the activation of comple-
 and octreotide acetate) to reduce the hypersecretion of gastric acid,
ment. The second and simpler tissue KKK system generates
reduce the clinical effects of gastric hyperacidity, and/or inhibit
kinin through the action of tissue kallikrein. Each of these
hormonal secretion from the tumor itself The infltrative nature of
enzyme systems may play different roles in the body.
the tumor and high metastatic rate makes medical management
The plasma KKK system, also called the contact system of
the only tenable option in the majority of our patients where diag-
plasma, consists of three serine proenzymes (coagulation factor
nosis is often made late in the clinical course of the disease.
XII or Hageman factor, factor Xl, and prekallikrein) and the
kinin precursor high molecular weight kininogen (HMWK).
using H2 blockers to prevent histamine-mediated parietal cell
 The contact of plasma with a negatively charged surface leads to
the binding and autoactivation of factor Xll. Factor XII activa-
proton pump inhibitors. The use of proton pump inhibitors has
tion is not only a first step in the initiation of the intrinsic clot-
largely replaced the use of H2 blockers for the treatment of a
ting cascade and the generation of kinins but it also leads to the
gastrinoma. Proton pump blockers available include omepra-
activation of the complement pathway.
 zole, lansoprazole, and pantoprazole. For patients with bleeding
Tissue kallikrein is widely distributed (kidney, blood vessels,
ulcers, sucralfate and or misoprostol can also be administered to
CNS, pancreas, gut, salivary and sweat glands, spleen, adrenal,
 promote healing.
and neutrophils) and this wide distribution suggests a paracrine
Chapter 2Endocrinology
53
(local) function. The regulatory mechanism of tissue kallikrein
Melatonin
remains partly unknown.
Almost all cells express kinin receptors, such as the vascular
The pineal gland is located near the center of the brain between
endothelium, primary sensory afferent neurons, vascular and
the two thalamic bodies, in the space between the two cerebral
nonvascular smooth muscle, epithelial cells, and perhaps some
hemispheres on the roof of the third ventricle. There are two
types of leukocytes. Receptor stimulation causes increased vas-
types of cells within the pineal gland: pinealocytes and glial cells.
cular permeability, relaxation of venular smooth muscle, hypo-
The main function of the pineal gland is the production of the
tension, contraction of intestinal smooth muscle, contraction
hormone melatonin, which is synthesized and secreted by the
of the smooth muscle in the airways (increasing airway resist-
pinealocytes.
ance), stimulation of sensory neurons (pain), alteration of ion
secretion by epithelial cells, production of nitric oxide (vasodila-
Pathophysiology of melatonin
tor), release of cytokines by leukocytes, and release of eicosa-
 noids from various cell types. The various pharmacological
The synthesis and secretion of melatonin by the pineal gland is
effects derive from the presence of these receptors on various
synchronized to diurnal circadian rhythms (the dark-light
cell types.
cycle). During the daytime when it is light, synthesis and secre-
tion are decreased such that serum concentrations are undetect-
 health. Tissue levels of kinin peptides are higher than circulating
able. At night when it is dark, synthesis and secretion increase
levels, consistent with tissues being the main site of formation
dramatically. The pineal gland is unique in this way, as it is the
of kinin peptides. Very high levels of kinin peptides are meas-
 only endocrine gland to have its secretion directly tied to infor-
ured during acute inflammation particularly during episodes of
mation received from the retina.
acute allergic reactions resulting in angioedema.
Information from retinal photoreceptors is transmitted to
higher brain centers in the hypothalamus and from there to the
pineal gland via the superior cervical ganglia and postganglionic
adrenergic sympathetic neurons. Changes in the levels of
Clinical disease states and applications
noradrenaline (NA) ensure proper translation of the light infor-
Research has helped shed light on the role of the KKK system.
mation (via the circadian clock) into melatonin synthesis by the
Recent findings suggest a possible role in blood pressure
 pineal gland.
regulation.
The overall amount of melatonin that is secreted over a
 Inhibition of angiotensin-converting enzymes (ACEs) with
24-h period is determined by the length of the photoperiod.
ACE inhibitors, which are commonly used drugs in dogs and in
 Other factors besides the photoperiod that may influence pineal
cats with cardiac or renal diseases, leads to a decrease in angi-
gland secretion of melatonin include ambient temperature and
otensin II (a vasoconstrictor) but also to an increase in kinin
dietary factors, such as the availability of tryptophan, folate, and
end products (bradykinin) due to decreased degradation. This
vitamin B6
explains why some patients on angiotensin-converting enzyme
 Melatonin is synthesized from a dietary amino acid precursor,
inhibitors (ACEIs) develop a dry cough, and some react with
 L-tryptophan. The rate of melatonin formation depends on the
angioedema, a dangerous swelling of the head and neck region.
 activity of two enzymes: serotonin N-acetyltransferase (AANAT)
Contact activation of the plasma KKK system with dialyzer
and, to a lesser extent, tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH), which
membranes may also account for why some canine and feline
 controls the availability of serotonin, an important intermediate
patients have an anaphylactic reaction during hemodialysis. It
within the pathway. The expression of these two rate-limiting
has also been hypothesized that many of the beneficial effects of
enzymes in melatonin secretion fluctuates in a clock-driven cir-
ACE inhibitors may be due to their influence on the KKK system.
cadian rhythm, with high concentrations occurring during the
This includes their effects when used for the treatment of arterial
 night and low to negligible concentrations occurring in the day-
hypertension, ventricular remodeling (after myocardial infarc-
light. Once synthesized, melatonin is not stored within the pineal
tion), and possibly, for diabetic nephropathy.
gland but is released directly into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
Although the pathophysiology of sepsis remains largely
 and blood to exert its biological actions by binding to melatonin
unknown, experimental and clinical data point to a role of kinins
receptors in various tissues.
 in inducing sepsis through the activation of the complement
There are two major classes of melatonin membrane-bound
cascade, consumption of contact activating factors in the intrin-
receptors (ML1 and ML2 receptors) that belong to a superfamily
sic coagulation pathway, and by promoting vasodilation and
 of G protein-coupled receptors. The different classes of mela-
increased vascular permeability. All of these mechanisms can
tonin receptors are differentially expressed in different tissues;
contribute to hypotension, edema, and disseminated intravascu-
this varied distribution is important in implementing the various
lar coagulation (DIC) with shock A significant increase of
 biological effects of melatonin. The highest density of melatonin
plasma bradykinin was also measured in patients suffering from
 receptors has been found in the hypothalamus, the anterior
Staphylococcus aureus sepsis. These observations could open a
 pituitary, and the retina. Receptors are also found in several
new area for the clinical application of B2R antagonists (receptor
 other areas of the brain (cerebral cortex, thalamus, hippocam-
antagonists for the end products of the KKK system).
pus, and cerebellum) and in several peripheral tissues, including
54
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
the adrenal gland, arteries and heart, lung, liver, kidney, small
compared to other treatments for adrenal disease, and is readily
intestine, skin, and on T and B lymphocytes.
available through health food stores. While typical HAC results
 More than 90% of circulating melatonin is deactivated by the
from excess production of cortisol, atypical HAC, alopecia X,
liver and a very small amount is excreted unchanged in the urine.
and sex hormone-responsive alopecia refer to HAC caused by
increased levels of intermediate adrenal steroids. It is now rec-
Functions of melatonin
ognized that other steroids besides cortisol have a negative feed-
back effect on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis, and steroid
With its secretion being tied to a circadian rhythm, melatonin
profling in dogs and cats has led to the realization that HAC can
has been implicated in the regulation of various neural and
be due to primary adrenal tumors that secrete other steroids
a  s a a  p ae  sd s
besides cortisol.
photoperiod. This includes regulation of the seasonal effects on
 In vitro cell culture studies have shown that both 21-hydroxylase
reproduction, body weight, pelage (coat growth and color) in
and aromatase enzymes, two enzymes in the steroid synthesis
some species, appetite, and activity and hibernation. Melatonin 
pathway, are inhibited by melatonin. Inhibition of the 21-
has also been shown to be important in the neuroendocrine
hydroxylase enzyme should lower cortisol production and secre-
 control of puberty in animals and has been implicated in playing
tion, and inhibition of the aromatase enzyme should lower
 an important role in the modulation of retinal function.
estradiol production and secretion by adrenal cortical cells. In
dogs with adrenal disease treated with melatonin, cortisol levels
Reproduction
are consistently reduced, and estradiol levels are variably reduced
Melatonin is considered an antigonadotropic hormone; by
when extended adrenal steroid panel values after treatment are
inhibiting the release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone
compared to pretreatment values.
(GnRH) from the hypothalamus, it inhibits the release of the
Treatment of cases of mild adrenal disease, particularly cases
 gonadotropic hormones (luteinizing hormone and follicle-
where sex steroids are increased, is often initiated with mela-
stimulating hormone) from the anterior pituitary gland. In some
tonin alone or melatonin with phytoestrogens. If clinical response
wild and domestic species, these hormonal effects play an essen-
over time is less than desired, then the addition of a maintenance
tial role in determining the timing of the breeding season.
dose of mitotane can be added to the treatment regimen.
 In some species, melatonin secretion, infuenced by seasonal
Although there is no scientific data from clinical trials to
variations, determines the timing of puberty, provided that a
 support its use, melatonin has also been used as a sedative and
sufficient degree of physical maturity has been reached
anxiolytic for the treatment of behavioral problems in dogs such
as separation anxiety and anxiety associated with thunderstorms
Miscellaneous effects
or freworks. It has also been used in the management of idio-
pathic epilepsy to reduce the risk of epileptic seizures at night.
There is evidence that melatonin may influence circadian aspects
Finally, melatonin has also been used for the treatment of canine
of glucose homeostasis, the immune system, and cardiovascular
cognitive dysfunction. It is used for its sedative effects, to treat
function. Melatonin receptors are expressed in several skin cells
 restlessness associated with this condition, and to improve the
(including normal and malignant keratinocytes, melanocytes,
quality of sleep.
 p dxa aq s l p (s p
skin functions such as hair growth cycling and fur pigmentation.
Melatonin is able to suppress ultraviolet (UV)-induced damage
Formulations of melatonin
to skin cells and shows strong antioxidant activity in UV-exposed
The use of melatonin in dogs must be considered experimental
cells. It is believed to play a role in the development of cancer of
at this time. There is no information on possible harmful long-
melanocytes (melanoma).
term side effects in dogs or in any other species. Melatonin is
easily synthesized and is available as tablets or capsules and as a
Clinical disease states and applications
constant-release SC implant. However, because melatonin is
classifed as a nutriceutical, not a drug, there is a lack of stand-
Reproduction in domestic ruminants and the desired winter fur
ardization in existing products. This means that there may be
coat of animals farmed for their fur such as mink, arctic foxes,
variable drug content within and between preparations, as well
and cashmere goats can be manipulated by photoperiod and
as variable absorption and bioavailability between products.
melatonin implant administration. Due to melatonin's effect on
 For oral dosing, typically a dose of 3 mg is given q 12h for dogs
the fur coat and the skin, it has been used with variable success
ay y s1< shop 10y yz1 b uaa si u 9 yo asop e pue y s1>
to treat a variety of dermatologic problems in dogs including
 melatonin is typically used, rather than rapid release or extended-
canine acanthosis nigricans, canine recurrent flank alopecia,
release products. Subcutaneous melatonin implants are available
canine pattern baldness, sex hormone-responsive alopecia, and
for dogs in 8, 12 and 18 mg doses. The effects of these implants
alopecia X in Pomeranians and in artic dog breeds.
last 3-4 months. Unfortunately, some dogs have experienced
Melatonin has also been recommended for the treatment of
sterile abscesses or granulomas at the site of implantation.
atypical HAC. Melatonin is particularly recommended for the
 Af least 4 months must be allowed to determine if there is any
treatment of mild cases because it is cheap, has few side effects
response to treatment with melatonin, and the response time is
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
55
variable between dogs. Response to treatment is monitored by
There is a large body of evidence supporting the fact that ANP
improvement in clinical signs, by improvement in serum bio-
 and BNP have important autocrine/paracrine roles within the
chemical abnormalities, or by repeat of steroid profles.
 heart itself. These local actions may be particularly prominent in
disease states and may involve cytoprotective actions in response
to myocardial ischemia, possible vasodilator actions in the coro-
Natriuretic peptides
       
Atrial natriuretic peptides (ANP) belong to a family of structur-
 trophy, and suppression of fbroblast proliferation.
 The expression of ANP and BNP is increased in cardiac hyper-
ally related peptide hormones that inhibit tubular reabsorption
of sodium ions in the glomerulus. Natriuretic peptides also
 trophy, dilation, and heart failure in response to atrial or ven-
include brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and C-type natriuretic
 tricular wall stress. Systemic hypertension, which induces left
peptide (CNP). ANP is synthesized mainly by cells in the cardiac
atria and BNP is synthesized mainly by cells of the cardiac ven-
concentrations of ANP and BNP.
tricles and atria, but both can be produced by cells of other
tissues (including the brain, pituitary gland, lung, and kidney).
Clinical disease states and applications
Both ANP and BNP are released as hormones into the blood-
of natriuretic peptide measurement
stream and they have paracrine (local) effects. CNP is produced
 by the vascular endothelium of many organs and appears to exert
The ELISA assays currently available for measurement of BNP
measure the circulating concentrations ofthe N-terminal portion
exclusively autocrine (self-stimulation) and paracrine effects
within the vasculature. Through the production of ANP and
(N-terminal prohormone of atrial natriuretic peptide [NT-
BNP, the heart is recognized as an important endocrine organ
 proANP] and N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic
d  d  g (l d
that plays a role in the regulation of blood pressure, blood
fragments) rather than the biologically active peptide. This is
yolume, and electrolyte balance.
because the N-terminal portion is less rapidly eliminated or
degraded and reaches a higher concentration than the active
Pathophysiology of natriuretic peptides
 portion (C-ANP and C-BNP).
The primary stimulus for ANP release is stretch of the cardiac
In humans, the measurement of natriuretic peptide (NP) in
atria in response to expansion of the intravascular volume.
 blood has been shown to serve as a biomarker for underlying
Secretion of ANP is also stimulated in response to some vasoac-
cardiac disease and is used in the diagnosis of CHF, differentia-
tion of cardiac disease from respiratory disease, and to provide
and vasopressin). Secretion of ANP is inhibited by nitric oxide
information regarding the risk of morbidity and mortality with
and by intravascular volume depletion (e.g., dehydration, hem-
cardiac diseases. In addition, NP has been used therapeutically
orrhage) and hypotension. Stretch of the cardiac atria and ven-
for the treatment of patients in acute CHF.
tricles with intravascular volume expansion is the primary
The plasma half-lives of ANP, BNP, and CNP are similar at
stimulus for the release of BNP, but angiotensin I, hypoxia, c1-
 approximately 1-2 min. The assay used for measuring or detect-
adrenoceptor agonists, endothelin-1, transforming growth
 ing canine and feline ANPs in tissues is a human assay: The high
factor-β, and vasopressin can also stimulate release.
level of homology between human, canine, and feline ANPs
allows accurate measurement of circulating feline and canine
Functions of natriuretic peptides
ANPs using antibodies directed against the human peptide. This
is not the case for BNP. A species-specific BNP assay must be
ANP and BNP possess diuretic, natriuretic, and hypotensive
used to measure circulating BNP in cats and dogs. Currently,
activity. They promote vasodilation and counteract the vasocon-
BNP assays are available for the detection of C-BNP and NT-
strictive and sodium-retaining effects of the renin-angiotensin-
 proBNP in humans, and, in general, the diagnostic utilities of
aldosterone system (RAAS). ANP, BNP, and CNP also inhibit
the tests are similar. In dogs and cats, a commercial test is avail-
the release and actions of vasopressin (ADH) and the secretion
able to detect NT-proBNP, for which recent clinical data are
and actions of renin and aldosterone.
available.
ANP has direct tubular actions that include inhibition of angi-
 The strongest indication for BNP or NT-proBNP testing is to
 otensin II-stimulated sodium and water transport in the proxi-
help rule out or confrm a diagnosis of volume overload due to
mal convoluted tubules, which leads to a decrease in sodium
CHF in dogs and cats. The test has litle diagnostic value in
reabsorption by the renal tubules. This is a dose-dependent effect
and is a major aspect of the natriuretic and diuretic effects of
 conventional diagnostic tests but has proven to be useful for
ANP. With more chronic stimulation, ANP decreases blood
 differentiating whether symptoms in a patient are due to cardiac
pressure through another mechanism (involving a decrease in 
intravascular volume) resulting from increased permeability
of the endothelium to water and macromolecules. ANP also
that commonly suffer from both cardiac diseases (e.g., mitral
induces dilation of arteries and veins in an endothelium-
valve endocardiosis) and airway diseases (e.g., chronic bronchi-
independent manner.
tis or tracheal or bronchial airway collapse). It is also useful for
56
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
cats that present with signs of respiratory distress, when it cannot
or NT-proBNP testing is to help guide therapy. Only time will tell
be determined from the history, physical examination, or radio-
whether NP concentrations in dogs or cats are useful in assessing
 graphs whether dyspnea is from respiratory or cardiac disease.
the risk of morbidity and mortality or in guiding therapy.
Two veterinary studies have evaluated the use of the NT-
proBNP assay in evaluating the presence of early heart failure in
Practicalities and limitations of BNP and
dogs with respiratory signs. The results of these studies closely
NT-proBNP testing
mimic those in humans, wherein the likelihood of heart failure
is very high when the NT-proBNP concentration is high but very
Limitations for BNP and NT-proBNP testing include the exist-
low when the NT-proBNP concentration is low. In the first study.
ence of concurrent diseases that can affect results (e.g., renal
46 dogs with respiratory distress or coughing were examined
disease and systemic hypertension) and issues with stability fol-
and the results showed that the median NT-proBNP concentra-
lowing collection. BNP and NT-proBNP are both partially
tion was significantly higher in dogs with heart failure than in
excreted by the kidney so circulating levels can be elevated in
dogs with respiratory diseases such as chronic bronchitis, infec-
cats and dogs with renal disease and decreased glomerular filtra-
tion, or neoplasia. In the second study, NT-proBNP concentra-
fion rate. In two separate veterinary studies, a signifcantly
tion >l158 pmol/L was found to differentiate dogs with CHF
higher mean NT-proBNP concentration was documented in
from dogs with respiratory disease with a relatively high accu-
azotemic dogs when compared with healthy control dogs. Renal
racy of 83.6%.
disease can therefore influence concentrations of ANP and BNP
Three feline studies have investigated the utility of natriuretic
 in cats and dogs.
 peptides to distinguish cardiac from noncardiac causes of respi-
Hypertension could affect plasma NP concentrations because
ratory distress in cats, when the compromised state of cats with
of its effects on atrial stretch. Plasma NT-proBNP concentrations
 severe respiratory distress often limits other diagnostic testings
are significantly higher in cats with hypertensive CKD compared
(eg., radiography and echocardiography). The studies have
with normal cats and those with normotensive CKD. Further-
included cats with a wide range of causes for heart and respira-
more, in cats where treatment with the vasodilator amlodipine
tory disease, and results from all three studies suggest that cir-
resulted in normalization of blood pressure, a significant reduc-
culating NT-proBNP concentrations can be used to reliably
tion in plasma NT-proBNP concentration was seen. These results
discriminate cats with CHF (caused by different types of cardio-
        (
tions in cats.
cause of respiratory distress.
In humans, circulating NP concentrations are also influenced
Another possible indication for measurement of serum NT-
by obesity, pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary embolism,
proBNP is the identification of patients with asymptomatic or
sepsis, hyperthyroidism, and age. The influences of these factors
occult cardiomyopathies or the identification of feline patients
on feline and canine NP concentrations have not yet been defini-
with hypertension. However, to date, the few studies done suggest
tively established.
that BNP or NT-proBNP only have a limited role in the detection
The administration of medications that have the potential to
 of occult cardiomyopathy in dogs and cats. Because NT-proBNP
alter volume status (i.e., diuretics) must also be accounted for
testing reveals information specific to a single time point and a
when interpreting results of BNP and NT-proBNP testing. It has
 normal value does not exclude the possibility of disease in the
also been shown that there is a high degree of weekly variability
future, this test is not considered a good screening test.
with respect to NT-proBNP concentrations. As such, NT-
Measurement of NT-proBNP in one study has shown promise
proBNP values must be carefully interpreted in the light of each
as a diagnostic marker for systemic hypertension in cats. The use
patient's complete clinical picture.
of this test was able to distinguish hypertensive from normoten-
It is important to realize that sample handling and assay per-
sive cats with a sensitivity of 80% and a specificity of 93% using a
formance can affect results. It is likely these factors (variation in
cutoff value of greater than or equal to 203 pmol/L. This could be
  s  s  
potential variation in NP concentration between plasma or
where assessment of blood pressure measurements is difficult to
serum samples) have played a role in the conflicting results seen
interpret due to a “white coat effect" possibly causing transient
in feline and canine studies evaluating the diagnostic utility of
hypertension. Coexistence of other comorbidities, such as severe
these assays for detection of occult cardiomyopathies. The half-
CKD and myocardial disease, will need to be ruled out in order to
life of canine BNP is very short (approximately 90s), and
accurately interpret the finding of an elevated NT-proBNP in any
although NT-proBNP is thought to be more stable, sample col-
cat where this test is done to screen for hypertension.
lection, handlling, and shipping protocols can affect results. The
 Another indication for BNP or NT-proBNP testing has been
ex vivo stability of canine NT-proBNP is highly time and tem-
for the assessment of a patient's risk of morbidity and mortality
perature dependent. Canine and feline NT-proBNP samples
related to cardiac disease. In people, practice guidelines indicate
should be collected into ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)
that either one-time or serial testing can be used to assess a
lavender top tubes, spun immediately, and samples should
patient's risk for death or to track a patient's clinical status with
either be transported to an external laboratory frozen or in
the risk of death increasing by 35% for every 100-ng/L increase in
BNP level above the reference range. A final indication for BNP
inhibitor. At present, no patient side test currently exists.
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
57
Currently, there are several available canine- and feline-
called prorenin, and the juxtaglomerular cells are capable of
specifc NT-proBNP ELISA assays. Since the introduction of this
secreting both renin and prorenin.
test, the assay for canine NT-proBNP has also undergone several
changes, and differences in assay performance as well as sample
Release
handling have likely contributed to important differences in the
 Renins release is stimulated by sympathetic nerve activation (acting
reference ranges and diagnostic cutoff points reported in differ-
via β,-adrenoceptors), renal artery hypotension (caused by sys-
ent clinical studies.
temic hypotension or renal artery stenosis), or decreased sodium
delivery to the distal tubules of the kidney. Inhibition of renin
Therapeutic uses of natriuretic peptides
-a a e a n si sas r a s
While no studies have been done in veterinary patients to assess
d   o  n   n 
the therapeutic use of natriuretic peptides, there are data from
sodium, and volume overload all inhibiting renin secretion.
human studies. In CHF, both the RAAS and the natriuretic
Action
 peptide systems are activated, and as heart failure worsens, the
activities of both systems increase. However, there is a relative
 In addition to renin, the other two important hormones involved
imbalance between these two systems with the net effect favor-
in the RAAS system are angiotensin II and aldosterone. When
ing vasoconstriction as well as fluid and sodium retention, espe-
 renin is released into the blood, it acts upon a circulating sub-
cially in the later stages of heart disease.
strate, angiotensinogen, which undergoes proteolytic cleavage to
Given the diuretic, natriuretic, and vasodilating activities of
form angiotensin I in the liver. Vascular endothelium, particu-
ANP, shortly after its discovery cardiologists hypothesized that
larly in the lungs, has an enzyme, ACE, which cleaves off two
ANP might be useful for the treatment of CHF. In Japan, recom-
 amino acids from angiotensin I to form the enzyme angiotensin
binant ANP (carperitide) is licensed for intravenous administra-
 I1. Angiotensin II has several very important functions: It con-
tion in patients with CHF and is used to treat acute crises. In
 stricts resistance vessels, thereby increasing systemic vascular
clinical trials, transient low dose ANP infusion has been shown
resistance and increasing the systemic arterial pressure. Angi-
to improve the long-term prognosis in patients with acutely
otensin II also acts on the adrenal cortex to promote the release
decompensated heart failure (ADHF). Inhibition of the RAAS
 of aldosterone, which in turn acts on the kidneys to increase
and the antioxidant effect of low dose infusion of ANP are the
 sodium and water retention in addition to promoting urinary
 mechanisms believed to be responsible for the long-term benefi-
excretion of potassium and protons. Angiotensin II also stimu-
cial effect
lates the release of vasopressin (ADH) from the posterior pitui-
The renal-protective effect of ANP infusion has been demon-
tary, which increases fluid retention by the kidneys; and finally,
 strated in human patients during cardiac bypass surgery and in
angiotensin II stimulates thirst centers within the brain and
patients receiving potentially nephrotoxic intravenous contrast
facilitates the release of norepinephrine from sympathetic nerve
 reagents for cardiac catheterization.
 endings and inhibits norepinephrine reuptake by nerve endings,
 In addition to the administration of synthetic natriuretic pep-
thereby enhancing sympathetic adrenergic function.
tides, the development of neutral endopeptidase inhibitors and
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone pathway is regulated not
NPR antagonists has also facilitated the investigation of the
 only by the mechanisms that stimulate renin release, but it is also
Aq pseaan (dNa pue dN) sapndad oau Aq paeo
tides. Administration of drugs that inhibit neutral endopepti-
the heart. These natriuretic peptides act as an important counter-
dase has been shown to reduce blood pressure in dogs with
regulatory system (Figure 2.6.1).
hypertension secondary to experimentally induced renal disease.
Their administration may be useful for inducing diuresis for the
Clinical disease states and applications
treatment of patients that were inadvertently overhydrated and
are in danger of developing life-threatening pulmonary edema.
Therapeutic manipulation of the RAAS pathway is very impor-
 tant in treating patients with hypertension, heart failure, and
 renal disease (especially suspected cases of glomerulonephritis).
Renin
ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II and aldosterone receptors block-
ers, for example, are used to decrease arterial pressure, ventricu-
Renin is the initial hormone released in the cascade referred
to as the renin-angiotension-aldosterone system (RAAS). The
lar afterload, blood volume, and hence, ventricular preload, as
RAAS plays a vital role in regulating salt, blood volume, and
well as inhibit and reverse cardiac and vascular hypertrophy for
patients with cardiac disease. ACE inhibitors have also been
systemic vascular resistance, which together influence cardiac
shown to have renoprotective effects in the treatment of glomer-
output and arterial pressure.
ulonephritis, and in some species, they are beneficial for slowing
the progression of CKD.
Pathophysiology of renin
Measurement of plasma renin
Renin is a proteolytic enzyme that is secreted exclusively by the
juxtaglomerular cells located in the walls of renal afferent arte-
 Measurement of plasma renin activity (PRA), along with, pos-
rioles in the kidneys. It is synthesized as an inactive zymogen 
sibly, measurement of other hormones such as aldosterone,
58
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
..+ Stimulatory signal
 Inhibitory signal
Decrease in
Liver
 Secretion from organ
renal perfusion
(juxtaglomerular
Active transport
apparatus)
Angiotensinogen
 Passive transport
Renin …
Angiotensin I
Water and salt retention
Surface of
ACE
↑ Circulating volume
pulmonary
and renal
endothelium
↑ Perfusion of
juxtaglomerular
apparatus
Angiotensin II
↑ Sympathetic activity
Pituitary gland, posterior lobe
→
ADH secretion
Collecting duct:
H20 absorption
Arteriolar
vasonconstriction
+
→
Adrenal
Aldosterone
Tubular Na+ Cl
Na+
H2O
 gland
↑ Blood pressure
reabsorption 
secretion
K+
cortex
K+ excretion
(arteriole)
HzO retention
CI
H2O
Figure 2.6.1 Pathways of the rennin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). Illustration by Juliane Deubner, medical illustrator, Western
College of Veterinary Medicine.
catecholamines, and glucocorticoids in dogs and cats may be
centration before and after stimulation with ACTH. An alterna-
indicated in patients with systemic hypertension where conven-
tive approach for diagnosing primary hypocortisolism and
tional diagnostics (imaging, serum biochemistry profle, other
endocrine testing) have failed to reveal an underlying cause.
corticism is to determine changes in the interrelationships of
Measurement of plasma renin or PRA can also be useful for
relevant endogenous hormones. This dual assessment is particu-
cases of suspected hypoadrenocorticism, especially if a selective
larly relevant when an isolated hormone deficiency is suspected.
deficiency of only mineralocorticoids is suspected. Most cases of
 The occurrence of isolated glucocorticoid deficiency and isolated
primary hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease) result from an
mineralocorticoid deficiency in dogs has been reported. In one
immune-mediated attack of the adrenal cortex and result in a
study where PRA and aldosterone concentrations were meas-
deficiency of both glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids. The
ured along with plasma cortisol and ACTH concentrations in
diagnosis is usually made by measuring the plasma cortisol con-
dogs with primary hypoadrenocorticism and were compared to
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
69
concentrations in healthy dogs, there was an overlap in the 
from the pancreas and the GI tract. In most other organs, SST
plasma concentrations of cortisol, ACTH, and aldosterone and
  nd e  sin    ns si 
 PRA between the two groups. However, when the ratio of corti-
 specifcity of endogenous SST derives from the fact that it is
sol:ACTH and aldosterone:renin activity was compared
 produced mainly at local sites of action and that following release
 is rapidly inactivated by peptidases in the tissue and blood,
measurement of these endogenous variables (in one blood
 thereby minimizing unwanted systemic effects.
sample) with calculation of the two independent ratios allows
SST acts through high affinity plasma membrane receptors
the specific diagnoses of primary hypocortisolism and primary
(termed SSTRs). To date, five receptors for SST have been identi-
hypoaldosteronism in dogs with primary hypoadrenocorticism
fed, and these all share common signaling pathways.
 and could be used as an alternative to ACTH stimulation testing.
which only evaluates for hypocortisolemia.
Function of somatostatin
Measurements  in patients  with unexplained persistent
hypokalemia, patients with renal tumors associated with hyper-
Role in the regulation of growth
tension, and patients with adrenal tumors suspected to be secret-
hormone secretion
ing aldosterone are other indications for measuring plasma
rennin or PRA. With primary hyperaldosteronism caused by an
In the hypothalamus, SST is produced in neuroendocrine cells
adrenal tumor-secreting aldosterone, plasma aldosterone con-
and is transported to the anterior pituitary gland by the
centrations will be high in the face of normal or low PRA. With
renal tumors secreting renin causing hypertension both plasma
the secretion of GH from somatotrope cells. The SST neurons in
 renin and aldosterone should be elevated
the hypothalamus secrete SST in response to high circulating
 The most common methods for measuring plasma renin are
concentrations of GH or somatomedins to mediate negative
feedback effects on GH release. Low circulating concentrations
the PRA assay and the renin immunoassay. In most current
renin assays, enzymatic activity is what is measured, and proto-
of these hormones inhibit the release of SST. In addition to
cols for this assay vary among laboratories. As for most labora-
inhibition of GH release by the pituitary, SST secreted from
tory variables, reference intervals for PRA should be generated
the hypothalamus also inhibits the release of TSH by the pitui-
by each laboratory. Concentrations could be altered by therapies
tary gland and so plays a limited role in thyroid hormone
 including potassium supplementation, fuid therapy, and ACE
regulation.
inhibitors.
Role in the regulation of gastrointestinal tract
Somatostatin
hormone secretion
Within the GI tract, SST is secreted by scattered delta cells in the
SST was frst discovered as a hormone secreted by the hypotha-
GI epithelium and by neurons in the submucosa that are part of
lamus and was named for its ability to inhibit the release of GH
the enteric nervous system. SST in the GI tract has been shown
from the anterior pituitary gland. However, it is now known that
to inhibit the secretion of virtually every GI hormone that has
SST is produced by a wide variety of cell types throughout the
been tested, including gastrin, CCK, secretin, motilin, gastric
body and that SST actually is a family of peptide hormones of
inhibitory polypeptide (GIP), enteroglucagon, and vasoactive
variable length that regulate the endocrine system and affect
intestinal peptide (VIP). Through such actions, SST has a gen-
neurotransmission and cell proliferation. SSTs can be thought of
 eralized inhibitory effect on gut exocrine secretion (gastric acid,
as inhibitory hormones based on their ability to suppress two
 pepsin, bile, colonic fluid). It suppresses motor activity generally
key cellular processes: secretion and cell proliferation. Other
 as well, through inhibition of gastric emptying, gallbladder con-
names for STT produced by the hypothalamus include growth
 traction, and small intestinal segmentation. Collectively, these
hormone release-inhibiting factor (GHIH) or somatotropin
activities seem to have the overall effect of decreasing the rate of
release-inhibiting factor (SRIF).
nutrient absorption.
Pathophysiology of somatostatins
Role in the regulation of pancreatic enzyme
 SSTs are produced by a variety of different cell types including
and hormone secretion
other neuroendocrine cells widely distributed throughout the
SST is produced by delta pancreatic islet cells, which lie in close
CNS and the peripheral nervous system, as well as in the pan-
proximity to other islets cells that secrete insulin, glucagon, and
creas and gut.
Secretion of SST is under the influence of a broad array of
secretagogues (substance which causes another substance to be
capacity, SST is important in the regulation of intermediary
secreted) ranging from ions and nutrients to neuropeptides, neu-
energy metabolism.
 rotransmitters, classical hormones, growth factors, and cytokines.
SST also inhibits secretions from the exocrine portion of the
SST acts by both endocrine and paracrine pathways to affect
 pancreas by inhibiting CCK-stimulated enzyme secretion and
its target cells. The majority of SST in the blood appears to come
secretin-stimulated bicarbonate secretion.
60
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Role in the regulation of neurotransmission
feasible. In cases of locally advanced disease or widespread metas-
tases, tumor debulking, chemoembolization of the primary tumor
SST-positive neurons and fibers are abundantly distributed
and of hepatic metastases, chemotherapy, SSTR-analogues
throughout the CNS and the peripheral nervous system with the
(octreotide acetate), and interferon-alpha can be used to control
notable exception of the cerebellum. SST is often referred to as
the clinical symptoms.
having neuromodulatory activity within the nervous system and
appears to have a variety of complex effects on neural transmis-
 su  e   e   s
Pharmacological uses of somatostatin
ity, it has effects on cognitive, locomotor, sensory, and autonomic
functions. It inhibits the release of dopamine from the midbrain
(SST analogue) that bind to receptors expressed on gastrinomas
and of norepinephrine, TRH, corticotrophin-releasing hormone
has facilitated the localization of tumors (gastrinoma, insulino-
(CRH), and endogenous SST from the hypothalamus.
n u pue aldod u suis sis pue (si s
cases, in dogs. Such diagnostic techniques are not widely used
Antiproliferative actions of somatostatin
in veterinary medicine at the current time.
SST and its synthetic analogues are used clinically to treat a
In addition to its antisecretory effects, SST inhibits the release of
constitutively secreted proteins such as growth factors and
cytokines by unknown mechanisms. In contrast to the antisecre-
insulinoma, somatotropinoma, gastrinoma, acromegaly).
The
tory properties of SST, its antiproliferative effects were relatively
frst clinically useful synthetic analogue that was produced was
late in being recognized and came about largely through the use
octreotide acetate.
of long-acting analogues such as octreotide acetate in the early
 In veterinary patients, SST analogues have been used in the
1980s for the treatment of hormone hypersecretion from pan-
treatment of gastrinomas, carcinoid tumors, and insulinomas.
creatic, intestinal, and pituitary tumors. It was noted that SST
Octreotide acetate (a long-acting synthetic analogue of SST that
not only blocked hormone hypersecretion from these tumors
suppresses pituitary release of GH), although effective for the
but also caused variable tumor shrinkage through an additional
treatment of acromegaly in people, has not been reported effec-
antiproliferative effect. The antiproliferative effects of SST have
tive in most cats with this condition.
since been demonstrated in normal dividing cells (e.g., intestinal
mucosal cells, activated lymphocytes, and inflammatory cells),
Other rare neuroendocrine tumors
as well as in vivo in solid tumors.
Neuroendocrine tumors are rare neoplasms that arise from the
Miscellaneous functions of somatostatin
neuroendocrine cell system and have widely divergent clinical
Many tumor cells have also been shown to produce SST in small
presentations. These tumors can be divided into two main groups:
amounts, and SST has been implicated as playing a role in the
carcinoids and endocrine pancreatic tumors. These tumors are
pathophysiology of several disease states including cancer,
classified as functional if they are associated with a clinical syn-
inflammation, DM, epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, Huntington's
drome related to hormone production or as nonfunctional if they
disease, and AIDS.
are not associated with clinical symptoms of hormone release.
Functioning islet tumors are further designated according to the
Somatostatinoma: A rare neuroendocrine
main hormone produced and the related clinical syndrome, for
tumor
example, insulinomas, gastrinomas, VIPomas, glucagonomas,
and somatostatinomas. Nonfunctional islet tumors include
Somatostatinoma is a very rare neuroendocrine tumor compris-
tumors that make pancreatic PP, chromogranin A, peptide YY
ing <1% of all gastroenteropancreatic endocrine neoplasms in
(PYY), and neurotensin but do not have signs associated with the
 people. Only a few have been reported in dogs. Most somato-
hormone release. In addition to whether they are functional or
statinomas derive from the SST-producing delta cells of the pan-
not, carcinoid tumors are also further designated by their loca-
creas or the neuroendocrine cells of the digestive tract. Most
tion (e.g.,lung, gastric, duodenal, pancreatic, colonic, and rectal).
somatostatinomas are carcinomas and have typically already
metastasized by the time they are detected. Common sites of
Pathogenesis
metastasis include the regional lymph nodes or the liver.
Since the clinical symptoms are often variable and nonspe-
 Neuroendocrine tumors are sometimes referred to as APUDo-
cifc, a great many somatostatinomas are “incidentalomas" found
mas (amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation), which indi-
during surgery for other disorders (e.g., cholelithiasis) or during
cates that the tumor cell types have the ability to accumulate
GI imaging studies. Pathological examination of the surgical
amine precursors 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA or 5-
biopsies with immunohistochemical staining for SST provides
hydroxytryptophan [5-HTP]) and can decarboxylate them to
the definitive diagnosis.
 produce biogenic amines (catecholamines or serotonin). In
Treatment for a somatostatinoma largely depends on the site
addition, many of these tumors also secrete one or more peptide
and size ofthe tumor and on the extent of the disease at the time
hormones (i.e., VIPomas that secrete VIP, gastrinomas that
of diagnosis. Surgical resection is the treatment of choice when
secrete gastrin) that can be responsible for the clinical signs seen.
Chapter 2  Endocrinology
61
The term APUDoma was first coined in 1974 to signify that these
neous flushing may occur due to vasodilatory effects. VIPoma
 tumor cells were of neural crest origin and had migrated during
 amo shop u o sieo u palodau uaaq jou a sio
their embryonal development into other tissues such as the
p sad a u po aid ane snoi s ardod
intestinal tract, pancreas, lung, and several endocrine glands.
 occasionally arise in other locations (e.g., lung or sympathetic
The term APUDoma has largely been abandoned in human
ganglia).
medicine, but since it provides a convenient framework for
explaining the multipotential capacity of these cells to produce
Diagnosis
various hormones and amines, it is still in use in veterinary
medicine.
Diagnosis of neuroendocrine tumors is based on histopathologic
diagnosis and immunohistochemistry for chromogranin A, syn-
aptophysin, and other hormones (e.g., gastrin, glucagon, and
Clinical signs
insulin).
The most common clinical syndrome associated with a neuroen-
docrine tumor in veterinary patients is a hypoglycemic syn-
Pathology
drome related to insulin oversecretion by a pancreatic islet
Although there is a histological resemblance, carcinoid tumors
beta-cell tumor (insulinoma). In people, insulinomas are also
must be differentiated from mast cell tumors or undifferentiated
one of the two most common types of neuroendocrine tumors;
the other most common type of neuroendocrine tumor in people
epithelial neoplasia by using a combination of routine hema-
toxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, special silver stains, immu-
is a gastrinoma, which causes the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
 nohistochemistry with antibodies against chromogranin A,
 Gastrinomas are also reported in dogs and cats but are compara-
synaptophysin and other peptide hormones, and electron
tively rare. Another type of functional neuroendocrine tumor
microscopy.
syndrome. This syndrome is characterized by a skin rash referred
Laboratory testing
to as NME in people and SND in dogs. All of the clinical signs
seen are related to oversecretion of glucagon by this tumor.
Depending on clinical symptoms, the measurement of other
Please see their respective sections in this text.
 peptide hormones (e.g., gastrin and insulin) in plasma may also
Carcinoid tumors, secreting a variety of peptide hormones
be indicated to establish a definitive diagnosis. In human medi-
cine, chromogranin A is also measured in the plasma when
 onin), have also been reported in dogs and in cats. These tumors
  s s   u   s
have been documented in a variety of anatomical locations,
reported in veterinary patients. Measurement of urinary hydrox-
including the stomach, liver, gallbladder, intestine, and lung. In
yindolacetic acid (5-HIAA), a serotonin metabolite, is also
humans, carcinoid neuroendocrine tumors are associated with
important in the diagnosis of certain carcinoid tumors in people;
the release of physiologically active substances, including
 this has not been done for veterinary patients to date.
5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin), 5-HTP, histamine, bradyki-
nins, tachykinins, and prostaglandins, which cause the unique
Imaging
carcinoid syndrome vary widely depending on the vasoactive
Localization of neuroendocrine tumors relies on imaging with
substance released but can include cutaneous flushing, diarrhea,
 CT, MRI, and ultrasound in veterinary patients. Adjunct imaging
endocardial plaque formation leading to right heart failure, and,
with SSTR scintigraphy and endoscopic ultrasonography are
 in severe cases, can potentially cause a life-threatening syndrome
 also commonly used in people; neither of these imaging modali-
with extensive cutaneous flushing combined with hypotension
ties is commonly available for veterinary patients; however,
and severe frequent diarrhea manifesting as a “carcinoid crisis?"
 because SST scintigraphy has been helpful in the localization of
One case of paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia and gastric
 insulinomas in dogs, it is reasonable to believe it would also be
ulceration in a boxer dog with an ileocecal carcinoid tumor has
useful for the diagnosis of other neuroendocrine tumors. SST
been reported with full clinical remission following surgical
 scintigraphy is useful because almost 80% of neuroendocrine GI
excision of the mass. In addition, syndromes of gallbladder dys-
tumors in people express the SSTR subtype 2 and will bind
function with GI hemorrhage and cholestasis associated with
111-indium-radiolabeled octreotide acetate. Radionucleotide
biliary carcinoids have been reported. However, in most carci-
 q ssod s r o o as aq  
noid tumors in dogs and in cats, clinical signs mainly relate to
for staging to detect metastatic disease and also for indicating
GI signs (e.g., chronic vomiting and diarrhea) caused by obstruc-
 sensitivity to treatment with SST analogues. Similarly, positron
tion or metastatic spread.
emission tomography (PET) using nC-labeled 5-HTP and
 A VIPoma tumor is another type of neuroendocrine tumor
L-dopa has also been shown to be effective in localizing carci-
that oversecretes vasoactive intestinal protein (VIP) causing a
 noids and endocrine pancreatic tumors as small as 0.5 mm in
syndrome accompanied by extensive diarrhea, hypokalemia, and
 people. This imaging technique also provides information about
achlorhydria (decreased gastric acid production). This syndrome
the metabolism of the tumors because 5-HTP is a precursor of
is referred to in people as the Verner-Morrison syndrome. Cuta-
serotonin synthesis.
62
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Treatment
2.Niessen SJM, Petrie G, Gaudiano F, Khalid M, Smyth JBA,
 Mahoney P, Church DB. Feline acromegaly: an underdiagnosed
Surgery remains the cornerstone of treatment for neuroendo-
endocrinopathy? Journal of veterinary internal medicine/American
crine GI tumors, although cure is often not possible. While
College of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2007;21:899-905.
aggressive debulking operations can be helpful in people with
3.1
Kooistra HS, Voorhout G, Mol JA, Rijnberk A. Combined pitui-
 pe  g b d  n s 
tary hormone deficiency in German shepherd dogs with dwarf-
facilitating medical treatment, too few cases in veterinary medi-
ism. Domestic Animal Endocrinology 2000;19:177-190.
4.
 Donaldson D, Billson FM, Scase TJ, et al. Congenital hyposoma-
cine are reported to really assess the surgical success rate. Other
-u nll apnu adod u pasn uan no jo su
totropism in a domestic shorthair cat presenting with congenital
corneal oedema. Journal of Small Animal Practice 2008;49:
plantation and arterial embolization. Arterial embolization has
306-309.
been used for hepatic metastatic disease in veterinary patients.
5.
Ramsey IK, Dennis R, Herrtage ME. Concurrent central diabetes
Medical treatments  for neuroendocrine tumors include
insipidus and panhypopituitarism in a German Shepherd dog.
chemotherapy and biotherapy using SST analogues and alpha
Journal of Small Animal Practice 1999;40:271-274.
interferons. Chemotherapy, in particular the combination of
6.
Schwedes Cs. Transient diabetes insipidus in a dog with acrome-
streptozotocin with 5-FU or doxorubicin, is still considered the
galy. fournal of Small Animal Practice 1999;40:392-396.
frst-line treatment for most endocrine pancreatic tumors in
7.
Rossi TA, Ross LA. Diabetes insipidus. Compendium of Contin
 people, while SST analogues and alpha interferons are consid-
Educ Vet 2008;Jan;30(1):43-52.
ered frst-line for some carcinoids. Long-term remission (>18
months) with carboplatin chemotherapy has been seen in one
Section 2
dog with a jejunal carcinoid tumor following surgical excision.
 Too few cases have been reported on to adequately assess the
1.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Hypothyroidism/the thyroid gland. In:
efficacy of chemotherapy in veterinary patients. SST analogues,
Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edition,
 particularly octreotide acetate, are commonly used today in
eds. EC Feldman, RW Nelson, pp. 86-151. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier
 people to control hormonally related symptoms. In addition to
Saunders; 2004.
suppressing hormone secretion by these tumors, SST analogues
2.
Scott-Moncrieff J, Catharine R, Guptill- Yoran L. Hypothyroidism/
endocrine disorders. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine.
have also been shown to be inhibitors of tumor growth. Tumor-
targeted radioactive treatment with indium-labeled octreotide
Comp., 6th edition, Vol. 2, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman, pp. 1535-
1544. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2005.
acetate, similar to use of radioactive iodine for the treatment of
Cote E. Hypothyroidism/diseases and disorders. In: Clinical
hyperthyroidism in cats, has been used for local therapy for
Veterinary Advisor, 1st edition, ed. E Cote,pp. 575-577.St. Louis,
neuroendocrine tumors in people and in the future may be an
MO: Mosby Elsevier; 2007.
option in veterinary patients. Chemotherapy and biotherapy are
4.
Tilley LP, Smith FWK, Jr. Hypothyroidism. In: Ihe 5 Minute
combined in many human patients, and while medical treatment
Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline, 3rd edition, eds. DB Troy,
is palliative and not curative, disease symptoms can be control-
MJ Hauber, KM Ruppert, pp. 686-689. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott
led for extended periods of time in some patients.
Williams & Wilkins; 2004.
 In general, external radiation therapy has not been successful
5.
Scott-Moncrieff J, Catharine R. Hypothyroidism/endocrine and
in the treatment of metastatic neuroendocrine tumors but has
metabolic diseases. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy, 14th
been used for the treatment of symptomatic bone, skin, and
edition, eds. JD Bonagura, DC Twedt, pp. 185-191. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier Saunders; 2009.
brain metastases in people with these tumors and could be con-
Gulikers KP, Panciera DL. Influence of various medications on
 sidered for paliative care in veterinary patients.
canine thyroid function. Compendium on Contimuing Education
for the Practicing Veterinarian 2002; 24(7):511-523.
Prognosis
treatment. Proceedings of the World Small Animal Veterinary
 Because the clinical manifestations of many neuroendocrine
Association World Congress 2010, Geneva, Switzerland. http://
tumors are not specific and they are typically small in size, early
www. VIN.com (accessed December 2010).
diagnosis can be difficult. These tumors tend to be malignant
8.
Evason MD, Carr AP, Taylor SM, Waldner CL. Alterations in
and, in most cases, they are not diagnosed early enough for a
thyroid hormone concentrations in healthy sled dogs before and
surgical cure to be possible. Hence, palliative medical treatment
after athletic conditioning.
AmericanJournalofVeterinary
is often the only viable option.
Research 2004;65(3):333-337.
9.1
 Plumb DC. Levothyroxine sodium. In: Veterinary Drug Handbook
Pocket Edition, 5th edition, ed. DC Plumb, p. 457-460. Ames, IA:
Bibliography
Blackwell; 2005.
10.1
Mooney CT. Hyperthyroidism. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine: Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 6th edition, Vol. 2, eds. SJ
Section 1
Ettinger, EC Feldman, pp. 1544-1560. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier
 Hurty CA, Flatland B. Feline acromegaly: a review of the syn-
Saunders; 2005.
drome. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
11.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Feline hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis).
2005;41:292-297.
In: Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edition,
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
63
eds. EC Feldman, RW Nelson, pp. 152-218. St. Louis, MO:
31.
Marks SL, Koblik PD, Hornof WJ, et al. 99mTc-pertechnetate
Saunders; 2004.
imaging of thyroid tumors in dogs: 29 cases (1980-i992). Journal
12.
Harvey A, Hibbert A, Barrett E, Day M, Quiggin A, Brannan R,
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 1994;204(5):
Caney S. Scintigraphic findings in 120 hyperthyroid cats. Journal
756-760.
of Feline Medicine and Surgery 2009;11(2):96-106.
32.
Klein MK, Powers BE, Withrow SJ, et al. Treatment of thyroid
13.
Kass PH, Peterson ME, Levy J, James K, Becker DV, Cowgill LD.
carcinoma in dogs by surgical resection alone: 20 cases (1981-
Evaluation of environmental, nutritional, and host factors in cats 
1989). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
1995;206(7):1007-1009.
1999;13(4):323-329.
Bailey DB, Page RL. Tumors of the endocrine system. In: Small
Greco DS. Feline thyroid disorders. The NAVTA Journal Fall
Animal Clinical Oncology, 4th edition, eds. SJ Withrow, DM Vail,
2008;62:59-63.
pp. 583-609. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2007.
15.
 Thyroid tumors. VSsOVeterinary Society of Surgical Oncology.
Carver JR, Kapatkin A, Patnaik A. A comparison of medullary
http://www.vsso.org/Ihyroid_ Tumors_-_Feline.html 
(accessed
thyroid carcinoma and thyroid adenocarcinoma in dogs: a retro-
August 29, 2010).
spective study of 38 cases. Veterinary Surgery 1995;24(4):315-319.
16.
Gunn-Moore D. Feline endocrinopathies. Veterinary Clinics of
Pack LA, Roberts RE,Dawson SD, et al. Definitive radiation
North America: Small Animal Practice 2005;35(1):171-210.
therapy for infltrative thyroid carcinoma in dogs. Veterinary
17.
 Mooney CT. Feline hyperthyroidism. Diagnostics and therapeu-
Radiology é Ultrasound 2001;42(5):471-474.
tics.Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice
 Brearley ML, Hayes AM, Murphy S. Hypofractionated radiation
2001;31:963
therapy for invasive thyroid carcinoma in dogs: a retrospective
Broome MR. Ihyroid scintigraphy in hyperthyroidism. Clinical
analysis of survival. Journal of Small Animal Practice 1999;
Techniques in Small Animal Practice 2006;21(1):10. Print.
40(5):206-210
19.
 Bonagura JD. Feline cardiovascular diseases. Proceedings of the
37.
 Mayer MN, MacDonald VS. External beam radiation therapy for
Atlantic Coast Veterinary Conference, Atlantic City, October
thyroid cancer in the dog. The Canadian Veterinary Journal. La
5-11, 2007.
Revue Veterinaire Canadienne 1997;48(7):761-763.
20.
 Panciera DL. Cardiovascular complications of thyroid disease.
38.
Turrel JM, McEntee MC, Burke BP, et al. Sodium iodide I 131
In: Kirks Current Veterinary Therapy XIll Small Animal Practice,
treatment of dogs with nonresectable thyroid tumors: 39 cases
ed. JD Bonagura, pp. 716-719. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders;
(1990-2003). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
1999.
Association 2006;229(4):542-548.
21.
Bruyette DS. Ihe options for treating feline hyperthyroidism.
39.
 Fineman LS, Hamilton TA, De Gortari A, et al. Cisplatin chemo-
Veterinary Medicine 2004;99(11):964-972.
therapy for treatment of thyroid carcinoma in dogs: 13 cases.
22.
 Peterson ME. Radioiodine for feline hyperthyroidism. In: Kirks
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 1998;34(2):
Current Veterinary Therapy XIV,eds. JD Bonagura, DC Twedt, pp.
109-112.
180-184. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2009.
40.
 Jeglum KA, Whereat A. Chemotherapy of canine thyroid carci-
23.
Peterson ME. Hyperthyroidism. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal
noma. Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing
Medicine: Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 5th edition, Vol. 2, eds. SJ
Veterinarian 1983;5(2):96-98.
Ettinger, EC Feldman, Pp. 1400-1419. Philadelphia, PA: W.B.
41.
Leav I, Schiller AL, Rihnberk A, et al. Adenomas and carcinomas
Saunders; 2000.
of the canine and feline thyroid. American Journal of Pathology
24.
Yu S, Wedekind KJ, Burris PA, Forrester DS, Locniskar MF.
1976;83(1):61-122.
Controlled level of dietary iodine normalizes serum total thyrox-
42.
 Iheon AP, Marks SL, Feldman ES, et al. Prognostic factors and
ine in cats with naturally occuring hyperthyroidism. Journal of
 patterns of treatment failure in dogs with unresectable differenti-
Veterinary Internal Medicine 2011;25:683-684. Print.
ated thyroid carcinomas treated with megavoltage radiation.
25.
 Milner RJ, Channell CD, Levy JK, Schaer M. Survival times of cats
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 2000;
with hyperthyroidism treated with iodine 131, methimazole, or
216(11):1775-1779.
both: 167 cases (1996-2003). Journal of the American Veterinary
43.
Wisner ER, Nyland TG. Ultrasonography of the thyroid and par-
Medical Association 2006;228:559-563.
athyroid glands. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal
26.
Nann EC, Kirpensteijn J, Kooistra HS, Peeters ME. Results of
Practice 1998;28(4):973-991.
thyroidectomy in 101 cats with hyperthyroidism. Veterinary
Surgery 2006;35:287-293.
 Birchard SJ, Roesel OF Neoplasia of the thyroid gland inthe dog:
Section 3
27.
a retrospective study of 16 cases. Journal of the American Animal
1.
 Henderson AK, Mahony O. Hypoparathyroidism: pathophysiol-
Hospital Association 1981;17(3):369-372.
ogy and diagnosis. Compendium 2005;27(4, April):270-278.
28.
 Harari J, Patterson JS, Rosenthal RC. Clinical and pathologic fea-
Henderson AK, Mahony O. Hypoparathyroidism: treatment.
tures of thyroid tumors in 26 dogs. Journal of the American
Compendium 2005;27(4, April):280-287.
Veterinary Medical Association 1986;188(10):1160-1164.
3.
 Feldman EC, Hoar B, Pollard R, Nelson RW. Pretreatment clinical
29.
 Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Canine thyroid tumors and canine
-aerediadky Areud qm sap u sauuy Aioenoqel pue
hyperthyroidism. In: Canine and Feline Endocrinology and
roidism: 210 cases (1987-2004). Journal ofthe American Veterinary
Reproduction, 3rd edition, eds. EC Feldman, RW Nelson, pp. 219-
Medical Association 2005;227(5):756-761.
249. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2004.
4.
 Pollard RE, Nelson RW, Hornof WJ, Feldman EC. Percutaneous
30.
Worth AJ, Zuber RM, Hocking M. Radioiodide (13'1) therapy for
ultrasonographically guided radiofrequency heat ablation for
the treatment of canine thyroid carcinoma. Australian Veterinary
treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism in dogs. Journal of the
Journal 2005;83(4):208-214.
American Veterinary Medical Association 2001;218(7):1106-1110.
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Section 4
19.1
 Herrera MA, Mehl ML, Kass OH, et al. Predictive factors and the
effect of phenoxybenzamine on outcome in dogs undergoing
1.  Klein SC, Peterson ME. Canine hypoadrenocorticism: part I. The
adrenalectomy for pheochromocytoma. Journal of Veterinary
Canadian Veterinary Journal.La Revue Veterinaire Canadienne
Internal Medicine/American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine
2010;51:63-69.
2008;22:1333-1339.
2.9
Scott-Moncrieff JC. Hypoadrenocorticism. In: Textbook of
20.
 Kook PH, Boretti FS, Hersberger M, et al. Urinary catecholamine
Veterinary Internal Medicine, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman,
and metanephrine to creatinine ratios in healthy dogs at home and
Pp. 294, 1847-1857. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2010.
 in a hospital environment and in 2 dogs with pheochromocytoma.
 3. Adler JA, Drobatz KJ, Hess RS. Abnormalities of serum electrolyte
Journal of Veterinary InternalMedicine/American Collge ofVet
concentrations in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism. Journal of
erinary Internal Medicine 2007;21:388.
Veterinary Internal Medicine/American College of Veterinary
Internal Medicine 2007;232:413-416.
Section 5
4. Lennon EM, Boyle TE, Grace R, et al. Use of basal serum or
plasma cortisol concentrations to rule out a diagnosis of hypoad-
1.
Rand. JS. Feline diabetes mellitus. In: Current Veterinary Therapy
renocorticism in dogs: 123 cases (2000-2005). The Journal of the
XIV, eds. JD Bonagura, DC Twedt, pp. 199-204. St. Louis, MO:
American Medical Association 2007;231:413-416.
Saunders Elsevier; 2009.
5.1
Robertson SA. Endocrine system. In: Textbook of Small Anirmal
2.1
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Feline diabetes mellitus. In: Canine
Surgery, ed. D Slatter, Pp. 187, 2589-2590. Philidelphia, PA:
and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edition, eds. EC
Saunders; 2003.
Feldman, RW Nelson, pp. 539-579.St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2004.
6.1
 Melian C, Perez-Alenza M, Peterson M. Hyperadrenocorticism in
Scott-Montcrieff C. Insulin resistance in cats. Veterinary Clinics of
dogs. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,eds. SJ Ettinger,
North America. Small Animal Practice 2010;40(2):241-258.
EC Feldman, pp. 292, 1816-1840. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2010.
4.
pue saop u sau salaqeip jo siadse aaenedu  Sua
7.
Gunn-Moore D. Feline endocrinopathies. Veterinary Clinics of
cats. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 2002;197(1-2):221-229.
North America: Small Animal 2005;35:171-210..
5.
Hall DG, Kelley LC, Gray ML, Glaus TM. Lymphocytic inflam-
8.1
 Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ. Diagnosis of canine hyper-
adrenocorticism. Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small
Diagnostic Investigation 1997;9:98-100.
Animal Practice 2001;31(5):985-1003.
6.
Hoenig M, Reusch C, Peterson ME. Beta cell and insulin antibod-
9.1
 Kooistra H, Galac S. Recent advances in the diagnosis of Cushing's
ies in treated and untreated diabetic cats. Veterinary Immunology
syndrome in dogs. Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small
and Immunopathology 2000;77:93-102.
Animal Practice 2010;40:259-267.
 Rand JS, Baral RM, Catt MJ, Farrow HA. Prevalence of feline
10. Feldman EC, Mack RE. Urine cortisol: creatinine ratio as a screen-
diabetes mellitus in a feline private practice. Journal of Veterinary
ing test for hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. Journal of the American
Internal Medicine/American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Veterinary Medical Association 1992;200:1637.
(Abstract) 2003;17:433-434.
11. Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's
8.1
Lederer R, Rand JS, Jonsson NN, et al. Frequency of feline diabetes
syndrome). In: Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduc-
mellitus and breed predisposition in domestic cats in Australia.
tion, 2nd edition, eds. EC Feldman, RW Nelson, pp. 187-265.
Veterinary Journal (London, England: 1997) 2009;179:254-258.
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 1996.
9.
Goossens MM, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Griffey SM. Response to
12.
Clemente M, Andres PJD, Arenas C, et al. Comparison of non-
insulin treatment and survival in 104 cats with diabetes mellitus
selective adrenocorticolysis with mitotane or trilostane for the
(1985-1995). Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine/American
treatment of dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorti-
College of Veterinary Internal Medicine 1998;12:1-6.
cism. The Veterinary Record 2007;161:805-809.
10.
 O'Brien TD. Pathogenesis of feline diabetes mellitus. Molecular
13.
 Brown C, Graves T. Hyperadrenocorticism: treating dogs. Comm-
and Celular Endocrinology 2002;197:213-219.
pendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian
11.
 Reush C. Feline diabetes melltus. In: Textbook of Veterinary
2007;29:137-145.
Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Etinger, EC Feldman, pp.
14.
 Zicker SC, Ford RB, Nelson RW, Kirk CA. Endocrine and lipid
1796-1816. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2010.
disorders. In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 4th edition, eds. MS
12.
 Rand JS, Bobbermein LM, Hendrikz JK. Overrepresentation of
Hand, CD Thatcher, RL Remillard, P Roudebush, pp. 850-885.
Burmese cats with diabetes mellitus. Australian Veterinary Journal
Topeka, KS: Mark Morris Institute; 2000.
1997;75:402-405.
15. Maher ER, McNeil EA. Pheochromocytoma in dogs and cats. Vet-
 Prahl A, Guptill L, Glickman NW, et al. Time trends and risk
erinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 1997;
factors for diabetes melitus in cats presented to veterinary teach-
27:359-380.
ing hospitals. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery 2007;
16.
5. Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Pheochromocytoma and multiple endo-
9:351-358.
crine neoplasia. In: Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Repro-
14.
 McCann TM, Simpson KE, Shaw DJ, et al. Feline diabetes mellitus
duction, 3rd edition, eds. EC Feldman, RW Nelson, pp. 440-463.
 in the UK: the prevalence within an insured cat population and a
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2004.
questionnaire-based putative risk factor analysis.Journal of Feline
17. Bouayad H, Feeney DA, Caywood DD, et al. Pheochromocytoma
Medicine and Surgery 2007;9:289-299.
in dogs; 13 cases (1980-1985). Journal of the American Veterinary
15.(
Crenshaw KL, Peterson ME, Heeb LA, et al. Serum fructosamine
Medical Association 1987;191:1610.
concentration as an index of glycemia in cats with diabetes mel-
18.
Barthez PY, Marks SL, Woo J, et al. Pheochromocytoma in dogs:
  fo p a ss e 
61 cases (1984-1995).Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine/
Medicine/American College ofVeterinary Internal Medicine 1996;
American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine 1997;11:272.
10:360-364.
Chapter 2  Endocrinology
65
16.
 Bailiff NL, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, et al. Frequency and risk
34.
 O'Brien MA. Diabetic emergencies in small animals. Veterinary
factors for urinary tract infection in cats with diabetes mellitus.
Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 2010;40:317-333.
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine/American College of
35.
 Boysen SR. Fluid and electrolyte therapy in endocrine disorders;
Veterinary Internal Medicine 2006;20:850-855.
diabetes mellitus and hypoadrenocorticism. Veterinary Clinics of
17. Marshall RD, Rand JS. Treatment with glargine results in higher
North America. Small Animal Practice 2008;38:699-717.
remission rates than lente or protamine zinc insulins in newly
36.
 Rothman DL, Magnusson I, Katz LD, et al. Quantitation of hepatic
diagnosed diabetic cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine/
C um sueum susey u sisauaoauona pue sisrouaaos
American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine (Abstract) 2005;
NMR. Science 1991;254:573.
19:425.
37.
 Karam JH. Hypoglycemic disorders. In: Basic and Clinical Endo-
18.
Weaver KE, Rozanski EA, Mahony OM, et al. Use of glargine and
crinology, 6th edition, eds. FS Greenspan, DG Gardner, p. 699.
lente insulins in cats with diabetes mellitus. Journal of Veterinary
New York, NY: Lange Medical Books/McGraw Hill; 2001.
Internal Medicine/American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine
38. Cryer PE, Gerich JE. Glucose counterregulation, hypoglycemia
2006;20:234-238.
and intensive insulin therapy in diabetes meltus. Ihe New
19.
Wess G, Reusch C. Capillary blood sarmpling from the ear of dogs
England Journal of Medicine 1985;313:232.
and cats and use of portable meters to measure glucose concentra-
39.
Cryer PE, Polonsky KS. Glucose homeostasis and hypoglycemia.
tion. Journal of Small Animal Practice 2000;41:60-66.
In: Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 9th edition, eds. JD
20.
 Reusch CE, Kley S, Casella M. Home monitoring of the diabetic
Wilson, DW Foster, HM Kronenberg,
PR Larsen, p. 939.
cat. journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery 2006;8:119-127.
Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1998.
21.
Wiedmeyer CE, DeClue AE. Continuous glucose monitoring in
40.
Cryer PE. Catecholamines, pheochromocytoma and diabetes.
dogs and Cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine/American
Diabetes Reviews 1993;1:309.
College of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2008;22:2-8.
41.
 Feldman EC. Diseases of the endocrine pancreas. In: Textbook
22.
 Marshall RD, Rand JS, Morton JM. Treatment of newly diagnosed
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, ed. SJ Ettinger, pp. 1615-1649.
diabetic cats with glargine insulin improves glycaemic control and
Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1983.
results in higher probability of remission than protamine zinc and
42.
 Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Beta-cell neoplasia; insulinoma. In:
lente insulins. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery 2009;
Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edition,
11:683-691.
eds.ECFeldman, RW Nelson, p.638.St. Louis, MO: W.B.Saunders;
 Roomp K, Rand J. Intensive blood glucose control is safe and
2004.
23.
effective in diabetic cats using home monitoring and treatment
43.
Fischer JR, Smith SA, Harkin KR. Glucagon Constant-Rate
with glargine. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery 2009;11:
Infusion: anovel strategy forthe management ofhyperinsulinemic-
668-682.
hypoglycemic crisis in the dog. Journal of the American Animal
24.
 Bennett N, Greco DS, Peterson ME, et al. Comparison of a low
Hospital Association 2000;36:27-32.
carbohydrate-low fiber diet and a moderate carbohydrate-high
44.
Tobin RL, Nelson RW, Lucroy MD, et al. Outcome of surgical
fber diet in the management of feline diabetes mellitus. Journal
of Feline Medicine and Surgery 2006;8:73-84.
cases.(1990-1997). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
25.
Hess RS, Kass PH, Ward CR. Breed distribution of dogs with
Association 1999;215:226.
diabetes mellitus admitted to a tertiary care facility. Journal of
45.
 Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Beta-cell neoplasia; insulinoma. In:
American Veterinary Medical Association 2000;216:1414-1417.
Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edition,
26.
 Guptill L, Glickman L, Glickman N. Time trends and risk factors
eds. EC Feldman, RW Nelson, p. 635. St. Louis, MO: W.B. Saunders;
for diabetes mellitus in dogs: analysis of veterinary medical
2004.
database records (1970-19999). The Veterinary Journal 2003;165:
46.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Beta-cell neoplasia; insulinoma. In:
240-247.
Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edition,
27.
 Nelson RW. Disorders of glucose metabolism in the dog—1: dia-
 eds. EC Feldman, RW Nelson, p.622.St. Louis, MO: W.B.Saunders;
betes mellitus. Veterinary Medicine 1985;1:27-36.
2004.
28.
Greco DS. Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus in cats and dogs.
47.
 Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Beta-cell neoplasia; insulinoma. In:
Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 2001;
Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edition,
31(5):845-853.
 eds. EC Feldman, RW Nelson, p.640.St. Louis, MO: W.B.Saunders;
29.
Rucinsky R, Cook A, Haley S, et al. AAHA diabetes management 
2004.
guidelines for dogs and cats. Journal of the American Animal
48.
Mizuno T, Hiraoka H, Yoshioka C, et al. Superficial necrolytic
Hospital Association 2010;46:215-224.
 dermatitis associated with extrapancreatic glucagonoma in a dog.
30.
 Fleeman LM, Rand JS. Management of canine diabetes. Veterinary
Veterinary Dermatology 2009,20:72-79.
Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 2001;31(5):855-879.
49.
Oberkirchner U, Linder KE, Zadrozny L, Olivry T. Successful
31.
 Rand JS, Fleeman LM, Farrow HA, et al. Canine and feline diabe-
 treatment of canine necrolytic migratory erythema (superfcial
tes mellitus: nature or nurture? The Journal of Nutrition
necrolytic dermatitis) due to metastatic glucagonoma with
2004;Aug;134(8 Suppl):2072s-2080s.
Octreotide. Veterinary Dermatology 2010;Oct;21(5):510-516.
 Hume DZ, Drobatz KJ, Hess RS. Outcome of dogs with diabetic
Epub ahead of print.
ketoacidosis: 127 dogs (1993-2003). Journal of Veterinary Internal
50.
Lurye JC, Behrend EN. Endocrine tumors. Veterinary Clinics of
Medicine/American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2006;
North America. Small Animal Practice 2001;31:1083-1110, ix-x.
20:547-555.
Revie w.
33.
 Connally HE. Critical care monitoring considerations for the dia
51.
Allenspach K, Arnold P, Glaus T, et al. Glucagon-producing neu-
betic patient. Clinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice 2002;
roendocrine tumour associated with hypoaminoacidaemia and
17(2):73-79.
skin lesions. Journal of Small Animal Practice 2000;41:402-406.
66
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
52. Langer NB, Jergens AE, Miles KG. Canine glucagonoma. Corm-
16. Roudebush P, Polzin DJ, Adams LG, et al. An evidence-based
pendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian
review of therapies for canine chronic kidney disease. Journal of
2003;25:56-63.
Small Animal Practice 2010;51:244-252.
53.
 Tierney EP, Badger J. Etiology and pathogenesis of necrolytic mi-
17.
 Roudebush P, Polzin DJ, Ross SJ, et al. Therapies for feline chronic
gratory erythema: review of the literature. MedGenMed 2004;6:4.
kidney disease. What is the evidence? Journal of Feline Medicine
54.
van Beek AP, de Haas ER, van Vloten WA, et al. The glucagonoma
and Surgery 2009;11:195-210.
maa e e ua au su pue aus
18.
 Randolph JE, Scarlett J, Stokol T, MacLeod JN. Clinical effcacy
European Journal of Endocrinology/European Federation of
and safety of recombinant canine erythropoietin in dogs with
Endocrine Societies 2004;151:531-537.
 anemia of chronic renal failure and dogs with recombinant human
erythropoietin-induced red cell aplasia. Journal of Veterinary
Internal Medicine/American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Section 6
2004;18:81-91.
1.1
 Dusso AS, Brown AJ, Slatopolsky E. Vitamin D. American Journal
19.
Cowgill LD, James KM, Levy JK, et al. Use of recombinant human
of Physiology. Renal Physiology 2005;289:F8-28. Review.
erythropoietin for management of anemia in dogs and cats with
2.1
LeVine DN, Zhou Y, Ghiloni RJ, et al. Hereditary 1,25-
renal failure. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Asso-
dihydroxyvitamin D-resistant rickets in a Pomeranian dog caused
ciation 1998;212:521-528.
by a novel mutation in the vitamin D receptor gene. Journal of
20.
Cowgill LD. Erythropoietin-replacement therapy. Personal com-
Veterinary Internal Medicine/American College of Veterinary
munication on American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Internal Medicine 2009;23:1278-1283.
listserve. http://www.acvim.org (accessed September 1, 2009).
3.
Taylor MB, Geiger DA, Saker KE, Larson MM. Difuse osteopenia
21.
Arcasoy MO. Non-erythroid effects of erythropoietin. Haema-
and myelopathy in a puppy fed a diet composed of an organic
tologica 2010;95:1803-1805.
premix and raw ground beef. Journal of the American Veterinary
22.
Fisher JW. Erythropoietin: physiology and pharmacology update.
Medical Association 2009;234:1041-1048.
Experimental Biology and Medicine 2003;228:1-14.
4. McMillan CJ, Griffon DJ, Marks SL, Mauldin GE. Dietary-related
23.
skeletal changes in a Shetland sheepdog puppy. Journal of the
tions.Annals of Clinical Biochemistry 2006;43:97-104.
American Animal Hospital Association 2006;42:57-64.
 Hughes SM. Canine gastrinoma: a case study and literature review
5.
Malik R, Laing C, Davis PE, et al. Rickets in a litter of racing
of therapeutic options. New Zealand Veterinary Journal 2006;54:
greyhounds. Journal of Small Animal Practice 1997;38:109-114.
242-247.
 Lourens DC. Nutritional or secondary hyperparathyroidism in a
25.
 Brooks D, Watson GL. Omeprazole in a dog with gastrinoma.
German shepherd litter. Journal of the South African Veterinary
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine/American College of
Association 1980;51:121-123.
Veterinary Internal Medicine 1997;11:379-381.
7.
 Sarkiala EM, Dambach D, Harvey CE. Jaw lesions resulting from
26.0
 Green RA, Gartrell CL. Gastrinoma: a retrospective study of four
renal hyperparathyroidism in a young dog—a case report. Journal
cases (1985-1995). Journal of the American Animal Hospital
of Veterinary Dentistry 1994;11:121-124.
Association 1997;33:524-527.
8.
Carmichael DT, Williams CA, Aller MS. Renal dysplasia with
27.
Simpson KW. Gastrinoma in dogs. In: Kirks Current Veterinary
secondary hyperparathyroidism and loose teeth in a young dog.
Therapy XIV, eds. JD Bonagura, DC Twedt, pp. 617-621. St. Louis,
Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 1995;12:143-146.
MO: Saunders; 2009.
9.
Geisen V, Weber K, Hartmann K. Vitamin D-dependent heredi-
28.
 Katkoori D, Samavedi S, Jorda M, et al. A rare case of renal gas-
tary rickets type I in acat. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine/
trinoma. The Scientifc World Journal 2009;9:501-504.
American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2009;23:196-199.
29.(
 Oberg K,JelicS, ESMO Guidelines Working Group. Neuroendocrine
10.
Tanner E, Langley-Hobbs SJ. Vitarmin D-dependent rickets type 2
gastroenteropancreatic tumors: ESMO clinical recommendation
with characteristic radiographic changes in a 4-month-old kitten.
for diagnosis, treatment and follw-up. Arnals of Oncology:
Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery 2005;7:307-311.
Oficial Journal of the European Society for Medical Oncology/
11.
Godfrey DR, Anderson RM, Barber PJ, Hewison M. Vitamin
ESMO 2009;20:150-153.
D-dependent rickets type II in a cat. Journal of Small Anirmal
30.9
 Shaw DH. Gastrinoma (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome) in the dog
Practice 2005;46:440-444.
and cat. The Canadian Veterinary Journal. La Revue Veterinaire
12.
 Schreiner CA, Nagode LA. Vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2 in
Canadienne 1988;29:448-452.
a four-month-old cat. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
31.
 Diroff JS, Sanders NA, McDonough SP, Holt DE. Gastrin-secreting
Association 2003;222:337-339, 315-316.
neoplasia ina cat. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine/American
13.(
 Gnudi G, Bertoni G, Luppi A, Cantoni AM. Unusual hyperpar-
College of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2006;20:1245-1247.
32.
Moreau ME, Garbacki N, Molinaro G, et al. Ihe kallikrein-kinin 
Oficial Journal of the American College of Veterinary Radiology
system: current and future pharmacological targets. Journal of
Pharmacological Sciences 2005;99:6-38.
250-253.
33.
Campbell DJ. Towards understanding the kallikrein-kinin system:
14. Henik RA, Forrest LJ, Friedman AL. Rickets caused by excessive
insights from measurement of kinin peptides. Brazilian Journal of
renal phosphate loss and apparent abnormal vitamin D metabo-
Medical and Biological Research 2000;33:665-677.
lism in a cat. Journal ofthe American Veterinary Medical Association
34.
 Zawilska JB, Skene DJ, Arendt J. Physiology and pharmacology of
1999;215:1644-1649, 1620-1621.
melatonin in relation to biological rhythms. Pharrmacological
15. Randolph JF, Scarlett JM, Stokol T, et al. Expression, bioactivity,
Reports: PR 2009;61:383-410.
and clinical assessment of recombinant feline erythropoietin.
35.
Diaz SF, Torres SM, Nogueira SA, et al. Ihe impact of body site,
American Journal of Veterinary Research 2004;65:1355-1366.
topical melatonin and brushing on hair regrowth after clipping
Chapter 2 Endocrinology
67
normal Siberian husky dogs. Veterinary Dermatology 2006;17(1):
52.
Patel YC. Somatostatin and its receptor family. Frontiers in
45-50.
Neuroendocrinology 1999;20:157-198. Review.
36.
 Frank LA, Hnilica KA, Oliver JW. Adrenal steroid hormone con-
53.
Hoenerhoff M, Kiupel M. Concurrent gastrinoma and somato-
centrations in dogs with hair cycle arrest (Alopecia X) before and
statinoma in a 10-year-old Portuguese water dog. Journal of
during treatment with melatonin and mitotane. Veterinary
Comparative Pathology 2004;130:313-318.
Dermatology 2004;15(5):278-284.
54.
 Nesi G, Marcucci T, Rubio CA, et al. Somatostatinoma: clinico-
37.
Frank LA, Donnell RL, Kania SA. Oestrogen receptor evaluation
pathological features of three cases and literature reviewed. Journal
in Pomeranian dogs with hair cycle arrest (alopecia X) on
of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 2008;23:521-526.
melatonin supplementation. Veterinary Dermatology 2006;17(4):
55.
Peterson ME. Acromegaly in cats: are we only diagnosing the tip
252-258.
of the iceberg? Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine/American
38.
 Baxter GF. Ihe natriuretic peptides. Basic Research in Cardiology
College of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2007;21:889-891.
2004;99:71-75. Epub January 23, 2004. Review.
56.
 Norman EJ, Mooney CT. Diagnosis and management of diabetes
39.
 Saito Y. Roles of atrial natriuretic peptide and its therapeutic use.
mellitus in five cats with somatotrophic abnormalities. Journal of
Journal of Cardiology 2010;56:262-270. Epub September 29, 2010.
Feline Medicine and Surgery 2000;2:183-190.
40.
Connolly DJ. Natriuretic peptides: the feline experience. Veterinary
57.
 Niessen S. Feline acromegaly: an essential differential diagnosis
Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 2010;40:59-70.
for the dificult diabetic. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery
Epub May 14, 2010. Revie w.
2010;12:15-23.
 Zimmering TM, Hungerbihler S, Meneses F, et al. Evaluation of
58.
Tappin S, Brown P, Ferasin L. An intestinal neuroendocrine tumor
the association between plasma concentration of N-terminal
associated with paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia and melaena
proatrial natriuretic peptide and outcome in cats with cardiomy-
in a 10-year-old boxer. Journal of Small Animal Practice 2008;49:
opathy. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
33-37.
2010;237:665-672.
59.
 Lippo NJ, Williams JE, Brawer RS, Sobel KE. Acute hemophilia
42.
Sisson D. B-type natriuretic peptides. Journal of Veterinary
and hemocholecyst in 2 dogs with gallbladder carcinoid. Journal
Cardiology 2009;11 Suppl 1:S5-S7. Epub April 24, 2009.
of Veterinary Internal Medicine/American College of Veterinary
Hsu A, Kittleson MD, Paling A. Investigation into the use of
Internal Medicine 2008;22:1249-1252.
 plasma NT-proBNP concentration to screen for feline hyper-
60.
 Oberg KE. Gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors. Arnals of
trophic cardiomyopathy. Journal of Veterinary Cardiology 2009;11
Oncoiogy: Oficial Journal of the European Society for Medical
Suppl 1:S63-S70. Epub April 22, 2009.
Oncology/ESMO 2010;21 Suppl 7:vi72-vii80.
44.
Oyama MA, Singletary GE. Ihe use of NT-proBNP assay in the
61.
Oberg KE. Neuroendocrine gastrointestinal tumors. Arnals of
management of canine patients with heart disease. Veterinary
Oncciogy: Oficial Journal of the European Society for Medical
Clinics ofNorth America. Small Animal Practice 2010;40:545-558.
Oncology/ESMO 1996;7:453-463.
45.
 Sisson DD. Neuroendocrine evaluation of cardiac disease.
62.
 Morrell CN, Volk MV, Mankowski JL. A carcinoid tumor in the
Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 2004;
 gallbladder of a dog. Veterinary Pathology 2002;39:756-758.
34:1105-1126. Review.
63.
Sako T, Uchida E, Okamoto M, et al. Immunohistochemical evalu-
46.
 Fox FP, Oyama MA, Reynolds C, et al. Utility of plasma N-terminal
ation of a malignant intestinal carcinoid in a dog. Veterinary
pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) to distinguish between
Pathology 2003;40:212-215.
congestive heart failure and non-cardiac causes of acute dyspnea
64.
 Spugnini EP, Gargiulo M, Assin R, et al. Adjuvant carboplatin for
in cats. Journal of Veterinary Cardiology 2009;11 Suppl 1:S51-S62,
the treatment of intestinal carcinoid in a dog. In Vivo 2008;22:
20.
759-761.
47.
 Zimmering TM, Meneses F, Nolte IJ, et al. Measurement of
65.
 Rossmeisl JH, Jr., Forrester SD, Robertson JL, Cook WT. Chronic
 N-terminal proatrial natriuretic peptide in plasma of cats with and
vomiting associated with a gastric carcinoid ina cat. Journal ofthe
without cardiomyopathy. Arerican Journal of Veterinary Research
American Animal Hospital Association 2002;38:61-66.
2009;70:216-222.
66.
Garden OA, Reubi JC, Dykes NL, et al. Somatostatin receptor
48.
 Lobetti RG. Hyperreninaemic hypoaldosteronism in a dog. Journal
imaging in vivo by planar scintigraphy facilitates the diagnosis of
of the South African Veterinary Association 1998;69:33-35.
canine insulinomas. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine/
49.
 Javadi S, Galac S, Boer P, et al. Aldosterone-to-renin and cortisol-
American College of Veterinary Intermal Medicine 2005;19:168-176.
to-adrenocorticotropic hormone ratios in healthy dogs and dogs
with primary hypoadrenocorticism. Journal of Veterinary Internal
 Suggested reading
Medicine/American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2006;
20:556-561.
1. Connolly DJ, Magalhaes RJ, Syme HM, et al. Circulating natriu-
50.
Mazza A, Zamboni S, Armigliato M, et al. Endocrine arterial
retic peptides in cats with heart disease. Journal of Veterinary
hypertension: diagnostic approach in clinical practice. Minerva
Internal Medicine/AmericanCollege of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Endocrinologica 2008;33:127-146. Epub February 15, 2008.
2008;22:96-105.
51.
 Della Bruna R, Kurtz A, Schricker K. Regulation of renin synthesis
in the juxtaglomerular cells. Current Opinion in Nephrology and
Hypertension 1996;5:16-19.
Chapter
Musculoskeletal
Editor: Colleen Ruderman
 Section 1 Anatomy and Physiology - Colleen Ruderman 69
Section 5 Musculoskeletal Therapy - 82
Section 2 Selected Diagnostics in Musculoskeletal Disease
Veterinary rehabilitation therapy - Melissa J. Supernor
Colleen Ruderman 72
and Constance Barkey 82
Section 3 Diseases of the Musculoskeletal System
Palliative radiation therapy - Rosemary Calderon 88
Colleen Ruderman 73
Section 6 Musculoskeletal Nutrition - Ann Wortinger 89
Section 4 General Musculoskeletal Examination -
Colleen Ruderman 81
SECTION 1 ANATOMY AND
It is typically more rigid than the appendicular skeleton, which
 is responsible for movement and includes the pelvic girdle and
PHYSIOLOGY
limbs.
The skeletal system
Bone growth
Introduction
 Bones begin as cartilage during the fetal stages of development
The skeletal system is the support structure for the body It func-
and become hardened bone by endochondral ossifcation as the
tions as the framework as well as the area where blood cell
body develops after birth. Osteoclasts are the cells that make
formation occurs. Bone is the second hardest substance in the
bone by secreting a material called the matrix, which will then
body, the hardest living tissue, and is capable of repair after
 harden by a process called ossification. Calcium and phosphorus
 injury. While the main function of the skeletal system is support,
will enter the matrix during ossification. During this process,
it also serves to protect internal organs and makes movement
osteoclasts will become trapped within the bone and mature into
 possible by allowing skeletal muscle to attach via tendons to
osteocytes (bone cells). The areas of hardened matrix that contain
move joints. Bone is the main storage area for calcium and other
the osteocytes are lacunae. Osteocytes obtain their blood supply
minerals. The skeletal system can be divided into two distinct
through canaliculi, which are channels within the bone that
areas based on function. The axial skeleton's principal function
allow nutrients and communication between cells. Osteoclasts
is support and includes the skull, vertebrae, sternum, and ribs.
 are the sculptors of the skeletal system and are also a part of the
Smat Anima nternat Medicine for VeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses, First Edition.Edited by Linda Merill
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
69
70
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
mononuclear phagocytic system (MPS), breaking down skeletal
down into zones of reserve cartilage (newest), proliferation,
tissue during remodeling and injury. Heteroplastic ossifcation
hypertrophy, and calcifed matrix (oldest). Where the epiphysis
 is a similar process that occurs in tissue other than bone, such
and diaphysis join is the metaphysis. Within the bone is a medul-
as the os penis. Intramembranous ossification is bone formation
lary cavity that contains the yellow marrow. The medullary
without the intervention of cartilage, such as the bones of the
cavity is lined by the endosteum and its structure is formed from
skull, face, and mandible.
compact bone. Cancellous bone is located on the ends of the
medullary cavity within the epiphysis and is the location for the
red marrow. The outermost surface of the bone is called the
Bone repair
 periosteum. Located at the most distal and proximal ends of the
-d a   s q e  sq  
bone are cartilages. Where there is cartilage, there is no perios-
osteum at the location of the injury, hemorrhage, or clot forma-
teum (Figure 3.1.1).
tion. When complete, this will form the external callus and will
 The short bones consist of a core of cancellous bone sur-
be followed by the formation of an internal callus by the endos-
rounded by compact bone. Examples of short bones include the
teum and will be composed of spongy bone or cartilage. Once
phalanges, carpus, and tarsus. Flat bones are made ofa thin layer
the internal and external callus formation is complete, the ossi
of cancellous bone surrounded by flat layers of compact bone on
fication process will begin. Any nonfunctioning bone located
within the callus is removed by osteoclasts and replaced with
matrix by osteoblasts. Once ossification is complete with the
Articular cartilage
formation of compact bone, any area of the callus that is no
Epiphysis
 Spongy bone
longer needed is reabsorbed.
 Epiphyseal plate
Types of bones
Red marrow
cavities
Each bone in the body can contain several types of material.
Cancellous bone (spongy bone) is named for its sponge-like
appearance. Cancellous bone is made up of spicules, and located
in the space between the spicules (also called trabeculae) is the
Compact bone
marrow. As well as the housing for marrow, cancellous bone also
functions to absorb shock and to lighten the overall weight of
bone. Bone marrow is hematopoietic tissue (blood cell forming).
 It is in larger quantities in younger animals and lessens as the
Endosteum
body ages. Older animals contain stores of red marrow mainly
 Medullary cavity
within the long bones and pelvis. These are also the main areas
used for bone marrow collection procedures. Yellow bone
marrow can be considered old red marrow and is primarily
Diaphysis
Yellow marrow
adipose connective tissue. This type of marrow cannot produce
any cellines; however, it can be converted to red marrow during
a disease process that requires the increased production of blood
cells. Compact bone is a heavy and dense material that comprises
Periosteum
the outside layer of most bones within the skeletal system. Within
compact bone is the Haversian system, which is a series of canals
that house blood vessels, lymph vessels, and nerves that supply
the bone. This is also the area where calcium is stored. Cancellous
bone, red and yellow marrow, and compact bone make up the
bones of the skeletal system, which are further defined by their
shape and include long, short, fat,irregular, and sesamoid bones.
Long bones serve as a prime area for collection of bone
marrow and, for this reason, are important to internal medicine
 and are the best example to describe the anatomy of bone. Long
bones develop starting at the diaphysis, or primary growth
 Epiphyseal plate
center, which is the shaft of the long bone. As development
Epiphysis
progresses, secondary growth centers called epiphyses (proximal
 and distal) are created. These are located at the ends of long
Figure 3.1.1   Structure of a long bone (tibia).
bones. Epiphyseal plates (growth plates) are located between the
diaphysis and epiphysis and are where bone growth occurs
Source: Used with permission, Colville T, Bassert JM. Cinical Anatomy and
Physiology for Veterinary Technicians, 2nd edition. St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier;
 r ae sd   e  
2008.
Chapter 3  Musculoskeletal
71
either side, creating a flat structure (ribs, skull, and scapula).
function. The skeletal muscle is responsible for controlled and
Irregular bones can share characteristics from long, short, and
 conscious movement, which is stimulated by the nervous system.
flat bones. Examples of irregular bones are the sesamoid bones
 Smooth and cardiac muscles are not under conscious control
located within tendons and include the patella, which is the
 and do not require stimulation from the nervous system to carry
largest sesamoid bone in the body. Splanchnic or visceral bone 
      s    
is bone that forms within organs, such as the os penis.
broken down into two categories. Voluntary muscles move on
A part of most bones are projections and grooves that serve a
conscious command such as the skeletal muscles. Involuntary
variety of functions. Articular projections are located where
muscles move with nonconscious control and include smooth
 bone meets bone to form a joint and are covered in a layer of
and cardiac muscles.
articular cartilage. Nonarticular projections are areas located on
bones and function as a location for tendons to attach. Nonar-
Skeletal muscle
ficular depressions called fossae and holes called foramina are
located on bones where vessels or nerves must cross or in areas
Most skeletal muscles extend from one bone, across a joint, to
where large bones are located and weight must be reduced, such
another bone. The origin is the muscle attachment to the more
as the obturator foramen of the pelvis.
stationary bone, and the insertion is the attachment to the more
 movable bone (ex. biceps brachi extends from its origin on the
Joints
scapula to its insertion to the radius). The movement of the
skeletal muscle is a result of contraction. Most skeletal muscles
Joints serve as the junctions between bones. There are several
are paired for positive and negative resistance. Agonist muscles
types, each with its own level of flexibility. The fbrous joints
work with antagonist muscles in opposition (ex biceps/triceps).
(synarthroses) are immovable joints, such as the sutures of the
 Synergist muscles work together to achieve the same movement.
skull. Cartilaginous joints (amphiarthroses) are slightly movable
 Fixator muscles work to stabilize joints.
and include the intervertebral disks and mandibular symphysis.
 The skeletal muscle is made of bundles of cells, or fbers, creat-
 Synovial joints are the most flexible, and most appropriate for
 ing striated (striped) tissue. Muscles are composed of layers of
internal medicine uses as these are joints where synovial fuid
connective tissue that encompasses muscle cells/fbers into
        
bundles, or groups. Surrounding each muscle fber is connective
extension, adduction, abduction, rotation, and circumduction of
tissue called endomysium. The end point of these connective
appendages.
tissues is what makes up the tendons and aponeuroses that
 Several components are involved in the structure of synovial
connect the muscle to the bone, or to another muscle.
joints. The joint capsule is made of fibrous connective tissue lined
The muscle cells, or fbers, that comprise the bundles, also
with the synovial membrane and makes up the joint cavity. The
called the muscle belly, have a fbrous cell membrane called the
 joint cavity is the space flled by synovia (joint fluid), which is
sarcolemma. Within each muscle fber are multiple nuclei sur-
what is sampled during arthrocentesis. Articular cartilage covers
rounded by myofbrils, which are made up of actin and myosin
the surface of the bone and functions to absorb shock and pro-
flaments, sarcoplasmic reticulum, and transverse tubules. Actin
vides for the smooth movement between two bones. Articular
and myosin are the layered protein myoflaments of muscle
cartilage is hyaline and covers the surface of bones. Its main func-
fbers that move against each other to create contraction. The
tion is to reduce friction and wear within the joint and to absorb
layers of actin and myosin are called sarcomeres. Muscle cells
shock Matrix secreting cells called chondrocytes are embedded
also contain a neuromuscular junction where nerve fbers
 in the cartilage. Because there is no blood supply within the car-
connect into muscle fbers. The small space between the nerve
filage, it obtains its nutrients from the synovial fluid within the
fiber terminal branch and muscle fber is a synaptic space, or
joint, as well as from small vessels located within a thin mem-
s s  p    in 
brane surrounding the cartilage. Ligaments are the bands of
vesicles are located in this space and contain acetylcholine, a
tissue between two bones that function to stabilize the joint.
neurotransmitter When stimulated, the nerve will release ace-
There are many types of synovial joints within the body and are
tylcholine that will bind to receptors located on the sarcolemma.
named for the movement they provide for. Ginglymus (hinge type)
 These receptors will trigger a reaction that will travel the length
for flexion/extension, arthrodial (gliding/rocking) for flexion/
of the sarcolemma and through the transverse tubules into the
extension and minimal abduction/adduction, trochoid (rotating/
muscle fiber. The acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) also allow for
pivoting) for rotation only, and spheroidal (ball and socket), which
sodium transfer that will result in the depolarization of the
allow for flexion/extension, abduction/adduction, and rotation/
muscle and subsequent contraction. The sarcoplasmic reticulum
circumduction and is the most versatile joint in the body.
will receive the impulse and release stored calcium into the
 myofbrils, which use adenosine triphosphate (ATP) for energy
The muscular system
to perform the contraction via the movement of the sarcomeres.
Introduction
Once the depolarization of the muscle is complete, the myofibrils
will use ATP and active transport to release the calcium back
There are three types of muscles within the body and they are
into the sarcoplasmic reticulum. As the calcium leaves the
defined by their cellular structure, which is further dictated by
 myofibrils, relaxation takes place.
72
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Cardiac muscle
for testing. The most common sites for collection of synovial
fluid are the radiocarpal and intracarpal, tarsal, and stife joints.
Cardiac muscle is an involuntary, striated muscle located only
within the heart. Cardiac muscle cells contain a single nucleus
Materials
and are smaller than skeletal muscle fibers. The cells link together
by intercalated disks to form the muscles of the heart. The inter-
1. Clippers
calated disks allow for the transmission of impulses between
 2. Surgical scrub/alcohol
cells. This allows for the cells of the atria and ventricles to func-
3. Sterile gloves
tion as a syncytium or a single cell. The sinoatrial (SA) node will
stimulate the cardiac muscle cells to contract at a specific pace
4.22- to 25-g needlles, 1.0- to 1.5-in. length
that is dictated by the body's perfusion needs.
5. 3- to 6-cc syringes
6. Slides
Smooth muscle
7. Culturette
The smooth muscle is involuntary, nonstriated muscle, and com-
 EDTA and plain Vacutainer
 prises visceral structures associated with the digestive, urogeni-
tal, respiratory, and vascular systems. The smooth muscle is
Patient preparation and restraint
regulated by the autonomic nervous system and contracts
without external stimulation. The smooth muscle cel structure
Sedation is recommended since arthrocentesis is an uncomfort-
of actin and myosin is arranged in a cross pattern that allows for
able and sometimes painful procedure. The sample quality can
significant elasticity. This provides for expansion when needed,
be greatly affected by excessive movement of the patient (blood
such as in the stomach, bladder, and uterus. Smooth muscle cells
contamination from trauma). In severely painful or fractious
are spindle shaped with a single nucleus.
animals, general anesthesia may be needed; however, this is not
common. Local anesthetics are not recommended as they add
extra fluid to the sample area and can contribute to contamina-
SECTION 2 SELECTED
tion. Once the site(s) for arthrocentesis is chosen, the area is
DIAGNOSTICS IN
shaved and surgically prepared.
MUSCULOSKELETAL DISEASE
Technique
Using aseptic technique, the gloved hand will palpate for ana-
Arthrocentesis
tomical landmarks. This can be aided by the flexion and exten-
Arthrocentesis is a relatively simple procedure to either collect
sion of the joint. With the joint in the flexed position (to allow
an opening into the joint capsule), the needle with the syringe
a sample of joint fluid for analysis (diagnostic) or to drain joint
fluid and/or to inject medication (therapeutic). This section
attached is inserted into the joint capsule. Once the needle has
reached the joint space, the syringe is gently aspirated. In small
will discuss diagnostic arthrocentesis only, commonly called a
joint tap.
patients, it is typical for only a minimal amount of synovial fluid
to be obtained (0.01-1.0 mL); however,if significant inflamma-
tion or infection is present, large amounts of fluid can be
Indications and contraindications
obtained. Once the sample is collected, prior to removal of the
Arthrocentesis may be indicated to aid in the diagnosis of joint
needle, negative pressure is released in order to minimize con-
diseases and synovial effusions (inflammatory, noninflamma-
tamination from hemorrhage or the surrounding tissues. If
tory, and infectious), to measure the response to therapy, and,
 blood contamination occurs, reaspiration or relocation to a dif-
in addition, to aid in the diagnosis of certain diseases. Arthro-
ferent joint is recommended. It is important to note that joint
centesis is typically performed by a clinician; however, if state
disease can cause a hemorrhagic effusion within the joint capsule
law allows, it may be performed by a credentialed veterinary
itself. Samples with blood contamination may stil be submited
technician.
for culture; however, clean samples are recommended for fluid
analysis, cell counts, and cytology. Typical synovial fluid in
ulopathy, and alternate site selection is indicated if the skin or
animals is minimal in volume, clear to straw colored, and does
surrounding tissues are infected.
not clot. If clots are noted within the sample, hemorrhage should
be suspected, either caused by underlying disease or by blood
Site selection
contamination during collection.
There are multiple site options available for the collection of
Synovial fluid analysis
synovial fluid. Typically, the site of lameness and/or joint swell-
ing is used for sampling. If indicated, multiple sites may be used
Volume, color, turbidity, and viscosity should be noted during
and either submitted separately or the samples may be pooled
collection. Normal volume should be between 0.01 and 1.0mL,
Chapter 3  Musculoskeletal
73
which varies with the joint used for collection as well as the size
Patient and sample care
of the patient. Clinical experience can help determine if abnor-
mal volumes are collected.
The procedure is surgical in nature and performed under general
The color of joint fluid should be clear to straw colored.
anesthesia. Typically, a 4- to 5-mm-wide, 2-cm-long section of
Abnormal samples can appear green yellow with mild to marked
a muscle belly is removed. The biopsy is then divided into two
 turbidity. Synovial fuid is highly viscous and can be checked by
 equal sections. One section is fxed in formalin for histopathol-
using the “strand" method. To perform this check, a small drop
 ogy. The other portion of the biopsy should be refrigerated in a
 gauze sponge and submitted for histochemical staining that
 q a s q a o  si  s g
forefinger together and then spread them apart. A strand of the
 cannot be performed on formalin-fixed tissue.
sample material will extend across the gap. It is important to note
Following the muscle biopsy monitoring of the surgical site
that if this test is performed after the sample is added to EDTA,
for hemorrhage or signs of infection is recommended. In addi
the viscosity can be falsely decreased due to the breakdown of
tion, adequate analgesia should be provided for a minimum of
hyaluronic acid that occurs in EDTA.
2-3 days post biopsy depending on the patients needs.
Sample submission is greatly determined by the volume of
fluid obtained during arthrocentesis. If a significant amount of
SECTION 3 DISEASES OF THE
joint fluid is obtained, the sample may be placed into an antico-
agulant, such as EDTA, and submitted for cell counts and cytol-
MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
ogy. If viscosity testing (e.g., mucin clot test) is needed and
sample size is sufficient, a small amount of fluid should be placed
There are several diseases that affect the musculoskeletal system.
into heparin, which does not affect viscosity. A small sample is
 This chapter wil discuss joint disease (inflammatory, noninflam-
also placed on a culturette or in a plain Vacutainer to submit for
 matory, and infectious), neuromuscular disease, and neoplastic
culture and sensitivity, as well as mycoplasma culture if indi-
disease.
cated. If multiple sites are used, pooling of samples for culture/
cytology can be performed. If only a small amount of synovial
Inflammatory joint disease
fluid is obtained, the sample is placed directy onto slides for
squash preparation and submission for cytology.
Infectious arthritis
Muscle biopsy
Infectious arthritis is a form of inflammatory joint disease. Due
to certain anatomical structures within the joint, as well as the
Muscle biopsies are performed when a myopathy of skeletal
blood supply within the bone itself, several pathogens are able
muscle, or an infectious disease affected muscle (e.g., hepato-
to affect the joints of small animals. Most often, this occurs as a
zoonosis), is suspected. Muscle biopsies are not commonly per-
- nn o ans pf oi  sad yo nsa
formed as less invasive testing methods are available (e.g., serum
genital deformity, degenerative joint disease (DJD), or surgery.
antibody testing, serum creatine phosphokinase (CPK) levels,
 Older, large breed dogs are more susceptible to infectious arthri-
and electrophysiology/myelography). It should be noted that
tis. Most often, it is only one to two joints that are affected,
 i a  a o s sn 
whereas systemic infections typically affect most or all joints.
peripheral neuropathies than in that of myopathies. Within 
 Pain on palpation, in addition to swelling of the outlaying areas,
internal medicine, a muscle biopsy is most commonly per-
is a common physical examination finding. Infectious arthritis
formed to aid in the diagnosis of masticatory muscle myositis
 can have several causes (bacterial, fungal, protozoal, and viral),
(MMM). The 2M antibody titer commonly performed can have
a false-negative result due to low circulating numbers of the
 ing urinary tract, skin, and prostatic infections, as well as cardiac
2M antibody. This is uncommon occurrence, but in these cir-
disease and myocarditis. Infectious arthritis is uncommon in
cumstances, a muscle biopsy may be helpful in the diagnostic
cats. More information on specific infectious diseases can be
process.
found in Chapter 11.
Bacterial arthritis
Site selection
Bacterial arthritis can be blood-borne (hematogenous) or local.
Most often, the muscle belly affected by the disease is biopsied.
Common causes for blood-borne bacterial arthritis include gen-
The site may be identifed by pain response, muscle atrophy, or
itourinary tract, skin, oral, and respiratory infections. Most
muscle hypertrophy.
often, blood-borne bacterial arthritis is seen with juvenile cel-
When a muscle biopsy site is selected, electrophysiological
lulitis, also called sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lym-
testing should be avoided in the muscle belly that is to be biop-
phadenitis or puppy strangles. Septicemia with progression into
sied. This testing can cause inadvertent changes and can affect
the joint cavity as a result of pyelonephritis, cystitis, and prosta-
the diagnosis. Single biopsies are common; however, biopsies of
titis has also been noted. Bacterial arthritis can affect proximal
multiple muscle biopsies increase the chance of obtaining a diag-
 joints as well as intervertebral disks. Local causes for bacterial
nostic sample.
arthritis are most often a result of surgical contamination,
74
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
nonsterile arthrocentesis, and wounds. Common organisms 
 botomus spp.). Dogs will typically show signs of polyarthropathy.
for bacterial arthritis include Streptococcus canis, methicillin-
Arthrocentesis will yield a macrophage-flled synovial fluid with
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), Pasteurella sp., Brucella
Leishmania bodies.
spp., and Satmonella spp.
The treatment of all forms of infectious arthritis should
Clinical  symptoms  of bacterial arthritis include weight-
include proper sterility to guard against nosocomial infections,
bearing and non-weight-bearing lameness, fever, swelling and
redness of the joint and surrounding tissue, nonhealing wounds,
potentially zoonotic organisms, the use of personal protection
and draining tracts. Imaging results that are often noted with
equipment (PPE), adequate disinfection, and proper isolation
bacterial arthritis are thick synovial membranes, distended joint
procedures is necessary.
capsule, displacement of fiscal planes, widening of the joint
 space, destruction of the synovial membrane, and osteomyelitis.
Tick-related joint disease
The diagnosis of bacterial arthritis is made by collection and
culture of the synovial fluid. Concurrent cultures of blood and
Tick-borne diseases can cause a form of infectious arthritis typi-
urine can also be performed. It has been reported that 50% of
cally affecting the joints of dogs. Tick-borne diseases can affect
dogs with infectious arthritis have bacteria that reach the blood-
cats; however, they are not associated with joint-related disease.
stream as a result of concurrent urinary tract infection.'
Lyme disease
 Treatment of bacterial arthritis is composed of general sup-
 portive care and antibiotic therapy based on culture results. If
Lyme disease, or Lyme borreliosis, is associated with a spirochete
blood and/or urine cultures are positive for bacterial growth, it
bacterial arthritis. Borrelia burgdorferi is a spirochete bacterium
is often considered the primary cause for the bacterial arthritis.
that is transmitted by ticks. These bacteria can become systemic
Local infusions of antibiotics can be used in addition to systemic
and have been found in the synovial fluid and central nervous
bactericidal medications.
system of dogs. The vector associated with this disease is Ixodes
 L-form bacterial arthritis is a disease that affects cats. L-form
spp. The musculoskeletal symptoms of Lyme disease are most
bacteria are cell wall deficient and are similar to mycoplasma.
often joint related in the limb closest to the tick bite. Acute pol-
 L-form bacteria cause subcutaneous draining wounds and are
yarthritis and shifting leg lameness are the most common clini-
most often attributed to bite wounds. For this reason, they are
cal signs and can become chronic intermittent. Other symptoms
often located in the distal portion of the limbs and invade the
include joint swelling and effusion, fever, and lymphadenopathy.
joint cavity via the bloodstream. Culture of synovial fluid in
General laboratory findings are often normal; however, other
these cases is often negative; however, treatment with tetracy-
forms of Lyme disease can result in abnormal biochemical
cline antibiotics is often successful. Mycoplasma arthritis is rare
and complete blood count (CBC) fndings. Radiographs of the
and typically associated with immune compromise and localiza-
limbs will typically reveal soft tissue swelling and nonerosive
 tion of mycoplasma to other areas (mostly respiratory).
arthritis.
Several diagnostic tests exist for Lyme disease; further discus.
Viral arthritis
sion is found in Chapter 11. Most often, suppurative inflamma-
Viral arthritis is not common in small animals; however, there
tion is noted on joint fluid cytology. Cultures of the synovial fluid
are typically not performed due to the difficulty in isolating the
 are reports of a limping syndrome in cats with concurrent cali-
bacteria from joint fluid.
civirus infection, as well as following the use of live feline cali
The treatment for arthritis associated with Lyme disease is
civirus vaccine.' Efusive forms of feline infectious peritonitis
have been associated with potential viral arthritis in cats. Live
multifocal. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications, in
yaccination has also been shown to cause limping in Weimaran-
-v ud s on psn An a 'spoo on u
inflammatory doses of glucocorticoids may also be used;
ers.' Distemper virus may affect the joints of dogs and may pos-
however, it is often contraindicated due to their immunosup-
sibly lead to rheumatoid conditions later in life.
pressive properties. See Chapter 11 for more information.
Fungal arthritis
Rickettsial/ehrlichial arthritis
 Fungal arthritis is rare in small animals and is most often second-
Rickettsial and ehrlichial arthritis are other forms of vector-
ary to systemic fungal disease such as coccidioidomycosis, blas-
borne bacterial infections that can have joint-related symptoms.
tomycosis, histoplasmosis, and cryptococcosis. Fungal culture on
The most common rickettsial disease is Rocky Mountain spotted
synovial fluid is the diagnostic test of choice in the face of sys-
fever (RMSF), which is caused by Rickettsia rickettsii and an
temic fungal infections with acute arthritis symptoms.
 intracellular bacterium that is transmitted by Dermacentor spp.
(deer ticks). RMSF can cause severe vasculitis and associated
Protozoal arthritis
polyarthritis. The clinical symptoms are often joint, muscle, and
Protozoal arthritis is not common in North America. Leishma-
 neurological pain, as well as a stiff gait caused by generalized
nia donovani is the organism associated with this disease and
 inflammation, lymphadenopathy, and fever.
affects Mediterranean dogs and foxhounds in New York (see
Chapter 11). It is transmitted via bloodsucking sand flies (Phle-
(brown dog) tick and cause a nonerosive polyarthritis. Different
Chapter 3  Musculoskeletal
75
types of Ehrlichia are associated with more severe forms of
 that present with fever of unknown origin.? It can affect single
arthritis (Ehrlichia ewingi and Ehrlichia equi) and are considered
 joints; however, the polyarticular form is most common. IMPA
to be the granulocytic forms. However, cross reactivity in diag-
su no ‘oi si I ai sd no ou p s
nostic testing will not differentiate between various types of ehr-
 related, and is the most common form. Type II is associated with
lichial disease. The clinical symptoms are similar to RMSF and
infection; type IHI is associated with gastrointestinal (GI) or
 include muscle stiffness, lameness, polyarthritis, lymphadenopa-
 hepatic disease, and type IV is associated with neoplastic causes.
thy, fever, and stilted gait.
The clinical symptoms and history of IMPA patients are a
Canine granulocytotropic anaplasmosis (Anaplasma phagocy-
 cyclic fever that is unresponsive to antibiotics; lethargy, stiff gait,
 tophilum) is a previous member of the Ehrlichia genus and is also
lameness, spinal pain, and immobility being the most common
 an obligate intracellular organism that causes musculoskeletal
signs.? Generalized muscle atrophy, joint swelling, lymphaden-
pain, stiffness, and lameness. It is transmitted by the Ixodes spp.
opathy, and anorexia are other possible clinical symptoms. IMPA
tick and is diagnostically and clinically similar to ehrlichiosis.
 most often affects medium to large dogs 1-6 years of age, and
 Diagnostic testing for ricketsial and ehrlichial arthritis is
 pure breeds are overrepresented (Labrador retrievers, German
needed to distinguish it from other forms of polyarthritis. Clini-
shepherds).
cal history is needed to determine exposure to ticks as well as
CBC will often show signs of general inflammation with neu-
general laboratory abnormalities such as thrombocytopenia. The
trophilia and leukocytosis. The serum biochemistry panel is
 granulocytic forms of Ehrlichia can be seen on blood film evalu-
 typically normal. Some liver enzyme elevation can be seen if gluco-
 ation; however, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), ELISA, and
titers are the diagnostic tests of choice. The treatment for rick-
of affected limbs will show soft tissue swelling. Arthrocentesis is
 ettsial and ehrlichial infections include tetracycline antibiotic
the diagnostic test of choice, and fluid analysis and cytology will be
therapy, supportive care, analgesia, vector control, and client
consistent with a sterile inflammation. The treatment for IMPA is
education.
 supportive and immunosuppressive. Single immunosuppressive
Any form of infectious arthritis can be difficult to treat. Treat-
ment duration can vary depending on the organism in question,
apy with additional immunosuppressives such as azathioprine,
with weeks to months being typical. It is important to educate
 cyclosporine, and leflunomide may be needed. Approximately
clients not only on treatment duration but also on the amount
 30-50% of dogs with IMPA will suffer relapse.'
As with any immune disease, client compliance is imperative
 is needed for successful recoveries, and maintaining communi-
for successful treatment. Most immune-mediated arthropathies
cations with veterinary professionals during the course of treat-
require treatment for 3-6 months. The most common medica-
ment can be helpful in determining if complications, relapse, or
tion prescribed is prednisone, and adverse effects can be pro-
adverse effects from medications occur. During the recovery
 nounced in some patients. These include polyuria, polydypsia,
period, exercise should be restricted so as not to cause further
 polyphagia, panting, abdominal distension, and poor hair coat
pain/inflammation of the joints. In addition, climate control can
 Or growth. For some clients, the side effects of prednisone can
be helpful as temperature extremes can increase pain and inflam-
significantly affect the quality of life at home and may lead to
mation in the joints. Working dogs should be placed on hiatus
until cleared from a veterinarian and gradually reintroduced to
chance of relapse and a strict medication schedule should be
their working environment while monitoring for recurrence of
discussed in detail. Clients should be made aware that patients
symptoms. Some permanent damage can result from infectious
requiring long-term treatment with immunosuppressive medi-
forms of arthritis, and intermittent to persistent lameness may
cations are prone to resistant infections and poor wound healing.
require treatment with physical therapy or medication.
Injuries should be monitored closely and examined if infection
Frequent rechecks are needed to properly evaluate the patient's
 is suspected. In addition, periodic urine testing can be helpful
recovery, which may include repeat antigen testing, radiographs,
 in detecting subclinical urinary tract infections. Patients requir-
and blood work It is helpful to develop a recheck schedule; this
 ing treatment with more than one immunosuppressive medica-
 can increase client compliance and improve patient outcome.
 tion often require longer treatment periods than with prednisone
Developing a schedule of fees for these rechecks can also provide
 alone. Recheck and fee schedules can provide additional infor-
 an opportunity for budgeting the long-term costs of patient care.
 mation that can increase client compliance and can aid in patient
recovery.
Noninfectious arthritis/immune-mediated
Canine rheumatoid arthritis
arthropathies
Canine rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a type I noninfectious
 inflammatory joint disease that affects small, toy breeds ranging
Immune-mediated polyarthropathy
from 8 months to 8 years of age. The clinical symptoms include
Immune-mediated polyarthropathy (IMPA), also known as idi-
shifing leg lameness and swelling, most often affecting the
opathic nonerosive, noninfectious arthritis, is the most common
carpal/tarsal joints, but it can affect any joint including vertebral
immune-mediated joint disease in dogs. It is less common in cats
articulations. Other symptoms are fever, lethargy, anorexia, and
but has been reported. IMPA is one of the leading causes of cases
lymphadenopathy.
76
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 A CBC will show evidence of generalized inflammation with
Systemic fupus erythematosus
leukocytosis and neutrophilia. Radiographic abnormalities are
typically loss of bone density at the joint, soft tissue swelling.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an immune disorder in
both dogs and cats. While it can be seen in mixed breeds, the
luxations/subluxations, and narrowing or widening of the joint
highest incidence of SLE is in purebred animals.'Most often, the
spaces. There is no specific rheumatoid factor testing in dogs due
     s r
to lack of sensitivity; however, antinuclear antibodies (ANAs)
patients will experience SLE-related polyarthritis. The diagnosis
can occasionally be detected in canine RA. Arthrocentesis will
of SLE is typically made by performing an ANA test and the
yield an inflammatory fluid analysis with an elevated white
exclusion of underlying causes. The treatment for SLE-related
blood cell count. IgG containing mononuclear cells within the
synovial fluid is the defining test resulting in a diagnosis of
canine RA.
therapy.
The treatment for canine RA consists of supportive care
Enteropathic polyarthritis
and lifelong immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids. Most
 often, a combination of multiple immunosuppressive medica-
There is a rare occurrence of polyarthropathy that has been
linked to chronic GI or hepatic disease. The clinical symptoms
tions is needed for the resolution of the clinical symptoms of
are similar to most joint disease with swelling, fever, and shifting
canine RA.
Joint laxity and physical deformity is common due to the
leg lameness being the most common. The treatment is aimed
erosive nature of RA. While patients undergoing treatment for
at the underlying disease process and pain control. Most often,
immunosuppressive therapy is initiated if indicated for the
RA may have minimal pain, they often require extensive care at
underlying GI or hepatic disease.
home as a result of decreased mobility. Carts or wheelchairs are
available, which can aid mobility and decrease the extensive
Noninflammatory joint disease
nature of home care. The mobility of dogs with erosive arthritis
varies between cases, and larger dogs often carry a poorer prog-
Degenerative joint disease/osteoarthritis
nosis as a result of the increased care needed at home.
For patients with significantly decreased mobility, providing
DJD is the most common joint disease in small animals and the
adequate bedding and cushioning is imperative to prevent decu-
most common cause for chronic pain. DJD can be divided into
- e sd s s ss piq n ss 
primary and secondary forms of osteoarthritis (OA). Primary
pressed, infection of decubital ulcers can be common and
OA is idiopathic, and secondary OA is the most common form
prevention is often the best treatment. Decubital ulcers should
in small animals. With secondary OA, changes occur within the
be cultured, if possible, to identify any potential resistant infec-
joint as a result of abnormal force on normal joints, or normal
 tions that may require more extensive treatment. In addition,
force on abnormal joints. This excessive or abnormal force will
 physical therapy can help increase muscle strength, which will
lead to synovitis and cartilage loss. With OA, there is a possible
in turn aid mobility.
 overproduction of destructive and proinflammatory substances
Frequent monitoring of CBC, biochemistry panels, and uri-
by the chondrocytes (cells of the cartilage), which leads to this
nalysis is required for patients undergoing lifelong immunosup-
 progressive breakdown of the cartilage.
pression to detect any potential adverse effects of medication
Any canine or feline breeds can be affected by DJD; however,
such as liver or kidney damage, or subclinical urinary tract
 overweight animals are at risk as a result of the excessive force
infections.
that occurs on all joints. Other predisposing factors of DJD
include misalignment, excessive activity (working dogs), joint
Drug related
injury, preexisting arthritis, and hip dysplasia. Secondary DJD is
In a similar fashion as immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
most often seen in large breed dogs; however, intervertebral disk
(IMHA), some medications can incite an immune response that
disease (IVDD) is a form of DJD that commonly occurs in small/
affects the joints of dogs. These medications include sulfona-
short-legged breeds of dogs. The most common factor leading
mides, penicillin, erythromycin, lincomycin, and cephalosporins.
to DJD in large dogs is hip dysplasia. Hip dysplasia is the result
Drug-related antibody complexes are deposited throughout the
of a shallow acetabulum that results in significant coxofemoral
body and cause the immune response. The clinical symptoms are
joint laxity and flattening of the femoral head, and is most often
 similar to IMPA but can also include hemorrhagic rashes and
attributed to developmental, environmental, and hereditary
acute vasculitis. Symptoms will typically present themselves
causes. The occurrence of DJD in cats is mostly associated with
10-21 days following the start of the medication. Treatment
 age and typically affects the front limbs.
consisting of general supportive care and discontinuation of
 The clinical symptoms of DJD (primary or secondary) of dogs
implicated medication most often yields a quick resolution;
and cats are progressive. Early symptoms encompass reluctance
however, some patients will require some immunosuppression
 to perform normal activity, lameness/stiff gait after activity or
medications.
 periods of rest, and during cold or damp weather As the damage
For patients with drug-induced IMPA, a list of medications to
  s      
 avoid can be given to the client and will be helpful in preventing
abnormal gait, vocalization, pain, decreased range of motion
relapse.
(ROM), crepitus, and change in personality.
Chapter 3  Musculoskeletal
77
The diagnostic used for DJD is typically radiographic but can
membranes and affects both dogs and cats. Both congenital and
be aided by palpation of the joints during a musculoskeletal
acquired forms exist. Acquired myasthenia gravis is the most
examination. Depending on the level of pain in the patient, seda-
 common form seen in small animals. It is a result of the produc-
s jo u ndnd  n an q  uo
 tion of antibodies against the AChRs that block neuromuscular
during the radiographic process. Images of joints will typically
transmission. The blockage can occur as a result of complement
 reveal evidence of bone remodeling and narrowing of the joint
or by accelerated normal destruction. Several disorders associ-
space. If arthrocentesis is performed, it will yield normal to
ated with myasthenia gravis are thymomas and paraneoplastic
increased amounts of fluid, often after periods of activity, and
disorders, drug-associated disorders (methimazole in cats),
Cytology will demonstrate a sterile synovitis.
third-degree heart block, hypothyroidism, and concurrent
The treatment of DJD requires significant client education as
immune-related problems (IMHA, IMPA, hypoadrenocorti-
the goal is aimed at the improvement of the quality of life.
 cism). For more information, please refer to Chapter 4.
Owners of young animals should be educated to know that some
Myasthenia gravis affects dogs and cats 2-3 years of age and
causes of DJD, such as obesity and excessive activity, can be
older than 8-9 years of age. Breed dispositions for myasthenia
prevented by proper nutrition and appropriate exercise and rest.
 gravis include German shepherds, Labrador retrievers, Akitas,
 In addition to medical therapy, many treatments that aid in the
terriers, and Abyssinian and Somali cats. The clinical signs are
reduction of pain caused by DJD/OA and the subsequent
skeletal muscle weakness, exercise intolerance, worsening of
improvement of the quality of life occur in the home. They
symptoms with exercise and improvement with rest, regurgita-
include weight reduction, physical therapy, and controlled or
 tion of food, dysphagia, and dyspnea associated most often with
limited exercise.
aspiration pneumonia.
 There are several medical therapies available for the improve-
There are focal, generalized, and acute fulminant generalized
ment of the quality of life for animals with DJD. The most
forms of myasthenia gravis. Focal myasthenia is associated most
common is the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medica-
 often with the cranial nerves, and symptoms include change in
fions such as deracoxib, meloxicam, carprofen, and frocoxib.
 voice, regurgitation, dysphagia, and facial, pharyngeal, laryngeal,
The side effects of NSAIDs include impaired renal/liver function
 and esophageal dysfunction. Generalized myasthenia is a chronic
as well as GI upset and may not be appropriate for all patients.
 disease and, most often, patients present with dyspnea as a result
Glycosaminoglycans such as Adequan? and Hyalovet? are intra-
 of aspiration pneumonia that occurs with megaesophagus.
articular and intramuscular injections of compounds derived
 Approximately 80-90% of generalized myasthenia patients have
from bovine cartilage that have been shown to reduce the degen-
 megaesophagus.35 Dogs with generalized myasthenia gravis may
erative changes that are seen with DJD. Glucosamine and chon-
also present with symptoms consistent with laryngeal paralysis.
droitin are supplements used for their possible effect on cartilage
Acute fulminant generalized myasthenia gravis is severe. Patients
 metabolism and breakdown and typically have a cumulative
willtypically present in a nonambulatory fashion with tetrapare-
effect. The most common veterinary supplements of glucosamine
sis and dyspnea. This form is fatal as respiratory arrest occurs as
and chondroitin are Cosequin? and Dasuquin'. Because of their
a result of poorly functioning intercostal muscles and aspiration
cumulative effect, several weeks of treatment are required before
pneumonia.
 improvement may be noted. A multifocal medical approach is
 Routine serum biochemistry panels are often normal; CBCs
often the most successful.
 can be normal or may show evidence of infection with leukocy-
 There are surgical treatment options for some forms of DJD.
tosis; and thyroxin levels are often low as a result of concurrent
 The most common is for arthritis associated with hip dysplasia
hypothyroidism or euthyroid sick syndrome. Thoracic radio-
and includes total hip replacement or femoral head osteotomy.
Other joints may be most benefited by arthrodesis.
astinal masses, or other evidence of metastasis.
Stem cell therapy, also called autologous adipose-derived mes-
There are several specifc tests available to help diagnose
enchymal stem cell (AD-MSC) therapy, is an emerging field of
myasthenia gravis. An AChR autoantibody test is commonly
treatment for some types of DJD/OA. A surgical harvest of
performed. This test detects specific antibodies against the
adipose tissue from the patient is performed. This sample is
AChRs. False negatives can occur in approximately 2% of
submitted to the laboratory, which forms a pellet of regenerative
 patients with generalized myasthenia gravis? and is thought to
cells including fibroblasts, parricides, endothelial cells, and AD-
be a result of low numbers of circulating acetylcholine antibodies
 MSCs. The pellet is then administered as an intra-articular injec-
 in the serum. False-positive results with this test are rare. It is
fion. Clinical studies34 have shown significant improvement in
important to note that AChR antibody testing should be per-
the coxofemoral and elbow joints in dogs with DJD/OA.
formed prior to the use of corticosteroids, which may lower
antibody concentrations.? Another useful test is the edropho-
nium (Tensilon") response test. Edrophonium is an indirect
Neuromuscular diseases
acting cholinergic/anticholinesterase drug that, when adminis-
tered intravenously (dog: 0.1-0.2 mg/kg, cat: 0.25-0.5 mg/kg),
Myasthenia gravis
can cause a myasthenic patient to have short-lived markedly
Myasthenia gravis is a neuromuscular transmission disease
increased muscle strength. Edrophonium overdose or use in
caused by a reduction in the numbers of AChRs on muscle cell
 nonmyasthenic animals will cause hypersalivation, vomiting,
78
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
and diarrhea and can be treated with 0.02-0.04mg/kg of
Tensilon testing and muscle biopsy showing a decreased number
 atropine. Pretreatment with atropine is recommended in cats as
of AChRs. The breeds associated with this disease include Jack
Russell and fox terriers, English springer spaniels, miniature
similar test can be performed with neostigmine (20 μg/kg IV or
dachshunds, Siamese cats, and domestic shorthair cats. Clinical
symptoms are typically noted at a very young age and do not
with this test. Electromyelograms can also detect delayed neu-
typically include megaesophagus. The treatment is similar to
romuscular transmission and can aid in the diagnosis of myasthe-
acquired myasthenia gravis; however, it is generally unsuccessful
nia gravis. Histopathologic evaluation of muscle biopsies can
and most perish within the frst year of life.4
 show decreased numbers of AChRs. A presumptive diagnosis of
p e hu a po aq uo s 
Inflammatory myopathies
 response to repetitive stimuli under anesthesia.
The treatment for myasthenia is medical and supportive.
Muscle disease caused by inflammation can occur in dogs and
 Medical treatments include anticholinesterase agents that
cats and are either immune related (idiopathic), or associated
 prolong the activity of acetylcholine and increase the reaction at
with other diseases such as parasite, viral, protozoal, and fungal
the neuromuscular junction. Pyridostigmine bromide (Mesti-
infections (secondary). Clinical symptoms of inflammatory
non°) at 1-3 mg/kg orally every 8-12 h is the maintenance treat-
myopathies are associated with the muscle groups affected and
ment of choice. It can be given as a constant rate infusion at
can often be systemic.
 0.01-0.03 mg/kg/h. Injectable neostigmine at 0.04mg/kg given
IM every 6h can be used if megaesophagus prevents the use of
Masticatory muscle myositis
 oral medications. Oral neostigmine bromide can be given at a
dose of 2 mg/kg/day In addition to anticholinesterase drugs, the
MMM is a canine idiopathic inflammatory myopathy that affects
avoidance of medications that reduce neuromuscular transmis-
the masticatory muscles, specifically the 2M myosin fbers
sion (magnesium, phenothiazine, aminoglycosides, ampicillin,
located only in the masticatory muscles (digastricus, temporalis,
and antiarrhythmic drugs) is highly recommended. Constant
masseter, and pterygoid). MMM mostly affects large breed dogs
monitoring of clinical symptoms and the response to treatment
(German shepherds, Labrador retrievers, Doberman pinschers,
is indicated as a spontaneous remission is possible. Adverse side
golden retrievers) with a median age of 3 years*; however, any
effects of anticholinesterase treatment  include bradycardia,
breed can be susceptible.
hypotension, heart block, diarrhea, vomiting, increased GI activ-
The clinical symptoms associated with MMM include acute
ity and GI rupture. The use of corticosteroids may also be helpful
or chronic bilateral hypertrophy of the temporal and masseter
in long-term, mild cases but is not recommended until a positive
muscles. This can progress to atrophy and fbrosis of these
response to anticholinesterase treatment is seen. This is due to
muscles. Fever jaw pain, and trismus (inability to open the jaw
the initial weakness and immunosuppression that can be seen
normally) with the associated signs of dysphagia and hypersali-
with myasthenia gravis. Treatment should also include the
vation are also common. Ocular muscles may be involved in
removal or treatment of concurrent thymoma or neoplastic syn-
approximately 44% of the cases.4 As a result, exophthalmos and
 dromes that may be causing myasthenic symptoms.
conjunctivitis may be noted and blindness, as a result of optic
The supportive treatment for myasthenia gravis can be exten-
nerve compression, can occur. Poor body condition scores as a
sive due to the common fnding of megaesophagus and concur-
result of inadequate nutrition from dysphagia may be noted.
rent aspiration pneumonia. Supportive care for myasthenics with
Routine blood work is typically nonspecific; however, common
 megaesophagus includes specifc feeding instructions and can
findings include evidence of inflammation on CBC and elevated
require significant time to perfect as the specifics can vary from
creatine kinase (CK) on serum biochemical analysis. CK is a
patient to patient. Upright, gravity feeding is the most common.
 muscle enzyme involved in energy storage and increases are seen
 Patients are fed varying consistencies of food from gruel to meat-
with muscle necrosis as a result of inflammation. CK results on
balls in an upright position and are then held upright for 5-10 min
serum biochemical analysis can be affected by poor blood col-
following feeding to ensure gravity has pulled the food from the
lection and hyperbilirubinemia, so high quality blood collection
nonfunctioning esophagus into the stomach. Gastrostomy tubes
is imperative. CK levels may be decreased in late/chronic disease
 can help with feedings; however, they do not prevent the possibil-
states. Urinalysis results may reveal proteinuria. Testing for tick-
ity of aspiration pneumonia. Extensive supportive care for
borne diseases may be indicated to rule out secondary causes for
patients with aspiration pneumonia is required, with fluid
inflammatory myopathy. Imaging results can aid in diagnosis as
therapy, antibiotics, and oxygen supplementation often needed.
well. If CK results are low, MRI may be helpful by showing
 Nutritional support with partial parenteral and total parenteral
inflammatory lesions in the masticatory muscles and may help
   s  i   n
by revealing the optimum locations for muscle biopsy. Thoracic
 amount of education should be made so the owners may be able
radiographs may show mediastinal masses (thymoma) or other
to tell the difference between regurgitation and vomiting, as well
tumor metastases associated with paraneoplastic issues that may
 as the symptoms for aspiration pneumonia.
be related to secondary causes for MMM.
The congenital form is a defect in the number of AChRs and
Diagnostic procedures include electromyography (EMG),
no production of AChR antibodies. It is typically diagnosed by
where abnormal spontaneous activity can be found in the acute
Chapter 3  Musculoskeletal
61
stages of MMM, and decreased activity is noted in later stages.
includes EMG and muscle biopsy. Muscle biopsy will show
However, EMG fndings may be nonspecific as it is unable to
 inflammation with evidence of necrosis and/or regeneration.
 Treatment of polymyositis is immunosuppression, supportive
Jo sisd noe sisu an u mdi aq  s
 and nutritional care, and monitoring for complications such as
the 2M fbers. Biopsy may also help with prognosis as it can give
 aspiration pneumonia.
an indication as to the duration and severity of the illness. Higher
 For patients with megaesophagus, at-home care can be diffi-
levels of fbrosis are associated with a poorer prognosis and
 cult, and experimentation with food consistencies can be helpful
increased loss of function of the masticatory muscles. The gold
 in determining what works best for each patient. Meatballs or
standard for the diagnosis of MMM is a 2M antibody test. This
 small boluses of food will do better for some, while gruel will do
test measures the presence of antibodies against the 2M fibers in 
 better for others. Gravity is the key in aiding digestion as the
the serum. It is 100% specifc and 85-95% sensitive. It is impor-
esophagus lacks the contractility to move food into the stomach.
tant to note that the results can be affected by corticosteroid
 Feeding and watering from an elevated position, as well as allow.
treatment for 7-10 days prior to collection.4
 ing the animal to remain elevated for 10-15min following
The treatment for idiopathic MMM involves immunosuppres-
feeding, will allow the food to pass from the esophagus into the
sion, most often with corticosteroid administration. The dose is
stomach. Larger dogs may be fed with their front end on the
tapered over a 4- to 6-month period based on clinical symptoms
 stairs or a counter, while smaller- to medium-sized dogs can be
and CK levels. It is important to educate clients on the clinical
 held or may use a Bailey chair. Bailey chairs may be constructed
symptoms so that close home monitoring is accurate. Multidrug
 or purchased and can help decrease the stress and time it takes
immunosuppressive therapy is needed in more severe cases or
 to feed a patient with megaesophagus. See Figure 4.4 (Chapter
in patients that cannot tolerate long-term prednisone. Nutri-
4, "Neurology").
tional interventions may also be needed as many cases have
Clients should also be instructed to monitor closely for evi-
significant jaw pain and/or lock jaw, preventing them from
dence of aspiration pneumonia, which is a common complica-
tion in patients with megaesophagus. If food or vomitus is
 nais ue pue ud ssat  sud au papau a
regurgitated and aspirated, the patient may exhibit cough, rattles,
eating with gruel consistency food in the early stages of treat-
or difficulty in breathing and may require medical intervention.
 ment. Once a response to immunosuppression is seen, most
patients can slowly transition back to their normal consistency
Hepatozoonosis
 of food. In severe cases where symptoms are slow to resolve,
esophageal or gastrostomy feeding tubes may be needed. Since
Hepatozoonosis is a protozoal vector-borne disease that prima-
 many patients do not have a full range of jaw motion, close
rily affects dogs. Hepatozoon americanum infection is associated
 monitoring for vomiting and aspiration pneumonia should be
with muscle and bone infection. Cats are susceptible; however,
performed Physical therapy can also hasten some recovery.
 it is rare, has different clinical symptoms, and is typically associ-
Toys, massage, and ROM exercise, patient willing, have been
 ated with other hepatozoonosis species. Following ingestion,
shown to help; however, no forcible retraction of the jaw should
sporozoites travel through the gut to the striated muscle, the
be attempted.
skeletal muscle, muscle fbers, and the cardiac muscle. Once
it has reached the target organs, it forms an “onion skin" cyst.
The cysts will rupture at various times, creating inflammation
Polymyositis
and creating a pyogranuloma at the site of the cyst. The pyo-
sn e Ado Ao idoi u si ssoi
granulomas that form in muscle tissue surrounding long bones
similar to MMM. Unlike MMM, there are no circulating 2M
 can cause periostial pain and proliferation. Information on
hepatozoonosis, diagnosis, and treatment can also be found in
local disease. It can have clinical findings similar to MMM with
Chapter 11.
lock jaw, temporalis muscle wasting, as well as ocular signs
Hepatozoonosis cases are most often seen in the warmer
noted. Polymyositis is also associated with lupus patients.
 months when exposure to ticks is highest; however, symptoms
Most often, large breed dogs are affected, and there is no 
 can be seen year round due to the waxing and waning nature of
known breed disposition in cats. The clinical symptoms include 
 this disease. The clinical symptoms are the result of the pyo-
fever, pain, cervical ventroflexion, dysphagia, change in voice,
 granulomatous inflammation and include fever, cachexia, muscle
 and muscle weakness, stiffness, and atrophy. Megaesophagus,
regurgitation, and aspiration pneumonia are also common find-
 and possible keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCs). Pain may be gen-
ings. Focal muscle groups can be affected, but most often, sys-
eralized or may be localized to joints, lumbar, and cervical
temic skeletal muscles are involved.
 regions. As a result, neck guarding and gait abnormalities may
As with most inflammatory myopathies, serum biochemical
be noted.
analysis often shows elevated CK values and CBC results will be
 Radiographs may show periosteal proliferation of the long
consistent with generalized inflammation. Infectious disease
bones, most commonly a result of inflammation in skeletal
 testing for secondary causes of inflammatory myopathy should
 muscle surrounding the diaphysis. This finding is most common
be performed as well. Diagnostic testing is similar to MMM and
80
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
also shown early bilateral bone lesions and may be helpful for
amputation is the standard surgical treatment. Most dogs will do
early H. americanum bone detection.
well with the absence of a limb; however, overweight dogs, dogs
with preexisting degenerative joints, or dogs with neurological
dlisease will often have a quick progression of postsurgical prob-
Neoplasia
lems. The amputation of a thoracic limb most often will include
Osteosarcoma
the scapula, and the pelvic limb amputations will involve cox-
ofemoral disarticulation for distal femoral lesions, and en bloc
 Osteosarcoma (OSA) is the most common primary bone tumor
acetabulectomy  or  subtotal  hemipelvectomy  for  proximal
 in dogs and causes bone lysis, bone production, or both. OSA
femoral lesions. Limb-sparing surgery with allograft or steel
accounts for 85% of skeletal malignancies.*" Breed dispositions
implants is a possible option for dogs with preexisting conditions
include rottweilers, St. Bernards, Great Danes, Doberman pin-
schers, German shepherds, and golden retrievers. It is relatively
 Good candidates for limb-sparing surgery include patients
uncommon in small breed dogs and more common in intact
whose lesions were detected early and those patients whose
animals. OSA affecting the appendicular skeleton is found in the
lesions are confined to the limb. Most often, this will be lesions
majority of patients accounting for up to 75% of OSA cases.89
of the distal radius/ulna and lesions where the majority (50%)
The primary location for the tumor is in the metaphyseal area
of the remaining bone is intact. Limb-sparing surgery does have
 ofthe long bones; however, it can also be found in the mandible/
a high rate of complications, including local infection, graft
maxillary, spine, cranium, ribs, and nasal passages. The front
infection and rejection, and recurrence of local disease. Postop-
limbs are most often affected at the distal radius and proximal
erative care for limb-sparing surgery includes exercise to mini-
humerus.9 OSA can also affect the spleen, liver, mammary
mize swelling ofthe distal limb and to prevent flexure contracture
tissue, testicles, and kidneys. It is uncommon for OSA to cross
of the digits.
joint spaces (joint spaces cause bone confinement); however,
Adequate pain control with epidurals, opioid injections, and
 metastasis will occur through soft tissue contact and the lungs
constant rate infusions are extremely important for postopera-
are the most frequent site of metastasis.
tive amputations. Most dogs will be able to ambulate without
The clinical symptoms of appendicular OSA are localized
assistance in 12-24h. The technician should assist and encour-
swelling, pain, and acute or chronic lameness. Axial skeletal
age movement during the recovery period. Extra care should be
symptoms vary and are dependent on the area affected. Local-
taken to prevent further injury to the other limbs. Detailed client
ized swelling is the most common general symptom of axial
education on home care should be performed including encour-
skeletal OSA. Maxillary and mandibular OSAs may cause dys-
agement to exercise with restrictions for confinement when not
phagia and pain upon opening/closing of the jaw. Facial, nasal,
monitored, avoidance of stairs, and leash walking only. Infection,
 or cranial OSA may cause exophthalmos, facial deformity, and
air embolism (as a result of minute amounts of air left inside
nasal and ocular discharge. Spinal OSA is associated with spinal
the body following closure of the incision), hemorrhage, and
pain and swelling, paraparesis, and ataxia. OSA of the ribs can
recurrence of disease at the surgery site are the most common
be seen and most often causes pain, occasionally resulting in
complications.
dyspnea.
Following surgery, chemotherapy may be used to control
CBCs may show evidence of inflammation and serum bio-
metastasis. The mean survival time for most OSA patients with
chemical analysis may have elevated alkaline phosphate results,
amputation and chemotherapy is 12 months. Technicians
but it is not uncommon for general blood work to be normal.
should be aware of specifc chemotherapy administration pro-
Radiographs of the affected area will often show lysis and other
tocols, side effects, handling guidelines, and elimination times.
osteogenic changes, periosteal proliferation around the lesion,
Technicians should educate clients on the side effects of the
and soft tissue swelling, and it is possible to see pathological
treatments and the care the patients will need at home. The most
fractures. A biopsy ofthe lesion is needed to differentiate between
commonly used chemotherapy agents for OSA are cisplatin,
OSA and other diseases or neoplastic processes.
carboplatin, and doxorubicin. Cisplatin is nephrotoxic and is
 Following the diagnosis of OSA, staging is required for ade-
 n n o e i si s  
quate prognosis due to its high rate of metastasis. Stage 1 com-
every 3 weeks. This medication is fatal in feline patients. Car-
prises local lesions with no metastasis; stage 2 is high grade
boplatin is less nephrotoxic than cisplatin; however, side effects
lesions with no metastasis, and stage 3 is OSA lesions with
include myelosupression and severe GI upset. Carboplatin is
metastasis. Staging typically includes fine needle aspirate and/or
typically given at a dose of 300 mg/m? intravenously every 3
biopsy of regional lymph nodes, three-view thoracic radio-
m e ia Ai  n-o p s u am
 graphs, abdominal ultrasound, and a thorough orthopedic
in feline patients. Doxorubicin is an anthtracycline chemother-
examination for pain and other possible sites of OSA. Bone
apy agent with possible myocardial toxicity typically seen with
survey radiographs, computed tomography (CT), and MRI may
cumulative doses of >180 mg/m2. Myelosuppression, GI upset,
be helpful in determining the presence of early lung lesions or
hypersensitivity/allergic reaction during administration, neph-
other soft tissue involvement.
 rotoxicity (in cats), and perivascular damage with extravasation
The treatment of canine OSA is focused on pain control and
can also be seen. The dose is typically 30 mg/m? intravenously
the extension of a good quality of life. With appendicular OSA,
every 3 weeks in patients weighing more than 10kg, and
Chapter 3  Musculoskeletal
81
n  ss im sd  ai 
RSA can also be found in the bladder and may cause hematuria,
 Radiation therapy may also be used for palliative purposes and
 dysuria, and stranguria.
 The diagnosis of RSA is made from biopsy, and the biopsy
is not an option or is refused. The side effects of radiation
 procedure is based on location. A fine needle aspirate may be
therapy are most often a moist desquamation, alopecia, depig-
attempted but may not be diagnostic due to poor cell exfoliation
mentation, and pathological fracture. See the section on radia-
with RSA. Other diagnostics such as CT and radiographs of the
tion therapy in this chapter for more information.
 site may be needed to prepare for surgical biopsy and/or removal.
 As previously stated, control of pain is an integral part in the
Staging of RSA, as with most neoplasia, is recommended and
 treatment of OSA. Pain can be relieved by amputation; however,
 should include routine serum biochemical analysis and thoracic
patients not undergoing surgery or patients with advanced
radiographs.
disease require signifcant analgesia. A multidrug approach is
The treatment of choice for RSA is surgical resection; however,
commonly used with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medica-
 recurrence is common at the surgery site. Wide surgical margins
tions and opiates such as tramadol, gabapentin, and amantadine.
(3 cm is typical) are recommended to ensure adequate margins
Glucocorticoids can also be used to decrease inflammation and
 are obtained. The resection of any tissues adhered to the tumor,
are often helpful in patients with pulmonary metastasis, but
 including bone, is recommended. Postsurgical chemotherapy for
cannot be used concurrently with NSAIDs. Analgesia should be
sarcoma can be administered; however, sarcomas have a poor
started immediately following the diagnosis of OSA. A better
response to chemotherapy. Radiation therapy can also be used;
quality of life can be maintained with preventative or proactive
 however, poor response has been noted with larger-sized tumors.
 pain control.
Most often, the vincristine, adriamycin/doxorubicin, and cyclo-
 OSA is an aggressive tumor where metastasis is likely and, as
 phosphamide (VAC) protocol is used for the treatment of sarco-
 noted earlier, is most often pulmonary related. If only amputa-
 mas. Vincristine (0.5-0.7 mg/m2 IV) is an antitubulin agent and
tion is performed, 90% of dogs will die of metastatic disease
 its side effects are myelosupression, perivascular damage with
within 1 year of diagnosis, and most within 3-4 months. Man-
 extravasation, peripheral neuropathy, and GI upset; in cats, con-
dibular OSA, however, does have a higher survival rate with just
 stipation can also be seen. Cyclophosphamide is typically bone
mandibulectomy. Feline OSA is rare but can occur, most often
 marrow toxic and can cause GI upset. A sterile hemorrhagic
in the pelvic limbs. Unlike canine OSA, amputation may be
cystitis may occur as a side effect of the inflammatory effects of
curative in cats.
the metabolites of the drug on the lining of the bladder. For this
reason, it is advised to encourage water intake, to provide ready
access to water, and to encourage frequent urination in patients
Chondrosarcoma
on this medication. The dose for cyclophosphamide varies, and
 it comes in oral and intravenous formulations.
Chondrosarcoma (CSA) is the second most common primary
bone tumor in dogs. Golden retrievers are most likely to be
afflicted by CSA. CSA will most often occur in the flat bones
Other neoplasia
(including the nasal cavity and ribs) but will occasionally occur
 Fibrosarcoma (FSA) of the bone in dogs has no specifc chemo-
 in the long bones. CSA can also be found in soft tissue including
therapy or radiation protocols. The recommendation for bone
mammary tissue, heart valves, aorta, larynx, trachea, lung, and
 FSA is surgical resection. FSA carries a poor prognosis. Metas-
 omentum. Unlike OSA, CSA is slow to metastasize and progno-
 tasis is common with FSA and commonly affects the heart, peri-
sis is based on the location of the tumor The treatment for CSA
 cardium, skin, and other bones before spreading to lung tissue.
is surgical resection of the area, if possible, which can be cura-
Hemangiosarcoma (HSA) can also rarely occur as a bone
tive. No known chemotherapeutic treatments for CSA exist. The
tumor. It carries a similar presentation to most bone neoplasia
clinical symptoms of CSA comprise pain and localized swelling.
 and will appear as lysis on radiographs. HSA of the bone carries
A diagnosis is based on histopathologic findings.
a poor prognosis with <10% surviving 1 year? after surgical
resection and VAC protocol.
Rhabdomyosarcoma
 Rhabdomyosarcoma (RSA) is a malignant tumor of striated
SECTION 4 GENERAL
muscle cells (soft tissue sarcoma) that occurs in young dogs and
MUSCULOSKELETAL
has been reported in dogs as young as 4 months." RSA is rela-
EXAMINATION
tively uncommon and carries a moderate risk for metastasis.
Common areas of metastasis are the lungs, liver, spleen, kidney.
and adrenal glands. RSA can appear as soft or firm, slow growing.
A thorough musculoskeletal examination performed by the
locally invasive, and nonpainful tumors. Rapid increases in size
 technician can provide the clinician additional information that
may help localize potential musculoskeletal disease and aid in
Symptoms can vary with location, and intra-abdominal RSA can
the creation of a diagnostic plan. The most important part of any
cause vomiting, diarrhea, melena, weight loss, and anorexia.
examination includes a complete history including signalment,
82
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
current medications, preexisting conditions, as well as the
extension and applying gentle pressure during joint movement
current complaint or presenting problems. When performing a
can help assess for effusion or swelling. Care should be taken to
musculoskeletal examination, which can be lengthy, it is impor-
avoid hyperextension or overflexing of the joint, specifically in
tant to take a systematic approach. Maintaining a consistent
cases where joint disease is expected as this can cause further
systematic approach for each patient will ensure that little to no
injury and pain to the patient. In some patients, it may be helpful
 information is missed during a musculoskeletal examination.
to have them held in lateral recumbency during this portion of
The beginning of a thorough muscular examination should
the examination. The spine should also be included in this evalu-
begin with gross observation of the patient, starting in the front
ation. Palpation of the spine should include musculature as well
(facing the patient), continuing to the rear, moving to the right
as the spinus processes. Firm pressure should be placed on each
and lef flanks, and continuing down the limbs, including the
 spinus process and the surrounding muscle while noting the
 joints and toes. During the entire examination, it is important 
patient's reaction, specifically looking for tensing, splinting, or
to take note of any swelling, muscle atrophy, or asymmetry in
movement away from the area of palpation, indicating an area
the body, as these are often indications of disease or injury.
 of potential disease or injury.
Gross observation at the front of the patient should involve
Assessment of the patient's gait should be performed by
noting the head position, any displacement of the ears, tilting of
watching as the patient is walked and trotted. Observation from
the head left or right, or any severe angling above or below the
the front, sides, and rear of the patient during movement should
shoulders. When observing the placement of the head, also
be performed. During this portion of the examination, specifc
noting the patient's mental status can be helpful. Following the
symptoms to monitor for include bunny hopping, limping, lame-
length of the spine and moving toward the rear of the patient,
ness, stilted or stiff gait, decreased joint movement, abnormal
observe any obvious hunched posture or sagging of the spine.
movement of the limbs either away or into the body, as well as
From the rear, evaluate the patient's distribution of weight
any inability to lift a limb from the floor, or dragging of the toes.
between the limbs or any obvious lameness. A limb with atrophy
 Assessment of gait is diffcult in feline patients but can be per-
or injury can cause an uneven distribution of weight and can
 "u xa pso e api  au q p
help localize a potential area of injury or disease. Moving to the
feline patients that are reluctant to move even in an enclosed
right and lef flanks of the animal, observe the length of all four
room, patient history and the clients' observations about their
limbs and lift the paws and evaluate each one. Patients with some
behavior at home is key.
musculoskeletal disease can drag the limbs, leaving scuffed or
Specific palpation of the pelvic joints looking for Ortolani's
broken nails, as well as minor abrasions.
sign, in addition to diagnostic radiographic procedures, can help
Following general gross observation, the next portion of the
diagnose hip dysplasia. To perform this palpation, the animal
musculoskeletal examination should involve palpation of mus-
should be placed in lateral recumbency. With the animal in
culature and bone. As with any assessment with the potential for
lateral recumbency, the stifle is held and the hip is flexed and
extended several times with a hand, stethoscope, or ear placed
the start of the examination. Begin the palpation with the
over the coxofemoral joint during evaluation to check for crepi-
muscles of the head and jaw; move down the spine all the way
tus. While the joint is adducted, pressure is applied to the proxi-
to the sacrum. Then, palpate down each limb; gentle pressure
mal area of the joint. In a patient with hip dysplasia, subluxations
should be placed with the tips of the fingers noting atrophy,
will occur during the adduction, and the proximal pressure
asymmetry, or swelling. For finding asymmetry, it is helpful to
applied during abduction of the stifle will create a thudding
palpate the left and right portions of the body at the same time.
noise. This noise is Ortolani's sign indicating likely hip dysplasia.
Atrophy can be an indicator of poor usage due to chronic injury
Barden's technique is a specifc subluxation of the coxofemoral
or disease (e.g., MMM). Swelling or heat can be an indication of
joint in puppies to evaluate them for potential hip dysplasia. This
acute muscle injury or tearing. During palpation, masses or areas
is a painful procedure and should be performed under anesthe-
 of abnormal tissue may also be noted and mapped. Bone and
isdsp d ron uaa go ad s sag us no ei
muscle palpation can be performed simultaneously using a
is subjective and inconsistent, it is not often performed; a defini-
 similar technique. Gentle pressure with the thumb or the fnger-
tive diagnosis is made radiographically.
tips should be used to palpate the bones of each limb, noting any
areas of pain, swelling, or abnormal bony protrusions. It is
important to avoid palpation of obvious fractures or areas of
SECTION 5 MUSCULOSKELETAL
significant pain without proper restraint and/or analgesia for the
patient.
THERAPY
Evaluation of the joints should include flexion and extension
to find any areas of crepitus, joint effusion, or heat/inflammation.
Veterinary rehabilitation therapy
Mobility of the joint should be assessed as any decrease in
flexion/extension can indicate disease or injury. Similarly, an
Veterinary rehabilitation therapy (also called veterinary physical.
      o    
therapy) is the use of noninvasive therapies for the rehabilitation
disease (e.g. RA). When assessing the joint, placing a thumb or
of animals following physical trauma, surgery, or prolonged
fngertip on the area of the joint that will open with flexion/
illness. Animal rehabilitation therapy employs many different
Chapter 3  Musculoskeletal
83
 modalities, both manual and mechanical, to produce the desired
tion. This localized vasoconstriction slows bleeding and decreases
effect. The goal of therapy is to reduce pain, to enhance recovery
the accumulation of edema that is caused by lymphatic and
following surgery or injury, and to maintain function and mobil.
 venous drainage into the injured area. The application of cold
    s  s    
therapy also aids in slowing the inflammatory process by slowing
plished through strength building exercises, proprioceptive
local metabolism and decreasing enzyme activity, thereby affect-
retraining, therapeutic stretches, joint mobilization, and control-
 ing the inflammatory process at the celular level. Cryotherapy
led physical exercise. Conditions frequently benefiting from
decreases muscular activity and slows nerve conduction, which
rehabilitation techniques include musculoskeletal imbalances,
in turn reduces muscle spasms and decreases pain (by numbing
tendon and ligament injuries and contractures, chronic inflam-
the area). Following cryotherapy, the body will rebound with
 matory disease, and degenerative conditions producing pain.
vasodilation, causing a flush of nutrients to the affected tissues.
Utilizing various modalities, rehabilitation therapists can
Cold or cryotherapy is especially useful during the first phase
increase circulation, reduce swelling and edema, promote tissue
 of the inflammatory process referred to as the acute stage, typi-
healing with reduced scarring and adhesions, as well as reduce
cally defined as the first 24-72h after injury, when other treat-
pain. Physical rehabilitation therapies can be utilized in both the
 ments would be contraindicated. Cryotherapy can also be used
acute and the chronic stages of healing, with attention to the
 as an adjunct therapy during chronic phases of inflammation
appropriate treatment being utilized at the optimal time. Con-
such as in patients with OA.
 traindications for veterinary rehabilitation include animals suf-
 Cryotherapy is achieved by the use of cold packs, cold wraps,
fering from elevated temperatures (febrile), systemic disease,
cold whirlpools, or by ice massage. Cold packs can be as simple
 gross fracture, infected or bleeding wounds, tumors not deter-
as a ziplock bag filled with ice and water. Cold packs should
mined to be benign, or recent surgical incisions. Each therapeu-
 never be applied directly to the skin and never on wet hair;
tic regimen is specifically designed by the referring veterinarian
 always use a protective cloth to prevent frostbite. Commercial
flexible ice packs are preferred as they can be easily molded to
The traditional approach to pain management has been
 the area receiving treatment. To make your own flexible ice pack,
through the use of pharmaceuticals even though veterinary
 mix one part isopropyl alcohol to three parts water; place in a
physiotherapy has long been recognized for its focus on pain
 ziplock freezer bag; remove most of the air, and seal. Double bag
reduction. More recently, the use of rehabilitation therapy
the ice pack in case of leakage and place it in the freezer. If the
modalities for the treatment of acute and chronic pain has
 pack is not slushy enough, add more water; if it is too solid, add
increasingly been utilized. The complimentary use of rehabilita-
 more alcohol. The addition of food coloring or dye can help to
tion therapy modalities with the concurrent use of medication
distinguish the ice pack in the freezer. If ice packs are reused,
 has highlighted the synergistic effects of both.
always disinfect the outer surface between uses. Ice packs should
There are many different physical rehabilitation modalities.
be used for no longer than 8-10 min at a time. The use of alarm
These include manual therapies and those provided by means of
timers and continuous local tissue monitoring is strongly recom-
mechanical equipment. Manual therapies are generally identi-
mended. Cryotherapy may be repeated every 2-3h until the
fed as those provided directly by the therapist via the use of the
 desired effect is reached or as directed by the veterinarian or
hands. Examples of manual therapies are application of heat and/
rehabilitation specialist.?
 or cold therapy, joint mobilization and stretching, therapeutic
 Ice massage is frequently utilized by human physical thera-
 ROM exercises, massage, and hydrotherapy. Machine directed
pists to reduce pain in a localized area. This method also has
therapies include therapeutic ultrasound, neuromuscular elec-
 applications in veterinary medicine. If prescribed, one method
trical stimulation, transcutaneous electrical neuromuscular
of ice massage is to freeze a small amount of water in a small
stimulation (TENS), and low level laser therapy. Orthotics and
 paper or Styrofoam cup. Once it is frozen, peel off the sides of
the cup to expose a small amount of ice all around and use the
This chapter will discuss some of these modalities while encour-
 remaining portion of the cup to hold the ice. Place the ice directly
aging the interested reader to continue their education in physi-
onto the area to be treated; keep the ice constantly moving in
circular motions to ice massage the area. Do not hold the ice in
veterinary technicians are available. Technicians interested in
 one area for any longer than 1 min to avoid causing frostbite. The
 pursuing certifcation should seek an accredited program recog-
total time for ice massage should not exceed 10 min.
nized by the American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA)
 Cryotherapy is contraindicated in areas of reduced circulation
and the state of intended practice.'
as further vasoconstriction can lead to tissue hypoxemia,
damage, and necrosis. It should also be used judiciously in
patients with subnormal temperatures to avoid exacerbating pre-
Cryotherapy and thermotherapy
existing hypothermia. Close monitoring of nonambulatory
Cryotherapy
patients is indicated since they lack the ability to move away
from the cold source; ice packs should not be left with unat-
Cryotherapy involves the utilization of various forms of cold to
tended patients. Patients with peripheral neuropathies should
slow or reduce the inflammatory process, absorb heat, reduce
be treated as nonambulatory patients and should be closely
muscle spasm, decrease pain, and induce localized vasoconstric-
monitored.
84
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Thermotherapy
or to overflex the joint. This is important to help maintain or
improve the motion of the joints, maintain or strengthen the
 Thermotherapy is the utilization of superficial heat therapy. Heat
muscles, improve circulation, and reduce pain after an injury or
therapy is generally utilized during the second phase (subacute
illness. Measuring the ROM of a joint helps to understand how
stage) of the inflammatory process, typically defined as after the
much joint mobility is present and to monitor the response to
first 72h following injury, overuse, or surgery. Heat therapy can
therapy. Flexing and extending the joint helps maintain the
also be used in chronic conditions and as an aid to warming
nutrition and health of the joint tissues through the movement
muscles before the prescribed exercise.
of joint fluid throughout the joint capsule.
The physiological effects of thermotherapy include increased
During ROM exercises, the therapist should be in a comfort-
extensibility of connective tissue, decreased joint stiffness,
able position and should use proper body mechanics to avoid
increased cellular metabolism, reduced muscle spasm, analgesia,
personal injury as well as to provide effective treatment to the
 and increased lymphatic and venous drainage. Thermotherapy
patient. The patient should be placed in lateral recumbency with
 causes an increase in local metabolism and the vasodilation pro-
the affected limb up. The joints proximal and distal to the affected
vides enhanced circulation to the tissue; both of these mecha-
joint should be supported to avoid excessive stress and pressure
 nisms aid in the healing process.
on adjacent structures. ROM exercises should only be performed
p ap d pou jo an a Aq pae si a ie
by skilled therapists certified in exercise therapy.
moist), infrared heat lamps, and hydrotherapy. Dry hot packs
The process begins by slowly and gently flexing the joint. Be
include rice bags, hot water bottles, fluid bags, therapeutic clay
careful to avoid any painful areas, such as incisions or wounds.
 packs, and heating pads. Moist hot packs include warm wash
The other joints of the limb should be maintained in a neutral
cloths and moist heating pads. Infrared heat lamps, more com-
position (relaxed, not flexed or extended). Slowly continue to
monly used with exotic companion animals, can also provide an
flex the joint until the patient shows any initial signs of discom-
external heat source, although this type of warming provides
fort, such as tensing of the limb, moving, vocalizing, turning
heat to a much broader area. Regardless of the heat source,
toward the therapist, or trying to get away. During ROM exer-
extreme care needs to be used to avoid thermal injury to the
cises, avoid any undue discomfort or pain in the patient. Con-
 patient. Hot packs should never be applied directly to the skin;
tinue these techniques for 15-20 repetitions, two to four times
always use a protective cloth to prevent burns. Heat, as a therapy.
daily until the ROM returns to normal. Continually monitor the
dliffers from rewarming techniques typically used in veterinary
patient for discomfort throughout the exercise period and alter
medicine. The temperature should be very warm to the touch
the technique accordingly. It is very important during ROM
but never hot. The length of time for thermotherapy is quite
therapy to maintain the normal ROM in the other joints of the
yariable, depending on the injury or condition. Thermotherapy
affected limb by exercising the entire limb. Once normal, the
is often applied for short periods of time (15-20 min) prior to
frequency and duration of physical therapy exercises can be
joint mobilization therapy. The use of alarm timers is strongly
gradually decreased.
recommended. Heat therapy may be repeated as directed, typi-
cally every 6-8h. For chronic conditions, where heating of the
Passive range of motion (PROM)
deep layers of the muscles is desired, therapy can be of longer
 In PROM exercises, the therapist provides the guiding force to
duration (hours).
produce joint movement. PROM can be used to evaluate as well
 The contraindications for thermotherapy are similar to those
as to improve the available range of extension and flexion avail-
of cryotherapy and include close monitoring of nonambulatory
able at a specific joint. The exercises are performed without
patients since they lack the ability to move away from the heat
muscle contraction by the patient.
source. Patients with peripheral neuropathies should be treated
Passive flexion and extension can be performed in conjunc-
 as nonambulatory patients and should be closely monitored. It
tion with each other to improve the joint's ROM. PROM exercise
should also be used judiciously in patients with above-normal
 temperatures to avoid exacerbating preexisting hyperthermia.
goals are to maintain and improve joint function while not
exceeding ROM limits, thereby causing pain or injury to the
Additionally, since heat is a vasodilator, thermotherapy should
 patient. The tissues that limit PROM exercises may be normal or
be used with caution in areas of bruising, infection, thrombosis,
diseased and may include the joint capsule, the soft tissue sur-
or other vascular diseases.
rounding the joint, muscles, ligaments, tendons, fasciae, and
skin.
Joint mobilization, stretching.
Surgical incisions may result in adhesions and fibrosis between
and therapeutic exercise
skin, subcutaneous tissues, fasciae, muscles, or bone, limiting the
Range of motion
ability of tissues to glide over one another. Muscle, tendon, and
ligament tisue may also be relatively shortened as a result of
 In ROM, the exercises or movements can be divided into three
spasm or contracture. Any restriction of these tissues may result
auu pasissn-an (o) uoo fo sut aissd snae
in resistance to movement and pain.
of motion (AAROM), or active range of motion (AROM).
PROM is appropriate for many different patients, such as
 ROM means the movement of a joint through its entire range,
those who are unable to move a joint on their own or if active
from fully flexed to fully extended, with care not to hyperextend
motion across a joint may be injurious to the patient. PROM is
Chapter 3  Musculoskeletal
85
used sometimes in anxious patients to relax them. Common 
 many other activities that can be employed, depending on the
 indications for PROM exercises are, immediately following
 patient's condition and restrictions. Each of these activities pos-
surgery, before weight-bearing exercises, to aid in the prevention
 sesses different advantages and disadvantages; therefore, it is
of ligament and tendon contracture and soft tissue adaptive
 advisable to consult a certified veterinary rehabilitation therapist
shortening, to reduce pain, to enhance blood and lymphatic flow,
 to design an appropriate regimen. It is important to determine
to maintain muscular fexibility, and to improve synovial fluid
the patient's needs and what benefits could be expected from a
production and diffusion.
 particular exercise.
 PROM can also be used in the prevention of joint contracture
As the patient's joint flexion and extension improves, it is
 during healing and recovery in paralyzed or recumbent patients.
important to continue the PROM exercises and to add muscle
These exercises can be performed many times a day depending
stretching exercises to achieve the most complete ROM possible.
on the severity of the disease under the supervision of the vet-
 Emphasis should be placed on encouraging the patient to regain
erinarian. Despite aggressive efforts, the patient may not regain
 complete use of the limb.
normal functional neuromuscular control and the joint can still
Greater strength is necessary during some ROM exercises, so
undergo some degree of contracture.
it is important to transition between AAROM and AROM.
PROM exercises are limited in that they will not prevent
AROM exercises may be the prelude to other strengthening
atrophy of the muscles, increase strength, improve endurance,
activities. Also, owners may be taught to perform exercises at
or be as effective in improving vascular and lymphatic flow as
home to augment their pet's rapid recovery.
will more active therapeutic techniques eliciting active muscle
Active-assisted range of motion
contraction. For this reason, it is typically not the sole modality
 used in a physical therapy program.
During AAROM exercises, the patient is assisted by the therapist
Proper technique in PROM is important. The treatment
to achieve a normal ROM when the prime muscle mover is weak
 should be administered to the patient in a quiet, comfortable,
or injured. The physical therapist guides the joint movement,
and relaxed atmosphere away from all distractions, such as loud
and some degree of the patient's muscle activity assists with the
noises, other pets, or people not participating directly in the
joint motion. In the animal patient, the amount of muscle activ-
therapy. It is especially important to be gentle, not creating any
ity provided by the patient is difficult to control. This makes it
pain or discomfort. If the patient is painful before treatment, is
difficult to avoid muscle activation in patients that are not para-
resistant to treatment, or is overly anxious, a muzzle or other
lyzed; therefore, most of the ROM exercises involve some degree
 restraint tool should be used for initial treatment. As the patient
of AAROM.
starts to relax, the muzzle or other restraint tool can be removed.
 AAROM exercises are most useful in those patients that are
The concurrent use of pain medication administered prior to
weak or those recovering from lower motor neuron conditions.
therapy can reduce pain and anxiety in the patient, although the
The assisted range of motion is usually performed in lateral
use of pain medication may mask the response to treatment and
s e sn d aq  ssiaxa no 
increase the risk of injury.
where the therapist assists limb movement and joint ROM
during ambulation. Another form of AAROM exercises can be
Active range of motion
There are two types of AROM—active-assisted (therapist assists
ability to ambulate. The water buoyancy helps support the weight
the movement) ROM and active (patient performs the pre-
 of the patient while the therapist concentrates on assisting the
scribed movement without assistance) ROM. Both AROM and
limb through the normal ROM.
AAROM can be used simultaneously to produce the desired
AAROM can also be used to combat the negative effects of
result.
 immobilization on the limbs. Any degree of active muscle con-
AROM is defined as the ability of a patient to voluntarily move 
 traction will aid in strengthening the musculoskeletal system. In
a limb through a ROM. AROM exercises may be initiated to
addition, AAROM can facilitate neuromuscular reeducation,
   n    
 proprioceptive retraining, and postural realignment.
ROM than the PROM exercises could achieve.
Precautions and contraindications
AROM exercises are achieved by active muscle contraction.
Coordination between muscle groups is necessary in AROM
Any form of ROM is contraindicated when the motion may
because the therapist no longer assists the patient to perform the
result in further injury or instability, such as unstable fractures
 exercise. AROM exercises may be performed during a regular
near joints, unstable ligaments, or tendon injuries.
gait cycle, such as walking or trotting. Since normal joint ROM
It is important that communication lines between the veteri-
is somewhat limited during exercises such as walking or trotting.
 narian and the therapist remain open to ensure that the appro-
 s       
 priate ROM exercises are performed and the limits of the patient
encourage a more complete ROM. Special conditions designed
are not exceeded.
to increase joint flexibility and to more completely elicit full
 In most cases, PROM done early in the disease or injury
ROM include swimming, climbing the stairs, treadmill use,
 process will have beneficial effects, as long as the therapist stays
crawling through tunnels, negotiating cavalletti rails, and
within a reasonable ROM for the patient and for the condition
walking in water, tall grass, snow, or sand. Be creative, there are
 being treated. The therapist should only perform the appropriate
86
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
exercises at a reasonable speed that is not painful or detrimental
capable of effectively exercising in water without the undue
to the patient.
stress to their musculoskeletal systems they might experience on
land. These benefits are directly associated with the physical
Massage therapy
 properties of water as described below.
The most common forms of hydrotherapy in physical reha-
 Therapeutic massage is the manual manipulation of muscle and
bilitation are the use of pools and underwater treadmills. The
connective tissues. The physiological effects of therapeutic
advantage of the underwater treadmill is that it provides a stable
massage include improved circulation, enhanced tissue healing.
surface allowing the patient to walk comfortably while being
pain relief, reduced swelling and edema, reduced muscle spasms,
partially supported by the water. This circumvents the panic
realignment of muscle fbers, improved ROM, reduced adhe-
     s   
 sions, lengthening of contracted tissue, drainage of lymph
touch the bottom of a traditional swimming pool. Underwater
tissues, and relief of anxiety and stress. Massage therapy has been
treadmills also provide a more controlled environment for a
shown to increase the endogenous production of chemical com-
specific rehabilitation program. The speed, resistance, and water
pounds such as endorphins that help to decrease pain. Condi-
depth are all controlled, which allows for individualization of the
tions that most frequently benefit from veterinary massage
rehabilitation program. To illustrate, filling the treadmill up to
include chronic inflammatory conditions, ligament and muscle
the height of the shoulders effectively diminishes the patient's
injuries, postsurgical and recovering trauma patients, patients
weight by 38%, providing maximum joint support while still
recovering from orthopedic surgery, and long-term medical
encouraging weight-bearing exercise. In contrast, swimming in
conditions.
deeper water allows the animal to use several muscles simultane-
ously with increased stretch of the muscle fiber but without
used in therapeutic massage. Each stroke has its own specifc
bearing weight. Underwater treadmills provide low impact car-
application and benefit. Techniques can be applied with varying
diovascular exercise that is well suited to older arthritic dogs.
amounts of firmness and for varied durations. Instruction on the
This modality is often utilized in programs designed for weight
proper application of strokes, the direction, the indications, and
loss and cardiovascular ftness.
the contraindications is essential. Veterinary massage therapy
Rehabilitative swim therapy should only be performed when
strokes are adapted from Swedish massage techniques developed
the rehabilitation therapist is in the pool with the patient. This
for use by human massage therapists. Traditional strokes used
allows the therapist to control intensity and effectiveness of exer-
 to treat animal patients include effleurage (gliding), petrissage
cise. Pool therapy is typically used later in the rehabilitation
(kneading), pin and stretch, lymphatic draining, wringing, cross-
fber friction, tapotement (percussive), coupage (cupping), skin
approach to rehabilitation will decrease the possibility of other
rolling, deep tissue and myofascial release. Massage therapists
injuries and facilitate a slow increase in the patient's exercise
endurance level.
cises, muscle strengthening, as well as cranial sacral techniques,
laser, cold and thermal therapies.
Principles and properties of water
 Contraindications of therapeutic massage are similar to physi-
To understand the benefits of hydrotherapy, a basic understand.
cal rehabilitation therapies and include elevated temperature,
ing of the principles and properties of water is needed. Hydro-
active infection, systemic disease, fractures, active bleeding, or
therapy makes use of the properties of water—thermal
patients on medications that would prematurely be released into
conductivity, relative density and buoyancy, hydrostatic pres-
the system through increased circulation.
sure, viscosity and cohesion, turbulence, resistance, and surface
Veterinary massage therapy should only be undertaken by a
tension. These properties act together to help strengthen the
 person trained in both veterinary medicine and massage therapy.
animal, to improve cardiovascular ftness, and to increase blood
flow, which aids in the healing process. Each of the properties
Hydrotherapy
has its own advantages.
Hydrotherapy, also known as aquatic therapy, is defined as the
Thermal
therapeutic treatment of disease or injury with the use of water,
 as in baths, pools, and underwater treadmills. Hydrotherapy can
The thermal properties of water allow it to conduct heat eff-
 be used to improve cardiovascular conditioning, to support
ciently. Heated water allows for superficial warming of the
postsurgical rehabilitation, to provide superficial massage
involved limbs, which in turn will increase circulation and help
therapy, and can also be used as part of a program for wellness,
to decrease pain and to relax the muscles (especially the skeletal
weight loss, conditioning, and for recreation.
muscles) in order to increase flexibility.
The principal benefit of hydrotherapy is the minimization of
Buoyancy
 gravitational forces on the joints during exercise, thereby reduc-
ing pain and accelerating the healing process. Consequently,
When a body is immersed in water, it is subjected to two forces-
water exercises can be initiated earlier in the rehabilitative
 gravity and buoyancy. Buoyancy is defined as the upward thrust
process with little or no risk of reinjury.? Older animals are
of water acting on a body that creates an apparent decrease in
Chapter 3  Musculoskeletal
87
the weight of a body while immersed.? Buoyancy counteracts the 
 nificant factor when a limb breaks the surface of the water.
force of gravity subjected on the pet's body as it is submerged in
Therapeutically, if a patient is extremely weak, movements may
the water. Buoyancy, by minimizing the amount of weight the
 be performed more easily in the water just beneath the surface
patient bears on its muscles and joints, decreases pain and allows
 rather than at or on the surface.
for modifed ambulation (or swimming). For neurological
Therapeutic benefits
       
body regain its vertical position, thereby allowing the patient to
There are numerous benefits to the use of aquatic therapy. Exer-
exercise in an upright position.
cising in water is effective for improving strength, muscular
endurance, ROM, agility, and psychological well-being, all while
Hydrostatic pressure
minimizing pain. Other benefts for aquatic therapy include
increased circulation to muscles, increased joint fexibility,
While the patient is submersed, pressure is exerted by the water
 improved cardiorespiratory endurance, and decreased stress on
on the body; this is called hydrostatic pressure. Hydrostatic pres-
healing tissue.
sure is defined as the pressure exerted by a fluid at equilibrium
at a given point within the fuid due to the force of gravity.?
The type of aquatic therapy will depend on the specific reha-
Hydrostatic pressure provides constant pressure to a limb or
bilitation needs of the individual.
body immersed in water Lung volumes are also affected by these
Conditions benefiting from hydrotherapy/aquatic
pressures; as a result, patients with respiratory compromise or
therapy
disease must be monitored closely.
Hydrostatic pressure is directly proportional to the depth of
 There are many diferent conditions that benefit from aquatic
therapy. Specifc conditions include postoperative fractures, cru-
tendency of blood and/or edema to pool in the dependent por-
ciate stabilization, neurological conditions, tendinitis, condi-
tions of the body and therefore aids in the reduction of fluid
tioning, and other disorders in which a patient is reluctant to use
accumulation. This reduction in edema is helped by a general
 extremities or there is a lack of strength, ROM, proprioceptive
increase in circulation as a result of the prescribed exercises and
 awareness, or weight-bearing ability.
may decrease pain during exercise. Hydrostatic pressure may
Contraindications and precautions
also decrease muscular pain, particularly muscle spasms, by
inhibiting sensory receptors through sustained pressure. This,
Some patients have a fear of water or are reluctant to swim. This
in turn, acts to decrease an animal's pain perception, thereby
is important to consider before prescribing any of these aquatic
allowing the patient to comfortably complete the prescribed
         s
exercise.
injury to himself/herself or the therapist. The patient should be
du si l ixue ue na oi adeie on imos pano
Cohesion and viscosity
 tive that the patient be monitored throughout therapy and never
left unattended while in the water.
Viscosity is a measure of the frictional resistance caused by cohe-
Postoperative patients may need to wait until incisions or
sive or attractive forces between the molecules of a liquid. The
 wounds are completely healed before starting therapy to mini-
viscosity (or resistance to fluid flow) is greater in water than in
 mize the risk of infection. There may be instances where therapy
air, making it harder to move through the water. The water pro-
 needs to commence prior to the removal of sutures or wound
vides increased resistance to help strengthen muscles and to
closure. Water therapies in this case will be under the direct
supervision of the veterinarian. Special consideration will need
therapy for additional reasons: It may increase sensory aware-
 to be given in protecting the surgery or trauma site.
ness in animals with poor balance, assist in the stabilization of
It is also important to consider the patient's overall health and
joints, and help prevent falling by increasing the time span for
medical history. The cardiovascular health and fitness level of the
 di ose a a i ps  ia  sdn
 patient must be considered The patient may be unable to swim
reduce anxiety in the patient.
 more than a few minutes before becoming fatigued. Swimming
Turbulence
 ai d      e s s d a
 patient's strength, ROM, and overall cardiovascular function. As
When a body moves through water, turbulence is created,
the patient responds, the length of the sessions or the resistance
causing even greater resistance. Most therapy pools and under-
may be increased to make the therapy more beneficial to that
water treadmills are equipped with a water jet system. This pro-
patient.
vides a variable velocity of water, which allows the therapist to
increase or decrease resistance based on the patient's needs and
Conclusion
the rehabilitation program. The turbulence also provides super-
ficial massage to the submerged area.
Veterinary rehabilitation therapies complement traditional vet-
Surface tension is the force of attraction between surface mol-
erinary treatments in various ways and are becoming increas-
ecules of a fluid. Surface tension is not a factor if the moving
 ingly accepted. Rehabilitative techniques can aid in the reduction
 e s h e     p 
 of pain, help to restore function, accelerate the healing process,
88
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
and retain movement, thereby increasing the quality of life of
surgery is usually not feasible. Radiation treatment for this
 our patients. This text is provided as an introduction and only
 tumor can be either palliative or definitive based on the aggres-
specifcally trained veterinary personnel should perform reha-
siveness of the tumor.
bilitation therapy.
Rare bone tumors
 Palliative radiation therapy
Hemangiosarcoma (HSA) is a rare bone tumor. Less than 5% of
bone tumor cases are HSAs.'2 Due to the high metastatic rate of
Radiation therapy involves the use of high energy beams of
has, the patient should be fully staged prior to treatment or
radiation to destroy cells by damaging their DNA. The total dose
therapy (e.g., thoracic radiographs, abdominal ultrasound). Fib-
of radiation is usually fractionated, meaning that the total dose
rosarcomas (FSAs) are another rare bone tumor that account for
is given over a number of treatments. Fractionated dosing is
less than 5% of cases.2 This tumor also can have a high rate of
metastasis, so staging is recommended. Multilobular osteochon-
can tolerate high doses of radiation. Cancer cells do not typically
drosarcoma is another uncommon tumor. These tumors are
repair as quickly as normal cells. The dose of radiation (meas-
usually found in the skull and are locally aggressive tumors that
ured in gray [Gyl) used to treat a tumor depends on the type of
 can recur following surgical excision and have the potential to
tumor being treated and the goals of the treatment.
metastasize.'2 It is difficult to define a treatment course with the
tumors mentioned above since they are rare and the prognosis
Goals of radiation therapy
is not known. FSAs and multilobular osteochondrosarcoma
radiation therapy can either be paliative or definitive depending
Radiation is used for definitive, adjuvant, or palliative therapy.
on how aggressive the tumor is and how aggressive an owner
The goals of treatment depend on the type of tumor, the tumor
wants to be.
location, and the overall health of the patient.
 Definitive therapy involves treating patients daily for 3-4
Feline bone tumors
weeks. They receive a small dose of radiation, typically 2-4Gy,
 Bone tumors in cats are rare. OSAs are the most common type.
for each treatment. The goal of this treatment is to deliver the
These can occur in the appendicular or axial skeleton. FSA is the
highest dose of radiation to the tumor while minimizing damage
second most common bone tumor, while CSAs and HSAs are
to surrounding tissues.
-n a so as u uu a  a'a aia
Adjuvant therapy is when radiation is used in combination
ment course depends on how aggressive the owner wants to be.
with other modalities such as chemotherapy or surgery.
With palliative radiation therapy, the goal of treatment is to
try to alleviate pain or to relieve symptoms caused by the tumor
Radiation side effects
while limiting the side effects caused by the radiation. Pain relief
Side effects from radiation are dependent on the dose a patient
 is achieved by reducing tumor size or by killing other cells such
receives and the location treated. With palliative treatment, even
 as cytokines and inflammatory cells.12 This typically involves
though the dosage increases with each treatment, the overall
between one and six treatments. Palliative therapy can be used
dose is far less than a definitive protocol. The goal of palliative
to treat a variety of tumors.
radiation therapy is to minimize radiation side effects while
Concerns that a client may have can affect which protocol is
    s  s n
chosen. These concerns can be due to financial constraint, worries
these patients have a guarded prognosis and the expectant life
over anesthetic complications, or fear of potential side effects
span is typically 6 months or less. The main focus for these
oa n   p pos d si s
Bone tumors
life. There are a variety of different medications that can be used
to help control pain, and client communication is essential in
Osteosarcoma (OSA)
fnding the right drug or combination of drugs. It is also impor-
The most common bone tumor in dogs is OSA. About 75% of
tant for clients to be aware that often the entire course of the
OSAs occur in the appendicular skeleton. Axial tumors have
 radiation treatments will need to be completed before a favorable
been reported in the mandible, maxilla, spine, cranium, ribs,
 response may be seen.
nasal cavity or sinuses, and pelvis.12 Typically with OSA, radia-
 Patients receiving definitive therapy typically get treated 5
tion is performed in a palliative setting. When treating these
 days a week for approximately 1 month. The location of the
sop jo  iao ud iuu on jud si h sud
 radiation and the dose will determine the type of side effects a
exhibit significant pain relief from the radiation treatment. '?
patient will develop. If the skin is involved in treatment, then
radiation dermatitis will occur, as well as side effects including
Chondrosarcoma (CSA)
severe erythema, moist desquamation, and ulceration. These
CSA is the second most common bone tumor in dogs. This
side effects can cause significant pain (Figure 3.5.1).
tumor can occur in the nasal cavity, ribs, long bones, pelvis,
 f footpads are treated, the pads typically slough, making it
vertebrae, facial bones, digits, os penis, and extraskeletal sites.12
very painful to walk Antibiotics, pain medications, ointments
 The nasal cavity is the most common location, and therefore
(silver sulfadiazine), and glucocorticoids can be used to mediate
Chapter 3 Musculoskeletal
89
Side effects in cats are typically much less severe than those
in dogs. Skin can get dry, flaky and itchy, so it is important to
prevent patients from licking or scratching. An Elizabethan
collar or a loose-fitting baby T-shirt may be helpful.
While these side effects can be painful, they usually persist for
and to monitor the comfort level throughout the treatment pro-
tocol. While radiation therapy personnel see these types of side
effects often, pet owners generally have no experience with radi-
ation and its effects, so client communication about potential
side effects and what to monitor for is extremely important. It is
also important to note that patients are different in terms of how
they will respond and how much supportive care they may need.
Veterinary technicians need to be strong advocates for their
patients to ensure their treatment is as comfortable as possible.
Figure 3.5.1 Dermatitis of the hind leg following radiation therapy.
SECTION 6 MUSCULOSKELETAL
NUTRITION
Chemical energy is stored in the high energy phosphate bonds
found in ATP; this provides the sole source of energy for muscle
contraction. ATP is also vital for relaxation and maintenance of
the ion gradients found in the muscles. Approximately one-third
of the basal energy requirements for dogs and cats are used to
membranes.
 There are both anaerobic and aerobic pathways for energy
production in muscles. Which pathway is utilized is dependent
on the duration and intensity of the activity and on the condition
and nutritional status of the animal.' For short bursts of activity
of low intensity exercise, glucose is the preferred energy source.
 Glucose can be stored endogenously as muscle glycogen, exog-
enously as hepatic glycogen, and very small amounts as free
glucose in the bloodstream. For high-intensity or long-duration
Figure 3.5.2  Oral mucositis on the tongue following radiation
 asu  a d a a s a 
therapy.
stored in the adipose tissues and within the muscle cells. Amino
acids are not used as a primary energy source for exercise. When
these side effects. It is important to monitor the patient's comfort
protein is used for energy, it is produced primary from the
level and to emphasize to owners that their pet must not be
branched-chain amino acids-—leucine, isoleucine, and valine.
allowed to traumatize their radiation site. An Elizabethan collar
The primary use of protein in the diet is structural and func-
is recommended when the patient is not being directly
tional, with the amount being required dependent on the fre-
supervised.
quency and duration of exercise.'
With radiation of the nasal cavity, the mouth and eyes are
The intensity and duration of exercise dictates which meta-
often involved, resulting in moderate to severe mucositis and
bolic pathway is used and which substrates are utilized. When
ulceration. Side effects will occur in any part of the oral cavity
the anaerobic pathway is utilized, lactic acid is one of the major
that is treated. Monitoring patients for discomfort and decreased
 by-products. This is a strong acid within the body and is oxidized
appetite is extremely important. Again, antibiotics, pain medica-
 for energy by the muscle or converted back to glucose through
fions, and glucocorticoids can be used. Oral anesthetic rinses
the Cori cycle. The aerobic pathway produces primarily carbon
that contain lidocaine can be prescribed if the oral cavity is
dioxide (CO) and water. Carbon dioxide acts as a weak acid and
affected (Figure 3.5.2).
d ss    s s s ss
If an eye is treated, it is important to keep it well lubricated
If the animal is engaging in a high intensity exercise, anaerobic
using topical antibiotics and lubricating ointments. It is also
 metabolic pathways will be providing the majority of the energy
important to prevent patients from rubbing or scratching at their
used for muscle activity. With endurance exercise, aerobic path-
face; therefore, the use of an Elizabethan collar is recommended.
ways are used, with glucose and glycogen being the primary
90
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 3.6.1
asiaxa buunp sainos Aaua jo uosjedwo
Nutrient
Sprint
Intermediate
 Intermediate
Endurance
Low frequency/
High frequency and 
moderate duration
duration
Water
Unlimited
Unlimited
Unlimited
Unlimited
Energy density
3.5-4.0kcal ME/g DM
4.0-5.0 kcal ME/g DM
4.5-5.5 kcal ME/g DM
>6.0 kcal ME/g DM
Fat
20-24% ME
30-55% ME
45-65% ME
>75% ME
Unsaturated
>60%
>60%
Carbohydrate (digestible)
50-60% NFE
20-50% NFE
15-30% NFE
<10% NFE
 Protein
20-25%
20-25%
18-25%
18-22%
Digestibility
>80%
>80%
>80%
>80%
Source: Toll Pw, Gillette RL, Hand MS. Feeding working and sporting dogs. In: Smalf Animal Cinical Nutrtion, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Thatcher, RL
Remillard, P Roudebush, BJ Nototny, pp. 326-345. Topeka, KS: Mark Morris Institute; 2010.
ME, metabolizable energy; DM, dry matter; NFE, nitrogen-free extract.
 energy sources. For intermediate exercise, a combination of both
On a dry matter (DM) basis, approximately 2% of the diet
pathways can be utilized' (Table 3.6.1).
should be composed of the essential fatty acids. The remainder 
can be composed of either plant or animal fats, in either satu-
Nutrients
rated or unsaturated forms. High levels of unsaturated fatty acids
S       
Water
 i r s a n o s 
should be 20-24% of the metabolizable energy (ME).
Water is undeniably the most important nutrient in the body
Working or sporting dogs should not be fed high fat
even though it contributes no calories, vitamins, or minerals to
meals immediately before or during intense exercise as diges-
the animal. It is the primary solvent found in the body, as well 
tion and assimilation of fats is slower than either proteins
as the primary transport medium used in the intracellular, trans-
or carbohydrates diverting blood from the muscles to the
cellular, and extracellular spaces. Hydration status is the single
intestines.
most important determinant in exercise endurance.
Animals should have access to clean, fresh water at all times
Carbohydrates
during exercise. This is even more important when ambient
temperatures are elevated, as dogs use respiration as their
Dogs and cats have no dietary requirements for carbohydrates if
primary means of cooling.
enough gluconeogenic precursors are available. The exceptions
Energy is produced through the metabolism of fats, proteins,
to this would be during gestation and neonatal development.
and digestible carbohydrates. These nutrients alone provide the
 Even though there is no requirement for carbohydrates per se,
 calories to run the machine.
dogs and cats are still able to digest and utilize carbohydrates,
a   r s  d pe s dn 
tion. Dogs are indeed much more efficient at this than are cats,
Fats
but cats, too, can use carbohydrates for energy.
Increasing the fat content of a diet is the only practical means of
The rate of glycogen use and energy production is dependent
increasing the caloric density of a diet. Fats provide 8.5 kcal/g,
on the concentration of glycogen found in the muscle. Increased
while carbohydrates and proteins provide only 3.5kcal/g.
levels of muscle glycogen can be achieved through a combina-
Increasing the fat content of a diet also tends to enhance the
tion of dietary adjustments and training. Glycogen loading is
probably not as beneficial for canine endurance athletes as would
a greater amount of the desired food.'
feeding a higher fat food on a regular basis. Athletes who require
 Dogs rely more heavily on free fatty acids for energy genera-
 n   s    n  
tion at all levels of exercise intensities than do people. Because
from carbohydrate loading, but the benefits have not been con-
of this, dogs are able to tolerate much higher levels of dietary fat
clusively established.
if the increase is introduced gradually and an adequate intake of
Carbohydrates are found in many forms, ranging from highly
nonfat nutrients is maintained.
digestible to nondigestible for dogs and cats. Increasing the
Chapter 3  Musculoskeletal
91
digestibility of the carbohydrates in the diet can help to decrease
Antioxidants
fecal water loss, flatulence, and fecal bulk and weight in the
colon.'
With exercise, the innate antioxidant capabilities are often over-
Digestibility should be at least 85% as some fiber is required
whelmed, leading to increased oxidative stress. This oxidative
for normal colon function. For sprint athletes, carbohydrate
stress may contribute to and/or exacerbate a wide variety of
levels -50-70% ME are recommended. Intermediate athletes,
 degenerative diseases. The more ofen this occurs, the more
dependent on intensity and duration of exercise, can tolerate
significant the potential damage. Oxidative stress can be miti-
levels of 15-50% ME. Endurance athletes should receive no
 gated to a degree through training. By increasing endurance
more than 15% carbohydrates in their diets.'
through training, the cells become more eficient at energy uti-
lization, decreasing the production of oxidative by-products,
Protein
decreasing the need for endogenous antioxidants.
High levels of an individual antioxidant can be counterpro-
The primary use of proteins is for structural, biochemical, and
 ductive as well, as many antioxidants at high levels become pro-
energy requirements. Cats are more efficient at using protein for
 oxidants. Ensuring balanced levels of antioxidants is best, so that
they may act synergistically to the benefit of the athlete.
and cell repair, plus their energy requirements, thereby increas-
 ing their overall protein requirements.
Vitamin E
Working animals have increased protein requirements that
vary based on the frequency and duration of exercise. This is due
Vitamin E or the mixed tocopherols are the primary lipid-soluble
to increased synthesis of structural and functional proteins,
antioxidant found in plasma, tissues, and red blood cells. They
Aa u psn hq sud dsn pe azua ps
are also one of the most effective antioxidants for polyunsatu-
 production pathways, and increased blood volume.
rated fatty acid oxidation. The minimum level of vitamin E for
Amino acids may provide 5-15% of the energy used during
 performance is 500 IU/kg of DM in the food (not kilogram of
exercise; this is primary through the use of the branched-chain
body weight).
amino acids—leucine, isoleucine, and valine. Compared to
glucose and faty acids, branched-chain amino acids provide
Vitamin C
very litle fuel to the body. This comes at the expense of
functional tissue because if you are using amino acids for
Vitamin C is the most powerful reducing agent available to the
energy, you have less available for tissue repair, thereby sacrifc-
cell and is an important co-oxidant with vitamin E. Dogs and
ing your functional tissue to provide energy.' The disadvantage
cats are able to synthesize normal amounts of vitamin C required
 an i si  n sd u i s 1
for maintenance and are able to rapidly absorb supplemental
no protein stores in the body (all protein is functional),
vitamin C from the GI tract. Recommended levels are 150-
making protein an inefficient source of energy, unlike fats or
 250 IU/kg DM of food.
carbohydrates.
 All proteins found in the body, other than small amounts
Selenium
found in the amino acid pools in individual cells, are either
functional or structural. Increasing the protein in a diet is not
Selenium is found in the antioxidant glutathione peroxidase. It
an advantage to the animal either as any protein consumed in
is responsible for protecting tissues against oxidative stress by
Excess of that required is deaminated. This process produces
catalyzing the reduction of peroxides and organic hydroperox-
keto acids that are either oxidized for energy directly or con-
ides. This has a sparing effect on vitamin E. Recommended levels
verted to fatty acids and/or glucose and stored in the adipose
are 0.5-1.3 mg/kg DM in food.
expensive for the owner, and the added protein (above the
Energy and growth
required amounts) is unnecessary to the diet, being quickly
converted into fats or carbohydrates, providing no benefit to the
Excessive amounts of food (energy) intake and or calcium during
animal.
early growth contributes to the development of hip and elbow
 Proteins, like carbohydrates, also have varying degrees of di-
dysplasia as well as ostochondrosis.? In young growing animals,
gestibility, with muscle and organ meat having the highest
excess energy, either through feeding adlib and not controlling
digestibility and hair and connective tissue having the lowest
the energy provided or feeding energy dense foods, does not
digestibility. Feeding proteins of low digestibility not only slows
cause a substantial increase in fat deposits. Instead, excess food
down the process of the animal receiving the nutrients that they
energy causes an increased rate of growth. This rapid growth rate
require but aso increases the fecal bulk—providing unnecessary
 decreases the time period that animal has for growth, causing
additional fecal weight to the animal athlete.
 s    pd a  rim psn
It is recommended that protein digestibility should be at least
support system.2
80%. The only way to assess the digestibility ofa food is through
Skeletal problems are associated more with the increased body
the use of feeding trials.
weight rather than with the protein content found in the diets.
92
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 Dogs who received less food during growth, maintaining a body
the arthritic joints, helping to decrease inflammation and pro-
condition score only slightly lower than ideal, had a slower
viding additional cushioning to the joint.2
growth rate and a longer growing period but no substantial
While all causes of OA cannot be prevented, by keeping our
change in their overall adult size.? OA in multiple joints, such as
growing dogs leaner, we can signifcantly decrease the incidence
elbows, hips, and shoulders, is seen more frequently in over-
in older animals.
weight dogs as opposed to slim dogs. Remember, overweight is
In older animals, additional comfort can be found by decreas-
defined as only 15% over ideal, with obesity being 30% over the
ing their weight in order to decrease the load on the damaged
ideal weight.
joints. Also, maintaining consistent exercise will help to main-
tain mobility and muscle strength in the damaged area.
Calcium
Body condition scoring
During the active growth phase, calcium requirements are
dependent on the stage of growth (i.e., the age of the puppy) and
Body condition scoring (BCS) is a subjective assessment of an
the growth rate (i.e., expected adult size and weight). High levels
animal's body fat and to a lesser extent protein stores.' The
of calcium decrease osteoclastic activity. Osteoclasts are the cells
scoring system takes into account the animal's frame size inde-
that replace bone-removing old cells so that the osteoblasts can
pendent of its weight. In animals, the subcutaneous fat adheres
make new cells. Excessive calcium also disturbs the endochon-
more to muscle than to skin, making skinfold thickness a ques-
 dral ossifcation process (when the growth plate stops growing).
tionable means for determining body fat in cats and dogs.
Additionally, puppies younger than 6 months of age are unable
There are two main scoring systems: the fve-point scale and
to protect themselves from excess calcium intake as well as older
the nine-point scale. Both systems use defined criteria to help
animals. In older animals, GI absorption of calcium decreases as
make the subjective process of body evaluation more objective,
the dietary level increases.?
but all subjectivity cannot be removed when assigning a score to
 A chronically high calcium intake will cause chronic hyper-
an animal. For this reason, it is important that the same person
calcitoninism, preventing calcium release from the skeleton by
assign the score each time the animal is evaluated. The five-point
decreasing bone-resorbing osteoclastic activity.  Absorbed
scale scores the animals to the nearest half score, and the nine-
calcium levels in the diet are a better determinant for the occur-
point scale scores to the nearest whole score.
rence of skeletal abnormalities when compared with the calcium/
Studies have shown that body fat increases 5-7% for each
phosphorus ratio.2
whole increment increase using a nine-point scale with mid-
range-scoring animals (4/9-5/9) having 15-20% of their body
 ao u s s  o   gre se s
Osteoarthritis
the use of BCS scores would probably not be your best choice,
OA is the largest orthopedic problem found in companion
but for monitoring and routine care, it is quick, easy, and painless
animals and is the main orthopedic cause of euthanasia. The age
(Table 3.6.2).
 of occurrence is dependent on breed and adult size but can range
from 3.5 to 9.3 years. Overloading the joint(s), either through
Body condition score uses
obesity or overuse, is the primary cause for the development
of OA.?
A body condition score should be recorded with the weight each
fime an animal is examined. Body weight alone does not indicate
Chondroprotectants
how appropriate the weight is for the individual animal. The BCS
puts in perspective what an individual animal should weigh.
Chondroprotectants work primarily by enhancing the metabo-
lism of chondrocytes and synoviocytes, inhibiting degrading
enzymes and inflammatory mediators, as well as decreasing
Table 3.6.2  Excess weight estimate using a five-point scale
thrombi formation in local blood vessels.?
The protectants we see most commonly include glucosamine
Body condition score
Excess weight (%)
and chondroitin—both glycoaminoglycans, eicosapentaenoic
acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)—omega-3 fatty
3.0 (ideal body score)
acids, vitamin E, vitamin C, lutein and polyphenols-all antioxi-
3.5
10
- su rm xa is pd u p s
 inflammatory agents, as well as glucosamine and chrondroitin.?
4.0 (overweight)
20
Glucosamine and chrondroitin are both precursors to the glu-
4.5
30
 coaminoglycans (GAGs). GAGs are mucosaccharides consisting
5.0 (obese)
40
of long, unbranched chains of polysaccharides, composed of
repeating disaccharide units of hexoses (a type of sugar). GAGs
Source: German A, Martin L. Feline obesity: epidemiology, pathophysiology
stimulate synthesis of prostaglandins and collagen. By increasing
and management. In: Encyciopedia of Feline Clinical Nutrtion, eds. P Pibot, V
the amounts found in the body, increased levels can be found in
Biourge, D Elliott, p. 46. Aimargues, France: Aniwa SAS; 2008.
Chapter 3  Musculoskeletal
93
 In general, dogs and cats with an optimal body condition have 
Muscle condition scoring
 normal body contours and silhouettes,
Muscle condition scoring differs from BCS by looking at the
 bony prominences that are easily palpated but are not seen
muscle mass of the animal, not at the fat layer. This is helpful in
 or felt above the skin surface, and
 animals where significant muscle wasting has occurred but not
intra-abdominal fat that is insufficient to obscure or interfere
a loss of subcutaneous fat.
with abdominal palpation.
With acute metabolic challenges, the body's preferred fuel is
 protein, not fat, so muscle will be used preferentially over stored fat
Normal BCSs are 3/5 or 4-5/9, when scores are below 2/5 or 3/9
for energy. This could be seen in animals suffering from an acute
or above 4/5 or 7/9 than action should be taken to bring the
illness as seen with infectious diseases, a chronic illness such as
animal into a more normal BCS' (Table 3.6.3 and Figures 3.6.1
 cancer, or a muscle wasting disease such as Cushing's disease.4
and 3.6.2).
 Overcoat syndrome can be seen when the animal being exam-
 Just because an animal scores a 5/5 or a 9/9 does not mean
 ined has more fat than muscle, making a muscle condition score
that this is the maximum size or weight that this animal can
of 1 or 2 seem normal by providing artifcial bulk to the muscle
attain. In fact, animals can be scored as a 5/5+ or 9/9+ if morbid
where none actually exists. Upon palpation, some areas of the
obesity is present. There is no “maximum" amount of body fat
 body may feel normal, but on continued interrogation, marked
compatible with life.
 d     i o m 
 Using BCS is an effective means of monitoring an animal's
syndrome should be considered when the physical examination
condition as well as its weight and is something that can be easily
and the history do not correlate. Palpation will help to define if
learned by most pet owners and done at home. This should be
 overcoat syndrome is present.
instituted early on in the client/patient/veterinary team relation-
The primary areas to check for muscle condition would be the
ship so that we can prevent obesity and all of the associated
scapula, the occipital crest of the skull, and the wings of the
problems.
ilium56 (Table 3.6.4).
Table 3.6.3
3Five-point body condition score
BCS
What you see
What you feel
1/5 emaciated
Obvious ribs, pelvic bones, and spine; no body fat or muscle mass
Bones with little covering of muscle
2/5 thin
Ribs and pelvic bones, but less prominent; tips of spine, an
Ribs and other bones with no palpable
"hourglass" waist (looking from above), a tucked-up abdomen (looking
fat, but some muscle is present
from side)
3/5 moderate
Less prominent hourglass and abdominal tuck
 Ribs without excess fat covering
4/5 stout
General fleshy appearance, hourglass, and abdominal tuck hard to see
Ribs, with difficulty
5/5 obese
Sagging abdomen, large deposits of fat over chest, abdomen, and
Nothing, except general flesh 
pelvis
Source: Case L, Carey D, Hirakawa D, Daristotle L. 0besity. In: Canine and Feline Nutrition, 2nd edition, p. 315. St. Louis, M0: Mosby; 2000.
Table 3.6.4
Muscle condition scoring system
Score
 Con dition
Muscle mass
What you see
 Severe muscle wasting
Pronounced decreased muscle mass palpable
Bony prominences highly visible
over the scapula, skull, or wings of ilia 
from a distance
1
Moderate muscle
Clearly discernible decreased muscle mass
Bony prominences visible from a
wasting
palpable over the scapula, skull, or wings of ilia.
distance
 Mild muscle wasting
Slight but discernible decreased muscle mass
Bony prominences slightly visible
palpable over the scapula, skull, or wings of ilia.
from a distance
 Normal muscle mass
Normal amounts of muscle palpable over the
No visible bony prominences
scapula, skull, or wings of ilia.
when viewed from a distance
Sources: Buffington CA, Holloway C, Abood SA. Nutritional assessment. In Manual of Veterinary Dietetics, pp. 4-5. St. Louis, M0: Saunders; 2004b; and Michel 
KE, Sorenmo KU. Nutritional status of cats with cancer: nutritional evaluation and recommendations. In: Encyciopedia of Feline Clinical Nutrition, eds. P Pibot, V
Biourge, D Elliott, pp. 389-400. Aimargues, France: Aniwa SAs; 2008.
Nestle PURINA
BODY
COND1T10N
SYSTEM
Ribs visible on shorthaired cats; no palpable fat;
 severe abdominal tuck; lumbar vertebrae and wings
of ilia easily palpated.
NIHI
Ribs easily visible on shorthaired cats; lumbar vertebrae
obvious with minimal muscle mass; pronounced abdominal
tuck; no palpable fat.
 Ribs easily palpable with minimal fat covering; lumbar
vertebrae obvious; obvious waist behind ribs; minimal
abdominal fat.
Ribs palpable with minimal fat covering; noticeable
waist behind ribs; slight abdominal tuck; abdominal
fat pad absent.
4
Well-proportioned; observe waist behind ribs: ribs palpable
E
with slight fat covering: abdominal fat pad minimal.
D
Ribs palpable with slight excess fat covering; waist and 
abdominal fat pad distinguishable but not obvious;
abdominal tuck absent.
HEAV
 Ribs not easily palpated with moderate fat covering;
waist poorly discernible; obvious rounding of abdomen; 
moderate abdominal fat pad.
Ribs not palpable with excess fat covering: waist absent;
obvious rounding of abdomen with prominent abdominal
fat pad; fat deposits present over lumbar area.
Ribs not palpable under heavy fat cover; heavy fat
deposits over lumbar area, face and limbs; distention of
abdomen with no waist; extensive abdominal fat deposits.
Call 1-800-222-VETs (8387), weekdays, 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. CT
6.8
 Nestle PURINA
Figure 3.6.1  Nine-point feline body conditioning score card.
94
Nestle PURINA
BODY
COND1T10N
SYSTEM
Ribs, lumbar vertebrae, pelvic bones and all bony prominences 
evident from a distance. No discernible body fat. Obvious loss
of muscle mass.
Ribs, lumbar vertebrae and pelvic bones easily visible.
 No palpable fat. Some evidence of other bony prominence.
Minimal loss of muscle mass.
o
Ribs easily palpated and may be visible with no palpable fat.
 Tops of lumbar vertebrae visible. Pelvic bones becoming
 prominent. Obvious waist and abdominal tuck.
 Ribs easily palpable, with minimal fat covering. Waist easily
noted, viewed from above. Abdominal tuck evident.
AL
E
Ribs palpable without excess fat covering. Waist observed
behind ribs when viewed from above. Abdomen tucked up
when viewed from side.
Ribs palpable with slight excess fat covering. Waist is
discernible viewed from above but is not prominent.
Abdominal tuck apparent.
Ribs palpable with difficu lty; heavy fat cover. Noticeable fat
3
deposits over lumbar area and base of tail. waist absent or
barely visible. Abdominal tuck may be present.
工
Ribs not palpable under very heavy fat cover, or palpable
only with significant pressure. Heavy fat deposits over lumbar
area and base of tail. waist absent. No abdominal tuck.
Obvious abdominal distention may be present.
Massive fat deposits over thorax, spine and base of tail.
Waist and abdominal tuck absent. Fat deposits on neck
 and limbs. Obvious abdominal distention.
The BODY CONDITION SYSTEM
woas developed at the Nestle Purina Pet Care Center and has been
MawbyD.Bartges J,Moyers T,et.alCor
rison of body fat estimates by duol-energ
LaHlamr
eDP.Develo
f and Validatin ofα Body Condiion ScoreSysem for Dogs. Conne Pracice
St-0t22 266! 4sn6ngAnr
Keoly, et al. Efects of Diet Restricthion on Life Span and Age-Related Changes in Dogs. JAVMA 2002;
220:1315-1320
Call 1-800-222-vET5 (8387), weekdays, 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. CT
Nestle PURINA
Figure 3.6.2  Nine-point canine body conditioning score card.
 Source: Nestle Purina.
95
96
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
11.1
 Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Bibliography
(Diseases of the Dog and Cat),5th edition, Vol. 2, pp. 536-538.St.
Louis, MO: Saunders; 2000.
Section 1
12.
 Melmed C. Masticatory muscle myositis: pathogenesis, diagnosis,
and treatment. Compendium 2004;26:590-605.
Colville T. Clinical Anatomy and Physiology for Veterinary
13.
Medici E. American canine hepatozoonosis.
Compendium
Technicians, 2nd edition, Pp. 154-204. St. Louis, MO: Mosby;
2008;30(11):E1-E9.
2008.
2.Reece W.Functional Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals,
14.
Sessions J. Canine appendicular osteosarcoma: curative-intent
treatment. Compendium 2004;26(3):186-196.
4th edition, pp. 179-223. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2009.
Section 2
Section 4
Fossum TW. Small Anirmal Surgery, 3rd edition, pp. 1144-1146.
 1. Piermattei D. Handbook of Small Animal Orthopedics and Fracture
1.
St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2007.
Repair, 4th edition, pp. 3-15, 478-480. St. Louis, MO: Saunders;
Ettinger SJ. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 5th edition,
2006.
2.
Vols. 1-2, Ppp. 79, 1865, 1879. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2000.
2.
Bloomberg M. Canine Sports Medicine and Surgery, Pp. 20-27. St.
3.
Pratt PW. Laboratory Procedures for Veterinary Technicians,3rd
Louis, MO: Saunders; 1998.
edition, p. 580. Philadelphia, PA: Mosby; 1997.
3.
Wheeler S.Snall Animal Spinal Disorders,Diagnosis and Surgery,
Hendrix CM. Laboratory Procedures for Veterinary Techncians, 5th
Pp. 21-30. Edinburgh, NY: Elsevier; 1994.
edition, pp. 323-325. Philadelphia, PA: Mosby-Elsevier; 2007.
5.
Cowell RL. Diagnostic Cytology and Hematology of the Dog and
Section 5
Cat, 2nd edition, pp. 104-118. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 1999.
1. McGowan C, Goff L, Stubbs N (eds.). Animal Physiotherapy,
6.
McCurnin DM. Clinical Textbook for Veterinary Technicians, 6th
edition, p. 105. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier-Saunders; 2006.
Assessment, Treatment, and Rehabilitation ofAnimals. Oxford, UK:
Ettinger SJ. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 5th edition,
Blackwell Publishing; 2007.
7.
Vol. 1, pp. 685-686. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2000.
2.1
 Rivera PL. Canine rehabilitation therapies I and I. Proceedings of
Melmed C. Masticatory muscle myositis: Pathogenesis, diagnosis,
the 79th Annual Western Veterinary Conference,February 18-22,
8.j
2007, Las Vegas, NV; p. 11.
and treatment. Compendium 2004;26(8):590-605.
3.
Webster's Dictionary, 2nd edition, p. 1074; 1982.
Hellyer P, Rodan I, Brunt J, et al. AAHA/AAFP pain management
Section 3
guidelines for dogs and cats. Journal American Animal Hospital
1.
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine
2007;43:235-248.
(Diseases of the Dog and Cat), 5th edition, Vol. 2, pp. 1867-1886.
5.
Millis DL, Levine D, Taylor RA. Canine Rehabilitation and Physical
St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2000.
Therapy. St. Louis, MO: Saunders/Elsevier; 2004.
2.0
 Clements D. Type I immune mediated polyarthritis in dogs—39
6.
Williams J (ed.). The Complete Textbook of Animal Health and
cases. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
Welfare. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier/Sanders; 2009.
2004;224(8):1323-1327.
7.
Jack CM, Watson PM. Veterinary Technician Daily Reference
3. Black LL. Effect of intra-articular inj. of autologous adipose-derived
Guide, Canine and Feline, 2nd edition. Ames, IA: Blackwell
mesenchymal stem and regenerative cells on clinical signs of OA of
Publishing; 2008.
the elbow joint in dogs. Veterinary Therapeutics 2008;9(3):192-200.
8.
Kahn CM (ed.). Ihe Merck/Merial Manual for Pet Health, Hore
4.
 Black LL. Effect of adipose-derived mesenchymal stem and regen-
Edition. New Jersey, NJ: Merck and Company; 2007.
erative cells on lameness in dogs with chronic OA of the cox-
9.
Cote E (ed.). Clinical Veterinary Advisor—Dogs and Cats.
ofemoral joints: a randomized, double-blinded, multicenter
St. Louis, MO: Mosby/Elsevier; 2007.
controlled trial. Veterinary Therapeutics 2007;8(4):272-284.
10.
Gaynor JS, Muir WW. Handbook of Veterinary Pain Management,
5.1
 Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine
2nd edition, Chapter 27, pp. 513-515. St. Louis, MO: Mosby
(Diseases of the Dog and Cat), 5th edition, Vol. 2, pp. 675-676.
Elsevier; 2009.
St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2000.
11.
Bassert JM, McCurnin DM. MeCurnin's Clinical Textbook for the
6.
Shelton D. Myasthenia gravis and disorders of neuromuscular
Veterinary Technician, 7th edition, pp. 791-802. St. Louis, MO:
transmission. The Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small
Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
Animal Practice 2002;32(1):189-206.
12.
Withrow SJ, Vail DM. Small Animal Clinical Oncology, 4th edition,
7.
Podell M. Inflammatory myopathies. The Veterinary Clinics of
St Louis MO, Saunders Elsevier, 2007.
North America. Small Animal Practice 2002;32(1):147-167.
'8
Green CE. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, pPp.
Section 6
195-197, 203-216, 232-241, 417-435, 705-711.St.Louis, MO:
Saunders; 2006.
1.
Toll PW, Gillette RL, Hand MS. Feeding working and sporting
9.1
 Potter T. Hepatozoon americanum: an emerging disease in the
dogs. In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS
south-central/southeastern United States. Journal of Veterinary
Hand, CD Ihatcher, RL Remillard, P Roudebush, BJ Nototny,
Emergency and Critical Care 2010;20(1):70-76.
Pp. 326-345. Topeka, KS: Mark Morris Institute; 2010.
Withrow S. Small Animal Clinical Oncology, 3rd edition, pp. 283-
2.
 Hazewinkel H, Mott J. Main nutritional imbalances implicated
289, 378-386. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2001.
in osteoarticular diseases. In: Encyclopedia of Canine Clinical
Chapter 3  Musculoskeletal
97
Nutrition, eds. P Pibot, V Biourge, D Elliott, Pp. 316-338.
5. Buffington CA, Holloway C, Abood SA (eds.). Nutritional assess-
Aimargues, France: Aniwa SAS; 2006.
ment. In: Manual of Veterinary Dietetics, pp. 4-5. St. Louis, MO:
3.Burkholder WJ. 20o0. Precision and practicality of methods
Saunders; 2004.
assessing body composition of dogs and cats. In: Nutrition Forum
6.
 Michel KE, Sorenmo KU. Nutritional status of cats with cancer:
Proceedings, Pp. 1-9. St. Louis, MO: Ralston Purina.
nutritional evaluation and recommendations. In: Encyclopedia
4.  Buffngton CA, Holloway C, Abood SA (eds.). Clinical dietetics. In:
of Feline Clinical Nutrition, eds. P Pibot, V Biourge, D Elliott,
Mamual of Veterinary Dietetics,p. 60. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2004.
Chapter 4
 The Neurological Examination
Author: Thomas Schubert
Clinical signs and the relevant
Menace deficits may also arise from lesions in the optic nerve or
cerebellum.
anatomy
When evaluating the neurological patient, the clinician system-
Brain stem
atically reviews each anatomical section of the nervous system.
The remainder of the brain is collectively referred to as the brain
Understanding neuroanatomy is essential to the goal of the neu-
stem. The most rostral part ofthe brain stem is the diencephalons,
rological examination, that goal being to place the lesion.
which is made up of the epithalamus, the thalamus, and the
hypothalamus. Caudal to the diencephalon is the mesencephalon
Brain
(midbrain); next is the metencephalon (pons and cerebellum),
and finally, the myelencephalon, which is the medulla oblongata.
The brain is divided into five main parts: telencephalon, dience-
The diencephalon is adjacent to and part of the forebrain. It
phalon, mesencephalon, metencephalon, and myelencephalon.
consists of the epithalamus (pineal body), the thalamus, the
Telencephalon
hypothalamus, the pituitary gland, and a few other structures.
 The mesencephalon is considered the midbrain. The meten-
The telencephalon, otherwise considered the forebrain, is further
 cephalon and the myelencephalon are considered the hindbrain.
divided into four lobes, each with a specific function. The four
The hindbrain consists of the pons and cerebellum (meten-
lobes are the frontal, parietal, temporal, and the occipital lobes.
cephalon), and the medulla oblongonta (myelencephalon). What
Because the frontal lobe deals with motor function, an abnor-
assists the clinician in lesion placement throughout the brain
mality in it often presents as compulsive pacing, circling, or
 stem is the association of the 12 cranial nerves with their respec-
 partial or generalized seizures.
tive areas of the brain stem.
The parietal lobe is the brain's area for interpretation of the
physical environment and interpretation of the body's position
Cranial nerves
in space. Lesions in the parietal lobe result in proprioceptive
deficits.
Anatomists have logically placed the 12 cranial nerves starting
Difficult to evaluate in the veterinary patient, the temporal
with I, olfactory, the most rostral, to Xll, hypoglossal, the most
lobe is associated with hearing. The temporal lobe has a propen-
caudal.
sity toward generating seizures.
 Loss of the sense of smell, cranial nerve 1 (CN I), is rare. CN
The occipital lobe interprets visual input and a lesion in it may
I may be tested by offering the blindfolded patient some food.
result in visual field deficits as evaluated by the menace reflex.
Alcohol or other mucosal irritating compounds should be
Smat Anima nternat Medicine forVeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses, First Edition.Edited by Linda Meril
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
66
100
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
avoided. Cranial nerve 2 (CN II), the optic, is evaluated in con-
A CN III palsy results in a ventral lateral deviation, CN IV a
junction with CN VII, the facial. A menacing gesture is made
lateral rotation of the dorsal aspect of the eye, and a CN VI a
toward the eye and there should be a reflexive blink If the patient
medial deviation. CN VI is also responsible for the retraction of
has a facial paralysis (CN VII), then the reflex will be incomplete.
the globe into the orbital socket. A light touch of the cornea
 Cotton balls may be tossed toward or into the peripheral area of
(sensory CN V) will result in the patient reflexively pulling the
the patient's visual field to assess vision.
 eye into the socket. Abnormalities of CN IV and VI are very rare.
A distinction must be made between a peripheral and a central
CN V is called trigeminal because of its three branches: the
blindness. A central blindness may be the result of a lesion in
mandibular (motor to muscles of mastication and sensory to the
the occipital lobe where a peripheral blindness will be associated
lower halfof the face), the maxillary (sensory to the upper lateral.
with lesions of the retina, optic nerve, or chiasm. A method of
half of the face), and the ophthalmic (sensory to the medial
dlifferentiating is with the pupillary light reflex (PLR). Shining a
portion of the face and top of the head).
light into the eye stimulates the retina. Electrical impulses are
The patient is evaluated for muscle symmetry and atrophy of
sent via the optic nerve through the optic chiasm and along the
the muscles of mastication; the mandible is assessed for muscle
optic tract to the pretectal motor nucleus in the mesencephalon.
tone and sensation. The palpebral reflex is used to evaluate the
Crossing to the opposite side of the mesencephalon, the impulse
maxillary and the ophthalmic branches. Touching both the
 synapses on the parasympathetic nucleus of the oculomotor
 medial (ophthalmic) and the lateral (maxilary) canthi ofthe eye
nucleus. The oculomotor nerve then acts to constrict the pupil.
should cause the patient to reflexively blink Unless there is a CN
A lesion in the pathway of the PLR can result in blindness and
VII (facial) deficit, the patient should feel the touch (CN V) then
a loss of the PLR (Figure 4.1).
blink (CN VII). CN V may also be evaluated by lightly touching
CN III, IV, and VI all work in conjunction to move the eye,
the mucosa of the nares; normal patients should pull their heads
and deficits in any of these may result in a strabismus.
away. This is a cerebral response to a noxious stimulus.
CN VII (facial) controls the muscles of facial expression. Para-
sympathetic fbers travel with CN VII to control tear formation
so a facial paralysis may result in an inability to close the eye and
an inability to produce enough tears.
CN VII (vestibular/cochlear) has two parts: the vestibular for
Ciliary
balance and the cochlear for hearing. There may be a dysfunc-
tion of either one or both.
The cochlear is tested with the crude test of clapping hands or
Opticn.(CNI)
banging two dog food bowls together. This test will not define
that portion of the population with a unilateral deafness (25%
 of Dalmatian puppies may have congenital unilateral deafness).
Brainstem auditory evoked response (BAER)/brainstem audi-
Opticchiasm
tory evoked potential (BAEP) testing is an objective way to
Optictract
evaluate hearing. Using the same electrodiagnostic equipment as
Oculomotorn
is used for electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction
(CN III)
velocities (NCVs) the actual electrical impulse of hearing is
measured as it travels up the cochlear nerve (see BAER testing
in “Diagnostic Testing").
The vestibular portion of CN VII is commonly affected by
disease. The patient may present with a head tilt, leaning to one
side, rolling, and variations of nystagmus.
GN
 In the normal patient, a movement of the head will elicit the
normal oculocephalic reflex. In the oculocephalic reflex, the eyes
will fix on one point as the head turns, then after the eyes reach
the limit of their sideway glance, they will quickly move to a
point in the direction of head movement. This ratcheting move-
ment (nystagmus) is controlled by CN VIII (vestibular) input-
ting head movement information into the medial longitudinal
fasciculus where the information is relayed to the nuclei of CN
Figure 4.1  Neuroanatomic pathways for vision and pupillary
III, IV, and V1. They in turn move the eyes appropriately. If the
constriction. LGN, lateral geniculare nucleus; PTN, pretectal nucleus;
information being given to II, IV, and VI is erroneous because
PN3, parasympathetic nucleus of cranial nerve ll; MN3, motor nucleus
of a diseased vestibular system, the eyes will be moving sponta-
of cranial nerve Il; SP, sphincter papillae muscle.
 s n ar a   n a
Source: Illustration by Hoffman A; reprinted with permission from Dewey CW. A
Practical Guide to Canine and Feline Neurology, 2nd edition, figure 2.8, p. 24.
nystagmus: horizontal, rotatory, vertical, and pendulous. Nys-
Ames, IA: Wiley; 2008.
tagmus is always characterized by its type and the direction of
Chapter 4  The Neurological Examination
101
the fast phase of the eye movement. Pendulous nystagmus is a
 nection to the UMN is lost, there is a release of the calming
nystagmus with the speed in both directions being the same, like
 influence on the LMN and the reflex arc, resulting in exaggerated
the pendulum of a clock Pendulous nystagmus is normal in
reflexes.
certain breeds of cats (e.g., Burmese and Siamese) and should
As part of the neurological exam, we will "tap tendons"; this
 not be considered a sign of pathology.
is a myotatic reflex. What is happening is that by tapping a
CN IX (glossopharyngeal) is sensory to the pharynx and
 tendon, we quickly cause the muscle to stretch; intrafusal fibers
caudal third of the tongue. It also innervates the muscles of the 
 in the muscle sense this stretch and send a signal to the spinal
pharyngeal and palatine structures. The stimulus of a finger in
 cord notifying the cord of this unexpected lengthening of the
the back of the throat or a gentle squeeze of the larynx should
muscle. The spinal cord (not the brain), in response to this unex-
 result in the patient swallowing.
 pected stretch, sends a signal to the extrafusal fibers in the
CN X (vagus) controls the laryngeal and vocalization func-
muscle to increase muscle tone. This increased tone results in
tion. The parasympathetic fbers of the vagus control the heart
and the thoracic and abdominal viscera. Difficulty eating.
changes in the voice (bark), stridulous breathing, and meg-
Jo poaa au, a i onb sns a suuu pue aos
aesophagus may all be signs of vagal dysfunction.
the UMN has been removed because of pathology in the central
CN XI (spinal accessory) is motor to the trapezius and other
 nervous system (CNS) rostral to the reflex arc, then the reflex
 muscles of the neck Abnormalities of this nerve are exceedingly
will appear more brisk or exaggerated. Segmental reflexes are
rare.
those that we test that show the integrity of the reflex arc, for
CN XlI (hypoglossal) controls the tongue. Early signs of dys-
example, the knee jerk Segmental reflexes of the limbs are in the
function may be rippling fasciculations of the surface on the
sections ofthe spinal cord C6-T2 and L4-S2. They go no farther
affected side of the tongue. At frst, the tongue deviates away
than from the limb to the cord then back to the limb.
from the affected side due to lack of opposing tone, then with
If the lesion is in the reflex arc, then the reflex will be depressed
chronicity, it will contract and pull toward the affected side.
or nonexistent. That is why one of the cardinal rules states, "If
 Abnormalities of the hypoglossal nerve are rare.
the reflex is depressed or absent, then you must place the lesion
Abnormalities in the cerebellum are most evident when there
in the reflex arc!"
is movement since the cerebellum's main purpose is to coordi-
Postural responses go from the limb to the brain then back to
 nate movement. The patient may have a generalized ataxia and
 the limb. Postural responses difer from segmental reflexes in
 hypermetria in the gait, yet strength is preserved. They stand
that the response is initiated from the brain. This necessitates
with a broad base and will have an intention tremor of the head.
that sensation from the periphery, whether it be nociception
An intention tremor is only evident when the patient intends to
 or joint position sense, be interpreted by the brain (parietal
do something, such as lap water or eat. Some cerebellar patients
lobe), then a motor movement (frontal lobe) is initiated with the
may have anisocoria and some may have a menace reflex deficit
result of returning the limb to its normal position or away from
since the pathway for the menace reflex courses through the
the pain.
cerebellum.
C1-C5
Spinal cord
Lesions in the C1-C5 region of the spinal cord may present with
 exaggerated (UMN) reflexes in all the limbs because the LMN
Caudal to the foramen magnum, the spinal cord begins. For
for the limbs has been released from the calming effect of the
lesion placement purposes, the spinal cord is divided into sec-
UMN. These animals may also present with a weakness or paral-
tions C1-C5, C6-T2, T3-L3, L4-S2, and coccygeal. The logic
 behind this division is based on the function of the upper motor
ysis in all four limbs (quadriparesis/quadriplegia) or only on one
side (hemiparesis/hemiplegia), loss of postural responses in all
neuron (UMN) and the lower motor neuron (LMN). This
concept of UMN and LMN is essential to the understanding of
four limbs or only on one side, urinary incontinence, cervical
pain, and in some severe cases, loss or difficulty in respiration.
neuroanatomy and the neurological exam.
Within the cerebral cortex (telencephalon) is the UMN. The
C6-T2
simple way to think ofthis is that the UMN, in order to command
motor movement, transmits an electrical impulse (action poten-
Lesions in the C6-T2 area should give LMN signs in the fore-
tial) down the axon to synapse on the LMN. The LMN may be
limbs and UMN signs in the rear; however, up to 30% of lesions
 in the facial nucleus of the brain stem if the patient wishes to
here will not result in depressed or absent reflexes in the fore-
blink the eye, or the LMN may be in the cervical or lumbar
limbs. This fact illustrates one of the idiosyncrasies of neurology:
intumescences if the patient wishes to curl a toe or lift a leg. The
there are always exceptions to the rule and always the possibility
intumescences are the enlarged areas of the spinal cord, C6-T2
 of shades of gray. A lesion in the C6-T2 area may also present
and L4-S2. These areas are enlarged because of all the intercon-
( iq     e  sm 
nections of UMN to multiple LMNs.
 depressed postural responses in all four limbs, urinary inconti-
The general influence of the UMN is not only the initiation of
nence, Horner's syndrome, and a possible loss of the panniculus/
motor movement but also the overall one of calming. If the con-
lateral cutaneous trunci reflex bilaterally or unilaterally.
102
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
T3-L3
however, they are the result of an intracranial disorder, for
 Example, brain tumor. A third classification is reactive epilepsy;
The T3-L3 area is the most common for spinal neurological
the patient is having seizures as a reaction to something else-
lesion placement. These patients will have normal forelimbs
where in the body, such as liver disease, low blood sugar, or
(Schif-Sherrington is the exception); they may have weakness
intoxication. No longer are the terms grand mal or petit mal used
 or paralysis in the rear limbs (paraparesis/paraplegia), normal to
 as  s s am e is a s 
brisk segmental reflexes in the rear limbs, postural response defi-
partial or a focal seizure is where there is no impairment of
cits in the rear limbs, increased focal sensitivity at the level of the
consciousness and possibly only a minor twitch in one muscle
lesion, possible urinary incontinence, and a possible disruption
 group. Complex partial seizures are where there are serial move-
of the panniculus/lateral cutaneous trunci reflex. Disruption of
 ments with some impairment of consciousness. The severe gen-
the panniculus, when present, is an invaluable aid in localizing
eralized seizure is the most common and troublesome form of
spinal lesions. Cutaneous sensation enters the cord via the dorsal
seizure. Other less observed forms of generalized seizures are
nerve root and travels rostral to the upper thoracic area where it
classified as absence and myoclonic seizures. Absence seizures
connects with the LMN for the lateral cutaneous trunci muscle.
are a very short (seconds) loss of cerebral function without
Exiting with the T2 nerve root, it makes the cutaneous trunci
motor involvement, and myoclonic seizures consist of one large
 muscle flinch, functionally to perhaps chase flies off the back If
 muscular jerk without loss of cerebral function.
the impulse is blocked anywhere along this path, then the reflex
Generalized seizures account for about 60% of all seizures in
muscle flinch is arrested. Once the examiner ascends to above
 as a  siop un ss as go   si
the blockage/lesion, the reflex is once again completed.
four phases: prodromal, aura, ictus (active seizure), and postic-
 The Schiff-Sherrington posture is an exception to this rule
tal. In humans, the prodromal and aura are more well-defined
 since a severe lesion in the T3-L3 area may disrupt a spinal tract
since the patients can describe the sensations that they experi-
that ascends the cord from border cells in the lumbar intumes-
ence in those minutes to seconds just before the seizure. Many
cence. This tract has an inhibitory effect on the extensors of the
clients will describe how they know their dog is about to have a
front limbs. If this inhibition is removed because of interruption
seizure because the animal will seek them out. For this to happen,
 of the spinal tract, then when the front limbs are at rest, they
the dog must be experiencing a prodrome or aura. The duration
remain in extension.
of the actual ictus is variable but is typically between 30s and
1.5 min. For the clinician, the postictal period is a critical length
L4-S2
of time to define since the patient with active intracranial disease
Lesions in the L4-S2 region may cause flaccid weakness or paral-
(symptomatic epilepsy) will have a protracted postictal period
ysis in the pelvic limbs, a flaccid weakness or paralysis of the tail,
 or possibly never return to normal between seizures. Most
postural response deficits in the rear limbs, urinary/fecal incon-
patients have a normal interictal period (i.e., period between
tinence, depressed or absent anal reflex, and possible focal pain.
seizures) with some demonstrating distinct calendar rhythms.
Absent or depressed reflexes and flaccid or limp muscle tone are
Status epilepticus is a seizure that persists for a sufficient length
LMN signs.
of time or is repeated frequently enough that recovery between
Diffuse or multifocal locations may be encountered. The most
attacks does not occur. Status epilepticus is a true medical emer-
common would be a diffuse LMN disease. These are most char-
gency. This is not to be confused with cluster seizures, which are
acteristically a toxin (botulism, tick, or coral snake) or immune
multiple seizures spaced over a day or two.
mediated (polyradiculoneuritis, fulminating myasthenia gravis
[MG]). The patient will have LMN signs in more than one limb
Diagnostic approach
or the signs may be progressing from the rear to the thoracic
limb. The presence of LMN signs in both the pelvic and thoracic
The diagnostic approach to seizures starts with the signalment
limbs can only be explained by a difuse or multifocal lesion.
since true epilepsy usually begins at 6 months to 5 years of age.
After placing the lesion, the clinician will formulate a list of
Certain breeds are more commonly aflicted: Tervuren, beagle,
possible suspect diseases based on signalment, history, and the
German shepherd, keeshonden, collie, golden retriever, Irish
lesion location.
setter, Saint Bernard, cocker spaniel, and miniature poodle.
There appears to be no gender preference.
Seizures
 In taking the history, there are specifc questions to ask the
client—previous illnesses, family history, vaccination status,
When we speak of seizures, we must have a basic understanding
describe what the seizure looks like, symmetry of the seizure,
of the nomenclature. Epilepsy is commonly thought of as a
frequency, duration, when was the frst seizure, are they becom-
disease; however, the word epilepsy only means recurring sei-
 ing more frequent, time of day, length of seizure, and the length
 zures. There are different types of epilepsy; true epilepsy is
of each phase of the seizure.
defined as recurrent seizures over a long period of time of a
 The physical examination should not be overlooked for its
 nonprogressive nature. True epilepsy may be inherited, acquired,
importance; for example, an ophthalmoscopic exam may show
 or idiopathic. Symptomatic epilepsy is a seizure disorder of a
the chorioretinitis of distemper or feline infectious peritonitis
progressive nature. The patient has the symptoms of epilepsy:
(FIP) (feline coronavirus). Similarly, cardiac auscultation is
Chapter 4  The Neurological Examination
103
important since syncope may be confused with a seizure. The
 activity readily makes the body temperature go up. Ofen these
seizure patient may have a normal neurological exam or the
    are e  are s
clinical signs may localize to the cerebrum.
If hypoglycemia is suspected, administer 2-4mL/kg of 50%
 Minimum database should include a complete blood count
 glucose that has been diluted 1:2 with sterile water intravenously.
(CBC), serum chemistries (fasting blood glucose if possible),
 Diazepam is the drug of choice to arrest seizures. It is generally
urinalysis, thoracic radiographs, and abdominal ultrasound.
 dosed between 0.5 and 1.0 mg/kg IV. If there is no response to
Choice of additional diagnostics such as bile acids, tick titers,
and fungal titers may change with initial blood values and geo-
be used as a constant rate infusion (CRI). The use of propofol will
graphical location.
 necessitate intratracheal intubation and constant monitoring.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis is required to rule out CNS
  e   o    e s s 
inflammatory disease, and advanced imaging with MRI or com-
 patient that may not be left when the clock hits five and everyone
puted tomography (CT) is invaluable for further defining intrac-
wants to head home! Phenobarbital is not used to stop status.
ranial disease.
Some clinics may still be using pentobarbital; however, its cost
has risen so dramatically as to make its use prohibitive. If toxicity
Treatment
 is suspected, now is the time to perform gastric lavage with
 The decision to initiate anticonvulsant therapy is based on many
copious amounts of warm saline or water followed by the instilla-
variables. Most veterinary neurologists start anticonvulsants
 tion of activated charcoal. If there is a response to diazepam, then
if there is more than one seizure a month. However, other vari-
 seizure control may be continued with phenobarbital loading.
ables may be included, including concerns of the owner (e.g..
Give phenobarbital q 6h at a dose of 2-4mg/kg IV for 48 h This
time commitment, ability to medicate), seizure frequency, char-
 protocol may be abbreviated if the patient is having good seizure
acter of the seizures, and monitoring costs. It is essential for the
 control. Loading with bromide rectally is another alternative.
owner to know that 20-30% of animals may not be controlled
 If 24-h care is not available at your clinic, then the client
despite medical therapy. Selection of an anticonvulsant may be
 should be advised to transfer the patient to a 24-h care facility
based on a clinician's personal preference. With canine patients,
where the patient may be monitored throughout the night. Ifthe
the author starts with phenobarbital then bromide, saving the
client declines this level of care, then make a note of this in the
tertiary anticonvulsants (levetiracetam [Keppra?], zonisamide,
medical record. Seizure patients should not be left in the hospital
felbamate) until later.
unattended.
Monitoring of drug levels is only a guide; the patient will tell
if the medication is working. See the pharmacology section for
Encephalopathies
more information on anticonvulsants.
 Home seizure therapy may help clients from having to run to
Storage diseases
the emergency clinic every time there is a seizure. Injectable
Storage diseases are rare and generally inherited by an autosomal
diazepam may be administered rectally with the aid of a plastic
recessive mechanism. The signalment is typically a young animal
teat cannula or other similar device. A dose of 1 mg/kg of rectally
with a slowly progressive loss of function. The compound that is
         
to be metabolically transformed in a stepwise fashion accumu-
Another at-home technique is vagal stimulation achieved by
lates because these animals are missing an enzymatic step in
pressing on the eyeballs. This may have some effect in preempt-
cellular metabolism. The storage of this compound leads to dis-
ing the seizure if done in the prodromal period.
ruption of the cell function. Some diseases have forebrain signs 
One study in the early 1990s with only 11 patients showed that
(e.g., dementia, wandering, and behavior changes), while others
acupuncture, straight needle, or gold bead implant had a benefit
have signs referable to the cerebellum (e.g., hypermetria, ataxia,
 in 50% of the patients by reducing either seizure frequency or
and broad-based stance).
severity.
 Some storage diseases have had their exact genetic defect
identifed and have the ability to be diagnosed by genetic testing
Status epilepticus
(see http://www.CanineGeneticDiseases.net to find a list of
Status epilepticus, or repeated seizure activity without inter-
breed-dependent tests).
mission, is a medical emergency. It can lead to hyperthermia,
 hypoxia, and acidosis. Sixty percent of epileptics will experience
Hydrocephaius
status epilepticus at some time. Increased body weight has been
Hydrocephalus is a developmental malformation that is common
shown to predispose epileptic patients to having status. Where
in certain small, toy, and brachiocephalic breeds (e.g., the Chi-
epilepsy will not normally shorten life span, an episode of status
huahua, toy poodle, and pug). Congenital stenosis or blockage
epilepticus may.
of the normal circulatory paths for CSF (as may be acquired
Treatment of status epilepticus entails all of the following to
from trauma, tumor, or infection) results in disruption of the
take place almost simultaneously: Establish an IV and start crys-
 ependymal lining of the ventricles with fluid migration into
talloids, obtain blood samples (especially for glucose), take a
d d    d  
history to define if there has been exposure to toxins, and do a
 loss with expansion of the ventricles. In the very young animal
physical exam. Body temperature is most important! Seizure 
 where there has not been closure of the cranial bone sutures, this
104
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
MRI of the caudal fossa and cervical spine. Syrinxes may be
throughout the cord; however, the most common site is the
rostral cervical spinal cord.
Treatment may be medical or surgical. Medical treatment
typically includes pain relief, reduction of CsF, and steroids.
Drugs used to relieve pain include gabapentin, tramadol, and
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Drugs used
to reduce CSF are acetazolamide (Diamox") or, anecdotally,
 omeprazole (Prilosec?). The steroid typically used is prednisone.
Success with medication will depend on the severity of clinical
signs. Surgical therapy involves removing part of the occipital
bone (foramen magnum decompression), thereby relieving the
compression of the cerebellum. With the restoration of normal
fluid flow, the clinical signs ameliorate; however, the syrinxes do
not go away. Postoperative scarring has been the major compli-
 cation. Up to 47% of animals treated with the older surgical
techniques require a second surgery. With newer surgical tech-
Figure 4.2 Chihuahua with hydrocephalus and the "setting sun sign."
niques, the success rate is closer to 80%.
Hepatic encephalopathy
internal pressure causes a large dome-shaped cranium often with
An important function of the liver is to act as a filter of potential
bilateral ventrolateral strabismus or "setting sun sign" (i.e., eyes
toxins emanating from the gut. If there is a vascular shunt (i.e.,
directed downward and outward) (Figure 4.2).
a virtual bypass), toxins have direct access to the systemic circu-
 Plain radiographs may demonstrate a lack of detail within
lation. With congenital shunts, the circulatory system bypasses
the cranial vault; however, CT or MRI is the desired imaging
the liver. Acquired shunts are caused by severe liver damage
modality.
through infection or other insult. Any shunt can lead to enceph-
Medical treatment involves carbonic anhydrase inhibitors,
alopathy. The congenital form is overrepresented in Old English
 proton pump inhibitors, and steroids. These are palliative at best.
sheepdogs, Yorkshire terriers, Australian cattle dogs, Maltese,
Surgical intervention is with shunt placement. A shunt is placed
and miniature and toy breeds.
into one lateral ventricle after making a small burr hole in the
 The clinical signs of encephalopathy include depression,
skull. From there, a tube is placed under the skin to the dorsum 
of the neck where a one-way valve is placed; from this valve, the
zures. These signs may wax and wane with the animal's appetite.
subcutaneous tube is directed to the abdominal cavity where the
Typically, the changes on the minimum database include
fluid is allowed to be absorbed. This shunt apparatus has a com-
 decreased blood urea nitrogen (BUN), albumin, cholesterol and
 plication rate of approximately 25% due to blockage, kinking.
glucose levels, and a mild microcytic, nonregenerative anemia.
infection, and breakage.
Urate crystals in the urine may also raise suspicion. The diagno-
      r 
Caudal occipital maiformation syndrome
tests, most commonly, blood ammonia and pre- and postpran-
Caudal occipital malformation syndrome (COMS) has become
dial bile acid levels, both of which should be elevated.
a very common problem in the Cavalier King Charles spaniel;
 Abdominal radiography may show microhepatica. Definitive
however, other breeds have been shown to have COMS (e.g., toy
dliagnosis is typically made by means of abdominal ultrasound
poodl, Maltese, Yorkshire terrier, pug, and Pekingese). With
 (80-90% sensitivity); however, other imaging modalities may be
COMS, there is less room in the caudal fossa because of a con-
indicated to diagnose the shunt (e.g., scintigraphy or portal, arte-
genital malformation of the occipital bone. This lack of space
rial, CT or MR angiography). Liver biopsy may be required if
results in the cerebellum being partially forced out the foramen
 portal vein hypoplasia with microvascular disease is suspected.
 magnum, altering normal CSF flow. The abnormal flow causes
p ans  nd pui q a j 
changes in pressure gradients with the result being the formation
in case of microvascular disease, where surgery is not feasible.
of syrinxes within the spinal cord. Because these syrinxes
Management includes fluid therapy to correct and maintain
impinge or destroy the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, the animal
hydration status, any electrolyte abnormalities, glucose levels,
often presents with pain as a primary clinical sign. This pain may
and metabolic acidosis. Initially, the animal may be NPO, and
be a paresthesia around the neck and shoulder region causing
when feeding is reinstituted, a low protein diet (e.g., Hill's k/d)
the patient to scratch at the area. The pain caused by COMS may
is usually prescribed. Antibiotics to decrease bacterial transloca-
 also be much more severe. If the syrinx is large and is affecting
u  ns d e n  siu 
the LMN, there may also be torticollis, muscle atrophy in the
ronidazole and ampicillin, are indicated. Medication to control
         
seizures and to treat gastric bleeding or ulcers and/or diuretics
present between 3 and 6 years of age. Diagnosis is made with
may be needed. Lactulose, administered either orally or rectally.
Chapter 4  The Neurological Examination
105
has many benefits. Lactulose lowers the pH in the gut (thus
Table 4.1  Canine meningioma survival times based on modality
trapping ammonia as nonabsorbable ammonium), changes the
colonic flora, accelerates gut transport time, and may have an
Modality
Average survival time
 antiendotoxin effect. With medical therapy alone, survival prog-
Steroids
1-2 months
 nosis ranges from 2 to 5 years. If there is a solitary shunt, then
following stabilization, surgical ligation is the treatment of
Radiation
250-322 days
choice.
Surgery alone
5-7 months 
 Surgery and radiation
15 months
Cerebral neoplasia
Cerebral neoplasia 0ccurs with a frequency of 14.5 in 100,000
 Chemotherapy is not considered very effective in the treatment
canines and 3.5 in 100,000 felines.
of cerebral neoplasm. The blood-brain barrier (BBB) isolates the
Signalment may be any breed of dog or cat, but generally, they
brain from the systemic circulation, making it dificult for large
are middle-aged or older. In dogs, the median age is 9 years, and
nonlipophilic drugs to penetrate. In a published study, BCNU
S szis ym jasad so se Jo sie n ia si ll 'sie l
(Carmustine?), at 50mg/m? every 6 weeks, had a survival time
the most common clinical sign, while cats typically present for
of 6-17 months no matter what kind of mass was being treated.
behavior abnormalities. There is no specific history associated
 Small numbers in this report give marginal validity to the data.
with cerebral neoplasia; the onset of seizures may be sudden or
The prognosis for patients with cerebral neoplasia is depend-
it may present as a slow, insidious progression of neurological
ent on tumor type, location, and species. While the invasive
dysfunction.
astrocytoma may have a survival time after diagnosis in dogs of
There are many tumor types associated with cerebral neopla-
only 1-4 months, canine meningioma survival time can be up
sia. The basic delineation is between primary versus secondary
to 15 months (Table 4.1).
neoplasia. Primary tumors are derived from neuroepithelial
 In felines with operable meningiomas, 71% were alive 6
fissue (e.g., astrocytoma, oligodendroglioma, glioblastoma,
months postoperative, 66% at 1 year, and 50% at 2 years.
choroid plexus papilloma, meningeal, or meningioma). Second.
ary tumors originate from other tissues, for example, lymphoid
Inflammatory/infectious etiologies:
(lymphoma), vascular (hemangiosarcoma), nerve sheath (neu-
rofbroma), and metastatic tumors. In dogs and cats, the most
encephalitis
common cerebral neoplasia is meningioma. Cats may have mul-
Bacterial
tiple meningiomas at one time, giving a neurological exam
typical of multifocal disease. Staging of the patient to rule out
The patient with inflammatory brain disease may present with a
secondary tumors is a necessity. The minimum database should
spectrum of possible clinical signs ranging from focal signs of
include a CBC, serum chemistries, and chest and abdominal
unilateral cranial nerve loss to a diffuse encephalopathy. Many
ultrasound. Skull radiographs are rarely diagnostic, while CSF's
of the clinical signs are nonspecifc (e.g., mental dullness, ataxia,
main benefit is in ruling out inflammatory disease. The prime
and cervical hyperesthesia) and may be confused with cervical
modality for diagnosis is MRI due to the superiority of soft tissue
disease, while "brain pain" as evidenced when the clinician
detail with MRI over CT.
squeezes on the head and the patient exhibits pain, may be seen
Once a definitive diagnosis of a brain tumor has been estab-
with any form of intracranial disease.
lished, options for treatment may be divided into palliative or
Bacterial infections of the brain are not common. Bacterial
definitive. Palliative therapy typically includes steroids and
 organisms generally gain access to the CNS via the bloodstream.
seizure control. Steroids reduce the permeability of the tumor
The changes in the CBC expected with a systemic infection are
capillaries, reduce the tumor blood supply, and may reduce the
normally not seen with infections of the CNS. Staphylococcus,
tumor blood volume by up to 21% in the frst 24h. However,
 Streptococus, and Escherichia coli are those organisms most
steroids also have many deleterious effects (see “Pharmacology"
often isolated, but culturing of the CSF is rarely definitive. When
section). Seizure control is generally through the use of pheno-
 possible, antibiotic selection should be based on culture results.
barbital or newer anticonvulsants.
However, in the absence of a definitive culture, Gram staining
The choice for surgery depends on the species, the location of
 may sufice. Gram-negative organisms should be treated with
the tumor, and accessibility. Once accessed, meningiomas in cats
enrofloxacin or with third-generation cephalosporin. If no
 tend to easily peel out, while the character of a meningioma in 
organisms are seen, yet the cytology of the CSF is indicative of
the dog is much more invasive and nonresectable.
bacterial infection, high intravenous doses of ampicillin (which
With radiation therapy, either palliative or definitive, the
will cross the inflamed BBB) may be started.
 patient receives small fractionated doses repeatedly over multi-
The prognosis for bacterial meningoencephalitis is guarded.
ple weeks until an accumulated dose is achieved. If available,
Rickettsial
stereotactic radiation surgery (i.e., Gamma Knife) utilizes special
computerized targeting of the tumor based on combined CT and
Rickettsial infections in the dog may cause neurological dysfunc-
MRI images to deliver a single high dose of radiation.
tion. Rocky Mountain spotted fever and ehrlichiosis (Rickettsia
106
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
rickettsii and Ehrlichia canis) are intracellular parasites that may
A fungal encephalitis may have the organism demonstrable in
 cause vasculitis and hemorrhage within the CNS.
the CSF, while viral or bacterial encephalitis is much less likely
 The history of tick exposure in the patient presenting with an
 to have the organism visible.
acute onset of encephalopathy and systemic signs of illness war-
Testing the CSF or serum for antibodies to the varied fungi
rants the evaluation of titers to Rocky Mountain spoted fever
is readily available. Latex agglutination testing for Cryptococcus
and ehrlichiosis. A single high serum titer combined with clini-
is very sensitive and specifc. The most basic of screening tests
cal signs is indicative of infection, while paired serum titers with
should not be overlooked since often Aspergillosis has been iden-
an evident rise over 2 weeks' time is definitive. The Snap 3DX
tifed in the urine.
Test? (heartworm, E. canis, Lyme) is a good screening test. Doxy-
 Treatment for CNS fungal disease is rarely rewarding with the
cycline is the treatment of choice. More information may be
exception of Cryptococcus. The BBB is a hindrance to penetra-
found in Chapter 11.
tion of many antifungals; however, fluconazole does penetrate
well and should be the drug of choice. If there is a favorable
Viral
response to treatment, the patient may need treatment for an
extremely extended period, often for the rest of its life.
The most commonly encountered viral meningoencephalitis in
the dog is distemper. Despite the widespread use of vaccines,
Protozoan
this virus is still a major cause of encephalitis. Young animals
with absent or incomplete vaccine history, animals coming
Protozoal agents are not common causes of meningoencephalo-
from shelters, or nutritionally/immunologically compromised
myelitis but must still be onthe potential list of suspects. Neospora
 individuals are all at high risk The paramyxovirus of distemper
caninum and Toxoplasma gondi are similar in their pathophysi-
has two infective phases. The animal may have a history of
 ology. Neospora was mistaken for Toxoplasma until refinement
upper respiratory infection that has resolved and is now pre-
of diagnostic capabilities proved the difference in the 1980s.
senting as a patient with CNS signs. Chief among the clinical
 Infective routes are transplacental, the ingestion of fecally shed
signs may be myoclonus, a rhythmic muscular jerk normally
oocysts, or the ingestion of intermediate hosts harboring the
 about the head and neck The patient may also present with
tachyzoite or bradyzoite stage of the protozoa. Young animals
 s r sis  m,  sied is
 may be more susceptible to infection. Diagnosis by serology is
predilection for the pontine-medullary angle of the brain stem
   d e n r i p  e e 
often giving cranial nerve signs in conjunction with seizures.
 a negative IgG, indicative of active infection.
The fundic exam may reveal chorioretinitis. Titers of serum and
The organism is rarely seen in CSF or muscle biopsy despite
CSF (both IgG and IgM) may be indicated to definitively diag-
the fact that the cysts may cause a myopathy. The CSF of an
 nose distemper. There is no treatment for distemper other than
active intracranial infection should have a mixed cell pleocytosis
supportive and nursing care. Some patients may mount a
with an elevation of protein; these fndings, compatible with
competent immune response and survive, often to be left with a
many diseases of the brain, are not definitive for protozoal infec-
residual myoclonus.
tion. The diagnosis may also be supported by a response to
In cats, the most common CNS viral disease is feline corona-
treatment. Clindamycin or trimethoprim-sulfa is commonly
virus (FIP), which may cause a multifocal encephalopathy in the
used for treating protozoan infections.
noneffusive (dry) form. The diagnosis of CNS FIP is based upon
clinical signs, physical examination findings (chorioretinitis),
Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
compatible serum chemistries (elevated immunoglobulin), sus-
Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis (GME) is an inflam-
ceptible age group (young or old), and titers. MRI may also be
matory disease of unknown etiology that may occur at a rate of
of value in that periventricular enhancement has been equated
1% of all neurological diseases. There are three forms of GME:
 to FIP meningoencephalitis. The only confrmatory test is tissue
disseminated, focal, and ocular Previous names for GME have
biopsy. The prognosis for the cat with CNS FIP is poor, with
been reticulosis, reticulitis, inflammatory reticulosis, and neo-
most progressing and dying over a few weeks. There is no effec-
plastic reticulosis. Pathology is limited to the CNS. Inflamma-
tive treatment. Steroids may be used to ameliorate clinical signs,
tory cells may produce granulomas, and these granulomas may
but they do not arrest disease progression.
compress or invade nearby structures, giving the symptoms of a
focal lesion. Thirty-five percent of GME is the focal form with
Fungal
lesions usually in the brain stem, especially the pontine-
Fungal meningoencephalitis may be caused by a number of
medullary area, but it may be in the cervical region. Sixty percent
fungi, most of which are geographically specific. Cryptococcus is
of GME is the disseminated form. These lesions may be through-
 the most common isolate in dogs and cats and is typically found
out the CNS but primarily in the white matter. The predilection
in young to middle-aged animals. Often there is an intrusion
is for brain stem and cerebral hemispheres. Five percent of GME
from an external infection, and if a demonstrable source of
cases are the ocular form with lesions in the retina, optic disk,
fungal infection is found in the encephalopathic patient, then it
and optic nerve. The common presentation of this form is
should be presumed to be the cause (e.g., as in a cat with nasal
known as optic neuritis. The etiology of GME remains unknown,
Cryptococcus infection breaking through the cribriform plate).
but a short illness is often a precipitating factor. There is an acute
Chapter 4  The Neurological Examination
107
onset with rapid decline in condition. The clinical course is gen-
Cranial nerve syndromes
erally 3-8 weeks. Diagnosis is based on clinical signs and history.
Most conclusive is the CSF results, a pleocytosis of 50-900
From an evolutionary aspect, it was necessary for the body to be
nucleated cells with a predominance of mononuclear cells and
able to right itself before it was even able to stand; hence, the ves.
occasional neutrophils. CSF protein ranges from 40 to 400 mg/
tibular component of the brain is contained within the oldest parts
dL. The definitive diagnosis of GME is with brain biopsy, and it
 of the CNS. Although the cerebral cortex receives balance projec-
is because of this rarely used diagnostic that many inflammatory
tions via the medial geniculate body, the cortex does not main-
diseases of the CNS have been lumped together as GME. There
tain balance; balance is maintained by the rhombencephalon/
is a trend toward using the newer nomenclature, meningoen-
hindbrain. The neurons of the vestibular ganglion receive
cephalitis of unknown etiology (MUE). With or without the
impulses from five sites: the crista of the ampulla of each of the
definitive diagnosis treatment is the same for these encephaliti-
three semicircular canals and the macula of the utricle and
dies, steroids (prednisone) as the frst drug then when pred-
macula of the saccule. The crista records the movement of the
nisone is no longer effective switching to cytosine arabinoside
head, while the macula records the position of the head. These
(Cytarabine/Cytosar*), which has given longer survival times
 neurons synapse in the vestibular nuclei (there are four main
than prednisone alone. Prognosis is poor, depending on the
vestibular nuclei) in the medulla (Figure 4.3).
form of MUE it may be a few weeks to 12 months before eutha-
 Neurons from the vestibular nuclei ascend ipsilaterally, while
nasia due to a lack of response to therapy. A recent publication
 others decussate then ascend. They project to the medial genicu-
had a survival time averaging 1800 days when the second thera-
late body and, on the way, give off multiple branches to the nuclei
peutic agent was azathioprine; however, there was no histologi-
 of CN II, IV, and VI, thereby giving a strong influence to eye
cal confrmation of the disease type. Cytosine is dosed at 50 mg/
 movement. The ascending tracts are predominantly in the medial
m? given twice a day for 2 days in a row every 3-4 weeks.
longitudinal fasciculus. There are also numerous projections into
   s     
the ascending and descending reticular formations. Some of
these descending reticular projections are involved in the vomit-
monocytes. Another treatment is with mycophenolate mofetil
 ing and cardiovascular reactions which may occur in vestibular
(CellCept°) at 20 mg/kg PO. Mycophenolate's main side effect is
disturbances. Clinical signs may be used to define a central
gastrointestinal upset. Once the patient is showing improve-
versus a peripheral vestibular lesion (Table 4.2).
ment, the dose may be halved.
Breed-specific inflammatory disease has been recognized. In
ldiopathic vestibular syndrome
the pug and Maltese, it is necrotizing meningoencephalitis
 (NME), and in the Yorkshire terrier, necrotizing leukoencepha-
Idiopathic vestibular syndrome is also known as senile vestibular
litis (NLE). As the name necrotizing implies, these forms of
syndrome. The signalment is an older dog (mean of 12.5 years
of age) with an acute onset of unilateral peripheral vestibular
encephalitis are more severe with seizure activity more preva-
 symptoms, head tilt, rolling/leaning, unilateral ventral strabis-
lent. The course of the disease is more rapid with survival times
often less than 2 weeks.
mus, and nystagmus. Diagnosis is by ruling out other causes of
Other breeds of dogs have been reported to fall subject to
the vestibular syndrome (e.g., otitis media, otitis interna, and
NME and NLE, these being typically young, small breed animals.
trauma). A minimum database should include a CBC and serum
 Differentiating NME and NLE from GME antemortem is diff-
chemistries. The treatment is palliative therapy, usually with
cult; however, MRI lesion distribution to either gray or white
meclizine at 25 mg PO daily; steroids are not indicated. Protec-
matter may aid in diagnosis.
tive cage padding and tranquilizers may be needed if the patient
 NME and NLE are resistant to successful treatment.
is attempting to ambulate and causing self-trauma. In the older
debilitated patient, fluid support may be needed. These patients
may be unable to stand, and close attention to hygiene may be
Meningitis
 needed to avoid urine scald and fecal soiling.
 More commonly seen in veterinary practice is sterile meningitis
 Improvement comes in stages; nystagmus, and with it the
(steroid-responsive meningitis). These are usually young dogs
 a  i  n   s  si 
(less than 2 years) that present with severe neck pain and fever.
48h. The patient may be left with a permanent, slight head tilt.
There may be a peripheral neutrophilia on the CBC. As a breed,
Otitis media-interna
boxers seem to be predisposed. CSF analysis will have a neu-
 trophilic pleocytosis and high protein levels. Treatment is with
Otitis media-interna patients present with similar clinical signs
immunosuppressive doses of steroids (prednisone) with an
 as peripheral vestibular syndrome (e.g., head tilt, nystagmus,
excellent prognosis.
leaning or falling against walls, ataxia, and occasionally vomit-
 Necrotizing vasculitis is a severe sterile meningitis/vasculitis
ing). If severe, Horner's syndrome may also be present. The route
seen in Bernese mountain dogs, beagles (beagle pain syndrome)
 of infection is usually by ascending the eustachian tube to the
and German shorthaired pointers. Signs are as in the above
middle ear with secondary inflammation affecting the endo-
steroid-responsive meningitis; however, the response to therapy
lymph of the semicircular canals, utricle, and saccule. Pene-
and prognosis is not as good.
tration of the tympanic membrane with intrusion from the
108
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 Schematic anatomy of
the vestibular system
Cerebellum
FN
Petrous
temporal,
bone
VNVN
MLF
Medulla
'VIL
 External 
UMN
ear canal
UMN
SN.
To facial
muscles
Tympanic
 Auditory tube
Vestibulospinal tract
elng
Extraocular
muscles
Spinal
IV
cord
Flexor muscles
Extensormuscles
Extensormuscles
MLF
Figure 4.3 Schematic anatomy of the vestibular system. ll, oculomotor nucleus; IV, trochlear nucleus; Vl, abducent nucleus; Vll, facial nucleus;
C, cranial nerve Vll—cochlear portion; V, cranial nerve VIll—vestibular portion; F, flocculus; FN, fastigial nucleus; MLF, medial longitudinal 
fasciculus; N, nodulus; S, saccule; SN, sympathetic neurons; U, utricle; UMN, upper motor neuron; VN, vestibular nucleus.
 Source: Reprinted with permission from de Lahunta A, Glass E. Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology, 3rd edition. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2009.
Table 4.2
 Central versus peripheral based on clinical symptoms
external ear may also be a source of infection. Common bacterial
organisms are Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Pseudomonas.
 Clinical symptoms
Central
Peripheral
 Diagnosis may be aided by visualization of a cloudy or darkened
bulging tympanic membrane.
Loss of balance
Yes
Yes
Skull radiographs, if taken, should include an open mouth
Head tilt
Yes
Yes
view; however, only 70% of the cases will have radiographic
changes. CT or MRI is very useful since it provides much better
Falling/rolling
Yes, greater
Yes
visualization of soft tissue and fluids. The treatment of otitis
tendency
 depends upon the severity. Patients presented for the first time
Nystagmus
Yes
Yes
typically require cleaning of the external ear canal (be sure to
Horizontal
Yes
Yes
avoid oily compounds and medications) and treatment with 4-6
Rotatory
Yes
weeks of antibiotics (frst choice is enrofloxacin; second choice
Yes
is cephalosporins). For chronic cases, additional diagnostics may
Vertical
Yes
No
be required including skull radiographs and myringotomy to
Positional
Yes
No
obtain a culture and sensitivity from the middle ear. While still
Strabismus (ventral)
Yes
Yes
anesthetized, a deep ear flush and cleaning should be performed.
 For the extremely chronic case with radiographic changes of the
Cranial nerve deficits
 Possible V,
Possible
bullae, a bulla osteotomy or total ear ablation may be required.
Vl, vIl
VIl
 In all cases, a residual head tilt may persist.
Horner's syndrome
No
Possible
Central vestibular
Cerebellar signs
Possible
No
Mental depression 
The major differences between central vestibular disease and
Possible
No
 peripheral vestibular disease are a greater tendency to roll, the
Hemiparesis, ipsilateral
Possible
No
possibility of vertical nystagmus, or a nystagmus that changes
conscious proprioception
with head position; in addition, there may be cerebellar signs,
(CP) deficits 
depression, loss of proprioception on the ipsilateral side and
Chapter 4  The Neurological Examination
109
other cranial nerves involved. Etiologies may vary and include
ldiopathic facial paralysis
distemper (predilection for cerebellar peduncles), GME, and, to
Idiopathic facial paralysis is an acute onset of a nonpainful paral-
a lesser extent, neoplasia (neurofbroma). The diagnosis of
ysis of the facial nerve in mature canines. At first, there is a lip
central vestibular disease necessitates CSF analysis and special
droop on the affected side of the face and then with time (weeks),
imaging with CT or MRI. A paradoxical head tilt may be seen
the resultant muscle contraction produces a deviation of the
with lesions in or about the cerebellar peduncles or the floccu-
 nose toward the affected side. Pathology is an active degenera-
lonodular lobe of the cerebellum.
tion of myelinated fibers, not an inflammatory response (Bel's
Hypothyroidism has been proven as a cause of central vestibu-
palsy in humans is an active inflammation). Diagnosis is based
lar disease; a recent article described adult canines, predomi-
 on history, physical and neurological exams, minimum database
nantly Labradors, presenting with an acute onset of central
(facial paralysis has been linked with hypothyroidism), EMG,
vestibular syndrome. MRI demonstrated lesions compatible
 skull radiographs, CT, and MRI. If no etiology is defined, treat-
with vascular infarct. All the patients improved with thyroid
supplementation. It was presumed that the elevated triglycerides
 ment is conservative care ( with ophthalmic ointments) to prevent
corneal damage since the patient cannot blink Steroids are
caused cerebrovascular disease. Thyroid screening should be a
 part of any vestibular patient's database.
not indicated. The prognosis is guarded for the full return of
function.
ldiopathic trigeminal paralysis
Spinal diseases
  ssd sid  d m d 
acute onset of a nonpainful inability to close the jaw. In addition,
Quadriparesis and quadriplegia are common problems in all
these patients may have drooling and dificulty eating. The sig-
 animals. An animal who has neurological disease affecting all
nalment has golden retrievers overrepresented. Pathology dem-
four limbs and who has been determined to have a lesion below
onstrates nonsuppurative neuritis of the motor branches of CN
the foramen magnum (i.e., spinal cord or peripheral disease) has
V, while the sensory branches do not seem to be affected. The
four possible anatomic locations for the disease process:
diagnosis is one of rule-outs. In one study of 29 dogs, 26 were
1) If there is UMN dysfunction in all four legs, the lesion is
idiopathic, 1 had lymphosarcoma, 1 had Neospora, and 1 had a
most likely in the cervical spinal cord between Cl and C5.
severe polyneuritis of unknown etiology. Usually, no treatment
2) If there is LMN dysfunction in the thoracic limbs and UMN
is needed; however, the patient may need to be hand-fed. Ster-
dysfunction in the pelvic limbs, the lesion is severe and
oids make no difference in the prognosis, which is generally
involves spinal cord segments C6-T2.
good with function returning in 2-3 weeks.
 3) If there is UMN dysfunction in the rear legs and “root sig-
nature" (lameness due to nerve root involvement) in the
Unilateral trigeminal paralysis
forelegs, the lesion is mild and affecting spinal cord seg-
Unilateral trigeminal paralysis is an uncommon condition that 
ments C6-T2.
may be preceded by facial pruritis on the affected side. Neoplasia
 4) If there is LMN dysfunction in all four limbs, the lesion is a
is the most common cause since the trigeminal nerve is a
dliffuse LMN disease.
common site for nerve root tumors. Diagnosis requires advanced
 In developing the differential diagnosis for quadriparesis, the
 imaging with MRI.
basic mechanisms of disease must be considered along with the
signalment and history. Congenital diseases are often diagnosed
Masticatory muscle myositis
 in the cervical spinal column of dogs. These include agenesis
 Masticatory muscle myositis (MMM) is an autoimmune focal
of the dens (with resultant atlantoaxial subluxation), blocked
 myositis that targets the muscles of mastication because of their
 vertebra, multiple cartilaginous exostoses, leukoencephalomy-
unique type IIM muscle fbers. It may present as an acute onset
elopathy of roftweilers, and hereditary ataxia of Jack Russell and
or it may be chronic in nature. The acute cases present with
 smooth-haired fox terriers. In older animals, degenerative
temporalis and masseter pain and a desire to not open the jaw
 intervertebral disk (IVD) disease, inflammatory meningomyeli-
due to pain. These muscles may be swollen and painful. The
 tis, and neoplasia are the most common. If the signs are sym-
chronic cases are usually presented because of a change in the
 metrical, nutritional, metabolic, and toxic diseases must be
shape of the dogs' head. Signalment is usually large dog breeds;
considered. Asymmetrical diseases can be separated into their
Cavaliers are an exception. With an average age on presentation
most likely causes: discospondylitis, meningomyelitis, IVD
 of 3 years, there is no gender predilection. Diagnosis is based on
disease, vascular fbrocartilaginous embolization (FCE), and
physical findings, elevation of serum creatine kinase, abnormal
neoplasia.
EMG, and serology for type IIM muscle antibody titer. This titer
 Like the rest of the nervous system, the neurological examina-
 is the gold standard and is 100% specifc and 85-90% sensitive.
 tion is the single most important diagnostic method to localize
 If caught early, the treatment is aggressive use of immunosup-
 diseases of the cervical spine. The ancillary diagnostic tests for
pressive doses of steroids. More information can be found in
 spinal cord disease are similar regardless of the cause and may
Chapter 3.
include the minimum database, spinal radiographs, EMG, CSF
110
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
tap and analysis, CT, myelography, and MRI. In older patients,
 Steroid-responsive meningomyelitis probably represents a
routine chest and abdominal radiographs and abdominal ultra-
form of vasculitis which results in inflammation of the CNS.
sound may assist in the diagnostic process and in determining
p ie suosund jo siisus aera e
the prognosis, especially when metastatic neoplasia is in the
in divided doses. Once the signs resolve (usuall within 72h),
differential.
the dosage is reduced. Therapy may last for months. Conven-
 Spinal radiographs may demonstrate signs of degenerative
tional therapy with corticosteroids may not always resolve this
disk disease, congenital malformation, spinal arthritis, or dis-
condition; it may only suppress the signs of the disease. Also see
cospondylitis, the later disease being one of the few disease diag-
the section “Meningitis."
noses that may be made on plain spinal radiographs. In acute
Discospondylitis
diseases, the EMG may not help identify denervation until 5-7
days have passed, but in chronic diseases, the EMG may help to
Discospondylitis represents an infection of the vertebrae and
localize the disease process so that radiographs can concentrate
 intervertebral space. It may be secondary to a migrating foreign
 on the appropriate area. The CSF tap can help determine the
n  s  a n s sas o o  
 presence of inflammation or infection in cases of cervical
thought that in most cases of discospondylitis, there is a hematog-
disease. The problem of inflammatory myelitis is increasing.
enous spread of the infection which isolates into a small area of
making CSF collection and analysis critical in assessing cervical
necrosis in the disk space or adjacent bone. These small necrotic
neurological disease. Even when other neurological conditions
areas of the vertebra are in locations where there is microtrauma
 are identifed, myelitis may also be present. Unfortunately, many
of the spinal column. This occurs in areas where one segment of
 patients are treated with corticosteroids before being adequately
the spine is affixed to another more ridged area (e.g., lumbar spine
evaluated for cervical disease. The CSF analysis performed in
to pelvis or cervical spine to thoracic rib cage). One possible
the face of steroids may be erroneous, and as such, surgical
source of infection is infectious agents entering through inflamed
 intervention may be performed to only later discover the cause
tissues that are associated with periodontal disease.
 of neck pain was inflammatory meningomyelitis. Spinal CT
In cases where there is persistent or intermittent fever, bacte-
myelography can help to contrast the spinal cord when looking
rial cultures are indicated. Blood cultures may provide informa-
for mass lesions and can be an extremely valuable diagnostic aid
tion about the infection approximately 70% of the time; urine
in determining the need for surgical intervention and which
culture may yield the organism approximately 45% of the time.
surgical approach is best. MRI is important in assessing neoplas-
The primary clinical sign in patients with discospondylitis is
tic disease processes including nerve root tumors. The sequence
pain at the site of infection. In severe cases, quadriparesis and
of diagnostic tests logically follows the pattern of minimum
anorexia may be present. The diagnosis is confirmed by routine
database, EMG, spinal radiographs, CSF tap, and CT myelogra-
spinal radiographs showing characteristic lysis and sclerosis of
phy and/or MRI.
the adjacent end plates of the vertebrae. This is one of the few
neurological conditions where the diagnosis can be made with
Meningomyelitis
routine radiographs. Since the radiographic changes may not
It is almost impossible to see animals with neck pain and not be
 occur until 2-3 weeks from the start of clinical signs, repeat
 suspicious of meningomyelitis. For this reason, even with clini-
radiographic examination is indicated when discospondylitis is
cal signs of early degenerative disk disease, surgery should not
high on the differential list. The CBC may reflect changes con-
be considered without ruling out meningitis. In the face of
sistent with infection (including neutrophilia) or may be normal.
meningomyelitis, myelography can exacerbate the clinical signs
The most common bacterial causative agents are Staphylococcus,
and is therefore generally contraindicated in meningomyelitis.
Streptococcus, and Corynebacterium or, if fungal, Aspergillus. The
The clinical signs of meningomyelitis are generally neck pain
treatment and prognosis vary depending upon the causative
and asymmetrical neurological deficits. The deficits depend
 organism. Discospondylitis secondary to bacteria can be treated
upon the pathways that are involved in the disease process. The
using a combination of sulfa drugs (sulfadimethoxine, 15 mg/kg
 signs are usually progressive but may develop acutely. In dogs
every 12h) and either cephalosporin (22 mg/kg every 8-12h) or
and cats, causes of meningomyelitis in order of likelihood are
enrofloxacin (5.0-7.5 mg/kg every 12h). The infection must be
viral, inflammatory, protozoal, fungal, rickettsial, and bacterial
treated for a minimum of6-8 weeks. Radiographic repair usually
diseases. The viral disease most commonly seen in dogs is canine
lags behind remission of the infection; however, continuing
 distemper (even in vaccinated dogs), while in cats feline leuke-
therapy beyond the time of radiographic quiescence is the best
mia virus (FeLV), FIP, and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
policy. Rarely will the infection result in bony compression or
are the most common viral infections. Toxoplasmosis can occur
instability requiring surgical intervention. Most often, spinal
in both dogs and cats, while dogs also may develop N. caninum
cord compression is the result of soft tissue inflammation, which
infections. Aspergillosis is common in dogs, while cryptococcosis
 subsides quickly with appropriate antibiotic therapy.
is more common in cats. Cats do not appear to have rickettsial
Cervical vertebral malformation complex
dliseases, but dogs have been shown to develop meningomyelitis
(wobbler disease)
from both ehrlichiosis and Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Titers
for these agents should be performed on the serum and/or CSF
Cervical vertebral malformation (CVM) or wobbler disease
when presented with meningomyelitis.
occurs in young and old animals. In young animals, it appears
Chapter 4  The Neurological Examination
111
to be secondary to inherited malformation and malarticulation
formations, various spinal cord malformations, multiple carti-
 of the cervical vertebrae, which is accentuated by high protein
laginous exostoses, and breed-specific disorders. Other disorders
 diets. In older animals, it appears to be secondary to chronic
 are similar to those that affect the cervical spinal cord including
degenerative disk disease. Although other large breeds can be
 meningomyelitis, degenerative disk disease, spinal cord trauma,
affected, it is said to be a disease of young Great Danes and old
FCE, and neoplasia. In some breeds, the differential also includes
 Doberman pinschers.
 degenerative myelopathy (DM).
The onset of clinical signs can be acute or slow and insidious.
 The neurological assessment for patients with rear leg prob-
Patients with wobbler disease have evidence of ataxia in all four
lems can help to confrm that the disease is neurological in
limbs with the pelvic limbs being more affected with both con-
 nature and is not an orthopedic or systemic ilness. Reproducible
scious and unconscious proprioceptive dysfunction. These
 deficits in proprioception usually are indicative of neurological
a pue 'saat rei a u auis a-im e aau s
 disease whether the deficit is knuckling, stumbling, falling, con-
forelegs may show a stif and stilted gait (two-engine gait).
 scious proprioceptive deficits, or the dysmetria of unconscious
The diagnosis can be suspicioned from survey radiographs of the
neck, looking for narrowed IVD spaces and sclerosis of the
lameness is secondary to orthopedic or neurological disease, an
facets. The diagnosis is confrmed with myelography or MRI.
 examination of proprioceptive function can help to make the
The treatment of CVM is surgery, but in cases where surgery is
differentiation.
not possible (e.g., other medical complications, poor anesthesia
 Unlike cervical disease, there are several neurological tests
 candidate), medical management with prednisone and diazepam
that can assist in lesion localization with thoracolumbar (TL)
 may provide temporary relief. There are several surgical tech-
 disease. If the lesion is between T3 and L3, Schiff-Sherrington
niques available to treat wobbler disease including dorsal lami-
syndrome may be seen. Also, between T3 and L4, the panniculus
nectomy, ventral slot, and ventral slot with distraction. In cases
 response may be elicited, where superficial stimulation of the
of multiple lesions, dorsal laminectomy is the method of choice.
 skin over the back results in the stimulation of intraspinal pain
This technique has risks and its success rate is the lowest of the 
pathways with the resultant contraction of the cutaneous trunci
methods for correcting CVM, but in qualifed hands, it is still a
 muscle. Due to the overlap of sensory dermatomes, the pannicu-
good technique. The overall success rate is around 75% with
lus response will be absent one to two segments caudal to the
20-25% morbidity and 5-10% mortality. Ventral slot is excellent 
lesion. Hyperpathia on deep palpation will be present at the
for IVD protrusion but increases compression from ligamentous
 cranial edge of the lesion and hyperesthesia will be evident on
 hypertrophy. A number of techniques have been described to
 pinprick of the skin at the cranial and caudal edges of the lesion.
perform a ventral slot and to maintain distraction across the
 By locating hyperpathia and hyperesthesia and by demonstrat-
 ing the loss of the panniculus response one to two segments
for 30 days. After the frst month, the activity level is gradually
caudally, the lesion is localized.
 returned to normal. Depending upon the severity of the initial
The ancillary diagnostic tests for TL spinal disease are identi-
damage, most patients will improve, reaching 80% of their recoy-
cal to those for cervical disease with the exception that lumbar
ery in the first 3 months. There is a potential for the “domino"
 CSF should be obtained in most instances since the flow of CSF
effect whereby the IVD on either side of the surgery site will 
is from cranial to caudal. Lumbar CSF more accurately repre-
 a m s z o s g un sd do
 sents changes within the TL spinal column.
correction.
 s e  d       s
Thoracoiumbar intervertebral disk disease
medical management was compared to surgery, the resulting
mean survival times were not statistically different. Medical
 IVD disease can occur as a protrusion of the intervertebral disk
management alone is a viable option.
(Hansen's type I IVD) with the dorsal annulus still covering the
disk material or as an extrusion of the nucleus pulposus into the
Acute and chronic paraparesis and paraplegia
neural canal (Hansen's type I IVD). Type II is most common
 Paraparesis or paraplegia unaccompanied by signs of additional
CNS disturbance suggests that the disease is located caudal to
occurs as a result of age-related changes in the IVD. As animals
T2. If the rear limb reflexes are intact, the lesion is between T3
age, the water content of the disk diminishes and the collagen
and L3. If the rear limb reflexes are diminished to absent, the
 content increases; this results in a decrease in elasticity, leading
lesion is between L4 and S2. This can be refined further in that
to degeneration of the annulus fibrosis and protrusion of the
lesions between L4 and L5 result in loss of femoral nerve func-
 disk Depending upon the location, this can result in spinal cord
tion manifested as a decrease in the patellar tendon reflex and
 or nerve root compression and in the development of neurologi-
inability to support weight in the rear legs. Lesions between L6
cal signs. The onset of clinical signs from type II IVD increases
and S2 result in sciatic nerve dysfunction, reducing rear leg
with age peaking around 8-10 years. This type of IVD protrusion
withdrawal, cranial tibialis muscle, gastrocnemius muscle, and
is uncommon before 5-6 years of age.
sciatic nerve reflexes.
 Chondrodystrophic breeds of dogs are prone to the develop-
The differential diagnosis of paraparesis and paraplegia
 s s u    ayo 
includes a number of congenital diseases such as vertebral mal-
dachshunds, beagles, Pekingese, miniature poodles, cocker
112
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
spaniels, Pomeranians, and basset hounds), there is a metaplasia
Grade 4. The patient is not walking, has no voluntary motor
of the nucleus pulposus whereby the normal collagen fbers of
movement even with support, no control of urination, but
the nucleus are replaced by hyaline fbers. The hyaline fibers are
does retain the ability to sense deep pain.
less elastic than collagen fibers, leading to degeneration of the
 Grade 5. The patient is paralyzed and has no sensation of deep
annulus fbrosis. The hyaline fibers calcify, creating further ine-
pain below the level of the lesion. Deep pain is evaluated by
lasticity. Due to the fact that the annulus fbrosis is thinnest
seeing the patient not only pull the limb back when the toe is
dorsally under the spinal cord, the least line of resistance for the
pinched but also turn and look at the limb and or try to bite
degeneration and breakdown of the annulus is toward the spinal
(ie., there must be cerebral recognition). Once deep pain is
cord. Ultimately, the annulus ruptures, allowing the extrusion of
lost, the cord has suffered such compressive forces as to render
 the degenerative nucleus into the neural canal compresing the
ineffective those very small nonmyelinated type C fbers that
spinal cord. Not only does the IVD material compress the spinal
are most resistant to crush.
cord but the degenerative material is irritative in nature. The
presence of the extruded material in the epidural space causes
 The grade of injury will determine the treatment plan. Grade 1
inflammation, furthering the swelling associated with the
requires strict confinement and the use of an NSAID to relieve
herniation.
discomfort. Strict confinement (crate or cage) for 3 weeks is
 Almost all chondrodystrophic dogs will show some degree
absolutely indicated Grade 1 patients generally will have 100%
 of IVD degeneration within a year of age. Usually, the age of
S     s    e
 onset is between 2 and 3 years with the peak incidence being
unless there is a question as to the possible progression of signs,
between 4 and 6 years of age. IVD herniation is less common
in which case it is advisable to hospitalize and perform serial
 in the upper thoracic region due to the intercapital ligament,
neurological exams. Keep in mind that steroid use has been
which connects the rib heads and reinforces the dorsal annulus
repeatedly shown to cause complications, create polypharmacy.
 in that area. Of the remaining spinal column regions, 20% of
and increase the cost of hospital stays. In fact, in one study of
IVD herniations occur in the cervical region (C2-C7) with 80%
dachshunds given steroids for CNS injury, their neurological
of these at C2-C3. In the TL spinal column, 80% of the IVD
q d-sod  o s an  q m 
herniations occur, with 67-75% of these occurring at T12-13
there was no difference in neurological status at the time of
or T13-L1. The incidence rapidly dissipates cranially and cau-
suture removal.
dally from the TL junction. The incidence between T1 and T9 is
 Grade 2 is treated as grade 1, with absolute confnement if the
less than 0.5%. From L4, caudally each disk has an incidence of
process is not progressing. This therapy gives a prognosis of 84%
around 2.5%.
recovery within 6 weeks. Steroids may be used with caution at a
 In addition to location, the dynamic factor dictates the sever-
one-time dose only if the patient is seen within 8h of the initial
ity of clinical signs. The dynamic factor states the amount of
insult; otherwise, steroids should be avoided. Polyethylene glycol
traumatic force imparted by a small amount of material traveling
(PEG), a 30% solution given IV at 2.2 mL/kg twice over 24h may
rapidly is greater than a larger amount going slow. In the worst
be used. PEG has not yet been shown to be of an absolute benefit;
case scenario, this means that the time for intervention is also
however, a multicenter study is currently underway to document
quite short. In most cases of IVD disease, definitive treatment
its benefit. If it has been longer than 72 h since injury, the benefit
must be started within 24h in order to achieve the greatest
of PEG is questionable. In those patients presented as grade 2
success. The specific therapy is dependent on the grade of spinal
and having decompressive surgery versus conservative care only,
injury.
the recovery rate improves to 95% and the recovery time is
shortened to less than 2 weeks; however, cost versus benefit is to
Grade 1. The patients' only clinical sign is pain. This is the earli-
be weighed.
est stage of the disease; at grade one only the meninges are
 involved and only the meninges, not the spinal cord, have pain 
Grade 3 is the same as grade 2. The recovery percentages and
fime to recovery are the same as for grade 2; however, if cost is
nerve endings. There is no compression of the cord.
not an issue, surgery would be advised because of the extra
Grade 2. The patient is paretic (weak and ataxic) but still
nursing care required to maintain a nonambulatory patient over
walking. The compressive nature of the protruding disk is
a 6-week rehabilitation time versus less than the 2- week expected
starting to affect the outer white matter of the cord. These
postsurgery.
white matter tracts carry proprioceptive information within
Grade 4 should have immediate decompressive surgery;
large, very sensitive fbers that are very susceptible to
however, even at this grade, conservative care will result in an
compression.
ambulatory patient 81% of the time. Recovery time without
 s s inq m  ou si d   a
surgery may take 9-12 weeks, while recovery time with surgery
control of urination and, if supported, will have very weak 
will be approximately 1-4 weeks. For some clients, conservative
voluntary motor movements. The patients may act uncom-
care is still a viable option.
fortable and may whine to go out or drag themselves to the
 Grade 5 should have immediate decompressive surgery. Con-
door to urinate. Once outside, they can voluntarily initiate
servative care gives only a 7% chance of recovery, while surgery
urination. The cord compression is now affecting the motor
within the first 24h will increase that percentage to 64%. After
fiber tracts found deeper in the cord parenchyma.
24h, the chance of recovery drops to 50% and continues to drop
Chapter 4  The Neurological Examination
113
after that. The longer the compressive force stays on the cord,
dysfunction. Clinical pathologic examinations are generally
the more permanent the deficit.
normal except for an elevated CSF protein in the lumbar cistern.
The EMG reveals no lower motor unit disease. Spinal cord
Fibrocartilaginous embolization
evoked potentials show changes compatible with loss of white
Even though animals do not suffer from the same degree of
 matter in the cord. Radiographs of the spinal column including
vascular disease as human beings, infarction of the spinal cord
 myelography and MRI are normal (other than old age changes)
with fbrocartilaginous material is not uncommon. It occurs in
 in uncomplicated DM.
any breed of dog but is most common in large breeds such as
DM is a diagnosis of exclusion. Once suspect diseases have
Great Danes, Labrador retrievers, and German shepherds; it is
 been excluded and with the added beneft of a positive genetic
also the most common myelopathy of schnauzers. Both arteries
      n  s 
and veins can be affected, and it is believed that herniation of
 certainty, say that the patient has DM.
the nucleus pulposus takes place either into the vertebral body
 Treatment for DM is severely lacking of any proven modalities.
or the venous sinuses within the spinal column. Since the verte-
 Antioxidants, nutraceuticals, and experimental medications have
bral body represents a vascular space communicating with the
all gone without validation. The one modality that has proven to
spinal venous system, the material gains access to the spinal
help patients maintain mobility (as it has also been shown in
veins. These spinal veins do not have valves, thus allowing the
 people with multiple sclerosis) is exercise. Daily walking or
fbrocartilaginous material to flow up and down the spinal
 swimming slows the decline of the patient. In the German shep-
column. Exactly how this material causes the infarct remains the
 herd, duration from onset until euthanasia is 6 months to a year.
subject of muliple theories, but pathologically, a pattern of inf-
 There is genetic testing available for both the German shep-
arction usually affecting a single quadrant of the spinal cord is
herd and the corgi at the University of Missouri. Contact
seen, although initial signs may indicate more spinal pathways
University of Missouri via their Web site at http://www.
involved from concurrent inflammation and spinal cord swell-
 caninegeneticdiseases.net/DM/testDM.htm or  through  the
ing. The infarction can occur anywhere along the spinal cord,
 Orthopedic Foundation for Animals at http://www.offa.org.
but the cervical and lower lumbar spinal cord segments appear
to be most frequently involved.
The presence of spinal cord infarction should be suspected
Neuromuscular diseases
       s   
Myasthenia gravis
paralysis that is markedly asymmetrical, and there is no evidence
of hyperpathia. Vascular disease is generall acute, nonprogres-
Myasthenia gravis (MG) may be the congenital form (as is seen
sive, and nonpainful (the spinal cord contains pain pathways but
 in springer spaniels, Jack Russell terriers, Samoyeds, smooth-
 no pain receptors so disease within the spinal cord without
haired fox terriers, and miniature dachshunds), or it may be the
 meningeal involvement is usually not painful). CSF analysis may
 acquired form. The acquired form is immune mediated; antibod-
demonstrate an increase in protein, which is nonspecifc. Spinal
 ies are produced that target the acetylcholine receptor in the
radiographs do not demonstrate the disease and myelography
neuromuscular junction. The loss of receptors results in an inter-
will be normal or demonstrate mild intramedullary swelling.
ruption of transmission across the synaptic cleft with a resultant
MRI will have evidence of hyperintensity in the cord paren-
muscle weakness, typically worsening with exercise. This weak-
chyma on T2 weighted images. The treatment of spinal cord
 ness may present as focal, generalized, or the most severe acute
 infarction is as for acute spinal cord injury. If the patient is seen
fulminating form. More information can be found in Chapter 3.
within the frst 8h post insult, then methylprednisolone at
The myasthenic may have a normal neurological exam until
15 mg/kg may be given. Many cases will improve dramatically
 the patient is exercised when the weakness then becomes evident.
within the first week PEG 30% solution at 2.2 mL/kg IV repeated
 A megaesophagus with regurgitation is a common presenting
within 24h may help. The benefit of PEG after 72h of insult is
clinical sign. For this reason, the minimum database should
not known.
 include thoracic radiographs, which may demonstrate the meg-
aesophagus and, in a small percentage of patients, a concurrent
Degenerative myelopathy of German shepherds
thymoma.
 DM has a typical age of onset between 5 and 14 years. In addition
 A diagnostic challenge test may be performed with edropho-
to German shepherds, a few cases have been reported in other
 nium chloride (Tensilon?). Edrophonium temporarily binds to
large breeds of dogs: boxer, ridgeback, Belgium shepherd, Old
 acetylcholinesterase, thus slowing its ability to hydrolyze acetyl-
English sheepdog, Rhodesian ridgeback, Weimaraner, and Great
 choline. This allows more acetylcholine to remain in the synaptic
Pyrenees. There is a genetic predisposition in German shepherds
 cleft longer, thereby improving muscle strength. If edrophonium
and corgis. DM in the corgi has a later age of onset, approxi-
 availability is an issue, neostigmine 0.05 mg/kg IM may be used
mately 12 years, and it may not be the same mechanism as the
 as a challenge. If the clinical signs resolve in 15-20 min, then a
German shepherd dog. Diagnosis of DM is made by a history of
 presumptive diagnosis of myasthenia is made. Atropine should
progressive spinal ataxia and weakness that may have a waxing
 always be available in the event of a cholinergic crisis (vomiting,
and waning course or may be steadily progressive. This is sup-
diarrhea, excessive salivation, lacrimation, and bronchospasm).
ported by the neurological findings of a diffuse TL spinal cord
The gold standard to diagnose the acquired form of myasthenia
114
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
injury with more serious consequences is the induction of apnea.
The emergency treatment for injury-induced apnea is mannitol
s n  s s a q d a p
the life of the patient. The client should always be counseled on
the potential adverse effects from CSF collection prior to the
procedure.
The materials needed for a CSF tap are a styleted spinal needlle
(22ga, 1.5-3.5in. long) for dogs or a 22 gauge nonstyleted
needle for toy dogs and cats, syringe, sterile gloves, drape, and
sterile test tubes or syringes with stoppers for CSF. For this pro-
cedure, the patient must be completely immobilized under
 general anesthesia and in right lateral recumbency for a right.
handed collector. Adequate airway patency must be guaranteed
because the patient's neck is flexed to open up the joint space.
 The hair is clipped from the occipital protuberance to the lateral
tips of the wings of the atlas. A surgical prep is performed within
Figure 4.4 Roxie in her "Bailey chair."
the triangle formed by the landmarks.
This is a sterile procedure and as such the needle is handled
is serologic testing for the circulating antibodies to the Ach
as in any surgical procedure. The puncture is made with the
receptor. This test is readily available through most labs. The
 needle placed in the caudal center ofthe three landmarks aiming
patient must have been off of steroids for at least 2 weeks for this
toward the patients' larynx. The needle is advanced slowly and,
test to be valid.
as each facial layer (approximately 4 to 5) is crossed, there will
 Long-acting anticholinesterase drugs, such as pyridostigmine
 r   s  d d q e 
(Mestinon?) will help to control the muscular weakness, but the
of these layers is crossed, the stylet should be removed and a few
megaesophagus rarely resolves. The possibility of aspiration
 o qnu a oi so i j aas oi ssed oi pamoe spuoias
needle. If no CSF flows into the hub, the stylet is replaced and
 The Bailey chair is one way of maintaining an upright posi-
the needle is advanced farther. For cats and tiny dogs, a regular
tion, thus assisting eating in the myasthenic suffering from the
22 gauge needle is used and the needle is slowly advanced while
complication of megaesophagus (Figure 4.4). See Chapter 8 for
the clinician watches the hub for CSE If at any time pure blood
more information on feeding patients with megaesophagus.
is encountered, the needle is withdrawn and the tap reattempted
with a new clean needle. Often the first drip of CSF may have a
bloody tinge to it; this is allowed to drip and clear; uncontami
Diagnostic testing
nated CSF may then follow. A guideline for the amount of CSF
Cerebrospinal fluid collection and analysis
to be collected is 1 mL/10lb of body weight.
Lumbar puncture CSF collection
CSF is produced within the ventricular system of the brain by
the choroid plexus and circulates through the ventricles and the
In animals with disease in the thoracic or lumbar area, lumbar
subarachnoid spaces of the brain and spinal cord. This fluid is in
puncture is the preferred site for collection because of the close
such close proximity to the CNS that it often gives us important
proximity to the affected area. In animals that may have dificulty
insights into the disease processes that can affect the CNS.
with general anesthesia, the lumbar tap may be done under a
The indications for CSF collection are seizures, other enceph-
local anesthetic and a tranquilizer or heavy sedation.
alopathies, myelopathies not diagnosed by noncontrast radiog-
The needed materials are the same as for above. The position
raphy or MRI, prior to myelography, meningiopathies, and
of the patient is in lateral recumbency but which side down
radiculopathies such as polyradiculitis (coonhound paralysis).
depends on the comfort of the clinician. The preferred space for
The contraindications to CSF collection are elevated intracranial
lumbar collection is the interarcuate space of L5-6. The wings
pressure and anesthetic risk.
of the ileum are used as landmarks and are palpated, and then
the interarcuate depression between L7 and the sacrum is identi-
Cerebellomedullary cistern CSF collection
fed. From this site, the dorsal processes are identifed and
The cerebellomedullary cistern is the site used for CSF collection
counted rostrally to the space of L5-6. The hair is clipped and a
when the patienfs clinical signs suggest cranial or cervical
surgical prep is performed over the landmarks.
 disease. Because of the proximity of important neural structures
 For needle placement, there are two different approaches; the
to the cerebellomedullary cistern, inadvertent penetration of
frst is to enter the skin over the dorsal spinous process of L6.
these structures is possible. The most common structures to be
The needle slides alongside the process in a rostral direction
injured are the cerebellum, the brain stem, or the cervical spinal
until it penetrates the interarcuate space and through the inter
arcuate ligament. As the needle goes through the dura or con-
Chapter 4  The Neurological Examination
115
tacts the cauda equina, there may be a twitch to a rear limb (this
causes no serious damage to the nerve). CSF may flow at this
time; if not, the needle may be advanced to the floor of the canal,
then the needle is retracted slightly and the stylet removed. A
few seconds are allowed to pass while the hub of the needle is
observed for the flow of CSF. The second technique is to direct
the needle perpendicular to the spinal canal going down parallel
to the rostral edge of the dorsal process of L6 or L5. Penetration
is the same with the same consequences. Once there is flow of
CSF, it is allowed to drip into a sterile test tube. Expect the
amount of CSF removed to be less than that obtainable from the
cisternal site because of the smaller subarachnoid site.
Laboratory analysis of CsF
There are many tests that may be run on CSF, but only the most
common will be outlined here. Immediately upon retrieval, the
fluid should be grossly observed for color and clarity. Normal
CSF should have allthe appearance of water, clear and colorless;
to facilitate observation of the fluid, the tube can be held against
a clean white sheet of paper. Any change in color or clarity
should be noted.
 Evaluation of cellularity is the most important aspect of any
Figure 4.5  Hemocytometer with five squares to be counted.
CSF collection, and this may be done easily using a standard
Courtesy of Dr. Mark Dunbar.
hemocytometer. Undiluted CSF is placed on one side of the
hemocytometer counting chamber, while on the other side
the CSF is mixed with diluting fluid On the undiluted side, the
number of cells in five large squares is counted then multiplied
by 2 to give the total cell count per microliter (Figure 4.5).
On the other side, the diluting fluid lyses red blood cells
(RBCs) and stains the nucleated cells, thus facilitating their enu-
meration. The lysing fluid is a mixture of 0.2-g crystal or methyl
violet dissolved in 10mL glacial acetic acid, which is then
expanded to 100mL with distilled water. Use this to dilute the
CSF at a 1:10 ratio (1 part diluting fuid, 10 parts CSF). Five
squares of the hemocytometer are counted then multiplied by
2.2 for the total nucleated cell count. One may substitute dilute
white vinegar with Quick-Dip" thiazine dye solution added for
the lysing solution (Figure 4.6).
The total nucleated cell count in cats is under five per micro-
liter and under eight per microliter in dogs. Because of the
caudal flow of CSF in the spinal canal, the cell count will be
higher from lumbar punctures. Cell counts should be performed
immediately because the cells will start to disintegrate within
Figure 4.6  Cose-up of hemocytometer showing nucleated cells after
30 min. One storage technique is to add 10% by volume of the
red cells have been lysed. Courtesy of Dr. Mark Dunbar.
patient's serum to the sample; hetastarch is another option added
in a 50:50 ratio. This has been shown to maintain cell count and
morphology for 24-48h, allowing extra time for transport to an
equipment. A simple technique to make a sedimentation slide is
outside lab. If serum is used, then the protein determination will
to cut a test tube to be open at both ends and then afix the
be greatly affected and the lab must be made aware of its
outside of the tube to a glass slide with paraffin. One milliliter
presence.
 z ioy ns on pamoe pue aqni a um d st is jo
There are correction factors for bloody or otherwise contami-
After 20 min, carefully pipette off the supernate; the test tube is
nated taps, 1 white blood cel (WBC) for every 500 RBC per
broken away from the slide, and the remaining fuid is allowed
microliter in dogs, 1 WBC/100 RBCs in cats. The differential cell
to air dry. Once dry, the parafin is scraped away and the slide is
count may be done by multiple techniques: cytocentrifuge,
stained with Quick-Dip (Figure 4.7).
microfltration, and sedimentation. In the general practice 
For total CSF protein determination, the refractive index of
setting, sedimentation is very simple and requires no special
the fluid is a general guide; the normal range is 1.3348-1.3350.
116
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
CSF for specifc diseases, for example, distemper, Lyme, toxo-
plasmosis, and equine protozoal myelitis (EPM). Vaccination
may affect the titers so the clinician must be aware of recent or
past vaccination history. In some cases, Western blot (WB) anal-
ysis may differentiate between vaccine induced and natural
exposure titers.
Imaging
Radiology
 Skull radiographs necessitate general anesthesia in order to
achieve diagnostic quality images. The standard views are both
left and right laterals, dorsoventral, open mouth, and oblique.
The open mouth view is best for evaluating the tympanic bullae.
Much information can still be gained by standard radiology, but
older techniques are now being replaced with the superior
Figure 4.7  Sedimentation chamber.
 images produced by CT and MRI.
For good quality spinal radiographs, anesthesia or sedation is
recommended. The most common reasons for poor quality flms
The protein content of urine test strips may also be used; however,
these will only provide a rough estimate. For the specifc milli-
are rotation, very low milliamperage (mA) for lumbar spinal
 gram per deciliter of protein, the sample must be sent to a com-
flms, and a lack of collimation allowing for more scatter radia-
tion. However, with good quality plain radiographs, there is a
mercial lab. The protein content of the sample will be stable and
50% chance of correctly diagnosing TL intervertebral disk
allows for the delay in evaluation. Normal cisternal protein is
less than 25mg/dL for the dog and less than 20 mg/dL for the
disease. Plain radiographs may also be diagnostic for some spinal
abnormalities,for example, atlantoaxial subluxation, dens aplasia,
cat. In the lumbar tap, the protein content may be twice that of
spinabifda, hemi- and wedge vertebra, and discospondylitis.
cisternal and may still be normal. There is a correction factor for
bloody taps; it is 1 mg/dL protein for every 1000 RBC.
Myelography
IgG and IgM levels for specifc diseases are normally very low
 or nonexistent; if elevated, they may indicate intrathecal produc-
Myelography utilizes an iodinated contrast agent to diagnose
 tion or disruption of the BBB.
spinal disorders. The myelography contrast agent used is iohexol,
Albuminocytological dissociation is defined as an increase of
-  m s saas ro u a
CSF protein without the concurrent elevation of cells. This is
tions of iodine. The standard dosage of 240 mg/mL iohexol is
seen in immunologic diseases and spinal cord compression.
0.3 mL/kg if administered near the lesion and 0.45mL/kg if
 Culture and sensitivity is not done routinely but should be done
distant from the lesion. Given as a very slow injection into the
 if the cell type suggests or if organisms are seen.
subarachnoid space, the newer contrast agents have less risk of
adverse effects than the early agents. However, myelography may
CSF findings in response to disease
Aeq a un ssa A p Aod un aqi
CSF is normally translucent and clear. If the fluid is opaque or
ambulatory patient becoming nonambulatory. There is also a
risk of postmyelography seizures (21% may have seizures), and
turbid, it is usually due to increased cells or protein. A pink or
red tinge to the CSF may indicate fresh blood contamination, as
is dependent on the weight of the patient, hydration status, and
may happen during the spinal tap. If observed, centrifuge the
injection site.
sample; the color should clear but remember the cellularity eval-
CT
uation must be performed before centrifugation. A yellowish
color (xanthochromia) is due to bilirubin from previous hemor-
CT ( Tome = Latin for part, area, segment) is the combination of
rhage or may be seen as a result of severe icterus.
computers and X-rays. The same basic radiographic principles
An increased cell count (pleocytosis) is typically due to
apply. CT slices the patient in “axial" slices, hence the term com-
inflammation secondary to infection, trauma, or immune-
puterized axial tomography (CAT). Older scanners would take
mediated causes. Cellularity will have two qualities: suppurative
one slice at a time; in newer scanners, the patient slides through
(the majority of the cells are polymorphonuclear) and nonsup-
the portal while a continuous spiral image is generated, provid-
 purative (where the majority of cells are mononuclear). Nonsup-
ing much faster scanning times. The contrast of the image is
purative is indicative of viral infections, CNS tumors, and some
adjusted by the computer in Hounsfield units or CT units where
immune-mediated inflammations.
+1000 = densest bone, 0 = water, and -1000 = air. The computer
Increased protein is nonspecific and can be seen in many dif-
may manipulate the “central window" to enhance certain areas,
ferent disease proceses either from disruption of the BBB or
for example, bone window. CT is primarily for bone and has
from intrathecal production. Specifc titers may be run on the
limitations with size of detail especially in the caudal fossa where
Chapter 4  The Neurological Examination
117
thick bone causes “beam hardening” a streak artifact that hinders 
tially smaller motor unit action potential (MUAP). This is
detail. CT uses an iodinated contrast agent to which 5% of
 termed a decremental response.
patients may be sensitive and run the risk of anaphylaxis.
CT benefits are low cost, fast scan times (3-5 min), and may
Nerve conduction velocities
be used post myelogram. CT drawbacks are lack of good soff
 By stimulating a nerve at three separate locations, measuring the
fissue detail, the need for sedation, and artifacts.
distance traveled, and then dividing by time, the actual conduc-
MR!
tion velocity of the nerve is determined. This diagnostic test may
 be performed on motor or sensory nerves. The speed of conduc-
MRI utilizes different physics from traditional radiology by using
 tion is primarily dependent upon fber diameter. Normal nerve
 a strong magnetic field to cause a uniform alignment of hydrogen
 she uo jaadap si  nq s na oi os o sli so
protons. Once aligned, the protons are bombarded with a radi-
 temperature. Animals greater than 10 years of age decline 10%
ofrequency pulse of energy that sends the protons spinning.
 in speed each year. Long anesthetic times with cold extremities
Once the pulse is stopped, the protons start to relax to their
will also slow NCVs. Slow NCVs may indicate nerve compres-
original position. Differing proton relaxation times emit different
 sion or loss of myelin. A complete block of conduction is an
radiofrequencies, and it is these differences that are interpreted
indication of nerve severance.
A    s s   s sd 
The size or amplitude of the motor unit action potential
ways; however, the most common images are T1 weighted and
(MUAP) is also an indicator of disease. If there is loss of nerve
T2 weighted. By varying the pulse frequencies, you produce dif-
fber or loss of muscle fibers, then the number of muscle fibers
ferent images. T1 has fat as white and fluid as dark, T2 has the
 brought into action with each impulse will be less, giving smaller
fat and fluid/edema as white. The contrast agent for MRI is an
 amplitude to the MUAP
inert element, gadolinium, to which it is extremely rare to have
Other EMG evaluations are F waves (evaluate ventral nerve
 any patient reactions. Gadolinium enhances the relaxation time
roots), H waves (dorsal nerve roots) and somatosensory evoked
of the protons. Where CT is superior for evaluating bone and
 potentials. F waves are generated when a nerve is stimulated and
lung, MRI is far superior for evaluating soft tissue.
electrical activity flows in both orthodromic and antidromic
directions. The antidromic activity excites the ventral horn LMN
Electrodiagnostics
eliciting a smaller orthodromic depolarization. This smaller
 depolarization is the F wave. Stimulating nerves in the limbs
Electromyography
elicits potentials that may be recorded as they proceed cranially
EMG utilizes electrodes placed within the muscle to demon-
in the spinal cord; these are somatosensory evoked potentials.
strate and characterize the electrical activity (potentials) in the
Sensory nerve conduction velocity (SNCV) is the stimulation
of peripheral sensory nerves which can produce a measurable
muscle. These potentials are amplified, displayed, and recorded
for the patients' record. Each type of potential has a characteris-
potential. When this potential reaches the ventral horn cell via
fic sound. While normal muscle is electrically silent at rest, dis-
the dorsal root, it produces a small waveform in the peripheral
 motor nerve called the H wave. The speed at which the nerve
 eased or denervated muscle is not. By evaluating specifc muscles
that are a part of the motor unit, the clinician may localize the
transmits is determined by physically measuring the distance
lesion. The motor unit is composed of the LMN in the ventral
traveled divided by the time taken.
horn of the spinal cord, the nerve root, the peripheral nerve, the
Brainstem auditory evoked responses
neuromuscular junction, and a number of muscle fbers. Motor
 neurons may innervate a varied number of muscle fbers. EMG
In BAER testing, an audible click is delivered to the external ear
 is best done under general anesthesia. When utilizing this test,
and the resultant eighth cranial nerve transmission is picked up
there is a time delay after injury; it will be 5-7 days post injury
by electrodes placed at the base of the ear and at the top of the
before abnormalities develop in the EMG.
head. Because of the small amplitude of this potential and the
Normal EMG has an audible insertion potential followed by
interference of background noise, the signal must be averaged
 silence. The abnormal EMG may have elongated insertion activ-
by a computer that time locks the stimulus to a specifc time
ity, positive sharp waves, fbrillation potentials, bizarre high fre-
when the computer “listens" for the action potential. The com-
quency waves, myotonic-like potentials, and myotonic (dive
 puter takes the raw data and averages the signal, thereby accen-
bomber) potentials. None of these abnormalities are pathogno-
tuating the one repeating action potential (Figure 4.8).
The generators of the different peaks are theorized to be (1)
indicative of pathology in the motor unit.
the cochlear nerve, (2) the cochlear nuclei in the medulla, (3)
the dorsal nucleus of the trapezoid, (4) rostral pons and lateral
Repetitive nerve stimulation
lemniscus, and (5) the caudal colliculus. Both amplitudes and
 Repetitive nerve stimulation (stimulating a peripheral nerve at
 latencies between peaks may be evaluated. BAER testing is used
five times per second) is used as an aid to diagnose MG. With
 frequently to evaluate hearing in puppies at the age of 6 weeks
MG, there is a fatigue of the nerve transmission across the syn-
 or older as normal hearing paterns should be in place by 30-40
aptic cleft and the repetition of stimulation results in a sequen-
days of age.
118
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
BAEP Click
1.0μV:1 L
1.0 μV:1 R
1 (ms)
Trace
Side
Stime
Stmr
Intensity
Threshold 
Mask
 Polarity
PV
AvgCnt
Reject
RepRate
Gain
1n2!H
Name
Type
Type
L/R (db)
L/R (db)
(db)
(μs)
(%)
(μV/div)
(Hz)
1.0 μV: 1 L
Left
Click
Phones
70/0ff
0/0
Diff 30
Alt
100
24.2
11.10
1.00
3000.00
1.0 μV:1 R
Right
Click
Phones
off/70
0/0
Diff 30
Alt
100
5.7
11.10
1.00
00'0000
Figure 4.8  A brainstem auditory evoked potential recording of the right and left ear with typical peaks.
Congenital deafness is associated with a lack of melanocytes.
Nerve and muscle biopsy
Normally, precursors of melanocytes migrate from the neural
crest to the ear and other parts of the body. The lack of melano-
 For the definitive diagnosis of many neuropathies and myopa-
cytes in the ear is associated with a degeneration of the organ
thies, biopsy is needed The biopsy allows for a direct evaluation
of Corti and its associated hair cells. Twenty-five percent of
of most motor unit components. The techniques are not compli-
Dalmatians may have congenital deafness in one ear and 7% in
cated and may be performed by any veterinarian.
both ears.
For nerve biopsy, a mixed motor and sensory nerve is most
representative. One that is easily accessed is the common pero-
Electroencephalography
 neal. With the patient under a general anesthetic and in lateral
 Electroencephalography (EEG), while widely used in the past,
recumbency, a surgical prep is done on the lateral aspect of the
has fallen out of favor. Electrodes are placed in a standard
stifle. If EMG testing has been performed on the patient, choose
 montage on the scalp of an awake but calm animal. Subcutane-
the opposite side for tissue sampling, thereby avoiding any
ous injections of lidocaine must be used to null out muscle
 needle trauma artifact.
electrical artifacts. Restraint is a major problem, promoting
A skin incision is made and with strict adherence to hemosta-
some neurologists to advocate using anesthesia or sedation for
sis, the common peroneal is isolated as it crosses the head of the
the study. With the standard EEG montage, the electrodes
gastrocnemius muscle. Using fine scissors (iris scissors), a longi-
present the sum of all electrical activity in the surface 3mm of
tudinal segment of the nerve is removed. The common peroneal
the cortex. EEG characteristics of normal animals will vary with
is well suited for this since it is flat and the separate fascicles are
the patient's different states of arousal or sleep. The EEG is inter-
easily identifed. The segment removed is usually 30% of the
preted on the basis of background rhythms (frequency and
nerve width and up to 5 cm long (2 cm being sufficient).
 amplitude), transient events (sleep spindles), and generalized
Half of the nerve biopsy is then pinned to a wooden tongue
and focal characteristics (spike wave complexes).
depressor and fixed in 10% formalin or 2.5% glutaraldehyde. The
Chapter 4  The Neurological Examination
119
other half is placed in a small airtight container with saline-
in Germany, the First World War delayed its debut in the United
moistened gauze (the muscle biopsy will also be placed in the
 States. Phenobarbital's effect is to potentiate the effects of gamma-
container).
aminobutyric acid (GABA) on the chloride channel, thus allow-
Closure of the site is routine, but care should be taken to avoid
 ing influx of more chloride into the neuron; this hyperpolarizes
placing absorbable suture in close proximity to the harvest site
 and stabilizes the neuron. Due to a half-life of approximately
so as to prevent an inflammatory response with possible scarring
70h, it will take about 2 weeks to reach steady state; however, a
(which can entrap the nerve). Other nerves commonly biopsied
beneficial effect will be noted long before that. Adverse effects
are the ulnar, caudal cutaneous antebrachial, superficial radial,
seen most commonly are sedation, polydipsia/polyuria, and
and buccal branches of the facial.
polyphagia. While on phenobarbital, the patient will have some
 The muscle biopsy is easily performed at the same time via
expected alterations in their thyroid levels; T4 may be reduced
the same site as the nerve biopsy. After harvesting the segment
by 50%, free T4 a 50% reduction, thyroid-stimulating hormone
of the common peroneal nerve, the fascia overlying the cranial.
(TSH) a 50% increase, while total T3 will have minimal reduc-
tibialis muscle is incised and a piece of the muscle approximately
tion. Liver enzymes will also be affected; alanine aminotrans-
1.5 cm long by 1 cm wide by 1 cm deep is removed. The muscle
ferase (ALT) may triple, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) may
is pinned to a small piece of tongue depressor and placed with
 increase sevenfold, gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) has
the nerve biopsy in an airtight container with saline-moistened
minor changes, albumin is unchanged, and cholesterol may
 gauze. The muscle is not placed in formalin. This entire package
ioodois p st ra a J o Aq ssa
 is shipped chilled (not frozen) overnight to the diagnostic labo-
 there are few if any pathological changes observable.
ratory. Delivery should not be delayed so always perform biopsy
Bromide
procedures early in the week allowing ample time for the lab to
receive the samples well before Friday. It is always a good idea
 Bromide is available in two compounds, potassium bromide
to contact the lab ahead of time for exact procedures and to
(KBr) and sodium bromide (NaBr). The bioavailability of
answer any questions.
bromide is different in each compound. KBr has 67% bromide
 In the United States, contact
available to the patient and NaBr has 78% bromide available.
Dr. Diane Shelton
Bromide is eliminated through the kidneys and has no effect on
the liver. The half-life of bromide in the canine is 21 days; in cats,
Comparative Neuromuscular Laboratory
it is 12 days. Analytical grade KBr mixed with distilled water to
Basic Science Building, Room 2095
give 250 mg/mL (60g KBr in 8oz of HzO) has been used in the
 University of California, San Diego
past. However, if compounded in-house, there may be liability
questions; the use of a compounding pharmacy is recommended.
La Jolla, CA 92093-0612
When using bromide, the goal is to obtain therapeutic blood
858-534-1537
levels of at least 1 mg/mL. Bromide is a salt, so side effects are a
http://vetneuromuscular. ucsd.edu/
salty taste, possible pancreatitis, megaesophagus, and skin erup-
E-mail: musclelab@ucd.edu
tions. In the diagnostic laboratory, bromide will falsely elevate
chloride determination since most analytical machines “see*
or in the United Kingdom, contact
bromide as chloride.
Dr. Caroline Hahn
Bromide loading may be accomplished either orally via the
Neuromuscular Disease Laboratory
stomach tube or rectally via enema at 400-600 mg/kg bid for 2
days.
Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies
Bromide may be used in the cat; however, the most trouble-
Easter Bush Veterinary Centre
 some adverse effect is an asthmatic-like condition presenting as
Midlothian
a cough shortly after initiating the bromide therapy. This com-
EH25 9RG
plication necessitates discontinuation of the bromide.
44 (0)131 650-6403
Diazepam
http://www.neurolab.vet.ed.ac.uk/
s u jse s e se asn nou si z
 E-mail: vetneurolab@ed.ac.uk
 due to its short halflife; however, the half-life of diazepam in
cats is approximately 15-20h. Diazepam at 0.5-2.0mg/kg
divided t.i.d may be used in cats as a maintenance therapy, but
Pharmacology
up to 20% of cats do not respond. When starting diazepam
therapy in cats, it is advisable to check liver enzymes over the
Anticonvulsants
   s si s  e s s sn 
 cats with maintenance diazepam therapy.
Phenobarbital
For both dogs and cats, an alternative or home therapy that
 Phenobarbital is one of the frst choice anticonvulsants for use
may be of benefit in seizure control is rectal diazepam. Injectable
in dogs and it is the first choice in cats. First discovered in 1912
diazepam is inserted into the rectum with the aid of a teat
120
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 cannula or other similar device. Rectally administered; diazepam
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
will achieve blood levels in 15-20 min. This therapy has been
used since the early 1990s for breakthrough seizure control to
The neurological patient is evaluated as any other patient as it
lessen emergency room visits. It is very useful for those patients
concerns anesthesia. Certain presenting issues may necessitate
immediate use of anesthesia and may not allow the clinician the
should not be stored in syringes.
luxury of complete patient evaluation prior to anesthesia, for
example, the spinal patient in need of immediate decompres-
Levetiracetam (Keppra?)
sion or the head trauma with depressed skull fractures. The
An anticonvulsant used in dogs in combination with phenobar-
most high risk anesthesia patients are those with intracranial
bital and/or bromide, levetiracetam is usually well tolerated. It is
disease, and anesthetic agents that may increase intracranial
 not substantially metabolized by the liver. In cats, levetiracetam
pressure or increase cerebral metabolism demands are to be
at 20 mg/kg bid as a single drug or in combination with pheno-
avoided (e.g., ketamine and xylazine). Barbiturates, propofol,
barbital at a reduced dose of 10 mg/kg bid has recently been
and etomidate do not affect cerebral blood flow or increase cer-
published to be efficacious.
ebral metabolic demand and, as such, would be better choices
for induction or short procedures. Both isofurane and sevoflu-
Zonisamide
rane increase cerebral blood flow and should be used with
 Zonisamide is a sulfonamide-derived antiepileptic first approved
caution in patients with head trauma or increased intracranial
Dog smoe ym (ust) siop u a-jeq Bul e s h ooz u
pressure; however, they are the most readily available and are
bid dosing at 5-10 mg/kg. There is minimal hepatic metabolism
widely used.
with 80% excreted unchanged in the urine. It appears to be very
Neurosurgery will cause pain. Since many of our patients may
safe in dogs; adverse effects may be transient sedation, ataxia,
not overtly demonstrate pain, we must be alert to the clinical
and inappetence. One study showed 58% of poorly responding
epileptics having good control when zonisamide was added to
blood pressure, vocalizing, biting, lethargy and withdrawal. One
the regime. Since it is costly, it may be used as a tertiary drug.
should always strive to preempt pain; anticipating the pain asso-
ciated with neurological procedures and responding with the
Drugs for CNs trauma
appropriate preanesthetic or intra-anesthetic drugs are not only
beneficial for the patient but will reduce the overall use of pain
Steroids are not used in the treatment of head trauma. In spinal
medications. The use of an acute pain scale (e.g., Melbourne,
trauma, Solumedrol (prednisolone sodium succinate) may be
Colorado, or Glasgow University's pain scales) may provide an
given if the patient is seen within the first 8h post injury. There
objective idea of the patient's level of pain. See Chapter 13 for
is extensive documentation noting the deleterious effects of ster-
more information.
oids, and the frequency and severity of these deleterious effects
 Fentanyl transdermal patches allow a slow release of an opioid
outweigh the minimal benefit. Steroids do have their use in the
(narcotic) that works in the periphery and the dorsal gray
treatment of inflammatory brain disease and in the palliative treat-
 column. For these patches to be effective, they must be placed
 ment of CNS neoplasia. The veterinary staff must be aware of and
 8-12h before the anticipated pain.
diligent in the prevention of steroid-induced delayed healing, glu-
Butorphanol (Torbugesic°) is a synthetic opiate that is about
coneogenesis and its effect on potentiating diabetes, immunosup-
five times more potent than morphine (morphine is the standard
pression, gastric irritation, pancreatitis, and muscular weakness.
 to which narcotics are compared). Butorphanol's main drawback
Polyethylene glycol (PEG) is classed as a surfactant that is
is that it needs repeating every 2-4h.
 known to seal defects in cell membranes, specifcally axons.
Buprenorphine is a synthetic partial opiate that is 30 times
 Early work shows beneft from administering 2.2 mL/kg IV of a
more potent than morphine. It has a longer-acting effect than
 30% solution of PEG. PEG is given within 72h of CNS trauma
butorphanol, allowing dosing every 6-12h.
and repeated within the following 24h. A large multicenter study
Hydromorphone is a semisynthetic opiate that on a weight
 is now underway to confirm or deny PEG's clinical effect.
Mannitol is an osmotic diuretic that in the brain has the
needs repeating every 2-6h.
benefit of causing a reflex vasoconstriction, a decrease in blood
 Methadone is a synthetic opioid that is approximately 1.5
viscosity, and scavenging of oxygen-derived free radicals. Dosage
 times more potent than morphine. Needing to be repeated every
is 0.5-1.0 g/kg IV given slowly; its effect is reached in 20 min and
2-4h, methadone's main benefit is fewer side effects than
is repeatable every 6-8h. CRIs of mannitol may be used; however,
morphine.
some report a better response if used as repeat boluses
Tramadol is a synthetic opiate that may be given twice to
Assisting maintaining urination
an oral medication for pain control and in those patients suffer-
 ing from neuropathic pain. It works well when combined with a
pharmacologically
NSAID.
d    ,   
All of the opiates must be used with caution in head trauma
zamine, prazosin, bethanechol, and propranolol.
patients or those with potential elevation of intracranial pressure
Chapter 4  The Neurological Examination
121
 or intracranial disease because the opiates cause respiratory and
source of B complex, and the flakes are palatable and may be
mental depression. This may be contributory to the patient's
sprinkled direcly onto the diet. Vitamin C is a water-soluble
clinical signs, making patient monitoring more difficult.
vitamin with antioxidant actions; if supplementation is needed,
Analgesia may also be achieved through the use of NSAIDS.
 it can be given at a dose of 250-500 mg/day. Each animal's toler-
There are currently many available (e.g, carprofen, deracoxib,
 ance to vitamin C is defined by its intestine. Excess amounts may
etodolac, ketoprofen, and meloxicam). NSAIDs affect cyclooxy-
 cause diarrhea and flatulence. Vitamin E is a fat-soluble vitamin
genase, lipooxygenase, prostaglandins, and leukotrienes, and
 that has strong antioxidant actions and can be given at a dose
each patient may have a varied response to each medication,
 400IU per day for dogs. Do not exceed this dose in cats (since
 often necessitating trial and error to find the optimum drug.
 it is fat soluble, storage is in the liver) as excess amounts may
Acepromazine and diazepam do not have analgesic effects but
 go more to the mental state of the patient with diazepam being 
 when consumed in excess, causing an increase in oxidative
a good anxiolytic. Diazepam also has the benefit of relieving
damage.
muscle spasm, another source of pain. The avoidance of acepro-
 Selenium is a mineral with antioxidant properties. It works
mazine in veterinary seizure medicine is more of an anachro-
synergistically with vitamin E, providing increased antioxidant
nism. Some researchers have reported that acepromazine has
protection and allowing a lower dose of vitamin E to be taken.
anticonvulsant activity.
The dosage is 100 mcg/day.
 L-Carnitine is a nonessential amino acid in dogs and is con-
Nursing considerations
 available. L-Carnitine helps to improve the utilization of oxygen
 at the cellular level and may be beneficial for any patient with
Nutritional support
nerve problems and especially those with myopathies. Dosage is
50 mg/kg PO bid.
 Coenzyme Q, also known as ubiquinone, is a fat-soluble anti-
 oxidant used in the mitochondrial respiratory chain to control
of the patient, this may be a maintenance diet, a higher calorie
the flow of electrons within the cell. By controlling the flow of
critical care diet, or a gastrointestinal diet may be indicated for
electrons, it helps increase the rate of ATP synthesis. Dosage is
 patients on high dose corticosteroids.
1-2 mg/kg daily.
 As with any critically ill animal, ensure that adequate amounts
of food are being consumed. For the oral route to be used, 85%
of the resting energy requirements (RERs) needs to be consumed
Nursing care
daily. If this amount is not being consumed, additional assistance
d pzaered a u pedi s si lons is
 in supplying calories needs to be pursued On average, no animal
u ae om s e u r o pos
every attempt should be made to maintain the patient in sternal
recumbency. Getting the nonambulatory patient up and walking
support.
 Partial parenteral nutrition can be used to help supplement
not only helps prevent atelectasis, but it helps their attitude. Sling
oral intake as can tube feeding. Because nerves and the brain
walking is relatively easy to perform; slings may be made of
have a preferential requirement for glucose, ensuring that neu-
 simple PVC piping from the hardware store and a sturdy cloth
 Or canvas. Turning every 4h helps to prevent atelectasis; in addi-
rological patients are receiving adequate nutrition is very impor-
tion, coupage of the thorax will help to prevent and/or treat
tant for the prevention of muscle catabolism and the breakdown
 of fat by the body for energy use.
atelectasis.
q ro ss asd sd ai n
As many of these animals may have difficulty prehending.
swallowing, or protecting their airways, special care needs to be
prominences; sof dry surfaces and frequent turning are a must
taken when feeding orally. If indicated, consideration should be
for prevention. To prevent formation of pressure sores, which
given to the placement and use of a feeding tube.
may lead to decubital ulcers, egg crate foam, padded doughnuts
trampolines, fleece bedding and baby powders may be used
 Medical management of decubital ulcers includes topical antibi-
Vitamins, minerais, and antioxidants
otic creams, enzymatic debriding agents, and astringents such as
Tanni-Gel.
All American Association of Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)
certified therapeutic and maintenance diets are complete and
Urinary contro!
balanced and already contain the required amount of vitamins
needed for maintenance. Depending on any metabolic chal-
Urinary control is important to aid in the prevention of reten-
lenges the animal may face, additional amounts of specific vita-
tion cystitis and urine scald. Pharmacologically, diazepam,
mins and minerals, over maintenance may be required. For B
 phenoxybenzamine, and prazosin are used in patients with
complex, a multicomplex compound will work The B vitamins
UMN bladder disorders because they will help relax the spastic
are water-soluble vitamins, so any excess consumed above main-
paralysis of the urethra and sphincter muscles. Diazepam will
tenance is excreted in the urine. Brewer's yeast is another good
affect the striated muscle while phenoxybenzamine and prazosin
122
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
(being alpha-adrenergic antagonists) will relax the smooth
be weight bearing on the injured paw, sled pulling, and hydro-
muscle. In the cat, propranolol may be of a greater benefit since
therapy. More information can be found in the rehabilitative
the feline urethra has beta-adrenergic fbers and a beta blocker
section of Chapter 14.
will help to relax these fibers.
 n n      s 
In patients with LMN bladder disorders where there is a
limbs or until function of the rear legs returns in surgical/
flaccid urethral sphincter, bethanechol may be used to promote
medical patients, there are walkers/wheelchairs for dogs and
bladder contraction.
cats. One Web site is that of K9 Carts, http://www.k9carts.com,
 The overall goal of urinary control is to keep the bladder as
or they can be reached via e-mail at wheels@k9carts.com.
empty as possible, and as such, both the UMN and LMN bladder
will often require manual expression at least three times a day.
Low level light therapy
Catheters may be used, but repeated catheterization may cause
LLLT is the use of laser light of a specific wavelength. The mito-
trauma or introduce infection.
   no  d   
increase of function here benefits the entire cell. LLLT is theo-
Postoperative rehabilitation therapy
rized to boost mitochondrial respiration. LLLT has shown
benefit in nerve grafts, spinal cord injury, and disk disease.
Postoperative care of the neurological patient is divided into
 In one study, using LLLT postoperatively for hemilaminec-
three main periods: the immediate, the early, and the late period.
tomy, patients returned to walking status in half the time com-
In this manner, the patient is slowly returned to full function.
pared to those not receiving the treatment. LLLT is now being
The immediate post-op period consists of pain control, cryo-
therapy, and passive range of motion exercises. Pain control may
tried in patients with head trauma.
be of varied modalities; please see the previous section on anal-
gesia. Cryotherapy or cold therapy induces vasoconstriction,
Neurological glossary
helps muscles relax, and decreases nerve conduction. Superficial
   s   ia s  a
Anisocoria. Inequality of the pupil size
two to four times daily for 10-15 min. Passive range of motion
Ataxia. Incoordination, when walking the patient deviates from
exercise requires no effort from the patient. Each joint in the
a straight line, the axis
limb should be flexed and extended for 10-15 cycles two to three
Atrophy. Wasting away or reduction in size
times a day. Please see rehabilitation therapy in Chapter 14 for
BAER/BAEP. Brainstem auditory evoked response/brainstem
more information.
auditory evoked potentials
 In the early period, thermotherapy, massage, therapeutic
BBB. Blood-brain barrier
ultrasound, and neuromuscular electrical stimulators are uti-
Cauda Equina. The accumulation of nerve roots in the lum-
lized. Thermotherapy or heat therapy is for use after acute
bosacral and coccygeal area
inflammation has subsided. Hot packs or damp hand towels
COMS. Caudal occipital malformation syndrome
heated in the microwave are applied for 10-20 min two to three
Clonus. A rapid tensing and relaxing repeatedly, often seen with
times a day. If electrical heating pads are to be used, great caution
release of inhibition of the lower motor neuron
must be exercised to avoid thermal injury. Heat therapy is opti-
Consensual. The reaction of the opposite pupil when a light is
mally applied before massage therapy. Massage is used to break
shone in one pupil
down adhesions of the muscles and to promote circulation.
Contrailateral. Situated on or pertaining to the opposite side
Many clients enjoy performing this therapy for their pets.
Craniectomy. The removal of part of the skull
Massage may be performed once or twice a day for 20min.
Craniotomy. Surgical opening of part of the skull
Therapeutic ultrasound uses sound energy converted to heat as
CVM. Cervical vertebral malformation
a form of thermotherapy. Low frequencies are utilized for deep
Decussate. To cross in the form of an X
 Dermatome. That area of the skin supplied by one nerve
formed for 5 min once a day. Clients should be told in advance
Disk Disease. Clinical syndrome of a disk protrusion or
that the site must be shaved in order to provide ultrasound
extrusion
therapy. Neuromuscular electrical stimulation or transcutaneous
Disk Extrusion. Rupture of the annulus fibrosus with extrusion
electrical neuromuscular stimulation (TENS) units help to
of the disk material into the spinal canal
maintain muscle mass and to decrease edema. The hair must be
Disk Protrusion. A bulging of the annulus into the spinal canal
shaved for good contact; the therapy is applied for 12s on then
without the extrusion of disk material
25 s off for 30 min once a day.
Diskospondylitis. An infection of the intervertebral disk with
The late period is when exercise is started This exercise regime
involvement of the juxtaposed vertebral end plates
 may be active, active assisted, or active resistive in nature. Exam-
 DM. Degenerative myelopathy
 ples of active assisted movement are towel walking, Swedish
Dysmetria. Disturbance in the control in the range of muscular
exercise ball, wheelbarrow, dancing, trampoline, using a syringe
movement
cap taped to the bottom of the good paw to entice the patient to
Dysphonia. Any impairment of voice (bark/meow)
Chapter 4  The Neurological Examination
123
EEG. Electroencephalography
Laminectomy. Surgical removal of the lamina (roof) of the
Embolus. A clot or other plug brought by the blood from another
spinal canal
vessel causing an obstruction
Leukodystrophy. Disturbance or malformation of the white
EPM. Equine protozoal myelitis
matter of the central nervous system
Falx. Used in context of the cranial fault, the falx is the sickle-
Lissencephaly. Malformation of the brain where the normal
shaped fold of dura mater that extends ventrally to separate the
a o se oos e u sa ss ae ps
two cerebral hemispheres
surface
 FCE. Fibrocartilaginous embolization
LLLT. Low level light therapy
 Fenestration. The act of making a defect (window) in the annulus
Lordosis. An
1 abnormal ventral curvature to the spine,
of the disk so as to remove the nucleus pulposus
swayback
Flaccid. Weak, lax, or soft
LMN. Lower motor neuron; neurons whose cell bodies lie
 Fucosidosis. A storage disease resulting from an enzyme defi-
within the brain stem or spinal cord and whose axons leave the
ciency resulting in the accumulation of fructose-containing gly-
central nervous system to activate muscles in the periphery
colipids in the cell
Luxation. Dislocation with major displacement
Gangliosidosis. A storage disease resulting from a deficiency of
Matacia. Pathological softening
various hydrolases; storage substrates accumulate these being
Mannosidosis. A disease resulting from an enzyme deficiency.
gangliosides and glycolipid metabolites
The storage substrate is a mannose rice material, including
Globoid Leukodystrophy. A storage disease resulting from an
oligosaccharides
 enzyme deficiency; also known as “Krabbe disease." The storage
Meningitis. Inflammation of the meninges
substrate is glucocerebroside.
Meningocele. A herniation of the meninges from the skull or
GME. Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
spinal column
 Hemilaminectomy. A surgery where one-half of the lamina is
 Meningomyelocele. A herniation of the meninges and part of the
 removed to expose the spinal cord
spinal cord from a defect in the spinal column
Hemiparesis. Weakness affecting one-half of the body
MG. Myasthenia gravis
Hemiplegia. Paralysis of one-half of the body
Micturition. The controlled act of urination
Hemivertebra. A developmental anomaly manifested by a verte-
Miosis. Excessively constricted pupil
bral body with incomplete development of one-half
MMM. Masticatory muscle myositis
Hepatic Encephalopathy. Malfunction of the brain secondary to
MUAP. Motor unit action potential
disease of the liver. This malfunction is most often associated
 MUE. Meningoencephalitis of unknown etiology
with congenital vascular shunts; however, encephalopathy may
Mucopolysaccharidosis. A disease resulting from an enzyme
be seen with infections and toxins
deficiency; the storage substrates are mucopolysaccharides.
Hydrocephalus. Abnormally large accumulation of fluid within
Mydriasis. Excessive dilation of the pupil
the ventricles of the brain
 Myelitis. Inflammation of the spinal cord
Hypalgesia. Reduced sensation to painful stimuli
Myelocele. Herniation of part of the spinal cord through a defect
Hyperalgesia. Increased sensitivity to painful stimuli
in the spinal column
Hypermetria. Overreaching or excessive range of movement
Myelodysplasia. Defective development of the spinal cord
Hypertonus. Excessive tone or tension
Myelogram. A radiograph of the spinal column after a contrast
Hypomyelinogenesis. A deficiency of myelin secondary to a lack
agent has been injected into the subarachnoid space
of normal production/development
Myelomalacia. Pathological softening of the spinal cord
Hypoplasia. Defective or incomplete development
Myoclonus. Shock-like rhythmic involuntary contractions of a
Idiopathic. Of unknown cause
muscle or group of muscles
Incontinence. Bowels and
bladder
may
be
emptied
Myositis. Inflammation of the muscle
involuntarily
Myotonia. Increased muscular irritability and contractility with
Incoordination. A lack of normal adjustment of muscular
decreased power of relaxation
motions
Myringotomy. Surgical incision of the tympanic membrane
Infarction. An area of tissue loss secondary to obstruction of the
Narcolepsy. Excessive sleepiness and/or sudden attacks of
vascular supply
sleep
Intention Tremor. Usually about the head, a tremor that is
NCV. Nerve conduction velocity
evident when the patient initiates a voluntary movement
Neuroaxonal Dystrophy. A degenerative disease where the axons
Ipsilateral. Pertaining to the same side of the body
of the CNS accumulate swellings (spheroids)
 schemia. Deficiency of blood in a part due to lack of circulation
Neuroma. A tumor growing from a nerve
or blockage
Neuron. A conducting cell of the nervous system
Kyphosis. Abnormal dorsal arching to the spine
Neuronopathy. Disease on the neuron where the primary
Labyrinthitis. Inflammation of the labyrinth of the inner ear,
 changes are seen in the nerve cell body
otitis interna
Neurotmesis. Complete severance of the nerve
124
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
NLE. Necrotizing leukoencephalitis
Trismus. Difficulty in opening the mouth
NME. Necrotizing meningoencephalitis
 UMN. Upper motor neuron; motor neurons whose cell bodies
Nucleus Pulposus. The central, gelatinous, portion of the inter-
and axons lie totally within the brain or brain stem and control
vertebral disk
the activity of the lower motor neuron
Nystagmus. Movement of the eyes that may be horizontal, rota-
Xanthochromia. Yellowish coloration
tory, vertical, or pendulous, seen with movement of the head or
involuntarily without head movement
Opisthotonus. A dorsiflexion of the head with a concurrent lor-
Suggested readings
dosis and extension of the limbs
 Palmar. The ventral surface of the thoracic limb paw
Textbooks
Palsy. Paralysis
Papilledema. Swelling or edema of the optic disk
Anatomy and physiology
DeLahunta A, Glass E. Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology.
Paraplegia. Paralysis of the pelvic limbs
 Paresis. Incomplete paralysis or weakness
3 edition, St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2009.
Evans HE, DeLahunta A. Millers Anatormy of the Dog, 3rd edition,
Paresthesia. Abnormal sensations, tingling, pinpricks in the
Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1993.
skin
PEG. Polyethylene glycol
Internal medicine
PLR. Pupillary light reflex
 Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th
Polio. Having to do with the gray matter of the CNS
edition. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 2010.
Greene CE. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat. 4"h edition, St Louis,
Polyradiculoneuritis. Inflammation of multiple nerve roots
MO: Elsevier; 2012.
Proprioception. Information sent to the brain from receptors in
 Bonagura JID, Twedt DC. Current Veterinary Therapy XIV. 14"h edition,
muscle, tendons, joints, and skin detailing the body's position in
St Louis, MO: W.B. Saunders; 2009.
space
 Ptosis. Dropping of the upper eyelid
Neurosurgery
Fossum TW. Small Animal Surgery, 3rd edition. St Louis, MO: Mosby;
Pyrexia. Abnormal elevation of body temperature
2007.
Radiculopathy. Disease of the nerve roots
Sharp NJH, Wheeler SJ. Smal Animal Spinal Disorders: Diagnosis and
Risus Sardonicus. The sardonic grin a spasm of the facial
Surgery. 2"d edition St Louis, MO: Mosby; 2005.
muscles causing them to be pulled dorsally and caudally
Satter DH. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3r edition. St Louis, MO:
Rostral. In the direction of the nose
Mosby; 2002.
Sacrococcygeal Dysgenesis. Defective development of the sacro-
Neurology
coccygeal spinal cord and vertebra
Bagley RS. Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Neurology. Ames, IA:
Seizure. A sudden attack or recurrence of disease, epilepsy
Blackwell; 2005.
SNCV. Sensory nerve conduction velocity
Dewey CW. A Practical Guide to Canine and Feline Neurology. 2md
Spastic. Increased muscular tone
edition Ames, IA: Blackwell; 2008.
Spina Bifda. A developmental abnormality with incomplete
Lorenz MD, Coates J. Handbook of Veterinary Neurology. 5"h edition
closure of the bones around the spinal cord
St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2011.
Platt SR, Olby NJ. BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Neurology, 3rd
Stenosis. A narrowing or stricture of a duct or canal
Storage Disease. Inherited defects, usuall of an important
edition. Wiley, 2004.
Vite CH, Braund KG. Braund's Clinical Neurology in Small Animals:
enzyme, that results in the cell's incapability to metabolize essen-
Localization, Diagnosis and Treatment. 2006. http://wwwivis.org/
tial compounds resulting in the accumulation of these com-
advances/Vite/toc.asp.
pounds (storage) in the cell
Strabismus. Deviation of the eyeball
Imaging
Stupor. Partial unconsciousness
Assheuer J, Sager M. MRI and CT Aflas of fhe Dog. Ames, IA: Iowa State
Subluxation. Incomplete or partial dislocation
University Press; 1997.
Thrall DE. Textbook of Veterinary Diagnostic Radiology. 5th edition St
Syncope. A sudden loss of consciousness generally as a result of
Louis, MO: W.B. Saunders; 2007.
circulatory compromise
Syndrome. A group of clinical signs indicative of one disease
Journals
Syringomyelia. The presence on an elongated fluid-filled cavity
within the spinal cord
The Compendium of Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian
JournalofFeline Medicine andSurgery
Syrinx. A flute-shaped or linear cavity
Journal of Small Animal Practice
Tetraparesis. Weakness in all four limbs
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
Tetraplegia. Paralysis of all four limbs
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
Thrombus. An obstruction/clot in the vascular system attached
Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
to the wall of the vessel
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Torticollis. A twisted neck usually due to asymmetrical muscle
Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics
contraction
Veterinary Radiology e Ultrasound
Chapter 4  The Neurological Examination
125
Veterinary Record
Diagnostic Imaging 1993;23(2).
Veterinary Surgery
Intracranial Disease 1996;26(4).
The Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice
Common Neurologic Problems 2000;30(1).
Common Neurologic Problems 1988;18(3).
Neuromuscular Diseases 2002;32(1).
Disease of the Spine 1992;22(4).
Neuromuscular Diseases II 2004;34(6).
Chapter
5
Thrombotic Disorders in Small
Animal Medicine
Authors: Justin D. Thomason and Clay A. Calvert
tion of the vessel wall. This smooth muscle contraction, in addi-
Physiology
tion to platelet contraction via cytoplasmic microtubules, forms
The hemostatic system is traditionally divided into three catego-
the platelet plug and initial hemostasis. However, for continued
ries: primary hemostasis, secondary hemostasis, and fibrinolysis.
hemostasis to occur, it is necessary that secondary hemostasis
This division is an oversimplifcation but is divided based on not
(activation of coagulation factors) follows.
only the types of disorders encountered in clinical medicine but
also on in vitro laboratory testing. The role of the hemostatic
Secondary hemostasis
system in the normal animal is to provide effective control of
 Secondary hemostasis (activation of coagulation factors) begins
endothelial damage through the generation of a “platelet plug"
and fbrin clots (coagulation) to minimize blood loss. In addi-
by the exposure of blood to negatively charged surfaces of
tion, the hemostatic system is also responsible for the slow dis-
 damaged endothelium (intrinsic coagulation system) or to extra-
solution of clots through fbrinolysis in order to maintain organ
vascular tissues (extrinsic coagulation system). The common
 perfusion. This hemostatic balance (coagulation and fbrinoly-
 end point of both the intrinsic and extrinsic coagulation systems
sis) is maintained by physiological inhibitors in the plasma.
 is the conversion of prothrombin to thrombin, which is the criti-
These physiological inhibitors are responsible for localizing
 cal step in the formation of the fibrin clot.
coagulation activity and for preventing systemic coagulation
Intrinsic coagulation
from occurring. It should be appreciated that any disorder of the
Upon exposure to damaged endothelium, factor XIl becomes
hypercoagulation (thrombosis), or both (disseminated intravas-
activated by the enzyme kallikrein. The enzyme kallikrein is
cular coagulation [DIC]).
produced from a complex formed by prekallikrein, high molecu-
lar weight kininogen (HMWK), and activated factor XII. Once
activated, factor XlI activates factor Xl. Activated factor XI acti-
Primary hemostasis
vates factor IX, and the process continues involving a total of 10
Primary hemostasis relies on endothelium and platelets. Platelet
serum proteins, calcium, and phospholipids (Figure 5.1).
adherence and activation represents the frst step in hemostasis.
Extrinsic coagulation
Platelets adhere to damaged endothelium or collagen mediated
by the von Willbrand factor and membrane glycoproteins
Blood exposure to extravascular tissue induces coagulation by
(GPs). Once adhered, the platelets become activated to aggre-
contact of factor VII to a cell membrane factor (factor IHI, tissue
gate, secrete, and contract. Serotonin and thromboxane A2,
thromboplastin, or tissue factor) and calcium. Tissue factor
secreted by activated platelets, initiate smooth muscle contrac-
is abundantly present on extravascular tissues and on certain
Smat Anima nternat Medicine forVeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses, First Edition.Edited by Linda Meril
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
127
128
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Intrinsic Coagulation
Extrinsic Coagulation
Charged Surface
Tissue Factor
?
Factor Xll  + HMWK + Kallikrein
Factor Xlla
Factor Vll
 Factor Vlla
Factor XI
Factor Xla
Ca++
Factor IX
Factor IXa
Ca++
Factor VllI
Ca++
 Phospholipid 
Factor X
Factor Xa
Factor V
Ca++
 Phospholipid
 Prothrombin
Thrombin
Fibrin
Fibrinogen
 Plasmin
Fibrin (ogen)
Degradation
 Products
Figure 5.1  Simplification of normal hemostasis.
 neoplastic cells. Endothelial cells, monocytes, and macrophages
Physiological inhibitors of coagulation
can express tissue factor in response to cytokines, especially
 There are numerous physiological inhibitors in plasma that
interleukin 1, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-c), and to
endotoxin. Activation of factor X leads to the common pathway
localize the coagulation activity to the site of injury and maintain
balance between coagulation and fbrinolysis in order to mini-
and, ultimately, the formation of the fbrin clot.
mize bleeding and to ensure continuous organ perfusion. The
Fibrinolysis
most important inhibitor is antithrombin (AT). AT is a physio-
logical inhibitor of blood coagulation in the normal animal.
Fibrinolysis is initiated simultaneously with the activation of
When combined with heparin, there is an acceleration of AT
the coagulation cascade. Damaged endothelium and damaged
complex formation with thrombin. These AT-thrombin com-
extravascular tisue facilitate the conversion of plasminogen to
plexes are removed via the liver, therefore decreasing the con-
plasmin through the release of tissue plasminogen activator
 centration of circulating thrombin.
(tPA) from the endothelium and urokinase plasminogen activa-
Also, circulating thrombin binds to an endothelial recep-
 tor from the kidneys. Plasmin's role in coagulation is to degrade
tor, t
thrombomodulin. Through binding with thrombomod-
fbrin and fbrinogen into fbrin and fbrinogen degradation
ulin, thrombin's coagulation activity is lost. The thrombin-
products (FDPs) and for the degradation of activated factors V,
thrombomodulin complexes activate protein C to activated
VIII, IX, and XI (see Figure 5.1). The FDPs formed are removed
 protein C (APC). Then, APC, with the assistance of cofactor
from circulation by the liver.
 protein S, inactivates factors V and VII1.
Chapter 5  Thrombotic Disorders in Small Animal Medicine
129
The fbrinolytic system is primarily opposed by alpha-
 Endothelial injury has been described in cats with left atrial dila-
 tion caused by cardiomyopathy. Such injury is most commonly
 associated with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). This is now an
 activator inhibitor inactivates tPA and urokinase plasminogen 
 uncommon disorder as its etiology was identified as a taurine
 activator, therefore regulating the conversion of plasminogen to
deficiency, and cat food manufacturers have made appropriate
plasmin.
 diet formula adjustments. Small areas of endothelial desquama-
tion are sometimes found at necropsy in cats with hypertrophic
Thrombotic disorders
cardiomyopathy (HCM) and restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM).
 Endothelial desquamation leads to platelet aggregation and acti-
The two most common thrombotic disorders encountered in 
 vation when subendothelial tissue is exposed. Factor IHl release
small animal medicine are systemic and pulmonary arterial
 can activate the extrinsic clotting cascade.
thromboembolism.
Stagnation of blood flow in the left atrium is a consistent
Systemic arterial thromboembolism
ography, when low intensity signals are not rejected, a hazy or
Feline arterial thromboembolism (FATE) is commonly associ-
spontaneous echo-contrast represents blood flow that is swirling
ated with cardiomyopathy. FATE is a devastating complication
within the left atrium and not proceeding promptly into the left
that usually manifests as a large thrombus at the aortic trifurca-
ventricle. This stagnant blood flow predisposes to thrombus for-
tion (saddle thrombus). However, thromboemboli can also
mation because not only are clotting factors allowed to accumu-
 occur in the tail, kidneys, in any limb (especiall the right tho-
late rather than being diluted away with normal blood flow but
racic limb), or the central nervous system (CNS).
also the “sticky” platelets of cats can accumulate and adhere to
Canine arterial thromboembolism (CATE) is, in our experi-
atrial endothelium.
ence, usually associated with protein-losing nephropathy (PLN).
Whether a hypercoagulable state can occur in cats with left
Other potential causes include protein-losing enteropathy (PLE),
atrial dilation is uncertain. Hypercoagulable states exist when
peracute DIC, and hyperadrenocorticism. Cardiac disease is a
the delicate balance between coagulation and fbrinolysis is dis-
rare etiology of CATE. Similar to FATE, CATE usually manifests
turbed so that the rate of coagulation exceeds the rate of fbri-
as a saddle thrombus, but thromboembolism can occur in other
nolysis. Although DIC has been reported in cats with saddle
organs (Table 5.1).
thrombi, it may be a result of thromboembolism rather than a
cause. The vascular occlusion and skeletal muscle ischemia
Pathophysiology of thrombus formation with FATE
resulting from the thrombus is the likely cause of the DIC.
Virchow defned the pathological prerequisites for abnormal
blood coagulation:
1. Endothelial injury
Clinical signs of FATE
2. Stagnant blood flow
The most common historical finding in cats with arterial throm
3. Hypercoagulation
 ed no sid rd  si () 
Table 5.1 Common sites of thrombosis
 Organ involved or location
Clinical signs and clinicopathologic findings
Kidney: acute necrosis; glomerulopathy
Hematuria, oliguria-anuria, azotemia, proteinuria, granular casts,
lumbar hyperesthesia
Lungs: acute respiratory distress, pulmonary
Dyspnea, pyrexia, cyanosis, hemoptysis, Pa02 <60 mmHg, respiratory
thromboembolism, cor pulmonale
acidosis
Heart: acute myocardial infarction, myocarditis.
Arrhythmias (ventricular), collapse, shock, elevated troponin I
cardiomyopathy
con centration
CNS (brain/spinal cord): necrosis
Coma, convulsions, blindness, tetra-/paraparesis, paralysis
Gastrointestinal tract
Melena, hematochezia, hematemesis, hemoconcentration, shock,
circulatory collapse
Peripheral arteritis
Hyperesthesia, lameness, swelling
Thrombophlebitis
Hyperesthesia, edema, heat
130
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 chronicity, pigmenturia (red urine) secondary to myoglobinuria
Table 5.2  Causes of pulmonary hypertension
may be reported. Given that FATE is most commonly seen sec-
 ondary to cardiomyopathy in cats, additional signs related to
Primary (idiopathic)
cardiac disease may be present: dyspnea, anorexia, paresis, rarely
Chronic alveolar hypoxia
coughing, and depressed mentation.
Bronchointerstitial lung disease
Physical examination findings in cats with ATE are paresis,
hyperesthesia, poor to nonexistent pulses, cyanotic nail beds,
Upper airway obstruction
cool extremities, and tachypnea secondary to hyperesthesia and/
Hypoventilation: Pickwickian syndrome
or pulmonary edema. With chronicity, turgid gastrocnemius
Chronic left-sided cardiac insufficiency—PH seldom severe
muscles may be noted on palpation. Less commonly, a thrombus
may affect only one leg, including a front leg (right thoracic limb
Pulmonary thromboembolism
most commonly). Examination findings related to myocardial
Hypercoagulable states
disease may be present and include murmur, gallop sound, tach-
Antithrombin deficiency
ycardia, arrhythmia, mufled heart/lung sounds with pleural
Protein-losing enteropathy
effusion, crackles and/or increased bronchovesicular sounds
associated with pulmonary edema, and hypothermia.
Protein-losing nephropathy
Hyperad renocorticism
Pulmonary arterial thromboembolism
Exogenous or endogenous
Peripheral pulmonary artery thrombosis is common in dogs and
Peracute DIC
rare in cats. Pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) is the obstruc-
tion of pulmonary vessels with blood clots and can be acute or
Ba cteremia
chronic. Rule-outs for acute dyspnea are pulmonary edema
Pan creatitis
(cardiac or noncardiac), aspiration pneumonia, airway obstruc.
Neoplasia
tion, pneumothorax, or PTE. Chronic, progressive dyspnea can
Trauma
be secondary to lower airway diseases or pleural effusion. Estab-
lishing the diagnosis of PTE, especially when associated with
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
chronic dyspnea, is difficult. PTE should also be considered in
Endothelial damage
patients with a diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension (PH) in
Heartworm disease
which a definitive etiology is not readily apparent.
Toxins
Clinical signs of PTE
Dogs with PTE variably exhibit dyspnea, exercise intolerance,
depressed mentation, syncope, and ± coughing/hemoptysis.
known to predispose to thromboembolism, such as hyperadren-
Auscultation may reveal pulmonary crackles and/or a heart
ocorticism or PLN, PH should be suspected to be the result of
crackles secondary to PTE, although related to pulmonary
chronic, progressive small pulmonary arterial thrombosis.
edema, are not due to left-sided congestive heart failure (LS-
Regardless of etiology, when PH is severe, there is always wide-
CHF). Frequently, patients presenting with respiratory signs,
spread small pulmonary arterial thrombosis secondary to
exercise intolerance, syncope, and/or crackles are believed to
endothelial dysfunction.
have LS-CHF and are mistakenly treated with an angiotensin-
 converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) and furosemide. Splitting
Diagnosis
of the second heart sound due to delayed closure of the pulmonic
valve is consistent with PH but is usually absent.
 Thromboembolism must be considered in patients that present
with clinical signs consistent with thrombosis of one or more
Puimonary hypertension
organ systems, with PH of an unknown etiology, or with a clini-
 PTE is a common cause of PH. PH results in a progressive
cal disease known to predispose to thromboembolism.
increase in pulmonary vascular resistance and, in severe cases,
 in right-sided congestive heart failure (RS-CHF).
Diagnosis of FATE
The causes of PH are numerous and, in some patients, the
etiology is uncertain (Table 5.2).
The diagnosis of saddle thrombus is most often a diagnosis made
The most common causes of PH are chronic left-sided cardiac
during physical examination (see above clinical signs). However,
insufficiency (i.e., elevated preload) and chronic bronchointer-
the diagnosis can be challenging in cases of partial obstruction.
 stitial lung disease. Primary PH is not well documented in dogs
 In these, the diagnosis can be supported by differential glucose
and is an exclusion diagnosis when no other etiology can be
and lactate concentrations (i.e., lower glucose and higher lactate
identified. In patients with a comorbid chronic disease process
concentrations in affected vs. nonaffected limbs).
Chapter 5 Thrombotic Disorders in Small Animal Medicine
131
Diagnosis of PTE
Thromboelastography
When the index of suspicion of PTE or other organ thrombosis
Thromboelastography (TEG) can provide evidence of hyperco-
not involving the aortic trifurcation is high, the defnitive diag-
agulation in dogs and in cats by evaluating the entire coagulation
nosis usually relies upon other available diagnostic tests. Clini-
 system from the beginning of coagulation through fibrinolysis.
cians rely heavily on their index of suspicion and the proper
Although hypercoagulation may be documented, abnormal
interpretation of available diagnostic tests to establish a diagno-
TEG does not prove thromboembolism.
sis of PTE.
A TEG tracing is performed on citrated whole blood and has
three zones that provide information about the quality and
dynamics of clot formation:
Laboratory evaluation
1.
 Procoagulation Zone. Start of the test to the formation of the
Complete blood count, serum chemistries, and urinalysis abnor-
first fbrin strands.
malities are frequently associated with an underlying disease
process (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism, PLN, PLE, and pancreati-
2. Coagulation Zone. End of procoagulation zone to the
tis). The complete blood count is frequently associated with a
maximum divergence of tracing lines.
consumptive thrombocytopenia (thrombocytopenia with an
3. Fibrinolysis Zone. End of coagulation zone to the point
 elevated mean platelet volume). If heartworm disease is present,
where tracing lines converge into a single trace (due to
delayed fibrinolysis in dogs/cats, the fibrinlysis zone is rarely
basophilia and anemia (due to chronic disease or lysis secondary
evaluated due to the automatic timed shutdown of the TEG
 to microangiopathy) is possible. An inflammatory (neutrophilia
machine).
with bandemia) or stress leukogram may be present with other
The interpretation of TEG tracing relies upon the evaluation of
 cases of PTE. In cases of chronic PTE, polycythemia secondary
four values:
to hypoxemia may be present.
 Reaction Time (R-Time). The time from the start of tracing
When evaluating a patient with clinical suspicion of PTE, it is
1.1
important to remember that thrombin activity predominates in
to 1-mm divergence of tracing lines.
the reaction. Although the activated partial thromboplastin time
2. Clot Formation Time (K-Time). The time from the end of
(APTT) and prothrombin times (PTs) would be expected to be
R-time to 20-mm divergence of tracing lines. The K-time
decreased with increased thrombin activity, most ofen the times
reflects the rapidity of clot development from the beginning
are normal. A more sensitive indicator of acute thromboembo-
of the visible phase of coagulation to a defined level of clot
lism is D-dimer concentration. D-dimers are cross-linked fibrin-
strength.
derived degradation products and are only present when
3.Maximum Convergence (MA). The maximal distance in
fbrinolysis is activated by ongoing coagulation. D-dimers are
 millimeter between the diverging tracing lines. The MA
more specifc than FDPs because the presence of FDPs does not 
reflects the final clot strength.
distinguish between fibrinogen- or fibrin (clot)-derived prod-
ucts. Given that fbrinogen concentration increases with inflam-
4. Alpha Angle. The angle between the midline and the tangent
 to the curve drawn from the l-mm wide point. Similar to
mation, the presence of FDPs may only represent the breakdown
K-time, the alpha angle is also an indicator of rate of clot
of fbrinogen and not fbrin. In contrast, D-dimers indicate the
breakdown of fbrin (clot) only. A positive result for D-dimers
formation.
is not diagnostic for PTE but is supportive of the diagnosis.
 D-dimer concentrations are not reliable in cats. Samples for
The values obtained from a given patient are compared to stand-
 D-dimer concentration are collected in sodium citrate tubes.
ardized normals. As an example, a short R-time, a short K-time,
and an increased MA obtained on TEG are consistent with
For short-time storage/transport (i.e., 24h), samples should
be refrigerated. For longer-time storage/transport, freezing is
hypercoagulation (Figure 5.2).
recommended.
Thoracic radiographs
sensitive indicator of thromboembolism, we have identified
patients with confrmed PTE in which D-dimer concentrations
Although thoracic radiographs are useful in the evaluation of
were normal at presentation. Whether normal D-dimer concen-
lower airway and cardiovascular causes of dyspnea, they are
u s a are o m sd u s
often difficult to interpret, especially in patients that are frac-
tives, related to chronic/peracute thromboembolism, or a result 
 tious, obese, or have comorbid diseases. Minimal radiographic
of delayed/impaired fibrinolysis is unknown. Therefore, if the 
 abnormalities, despite moderate to severe dyspnea, increase the
 D-dimers are normal in a patient with suspected PTE, consider 
 likelihood of PTE. Two distinct radiographic changes have been
serial D-dimer assays, echocardiography, selective pulmonary
  s     s
 affected by interstitial to alveolar infltrates commonly of the
nary arteriography and radioisotope lung scans are limited to
right and caudal lung lobes. PTE may also be associated with
large referral centers.
mild pleural effusion.
132
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
R
K
Angle
MA
PMA
epl
A
CI
LY30
min
min
bap
mm
d/sc
%
mm
%
6.1
1.5
67.7
59.6
0.0
7.4K
1.3
53.4
1.7
1.3
9 - 27
2-9
22 - 58
44 - 64
3.6K-8.5K
0-15
E-E-
0-8
Result reported:
Reported date:
Reported by:
Figure 5.2  TEG tracing demonstrating hypercoagulation.
Electrocardiogram
6.
 Paradoxical septal motion
7.
 Upward diastolic billowing of the pulmonic valve leaflets
The electrocardiogram (ECG) is of value only in a minority of
 patients. When PTE results in chronic and severe PH, high
8.
Prolonged duration from initial to maximum right ventricu-
 voltage S waves may be present in leads II, III, and aVF and the
lar outflow tract (RVOT) systolic flow velocity
left thoracic leads. High voltage P waves (P-pulmonale) are occa-
i rea    a g 
e    e   p sd as
 and high velocity TR and PR regurgitant jets are most common.
ment secondary to PH is referred to as cor pulmonale.
ST
The severity of the right ventricular hypertrophy, right ventricu-
segment depression/elevation may be present secondary to myo-
lar dilation, and maximum regurgitant velocities correlate with
cardial hypoxia. However, many patients with symptomatic PTE
the severity of PH. Severe PH is associated with TR velocities
have normal ECGs.
above 4m/s and PR velocities above 2 m/s. In the absence of PH,
clinical signifcant PTE is unlikely.
Arterial blood gas analysis and puise oximetry
Blood gas analysis and pulse oximetry may be useful in the
 evaluation of patients with PH and suspected chronic PTE. If
Therapy
normal in symptomatic patients, PTE can be ruled out. However,
Although the focus of therapy and prevention described here
these tests lack specifcity in that low arterial blood oxygen satu-
 pertains to FATE, the treatment/prevention medications used in
ration and low hemoglobin oxygen saturation can occur with
CATE and PTE are similar.
many causes of PH and pulmonary diseases.
Echocardiography
Treatment of ATE
 Echocardiography, in our experience, is the best, practical diag-
Treatment for ATE, most often manifesting as a saddle thrombus
 nostic test for initial evaluation of patients with suspected PTE.
in cats, requires attention to cardiovascular status, collateral cir-
  n is oa    
culation, analgesia, nutritional support, correction of hypother-
 pulmonic regurgitation (PR) will be present. With chronicity,
mia, prevention of self-mutilation, rehabilitation therapy, and to
there are a number of abnormalities supportive of the diagnosis:
limit rethrombotic episodes. Hyperkalemia, myoglobin neph-
1.
Underloaded left atrium, left ventricle, and pulmonary veins
ropathy, and decompensation of cardiomyopathy are potential
High velocity TR and PR
complications of thrombolysis (especially when tPA is used).
Close monitoring of renal status, electrolytes, and for congestive
 Right ventricular dilation with hypertrophy
heart failure (CHF) is imperative.
4.
 Right atrial dilation
Surgical embolectomy is occasionally performed, although
5.
 Flattening of the interventricular septum
 pulmonary edema, pleural effusion, and atrial fbrillation must
Chapter 5  Thrombotic Disorders in Small Animal Medicine
133
 be absent. Ifleft atrial dilation is severe, then pulmonary edema
Table 5.3 Recommended dosages—FATE
may develop soon after surgery.
FATE therapy
Dosage
Medical management
Amlodipine
0.625 mg/cat every 24h
Collateral circulation refers to the establishment of blood flow
through small adjacent vessels in response to the thrombosis of a
Fentanyl CRI 
 1-3 mcg/kg/hour
 main blood vessel. While some studies have indicated the impor-
Sodium heparin
300 U/kg IV once followed by
 tance of inhibiting platelet-derived vasoconstrictors (which may
SQ every 8h
 prevent and inhibit collateral circulation in cases of FATE), there
tPA
0.25-0.5mg/kg IV hourly to a
are no controlled studies demonstrating improvement of collat-
total dosage of 1-10 mg/kg
eral flow with arteriolar dilator therapy. Nevertheless, amlodipine
(Norvasc?) can be used in an attempt to improve collateral circu-
FATE prevention
lation. However, when FATE is caused by HCM, arteriolar dila-
 Aspirin
81 mg/cat every 3-4 days
tion is contraindicated in the face of severe left ventricular
Clopidogrel (Plavix?)
18.75 mg/cat every 24 h
outflow tract obstruction (loud heart murmur). Therefore,
Warfarin
0.5 mg/cat every 24h (starting
amlodipine is not recommended if there is a loud heart murmur
dosage and adjusted based on
or if there is echocardiographic evidence of severe outflow tract
PT time)
obstruction. Warm compresses can also be applied with the goal
Sodium heparin
100-300 U/kg SQ every 8h
 of improving collateral circulation by promoting vasodilation.
They may also provide some additive analgesic effects.
LMWH heparin 
100 U/kg sQ every 6-8h
Analgesia must be addressed in thromboembolism cases.
(dalteparin)
 Butorphanol, an analgesic and a sedative, provides pain relief
and may also provide a calming influence, but the necessity of
Source: Compiled from Hogan et al. (2004), Smith et al. (2004), and
Thompson et al. (2001).
the use of fentanyl as a constant rate infusion (CRI) to initially
 manage pain. A fentanyl patch can also be used, but analgesia
sis is prevented with anticoagulants, gangrene-toxicity does not
must be addressed prior to its onset of action.
occur, and CHF can be prevented or controlled.
Anorexia is common in patients with thromboembolism and
is associated with hyperesthesia, stress/anxiety of hospitaliza-
Pharmacology
tion, medication side effects, and/or CHF. In our experience,
Heparin therapy in combination with aspirin and/or clopidogrel
most cats with ATE do not drink appropriately to maintain
(Plavix?) is useful to prevent additional thrombus formation (see
hydration. Dehydration, coupled with myoglobinuria from
"Prevention of ATE" for more information).
ischemic myopathy, increases the risk of kidney failure. In
tPA is the only definitive therapy for thrombolysis. Unfortu-
patients with mild to no cardiomegaly, intravenous fluids (IVs)
nately, the treatment is expensive and of questionable effcacy.
can be provided to maintain hydration. However, given that
At the university, we break down commercial vials into small
 most cats have at least moderate cardiomegaly with risk of fluid
aliquots that are deep frozen until used. A jugular catheter
overload, we recommend the placement of a nasoesophageal
should be placed to facilitate monitoring of electrolytes and
(NE) tube at presentation. Not only do NE tubes provide a route
acid-base balance. A complication of thrombolysis is reper-
of fluid administration with low risk of fluid overload, but they
 (a on n) al aq s s rs uoi
also provide a means of nutritional support.
          
 Hypothermia is often associated with shock (cardiogenic, dis-
reperfusion syndrome (Table 5.3).
tributive, and/or metabolic). Body temperature can be increased
with warming blankets, warming cages, and/or heat packs.
Prevention of ATE
 Heating devices are best applied to the glabrous skin (abdomen
and groin regions). Remember when applying a heat source to
The simplest prescribed ATE prophylactic treatment is aspirin.
        an 
 s  o   
 associated with a poorer prognosis in FATE.
version of arachidonic acid to thromboxane A. Thromboxane A2
 During recovery from FATE, some cats may develop excessive
is a potent platelet aggregator and vasoconstrictor Aspirin inhib-
licking and/or chewing of the distal limb. Application of a barrier
 its platelet aggregation for the life span of the platelet (3-4 days).
(stockinette or bandage), coupled with effective analgesics, will
Another class of drug that exerts an additive antiplatelet
usually prevent self-mutilation.
action is the thienopyridines, which can be used in conjunction
 Physical therapy, via massage therapy and passive range of
with or in place of aspirin. Thienopyridines impair platelet func-
motion exercises, may retard or slow muscle atrophy and may
tion by irreversibly antagonizing the receptor for adenosine
also assist in the promotion of collateral circulation.
diphosphate (ADP). ADP is a proaggregating substance that
 Some patients will recover from the thromboembolic effects
induces changes in platelet shape and induces expression of GP
within 3 weeks. Revascularization can occur if further thrombo-
IIb/IIla receptors. Binding of protein ligands to the GP IIb/IIla
134
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
receptors is the final step in platelet aggregation. By blocking the
Table 5.4 General guidelines for FATE prophylaxis
ADP receptor, thienopyridines render the platelets unable to
aggregate in response to ADP. Hepatic metabolites of the
Risk
Left atrial
Therapy
diameter (2-D
thienopyridines are the active compounds in platelet inhibition,
ech ocardiography)
and similar to aspirin, this inhibition is for the life of the platelet.
In human trials, the combination of aspirin and a thienopyridine
Low
<16mm
None
is superior to aspirin alone in the prevention of thrombosis. One
or
of the thienopyridines, clopidogrel, has been studied in cats and
aspirin or clopidogrel
 produces dramatic antiplatelet action with a maximum activity
monotherapy
reached in 3 days. Vomiting is the most common adverse effect
Moderate
16-20mm
Asprin or clopidogrel
reported in dogs. In humans, hepatoxicity and blood dyscrasias
monotherapy
are uncommon adverse effects.
or
An alternative prophylaxis is Coumadin? (warfarin). Although
aspirin and clopidogrel 
combined therapy
warfarin may be a more effective prophylaxis than aspirin, clini-
cal trials have not been performed. Hemorrhage complications,
High
>20mm or left
Aspirin and clopidogrel
atrial "smoke" or
or aspirin or clopidogrel
usually not severe, are a common complication when warfarin
history of FATE
and heparin combined
is used. Warfarin acts as an anticoagulant by inhibiting the syn-
therapy
thesis of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors II, VIl, IX, and X.
or
Vitamin K is an essential cofactor for the postribosomal synthe-
aspirin, clopidogrel, and
sis of these clotting factors. Warfarin also inhibits the synthesis
heparin combined 
therapy
of the anticoagulant proteins C and S. This latter effect produces
a hypercoagulable state for a few days until the clotting factor
levels decrease. For this reason, it is recommended to coadmin-
    s m e r ud si
phase of warfarin therapy.
 of 18-pentasaccharide units required for the LMWH-AT complex
Warfarin therapy is more labor intensive and is likely to result
to bridge and bind to thrombin. This minimizes the risk of hem-
 in some hemorrhage complications. The warfarin regimen must
orrhage and largely invalidates the utility of the PT, thrombin
be highly individualized for each patient and the therapeutic
time (TT), and APTT for monitoring efficacy. An affordable
 index is narrow. The PT should be measured frequently during
LMWH preparation is dalteparin in 9.5-mL vials. Each vial con-
the frst few weeks of therapy and then monthly thereafter.
tains 10,000 U/mL of LMWH. We prescribe dalteparin via a
Unfortunately, the drug is not evenly distributed throughout the
compounding pharmacy that provides the clients with diluted
pill; therefore, the pill should not be split but recompounded.
(1:9 in D5W or normal saline) aliquots of sufficient volume for
Maintaining a PT of 1.5-2.0 times above baseline level is recom-
1-2 months (Table 5.3).
mended Daily administration, monitoring of the one-stage PT,
 Our general guidelines for FATE prophylaxis are outlined in
and the risk of hemorhage all weigh against the use of warfarin
Table 5.4.
for prophylaxis. Although usually not life threatening, most
treated patients will experience at least one episode of hematuria
Client education
or hematoma.
Low dose unfractionated heparin administration is an alter-
Clients should be informed ofthe guarded short-term prognosis
native to warfarin, and perhaps aspirin in cats, because it rarely
for patients with thromboembolism. In some patients, resolution
causes hemorrhage, requires minimal monitoring, and is not
can take many days to weeks. Should successful resolution occur,
administered orally. However, it must be administered every 8 h
the patient is often at risk of relapse due to persistence of the
to be effective. While heparin may be a more effective ATE
predisposing etiology (i.e., cardiomyopathy). Despite the use of
preventive anticoagulants, relapses are frequent.
makes it an impractical choice.
Low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) is an alternative to
Suggested readings
warfarin, unfractionated heparin, and aspirin, or it can be com-
bined with aspirin in very high risk patients. The major advan-
Carr AP, Johnson GS. A review of hermostatic abnormalities in dogs
tages of LMWH are that it is administered only once daily (SQ)
and monitoring of the coagulogram is neither required nor
and cats. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 1994;
30:475.
useful. However, recent studies suggest three to four times daily
Topper MJ and Welles EG. Hemostasis. In Duncan and Prasse's (eds):
administration may be required for effective inhibition of factor
Clinical Pathology, 4rh edition, Ames, lowa, Iowa State University
Xa. LMWH enhances the inhibition of factor Xa and thrombin
Press, 2003;4:99.
via antithrombin. LMWH potentiates preferentially the inhibi-
Hackner SG. Approach to the diagnosing of bleeding disorders.
tion of coagulation factor Xa. Unlike unfractionated heparin,
Compendium on Contimuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian
 only 15-25% of LMWH molecules have the necessary sequence
1995;17(3):331.
Chapter 5  Thrombotic Disorders in Small Animal Medicine
135
Triplett DA. Coagulation and bleeding disorders: review and update.
Hogan DE, Andrews DA, Green HW, et al. Antiplatelet effects and
Clinical Chemistry 2000;46(8):1260.
pharmacodynamics of clopidogrel in cats. Journal of the American
Mammen EF. Disseminated intravascular coagulation. Clinical Labora-
Veterinary Medical Association 2004;225:1406.
tory Science 2000;13(4):239.
Smith CE, Rozanski EA, Freeman LM, et al. Use of low molecular
Asakura H, Suga Y, Asoshima K, et al. Marked difference in pathophysi-
weight heparin in cats: 57 cases (1999-2003). Journal of the American
ology between tissue factor and lipopolysaccharide induced dissemi-
Veterinary Medical Association 2004;225:1237.
nated intravascular coagulation models in rats. Critical Care Medicine
Smith SA, Tobias AH, Jacob KA, et al. Arterial thromboembolism in
2002;30(1):161.
cats: acute crisis in 127 cases and long term management with low-
dose aspirin in 24 cases. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine/
tions to Microbiology 2003;10:18.
American College ofVeterinary Internal Medicine 2003;17:73.
Levi M. Pathogenesis and treatment of disseminated intravascular coag-
 Donahue SM, Oto CM. Ihromboelastography: a tool for measuring
ulation in the septic patient. Journal of Critical Care 2001;16(4):167.
hypercoagulability, hypocoagulability, and fibrinolysis. Journal of
 Cate H. Pathophysiology of disseminated intravascular coagulation in
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 2005;15:9.
sepsis. Critical Care Medicine 2000;28(9):9.
Stokol T. Plasma D-dimer for the diagnosis of thromboembolic disor-
 Bateman SW, Matthews KA, Abrams AC. Disseminated intravascular
ders in dogs. Veterinary Clinics of North America. Smal Animal
coagulation in dogs: review of the literature. Journal of Veterinary
Practice 2003;33:1419.
Emergency and Critical Care 1998;8(1):29.
Thompson MF, Scott-Montcrief JC, Hogan DE Thrombolytic therapy
Rozanski EA, Hughes D, Scotti M, et al. The effect of heparin and fresh
in dogs and cats.Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
frozen plasma on plasma antithrombin Ill activity prothrombin time
2001;11:111.
and activated partial thromboplastin time in critically ill dogs.
Caldin M, Furlanello T, Lubas G. Validation of an immunoturbidimetric
Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 2001;11(1):15.
D-dimer assay in canine citrated plasma. Veterinary Clinical
Aoki Y, Ota M, Katsuura Y, et al. Efect of activated human protein C
on disseminated intravascular coagulation induced by lipopolysac-
29(2):51-54.
charide inrats.Arzneimittel-Forschung/Drug Research 2000;50(11):809.
 Matsuo T, Kobayashi H, Kario K, et al. Fibrin D-dimer in thrombogenic
Izutani W, Fujita M, Nishizawa K, et al. Urinary protein C inhibitor as
disorders. Seminars in Thrormbasis and Hemostasis2000;26(1):101-107.
 a therapeutic agent to disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC):
Moresco RN, Vargas LC, Voegell CF, et al. D-dimer and its relationship
to fibrinogen/fibrin degradation products (FDPs) in disorders associ-
polysaccharide induced DIC. Biological e Pharmaceutical Bulltin
ated with activation of coagulation or fbrinolytic systems. Journalof
2000;23(9):1046.
Clinical Laboratory Analysis 2003;17:77-79.
Chapter
Respiratory
Editor: Jennifer Garcia
 Section 1 Upper Airway Disease - Amy Kubier and
Section 5 Pleural Disease - Marcella D. Ridgway 152
Marcella D. Ridgway 137
Section 6 Anesthesic and Analgesic Considerations in Respiratory
Section 2 Mediastinal Disease - Robin Sereno 141
Disease - Katrina Lafferty 156
Section 3 Lower Airway Disease - Sallianne Schlacks
Section 7 Feeding Considerations for Respiratory Disease -
 and Marcella D. Ridgway 142
Ann Wortinger 157
Section 4 Pulmonary Parenchymal Disease -
Marcella D. Ridgway 146
SECTION 1 UPPER AIRWAY
Brachycephalic airway syndrome
DISEASE
such as English bulldogs, pugs, Boston teriers, shih tzus, and
Anatomy and physiology
Persian cats. Brachycephalic airway syndrome results from multi-
ple abnormalitites of the upper airway, including congenital and
The upper airway includes the respiratory structures rostral to
acquired components. The abnormalities cause upper airway
the trachea including the nasal passages, pharynx, and the larynx.
 obstruction and varying degrees of dyspnea. The congenital
The larynx has two main functions: protection of the lower
abnormalities are stenotic nares, elongation and thickening of the
-d i n rm s n a jo uod pe mi
 soft palate, and redundant pharyngeal tissue. The acquired abnor-
tected against inhalation of both food and water by multiple
malities arise secondary to the chronically increased inspiratory
 mechanisms that include the epiglottis covering the laryngeal
 effort necessary to overcome the upper airway obstruction caused
entrance on swallowing and closure of the glotis by adduction
by the congenital abnormalities. The acquired components of
of the vocal folds.
brachycephalic air way syndrome are everted laryngeal saccules,
further enlargement of pharyngeal mucosal and soft palate tissues
Diseases of the upper airway
because of edema and inflammation, laryngeal edema, and poten-
tially, laryngeal collapse as an end-stage manifestation of this
The most common airway diseases in dogs and cats are brachy-
syndrome. Tracheal hypoplasia is a congenital abnormality that
cephalic airway syndrome, laryngeal paralysis, nasopharyngeal
 may be seen concurrently in animals with brachycephalic airway
 polyps, and laryngitis.
 syndrome, especially English bulldogs.
Smat Anima nternat Medicine forVeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses, First Edition.Edited by Linda Meril
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
137
138
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Clinical signs
lateral thoracic radiographs. In a normal dog, the ratio is 0.16.
Brachycephalic breeds have smaller tracheal sizes, and a ratio of
 The most common clinical sign of brachycephalic airway syn-
0.14 is considered normal in all brachycephalic breeds except in
drome is an abnormally increased inspiratory effort, which
 English bulldogs, where 0.12 is considered normal.
ranges in severity from stertor to dyspnea. The increased inspira-
Brachycephalic airway syndrome is not usually associated
tory effort is often exacerbated by exercise and worsens over time
with signifcant laboratory abnormalities. Chronic hypoxemia
as the acquired abnormalities develop and progress in severity.
can occur, which may lead to a secondary polycythemia. Arterial
Coughing, gagging, and inspiratory stridor may also be noted.
blood gas (ABG) abnormalities such as a low PaO, or elevated
Diagnostic testing
PaCO, can occur.
The diagnosis of brachycephalic airway syndrome is based on
Treatment
direct examination of the upper airway structures. The nares can
be evaluated in the awake patient but examination of the soft
 Dogs with brachycephalic airway syndrome may present in acute
palate, pharynx, and larynx requires heavy sedation or light
respiratory distress. The presence of inspiratory dyspnea in a
anesthesia. The caudal edge of a normal soft palate touches the
brachycephalic breed should prompt the consideration of diagno-
proximal portion of the epiglottis. Normal laryngeal cartilages
-s aa  u s an an po si
should be frm and symmetrical and should abduct on inspira-
 tion, mild sedation or an anxiolytic, and oxygen therapy are
tion. In dogs with brachycephalic airway syndrome, the nares
indicated. In patients with extreme dyspnea, IV catheter place-
are often stenotic and do not allow suffcient airflow. If the soft
ment, anesthetic induction, and endotracheal intubation can be
palate is elongated, the caudal edge often overlaps with a large
needed. These patients are also prone to development of very high
portion of the epiglottis (Figure 6.1.1). Everted laryngeal sac-
cules can be visualized on the ventrolateral aspect of either side
of the larynx and look like small bubbles protruding from the
and cooling measures instituted as needed. Additionally, dyspneic
surface of the mucosa. If laryngeal collapse has occurred, the
animals may swallow a lot ofair intheir effort to breathe, resulting
laryngeal cartilages are neither frm nor symmetrical and can
 in gastric distention that may impede movement of the dia-
 often be seen sagging ventrally.
phragm and further reduce ventilation. Patients should be moni-
Lateral radiographs of the head and neck may show elon-
tored for gastric distention and decompression via gastric
gation of the soft palate, but radiography is not generally con-
intubation or percutaneous decompression performed if needed.
tributory in diagnosing brachycephalic airway syndrome.
Radiographs of the trachea are indicated to evaluate for concur-
gical. Stenotic nares, everted laryngeal saccules, and an elon-
rent tracheal hypoplasia, another congenial abnormality to
gated soft palate can be surgically corrected (see Figure 6.1.2).
s  sa    
Stenotic nares can be corrected with a wedge resection (see
are predisposed. Tracheal size is assessed as the ratio of tracheal
Figures 6.1.3 and 6.1.4), everted saccules can be removed, and
diameter at the level of the thoracic inlet to thoracic inlet size on
an elongated soft palate can be shortened with a palatectomy. If
Figure 6.1.1  View of elongated soft palate (black arrow) overlapping 
the epiglottis (not visualized) in a bulldog.
resection. Note glasses on patient to protect eyes from laser. Courtesy
of Michelle Jaeger.
Chapter 6 Respiratory
139
Figure 6.1.3  Before rhinoplasty to corect stenotic nares in a
Figure 6.1.4 After rhinoplasty.
1-year-old female pug.
the brachycephalic airway disease progresses to laryngeal col-
 prompt, symmetrical abduction in inspiration. It is helpful to
lapse, a permanent tracheostomy is needed to bypass the obstruc-
have an assistant watch the patient's thorax and tell the examiner
tive larynx.
when the dog inhales to correlate cartilage movement (or lack
thereof) with respirations. It is important to ensure that the
Laryngeal paralysis
patient is making significant respiratory effort during the exami-
nation as depression of respiratory drive by sedatives and anes
Laryngeal paralysis can be congenital or acquired and may man-
thetic agents may result in incorrect diagnosis of laryngeal
ifest as either unilateral or bilateral paralysis of the muscles
 paralysis because of reduced arytenoid excursion with shallow
moving the arytenoid cartilages. Laryngeal paralysis is usually
breathing. Stimulation of maximal respiratory effort by toe pinch
an acquired condition affecting middle-aged, medium to large
or, ideally, by the administration of a respiratory stimulant (dox-
dog breeds and is especially common in older retrievers.
apram 2mg/kg IV) improves the accuracy of assessment of
laryngeal function by overcoming artifcial depression of aryte-
polymyopathy, laryngeal trauma, injury, or disease affecting the
noid motion.
recurrent laryngeal nerve. Congenital laryngeal paralysis has
Dogs with laryngeal paralysis should always have thoracic
been reported in certain dog breeds including the Bouvier des
radiographs taken to evaluate for aspiration pneumonia second-
Flandres, Siberian husky, and Alaskan malamute, but is rare.
ary to laryngeal dysfunction, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema
secondary to upper airway obstruction, and for concurrent
Clinical signs
 abnormalities which may suggest an underlying cause or disease
 The most common clinical signs associated with laryngeal paral-
 process (e.g., megaesophagus with polyneuropathies or polymy-
ysis include inspiratory noise and exercise intolerance. The
 ositis; inflammatory masses that may affect the recurrent laryn-
inspiratory noise is often referred to as stridor. The inability of
geal nerves).
the arytenoid cartilages to abduct results in upper airway
 There are no specific laboratory abnormalities associated with
 obstruction. Dogs that have acquired laryngeal paralysis often
 laryngeal paralysis; however, patients with laryngeal paralysis may
 develop clinical signs during late spring or early summer, when
 be unable to protect their airway and are therefore predisposed
 it begins to become warm and they are panting more frequently
 to aspiration pneumonia, which may result in a leukocytosis.
   si   so  s 
Treatment
atory stridor, gagging, and coughing. Owners may note that
 I  u e    e   
Dogs with laryngeal paralysis may present in acute respiratory
distress. The signalment (middle-aged medium to large dog
Diagnostic testing
breed), time of year (hot humid weather), and the presence of
The diagnosis of laryngeal paralysis is made by direct laryngeal
 inspiratory dyspnea can be suggestive of laryngeal paralysis.
examination under heavy sedation or light anesthesia. The seda-
 Emergency management includes mild sedation with an anxio-
tion needs to be adequate for the animal to allow access for
lytic or sedative (e.g., acepromazine, butorphanol) to reduce the
examination but light enough to avoid depression of spontane-
 exaggerated inspiratory effort, which tends to worsen the laryn-
ous respiratory effort. Normally, the arytenoid cartilages show
 geal collapse. Intravenous access should be obtained as soon as
140
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
possible. In extreme dyspnea, IV catheter placement, anesthetic
 There are no specifc laboratory abnormalities associated with
induction, and endotracheal intubation are needed. Patients are 
laryngitis; however, cats with laryngitis often have associated
also prone to the development of very high body temperatures
 systemic ilness, and thus a leukocytosis could be seen on a
because upper airway obstruction impairs heat dissipation. Body
complete blood count (CBC).
temperatures should be monitored and cooling measures insti-
tuted as needed. Additionally, dyspneic animals may swallow a
Treatment
lot of air in their effort to breathe, and resulting gastric distention
Laryngitis is often self-limiting, and patients are managed with
may impede movement of the diaphragm and further reduce
general nutritional and hydration support, and antitussive medi-
 ventilation. Patients should be monitored for gastric distention
no e adn ss si se  pau se s
and decompression via gastric intubation or percutaneous
tion can occur due to the inflammation or edema. In these rare
decompression if needed.
cases of upper airway obstruction, a tracheostomy should be
 If laryngeal paralysis is bilateral, as is the case in most patients
performed to bypass the obstructed larynx. The tracheostomy is
with clinical signs of laryngeal disease, surgical correction may
often temporary to allow stabilization and additional diagnos-
be necessary. In particular, if the patient cannot be stabilized on
fics; however, occasionally, a permanent tracheostomy is needed.
initial presentation or if management of environmental factors,
Special nursing care is needed if a tracheostomy is placed. In
exercise level, and weight reduction does not adequately control
cases of a temporary tracheostomy, the tube management and
clinical signs, surgery is indicated. Many surgical techniques are
cleaning technique will depend largely on the type of temporary
available, but unilateral arytenoid lateralization is the most
tracheostomy tube used. If the tube is a single lumen, the tube
common procedure. It should be noted that patients with laryn-
should be gently wiped off and suctioned throughout the day. A
geal paralysis remain predisposed to aspiration pneumonia after
double lumen tracheostomy tube has a removable inner tube
 surgical correction and should be monitored in the immediate
that can be taken out of the tracheostomy tube to allow a more
 postoperative period for the development of pneumonia. With-
thorough cleaning. Initially, the tube is cleaned every 2h, and
holding oral intake of food or water until the dog is fully recoy.
then the cleanings can be spaced out (every 4-6h). The time
ered from anesthesia and feeding of small meatballs of food may
frame for cleaning often changes, and when animals begin to
help minimize the chance of aspiration pneumonia.
recover and are more mobile, the secretions often increase,
requiring more frequent cleaning.
If a permanent tracheostomy is performed, nursing care is
Laryngitis
vital to a successful recovery. The permanent tracheostomy site
Laryngitis is an inflammation, swelling, or irritation of the
should be cleaned by gently wiping the secretions off of the inci-
larynx. Laryngitis can occur in both cats and dogs, and the cause
sion with moist gauze. If signs of an upper airway obstruction
of laryngitis often differs between these two species. In dogs,
occur, the tracheostomy site should be suctioned to remove
laryngitis can be associated with viruses, bacteria, mycoplasma,
mucous plugs or heavy secretions.
excessive barking, intubation, insect bites, trauma, foreign
 doaap ses iei sns sodau ie paou a pos h
bodies, or masses. In cats, laryngitis is often associated with viral
airway secretions and have a higher mortality rate than dogs
 infections such as feline herpesvirus or calicivirus.
with this surgical procedure.
Clinical signs
Nutritional considerations
The main nutritional consideration with upper airway disease is
and the severity of laryngitis. Dogs with laryngitis often have a
ensuring that the patient maintains a lean body condition.
mild, self-limiting cough. Cats with laryngitis often have an indi-
 Brachycephalic breeds are predisposed to obesity, which alone
cation of systemic illness, and the signs include anorexia, ptyal-
can worsen respiratory function and can increase the demand
ism, fever, and dyspnea. Swelling and edema of the larynx occurs
for oxygen. After surgery to correct brachycephalic airway
 more commonly in cats than in dogs.
disease or laryngeal paralysis, special feeding considerations
should be used until the patient has healed from the surgery. Soft
Diagnostic testing
food given in meatballs should be the initial food of choice.
Additional information can be found in Section 7 of this chapter.
A tentative diagnosis of laryngitis can be made based on history
and a thorough physical examination. A laryngeal examination
re q naa on uoss naun paad aq u
Anesthetic and analgesic
considerations
 ogy can be performed on any abnormal laryngeal mucosa and
may help to discriminate inflammation from neoplasia.
Dogs with both brachycephalic airway syndrome and laryngeal
 Animals with laryngitis can have concurrent pneumonia, and
 paralysis can present in respiratory distress. If this occurs, a
thus thoracic radiographs should be evaluated in patients with
sedative and anxiolytic such as butorphanol and acepromazine
suspected laryngitis.
may be indicated. Analgesic considerations are necessary post-
Chapter 6  Respiratory
141
operatively. It is important to control the pain associated with a
surgical procedure in these animals, but heavy sedation postop-
Pneumomediastinum
eratively can lead to an unprotected airway, which could further
Pneumomediastinum is the accumulation of air in the mediasti-
 predispose dogs with laryngeal paralysis to develop aspiration
num. When this condition exists, the outer wall of the trachea
 pneumonia. Additional information can be found in Section 6
and other cranial mediastinal structures appear in contrast radi-
of this chapter.
ographically. Although most cases of pneumomediastinum are
self-limiting and mild, there are instances in which it can lead
to pneumothorax, pneumoperitoneum, and pneumopericar-
dium. Depending on the underlying etiology pneumomediasti-
SECTION 2 MEDIASTINAL DISEASE
 num may be either self-limiting or progressive, more often than
not overlapping with some form of pulmonary disease or process.
Anatomy and physiology
The effect of a small amount of free gas in the mediastinum alone
is usually minimal. The most common underlying cause is
The mediastinum is the central compartment of the thoracic
 trauma to the esophagus, trachea, pharynx, or a pulmonary
cavity, made up of a nondelineated group of structures in the
injury.
thorax, surrounded by loose connective tissue. It contains the
Clinical presentation of pneumomediastinum can consist of
heart, the great vessels of the heart, esophagus, trachea, phrenic
respiratory distress (restrictive respiratory pattern), dyspnea,
nerve, cardiac nerve, thoracic duct, thymus, and lymph nodes of
subcutaneous emphysema, tissue trauma, and/or muffled heart
the central chest. This section will discuss specific mediastinal
sounds. Disease differentials can be quite varied but oftentimes
 diseases; however, there is much overlap with pulmonary disease.
 are the result of trauma. Less common causes include underlying
All related diseases will be covered in Section 4 of this chapter.
disease processes such as pneumonia, pulmonary abscess, neo-
plasia, chronic granulomatous infection, or pulmonary parasitic
infection. Diagnostic testing includes (but is not limited to) tho-
Mediastinitis
racic radiographs, ultrasound, computed tomography (CT) scan,
and thoracocentesis. Treatment options include chest tube place-
Mediastinitis is inflammation of the mediastinum, the area
ment (pressure relief), medical management (monitoring, cage
between the lungs. The most common clinical presentation in
 rest), and/or surgical management (repair of large, unhealing
dogs and cats with mediastinitis include gagging, ptyalism
tears). Many times, cage rest is adequate for resolution or natural
(hypersalivating), dysphagia, vomiting, lethargy, respiratory dis-
sealing of these tears.
tress, swelling of the head, neck, and/or front legs, weight loss,
Pneumomediastinum can and often does occur as a result of
or fever.
n  s     an  s 
A common scenario in which mediastinitis occurs in small
racic pressure. Common causes of intrathoracic pressure change
animals results from the ingestion of an inedible item such as a
include coughing, blunt force, excessive respiratory eforts
stick or needle that causes a full or partial blockage in the
against an obstructive airway (e.g., close pop-off valve), or tra-
 esophagus or trachea. This blockage allows fluids to pass but not
 cheal tears. Iatrogenic causes include tracheal washing, trache-
food. If the blockage has occurred for a period of time, the
ostomy, endotracheal tube placement, and/or overinflation of
animal may lose weight and/or become lethargic. The foreign
endotracheal tube cuffs.
object may puncture the structure that it is lodged in, resulting
in an abscess. Other routine presentations of mediastinitis may
Mediastinal masses
be caused by trauma such as a blow or wound to the neck or
chest.
Masses in the mediastinum are the most common and prolific
The range of diagnostic evaluators for mediastinitis are varied
 mediastinal disease seen in small animals. These masses typically
and typically are more of a rule-out of symptoms; among them
cause inspiratory distress due to the displaced lung tissue and
are abdominal ultrasound, echocardiogram, CBC, chemistry
 decreased lung volume; at times, secondary pleural effusion may
panel, blood gas, chest and/or abdominal radiographs, vide-
develop.
ofluoroscopic swallow study, and ± endoscopy.
a ad o o  sis 
Treatment options for mediastinitis are dependent on the
sion, palpable tissue mass, respiratory distress, and/or facial
severity, type, and cause of infection; if severe, hospitalization
edema. Neoplasia is the primary differential diagnosis, although
for intravenous fluids, antibiotics, and chest tube placement are 
there are other non-neoplastic causes to be considered. Lym-
typical. If the cause is an abscess, then surgery is the recom-
 phoma, particularly (but not exclusively) in cats, is very common.
mended treatment along with the aforementioned treatments. If
 Other neoplasms that are reported include thymoma, thyroid
there is a foreign object causing the mediastinitis, treatment may
 carcinoma, parathyroid carcinoma, and chemodectoma. Non-
include removal via endoscopy with surgery as a backup if non-
 neoplastic causes include abscesses, granulomas, hematomas,
 invasive attempts at removal are unsuccessful. The medical man-
or cysts.
agement of mediastinitis can range from 2 weeks to 6 months,
 Diagnostic evaluation typically includes thoracic radiographs,
dependent on the type of infection, fungal versus bacterial.
thoracocentesis and cytology (in patients with effusion), ultrasound,
142
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
fine needle aspirate, CT scan, videofluoroscopic swallow study,
matory cells. Excess mucus and injurious agents may overwhelm
endoscopy, and/or biopsy.
the mucociliary clearance mechanism and stimulate cough
 Treatment options are solely dependent on the type of mass
receptors. Bronchial smooth muscle may spasm or become
(neoplastic vs. non-neoplastic) and are quite varied due to the
hypertrophied, which results in narrowing of the airways.
and surgical treatments are commonly utilized when treating
Clinical signs
mediastinal masses. Medical treatment may consist of both
chemotherapy and radiation therapy in addition to surgery
Clinical signs of lower airway disease relate to interruption of air
when dealing with neoplastic masses. Non-neoplastic masses are
flow (wheezing, dyspnea), stimulation of cough receptors, or
 most commonly resolved with surgical intervention.
triggering of mucus secretion (crackles on auscultation, produc-
tive cough).
SECTION 3 LOWER AIRWAY
 The most common clinical sign of primary lower airway
disease is cough, which can also arise secondary to other diseases
DISEASE
which cause compression of airways (enlarged tracheobronchial
lymph nodes, cardiac enlargement, pulmonary mass) or involve
Anatomy and physiology
terminal airways by the extension of inflammation or the accu
mulation of fluid or secretions (pneumonia, pulmonary edema).
The lower airway includes all airway structures distal to the
Causes of primary lower airway disease in small animal
 glottis, including the trachea, carina, bronchi, and bronchioles.
patients include tracheal collapse, chronic bronchitis, feline
The trachea bifurcates into the left and right principal bronchi
bronchitis/asthma, airway infection (Mycoplasma, Bordetella,
at the carina. Each principal bronchus divides into lobar bronchi,
parasites), tracheal trauma, inhaled foreign body/foreign mate-
which each supplies a specific lung lobe, branching into progres-
rial, and, less commonly, tracheal hypoplasia and ciliary
sively smaller segmental then subsegmental bronchi and bron-
dyskinesia.
chioles that terminate at the alveolar sac. The airway functions
au a jo ino pue u saessed ie ioy npuos e se Aedioud
Diagnostic testing
 gas exchange (uptake of oxygen and inhalant anesthetic agents,
release of carbon dioxide and other waste gases) occurs at the
History and physical examination
level of the alveoli.
The airway structure serves to keep the passageways open for
Most patients with lower airway disease have a history of cough,
unobstructed airflow to and from the alveoli. The trachea is
which should be characterized as to the length of time present,
composed of semicircular cartilage rings connected by fbroelas-
character (productive, dry), occurrence (nocturnal, when excited),
tic annular ligaments, allowing flexibility of the neck while main-
and triggers (exercise, pulling on collar). Information on breed,
age, and body size can aid in prioritizing differentials. Potential
-q pe iei asxa ssa ae inq Aia Tm id
for exposure to infectious diseases (dog park, kennel), vaccina-
chial walls are also composed of smooth muscle. Progressing
tion status, heartworm status and the use of heartworm prophy-
distally in the airways there is less cartilage and more smooth
laxis, and potential trauma or inhaled irritant exposure should
muscle until the walls of the bronchioles, which are almost
be determined
entirely composed of smooth muscle.
In cats, it is important to help owners distinguish cough from
A thin layer of mucus secreted by goblet cells in the airway
mucosa coats the airway lumen to moisten inspired air and to
 ing up a hairball" when in fact the cat is coughing.
trap inhaled particles (foreign material, infectious agents).
Physical examination may reveal inspiratory (cervical trachea)
Airways are lined by ciliated epithelial cells. These cilia beat
continually, which, combined with airflow, moves the mucus
expiratory effort due to partial obstruction (bronchoconstric-
layer slowly toward the pharynx where the mucus is then swal-
 tion, increased secretions, or both). Palpation of the trachea may
lowed or coughed out of the airways. Submucosal mucous
elicit paroxysmal coughing in patients with tracheal sensitivity
glands, immune cells, and cough receptors are also present in
due to tracheal inflammation or collapse. Subcutaneous emphy-
the airways. The cough reflex is an important defense mecha-
nism protecting the airways from injurious agents and from the
cervical trachea. Harsh lung sounds, crackles, or wheezes may
accumulation of secretions. Mechanical or chemical stimulation
be evident on lung auscultation.
of cough receptors results in reflex forceful expulsion of air,
which also serves to expel harmful substances.
Laboratory findings
Although varied disease processes affect the lower airways,
there are a limited number of ways that airways respond to
CBC and serum chemistry results are usually normal unless
injury. Airway goblet cells and submucosal mucous glands may
systemic disease or infection is present. Leukocytosis may be
hypertrophy and secrete excess mucus. Bronchial mucosa and
 present if there is parenchymal inflammation, and eosinophilia
submucosa may become edematous and infltrated with inflam-
may occur with allergic or parasitic disease. Arterial blood gas
Chapter 6  Respiratory
143
analysis allows identification of the presence and severity of 
lower airways of small animal patients, although they are rela-
respiratory function impairment resulting from airway disease.
 aq  s s   oo o
by Capillaria aerophila, Paragonimus kellicotti, Oslerus osleri, and
Imaging
Crenosoma vulpis. Cats can be infected by C. aerophila, P kelli-
cotti, and Aelurostrongylus abstrusus. Diagnosis of lung parasites
Thoracic radiography allows for evaluation of extra-airway
 is based on demonstration of ova or larvae in TTW or BAL fluid,
causes of coughing (cardiac disease, tracheobronchial lymphad-
 in feces, or by direct visualization during bronchoscopy.
enomegaly) as well as signs of lower airway disease. Bronchial
 Feces can be analyzed by direct smear, fecal flotation, or the
inflammation may produce a bronchial radiographic pattern 
 Baermann funnel technique, which improves diagnostic yield by
characterized  by  thickened  cross-sectional  end-on  bronchi 
allowing analysis of a greater volume of feces and improves the
(doughnuts) and longitudinal sections (tram lines). In cats,
ability to detect larvae. The Baermann technique is performed
bronchial disease may also be manifested by unstructured inter-
 by placing gauze at the base of a funnel, suspending fecal mate-
stitial and alveolar patterns, lung hyperinflation, and lobar atel-
rial in water, and allowing the water to pass through the funnel
ectasis.' Some animals with significant lower airway disease
overnight. The water is then centrifuged and the sediment is
have normal thoracic radiographs. Thoracic radiographs should
examined microscopically. Ideally, for fecal evaluation tech-
include the cervical as well as thoracic trachea in patients with
 niques, three fecal samples taken several days apart are analyzed
potential tracheal disease. If tracheal collapse is suspected, both
 to improve the chances of identifying parasites which may inter-
 inspiratory and expiratory radiographs should be taken due to
mittently release ova or larvae.
the dynamic nature of the disease.
 Fluoroscopy is useful for the detection of dynamic disease
processes such as tracheal or bronchial collapse. Eliciting a
Specific airway diseases and
cough during fuoroscopic imaging of the trachea and bronchi
treatment
may improve the detection of airway narrowing or collapse.
Tracheobronchial malacia: collapsing trachea
     si  r
Biopsy techniques and other diagnostic tests
(usually dorsoventral) of the tracheal rings and laxity of the
Transtracheal wash (TTW) allows secretion sampling from the
dorsal tracheal membrane. Progressive degeneration of tracheal
trachea and principal bronchi for cytology and culture. TTW
 rings with hypocellularity and softening of the cartilage leads to
can be performed through a sterile endotracheal tube or by
airway collapse during respiration. A genetic component of the
 percutaneous insertion ofa catheter into the tracheal lumen. An
disease contributing to abnormalities of the tracheal ring carti-
advantage of percutaneous TTW is that it can be performed
Tius pue Ao ui suosodsipaid paaq oi snp pausad si ae
 awake or with sedation rather than general anesthesia. Eliciting
dog breeds. Loss of airway support and subsequent loss of airway
a cough before aspirating the wash sample can improve diagnos-
lumen patency lead to obstruction of airflow, mucosal inflam-
fic return. The potential for contamination of the sample by
mation, and triggering of cough by mechanical (collapse) or
oral and pharyngeal material is a drawback to this procedure.
chemical (inflammation) stimulation. Dogs typically present as
Also, TTW does not allow evaluation of smaller airways. Com-
adults with a history of chronic, loud, or "honking" cough. The
plications are rare but can include exacerbation of cough and
disease can affect the cervical trachea, intrathoracic trachea,
 inflammation, tracheal laceration, pneumomediastinum, or sub-
mainstem bronchi, and bronchioles or can simultaneously
cutaneous emphysema.
 involve multiple regions of the airways.
 Bronchoscopy allows direct visualization of airways for detec-
A collapsing trachea is often diagnosed by a combination of
tion of structural abnormalities, identifcation and retrieval of 
 clinical and imaging (radiography, fluoroscopy) findings. Palpa-
foreign material, and collection of samples by bronchoalveolar 
 tion of the trachea in affected dogs will often elicit a cough and
d  m d si ad s ( s
 may reveal a palpably abnormal flattened trachea. Endoscopy is
under general anesthesia. Flexible endoscopy is preferred and
 useful in the diagnosis of tracheal collapse, grading its severity.
the endoscope may be introduced into the trachea directly
 and evaluation for collapse in lower airways (not well demon-
(which allows examination of more distal airway structures)
 strated by other diagnostics) by providing direct visualization of
or through specialized adapters attached to the endotracheal
 abnormal airways.
tube in intubated patients. Collection of diagnostic samples 
 Medical management of tracheal collapse includes weight loss
is aided by direct visualization of specifc lesions or regions 
 and use of a harness instead of a collar to eliminate pressure on
of the lung. Endoscopic biopsy forceps and brushes facilitate
the trachea.
sampling of luminal lesions. BAL is generally performed through
If secondary infection is identified through cytology and/
the endoscope and allows sampling of more distal airways
 or culture, specifc antimicrobial therapy should be imple-
than TTW.
mented. Pasteurella spp., Staphylococcus spp., Streptococus spp.
Evaluation for parasite infection should be a component of
Escherichia coli, and other gram-negative bacteria are common
evaluation of respiratory disease. Several parasites can infect the
airway isolates. Antibiotic choice should be based on sensitivity
144
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
results  when possible.  For empirical therapy, doxycycline 
trachea. The cough can be productive or nonproductive and
(3-5 mg/kg PO q 12h) is often selected because of its broad-
owners may describe terminal retching or gagging. Diagnosis is
spectrum activity, ability to penetrate the airway, and minimal
o jo pasuo ane pue ars uo paseq asd aenn
side effects.
A CBC, serum chemistry, and thoracic radiographs are often
Antitussives are used as needed to control signs and to dis-
unremarkable. In severe cases, disruption of the mucociliary
rupt the cycle of self-perpetuating cough. Over-the-counter
clearance mechanism by inflammation and infection can facili-
dextromethorphan-containing compounds such as Robutussin-
tate establishment of secondary pneumonia, which may be man-
 DM? (Wyeth) or Delsym? (Reckitt Benckiser) or central acting
ifested by signs of systemic illness in the patient and changes on
narcotics such as butorphanol or hydrocodone may be used.
a CBC and thoracic radiographs reflecting more severe disease
Bronchodilators (theophylline, terbutaline, albuterol) are
and pneumonia. Infectious tracheobronchitis is usually a self-
sometimes used, but their use in tracheal collapse is controver-
 limiting disease treated with symptomatic and supportive care.
sial. These medications are usually given orally and work by
To avoid exacerbation of the cough, rest for 7-10 days with
relaxing the smooth muscle, especially the bronchial smooth
restricted exercise and avoiding excitement is recommended. In
muscle. Albuterol can also be administered by inhalation by the
uncomplicated tracheobronchitis, antitussives are used to control
use of a face mask system, such as the AeroKat", made by Trudell
coughing and break the cough-inflammation cycle. If the cough
Medical International.
is productive or the condition is complicated by pneumonia,
 Directions on how to use this system can be found on the
antitussive use should be limited or avoided.
manufacturer's Web site at http://www.trudellmed.com/animal-
Antibiotics are not usually recommended because the disease
 health. Common side effects of bronchodilators include tachy-
is self-limiting and antibiotics have not been shown to alter the
 cardia, gastrointestinal (GI) upset, and hyperexcitability.
severity or duration of disease. If a signifcant bacterial compo-
 Short courses of anti-inflammatory agents such as glucocor-
nent is suspected or pneumonia is present, antibiotic therapy
ticoids are used intermittently to control acute worsening of
should be based on culture and sensitivity results. Empirically,
clinical signs attributed to flare-ups of secondary airway inflam-
doxycycline (5-10 mg/kg PO BID for 10-14 days) is a rational
mation. Long-term steroid use is contraindicated as it can pre-
choice because of its effectiveness against Bordetella spp. and
dispose to secondary bacterial infection, further degeneration of
 ability to reach the bronchial epithelium.
cartilage, and weight gain. An anti-inflammatory dose of pred-
Glucocorticoids are not recommended for treating associated
pmous sAep 01-2 ioy (aia Od By/au s'o) suonosupaid 1o suosu
inflammation due to the infectious nature of the disease and a
saop u pasn aq a spiais jueun paaden u pasn aq
failure in clinical trials to demonstrate eficacy in patients with
with concurrent chronic bronchitis requiring long-term anti-
infectious tracheobronchitis.6
inflammatory medication. The most commonly used inhaled
corticosteroid is fluticasone propionate (Flovent 110mcg/puff
Canine chronic bronchitis
by GlaxoSmithKline"), a synthetic corticosteroid. The recom-
mended dose for dogs is one puff q 6-12 h for controlling bron-
Chronic bronchitis is defined by the presence of a daily cough
chiolar inflammation.4
for at least 2 months of the year that lacks an identifiable specifc
n ro    sd 
cause.4 It is a diagnosis of exclusion achieved by
options include surgical placement of external prosthetic sup-
1)  ruling out other causes of cough and
ports (extraluminal polypropylene rings) for cervical tracheal
2）
identifying bronchial inflammation (radiography, bron-
collapse or placement of an intraluminal stent, which can be
choscopy, BAL cytology).
placed nonsurgically with endoscopic or fluoroscopic guidance.
The pathogenesis of the disease inyolves chronic inflammation
Canine infectious tracheobronchitis
that results in a continuous cycle of injury and repair, ultimately
 resulting in permanent damage of the airways. Chronic bronchi-
Canine infectious tracheobronchitis, also referred to as “canine
tis is often accompanied by secondary airway collapse.
respiratory disease complex" and "kennel cough," is a highly
 Because the clinical signs and airway injury result from airway
contagious infectious airway disease of dogs. Several infectious
inflammation, anti-inflammatory agents are the mainstay of
organisms are implicated as causative agents in this disease
treatment for chronic bronchitis. Glucocorticoids are often used
complex, including canine adenovirus-2 (CAV-2), parainfluenza
 and dosage is catered to patients on an individual basis: Long-
virus (PIV), and the bacteria Bordetella bronchiseptica as pri-
term administration is often necessary. To minimize the sys-
mary pathogens and multiple secondary bacterial agents. Con-
temic side effects of corticosteroids, local delivery to the airways
current infection with more than one agent is common in this
may be achieved by the use of a metered-dose inhaler Flutica-
disease.
sone proprionate (Flovent? by GlaxoSmithKline) is the most
A history of exposure to groups of other dogs (animal shelter
commonly used inhalable glucocorticoid, and dosage for dogs is
environment, dog park, dog show, recent boarding at a kennel)
ds ,i-g Aia hnda niu a go (nd) uo suo
or exposure to a sick dog or puppy is common. Clinical signs
chambers for use with aerosol inhalers are available through
include sudden onset of persistent, often severe cough that is
many respiratory supply companies and can be used to facilitate
exacerbated by exercise, excitement, or pressure on the cervical
administration of inhalants to dogs.
Chapter 6 Respiratory
145
The use of bronchodilators to treat chronic bronchitis is con-
troversial because the role of bronchoconstriction in the disease
  e     s
that bronchodilators combined with glucocorticoids may be
beneficial in some patients, so they are often used as adjunctive
Aerokt
therapy.4 The two common classes of bronchodilators used in
elineAerosolChan
chronic bronchitis are the methylxanthine derivatives (theophyl-
line) and the beta-2 agonists (terbutaline, albuterol), which act
by causing relaxation of the bronchial smooth muscle. Chronic
bronchitis is usually not associated with secondary bacterial
infection. If infection is identifed by culture, antibiotic treat-
Figure 6.3.1 AeroKat (Trudell Medical Intemational) spacer with
ment should be implemented based on sensitivity results.
attached metered-dose inhaler (MDl). Also available in larger size for
Antitussive agents may be considered in patients with chronic
dogs is the AeroDawg (not pictured).
nonproductive cough if the cough persists despite appropriate
treatment of airway inflammation. Cough suppression is con-
 u p no ad e m sd u p
clear mucus from the lower airways. Ancillary measures such as
 s  ao s  sn
maintenance of a lean body weight and environmental control
are vital to optimal management of patients with respiratory
phanol can aid in decreasing stress and in allowing safe handling.
disease in general and chronic airway disease in particular.
 but lower dosages should be used to avoid respiratory depres-
Owners should be instructed to minimize exposure of the patient
sion. Intravenous fast-acting anti-inflammatories such as dex-
to airway irritants (dust, smoke, aerosol sprays) that can trigger
amethasone (0.2-0.5 mg/kg) can be given to decrease airway
 coughing and initiate/exacerbate airway inflammation. Owners
inflammation, but, because glucocorticoids can impact the
can be referred to Web sites for human patients with asthma for
 results of diagnostics, their use should be reserved for patients
specific measures of controlling airway irritant exposure in the
that do not respond to bronchodilators and oxygen therapy.
household environment. Owners should also be advised that
Maintenance therapy includes anti-inflammatories (oral or
dogs with airway disease are at risk of respiratory distress and
inhalant corticosteroids) and bronchodilators (oral theophylline
overheating in hot or humid environmental conditions or with
 or terbutaline, inhaled albuterol). Inhalant drugs are preferred
exertion.
 due to reduced systemic side effects. Patient response to therapy
must be monitored to guide dose adjustment to the lowest effec-
Feline bronchial disease: "feline asthma'
tive dose of steroids. Fluticasone propionate, a synthetic corti-
costeroid, is commonly used and administered at a dose of one
 Feline bronchial disease, sometimes referred to as feline asthma,
actuation or puff (110mcg/puff) every 12 h.7
is a syndrome of bronchoconstriction and airway inflammation
 Inhalant administration is best achieved by the use of a spacer
characterized by recurrent episodes of wheezing, coughing, and
 such as AeroKat (Trudell Medical International) (see Figure
respiratory distress. An allergic (type I hypersensitivity) com-
6.3.1). Antibiotic treatment is indicated for cats with positive
ponent and genetic predisposition to developing the disease
 culture or Mycoplasma PCR results on TTW or BAL. Doxycy-
are suspected. Asthma is defined as a disorder of the lower 
 cline shows activity against Mycoplasma and has good distribu-
airways that causes airflow limitation by a combination of airway
tion into airway mucosa.
inflammation, accumulated airway mucus, and smooth muscle
Cyproheptadine (2mg per cat PO q 12h) has recently been
contraction, which impede airflow and trigger chronic cough.
used to control disease in patients with inadequate response to
Cats are usually presented because of respiratory distress or
traditional therapies, but there is litle evidence supporting its
coughing.
use, which should be considered as still in the experimental
 Feline bronchial disease is usually diagnosed by finding radio-
stage.′ Environmental control and use of low dust cat litters are
 graphic and bronchoscopic evidence of airway injury, inflamma-
 important aspects of patient management.
tion (usually eosinophilic) on airway cytology, and exclusion of
 other causes of cough, airway inflammation, and injury (upper
Ciliary dyskinesia
airway disease, lungworm infection, heartworm disease, cardiac
disease, neoplasia, pneumonia). Thoracic radiographs may show
Ciliary dyskinesia is a condition in which the function (move-
bronchial (common), unstructured interstitial or alveolar lung
 ment) ofcilia is impaired: In the respiratory system, this results in
   sie     s
 failure of the mucociliary clearance mechanism. It may be hered-
 normal in some affected cats. Bronchoscopy may show airway
 itary (primary) or acquired. Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is
inflammation and narrowing, mucus plugs, and airway collapse.
 an uncommon inherited disorder that affects microtubule forma-
A p ae ss su e u d si
tion in ciliated cells (respiratory, urogenital, and auditory epithe-
minimizing stress, relieving bronchoconstriction with injectable
lium). PCD may be associated with situs inversus (left-right
146
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
reversal of internal organ position) and dextrocardia (heart
alveolus is surrounded by a network of pulmonary capillaries.
positioned on the right instead of on the left), known as
Gas exchange occurs across the wall of the alveolus and the wall
Kartagener's syndrome. The acquired form of the disease can
of the adjacent capillaries with gases diffusing in response to
result from chronic inflammation that damages cilia and ciliated
concentration gradients. Oxygen (O2) diffuses out of the alveo-
cells.
lar lumen, where oxygen concentration is highest, into capillar-
The consequences of defects in ciliary function in the respira-
ies, where most becomes bound to hemoglobin in red blood
tory tract include chronic bacterial bronchopneumonia, sinusi-
cells. This oxygenated blood returns via the pulmonary venous
tis, and bronchitis. Due to chronic inflammation, infection, and
circulation to the left heart and is then pumped out into the
 reduced clearance of secretions, there is progressive damage to
systemic arterial circulation for distribution to tissues through-
airways leading to bronchiectasis (irreversible dilation of distal
out the body. At the tissue level, O, diffuses from the higher
airways) and further predisposition to infection.
concentration capillary lumen into tissues. Carbon dioxide
 Clinical signs are those of chronic or recurring respiratory
(CO2), produced as a waste gas of tissue metabolism, diffuses
infections including cough, often productive, and chronic
from tissues into the capillary lumen, where its concentration is
nasal discharge. Patients with PCD may also show abnormalities
initially lower. The capillaries collect into veins, which carry
of other systems related to ciliary dysfunction (deafness, infertil-
blood, which is now depleted of O, and high in CO, back to
ity). Thoracic radiographs may show bronchiectasis, situs inver-
the right heart, where it is pumped via the pulmonary artery to
sus, or dextrocardia. Definitive diagnosis of PCD requires
pue sade ard ou paas pue siu a
electron microscopic examination of ciliated cells (respiratory
alveoli. CO, diffuses from the capillary lumen into the alveoli,
epithelium, sperm) to demonstrate the structural defect in
where the concentration of CO, is lower than in venous blood,
the cilia.
to be exhaled and removed from the body. At the level of the
Treatment of ciliary dyskinesia centers on control of secondary
alveolus, the barrier to gas diffusion is normally a very thin
infection and accumulation of secretions (antibiotics, nebuliza-
      o 
the capillary endothelium and their fused basement membranes,
promised, avoidance of smoke, aerosol sprays, and other irritant
with intermittent connective tissue fibers widening the barrier
 particles is important and antitussives are contraindicated.
in some places. In pulmonary diseases, changes in this alveolo-
Dietary management for weight loss and maintenance of a
capillary membrane (e.g., deposition of more connective tissue,
lean body condition is a vital component oftreatment for patients
edema fluid) can interfere with difusion/gas exchange. Because
with respiratory disease. Additional information can be found
CO, diffuses more readily than O, CO, levels often remain
 in the nutrition section of this chapter.
 normal (or low) even when diffusion barrier changes result in
marked reductions of O, diffusion and hypoxemia. CO, levels
Anesthetic and analgesic
respiratory drive in anesthetized or comatose patients, upper
considerations
airway obstruction, thoracic wall injury, or respiratory muscle
exhaustion).
Lower airway disease is not generall painful. Animals with
airway disease require special consideration for general anesthe-
sia as drug-associated decreases in respiratory rate and effort
Clinical signs
may further worsen respiratory function. Endotracheal intuba-
 tion may exacerbate airway inflammation by mechanical injury
Clinical signs of pulmonary parenchymal disease result from
to an already abnormal mucosa. Anxiety and increased respira-
reduced oxygen diffusion from the alveoli to the bloodstream
tory rate and effort during recovery may worsen airway collapse
and the resultant hypoxemia. Signs of pulmonary disease may
and obstruction: Close patient monitoring is imperative and
be absent or vague until the disease is advanced or the lungs are
postanesthetic administration of anxiolytics may be necessary
diffusely involved, and may include exercise intolerance, tachyp-
Additional information can be found in the anesthesia and anal-
nea, dyspnea, orthopnea, and cyanosis. Localized disease may be
gesia section of this chapter.
subclinical or may result in nonrespiratory manifestations such
as a j susnd aq ae ano 'suiaddu pue iaa se
process extends into airways, results in increased airway secre-
SECTION 4 PULMONARY
tions, or causes extraluminal airway compression. Fever, ano-
 rexia, weight loss, or generalized lymphadenomegaly may be
PARENCHYMAL DISEASE
present depending on the underlying cause of pulmonary
disease. Cardiac arrhythmias secondary to hypoxia may be
Anatomy and physiology
pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary edema, or if excess airway secre-
Conducting airways of the lung terminate in respiratory bron-
 tions or inflammation is present. Reduced heart and lung sounds
chioles which branch into alveolar ducts. Alveolar ducts open
on auscultation and dullness on thoracic wall percussion may be
noted over regions of lung consolidation.
Chapter 6 Respiratory
147
Diagnostic testing
Diagnostic testing should be delayed in dyspneic patients until
they can be stabilized with supplemental oxygen, anxiolytics, and,
when indicated, bronchodilators, diuretics, or thoracocentesis.
Laboratory findings
There are no clinicopathological changes that are specifc for
reflect the underlying disease process. A CBC may show leuko-
cytosis in infectious processes or thrombocytopenia in patients
with certain infectious diseases (ehrlichiosis, leptospirosis) or
vasculitis. Determination of hematocrit or packed cell volume is
 important to help distinguish patients with elevated respiratory
Figure 6.4.1  Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema in a dog with acute
rate and effort associated with anemia from patients with respi-
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)—-lateral thoracic radiograph
ratory disease. Biochemical parameters are unaffected by pulmo-
lesiopopnes Aewud e ym wanied bunl jeloaale bueisuowap
distribution.
nary disease unless the disease process is multisystemic or other
 tory dysfunction. For example, secondary hepatopathy and mild
elevations of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) may be seen in
hypoxemic patients. Azotemia and hyperphosphatemia are
ee Aried se readde Aeu pue soueeadde oidenop
expected in patients with uremic pneumonitis secondary to
severe renal disease. ABG analysis provides a sensitive assess-
disease. Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema manifests as an alve.
olar pattern with a caudodorsal distribution (Figure 6.4.1).
ment of respiratory function and measures the partial pressure
of oxygen and carbon dioxide gases dissolved in plasma.
Smoke inhalation and near drowning are also associated with
.In
alveolar patterns. Pulmonary contusions show an alveolar
pulmonary disease, hypoxemia develops because of impaired gas
diffusion, ventilation-perfusion mismatch, or shunting. Hypo-
pattern that is often patchy with a variable distribution depend-
 rede au sus sn  jo ae a uo 
 capnia reflecting increased ventilation and enhanced discharge
 distinct solitary (primary pulmonary neoplasia), multiple to
 in patients with pulmonary disease is an ominous sign resulting
diffuse (metastatic disease) pulmonary nodules or miliary
changes, or as unstructured interstitial disease (lymphosar-
from respiratory muscle fatigue and subsequent ventilatory
failure in patients that have a sustained increased respiratory rate
lism (PTE) is variable, including interstitial and alveolar changes,
and effort. Cytological evaluation of samples collected from lung
fissue, airways, or tracheobronchial lymph nodes may reveal the
pleural fluid, blunting of pulmonary vessels, or a combination of
patterns, but radiographs may also be normal. Acute respiratory
general type of disease process (e.g., eosinophilic vs. pyogranu-
distress syndrome (ARDS) generally produces an alveolar
lomatous inflammation) or the specific etiology (e.g., Blastommy-
ces organisms, neoplastic lymphocytes).
 pattern that may be patchy or diffuse.
 Thoracic ultrasonography may be useful for evaluating areas
Imaging
usefulness of ultrasonography may be limited because of inter-
 ference by the air interface in aerated lung.
Thoracic radiographs are standard for identifying pulmonary
CT of the thorax may aid in the diagnosis of pulmonary
disease and for monitoring progression or therapeutic response.
disease when other techniques do not elucidate a cause. Ultra-
They may also elucidate an underlying cause (neoplasia, cardiac
 sonography of peripheral and consolidated lesions and CT of
disease) or may demonstrate a particular pulmonary pattern that
anesthetized patients can be used to guide fine needle aspiration
helps narrow the list of differentials. Structured (nodules) and
for the collection of samples for cytology.
unstructured interstitial and alveolar patterns or a combination
 of these may be seen in pulmonary disease, and the distribution
Other diagnostic tests and biopsy techniques
may be focal, regional, multifocal, or diffuse. Pneumonia often
produces an unstructured interstitial pattern initially, which
 Pulse oximetry is a rapid and noninvasive technique for evaluat-
 ing oxygen saturation of red blood cell hemoglobin for the detec-
shows a cranioventral distribution. Fungal pneumonia typically
tion of hypoxemia. ABG is a more accurate method of measuring
produces a nodular or miliary pattern. In dogs, pulmonary
 changes in circulating oxygen levels and provides a more thor-
edema due to congestive heart failure is manifested as increased
 ough evaluation of respiratory function by measuring carbon
pulmonary density (alveolar pattern) with a perihilar distribu-
dioxide levels, an assessment of ventilation.
148
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Lung aspiration, or fine needle aspiration of lung lesions,
to oxygen therapy can be monitored by pulse oximetry or
 provides samples for cytological evaluation and is useful for
ABG.
evaluating diffuse disease or accessible peripheral lesions. Ultra-
Fluid therapy may be needed for patients unable to meet their
 sonographic or CT guidance can improve the diagnostic yield of
 own requirements for maintenance plus additional evaporative
this technique by allowing a more accurate placement of the
losses resulting from tachypnea. Intravenous fluids should
needle into abnormal tissue. Pneumothorax and hemorrhage as
be administered with caution and close monitoring is indicated
a result of airway or blood vessel laceration are potential com-
due to increased vascular hydrostatic pressure or increased vas-
plications of lung aspiration, but the procedure can usually be
cular permeability in inflamed or damaged areas of the lung.
completed safely.
This increase may promote fuid extravasation into lung intersti-
 TTW or bronchoscopy with BAL to collct samples for cytol-
tium thereby worsening gas exchange resulting in respiratory
ogy and culture can be diagnostically useful for pulmonary
distress. Anxiety can contribute to tachypnea and can exacerbate
dliseases, which characteristically have an airway component
airway collapse through increased respiratory effort, further
(eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy, pneumonia), or diseases
compromising gas exchange. Sedation may be beneficial in
that involve the airway by extension. Bacterial culture and sen-
sitivity are important to direct antimicrobial therapy in bacterial
is often recommended because it has beneficial effects on pul-
pneumonia.
monary vasculature as well as anxiolytic effects.
Thoracoscopy provides direct visualization of thoracic struc-
In patients with excess airway secretions, nebulization and
 tures including the lungs and can be useful for assessment and
coupage can be used to moisten (nebulization) and loosen
 potentially for treatment of patients with pulmonary disease.
(coupage) secretions to make them easier to remove from
Ventilation-perfusion scintigraphy can be used to assess
airways through coughing and mucociliary clearance.
 patients for PTE, but its availability is extremely limited. Angi-
ography is another technique for identifying vascular occlusion
in PTE patients.
Diseases
Other diagnostic tests may be indicated to evaluate patients
with pulmonary disease secondary to disease in another organ
Pneumonia
diogram (ECG) serves to detect and help characterize arrhyth-
Pneumonia is defined as an inflammatory disease of the terminal
mias resulting from hypoxia, and echocardiography is useful in
airways and pulmonary interstitium. It is important to recognize
defining primary cardiac disease in patients with cardiogenic
that pneumonia has many etiologies. Too often, the term “pneu-
monia" is used inappropriately as a synonym for bacterial
strate a primary neoplasm in patients with pulmonary metas-
 pneumonia, and clinical fndings indicative of pneumonia are
 sd  s o  s s   s
erroneously ascribed to bacterial infection. Infectious agents that
systemic  infectious  diseases  with  pulmonary  involvement.
may cause pneumonia include bacteria (including rickettsial
Additionally, lesions present in abdominal organs may be more
agents), viruses (canine distemper virus, canine influenza virus,
 accessible and more readily aspirated for possible cytological
CAV-2, canine PIV, feline herpesvirus, feline calicivirus), proto-
diagnosis.
zoa (Toxoplasma, Neospora), respiratory parasites (Paragonimus,
Aelurostrongylus, Filaroides), and fungi (Blastomyces, Histo-
plasma, Coccidioides, Aspergillus, Cryptococcus, and Pneumo-
Treatment
cystis). Some viral agents predispose to secondary bacterial
pneumonia (canine distemper virus, canine PIV, FeLV, and FIV).
 General treatment measures for animals with pulmonary paren-
Noninfectious forms of pneumonia include aspiration pneumo-
 chymal disease may include oxygen therapy, fluid therapy, seda-
nia, pneumonia secondary to smoke inhalation, and lipid pneu-
 tion, nebulization, and coupage.
 o s  d pd sox 
Oxygen supplementation is indicated for dyspneic patients
 and can improve oxygenation of the blood in conditions causing
release from breakdown of pulmonary tissues). Appropriate
hypoventilation, gas diffusion barrier problems, or ventilation
treatment of pneumonia requires identifcation of the specifc
perfusion mismatch. Oxygen can be provided via flow-by oxygen
etiology, including identification of specific organisms and their
face mask, personal oxygen devices, or placing the animal in
antimicrobial sensitivities in bacterial disease.
an oxygen cage. Humidifcation of the oxygen gas before it
Bacterial pneumonia is considered a secondary condition that
Anu iany pue suip juand o uo s! paequ s
is established following some other pathological insult that
 to airway surfaces. Because oxygen can be toxic to the airways
 impairs the natural defense mechanisms of the lung. Infection is
  s   n a s n
usually associated with resident respiratory flora, although
 above 60% and limit the duration of oxygen therapy to what is
        
(Enterococcus), and most cases of pneumonia involve more than
worsening of the respiratory function due to inflammation,
one bacterial agent (polymicrobial). Common agents include
edema, and decreased clearance of airway secretions. Response
Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, E. coli, Pasteurella, Klebsiella,
Chapter 6 Respiratory
149
Pseudomonas, Bordetella, and Mycoplasma. Samples for bacterial
 impairment of gas exchange and can vary from subclinical to life
culture and sensitivity can be collected by TTW, BAL, or lung
threatening. Radiographic changes may not be evident initially
aspirate. Empiric antibacterial therapy using broad-spectrum
 is often present concurrently, and ECG monitoring for cardiac
pending culture results. A combination of (1) an aminopenicillin 
 arrhythmias is recommended.
or a first-generation cephalosporin and (2) a fluoroquinolone or
 Hypoventilation may occur as a result of pain or disruption
an aminoglycoside provides a rational empiric choice. Parenteral
 of the thoracic wall or diaphragm. Treatment to stabilize or
administration of drugs is advised for patients with severe 
 repair such injuries may be required in the form of aggressive
hypoxemia that may secondarily impair gut function and absorp-
 pain management, oxygen supplementation, or ventilatory
tion of orally administered drugs. Aerosol administration of
support. Antibiotics are not indicated unless there is penetrating
 antibiotics is not recommended. Response to treatment is moni-
   p   
tored by sequential thoracic radiographs ± ABG determination
is expected within 1-2 days of onset.
and antibacterial drugs are continued until 1-2 weeks past reso-
lution of clinical and radiographic evidence of disease.
Other forms of infectious pneumonia are also treated as indi-
Eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy
cated for the specific causative agent (i.e., long-term [months]
and eosinophilic granulomatosis
administration of oral antifungal drugs with or without a course
 of injectable antifungal drug for fungal pneumonia; clindamycin
EB, formerly known as "pulmonary infltrates with eosinophils"
 or trimethoprim-sulfa with or without pyrimethamine for pro-
(PIE), is an idiopathic inflammatory disorder of the lung char-
tozoal pneumonia). Patients with infectious or noninfectious
acterized by eosinophilic infltration of alveoli and bronchioles
with no identifable cause. The condition occurs in dogs, usually
pneumonia will often require general treatment measures such
as oxygen supplementation, fuid therapy, nebulization, and
 young to middle-aged large dog breeds, and Siberian huskies
 coupage. Use of bronchodilators and mucolytics in the treatment
appear to be predisposed, although any age or breed can be
affected. A history of chronic (months to years) respiratory signs
of pneumonia is controversial.
and progressive exercise intolerance is common. Cough, which
is often productive of thick green-yellow mucus, is the usual
Pulmonary edema
clinical presentation. Nasal discharge may also be present, and
 Pulmonary edema is the accumulation of fluid in the pulmonary
Ms sn i i Ass ar sip 
varying lung patterns and a combination of unstructured inter-
interstitium and alveoli. It usually results from increased hydro-
 stitial, bronchial, and alveolar changes may be present. A CBC
static pressure in pulmonary capillaries, most commonly seen in 
association with congestive heart failure (cardiogenic pulmo-
may show a peripheral eosinophilia, which can be marked, in
nary edema) but also as a result of fluid overload. Noncardio-
some patients, and hypoxemia is often identifed by ABG. EB is
genic pulmonary edema refers to edema that occurs by
a diagnosis of exclusion. Important differentials include heart-
mechanisms other than increased vascular hydrostatic pressure
worm disease, lungworm infection and pulmonary migration of
in heart failure. These other mechanisms include low vascular
other parasites, respiratory fungal infections, or neoplasia that
 can also be associated with eosinophilic infltration.
oncotic pressure (hypoalbuminemia), increased vascular perme-
ability (vasculitis secondary to systemic infectious or inflamma-
 EB is treated with immunosuppressive doses of corticoster-
tory disease, sepsis, ARDS, neurogenic edema, uremia) and
oids (prednisone, prednisolone) tapered over 3-6 months
decreased lymphatic drainage of the pulmonary interstitium.
 depending on response to therapy. Most dogs respond favo-
The severity of clinical signs depends on the degree to which
rably and may eventually be taken off corticosteroids or main-
the interstitium and alveoli are flooded by fluid, impairing gas
 tained on low doses. Environmental control to reduce exposure
Exchange. Treatment includes administration of diuretics, which
to respiratory irritants and potential allergens should be insti-
h si  e   e  a aq 
tuted and prophylactic treatment for occult parasitism is also
ally less effective in managing edema secondary to increased
recommended.
vascular permeability. Oxygen supplementation is often neces-
Eosinophilic granulomatosis is a similar idiopathic eosi-
sary initially until response to diuretic therapy and specifc treat-
nophilic inflammatory condition, but, in this condition, the
ment of the underlying cause is evident.
inflammatory infltrates in the lungs form nodular lesions, which
 must be distinguished from neoplastic or other granulomatous
conditions.
Pulmonary contusions
 Pulmonary contusions are regions of hemorrhage into the pul-
Lung lobe torsion
monary interstitium and alveoli caused by blunt trauma to the
thorax and are commonly seen in animals that are hit by cars.
 Lung lobe torsion occurs when a lung lobe rotates around the
Significant pulmonary contusion may be present even if there is
 axis of the lobar bronchus, closing off the bronchus and blocking
 no external evidence of injury. The severity of clinical signs
 venous drainage. Continuing inflow of arterial blood, which is
depends on the volume of lung affected and the subsequent 
less susceptible to obstruction, causes progressive congestion
150
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
and enlargement of the lung lobe and exudation of bloody fluid
into the pleural space. The mechanisms resulting in lung lobe
d  a s s s nq  a 
agulability), cardiac disease (stasis of blood flow), sepsis, and
 effusion, trauma, or consolidation or atelectasis of a lung lobe.
 sss aid ( a siss res) n
The condition is usually seen in dogs, more commonly those
emia because of ventilation/perfusion mismatch and right-to-
with a deep-chested conformation, and Afghans and pugs appear
left shunting of unoxygenated blood. Secondary edema, reduced
to be predisposed. Radiographic fndings include pleural efusion
lung compliance, and bronchoconstriction may occur and
and lung lobe consolidation and, sometimes, a more specific
worsen the hypoxemia. The typical clinical presentation is acute
finding of an abnormally positioned bronchus. Pleural fluid may
 onset of tachypnea and respiratory distress.
show chyle, modified transudate, exudate, or hemorrhage. Bron-
 Thoracic radiographs are often abnormal, but radiographic
includes stabilization with oxygen therapy and thoracocentesis in
pleural effusion, blunted pulmonary vessels, or may be normal)
 preparation for definitive surgical treatment (lung lobectomy).
and not specifc for PTE. Premortem diagnosis of PTE is diff-
disease condition that show acute onset of tachypnea or respira-
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
 asd e si () si red so
 porting evidence for PTE, but levels are elevated in a number of
lung disease of dogs and, rarely, cats. IPF is a diagnosis of exclu-
other disease conditions. A normal D-dimer result suggests that
 sion, made after ruling out alternative causes of pulmonary
PTE is less likely. Scintigraphy (perfusion ± ventilation scan),
fibrosis. IPF may occur as an end result of pulmonary inflam-
angiography, CT, and MRI can be used to support a diagnosis of
mation or secondary to inhaled toxins, administration of certain
 PTE but are rarely used in veterinary patients because of limited
drugs, or neoplasia. The condition is more common in terriers,
availability or need for general anesthesia of a high risk patient.
 especially West Highland white terriers, and most patients are
PTE is treated with oxygen therapy, although hypoxemia in
presented when they are middle-aged or older. Clinical signs
PTE patients may be refractory to oxygen administration, and
include progressive exercise intolerance and dyspnea and some-
administration of anticoagulants (heparin or warfarin) to prevent
 times a nonproductive cough. Patients typically show tachypnea,
further clot formation. Thrombolytic treatment with tissue plas
which may be marked, and diffuse inspiratory crackles are often
 minogen activator (tPA) or streptokinase to break down existing
found on auscultation. Patients with pulmonary hypertension, a
clots is usually NOT done in veterinary patients because of cost
common consequence of IPF, may have a tricuspid systolic
and potential complications but may be considered for severely
murmur or a split-second heart sound. Thoracic radiographs
affected animals with low output cardiac failure associated with
a  i d   e ms a
 PTE. Treatment of the underlying disease process that predis-
d  m sd     
posed to PTE is a vital component of PTE management, and
hypertension. Diagnosis requires lung biopsy and demonstra-
recurrence of PTE is likely if the predisposing cause cannot be
tion of interstitial fbrosis. Inflammation may or may not be
resolved. See Chapter 5 for additional information.
of corticosteroids ± azathioprine to try to reduce inflammation
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
and further fbrosis, pulmonary vasodilators to control second-
ary pulmonary hypertension, bronchodilators to control con-
ARDS is a condition of rapidly progressive acute respiratory
current bronchitis, and general measures of weight management
Aedes Areuound paseaou Anfu uni anse oi anp anie
and environmental control.
permeability secondary to injury to alveolar epithelium or capil
lary endothelium leads to proteinaceous noncardiogenic pulmo-
Pulmonary thromboembolism
nary edema, inflammation, refractory hypoxemia, decreased
lung compliance, and, later, hyaline membrane formation and
 PTE is a condition that results from obstruction of a pulmonary
fbrosis. ARDS is a secondary condition that may develop in
vessel or vessels by a thrombus (clot) that forms locally in the
 patients with a number of other critical ilnesses including sepsis
vessel or by an embolus (clot, parasite, fat, neoplastic cells) that
(most common cause), aspiration or bacterial pneumonia, drug
 forms elsewhere and travels to the lung to lodge in the vessel
or transfusion reaction, severe inflammatory disease (pancreati-
lumen (embolization). PTE is a secondary condition. Predispos-
tis), or trauma.
ing factors include stasis of blood flow, injury to vascular
Patients typically present with acute severe respiratory dis-
tress. Crackles and wheezes may be detected on thoracic auscul-
patients with diseases that impact one or more of these factors.
tation, and other signs related to the underlying cause (e.g.
The most common cause of PTE in dogs is heartworm infection, 
abdominal pain in patients with pancreatitis) may be evident.
which causes mechanical obstruction of blood flow and injury
Thoracic radiographs show bilateral alveolar or mixed pulmo-
to the vessel lining (presence of the parasite in the vessel lumen).
nary changes, often with a caudodorsal distribution (Figure
Other associated diseases include immune-mediated hemolytic
6.4.1) and normal cardiac silhouette, which helps differentiate
 anemia (hypercoagulability, endothelial injury), protein-losing
the changes from those of cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Chapter 6 Respiratory
151
disease and may show evidence of pulmonary hypertension,
which can develop acutely in ARDS patients.
ARDS is treated aggressively with oxygen therapy and treating
the underlying disease that initiated the lung injury. Mechanical
ventilation with positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) may be
necessary for improving oxygenation. Diuretics may be helpful
in the early stages of lung injury, but pulmonary edema that is
proteinaceous, as it is in ARDS, is characteristically nonrespon-
sive to diuretic administration. Lung function can be monitored
by serial ABG and thoracic radiography. Mortality is high in
patients that do not show improvement in the first 24-36 h.
Smoke inhalation
 Injury to the airways and lungs with smoke inhalation is multi-
factorial and results from heat, toxic gases released from burning
Figure 6.4.2  Pulmonary nodules in a dog with metastatic neoplasia.
materials, and particulates inhaled in the smoke. Initially, smoke
Nodular lesions in lung parenchyma may also be seen in other disease
inhalation results in tissue injury, edema, and tissue hypoxia.
conditions (fungal pneumonia, eosinophilic granulomatosis), and
additional diagnostic procedures are necessary to distinguish among
Ventilation may be impaired by laryngeal edema or neurological
neoplastic and infectious/inflammatory causes.
 dysfunction due to carbon monoxide intoxication. Subsequently.
there is an increase in mucus and other respiratory secretions
and infltration with inflammatory cells. Inflammation can con-
tribute to chemical injury of the airways and lungs, which con-
anaplastic carcinoma, sarcoma, histicytoma) or secondary (met-
stitutes the main mechanism of injury in smoke inhalation.
astatic). Metastatic neoplasia is more common. Pulmonary neo-
Reflex bronchoconstriction in response to chemical or particu-
 plastic lesions may be radiographically indistinguishable from
late irritants worsens respiratory function. Carbon monoxide
nodular lesions associated with inflammatory/infectious diseases
and other gases released in the smoke further worsen tissue
especially granulomatous processes (fungal disease, eosinophilic
- so o pu aq a o o aq ao
granulomatosis) (Figure 6.4.2). Lung aspiration, TTW, or BAL
boxyhemoglobin formed by carbon monoxide) and by altering
may provide diagnostic samples for cytological diagnosis; other-
cell metabolism (hydrogen cyanide). Secondary bacterial infec-
wise, lung biopsy may be necessary to distinguish neoplastic
tion is common due to damage to the respiratory epithelium and
from non-neoplastic lesions and to identify the cell type for neo-
disruption of mucociliary clearance.
plastic lesions. Treatment recommendations are based on tumor
Treatment is supportive with oxygen administration being key
type. Solitary lesions may be amenable to surgical resection.
in the efforts to improve tissue oxygenation and to facilitate
clearance of carboxyhemoglobin. Judicious use of intravenous
Nutritional considerations
Patients with pulmonary disease may experience weight loss
tions without promoting pulmonary edema due to increased
permeability of pulmonary vessels. Nebulization and coupage
work of breathing, reduced gut function because of hypoxia, and
are beneficial in patients with excessive accumulations of airway
decreased intake because sustained efforts to breathe preclude
secretions. Bronchodilator therapy (methylxanthines, beta-2
agonists) may be benefcial by relieving refex bronchoconstric-
stopping to eat. Small frequent meals and food that is calorie
dense and requires minimal chewing may be helpful in dyspneic
tion. The use of corticosteroids to reduce inflammation is not
recommended because it has not been shown to result in
animals. Patients that are significantly hypoxemic and experi
improvement and may interfere with healing of injured tissues.
 encing reduced gut function may benefit from highly digestible
Antibiotic use should be based on specific diagnosis of the pres-
diets.
ence of bacterial infection by culture and determination of
antimicrobial sensitivity. Prophylactic antibiotic use is contrain-
Anesthetic and analgesic
dicated by the tendency of smoke inhalation victims to develop
considerations
resistant infection. The overall survival rate of dogs and cats
 si i os    
Alterations in respiratory and cardiac function in pulmonary
disease patients are important anesthetic considerations. Hypox-
Pulmonary neoplasia
emic patients are predisposed to the development of cardiac
arrhythmias. Pulmonary hypertension is a potential complica-
Neoplastic pulmonary disease may be primary (adenocarci-
 tion of pulmonary disease that may alter right heart function.
noma, bronchialveolar carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma,
 Anesthesia results in decreased spontaneous ventilation and
152
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
worsening of ventilation-perfusion mismatch and shunt frac-
pleural masses (including diaphragmatic hernia). Heart and lung
tions. Patient positioning while under anesthesia contributes to
sounds may be dorsally decreased with pneumothorax. Thoracic
 atelectasis and small airway obstruction in the dependent lung.
wall percussion may show dullness ventrally in the presence of
 Mechanical ventilation may result in rupture of diseased lung
pleural fluid or increased resonance dorsally with pneumo-
tissue and the resultant pneumothorax. Preoxygenation and pro-
thorax. A restrictive respiratory pattern (rapid, shallow breaths)
cedures to minimize the stress of handling during anesthesia
should prompt consideration of possible pleural or pleural space
induction are recommended for patients with pulmonary
disease.
disease.
Diagnostic testing
SECTION 5 PLEURAL DISEASE
Prior to diagnostic testing, dyspneic patients should be stabilized
as needed with supplemental oxygen, anxiolytics, and thoraco-
Anatomy and physiology
centesis to remove enough fuid or air to restore adequate
ventilation.
 The pleura is a thin layer of mesothelial cells and supporting
connective tissue, vasculature, and lymphatics that lines the
Laboratory findings
inner surface of the thoracic wall, anterior surface of the dia-
phragm and lateral mediastinum (parietal pleura), and the outer
 There are no clinicopathological changes that are specific for
lung surface (visceral pleura). The pleural space is a potential
pleural disease, but laboratory results may reflect the underlying
space between the lungs and thoracic wall(visceral and parietal.
disease process. A CBC may show leukocytosis in infectious
pleura), which normally contains a very small volume (few mil-
processes, thrombocytopenia in patients with vasculitis, and
liliters) of fluid that serves to lubricate pleural surfaces to facili-
anemia in patients with traumatic hemorrhage or coagulopa-
tate their sliding movements during respiration. Pleural fluid is
thies associated with hemothorax. Lymphopenia may be present
formed continuously from capillaries in the parietal pleura and
in chylothorax or severe lymphatic disease. Hypoproteinemia
is absorbed by lymphatic vessels in the parietal pleura and capil.
and hypoalbuminemia are identified in patients with pleural
laries in the visceral pleura. Movement of the lungs, diaphragm,
effusion secondary to low vascular oncotic pressure, chylotho-
 and thoracic wall during respiration facilitates lymphatic flow.
 rax, and some conditions of increased vascular or lymphatic
Excess accumulation of pleural fluid
l may occur secondary
permeability. ABG analysis may show hypoxemia and poten-
to increased hydrostatic pressure, decreased oncotic pressure
tially hypercapnia reflecting reduced ventilation resulting from
(serum protein) or increased permeability in pleural capillaries,
restricted lung expansion. Fluid analysis and cytology of pleural
decreased lymphatic drainage, or increased oncotic pressure of
fluid is important in differentiating various disease processes
material within the pleural space. Pleural space disease is usually
causing pleural effusion. Fluid should be examined for character
secondary to heart disease, lung disease (by extension or by
(chylous, hemorrhagic, clear) and evaluated for protein content
rupture of air-filled structures), lymphatic/thoracic duct disease,
and cellularity, which allows classification of the fluid as a tran-
 thoracic wall injury, or migrating foreign body. Specifc disease
sudate, a modifed transudate, or exudate, and helps narrow
conditions of the pleura and pleural space include pleural
down the list of possible causative diseases (Table 6.5.1).
effusion, pneumothorax, hemothorax, pyothorax, chylothorax,
Triglyceride concentration relative to serum triglyceride levels
fbrosing pleuritis, and diaphragmatic hernia. The abnormal
is used to characterize milky effusions as chyle. Low glucose
presence of air, fluid, or tissue in the pleural space reduces the
concentration and a low pH in pleural fluid is consistent with a
area into which the lungs can expand and may directly compress
septic process (pyothorax).
the lungs, causing hypoventilation and reduced oxygen exchange.
Clinical signs
 Clinical signs of pleural disease result from restriction of lung
Table 6.5.1  Charactenization of pleural fluid
expansion and subsequent hypoventilation and hypoxemia but
 may be inapparent or subtle until pleural disease is advanced.
Fluid type
Appearance
Protein
Cell count
Signs may include tachypnea, shallow breathing, dyspnea,
con centration
(per μL)
orthopnea (shortness of breath when recumbent), and cyanosis.
(g/dL)
cardiac murmurs or arrhythmias, jugular pulses, and ascites are
Transu date
Clear
<2.5
<1500
sometimes present depending on the underlying cause of pleural
Modified 
Hazy
2.5-4.5
1000-3000
transudate
 pyothorax or traumatic hemothorax or pneumothorax. Mufled
Exudate
Turbid to
>3.0
>3000
heart sounds and ventrally decreased or muffled lung sounds
opaque
may be identifed in animals with pleural fluid accumulation or
Chapter 6Respiratory
153
Imaging
 Thoracic radiographs are important to confrm the presence of
pleural disease and may also help identify an underlying cause
(neoplasia, cardiac disease, lung disease, diaphragmatic hernia).
cK[3vie
 Patients may tolerate dorsoventral (DV) positioning better than
fluid or air is confrmed radiographically, radiographs should be
repeated after maximal thoracocentesis to evaluate for abnor-
malities obscured by the fluid or air. Radiographic changes indi-
cating pleural efusion include rounding of lung margins,
visualization of and widening of interlobar fssure lines, separa-
tion of the lung from the thoracic wall, and obscuring of the
cardiac silhouette (Figures 6.5.1 and 6.5.2).
 A horizontal beam study may allow demonstration of a fluid
line. A positive contrast lymphangiogram is sometimes used to
evaluate the patency of the thoracic duct in patients with chylotho.
rax. Fibrosing pleuritis, which may be a consequence of long-
standing pleural effusion, is manifested radiographically by
 rounded lung lobes and prominent fissure lines. In pneumothorax,
radiographs show dorsal displacement of the cardiac silhouette
away from the sternum, separation of the lung from the thoracic
wall with radiolucent areas free of identifiable vascular structures
between the lung and thoracic wall, and increased density of the
lungs due to lung tissue collapse (Figures 6.5.3 and 6.5.4).
Figure 6.5.2  VD projection of same cat in Figure 6.5.1 showing
Thoracic ultrasonography is actually facilitated by the pres-
retraction of the peripheral lung margins from the thoracic wall,
ence of fluid in the pleural space and can be useful in guiding
presence of soft tissue opacity (pleural fluid) in the pleural space and
delineating the interlobar fssures between lung lobes. The left cranial
thoracocentesis and in identifying soft tissue abnormalities in
lung lobe is reduced in volume due to atelectasis secondary to the
the pleural space or mediastinum, which may indicate an under-
pleural fluid accumulation. The enlarged cardiac silhouette suggests
lying cause of the pleural disease. CT of the thorax may facilitate
underlying heart disease as a possible cause of the pleural effusion.
diagnosis of pleural disease when other techniques do not elu-
cidate a cause.
Figure 6.5.3  Lateral radiograph of a dog with pneumothorax
Figure 6.5.1  Peural effusion in a cat with dilated cardiomyopathy
showing elevation of the cardiac silhouette and gas opacity with no
and right-sided heart failure. This lateral radiograph shows the
identifable blood vessels between the stemum and the ventral
presence of pleural fluid obscuring the cardiac silhouette and
margin of the heart.
rounding of the lung margins. The elevation of the trachea suggests
cardiomegaly and possible underlying cardiac disease as an etiology
for the pleural effusion.
154
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
2)treating the underlying cause of the pleural disease, that is,
definitive treatment; this varies widely depending on the
specific diagnosis.
Pleural effusion
Pleural effusion, or abnormal accumulation of fluid in the pleural
space, is further classifed according to the character of the fluid:
transudate, modifed transudate, exudate, hemorrhagic (hemo-
thorax), or chylous (chylothorax). This is a diagnostically useful
classification as specific types of effusion are associated with a
particular subset of differentials. Transudates are seen with dis-
eases that cause increased capillary hydrostatic pressure (conges-
tive heart failure, pericardial effusion/cardiac tamponade, PTE,
heartworm disease) or decreased vascular oncotic pressure/
nephropathy, liver failure). Cardiac disease and hypoalbumine-
mic states are the most common causes of pleural transudate
accumulation. Modified transudates (transudates modified by
additional protein or cells) occur in conditions associated with
Figure 6.5.4 VD radiograph of a 6-month-old puppy with right-sided
increased vascular permeability/vasculitis (systemic infectious
pneumothorax with secondary lung lobe collapse showing the
or inflammatory conditions), increased lymphatic permeability
retraction of the peripheral lung margins from the thoracic wall and
(inflammatory disease, lymphatic neoplasia), or increased
the presence of avascular gas opacity (free air) flling the pleural space
hydrostatic pressure (lung lobe torsion, diaphragmatic hernia)
and compressing the lung lobes.
and also result from the long-standing presence of transudates.
Exudates (fuid with higher protein content and cell count)
Other diagnostic tests and biopsy techniques
occur secondary to increased vascular or lymphatic permeability
or reduced lymphatic drainage and are associated with systemic
Thoracocentesis, or aspiration of the pleural space, is an impor-
tant technique for both diagnosis and treatment of pleural space
infectious and inflammatory conditions including FIP, neopla-
disease. It can be performed with a 22G needle and syringe, a
sia, and chronic diaphragmatic hernia.
Treatment of pleural effusion includes removal of sufficient
butterfly catheter, or an over-the-needle intravenous catheter.
 Because metal needles may pose a greater risk for lacerating lung
volume of pleural fluid to relieve respiratory distress (thoraco-
 centesis, chest tube placement) and treatment of the underlying
 during thoracocentesis, especially in animals with a rapid respi-
 cause. Diuretics may be beneficial in reducing hydrostatic pres-
ratory rate so that the lung moves past the needle frequently
sure that contributes to fluid accumulation but do not reduce
during the procedure, the use of soft over-the-needle catheters
pleural fluid that has already formed. Hypoalbuminemic animals
is preferred for more prolonged aspiration of pleural space (ther-
may require administration of colloids to increase vascular
apeutic removal of air or fluid to restore respiratory function).
 Thoracocentesis can usually be performed in awake animals and
oncotic pressure. Removal of maximal volumes of pleural fluid
may lead to further depletion of albumin and other fluid com-
often results in rapid improvement in respiration and anxiety
level in patients with significant volumes of pleural air or fluid
ponents. Residual pleural fluid is resorbed and pleural effusion
resolves if the underlying cause can be remedied. In cases
that are relieved by aspiration. See Chapter 14 for a detailed
of chronic refractory pleural effusion, surgical procedures to
description of the procedure.
divert the abnormal fluid from the pleural space (shunts to
Thoracoscopy is another technique that may contribute to
the peritoneum or venous vasculature, omentalization across
assessment, and sometimes to treatment of, patients with pleural
the diaphragm) may be indicated. Pleurodesis (instillation of
disease. It requires general anesthesia and is generally performed
irritant chemicals such as tetracycline or talc into the pleural
provides direct visualization of structures in the thoracic cavity
space to cause destruction of fluid-producing pleura and causing
and allows diagnostic and therapeutic procedures to be per-
adhesions to form between the visceral and parietal pleura to
formed with less morbidity than thoracotomy.
obliterate the space where fluid can accumulate) is variably
effective.
Treatment
Treatment of pleural disease involves two main components:
Hemothorax
1）
immediate “symptomatic" care of restoring ventilatory func-
Hemothorax, or accumulation of blood in the pleural space, may
tion and oxygenation by removing pleural fluid or air and
be secondary to trauma, ulcerated thoracic or lung masses, lung
Chapter 6 Respiratory
155
lobe torsion, PTE, or systemic coagulation disorders. Hemotho-
rax is identified by finding blood via thoracocentesis.
Treatment includes removal of a sufficient volume of pleural
 blood to relieve respiratory distress and treatment of the under-
lying cause. Residual blood in the pleural space is expected to be
-sne q ui a o pu pue piqosqen iden
fusion within a few days, which should be taken into considera-
tion in determining the volume of blood to be removed by
thoracocentesis (generally just enough to resolve respiratory
restriction). Blood transfusion should be considered for anemic
 patients that remain tachypneic and tachycardic after therapeu-
tic thoracocentesis.
Pneumothorax
Pneumothorax, or presence of free air in the pleural space, may
be secondary to trauma to the lung or thoracic wall, lung disease
Fig ure 6.5.5 Pleural effusion in a cat with chylothorax. This lateral
radiograph shows the presence of pleural fluid obscuring the cardiac
(leakage of air from abnormal lung tissue or ruptured bulla), or
silhouette and causing dorsal elevation of the trachea and
pleural or lung infection with gas-forming bacteria. Spontaneous
caudodorsal displacement of the lungs with ventral scalloping of lung
pneumothorax refers to pneumothorax not associated with
margins.
trauma. Pneumothorax can also be iatrogenic as a result of injury
to the lung following aspiration procedures or failure to properly
maintain a seal against air entry into the pleural space with tho-
racocentesis or chest tube placement/maintenance. Some pleural
air is expected following thoracic surgery. Air leakage from tra-
cheal, bronchial, and esophageal lesions generally results in
pneumomediastinum rather than pneumothorax. Management
 of pneumothorax varies depending on the severity and whether
air leakage is ongoing. In patients with subclinical to mild pneu-
mothorax, cage rest and monitoring is recommended as unnec-
essary thoracocentesis may disturb any fibrin seal over the region
of air leakage. Pleural air will be absorbed from the pleural space
Over days to weeks. If respiratory compromise is present, thora-
cocentesis is performed and repeated as needed to maintain res-
 piratory function. Chest tube placement and possibly continuous
pleural drainage devices may be necessary if thoracocentesis is
required frequently or beyond the first 24h of presentation.
damaged lung is needed for nonresolving pneumothorax.
Chylothorax
Chylothorax, or accumulation of lipid-rich chyle in the pleural
space, is often idiopathic or may be secondary to injury or
Figure 6.5.6 VD projection of the same cat in Figure 6.5.5 showing
 obstruction of the thoracic duct, lymphangiectasia, granuloma-
the retraction of lung lobes from the thoracic wall and the presence of
tous disease, heart disease (including hyperthyroidism and
soft tissue opacity (pleural fluid) in the pleural space between the
 heartworm infection), lymphatic or mediastinal neoplasia, lung
thoracic wall and lung margins. The lungs are displaced caudally and
lobe torsion, or inflammatory abdominal disease (pancreatitis).
the lung margins are rounded. An alveolar pattem is evident in the
right cranial lung lobe, which may represent secondary atelectasis or
Breed predispositions are reported for the Afghan hound, Shiba
infiltrative pulmonary disease.
 Inu, and Siamese and Himalayan cats. Chylothorax is diagnosed
by identifying pleural fuid that is hazy to milky in appearance
and has a higher triglyceride concentration than serum collected
Treatment includes thoracocentesis as needed to relieve res-
at the same time as the pleural fluid (Figures 6.5.5 and 6.5.6).
piratory distress, but removal of large volumes should be avoided
 Diagnosis of chylothorax should trigger a diagnostic evalua-
because the fluid contains protein, fats, electrolytes, and lym-
tion of a possible underlying cause and corresponding specific
 phocytes that can become depleted through extensive and/or
treatment; however, a definitive cause is often not found.
 repeated drainage. Low fat diets are recommended to decrease
156
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
the lipid content of the fluid, which may facilitate its reabsorp-
the stomach to press on and limit the excursion of the diaphragm
 tion from the pleural space. Rutin, administered at 50-100 mg/
 and can further restrict thoracic and lung expansion. Patients
kg PO q 8h, may stimulate macrophage uptake of extravasated
with chylothorax should be fed a low fat diet to reduce thoracic
 protein and thereby improve resorption of pleural fluid. Octre-
duct flow, but, since these diets are calorie restricted and these
otide administered subcutaneously at 10 μg/kg q8 h may decrease
patients have increased nutrient loss through aspirated pleural
chyle flow through the thoracic duct, reducing the volume of
fuid, ongoing weight loss may be problematic and additional
chyle accumulating in the thorax, but is expensive and must be
nutritional support may be necessary. Additional information
administered by injection. Chylothorax may resolve spontane-
can be found in the nutrition section of this chapter.
ously or with treatment, but improvement takes weeks to months.
Patients not responding adequately to medical management
Anesthetic and analgesic
are candidates for surgical treatment (ligation of the thoracic
duct ± pericardectomy, cisterna chyli ablation, omentalization,
considerations
pleuropericardial shunt placement). Fibrosing pleuritis (pleural
Patients with pleural disease have decreased capacity for lung
thickening) is a potential consequence of long-standing chylo-
thorax, which results in restriction of lung expansion and heart
expansion, which impacts assisted ventilation as well as their
function, requiring removal of the abnormal pleura (decortica-
cardiac function may also be impaired. Additional information
 tion). Pleurodesis has sometimes been employed to treat chylot-
horax with limited success.
can be found in the anesthesia and analgesia section of this
chapter.
Pyothorax
SECTION 6 ANESTHESIC AND
Pyothorax, or accumulation of purulent pleural fluid, may occur
ANALGESIC CONSIDERATIONS
secondary to bacterial introduction into the pleural space by
 penetrating thoracic wall injury, migrating foreign bodies, exten-
IN RESPIRATORY DISEASE
sion of pulmonary infections, and hematogenous spread from
other sites. The most common bacterial agents associated with
 Patients with respiratory disease or dysfunction can be challeng-
pyothorax are anaerobes, Nocardia asteroides (dogs), and Pas-
ing and sometimes intimidating to anesthetize. Many of the
teurella muitocida (cats), although other bacteria and fungal
diagnostic procedures or surgical treatments involve general
agents are reported and cytological and microbiological identi
anesthesia. Often patients will become distressed or dyspneic
fication of the causative agent for each case should be pursued.
 Affected animals are often febrile in addition to showing general
with handling and require sedation for less invasive procedures-
ultrasound, radiography, or even general physical exams. Spe-
clinical signs of pleural filling. Patients with roughening of the
[d e aa e (ad) uou jo siq end
cific issues pertinent to respiratory disease have been previously
noted in this chapter where appropriate.
friction rub evident on thoracic auscultation and pain with res-
piratory motion.
Pyothorax is treated by pleural drainage and administration
Premedication
of antibiotics. Pleural drainage is achieved by the placement of
chest tubes for complete and ongoing drainage of purulent
Many anesthetic drugs have respiratory depressive effects-
these side effects are usually tolerated by fairly stable patients
pleural fluid and lavage of the pleural space with sterile saline.
In selecting a tube for placement, it is important to select a large
but can be extremely signifcant in patients with respiratory
enough diameter tube to allow drainage of thick exudates. Anti-
compromise.
 Phenothiazines (e.g., acepromazine) tend to have little nega-
microbial therapy should be directed by culture and sensitivity
tive effect on the respiratory system when given at low doses.
results, but broad-spectrum coverage with a combination of
 aminopenicillin and fluoroquinolone is appropriate pending
Respiratory rate may slow, but patients tend to compensate with
 culture results. Antibiotic therapy is usually continued for at
larger volume breaths. If given at higher doses, depression may
least 4-6 weeks, longer with Nocardia or Actinomyces infections.
occur.
 Alpha-2 adrenergic agonists (e.g., dexmedetomidine) may not
Surgical exploration ± debridement of the thorax is indicated in
patients with suspected migrating foreign bodies (based on
be the best choice for sedation. The level of respiratory depres-
history or the presence of Nocardia or Actinomyces) or those
sion can vary greatly and the response may be erratic. This class
failing to respond adequately to medical management.
 of drug can cause dark mucous membrane color that is unrelated
to oxygenation of tissue. In patients with respiratory compro-
mise, this can make it more difficult to visually assess potential
Nutritional considerations
hypoxemia.
Benzodiazepines (diazepam and midazolam) have little respi-
 Patients with pleural space disease may tolerate small frequent
ratory effect and are probably the safest choice when dealing
meals better than large meals because gastric filling can cause
with patients with respiratory or pulmonary compromise.
Chapter 6 Respiratory
157
 s      
 carbon dioxide monitoring are essential tools for assessing
is usually less so with butorphanol and buprenorphine, but 
 appropriate ventilation. It is advised to check ABG levels peri-
-d mued iog sissaleue aenbape pou are sinip omi sso
 odically to verify adequate ventilation.
dures. Morphine, hydromorphone, oxymorphone, and fentanyl
 Mechanical or assisted ventilation will be necessary for most
may cause dose-dependent respiratory depression and while 
cases with pulmonary or respiratory compromise as they will be
they should be used for patients undergoing painful procedures,
 unable to achieve adequate lung expansion and maintain appro-
they should be used with caution in especially compromised
 priate spontaneous ventilation.
cases.
 Blood pressure monitoring via an arterial catheter is recom-
mended for compromised cases. Not only will the invasive blood
pressure monitoring give an accurate picture of the level of hypo-
Induction
tension or normotension but it can also alert the anesthetist to
If at all possible, it is recommended to preoxygenate patients for
the adequacy of ventilation. Excessive positive pressure ventila-
at least 5min before induction. This can be accomplished
tion can occlude venous return and may result in a state of
through a mask, nasal catheters, or an oxygen cage.
hypotension. Alterations in the arterial waveform coinciding
 Propofol is the most common induction agent used for respi-
with the fring of the ventilator can be another clue that ventila-
ratory cases. While it does cause profound apnea when given
 tion may be negatively affecting blood pressure.
(this is less dramatic when given slowly), the drug is eliminated
very quickly and immediate intubation and assisted ventilation
Recovery
can negate the apnea.
Ketamine/diazepam can be used for induction, though with
With few exceptions, cases with respiratory or pulmonary com-
care. While patients usually do not become apnic after induction
promise should be recovered in a critical care unit where they
with this combination, they may exhibit an apneustic breathing
can be closely monitored postoperatively.
pattern. Pharyngeal and laryngeal reflexes are still intact and
Pulse oximetry should be monitored for as long as is feasible.
laryngospasms, bronchospasms, or coughing may still occur
If saturation falls below 95% on room air, some form of sup-
with tracheal stimulation.
plemental oxygen should be considered—flow by oxygen, nasal
 Etomidate does not typically cause much respiratory depres-
catheters, or an oxygen cage. ABGs should also be monitored in
sion but can cause apnea immediately following induction. Some
order to gain a clearer picture of ventilatory status.
patients may retch or gag when given this agent.
   pd a s 
Depending on the procedure, additional analgesia may be
a ss Asu  pie ri  u 
tion. Patients with respiratory disease may have significantly
a constant rate infusion (CRI) of fentanyl or butorphanol is
sd au oi ae sa are pue uou hun pasdn
of apnea or hypoxia than more stable patients. Depending on
 opioid agonist given can be either reversed with naloxone (which
the type of respiratory disorder, equipment for a tracheostomy
tube may be needed. When checking the cuff or delivering
-d 1o (ido  Aq pd oise Ae asia Ay m
tially reversed with butorphanol (which will offer some mild
an assisted breath, it is important to use caution if any kind
 analgesia but less respiratory depression). Non-steroidal anti-
of intrapulmonary disorder is present (e.g, pulmonary bulla,
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are an option as well for less
pneumothorax, flail chest) where lung expansion could be com-
 painful procedures, as they do not adversely affect the respira-
 promised. Mechanical ventilation should not exceed 20 cm of
tory system and offer mild pain relief.
HO to avoid barotrauma.
Maintenance anesthesia
SECTION 7 FEEDING
 Isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane are all acceptable choices
CONSIDERATIONS FOR
for respiratory cases. All volatile anesthetics cause some degree
of respiratory depression, often of a dose-dependent type.
RESPIRATORY DISEASE
Nitrous oxide is not recommend for respiratory cases and in fact
is contraindicated in cases such as pneumothorax. Nitrous oxide
While there are no specific nutritional recommendations for
moves to internal areas of pocketing gas and will cause increas-
 animals that have either acute or chronic respiratory diseases,
ing pressure in those spaces.
the value and importance of nutrition in the management of
these animals should not be underestimated. Specific issues per
Monitoring
         n
chapter where appropriate.
In respiratory cases, controlling and maintaining ventilation and
The entire respiratory process uses many muscles and involves
tissue oxygenation are going to be of utmost importance while
 multiple chemical and enzymatic reactions to ensure that oxygen 
the patient is under anesthesia. Pulse oximetry and end tidal
 transfer occurs within the alveoli.
158
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
An animal with acute or chronic respiratory disease has
Bibliography
the potential to be utilizing up to twice their normal calorie
requirements. Initial caloric intake calculations are done for
 resting energy requirements (RER) as with other critical care
Section 1
hospitalized patients and adjusted based on weight changes and
1.
 Bonagura JD, Twedt DC. Krks Current Veterinary Therapy XIV,
hydration levels.'
Pp. 619-621, 627-628. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elseiver; 2009.
King LG. Textbook of Respiratory Disease in Dogs and Cats
animals with respiratory disease due to the increased incidence
Pp. 310-338. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elseiver; 2004.
 of vomiting and aspiration. If the animal is unable to meet their
caloric requirements through oral intake, then gastrostomy, jeju-
Section 2
nostomy or IV parenteral or partial-parenteral nutrition would
1.
Tilley LP, Smith FWK, Jr. Mediastinitis in The 5-Mimute Veterinary
 be viable options.
Consult Canine and Feline, 2nd edition, p. 939. Baltimore, MD:
Due to the difficulty with breathing, many animals are unable
Williams & Wilkins; 2000.
to consume an adequate number of calories to meet their RER
2.
Nelson RW, Couto CG (eds.). Small Animal Internal Medicine, 4th
or increased caloric requirements. It is difficult to eat and breathe
edition, St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier; 2009.
 q so  s j   s  n
3.
 Rogers KS, Walker MA. Disorders of the mediastinum. Cormpendium
 eating. Keep in mind that many of the medications used to treat
on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian 1997;19:
respiratory diseases may cause nausea in the animal, further
69-83.
 decreasing their desire to consume adequate quantities of food.?
4.
 Bauer T, Woodfield JA. Mediastinal, pleural, and extrapleural
disease. In: VeterinaryInternal Medicine,4thedition, eds.SJ Etinger,
 Small meals frequently offered may help prevent vomiting
EC Feldman, Pp. 812-842. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1995.
 associated with drug-induced nausea. An increase in appetite
5.
Konde LJ, Spaulding K. Sonographic evaluation of the cranial medi-
 may also be seen when steroids are used to reduce airway
astinum in small animals. Journal of Veterinary Radiology and
inflammation—-use this to your advantage by offering food fre-
Ultrasound 2005. DOl: 10.1111/j.1740-8261.
quently and monitoring the total intake of calories. It may take
a couple of days to see this side effect. For animals on long-term
Section 3
steroid medications, there is no increased physiological need for
Corcoran BM, Foster DJ, Fuentes VL. Feline asthma syndrome: a
calories, just an increased desire. A higher protein diet will not
retrospective study of the clinical presentation in 29 cats. Journal of
help prevent the muscle wasting commonly associated with
Small Animal Practice 1995;36:481-488.
steroid use, but this will resolve as the dose is slowly decreased
Mantis P, Lamb CR, Boswood A. Assessment of the accuracy of
over time.
thoracic radiography in the diagnosis of canine chronic bronchitis.
 To make meeting their energy requirement easier for the
Journal of Small Animal Practice 1998;39:518-520.
animal, a calorically dense, highly palatable diet is usually rec-
3.
Herrtage M. Medical management of tracheal collapse. In: Kirk's
 ommended. For most animals, this would be one of the many
Current Veterinary Therapy, 14th edition, eds. JD Bonagura, DC
veterinary recovery diets. These recovery diets also have the
Twedt, p. 630-635. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2009.
 advantage of increasing the fluid intake to help with maintaining
4.
Johnson L. Chronic bronchitis in dogs. In: Krks Current Veterinary
Therapy, 14th edition, eds. JID Bonagura, DC Twedt, Pp. 642-645.
hydration. Maintenance of airway hydration is important to
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2009.
facilitate mucociliary clearance.? Some patients will also have an
5.
Hawkins EC. Respiratory system disorders. In: Small Anirmal
increase in water loss through the respiratory process that will
Internal Medicine, 3rd edition, eds. RW Nelson, CG Couto,
need to be compensated for, making a liquid recovery diet even
pp. 250-298. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2003.
more beneficial.
6.
Thrusfield MV, Aitken CGC, Muirhead RH. A field investigation of
For animals with chronic respiratory diseases, weight man-
kennel cough: effcacy of different treatments. Journal of Small
 agement may need to be considered. Exercise has the benefit of
Animal Practice 1991;32:455.
helping to expand the pulmonary airways, helping in clearing
7.
Padrid P Chronic bronchitis and asthma in cats. In: Kirks Current
 out the accumulated debris in the lower airways and stimulating
Veterinary Therapy, 14th edition, eds. JD Bonagura, DC Twedt,
pp. 650-657. Philidelphia, PA: Saunders; 2009.
coughing to move the material out of the upper airways. An
exercise program would need to be tailored to the individual
8.
Hawkins EC, Clay LD, Bradley JM, et al. Demographic and histori-
cal fndings, including exposure to environmental tobacco smoke,
patient's fitness level and degree of pulmonary dysfunction to
in dogs with chronic cough. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine
 keep from causing excessive respiratory effort or even death.?2
2010;24:825-831.
Client education in measurement of respiratory rate, assessment
9.
Moise NS, Wiedenkeller D, Yeager AE, et al. Clinical, radiographic,
of mucous membrane color, and other signs of increased effort
and bronchial cytologic features of cats with bronchial disease: 65
will help to improve their ability to assess their pet's status during
cases (1980-1986). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
exercise.
Association 1989;194:1467-1473.
 The key to management of patients with either acute or
chronic respiratory disease is to keep them well hydrated, ensure
Section 4
they are receiving adequate calories in a form that they will will-
1.
 Fox PR. Approach to the coughing and dyspneic dog. Proceedings
ingly consume, and to help to move the pulmonary debris out
of the 32nd Annual World Small Animal Veterinary Association
of the air way.
Congress, August 19-23, 2007, Sydney, Australia; 2007.
Chapter 6  Respiratory
159
2.
 Reinero C, Cohn L. Interstitial lung diseases. Veterinary Clinics of
Section 6
North America. Small Animal Practice 2007;37(5):937-947.
 Cohn L. Pulmonary parenchymal disease. In: Textbook of Veterinary
1.
Grimm K, Ihurmon J, Tranquilli WJ. Lumb and Jones Veterinary
3.
Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman,
Anesthesia and Anaigesia, 4th edition, Ames, IA: Blackwell
 Pp. 1096-1119. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
Publishing; 2007.
Section 7
Section 5
1. Pawloski DR, Broaddus KD. Pneumothorax: a review. Journal of the
1. Saker K, Remillard R. Critical care nutrition and enteral-assisted
American Animal Hospital Association 2010;46(6):385-397.
feeding. In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds.
Silverstein DC. Pleural space disease. In: Textbook of Respiratory
MS Hand, CD Ihatcher, RL Remillard, P Roudebush, BJ Novotny,
2.
Disease in Dogs and Cats,ed. LG King, Pp. 49-52. St. Louis, MO:
Pp. 439-445. Topeka, KS: Mark Morris Institute; 2010.
Saunders Elsevier; 2004.
2.
Hawkins E. Disorders of the trachea and bronchi. In: Small Animal
3.
 McPhail CM. Medical and surgical management of pyothorax.
Internal Medicine, 4th edition, eds. R Nelson, CG Couto, pp. 285-
Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 2007;
290. St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier; 2009.
37(5):975-988.
4.
 Beatty J, Barrs V. Pleural effusion in the cat: a practical approach to
determine aetiolgy. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery 2010;
12(9):693-707.
Chapter
Hematology
Editors: Jennifer Garcia and Rhonda South-Bodiford
Section 1 Anatomy and Physiology - Marcia Carothers 161
Section 3 Leukocyte Disorders - Marcia Carothers 174
Section 2 Red Blood Cell Disorders 163
Section 4 Platelet, Coagulation, and Inherited Disorders 182
 Anemia - Heather A. Flaherty 163
Diseases of coagulation - Jo Ann Morrison 182
Polycythemia - Heather A. Flaherty 167
Disorders of platelets - Marcia Carothers 184
Transfusion medicine - Tracy Darling 167
Breed-related disorders - o Ann Morrison 188
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia - Anthony P. Carr 171
SECTION 1 ANATOMV AND
fbrous pericardium is the outer layer made of fbrous connective
tfissue and is loosely aftached to the diaphragm. The serous peri-
PHYSIOLOGY
cardium has two layers, the parietal layer and the visceral layer.
The parietal layer lies between the fbrous pericardium and the
The circulatory system
visceral layer. The visceral layer is also called the epicardium and
is closely attached to the myocardium. A thin fluid cavity exists
The function of the cardiovascular system is to provide nutrient
between the parietal and visceral layers. This fluid acts as a lubri-
fluid (blood), oxygen, immune substances, hormones, and chem-
cant allowing the heart to smoothly expand and contract. If this
icals to distant tissues and to remove tissue waste products and
fluid space flls with excessive fluid, this pericardial effusion may
carbon dioxide. Regulation of temperature and normal water and
interfere with the normal heart function. The increased pressure
electrolyte balance is also controlled by the cardiovascular
to the right heart results in the collapse of the right atrium
 system. The heart is the central muscular organ that pumps blood
 causing pericardial tamponade. If the pericardial effusion is left
through a network of joined vessels (arteries, veins, and capillar-
untreated, right heart failure usually occurs. The myocardium is
ies). The lymphatic system also assists the return of fluid from the
the thickest layer of the heart and consists of cardiac muscle
interstitial spaces back to the blood via the venous system.
fbers. Cardiac muscle cells are involuntary striated cells with
The heart lies in the mediastinum and is surrounded by lungs.
 end-to-end attachments called intercalated disks. The interca-
The rib cage protects both the heart and the lungs. The anatomy
lated disks allow transmission of impulses from cell to cell,
 of the heart consists of the outer pericardium, the myocardium,
 resulting in large groups of cardiac cells to contract in unison
and the inner layer, the endocardium. The pericardium has two
forming a syncytium. The endocardium is a thin membranous
layers, the fibrous pericardium and the serous pericardium. The
 lining of the heart chambers.
Smat Anima nternat Medicine forVeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses, First Edition.Edited by Linda Meril
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
161
162
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 There are four chambers of the heart (right atrium, right
system include (1) removal of excessive tissue fluid, (2) transport
ventricle, left atrium, and left ventricle). The heart is a “two-
of waste materials to the blood, (3) fltration of lymph fluid by
pump' organ. The low pressure right heart pumps blood through
the lymph nodes, and (4) transport of large proteins (i.e,
the lungs, and the left heart pumps blood to the peripheral
enzymes) to the bloodstream. The lymphatics carry proteins and
organs. The atrium functions as a weak primer pump, while
large particulate matter away from tissue spaces, neither of
the ventricle is a much stronger pump propelling blood to the
which can be removed by direct absorption into the blood capil-
tissues.
laries. Most tissues have lymph channels that usually align with
 Deoxygenated blood is received into the right atrium from the
veins. There are no lymph vessels in the brain, spinal cord, bone
 systemic and coronary veins. From the right atrium, the blood
marrow, or skeletal muscle. The lymphatic channel is a thin-
 passes through the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle. The
walled vessel with one-way valves. The larger lymphatic vessels
right ventricle contracts during systole, and the tricuspid valve
are surrounded by smooth muscle and a fbrous adventitia (outer
closes to prevent backflow of the blood into the right atrium. The
connective tissue covering). Although there are occasional
 blood is pumped through the pulmonary valve into the pulmo-
intrinsic pulsations of the lymph vessels, the flow of lymph fluid
nary arteries. The blood continues through branching arteries to
depends on the movement of adjacent muscles. The lymphatic
the pulmonary capillaries of the alveoli where oxygen exchange
      o    s
occurs. Oxygenated blood travels through merging vessels that
thoracic duct terminates in the vena cava.
terminate into the pulmonary veins. The pulmonary veins
Lymph fluid is formed when excessive interstitial fluid accu-
deliver oxygenated blood to the left atrium. Oxygenated blood
mulates in the tissue. Lymphocytes are the primary cell of the
 then travels through the mitral valve to the left ventricle. During
lymphatic fluid when the fluid reaches the thoracic duct. Lymph
systole, the mitral valve closes and oxygenated blood is pumped
from the digestive tract is known as chyle. Chyle contains micro-
 ig (poq a u Arae isr a) ee  yaol
scopic particles of fat (chylomicrons).
aorta, the blood flows from the arterial branches to the capillar-
The lymphatic structures include thymus, tonsils, gut-
ies of the tissues.
associated lymph tissue (GALT), lymph nodes, and spleen. The
There are two basic means of regulation of the heart pump.
thymus is located in the caudal neck and cranial thoracic region.
First, the intrinsic cardiac regulation occurs in response to blood
This organ is prominent in young animals and regresses as the
volume flowing into the heart. The intrinsic ability of the heart
animal matures. The tonsils are found in the pharyngeal region
to adapt to changing volumes of blood is called the Frank-
and function to prevent spread of infection to the respiratory
Starling mechanism, which states that the greater the heart
es u su r  r au sn asii e
 muscle is stretched during filling, the greater the force of con-
ways. First, tonsils are found close to moist epithelial surfaces.
traction and the greater the quantity of blood pumped into the
Second, tonsils do not have a capsule. And third, tonsils are
aorta. And second, the control of heart rate is determined by the
found at the beginning of a lymph drainage system but not
autonomic nervous system. Stimulation of the sympathetic
along the lymphatic channel as are the lymph nodes. GALT is
nerves can increase the heart rate and force of contraction,
lymphoid tissue found in the lining of the intestines (mucosa
which increases cardiac output. Inhibition of the sympathetic
and submucosa). B lymphocytes are processed through the
nervous system can decrease heart rate and cardiac output. Para-
GALT system prior to being sent to the peripheral lymphoid
 sympathetic (vagal) stimulation will slow the heart rate with
tissue.
minimal effect on the strength of the contraction.
The lymph nodes are small kidney bean-shaped encapsulated
The transport of nutrients to the tissues and the removal of
structures located along the lymphatic vessels. See Figure 7.1.1
cellular waste occur in the microcirculation. The capillaries are
for the location of common peripheral lymph nodes. The two
thin-walled vessels consisting of highly permeable endothelial
major functions of lymph nodes include (1) the filtering of par-
cells. The blood flow is not continuous in the capillaries. The
ticulate material from lymph fluid and (2) the participation in
intermittent blood flow is caused by vasomotion (intermittent
immunologic processes (i.e., stimulation of B and T cells).
contractions of the metarteriole and precapillary sphincters).
Microscopic evaluation of the lymph node demonstrates an
Each tissue has the ability to control local blood flow, and this
outer capsule and internal framework of septa and trabeculae.
occurs in proportion to metabolic needs. Tissues with greater
 Internally, the lymph node contains a poorly defined cortex and
metabolism (ie., liver and kidney) have greater blood flow
medulla. Tissue macrophages are embedded in a coarse, fbrous
through the capillary bed. In the resting state, the metabolic
mesh of the medulla. The cortex contains lymph nodules. T cells
 activity of muscles is very low, resulting in low blood flow during
reside in the paracortical areas and B cells are found in the
this time.
central germinal centers of the lymphoid follicles.
The lymphatic system
The spleen
The lymphatic system includes a network of vessels that carry
 oq a u uno pi is a si us 
lymph (a fluid similar in composition to that of interstitial fluid)
 tongue-shaped organ is located on the left side of the abdomen
to the bloodstream. The four major functions of the lymphatic
and has both lymphatic and hematologic functions. The spleen
Chapter 7Hematology
163
plug, however, serves as the framework for clot formation. Sec-
ondary hemostasis is the development of the clot or thrombus
 coordinated by a tightly controlled and well-balanced interplay
of hemostatic proteins. Coagulation also initiates fbrinolysis
(clot removal) to restore blood flow (Table 7.1.1).
The coagulation models for the clotting cascade include the
extrinsic, intrinsic, and common pathways (see Figure 7.1.2).
The extrinsic pathway occurs with the release of tissue procoagu-
lants (tissue factor [TFl). Factor X is generated via the complex
of TF and factor VIla. The intrinsic pathway consists of the
contact activation of factor XII followed by the activation of
factors XIa, IXa, and VIIla. The contact pathway consists of
factor Xll, prekallikrein, and the cofactor high molecular weight
kininogen. The role of this pathway in vivo is questionable as
animals with factor XII deficiency have no bleeding tendencies.
 The common pathway consists of the formation of factors Xa
Figure 7.1.1 Location of the common lymph nodes (LNs) in the dog.
and Va and the generation ofthrombin. The function of thrombin
1, submandibular LN; 2, prescapular LN; 3, axillary LN; 4, inguinal LN; 5,
is the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin. Factor XlHla is critical
popliteal LN.
for normal clot strength and stability. The classification of the
clotting cascade into these pathways is a useful model for in vitro
laboratory evaluation; however, such divisions do not occur
in vivo.
has multiple functions including storage of blood, removal of
 Fibrinolysis is defined as clot dissolution and is necessary to
foreign material from circulation, removal of dead, dying, and
restore blood flow. Plasminogen, a protein synthesized by the
abnormal red blood cells (RBCs), and lymphocyte cloning
liver, is converted to plasmin via plasminogen activators (tissue
during an immune response.
plasminogen activator [tPA] and urokinase plasminogen activa.
 The capsule of the spleen is made of a fibrous connective
tor [uPA]). Excess plasmin formation can lead to spontaneous
fissue and smooth muscle. Trabeculae are branches of the
 bleeding due to excessive fbrinolysis. Plasminogen activator
capsule that contain blood vessels, nerves, lymph vessels, and
inhibitors (plasminogenactivator inhibitor 1, alpha 2-antiplasmin,
smooth muscle cells. It is through these channels that blood is
and thrombin activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor) will prevent
pumped in and out of the spleen. The interior of the spleen is
fbrinolysis leading to thrombosis. Fibrin degradation products
made up of white and red pulps. The white pulp consists of
(FDPs) result from the breakdown of fibrin. FDPs can be meas-
lymphoid tissue that responds to immunologic challenges. The
ured and may be useful in diagnosing disseminated intravascu-
red pulp consists of blood vessels, tissue macrophages, and
lar coagulation (DIC)
blood storage spaces (sinuses). In normal circumstances, the
spleen can store 10-20% of the total blood volume. Certain
drugs (i.e., tranquilizers and barbiturates) can relax the smooth
SECTION 2 RED BLOOD CELL
muscle of the capsule and increase splenic pooling by up to 30%
of the blood volume.
DISORDERS
Anemia
The coagulation system
Anemia can be defined as a decrease in RBC concentration,
Hemostasis is defined as the prevention of blood loss and is a
a decrease in hemoglobin concentration or as a decrease in
complex series of mechanisms that maintain the integrity of a
hematocrit (HCT) or packed cell volume (PCV). Anemias are
closed circulatory system. Injury to a blood vessel results in
 usually associated with a decrease in oxygen carrying capacity.
activation of the hemostatic system. Immediately after trauma,
 In small animals, anemia is classified as regenerative or nonre-
the vessel starts to contract and reduces blood flow. This vascular
 generative. This is determined by assessing the number of poly-
spasm is the first step in coagulation. The next step is the forma-
 chromatophils present. Anemias are normally a secondary
tion of the platelet plug. Exposure of the subendothelial surface 
 manifestation of a primary disease state and are not considered
by vessel trauma results in rapid platelet adhesion. The adhesion 
a primary disease.' A decrease in RBC concentration may be
 of platelets to the endothelial wall is mediated by adhesive pro-
 divided into a set of categories. It may present due to a lack
teins (ie., von Willbrand factor [vWF] and fbrinogen) and
 of production (aplasia), an increase in destruction (such as
allows for the formation of the platelet plug. The platelet plug is
 an immune-mediated destruction), blood loss (trauma), or a
short-lived (seconds) and unstable. This primary hemostatic
 combination of any of these. Animals may present with pale
164
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 7.1.1
Summary of the hemostatic proteins in the various coagulation pathways
Pathway
Factor
Other name
 Function
Extrinsic
 Tissue factor
Thromboplastin
Cofactor
Factor Vll
Proconvertin
Inactive precursor
Factor Vlla
Active enzyme
Contact
Factor Xll
Hageman factor
 Inactive precursor
Factor Xlla
Active enzyme
Prekallikrein
Fletcher factor
Inactive precursor
Kallikrein
Active enzyme
High molecular weight kininogen
Cofactor
Intrinsic
Factor Xl
Inactive precursor
Factor Xla
Active enzyme
Factor IX
Christmas factor
 Inactive precursor
 Factor IXa
 Active enzyme
Factor VIlI
Procofactor
Factor Mlla
Cofactor
Common
Factor X
 Inactive precursor
Factor Xa
Active enzyme
Factor V
Procofactor
Factor va
Cofactor
Prothrombin
Factor I
 Inactive precursor
Fibrinogen
Factor I
Substrate
Fibrin
Final product 
 Factor XIII
Inactive precursor
Factor Xllla
Active enzyme
Fibrinolysis
Plasminogen
Inactive precursor
 Plasmin
Active enzyme
mucous membranes, exercise intolerance, rapid respiration, and/
They carry less hemoglobin or have incomplete hemoglobin syn-
 or collapse.
 thesis and therefore have a decreased mean corpuscular hemo-
globin concentration (MCHC). When a complete blood count
(CBC) is performed, these RBC indices accompany the HCT. A
Regenerative anemia
regenerative anemia is often classified as a macrocytic hypochro-
A regenerative anemia is assessed by the presence of increased
mic anemia. However, not all regenerative anemias will fit neatly
numbers of polychromatophils in circulation.? Polychromat-
into these classifications and not all macrocytic hypochromic
ophils are visualized on microscopy with Wright's stain. They
anemias are regenerative. Measuring reticulocyte numbers is
will stain pale to moderately basophilic (Figure 7.2.1).
recommended in order to properly assess the regenerative
If a new methylene blue stain is utilized on a dog's blood, the
response. Most veterinary laboratories will automatically per-
polychromatophils will be visualized with aggregates of RNA in
form an automated reticulocyte count on small animals if the
the cytoplasm. These cells are called reticulocytes.
calculated HCT falls below a predetermined number.
 In canines, reticulocyte concentration will begin to increase
 gate. In this text, an aggregate reticulocyte will be used synony-
within 2-4 days post-RBC loss or destruction and will peak
mously with polychromatophil (Figure 7.2.2).
within 7-10 days.4 With the development of anemia due to blood
Polychromatophils usually have more volume than a mature
loss or destruction, erythropoietin (EPO) will stimulate eryth-
 RBC and thus have a larger mean corpuscular volume (MCV).
roid blast-forming units and committed stem cells in the
Chapter 7 Hematology
165
Contact Pathway
PK
HMK
XII
 Extrinsic Pathway
Intrinsic Pathway
XI
Tissue Factor 
Xla
VII
IX
Vlla
IXa
VIl
Vllla
Common Pathway
十
Xa
Va
Prothrombin
 Thrombin
XII
elllx
 Fibrinolysis
Fibrinogen
Plasminogen
Fibrin
Plasmin
Fibrin - FDPs
Figure 7.1.2 The coagulation pathways. PK, prekallikrein; HMwK, high molecular weight kininogen; Xll, factor Xll; Xl, factor Xl; Xla, activated
factor XI; IX, factor IX; IXa, activated factor IX; VlI, factor VIll; VIlla, activated factor VIll; VIll, factor VIll; Vlla, activated factor VIll; X, factor X; Xa,
activated factor X; V, factor V; Va, activated factor V; XIll, factor XIll; Xllla, activated factor XIll; FDP, fibrin degradation product.
Figure 7.2.1  Polychromatophils (arrows) in a canine with
Figure 7.2.2  Aggregate reticulocytes (arrows) and punctate
regenerative anemia. Wright's stain.
reticulocyte (arrowhead) in a feline with regenerative anemia. New
methylene blue stain.
bone marrow, resulting in an increase in erythroid production
ability, renal interstitial cells will produce EPO. The EPO will
(Figure 7.2.3).
 EPO is also important in preventing apoptosis (programmed
forming unit-erythroid (BFU-E) and colony forming unit-
cell death) of these progenitor cells and in increasing the mass 
 erythroid (CFU-E) cells and by decreasing apoptosis. Reticulo-
of erythroid precursors. In the adult, EPO is produced by renal
 e  sd s ia m    s
 interstitial cells within the kidneys in response to hypoxia.
 peak within 7-10 days. The increase in aggregate reticulocytes
With blood loss or increased destruction of the RBC, anemia
 in response to the anemia is classifed as a regenerative anemia
will develop. With the resulting decrease in oxygen carrying
(Figure 7.2.4).
166
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 7.2.3  Polychromatophils (arrows) and agglutinating
Figure 7.2.5 Nonregenerative anemia in a canine. Wright's stain.
erythrocytes (arrowhead) in a canine with regenerative anemia caused
by immune-mediated destruction. Wright's stain.
 Diagnosis may be made by imaging of the long bones with evi-
dence of osteosclerosis. Bone marrow samples may be of low
cellularity due to progressive myelofbrosis and osteosclerosis.
Affected dogs are normally treated symptomatically.
Nonregenerative anemia
 Nonregenerative anemias may result for a number of reasons. In
these instances, the anemia does not have a concomitant increase
in reticulocytes and the mature erythrocyte population is not
 sq yo y e o a  a s  
response or chronicity of the anemia. In nonregenerative
anemias, reticulocytes are not increased in circulation. Aplastic
 anemia is a condition that can lead to nonregenerative anemia.4
Aplastic anemia can affect dogs and cats. It is characterized by
a severe, nonregenerative, normocytic, normochromic anemia
(Figure 7.2.5).
Aplastic anemia may result as a primary or secondary condi
Figure 7.2.4  Polychromatophils (arrows) in a feline with regenerative 
tion. Primary aplastic anemia in canines is found to be the result
 anemia. Wright's stain.
 of an immune-mediated disorder that targets and destroys
erythroid precursors in the bone marrow.? These animals may
have peripheral erythroid agglutination, positive Coombs test,
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
and/or spherocytes.' In immune-mediated aplastic anemia,
Pyruvate kinase (PK) defciency is a genetic defect of RBC
because destruction occurs at the level of erythroid precursors,
metabolism where the lack of PK leads to shortened RBC life
reticulocytes will not be present in circulation. Bone marrow
 span, resulting in a strongly regenerative anemia. PK deficiency
 exam may reveal an increase in phagocytosis of rubricytes and
 is seen in basenjis, West Highland white terriers, cairn terriers,
metarubricytes. This may result in maturation arrest at the level
 pugs, Chihuahuas, miniature poodles, and many other breeds.6
of rubriblast or prorubricyte stages.7 In severe cases or in animals
The dogs present clinically at a few months of age with exercise
with chronicity, aplasia of the erythroid line may be evident in
intolerance and weakness. Mucous membranes will be pale on
the bone marrow. As primary aplastic anemia is the result of
exam. CBC will reveal a HCT that may range from 12% to 28%
immune-mediated destruction, animals are often treated with
 and a reticulocyte count of up to 90%.7 In PK-deficient dogs,
immunosuppressive drugs.4
RBC half-life may be as little as 5-6 days. MCV is often increased
Secondary anemia
due to the marked increase in reticulocytes. Affected dogs have
a shortened life span, normally succumbing within 1-5 years of
Secondary aplastic anemias may result for various reasons, such
 age. Most die from complications of anemia or hepatic failure.
as toxins, drugs, and estrogens. Immunosuppressive drugs and
Chapter 7  Hematology
167
chemotherapeutic agents may lead to reversible aplastic anemias.
 secondary polycythemia. Secondary polycythemia is also seen
In these situations, the stem cells within the bone marrow are 
 with animals living at high altitudes and renal masses such as
 damaged, but with the cessation of the drugs, the effect may be
 renal cysts.
reversed.
Viruses such as feline leukemia virus (FeLV) may result in
Diagnosis
aplastic anemia.4 FeLV may cause pure red cell aplasia or hypo-
plasia. It may also cause dysplastic maturation within the RBC
 In order to diagnose polycythemia and to diferentiate it from
line. Macrocytosis without regeneration may be present.
relative, secondary, and primary polycythemia, one should
In canines, Ehrlichia canis can cause immune-mediated
assess the hydration status of the patient. If the animal is not
destruction of progenitor cells of the erythroid line within the
 dehydrated and an increase in PCV, HCT, or hemoglobin per-
bone marrow, resulting in aplastic anemia. E. canis may also lead
 sists, the next step would be to measure PaO, and EPO levels.
 to immune-mediated destruction of RBC in circulation. Diag-
Within the United States at the time of this writing, commercial
 nosis ofE. canis should be made by serology or polymerase chain
 testing for EPO is not currently available. Testing is offered in
reaction (PCR). The organism is not readily seen on blood
the United Kingdom. EPO levels would be beneficial in aiding
and classfying polycythemic conditions, but this is not neces-
smears.10
sary. In relative polycythemia, PaO, levels and EPO levels would
fall within reference intervals for that species. Secondary poly-
Polycythemia
cythemia resulting from hypoxia or hypoxemia would have low
Polycythemia is an increase in erythrocyte concentration. This
 PaO, levels and increased EPO levels. Primary (absolute) poly-
is normally indicated as an increase in PCV and/or HCT, hemo-
cythemia (polycythemia vera) would have PaO, levels within
globin concentration, or RBC count. If only RBC parameters are
reference intervals, and EPO levels may be within reference
increased, it is more appropriate to label it as erythrocytosis.
intervals or decreased.10
Polycythemia is more appropriately used to indicate an increase
in multiple cellines. In this text, as in common usage, the term
Treatment
"polycythemia" will be used to indicate an increase in RBC
parameters. Polycythemia can be classifed as either relative
 Treatment should be aimed at the underlying pathology. If the
 polycythemia or absolute polycythemia.1
animal is suffering from relative polycythemia due to dehydra-
tion, appropriate fluid therapy should be implemented. In
animals with secondary polycythemia resulting in hypoxia or
Relative polycythemia
hypoxemia, diagnosing and treating the underlying disease or
Relative polycythemia is usually due to fluid shifts or redistribu-
congenital abnormality is critical. A veterinary oncologist should
tion of RBCs in circulation."2 Fluid shifting is most commonly
 be consulted if primary absolute polycythemia (polycythemia
due to dehydration. Redistribution of RBC in circulation is com-
 vera) is suspected or diagnosed.0
monly associated with splenic contraction.
Transfusion medicine
Absolute polycythemia
The administration of blood and blood components is common
Absolute polycythemia is the result of an actual increase in
 among veterinary practices today, and it is most often the job of
RBC mass. This can be further classifed into primary or
the veterinary technician to be responsible for the collection,
secondary.13
handling, and administration of these life-saving products. This
Primary polycythemia
makes it important for the veterinary technician to be familiar
Primary polycythemia is also called polycythemia vera and is the
likelihood of potentially fatal transfusion reactions and/or trans
result of a primary myeloproliferative disorder of the bone
fusion failures. These adverse events can be minimized by careful
marrow that results in increased RBC production independent
product selection, donor screening, and careful monitoring of
oia a jo uid peaun ue si u e's Od jo
patients during administration.
line resulting in an increase in PCV. The erythroid line will often
appear without morphological abnormalities.
Blood products
Secondary polycythemia
One of the best advances in transfusion medicine over the past
Secondary polycythemia usuall occurs secondarily to other
 few decades is the increasing availability of veterinary compo-
pathological conditions such as hypoxia or hypoxemia that 
t nent products through commercial blood banking facilities.
results in a decrease in the partial pressure of oxygen (PaO). As  Component products are separated out from fresh whole blood
a compensatory response to decreased PaO, the body wil stim- (FWB) and can be used to treat very specific disorders. These
ulate an increase in RBC mass. Conditions such as heart or 
 products allow the veterinarian to tailor transfusion therapy to
chronic lung disease and congenital heart defects may lead to
 each patient's specific needs. This also allows for a higher yield
168
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 of products from a single unit of whole blood and decreases the
Recipient weight (kg) X
yolume administered to each patient when indicated.
[85(dog)or 60(cat)]x
Whole blood
Volume of donor  desired recipient PCV - current PCV
Whole blood products are either considered FWB or stored
blood (mL)
PCV of donor blood
whole blood (SWB). The most common use for whole blood
products is in the patient with acute blood loss, but it can be
An inline blood filter (180-220 microns) should always be used
used for a variety of other disorders. The main benefits of whole
during administration to eliminate any microaggregates that
 blood administration are the replacement of RBCs, plasma pro-
may have formed during storage.
teins, and intravascular volume expansion. It must be noted that
whole blood should not be used in patients with a normal or
Packed red blood cells
increased volume status due to the risk of fluid overload in these
 animals. See the administration guidelines later in this chapter
pRBCs contain RBCs, an anticoagulant, and a red cell nutrient.
 This product is commonly used in veterinary practices today and
for more information on the administration of whole blood
allows administration ofthe oxygen carrying capabilities of RBCs
products.
without the extra volume of plasma in whole blood products.
Whole blood is considered “fresh" for up to 24h after phle-
botomy.14 FWB consists of anticoagulants, RBCs, white blood
pRBCs are often used for the treatment of symptomatic anemia
in the normovolemic or hypovolemic patient. It should be noted
cells (WBCs), platelets, plasma, and coagulation factors. FWB
is usually used when stored products are not available, and/or
that pRBCs do not contain viable platelets or coagulation factors;
therefore, pRBCs should not be considered in patients suspected
when platelets are required. The advantages of using FWB
to have these deficits. pRBCs are stored in the refrigerator (1-
are that platelets and coagulation factors remain intact. This
6°C) and remain viable for up to 42 days, depending upon the
 may be beneficial in cases where acute blood loss is due to
platelet disorders (thrombocytopenia or thrombocytopathia)
type of red cell nutrient used. A single unit of pRBCs usually con-
tains 125 mL of RBCs in addition to a red cell preservative. A
 feline unit contains 20 mL of RBCs plus a preservative.
sion) is dramatically decreased after 6-8h of refrigeration,
and the hemostatic ability of platelets is completely lost after 72 h
Plasma
au an ar a no ss  s ai j
 to the collection process. Identification and screening of a
Plasma is the liquid portion of whole blood after the RBCs have
been removed. It contains proteins, clotting factors, albumin,
suitable donor (if not immediately available) and the process
of collection can delay the time until administration to the
and immunoglobulins. The benefit of plasma products is that it
allows us to administer these blood components to patients
recipient.
 SWB has been kept refrigerated (1-6°C) and differs from
without the added volume of RBCs, which can lead to hypervis-
FWB in that platelets are destroyed within 24-72h (many are
cosity, polycythemia, and the potential adverse effects of expo-
not viable after 6-8h), and some clotting factors (V and VIII
sure to large volumes of red cell antigens. Canine single units
within 2-4h) are lost during storage. The common use for SWB
usually contain 120mL of plasma product. Mini (60 mL) and
is acute blood loss due to trauma or surgery. When stored prop-
double (240mL) units are available from some commercial
erly, the therapeutic properties of SWB remain viable for 21-35
blood banking facilities. Feline single units usually contain about
days depending upon the anticoagulant used. Blood that has
20mL of plasma.
been at room temperature for 30 min must be infused within 6 h
Fresh frozen plasma
 or returned to the refrigerator and relabeled with an expiration
of 24h. Blood that has become discolored should be considered
        
 contaminated and discarded regardless of proper storage.
albumin, and immunoglobulins contained in FWB, in addition
The dose and rate of administration of SWB and FWB are
to clotting factors (VIII, IX, X, and II). To be considered FFP, it
based upon the volume status of the patient. In the case of acute
must be separated from the FWB within 8h of collection and is
hemorrhage, these products can be administered at a rate to
given a shelf life of 1 year when stored at -18°C or colder.
match the patient's current and ongoing losses. With the avail-
Common uses for FFP in dogs and cats are the replacement of
ability of packed red blood cells (pRBCs), whole blood may
labile and/or nonlabile clotting factors, and conditions that may
no longer be the preferred product to correct anemia in the
benefit from immunoglobulin administration such as canine
 normovolemic patient but might still be used in cases where
parvovirus enteritis.16
pRBCs are not accessible. In these cases, caution must be used
Frozen plasma
to prevent a life-threatening volume overload state. This is
achieved by careful calculation of the patient's volume require-
FFP is considered frozen plasma (FP) after 1 year of storage.
ments, monitoring respiratory rate and pattern, and monitoring
Labile clotting factors (factors V, VII, and vWF) are lost. The
central venous pressure in at-risk patients. If used to correct
plasma proteins, albumin, and immunoglobulins remain useful
anemia, the volume calculation for whole blood administration
for an additional 4 years when stored at or below -18°C. FP can
is as follows:
also be plasma that was separated and frozen more than 8h after
Chapter 7  Hematology
169
collection. Common uses for FP are disorders that may benefit 
 management of hypoproteinemia and/or hypovolemic shock
from immunoglobulins such as acute pancreatitis and canine 
 until the underlying disorder can be corrected. This product is
parvovirus enteritis or conditions that may benefit from nonla-
stable for up to 15 months under refrigeration (4-6°C) and for
bile clotting factors.
24h after rehydration. It is important to note that lyophilized
canine albumin is hyperosmolar, and careful monitoring should
Cryoprecipitate
be provided to avoid volume overload in at-risk patients. In
   e  d   
addition, this product should not be used in patients with dehy.
contains factor VIII, fbrinogen, fibronectin, vWF, and a small
dration or anemia without appropriate therapy to correct these
quantity of other plasma proteins. Cryoprecipitate is commonly
conditions.
used in the treatment of hemorrhage due to von Willebrand's syn-
 drome and hemophilia A (factor VlI deficiency). An advantage of
Donor selection
cryoprecipitate is that the high concentration allows for low
volume administration for patients at risk of volume overload.
Careful donor selection is important for two reasons—to mini-
Cryoprecipitate is stable for up to 1 year when stored at -18°℃.
mize risk of harm to the recipient as well as to the donor animal.
New lyophilized (freeze-dried) cryoprecipitate has recently
There are many criteria to consider when selecting a donor.
become available. Its uses include pretreatment of von Wille-
Size
 brand or hemophilia A patients prior to surgical procedures and
It is generally accepted that dogs and cats can donate up to 10%
as a topical hemostatic agent.
of their blood volume without any clinically significant deleteri-
Cryoprecipitate poor plasma
ous effects. Up to 20% blood volume can be collected, but this
Cryoprecipitate poor plasma (CRYOPP) or cryosupernatant is
may cause a decrease in arterial blood pressure, heart rate, and
PCV. Volume replacement in the form of intravenous crystalloid
the plasma supernatant that is left after the removal of the cryo-
administration might help to offset these effects when close to
precipitate. It contains most of the nonlabile clotting factors,
 20% blood volume is collected. Blood volume is approximately
albumin, immunoglobulins, and antithrombin II1. Common
 90mL/kg in dogs and 66 mL/kg in cats. Cats should weigh at
uses of CRYOPP are the treatment of vitamin K-dependent
least 4.5kg and dogs at least 30kg in order to donate a complete
coagulopathy and patients that will benefit from immunoglobu-
unit of blood (50 mL/cat, 500 mL/dog).
lins as with FP and FFP. Cryosupernatants remain stable for up
to 5 years when stored at -4 to 6°C, such as with FP.
Packed cell volume
Frozen plateiet concentrate
PCV should be checked on all donor animals prior to each blood
collection. This is to prevent life-threatening anemia to the
Frozen platelet concentrate is collected using plateletpheresis
 donor and to optimize the benefit to the recipient. Dogs should
and contains FP and DMSO as a preservative. It is used to treat
have a PCV >40% and cats >35%. Iron supplementation should
disorders causing thrombocytopenia or thrombocytopathia but
be considered in all donors that are regularly used to prevent an
may not be the treatment of choice because many of these
 iron defciency anemia. Most patients can donate once every 4-6
patients need the replacement of RBCs and plasma volume due
weeks without developing anemia.
to blood loss. This product can be stored for up to 6 months in
 In 2005, the American College of Veterinary Internal Medi
the freezer (-20°C). This product should be administered slowly
cine published its consensus statement on Canine and Feline
(over 1-2h) to prevent bradycardia due to the DMSO. A 2008
Blood Donor Screening for Infectious Disease.8 The statement
in vitro study showed a decrease in platelet quantity and function
gives an overview of vector-borne and non-vector-borne dis-
 of this product when compared to fresh platelet-rich plasma
 d o     p s
(PRP).17
sion and recommended testing modalities. Recommendations
Platelet-rich plasma
for donor selection, blood collection, and record keeping are also
discussed, making the statement a valuable reference for facili
 PRP contains platelets, plasma, some leukocytes, and anticoagu-
fies with a blood donor program.
lant. PRP is separated from the whole blood unit within 2h of
Blood typing
collection and has a shelf life of up to 72 h under refrigeration,
but the viability of the platelets can be dramatically reduced after
Blood typing is the identification of antigens on the surface of
6-8 h. Indications for the use of PRP include thrombocytopenias
 an animal's RBCs. These antigens can cause an acute reaction
due to decreased production and thrombocytopathias. The use
when administered to a patient with antibodies against that par-
of this product for immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT)
ticular antigen. In addition, administration of an incompatible
is not recommended as the platelets will be readily destroyed.
blood type can cause the recipient to develop antibodies against
that RBC antigen, which could cause delayed transfusion failures
Canine aibumin
and acute transfusion reactions in the future.
Lyophilized canine albumin has recently become available. This
 In dogs, there are at least a dozen known erythrocyte antigens.
 product is prepared from FFP and can be used for the temporary
 Most of the antigens are labeled within the dog erythrocyte
170
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
antigen (DEA) system, with the exception of the newly discov-
ing is recommended if time allows. The cross match should not
ered Dal antigen. Ideally, all recipients would have a complete
be used as a replacement for blood typing because a recipient
blood typing performed and transfused with a perfectly matched
can develop antibodies against a foreign blood type in as few as
4 days, which will shorten the life of the transfused cells and may
be sent out to a commercial lab) and costly. Most veterinary
prime the patient for an acute transfusion reaction if ever trans-
 patients cannot afford the time it takes to perform this extensive
s asu 'ag a u a poo as a m ue pa
testing. In clinical practice, the most important canine blood
of incompatibilities cannot be detected by cross match.
type is DEA 1.1, which is highly antigenic. This means that
 Unlike dogs, it is well documented that cats can have very
 transfusion of DEA 1.1 positive blood to a DEA 1.1 negative
strong, naturally occurring alloantibodies against foreign red cell
recipient could result in antibody production against DEA 1.1,
        
which may result in a significant acute transfusion reaction if the
anti-A antibodies that can produce a life-threatening reaction
patient is ever exposed to this antigen again. Point-of-care tests
even when administered in small amounts (just a few milliliters),
are available to identify DEA 1.1 status in dogs and should be
 making cross match imperative for all feline blood transfusions.
used prior to the administration of all RBC products. Antibodies
There are several ways to perform donor/recipient cross
to the other antigens (DEA 3, 4, 5, and 7) can rarely cause acute
 matching. The blood cross match procedure can be performed
hemolytic reactions, but delayed transfusion reactions are known
by most reference laboratories, but this procedure is most often
 to occur in immunosensitized patients. Ideally, donor dogs are
 performed within the hospital seting. The traditional method is
to perform a major (recipient serum or plasma and donor red
cells) and minor (donor serum or plasma and recipient RBCs)
all dogs are positive for DEA 4. The Dal antigen is newly reported
cross match along with a control where the red cells are washed
and of unknown significance at this time.
 In cats, there are at least four known red cell antigens. These
 for macroscopic and microscopic agglutination. A new gel cross
are A, B, AB, and the newly discovered Mik Type A is by far the
matching kit is now available, which allows the technician to
 most common, followed by type B. Type AB is very uncommon,
perform a major cross match in much less time than the tradi-
and the antigen Mik is of unknown prevalence. Frequency also
tional method.
varies among certain breeds as well as geographic locations.
 Naturally occurring alloantibodies against foreign red cell anti-
Administration
 gens are common in cats, and these antibodies can cause fatal
hemolytic transfusion reactions. In addition, these alloantibod-
Careful administration of blood products is essential to reduce
ies are readily passed through a queen's colostrum, which can
the incidence of adverse events. Potential complications from the
result in neonatal isoerythrolysis.
administration of blood products include but are not limited to
Neonatal isoerythrolysis is a potentially fatal disorder that
acute hemolytic transfusion reactions, thromboembolism, circu-
 s    a s   a e  s
latory overload, sepsis, infectious disease, anaphylaxis, electro-
strong anti-A antibodies are passed through the colostrum and
lyte derangements, and citrate toxicity. These events can vary in
 attack the kittens RBCs. Typing for the feline AB blood group
         i
can be performed at most reference laboratories, and point-of-
important for the nursing staff to be diligent about the proper
care typing kits are now readily available.
administration and monitoring of patients receiving these prod-
ucts. Several steps must be taken before and during administra-
Cross matching
tion to reduce the likelihood of acute or delayed adverse events.
 In addition to blood typing, one of the most important proce-
Careful storage and inspection of blood products prior to
dures that can be done to reduce the likelihood of an adverse
administration is a very important step that should not be over-
transfusion event is the recipient/donor cross match. Even with
looked. Controls should be in place to ensure that storage refrig-
the availability of point-of-care blood typing, it is still important 
erators and freezers maintain a consistent temperature according
to perform a blood cross match on all transfused units of blood.
to the storage requirements of each product. The use of these
Recipient antibodies against a donor's RBCs are a major cause
refrigerators and freezers should be limited to product storage
of acute transfusion reaction and transfusion failure. The major
when possible to prevent temperature fluctuations. Each unit of
cross match is used to detect the presence of these naturally
blood product should be carefully inspected for signs of discol-
 Occurring or induced antibodies in the recipient's plasma against
oration and current expiration date. Discolored blood products
the donor's RBC antigens. Since there are no known clinically
may indicate bacterial contamination and should never be
significant naturally occurring alloantibodies in dogs, a major
administered to a patient.
cross match will likely be negative in a dog that has never received
Refrigerated blood products can typically be administered
a blood transfusion, and some may argue that a cross match is
without warming to room temperature in most patients. Most
not necessary when transfusing a dog that has never been trans-
infusion rates will allow much of the product to reach room
fused before. Unfortunately, many veterinary patients have an
temperature during administration. Excessive warming of RBC
products can damage the cells and encourage bacterial growth,
of the possibility of previous transfusion; therefore, cross match-
which may increase the risk of transfusion failure or sepsis. Some
Chapter 7 Hematology
171
cases that may require warming of products to room or body
 RBC product, administration through a small bore catheter or
temperature are hypothermic patients and when rapid infusion 
 needle, and bacterial contamination of the blood product.
of large volumes is anticipated. The rapid administration of cold
Nonhemolytic, nonimmunologic transfusion reactions can be
fluids may induce arrhythmias in some patients. When warming
caused by citrate toxicosis in cases of large volume administra-
is required, care must be taken not to overwarm the product.
 tion of blood products or the improper ratio of citrate containing
Sitting at room temperature for 30-60 min is likely the safest way
 anticoagulants during blood collection and storage. Another
to warm RBCs, but placing the fluid line in a 38°C water bath
nonhemolytic, nonimmunologic transfusion reaction can be
can facilitate warming when delaying transfusion may threaten
 caused by the administration of stored blood products to patients
the patient's recovery. Microwaving is not recommended and
with hepatic insufficiency due to the accumulation of ammonia
may cause hemolysis of the RBCs. Thawing and administration
 during RBC storage. It has been suggested that only RBC prod-
instructions accompanying blood products should always be
ucts stored for under 2 weeks be administered to patients with
carefully followed.
liver failure.'5
 Frozen products can be more rapidly warmed in a 38°C water
bath. Higher temperatures should be avoided to prevent the
Monitoring
denaturing of plasma proteins. These products can be submerged
Early identification and treatment of an acute transfusion reac-
in water, but they should have an outer wrapping to avoid con-
 n     n  sn 
tamination of the injection ports. Intermittent gentle agitation
patients. A standard protocol should be developed for use by all
 can be performed to accelerate thawing by breaking up ice crys-
 nursing staff to ensure a standard of care for all transfusion
tals. Microwaving of plasma has been described in some litera-
patients. In general, the most severe and life-threatening reac-
ture, but this process may increase the risk of protein denaturation
tions usually occur within the first 15 min of administration, and
due to nonuniform heating. Some products come with specifc
 monitoring should be most diligent during this period. A base-
thawing instructions and these should be followed when
 line body temperature, pulse, respiration, mucous membrane
provided.
color, and capillary refill time should be obtained prior to admin-
 Many blood products have the potential of containing small
istration. During the frst 15 min, blood products should be
clots or other microaggregates that could cause harm to a patient.
administered at a decreased rate (about 25% the normal rate) so
This hazard can be minimized by using a syringe filter or blood
al jo soe siel aoaq paguai aq ue uooean e ie
administration set, which should be used when administering
 products have been administered. During this time, all of the
any blood product. Filters should be changed at least every 4h
baseline parameters should be monitored every 5 min and with
to avoid bacterial contamination and occlusion.
close, constant visual monitoring by the nursing staf Any dra-
matic change from the baseline parameters should initiate dis-
Transfusion reactions
continuation of blood product administration and veterinarian
Transfusion reactions are often categorized by immunologic and
attention. After the frst 15 min, the administration rate can be
nonimmunologic reactions. Immune-mediated reactions can be
titrated up toward the prescribed rate and vitals can be measured
further categorized as hemolytic or nonhemolytic. In addition,
every 15-30min.
each type of reaction can be categorized as acute or delayed
reaction.
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
Immunologic reactions
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) is a relatively
common disease in dogs with marked morbidity and mortality.
Hemolytic immunologic reactions are caused by preexisting
IMHA can be primary (idiopathic) or secondary. In North
antibodies against RBC antigens from mismatched blood prod-
America, primary IMHA is the most common form in dogs,
ucts and can be acute (immediate) or delayed (2 days to 3 weeks
whereas in cats, secondary IMHA (usually caused by Mycoplasma
 posttransfusion) and result in the destruction of the transfused.
haemofelis) predominates. Secondary IMHA has been caused by
RBCs. Clinical signs of acute hemolytic immunologic reaction
a variety of medications (trimethoprim-sulfa, cephalosporins,
can include pyrexia, tachycardia, tachypnea, muscle tremors,
etc.), neoplasia (especially lymphoma), and infections. The devel-
vocalization, arrhythmia, seizures, hypotension, cardiac arrest,
  s  pa d i  yo o
and a dramatic drop in PCV.
certain breeds, such as the cocker spaniel, are overrepresented in
Nonhemolytic immunologic transfusion reactions are often
 studies looking at the prevalence of IMHA. Gender may play a
 role as females are overrepresented (both spayed and intact).
Signs of nonhemolytic transfusion reactions are signs of anaphy-
The exact pathogenesis of IMHA is not known in each indi-
laxis, which include pyrexia, facial swelling, urticaria, pruritis,
vidual. What is known to occur is that the RBCs are tagged as
yomiting, and dyspnea.
being foreign. This results in the attachment of antibodies to the
red cells, either IgG or IgM. The presence of antibodies results
Nonimmunologic reactions
 in the RBC being cleared partially or completely from the blood-
Nonimmunologic transfusion reactions can have several causes.
stream by the mononuclear phagocyte system (extravascular
Hemolytic causes include overheating or mishanding of the
hemolysis). In some instances, the antibodies can also fix
172
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
complement resulting in the formation of membrane attack
Table 7.2.1 Clinical signs of IMHA
complex that leads to intravascular hemolysis. The triggers for
 this are uncertain. Some studies have suggested that vaccines
As noted by owners
On physical examination
could result in IMHA; others have determined this not to be the
Rapid respirations (cannot
Tachypnea, dyspnea (from
case.19
 catch breath) or abnormal
The presence of IMHA is indicative of immune system dys-
anemia, inflammation, or 
respiratory pattern (belly
pulmonary
regulation. This means that other concurrent immune-mediated
breaths)
thromboembolism)
diseases could be present. By far, the most common concurrent
immune-mediated disease is immune mediated thrombocytope-
Pounding heart
Tachycardia
Murmurs and/or gallops
nia (IMT). The combination of IMHA and IMT is referred to as
Evans syndrome. Evans syndrome has been suggested to have a
White or pale gums
 Pale mucous membranes
 poorer prognosis than isolated IMHA. Rarely have other
Yellow or orange gums
Jaundice
immune-mediated diseases such as glomerulonephritis been
identified as a concurrent issue in dogs with IMHA.
Fever
Fever
Both morbidity and mortality are high with IMHA, and
Discolored urine
Discolored urine
because transfusions and careful monitoring are often needed,
(hemoglobinuria or
the costs of treatment can be quite high. This results in some
bilirubinuria or both)
patients being euthanized because of financial concerns. The
Lethargy, weakness, collapse,
Lethargy, weakness, collapse,
other major reason for mortality in these patients is the develop-
or exercise intolerance
or exercise intolerance
ment of widespread thrombosis, with pulmonary thromboem-
Anorexia
Weight loss
bolism being especially common and catastrophic. The reason
Large abd omen
Organomegaly
why thromboembolism is so common in IMHA is unclear; a
(hepatomegaly
variety of processes may play a role. Severe inflammation is
splenomegaly)
known to favor coagulation.
Lumps
Lymphad en omegaly
Clinical signs
Skin problems
Petechia (if Evans syndrome)
Clinical signs are variable with IMHA and partially are depend-
ent on how severe the anemia is and how fast it developed. Given
to reticulocytes are targeted or alternatively the reticulocyte itself
that anemia is usually quite marked, the clinical signs associated
could be the target. Platelet numbers may be variable. Decreased
with this such as tachypnea, exercise intolerance, and dyspnea
counts could be from Evans syndrome or from consumption via
will often predominate over other signs. IMHA is also associated
DIC. WBC counts will often be elevated, either from generalized
with a marked inflammatory response that may also cause sig-
inflammation, bone marrow activation, or, if markedly elevated,
nificant clinical issues (Table 7.2.1).
because of organ necrosis. A manually reviewed blood smear is
vital with the CBC to evaluate for microscopic autoagglutination
Diagnostic testing
and for the presence of spherocytes (small and very dense RBCs
that lack central pallor, only seen in dogs). A large number of
Diagnostic testing for patients with IMHA serves a variety of
purposes. One goal is to identify if the patient truly has IMHA
 The slide agglutination test, when positive, is definitive for
or some other disease process. Differential diagnosis includes
IMHA. To perform this test, a drop of ethylenediaminetetracetic
zinc toxicosis, genetic diseases (phosphofructokinase deficiency,
acid (EDTA) blood is mixed with two to three drops of saline
PK deficiency), or microangiopathic disease (hemangiosarcoma,
on a microscope slide. This helps to disperse rouleaux that are
hemolytic uremic syndrome [HUS]) that could be causing
similar in gross appearance to agglutination. Agglutination is
hemolysis. If indications are found for immune-mediated hemo-
caused by IgM or IgG antibodies. If gross agglutination is not
lysis, then diagnostic testing is also important to try to identify
seen, the slide should be examined under the microscope for
any causes of secondary immune-mediated disease (e.g., infec-
microscopic agglutination.
tions or neoplasia). Diagnostic testing also is useful in establish-
A variety of abnormalities can be seen on the chemistry panel
ing a prognosis by identifying abnormalities that have been
in patients with IMHA. A decrease in albumin may be seen,
found to worsen outcome.
which is consistent with marked inflammation. During the acute
phase response, albumin production is decreased. Hypoalbu-
Laboratory
minemia has been associated with poorer outcome.? Bilirubin
The CBC will establish that an anemia is present. With IMHA,
concentration will often be elevated due to hemolysis, which
a regenerative anemia would be expected (this can only be objec-
results in greater hemoglobin turnover. The higher the bilirubin
tively determined by performing a reticulocyte count). In some
concentration, the poorer the prognosis. Liver enzyme activity
cases, the immune reaction is to early RBC precursors so the
(e.g., alkaline phosphatase [ALP] and alanine aminotransferase
anemia can appear nonregenerative in that either the precursors
[ALT]) is also frequently elevated, initially probably via hypoxic
Chapter 7 Hematology
173
injury?′ With corticosteroid treatment, liver enzyme activity will
ing capacity. It is also of minor benefit in dogs with pulmonary
increase in dogs, often markedly.
thromboembolism.
Many times, urinalysis with IMHA is unrewarding due to the
Oxygen carrying support
large amount of bilirubin or hemoglobin in the urine. Hemo-
globinuria and bilirubinuria can interfere with the ability to
To date, there are no specific evidence-based guidelines for when
 properly assess urine on the dipstick portion. The presence of
or if to administer blood products to patients with IMHA. It is
marked proteinuria could be a marker of concurrent glomerular
 generally accepted that there are no indications that transfusions
disease such as glomerulonephritis.
worsen outcome in IMHA, though at one time there was concern
 In those cases where IMHA is suspected but not confrmed
 about “adding fuel to the fire?” Although the decision to transfuse
 by the presence of autoagglutination or marked spherocytosis,
 Coombs testing is indicated. This test is based on finding anti-
fuse patients with PCVs less than 15% even if they are not
bodies against RBCs either on the RBCs themselves (direct test)
 exhibiting any clinical signs. Typically, pRBCs are used since
or in the serum of the patient (indirect test). This test can be
dogs with IMHA often do not need the plasma component of
negative in patients with IMHA, especially if they have received
whole blood (unless significant coagulopathies are documented).
immunosuppressives prior to testing. False positives have been
The major cross match is not possible in dogs with autoaggluti-
seen as well.
 nation, so ideally, blood from universal donor dogs (DEA 1.1
 Coagulation abnormalities are not uncommon with IMHA.
negative) should be used.
 Assessing one-step prothrombin time (OSPT), activated partial
 It is possible to use polymerized bovine hemoglobin (Oxy-
thromboplastin time (APTT), and fbrin split products can help
globin, Biopure Corporation) especially when blood is not
to determine if DIC is present. DIC is common in IMHA and
available or there is a concern about incompatible transfusions.
can lead to thrombosis.
If the patient has been transfused more than 5-7 days previously,
 It is reasonable to test for tick-borne diseases in a dog with
it is possible that antibodies have developed that could lead to a
 IMHA since they can be a trigger for the disease. FeLV and feline
major transfusion reaction. If cross matching is not possible in
 immunodeficiency virus (FIV) testing is always indicated in
this scenario, Oxyglobin may be a better option. The impact of
  s   sn o    s
Oxyglobin use on outcome in patients with IMHA is uncertain
indicated.
with conflicting data having been published.
Imaging
immunosuppression
 In most cases, combination therapy is used, which minimizes
Imaging studies are useful in patients with IMHA. Thoracic
some of the side effects that might be seen with single-agent
radiographs, abdominal radiographs, and abdominal ultrasound
therapy. Treatment is usually prolonged; rarely are medications
are of benefit to determine if there is disease present that could
used for less than 3-4 months. Glucocorticoids are almost always
cause secondary IMHA (such as neoplasia).
used (prednisone 2-4mg/kg/day initially). If contraindicated
 due to nausea or vomiting, injectable dexamethasone can be
Treatment and pharmacology
used instead. Glucocorticoids have many side effects that tend
General supportive and nursing care is often needed as these
to impact the pets and the owner's quality of life, such as polyu-
ria, polydipsia, polyphagia, thin hair coat, incessant panting, and
 animals can be quite ill at the time of presentation.
Treatment in dogs with IMHA focuses on several aspects.
loss of muscle mass. To minimize these effects, a variety of other
Immunosuppression is indicated to attempt to stop the hemo-
medications can be given concurrently. There is no strong evi-
lytic process. Blood transfusions often become necessary if the
dence indicating if there is an advantage to any one of these
 Oxygen carrying capacity is severely compromised. Treatment to
drugs over the others.
prevent thromboembolism is also indicated in dogs given that
Azathioprine. Used fairly commonly as it tends to be inexpen-
thromboembolism is the most common cause of death.
sive and effective. Dosage is 2mg/kg SID for 7 days, then
 Treatment in cats is usually focused on the causative agent.
reduce to every other day. There are other protocols that can
 be used. Rarely will adverse side effects develop, though when
Supportive care
they do, they tend to be more serious (pancreatitis, hepatopa-
 sd  ss  a si a 
thy bone marrow suppression). Not usually used in cats.
IMHA are debilitated. Fluid therapy maximizes perfusion, which.
CBCs should be monitored initially every 1-2 weeks, then
helps to limit acid-base disturbances and reduce the chance of
every 1-2 months.
thromboembolism by minimizing blood sludging. Fluid therapy
Cyclosporine. This medication may have a faster onset of action
than azathioprine. Cost may be an issue. Dosage is 5-10 mg/
minimizing the damage free hemoglobin may cause to kidney
kg/day. It is associated with gastrointestinal (GI) side effects
function.
relatively frequently, although less so at the lower dosage
Oxygen therapy is less likely to be of benefit in IMHA patients
 ranges. Drug interactions have been noted; consult a formu-
    i      
lary when used concurrently with other medications. Blood
174
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
level monitoring is recommended, though it is uncertain if
successful management can occur; the exact recurrence rate is
this is needed, especially when using the 5 mg/kg/day dose.
 unknown at this time, though it has been suggested to be as high
Sandimmune", Neoral, and Gengraf are not bioequivalent;
as 15%.
if using generics, determine the name brand equivalent when
A variety of factors have been found to be indicators of a poor
dosing.
prognosis. The presence of overt jaundice was associated with
Intravenous Human Immunoglobulin. This product can be diff-
increased mortality as well as an increased risk of thrombosis in
cult to obtain and is exceedingly expensive. Dosage is 0.5-
multiple studies. Jaundice is one of the most consistent factors
1.5 mg/kg, single-dose intravenous transfusion. Although
in predicting a poor outcome. Other indicators of increased
effective at limiting the immune-mediated destruction, to date,
mortality include hypoalbuminemia, thrombocytopenia, and
there are no studies that demonstrate outcome is better when
elevated ALP activity at presentation.21
this product is used in comparison to other treatments.22
Cyclophosphamide. Although this has been used previously,
Role of the veterinary technician
current studies suggest that this medication may do more
Treatment of IMHA is an intensive undertaking. These patients
harm than good in IMHA patients and, as such, its use is
are often quite ill and will require considerable attention. Blood
generally not recommended in this disease.?3.24
 transfusions are often indicated and careful monitoring for pos-
Others. Leflunomide, mycophenolate mofetil, and splenectomy
sible adverse reactions is necessary. Aseptic techniques should
have all been recommended for treatment of IMHA in various
be stringently followed since these patients are immunosup-
 publications and forums. To date, there is not enough infor-
pressed. Intravenous catheters should be checked frequently;
mation available to routinely recommend these interventions
these patients are also at risk for thrombosis. It is important to
 over standard therapy.
monitor the patient's vital signs, particularly the respiratory rate
and breathing pattern since thrombosis to the lungs is not
Thrombosis prevention
uncommon and can be catastrophic for the patient. Early recog-
nition of breathing problems may allow for medical intervention
Heparin. The dosages of heparin that have been recommended
and can impact the prognosis.
vary widely. The effect of a dose of heparin on a patient cannot
be predicted. It has been shown that heparin therapy under
close laboratory monitoring can improve outcomes.?5 Unfor-
SECTION 3 LEUKOCYTE
tunately, the monitoring needed is rarely available in practice
(factor Xa activity). Although prolongation of APTT can be
DISORDERS
used as an end point for adjusting heparin dosages, this tends
not to be very easy to accomplish in practice. Dosages of
Evaluation of the leukogram is part of the CBC and includes
100-150 units/kg SQ TID can be considered and are unlikely
quantifcation of the white blood cells and qualitative informa-
to cause a hypocoagulable state while still having some anti-
tion via the differential count. Although a specifc disease is
thrombotic effect. Low molecular weight heparins have
rarely diagnosed by leukocyte evaluation, the information
also been recommended for thromboprophylaxis in IMHA;
obtained from the CBC may be useful in narowing the number
however, there is no information available on optimal dosage
of differential diagnoses and in predicting the severity of the
and dosage interval with these heparin products and no data
disease and prognosis. Also, sequential CBCs may be useful in
 on their clinical efficacy.
monitoring the response to therapy.
Low Dose Aspirin. There has been renewed interest in using low
dose aspirin in patients with IMHA. A dosage of 1-2 mg/kg/
Methods for determining
day has been suggested to improve outcomes in patients with
IMHA.?6 This dosage has not been shown to worsen stomach
the leukogram
pathology, even though glucocorticoids are being used.
There are several methods of determining the leukogram portion
of the CBC. Automated particle counters used in human analyz-
ers are not validated for the veterinary patient. Newer technolo-
Prognosis
gies using flow cytometry provide reliable differential counts.
The prognosis with IMHA in dogs tends to be guarded. Depend-
However, when values are flagged or fall outside the normal
ing on the study, anywhere from one-third to two-thirds of the
reference range, the blood smear should be carefully evaluated
affected dogs will die from IMHA. Euthanasia is a major factor
by the technician or clinician. It is important to make fresh blood
in mortality as well since a guarded prognosis and high cost
 smears as WBC artifacts (such as hypersegmentation, pyknosis,
estimates for treatment may lead some owners to not pursue
 and cytoplasmic vacuolation) may occur if the sample is allowed
 r  n os o qs  s   
 to sit for several hours.
days, generally as a result of thrombotic complications, espe-
All nucleated cells are counted including nucleated red blood
cially pulmonary thromboembolism. In one study, 80% of the
cells (nRBCs). The following formula is used to obtain a cor-
dogs at necropsy had evidence of thrombosis.? Relapses after
rected leukocyte count:
Chapter 7 Hematology
175
WBC count x100
the size of the CNP. The neutrophil has the average transit time
Corrected WBC count =
100 + nRBC/100 WBC
of approximately 6-8h in dogs and 10-12h in cats, with all of
 s so r ad aq su og 
the neutrophil leaves the blood vessel, it normally does not
The differential WBC count may be reported in relative numbers
return to the circulation and may be lost in the lungs, gut, urine,
(percentages) or absolute numbers (number per microliter).
skin, saliva, and other tissues.
Interpretation should always be based on absolute leukocyte
Abnormal morphological characteristics of neutrophils may
O u hs Aia aq A sead a se sia
have considerable clinical significance. Neutrophils become
counts that are very low or very high. Leukocytosis occurs when
toxic and poorly functional in response to injury. Toxic changes
the WBC count exceeds the normal reference range. Leukopenia
occur during maturation and are caused by toxic substances
occurs when the WBC count is below the normal reference
 so n s  
range.
sepsis, acute inflammatory disease, burns, etc.). These changes
Neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, lymphocytes, and mono-
are most frequently associated with systemic rather than local
Cytes make up the major WBCs in circulation. Disorders of each
inflammatory/infectious disease. Toxic neutrophils contain
cell type will be discussed.
cytoplasmic vacuoles, basophilic granules, and Dohle bodies.
 Dohle bodies are blue-to-gray cytoplasmic granules that are
lamelar aggregates of the retained rough endoplasmic reticu-
Disorders of neutrophils
lum. Resolution, with treatment, of the toxic change in the neu-
 trophils suggests a favorable prognosis.
Neutrophils are the most common WBC in circulation. Neu-
Intracytoplasmic organisms and inclusion bodies are uncom-
trophil numbers are highest in the young and decrease in number
 monly seen in neutrophils of dogs and cats. Bacterial rods and
with age. The primary function of neutrophils is ingestion and
 cocci may be seen during sepsis. Histoplasma capsulatum organ-
killing of bacteria and fungi. Many processes including margina-
 isms have been seen in WBCs from dogs with systemic infec-
tion, emigration, adhesion, chemotaxis, phagocytosis, degranu-
tions (see Figure 7.3.1). Other organisms that may be seen in
lation, and bactericidal actions have important roles in these
neutrophils include distemper inclusion bodies, Hepatozoon
functions. Endogenous pyrogens may be secreted by neutrophils.
canis, Hepatozoon americanum, Leishmania donovani, and Ana-
Leukocyte-derived mediators (e.g., proteases, elastases, colla-
plasma phagocytophilia.
 genases, leukotrienes) also play an important role in inflamma-
 Nuclear hypersegmentation (ie., five or more distinct nuclear
tion and tissue injury.
lobes) may result from prolonged transit time. Hyperadrenocor-
Pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells give rise to neutrophils,
ticism, corticosteroid therapy, and chronic inflammatory disease
as well as other blood cells (RBCs, megakaryocytes, lymphocytes,
 may be associated with this change. Hypersegmentation has
eosinophils, basophils, and monocytes). Differentiation is regu-
been seen in some poodles with macrocytosis and in feline
lated by specifc protein factors (colony-stimulating factors).
sample when the EDTA blood sample sat for several hours prior
 Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) stimulates the
to making the blood smear.
 proliferation of neutrophils from the late progenitor stages.
Neutrophils are produced primarily in the bone marrow with
occasional production extramedullary in the spleen and liver.
There are three theoretical neutrophil compartments in the
bone marrow. The proliferation compartment is composed of
myeloblasts, progranulocytes, and myelocytes. The approximate
maturation time from myeloblast to metamyelocyte is 48-60h.
The maturation compartment consists of metamyelocytes and
band neutrophils. The transit time through this compartment is
46-70h. The storage compartment is made up of mature neu-
 trophils. Transit time in this compartment is approximately
 50h. There is a 5- to 6-day supply of neutrophils in the storage
compartment. Mature neutrophils leave the bone marrow by a
random process that involves changes in cell deformability and
adhesiveness.
 In the vascular compartment, there are two neutrophil pools.
The marginal neutrophil pool (MNP) consists of neutrophils
that adhere to the vascular endothelium. The circulating neu-
trophil pool (CNP) consists of neutrophils in circulation, and
the WBC count and differential count are estimations of the
Figure 7.3.1 Histoplasma capsulatum in a white blood cell in a dog.
CNP. In dogs, the CNP is approximately equal to the MNP;
Courtesy of Stan Krogman, Site Manager, Marshfield Veterinary Labs,
however, in cats, the MNP is approximately two to three times
 Marshfeld, Wisconsin.
176
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Pelger-Huet anomaly
forms (i.e., band neutrophils). Neutrophilia with a left shift
occurs when both mature and immature neutrophils are
The Pelger-Huet anomaly occurs when the nucleus fails to
increased. A regenerative left shift occurs when the number of
undergo division but the nuclear chromatin and cytoplasmic
mature neutrophils exceeds the number of immature forms. A
 maturation are complete (i.e., the nucleus has a bandlike appear-
degenerative left shift occurs when the number of immature neu-
ance with clumped chromatin). Affected females lack Barr
trophils exceeds the number of mature forms. Neutrophilia may
bodies (sex chromatin "drumstick") in circulating neutrophils.
or may not be present. A degenerative left shift usually implies a
This disorder has been reported more commonly in dogs and
severe disease process and poor prognosis. A leukemoid response
rarely in cats. Often these animals are diagnosed with extreme
is defined as a marked neutophilia with a severe left shift that
left shifts; however, upon careful evaluation of these neutrophils,
includes metamyelocytes and myelocytes. Such a response indi-
normal cytoplasm and hyposegmentation are identifed. These
cates severe inflammatory disease and may be difficult to dis-
changes may also be apparent in the eosinophils and basophils.
tinguish from chronic granulocytic leukemia. The causes of
 This anomaly may be inherited (suspected to be autosomal dom-
neutrophilia can be classified into three groups: physiological
 inant in Australian cattle dogs) or acquired (seen in dogs under-
 or epinephrine-induced neutrophilia, stress or corticosteroid-
 going chemotherapy). Homozygous genetic expression has been
induced neutrophilia, and inflammation or increased tissue
rarely observed and is thought to be lethal in utero. In cats, the
homozygous form has been associated with skeletal deformities.
associated with a release of neutrophils from the MNP. This form
Latimer et al. found a 9.8% incidence of Pelger-Huet anomaly
of neutrophilia is transient and occurs only in normal animals
  , i e  s  b 
(most common in cats). Other changes in the CBC include
reported with this anomaly include the American foxhound,
basenji, border colie, Boston terrier, cocker spaniel, German
corticosteroid-induced neutrophilia is associated with long
shepherd dog, samoyed, and various coonhounds.
transit time in circulation and increased bone marrow release of
neutrophils in the storage pool. Other CBC changes include lym-
Neutrophil granulation anomaly
phopenia, eosinopenia, and monocytosis (the latter occurring
only in dogs). Inflammation or increased tissue demand results
A neutrophil granulation anomaly was identifed in Birman cats
in variable increases in neutrophil counts. The magnitude of the
by Hirsch and Cunningham." The neutrophils contained numer-
response, which is determined by the balance between the rate of
ous fine, reddish-purple cytoplasmic granules similar to gran-
bone marrow release and tissue emigration, may vary with the
 ules seen in promyelocytes. There are no clinical signs associated
 species, location of inflammation, virulence of the causative
with this finding. In vitro studies demonstrated that affected cats
 agent, and inciting cause of the inflammation ( Table 7.3.2).
exhibit bactericidal activity against E. coli similar to normal cats.
The treatment is directed at the underlying cause of the
Inheritance via an autosomal recessive manner was found.
neutrophilia.
Neutropenia
Neutropenia is an absolute decrease in circulating neutrophil
Neutrophil function defects
numbers. Causes of neutropenia can be classifed into three
Neutrophil function defects result in decreased host defense
 groups: decreased or ineffective production of cells in the prolifer-
against bacterial invaders. Adherence, chemotaxis, phagocytosis,
 ating pool, sequestration of neutrophils in the marginating pool,
and bacteriocidal activities are important functions of the neu-
and sudden excessive tissue demand or consumption (Table 7.3.1).
trophil. Both congenital and acquired neutrophil dysfunctions
The treatment of neutropenia is aimed at treating the underly-
have been reported (Table 7.3.3). Additional information on
ing cause. A recombinant granulocytic colony stimulating factor
breed-related disorders may be found in Section 4.
(rhG-CSF) has been used with some success in veterinary
patients with parvovirus and chemotherapy-induced neutrope-
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
nia. The dose is 5 μg/kg/day subcutaneously for 5-20 days. Side
effects include pain at the injection site and neutralizing anti-
Chediak-Higashi syndrome is characterized by enlarged neu-
body formation. The development of neutralizing antibody
trophilic and eosinophilic granules in the cytoplasm (see Figure
occurs more frequently with prolonged use of this drug. Canine
7.3.2). Other associated abnormalities include partial albinism,
recombinant G-CSF has been used to treat cyclic neutropenia in
photophobia, increased susceptibility to infections, bleeding
 gray collie dogs. The development of neutralizing antibodies is
tendencies, and abnormal melanocytes. This lethal autosomal
 unlikely with a species-specific recombinant drug.
recessive condition has been documented in Persian cats with
smoke-colored fur and yellow eyes. A mutation in the lysosomal
trafficking gene (LYST) results in the lysosomal storage disorder.
Neutrophilia
Diagnosis is based on history, physical exam, and evaluation of
Neutrophilia is an absolute increase in neutrophil numbers and is
WBCs for large cytoplasmic eosinophilic granules, prolonged
the most common cause of leukocytosis. A mature neutrophilia
bleeding of the buccal mucosal bleeding test, and increased
is an increase in neutrophils without an increase in the immature
 melanin pigment in hair shafts. Supportive medical therapy for
Table 7.3.1  Causes of neutropenia
Decreased production in the proliferating pool
Myelophthesis
 Drug-induced 
 Infectious disease
 Others
marrow effects
Myeloproliferative
 Chemotherapy drugs
 Inorganic solvents 
 Parvovirus
Idiopathic bone marrow
disorders
 aplasia/hypoplasia
Lymphoproliferative
 Chloramphenicol 
Benzene
Retrovirus (FeLv, FV)
 Cyclic neutropenia of
disease
gray collies
Myelofibrosis
Griseofulvin
Fusarium
Ehrlichiosis
Acquired cyclic
 sporotrichioides toxin
neutropenias
Systemic mast cell
 Trimethoprim/sulfa
Toxoplasmosis
 Steroid-responsive
disease
neutropenia
 Metastatic carcinoma
Estrogen
Early canine
distemper virus
Malignant histiocytosis
Phenylbutazone
Early canine hepatitis
virus
Ph en obarbital
Anaplasmosis
 Others
 Sequestration in marginating pool
 Anaphylactic shock
 Endotoxic shock
Anesthesia
Excessive tissue demand or consumption
Peracute overwhelming infections
Drug induced
Immune mediated 
Paraneoplastic
Hypersplenism
Table 7.3.2  Causes of neutrophilia
 Physiological or epinephrine induced
Stress or corticosteroid induced
Inflammation or increased tissue demand
Fear
Pain
Infection
Excitement
An esthesia
Tissue trauma and/or necrosis 
Exercise
Trauma
Immunemediated disorders
Seizures
Neoplasia
Neoplasia
Parturition
 Hyperadrenocorticism
Metabolic disorders (uremia, diabetic ketoacidosis)
Hypertension 
Metabolic disorders 
Burns
Chronic disorders
 Neutrophil function disorders 
Other (acute hemorrhage, hemolysis)
177
178
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 7.3.3  Neutrophil function defects
for three mitogens. The cause of this dysfunction is unknown,
 and the inheritance pattern was not reported.
Congenital disease
Acquired disease
Canine feukocyte adhesion deficiency
Chediak-Higashi
Metabolic or nutritional disease
Canine leukocyte adhesion deficiency (CLAD) is a rare disease
syndrome in blue
resulting in poor adherence (e.g.:
smoked Persians
poorly controlled diabetes mellitus)
affecting Irish setters, Irish setter crosses, and Irish red and white
setters. The disease is characterized by recurrent infections with
Neutrophil defect of 
 Infectious disease resulting in
Doberman pinschers
a marked leukocytosis occurring shortly after birth. Recurrent
decreased chemotaxis (bacterial
 pyodermas, FeLv, feline infectious
 pyoderma, pododermatitis, pneumonia, thrombophelbitis, and
peritonitis [FIP]}
osteomyelitis with minimal pus formation are common. The
Canine leukocyte
Toxins resulting in decreased
defect is caused by a genetic mutation resulting in a CD18 defi-
adhesion deficiency
bacteriocidal function (lead,
ciency. As an autosomal recessive trait, carrier dogs do not
in Irish setter dogs
turpentine)
exhibit signs of disease. Affected dogs respond poorly to medical
Lysosomal storage
Metabolic abnormalities resulting in
therapy even with aggressive antibiotic therapy. Successful treat-
disease
decrease chemotaxis, phagocytosis,
ment of four out of five affected dogs using foamy virus vectors
and bactericidal activity
expressing canine CD18 was achieved by Bauer et al.'3 OptiGen,
(hypophosphatemia)
LLC (Ithaca, New York) offers genetic testing using PCR ampli-
Canine cyclic
 fication of the gene to identify affected and carrier dogs.
hematopoiesis of
gray collie dogs
Lysosomal storage diseases
Immunod efi ciency
The lysosomal storage diseases are rare, inherited disorders
of Weimaraners
caused by the deficiency of one or more enzymes within the
lysosome. The consequence of this dysfunction is the inability to
activate the protein or cofactor necessary for enzymatic activity.
This disruption of the catabolic pathway results in accumulation
of storage material (glycoproteins, oligosaccharides, sphingolip
ids, mucopolysaccharides, etc.). The inheritance pattern is auto-
somal recessive in most veterinary patients. Although puppies
and kittens are normal at birth, progressive accumulation of
lysosomal storage products can lead to skeletal abnormalities,
growth retardation, visual defects, and organomegaly. Abnormal
fndings include neurological abnormalities (seizures, behavio-
ral abnormalities, tremors, cerebellar signs, hypermetria), ocular
changes (corneal opacification, cataract development, impaired
vision), skeletal and connective tissue changes (dwarfism, coarse
facial features, collapse of intervertebral disk spaces, dysostoses
multiplex, long bone deformation), and hepatomegaly. An early
clue to diagnosis is the presence of abnormal vacuoles or cyto-
plasmic granules in peripheral blood leukocytes. Cytology of
aspirates of the lymph node, spleen, and liver may help identify
abnormal cytoplasmic vacuoles. Radiographic changes include
 skeletal deformities (dysmorphism, vertebral changes, and frac-
Figure 7.3.2  Eosinophilic granules in a neutrophil of a cat with
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome. Courtesy of Stan Krogman, Site Manager,
tures). Cerebrospinal fuid may reveal vacuolated macrophages
Marshfeld Veterinary Labs, Marshfeid, Wisconsin.
or lymphocytes. Specific diagnosis of canine fucosidosis, globoid
cell leukodystrophy, mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) I and VII
and feline MPS VI is available through DNA-based molecular
secondary infections and anemia secondary to bleeding may
testing. The long-term prognosis is poor due to the progressive
prolong survival. Shielding cats from sunlight is also advised.
nature of these diseases (Table 7.3.4).
The prognosis is poor.
Canine cyclic hemopoiesis of gray collies
Neutrophil defect of Doberman pinschers
Cyclic hemopoiesis is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of stem
Breitschwerdt et al. identified a neutrophil function defect in
cells in gray collies. A genetic mutation results in a neutrophil
eight closely related Doberman pinschers with chronic rhinitis
elastase-processing defect. This disease is characterized by a
regular 12- to 14-day cyclic decrease of neutrophils, monocytes,
bacteria normally, there was impaired bactericidal activity. One
eosinophils, lymphocytes, platelets, and reticulocytes. Puppies
 of eight dogs had decreased lymphocyte transformation indices
are usually smaller than normal littermates and develop clinical
Chapter 7 Hematology
179
Table 7.3.4 Lysosomal storage diseases
Storage disease
Enzyme defect
Breeds affected
Fucosidosis
Alpha L fucosidase 
English springer spaniel
Mannosid osis
Alpha D mannosidase
Domestic shorthair (DsH), Persian cat
Pompe's disease
Alpha-glucosidase
Lapland dog, DSH
GMl gangliosidosis
Beta D galactosidase
Siamese, DsH, Korat, English springer spaniel, beagle,
Portugese water dog, Alaskan malamute, husky.
mixed breed dog
GMIll gangliosid osis
Beta D hexosaminidase
DSH, Korat, Siamese
 German shorthair pointer
Activator protein
Japanese spaniel
Gaucher's disease
Beta D glucocerebrosidase
Sydney sillky terrier
Globoid cell leukodystrophy
Beta D galactocerebrosidase
West Highland white terrier, cairn terrier, beagle,
poodle, DSH
Sphingomyelin osis
 Sphingomyelinase (type A)
Balinese, Siamese cats
(Niemann-Pick disease)
Poodle
 Cholesterol esterification
Boxer
deficiency (type C)
DSH
Mucopolysaccharid osis (MPS)
Alpha L iduronidase
DSH, Plott hound
MPS 1
MPS II
Iduraonate-2-sulfate sulfatase
Labrador retriever
MPS II
Sulfamidase
Wire-haired dachshund
MPS VI
Arylsulfatase B
Siamese cat
MPS VIl
Beta D gucuronidase
Mixed breed dog
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
Unknown but several gene
Siamese cat, many breeds (dachshund, American
defects identified in some breeds
Staffordshire terrier, American bulldogs, border collies,
English setters, Labrador retriever, Tibetan terrier)
signs by 8-12 weeks of age. Fever, diarrhea, respiratory and skin
to produce serum immunoglobulins (IgG and IgA) has been
 infections, and epistaxis may occur during the cytopenia phase.
documented in many studies. The lack of response to produce
e go sa e aq a nsn shop pe  mo
 adequate vaccine titers following immunizations also suggests
Improvement of the neutrophil nadir and control of the clinical
an abnormality in immunoglobulin production. There has been
signs have been seen with high dose oral lithium carbonate and
concern that this disease may be triggered by vaccinations as the
recombinant human G-CSF and canine G-CSF injections. Bone
 timing of puppy vaccination protocols correlates with the time
 marrow transplantion has resulted in resolution of the cyclic
of disease development. The onset of clinical signs usually occurs
hematopoiesis and coat color change toward normal. Yanay
at 12-15 weeks of age when maternal antibody wanes. Involve-
et al. successfully treated an affected collie with a lentivirus-
ment of multiple body systems has been described and includes
mediated G-CSF delivery method for 17 months.1 Several com-
oir) st (e po i (ed) us a
panies (HealthGene, Toronto, Canada; VetGene, Ann Arbor,
n (u) n (s) aq (osoi
Michigan) offer DNA testing for this disorder.
nervous system (seizures, behavioral changes), and eye (con-
junctivitis). Anorexia, lethargy, diarrhea, lameness, and cough-
Immunodeficiency of Weimaraners
ing are commonly noted by owners. Physical examination
 Chronic recurrent infections in young Weimaraner dogs have
findings of fever, lymphadenophathy, bone pain, and hypoplasia
been reported worldwide since the 1980s. The exact pathogen-
 of dental enamel are typical. Diagnosis is based on history, physi-
esis is unknown but suspected to be related to an immunodefi-
cal findings, radiographic evidence of hypertrophic osteodystro-
ciency syndrome. Although the mode of inheritance is unknown,
phy and pneumonia, CBC fndings of mild anemia, mild
the disease is suspected to be inherited Some studies suggest
thrombocytopenia, neutrophilia with a left shift, monocytosis,
that affected dogs have an intrinsic functional defect (decreased
and decreased gammaglobulins. Measurement of serum immu-
phagocytosis and destruction of pathogens). However, a failure
 s  s 'in p  as 
180
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
treatment for this disease is supportive care. Anti-inflammatory
exam findings include emaciation, hepatosplenomegaly, thick
doses of glucocorticoids have been reported to be beneficial in
ened intestinal tract, mesenteric lymphadenopathy, fever, and
dogs with hypertrophic osteodystrophy. Vaccination protocols
rarely, eosinophilic granulomatous lesions of lymph nodes and
are usually modified using killed products and separating vaccine
 organs. Hematologic abnormalities include marked eosinophilia,
components.
basophilia, and occasional anemia. Biochemical abnormalities may
be seen with organ dysfunction. Imaging often reveals thickened
intestines, mesenteric lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomeg-
Disorders of eosinophils
aly. Bone marrow aspirate findings are consistent with a hyper
The eosinophil is produced in the bone marrow and, like neu-
plastic marrow with eosinophilic hyperplasia and an increased
trophils, they function to phagocytize and kill pathogens (bac-
myeloid/erythroid ratio. Histopathology of affected tissues dem-
teria, mycoplasmas, yeasts, etc.). Additional functions of the
onstrates pronounced eosinophilic infltration. Therapy includes
eosinophil included parasitical activity, modulation of type I
 corticosteroids and chemotherapeutic agents; however, the prog-
hypersensitivity reactions, and activation of plasminogen result-
nosis is poor with mean survival from diagnosis to death being
ing in thrombosis. Eosinophil production occurs in response to
7.5 weeks reported from several studies.
GM-CSF, IL-3, and IL-5. Normally, there are only a small number
of eosinophils in the peripheral circulation. Eosinophils migrate
Eosinopenia
 to tissues (gut, skin, and lung) that have a close interaction with
foreign material. Like neutrophils, eosinophils do not recircu-
 Eosinopenia is diffcult to document in dogs as the normal range
late. The transit time within the blood is approximately 24-35h.
of eosinophils is 0-1300/μL. Endogenous glucocorticoids from
 The tissue eosinophil pool is significantly larger than the circu-
stress and inflammation and exogenous glucocorticoids are often
lating pool, and eosinophils are predominant in the mucous
the cause of suspected eosinopenia in dogs. In cats, the eosi-
membranes.
nophil range is 0-1500/μL and as in dogs, the cause of eosinpenia
Eosinphilia is defined as an absolute increase in eosinophils
is associated with endogenous and exogenous glucocorticoids.
-ledopua) ususe1ed (sies u! Tn/0osI< pue saop u! Tm/00e I<)
asites and ectoparasites) is the most common cause of eosi-
Disorders of basophils
nophilia in dogs. Other causes include inflammatory and
hypersensitivity reactions of the GI, respiratory and genitouri-
Basophils are the least numerous circulating blood cell. The
nary systems, and in the skin eosinophilic infltrative disease.
function of basophils appears to be similar to mast cells as both
Neoplasia-associated eosinophilia has been associated with mast
contain histamine and other vasoactive substances. Basophils
cell tumors and lymphoma. Uncommonly, eosinophilia has
play an important role in type 1 hypersensitivity reactions, cell-
been associated with hypereosinophilic syndrome, tetracycline
mediated delayed-type hypersensitivity response, and develop-
and recombinant interleukin-2 administration, and canine
ment of IgE-mediated chronic allergic reactions. Basophils are
estrus. In 1990, Center et al. retrospectively surveyed 312 cats
produced in the bone marrow with maturation completed in 2.5
with eosinophilia over an 11-year period.23 The eosinophil count
days. Peripheral circulation in the blood lasts approximately 6 h;
ranged from 1500 to 46,200/μL (median 2400/μL). Skin-related
however, some may live for as long as 2 weeks. Interleukin-3
disease accounted for 27.6% of cats with eosinophilia. Respira-
is the major basophil growth factor and cytokine effector of
tory disorders (20.8%) and neoplasia (6.4%) were the second
basophil function.
and third most common causes of feline eosinophilia. Other
Basophilia is defined as an absolute increase in peripheral
 conditions included cardiac disease, feline urological syndrome,
basophils (>140/μL in dogs and >200/μL in cats). Usually,
toxoplasmosis, feline panleukopenia, renal disease, feline infec-
basophilia accompanies eosinophilia. The most common cause
tious peritonitis, myeloproliferative disease, IMHA, and hyper-
of basophilia in dogs is heartworm disease. Other causes of
immune serum reaction.
basophilia in dogs and cats include allergic respiratory disease,
parasitic disease, disseminated mast cell disease, other neopla-
Hypereosinophilic syndrome
sias (basophilic leukemia, myeloid leukemia, thymoma), and
pulmonary granulomatous disease.
Hypereosinophilic syndrome has been reported in cats and
 rarely in dogs. The cause is unknown, but possible mechanisms
Disorders of monocytes
 suggested include abnormal regulation of eosinophil produc-
 tion, abnormal immunoregulatory ability, and/or inappropriate
 Monocytes with free and fixed macrophages and their progeni-
response to an antigen. This disease is characterized by marked
tor cells in the bone marrow make up the mononuclear phago-
eosinophilia (>50,000/μL). Purebred felines are unlikely to
cyte system. Monocytes emigrate from the blood into peripheral
 develop this disease. Ages affected have ranged from 10 months
tissues and, depending on the tissue and inflammatory response,
to 12 years. Females are overrepresented in a study by Helmond
differentiation into free, fixed tissue and inflammatory macro-
et al.?5 The most frequently affected organs or tissues include
 phages may occur. Functions of the macrophage include phago-
bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes, and the gut. Anorexia, vom-
cytosis of pathogens, senescent cells, and cellular debris;
iting, diarrhea, and weight loss are commonly reported. Physical
presenting antigen to lymphocytes; cytotoxic effects against
Chapter 7 Hematology
181
some tumor cells; and secretion of cytokines, interleukins,
Lymphocytosis is defined as circulating lymphocytes >2900/μL
chemokines, endogenous pyrogens, lysosomal hydrolases, pros-
 in dogs and >7000/μL in cats. Causes of lymphocytosis include
taglandins, and complement procoagulation factors. The half-
 chronic antigenic stimulation, hypoadrenocorticism, lymphoid
life of circulating monocytes in cats and dogs is unknown;
 neoplasia, feline hyperthyroidism, and physiological leukocyto-
however, it is 20-23h in cattle and 70h in humans. Monocytes 
sis (more common in cats).
leave circulation in a random manner or in response to inflam-
 Lymphopenia occurs when circulating lymphocyte numbers
 mation. Free macrophages may migrate to other tissues or may
are decreased (<400/μL in dogs and <1500/μL in cats). Causes
reenter the circulation. The exact life span of macrophages is
of lymphopenia include acute systemic bacterial infections, glu-
 cocorticoids (endogenous and exogenous), disruption of the
Monocytosis is defined as >1400/μL in dogs and >850/μL in
lymph node architecture, immunosuppressive drugs, loss of
cats and is associated with necrosis, suppuration, pyogranulo-
lymphocyte-rich fluids, malignant neoplasia, GI disease, radia-
matous lesions, internal hemorrhage, trauma, immune-mediated
tion, and viral infections.
disease, and malignant neoplasia (monocytic and myelomono-
Immunodeficiency disorders occur when one or more com-
cytic leukemia). Excessive glucocorticoids (endogenous and
 ponents of the immune system are defective and result in an
Exogenous) are a common cause of monocytosis in dogs but not
increased susceptibility to infection. Decreased immunoglobu.
in cats.
lins have been recognized in several canine breeds.
 Monocytopenia is clinically unimportant as the low end of the
reference range is zero.
Selective IgA deficiency
Selective IgA deficiencies have been identified in Chinese shar-
Disorders of lymphocytes
The lymphocyte is the second most common WBC in circu
wolfhound dogs. There are several consequences of decreased
  on o e  
concentrations of IgA. A failure to mount a local immune
of lymphocytes (T and B cells) in circulation. T lymphocytes
 response to pathogens (bacteria and virus) results in recurrent
(derived from the thymus) participate in cell-mediated immu-
 infections. These animals also have an increased risk of allergic
nity, and B lymphocytes (derived from the bursa) are associated 
 and autoimmune disease due to increased absorption of anti-
with humoral immunity. Only 10% of the total lymphocyte pool
 gens. The mode of inheritance is unknown. The most common
circulates in the peripheral blood. Unlike other WBCs, lym-
 clinical signs are respiratory infections, staphylococcal dermati-
phocytes are long-lived and are capable of transformation to
 tis, and atopic dermatitis. Although these signs occur at an early
more functional active forms. Lymphoid precursors are present
 age, life-threatening infections are uncommon. The diagnosis is
in the central compartment (thymus, bone marrow, and bursa
based on quantitation of serum IgA. Normally, serum IgA con-
 centrations are low in all dogs until 12-18 months of age; there-
 precursors to the peripheral compartment (lymph nodes, spleen,
fore, comparison of serum results with age-matched controls is
and Peyer's patches). The lymphocytes of the peripheral com-
 necessary in dogs less than 18 months of age. Approximately
partment respond to antigenic stimulation and develop into B
 20% of dogs diagnosed with IgA deficiency before 1 year of age
 or T lymphocytes. Lymphocytes can recirculate into the blood-
will revert to normal IgA concentrations between 12 and 18
stream via efferent lymphatics and the thoracic duct. The number
 months. However, approximately 10% of dogs diagnosed with
 of circulating lymphocytes declines with age.
 IgA deficiency after 1 year of age will revert to normal. Treatment
Several morphological alterations of lymphocytes can occur.
of this disease is limited to supportive care.
 Reactive lymphocytes (also termed immunocytes) are produced
in response to antigenic stimulation. Morphologically, these cells
X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency
have an intense basophilic cytoplasm and perinuclear Golgi
(XSCID)
d aq os  s  s  
Large granular lymphocytes (natural killer cells, null lymphoid
Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) has been reported
cells) have azurophilic granules and, occasionally, vacuoles.
 in Cardigan Welsh corgis and basset hounds. Infections begin to
 Granular lymphocytes have been reported in association with
 occur when maternal antibody levels decline (usually between 4
 and 8 weeks of age). These puppies fail to thrive and are usually
phocytes with intensely basophilic cytoplasm and a prominent,
stunted. Physical examination reveals small or absent lymph
pale staining perinuclear Golgi zone; these lymphocytes are rare
nodes and tonsils. Lymphopenia may be seen in the CBC. Meas-
in the peripheral circulation. Severe antigenic stimulation or
Di unias raamou reuou Aensn s! Nai unas jo juaan
   (   
 and IgA are very low to absent once maternal antibodies are gone.
ated with circulating plasma cells. Lymphoblasts are large lym-
 Postmortem findings include a small thymus and a lack of tonsils,
 phocytes with a large nucleus that has a vesicular chromatin 
 lymph nodes, and Peyer's patches. Mutations in the common
pattern of the nucleus and prominent nucleoli. Circulating lym-
gamma chain gene result in a deficiency of several interleukins
phoblasts are associated with lymphoblastic leukemia and dis-
(IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15) and in a lack of normal develop-
seminated lymphoma.
ment and function of B and T cells. The mode of inheritance
182
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 is an X-linked recessive pattern. Successful treatment has been 
The deficiency is more common in large dog breeds and German
achieved with bone marrow transplantation and in vivo retroviral
shepherds are overrepresented.
 gene therapy.
Hemophilia B (factor IX deficiency) is the second most
common inherited coagulopathy and Labrador retrievers may
be overrepresented. Factor IX is also part of the intrinsic pathway.
Combined immunodeficiency
Inheritance for both conditions is X-linked recessive and males
of Jack Russell terriers
are more commonly affected than females. Identification of
Bell et al. described SCID in a family of Jack Russell terriers.31
female carriers may be difficult. Clinical disease is only seen in
those animals that are homozygous recessive. Initial episodes of
Twelve puppies died between 8 and 14 weeks of age. Six other
abnormal hemorrhage may be seen with minor surgical proce-
 puppies died within 50h of vaccination with modifed live vac-
dures or loss of deciduous teeth. Both forms of hemophilia have
 (    s  s
been diagnosed in cats. As these conditions are genetic, breeding
lymphopenia were found in affected dogs. Necropsy revealed
of affected animals is not recommended.
hypoplasia of all lymphoid tissue. The pedigree analysis sug-
 gested that the pattern of inheritance was autosomal recessive.
 Prognosis is very poor.
Pharmacology, treatment, and contraindications
Basic nursing care should be employed for animals with active
C3 deficiency of Brittany spaniels
hemorrhage, consisting of compression bandages, cold com-
presses, and strict cage rest. Hospitalized animals should be
Deficiency of the third component of complement (C3) was
clearly identifed as having a coagulopathy. Jugular venipuncture
identifed in a closed colony of Brittany spaniels by Blum et al.?2
should be avoided and venous access should be obtained with
 g   m    sio 
the smallest possible needle. Intramuscular injections should be
Five of these dogs developed severe bacterial infections (pneu-
avoided in animals with coagulopathies to avoid the formation
monia, sepsis, and pyometra), and two of these developed
of painful intramuscular hematomas. For animals with more
renal disease (amyloidosis and membranoproliferative glomer-
extensive hemorrhage, transfusion therapy is indicated. Factor
ulonephritis). This disorder is inherited as an autosomal reces-
VIII is found in fresh whole blood and fresh frozen plasma. If
sive trait.
available, cryoprecipitate has higher levels of factor VIll, along
with vWE, but does not contain factor IX Factor IX may be suc-
cessfully transfused via whole blood, plasma, and fresh serum.
Immunodeficiency associated
 If hemorrhage has been significant, additional RBC transfusions
with respiratory disease
may be required. However, in animals that require repeated
 Several breeds have been described with chronic respiratory
transfusions, factor VIlI inhibitor antibodies have been shown
to develop and can complicate therapy.
 disease and immunodeficiency. Reported breeds include young
 Irish wolfhounds with chronic rhinitis and/or bronchopneumo-
nia and decreased serum IgA levels, several related miniature
Diagnostic testing: laboratory, imaging, biopsy
dachshunds with Pneumocystis carinii (an opportunistic organ-
Prolonged partial thromboplastin time (PTT) with normal pro-
ism usually associated with immunodeficiency), and several
thrombin time (PT) should increase suspicion for hemophilia A
 Cavalier King Charles spaniels (CKCS) with respiratory signs
and generalized demodicosis. Decreased immunoglobulin con-
or B. Specific assays for factor VIII and factor IX analysis are
 centrations have been reported in these dogs.
available. Clinically significant bleeding is noted when factor
concentration is <5% when compared to normal control. Spon-
taneous bleeding, with no identifed traumatic episode, may be
seen with levels <2%.
SECTION 4 PLATELET,
COAGULATION, AND INHERITED
Feline factor Xll deficiency
DISORDERS
Factor XIl (Hageman factor) deficiency is the most common
Diseases of coagulation
incidence is three to four times that of hemophilia A and B.
Factor Xll is also part of the intrinsic pathway, but in contrast
Inherited
to hemophilia, factor Xll deficiency is an autosomal recessive
Hemophilia
inheritance, and thus there is no sex predilection. Siamese cats
 may be predisposed. Also, the deficiency is clinically silent and
Hemophilia A is the most common inherited coagulopathy and
 cats do not have hemorrhagic tendencies.
represents a defciency of factor VII1. Factor VIII is part of the
uinsun no sinpod pooq ou pe pabau si Adeia on 
 intrinsic pathway and is linked to the normal function of vWF.
 support is necessary.
Chapter 7 Hematology
183
Diagnostic testing: laboratory, imaging, biopsy
may require antiemetic or antinausea medication. Sudden onset
 or significant abdominal pain should increase the suspicion for
A prolonged PTT with normal PT in a cat with no clinical signs
 GI perforation pain relief is indicated. In severe cases, GI per-
of bleeding should increase the suspicion for factor XIl defi-
 foration and septic peritonitis may result. As with rodenticide
ciency. As with other individual coagulation factors, factor XII
levels can be measured specifically.
with severe disease.
Acquired
Diagnostic testing: laboratory, imaging. biopsy
Toxicity
Vitamin K antagonism affects those coagulation factors that are
vitamin K dependent (factors II, VII, IX, and X). As factor VII
The major toxicities associated with coagulation deficits are
has the shortest half-life, the extrinsic pathway is the first pathway
rodenticide (vitamin K antagonists) and non-steroidal anti-
 affected, evidenced by prolonged PT. With time and consump-
inflammatory drug (NSAID) ingestion. Vitamin K antagonism
tion of other factors, PTT also becomes prolonged. The diagno-
affects secondary hemostasis (hemostasis associated with coagu-
 sis is made via abnormal coagulation testing with prolonged PT,
lation factors), while NSAID intoxication results in abnormali-
 PTT, or activated clotting time (ACT) in an animal with consist-
fies with primary hemostasis (hemostasis due to platelets). As
with any coagulopathy, gentle handling and nursing care of hos-
Other tests of coagulation include proteins induced by vita-
pitalized animals and clear communication with hospital staff is
min K antagonism (PIVKA) and thromboelastography (TEG).
imperative.
Normal ranges for coagulation testing are specific to each labora-
tory, so it is recommended to become familiar with the normal
Pharmacology, treatment, and contraindications
ranges and testing recommendations for your laboratory.
For rodenticide intoxication, bleeding is primarily associated
With NSAID toxicity, the hemorrhagic tendency is due to
with deep body cavities (hemothorax, hemoabdomen, hemome-
platelet dysfunction. Therefore, tests of platelet function are rec-
diastinum), though hemorrhage may be seen in numerous loca-
 ommended (buccal mucosal bleeding time, platelet aggregation,
tions (joints, spinal cord, etc.). Clinical signs of hemorrhage may
TEG).
be delayed for days to weeks after ingestion, depending upon the
substance ingested. Thus, obtaining an accurate and complete
Nutritional considerations
history is imperative. When possible, the identity of the specifc
Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin, so appropriate dietary fat is
rodenticide should be ascertained. Immediate therapy is admin-
necessary for adequate absorption.
istered via subcutaneous injection of vitamin K,. Intravenous
injection of vitamin K, has been associated with anaphylaxis and
Uremia
is not recommended. Intramuscular injections are contraindi-
Uremia (the clinical syndrome associated with renal failure)
cated so as to prevent intramuscular hematomas. In severe cases,
has hemorrhagic consequences. The main sources of bleeding
animals may require transfusion support with coagulation
factors or RBCs. Hemorrhage in and around the pulmonary
include inhibition of normal platelet function due to uremic
toxins and blood loss from GI erosions and ulcerations. This
system is common, so animals may present with dyspnea and
nns p ard oq u sue ss 
hemostasis. Anemia, due to blood loss, decreased RBC produc-
stable, therapy is continued with oral vitamin K, and the length
 tion, and decreased RBC life span, can be a signifcant contribut-
 r s  sads a  s si nn n
 ing factor to disease progression with renal failure.
continuation of vitamin K, therapy, coagulation times should be
 rechecked to ensure additional therapy is not necessary.
Pharmacology, treatment, and contraindications
With NSAID intoxication, evidence of platelet dysfunction
may be seen as petechiation, ecchymosis, or other mucosal hem-
Treatment is supportive, centered on reducing uremic toxins and
orrhage (epistaxis, hematochezia, etc.). All NSAIDs should be
Options for therapy include crystalloid fluid administration, gas-
immediately discontinued in animals with signs of toxicity. As a
 general recommendation, NSAIDs should be used with caution 
 troprotectants, EPO therapy, RBC transfusions, and supplemen-
in animals with underlying renal or GI disease as they may
tal iron administration.
exacerbate the potential for renal and GI toxicity. Excessive hem-
Anesthesia and anaigesia
orrhage may be seen during surgical procedures on animals that
have had recent NSAID therapy. Due to the GI effects of NSAIDs,
Topical (oral) anesthetics may be utilized if oral ulceration is
GI upset, erosions, and ulcers may also be seen. Therefore, gas-
severe enough to impact normal prehension and mastication.
troprotectant (sucralfate) and antacid therapy (famotidine, ome-
 The placement of indwelling feeding tubes (esophagostomy, gas-
uelisnd e si poisoidos paiini sq Au (ia iozd
trostomy) allows administration of water, nutrition, and medica-
analogue that is especially effective at preventing the GI side
tion for animals with uremia. Tube placement should be
effects seen with NSAID administration. Animals with NSAID
 performed cautiously in animals with underlying hemorrhagic
intoxication and GI distress may have nausea and vomiting and
tendencies.
184
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Diagnostic testing: laboratory, imaging. biopsy
Thrombocytopenia
Anemia is readily diagnosed on routine blood work Azotemia
Thrombocytopenia is defined as a decrease in circulating platelet
is identifed as elevations in blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and
numbers and results from one or more of four basic mecha-
phosphorus. Urine specific gravity may be concentrated in cases
nisms. See Table 7.4.1 for causes of thrombocytopenia.
 of prerenal azotemia or may be isosthenuric. Platelet dysfunc-
Decreased production disorders are uncommon and result
tion and prolonged bleeding times are diagnosed as described
from disorders or radiation therapy that directly affects the meg-
above.
akaryocyte or bone marrow microenvironment (e.g., tumor
infltration, fibrosis, and necrosis). Infltrative neoplasia or
Hepatic
leukemia may decrease platelet numbers due to the destruction
Animals with severe acute or chronic hepatic disease may have
of the bone marrow architecture. Acquired megakaryocytic
clinical hemorrhage. In most cases, this will be due to decreased
hypoplasia occurs as a consequence of immune-mediated
production of coagulation factors, which results in a syndrome
destruction or secondary to infections or drug reactions.
 similar to that of rodenticide toxicity.
 See Table 7.4.2 for drugs that may affect platelet function or
numbers.
Pharmacology, treatment, and contraindications
Increased platelet loss or consumption results in a mild to
moderate decrease in platelet number. Thrombocytopenia with
 In addition to coagulation support, therapy may need to be
external hemorrhage is usually self-limiting and resolves once
directed toward the primary hepatic disease itself. It should be
the hemorrhage is stopped. Massive trauma may result in utiliza-
noted that stored canine RBC products have higher ammonia
tion of platelets in areas of vascular damage. The thrombocyto
concentrations. It is uncertain if administration of stored
penia associated with massive trauma is usually mild to moderate
RBCs to animals with hepatic disease may result in hyper-
and transient. DIC occurs secondarily to a wide variety of sys-
ammonemia and neurological signs. Low protein diets may be
temic diseases (septicemia, neoplasia, and severe metabolic
 s o r  s i ass r pn
disease). DIC is characterized by overwhelming activation of
hepatic encephalopathy. However, it is important to ensure that
coagulation and subsequent disruption of normal regulatory
 diets are nutritionally complete and protein malnutrition does
mechanisms. The degree of thrombocytopenia with DIC is vari-
not result.
able. Hemolytic uremic syndrome is rare in veterinary patients
Diagnostic testing: laboratory, imaging, biopsy
giopathic hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia are preceded
In addition to prolonged bleeding times as described above,
by hemorrhagic diarrhea in these cases.
Increased platelet destruction results as a consequence of
hypoglycemia, hypoalbuminemia, elevated liver enzymes, hyper-
platelet lysis, phagocytosis, or aggregation. IMT is the most 
bilirubinemia, and hypocholesterolemia. If hepatic biopsy is
common cause of increased platelet destruction. Primary IMT
pursued, coagulation status needs to be determined prior to
 occurs independent of predisposing factors (drugs, infectious
invasive techniques and coagulation support may be necessary.
agents, and neoplasia). Secondary IMT results when there is
Most, if not all, systemic anesthetics and analgesics require some
 a clear association of thrombocytopenia with an underlying
degree of hepatic metabolism. Dosage adjustments may be nec-
condition.
essary and close monitoring for side effects and drug interac-
Thrombocytopenia associated with platelet sequestration is
tions is recommended.
rare. Hypersplenism occurs when 90% of the circulating platelets
Disorders of platelets
splenomegaly, the presence of one or more cytopenias, and bone
marrow hyperplasia. Mild thrombocytopenia may develop with
Platelets are the first line of defense against bleeding at the sites
severe hypothermia. This condition adversely affects platelet
- uo s u   e Ad ue Ai rsa jo
 morphology, leading to platelet pooling in the spleen.
lation, and localization of hemostasis. These small, anucleated
 It is important to note that several breeds have nonclinical
cells originate in the bone marrow from megakaryocytes and
thrombocytopenia. The greyhound platelet count normally
are the second most numerous cells in circulation. Throm-
ranges between 80,000 and 120,000/μL. An inherited thrombo-
bopoietin is the major cytokine that regulates all stages of meg-
cytopenia has been reported in the CKCS. An autosomal reces-
akaryocyte and platelet production.  Platelet production is
sive trait has been identifed and as many as 50% of CKCS may
regulated by total platelet mass rather than platelet numbers.
be affected. Macroplatelets are often present and may result in
  s  d a e 
unreliable platelet counts when using automated machines;
siently compartmentalized in the spleen. Platelets circulate in
 therefore, hand platelet evaluation is more reliable in assessing
the bloodstream for approximately 5-9 days. Macrophages in
the spleen and liver remove aging platelets. In the healthy body,
circulating platelet number is decreased, the total platelet mass
there is a steady state between platelet production and platelet
remains normal and the thrombocytopenia in this breed is con-
destruction.
sidered benign and clinically insignificant.
Chapter 7 Hematology
185
Table 7.4.1Causes of thrombocytopenia
Decreased production (primary
 Increased platelet loss or
Increased platelet destruction
 Platelet sequestration
bone marrow disease)
consumption
Megakaryocytic hypoplasia
Hemorrhage
Immunemediated
Hypersplenism
thrombocytopenia
Immune mediated
Cytoxic drug effect
Infections
Infection
Massive trauma
Infections
Severe hypothermia
Viral (e.g. parvo, FIv, FeLv)
Bacterial
Rickettsial (e.g. ehrlichia)
Rickettsial
Viral
Myelopthisis
Disseminated intravascular
Neoplasia
coagulation (DIC)
Neoplasia
Hemangiosarcoma
Myelofibrosis
Lymphoproliferative tumors
Myeloproliferative tumors
Hemophagocytic
Histiosarcoma
Myelonecrosis
 Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Drugs
(HUS)
Various antibiotics
Chemotherapy drugs
Ph en obarbital
NSAIDS
Estrogen
Radiation therapy
Clinical signs
The diagnosis of primary IMT is one of exclusion. Blood
work, body imaging, infectious disease panels, and bone marrow
evaluation are necessary to rule out other causes of thrombocy-
detailed history, thorough physical examination, and an initial
topenia. Flow cytometry has been utilized to detect platelet
minimum database (CBC, biochemical panel, coagulation panel,
surface-associated immunoglobulin (PSAIg) in dogs and cats.
urinalysis, chest and abdominal radiographs). The severity of the
 PSAIg are found in patients with IMT and other secondary
thrombocytopenia may also help narrow the list of rule-outs.
Treatment of thrombocytopenia is aimed at eliminating or man-
disorders (secondary IMT) and are not pathognomonic for
 primary IMT. A major disadvantage of this test is false-positive
aging the underlying disease.
results due to a number of factors such as low storage tempera-
 Primary IMT is the most common cause of severe thrombo-
ture, improper blood drawing, tube agitation, and storage time.
 Cytopenia in the author's clinic. Itis important to obtain a detailed
history to rule out drug reactions (including vaccination sched-
Treatment
ule) and exposure to infectious agents (tick infestation, geo-
 graphic location). Clinical signs reported by the owner include
Immunosuppressive doses of glucocorticoids are the mainstay of
lethargy, anorexia, weakness, collapse, hematuria, hemorrhage
 treatment for IMT. Other immunosuppressive agents such as
(skin, eyes, gums, nose), and GI bleeding. Some animals may be
azathioprine, cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, danazol, myco-
asymptomatic and the thrombocytopenia is detected in a CBC.
 phenolate, vincristine, and human gammaglobulin have been
 Physical findings may include petechial and ecchymotic hemor-
used. Platelet transfusion (PRP) may be used in life-threatening
 rhages, epistaxis, melena, oral hemorrhage, and hematuria (see
situations. The life span of transfused platelets is relatively short
Figures 7.4.2 and 7.4.3). Pale mucous membranes, tachycardia,
 due to the increased consumption and destruction by circulating
and a heart murmur may occur with severe hemorrhage.
antiplatelet antibodies. Splenectomy may be a consideration
186
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 7.4.2 Drugs that have been associated with platelet disorders
Drug
 Effect on platelet
Antibiotics
Cephalosporins
Altered platelet function
 Chloramphenicol
 Decreased platelet number
 Penicillin 
Decreased platelet number
 Sulfonamides
 Decreased platelet number
Anti-inflammatory drugs
Aspirin 
Altered platelet function
Ibuprofen 
Altered platelet function 
Naproxen
Altered platelet function 
Figure 7.4.1  Macroplatelets in a Cavalier King Charles spaniel.
Phenylbutazone
Altered platelet function,
Courtesyof Stan Krogman, Site Manager, Marshfeld Veterinary Labs
 decreased platelet number
Marshfeld, Wisconsin.
Cardiac and respiratory drugs
Aminophylline
Altered platelet function
Diltiazem
Altered platelet function
Procainamide
Decreased platelet number
Propranolol 
Altered platelet function
verapamil
Altered platelet function 
Cytotoxic drugs
Azathioprine
Decreased platelet number
Chlorambucil
 Decreased platelet number
Cyclophosphamide
Decreased platelet number
Doxorubicin
Decreased platelet number
Figure 7.4.2  Petechial hemorrhage in the oral mucosa of a dog with
IMT.
Miscellaneous
Dextran
Altered platelet function
Estrogen
Decreased platelet number
Methimazole
Decreased platelet number
when there is poor response to medical therapy. Supportive
care utilizing intravenous fluids, antiemetics, gastroproctectant 
 agents, and RBC transfusions may also be necessary. Antibiotics
must be used with caution due to potential side effects. Patients
should be handled with care due to the increased risk of bruising.
Injections, venipunctures, and needle aspirations (e.g., for cysto-
centesis) should be avoided. A peripheral vein should be used
for blood samples, and a pressure bandage should be applied to
the site used. Liquid and soft diets are used to prevent damage 
Figure 7.4.3  Ecchymotic hemorrhages of the lateral body wall of a
 to the gingival surfaces.
 miniature poodle with IMT.
Chapter 7 Hematology
187
Prognosis
consistent finding in dogs. Several drugs (vinca alkaloids, epine-
phrine, and glucocorticoids) have been associated with throm-
The prognosis with IMT is guarded. Survival rates reported have
bocytosis. Inflammation, infections, and trauma are another
ranged from 10% to 43%; however, relapses of the thrombocy-
cause of thrombocytosis. Several retrospective studies reported
topenia may occur, requiring chronic therapy.
that Gl disorders (pancreatitis, inflammatory bowel disease,
chronic hepatitis) were only second to neoplasia (lymphoma,
Thrombocytosis
carcinoma) as a cause of thrombocytosis. Other causes of reac
tive thrombocytosis include iron deficiency, endocrine disorders
Thrombocytosis is defined as an increased platelet count above
(hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism), and
the reference range. Causes of thrombocytosis are listed in
a rebound phenomenon associated with recovery from throm-
Table 7.4.3.
 Psuedothrombocytosis occurs when cellfragments are counted
bocytopenia disorders. Treatment of reactive thrombocytosis is
directed at the cause of the underlying disease.
as platelets. Evaluation of the blood smear is helpful to verify the
 platelet count and to identify any morphological changes.
Essential thrombocytosis is a clonal disorder of hematopoiesis
that affects megakaryocytes. The disease is characterized by a
Reactive thrombocytosis is the most common cause of
marked thrombocytosis in peripheral blood and megakaryocytic
increased platelet numbers in dogs and cats. Cytokine stimula-
tion of thrombopoietin is suspected to induce the thrombocyto-
hyperplasia of the bone marrow. This disease is rare in dogs and
 cats and must be differentiated from reactive thrombocytosis.
sis. Physiological thrombocytosis may develop secondary to
Other bone marrow disorders associated with thrombocytosis
splenic contraction, which can be secondary to excitement, exer-
cise, and trauma. In humans, a transient or persistent thrombo-
 include polycythemia vera and basophilic leukemia, which are
 rarely reported in dogs and cats.
cytosis occurs after splenectomy. This phenomenon is not a
Platelet function disorders
Thrombocytopathia is defined as platelet dysfunction. The clini-
Table 7.4.3 Causes of thrombocytosis
pathogenesis is complex and multifactorial. Many disease proc-
Psuedothrombocytosis
esses (anemia, liver failure, uremia, DIC, and paraproteinemia)
may result in platelet dysfunction. Many drugs are associated with
Reactive thrombocytosis
thrombocytopenia and/or platelet dysfunction (see Table 7.4.2).
 Congenital defects of platelet dysfunction are rare. Intrinsic
Physiological—red istribution
platelet disorders are characterized by defects of membrane
Epinephrine
glycoproteins, storage granules, signal transduction proteins, or
Postsplenectomy
structural proteins. Extrinsic platelet disorders are characterized
 Drug induced
by abnormalities in plasma or subendothelial proteins that are
necessary for platelet adhesion or aggregation. von Willebrand
vinca alkaloids
disease (vWD) and hypo- or dysfbrinogenemia are examples of
Epinephrine
extrinsic platelet disorders.
Glucocorticoids
Glanzmann's thrombobastenia (GT) occurs when platelet
glycoprotein complex IIb-IIla is absent or markedly reduced.
Inflammation, infection, trauma
This disorder has been reported as an autosomal recessive trait
Rebound effect from thrombocytopenia
in otterhounds and Great Pyrenees dogs. Basset hounds and
Iron deficiency
transduction platelet disorder. The lack of procoagulant expres-
Paraneoplastic (lymphoma, lung carcinoma)
sion on the surface of platelets has been recognized in a family
Endocrine disorders (hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus,
 of German shepherd dogs. Although the clinical signs are typical
hypothyroidism)
of a coagulopathy (e.g, epistaxis, hyphema, and intramuscular
hemorrhage), this is a platelet defect.
Neoplasia involving megakaryocytes
von Willebrand disease
Primary (essential) thrombocytosis
vWD is the most common hereditary hemostatic defect in dogs;
Acute megakaryocyte leukemia (M7)
it is an autosomal trait. There are both incomplete dominance
Myeloproliferative disease
and recessive patterns seen. Multiple breeds have been reported
Polycythemia vera
with this disease and include the Doberman pinscher, Airedale
terrier, Akita, dachshund, Bernese mountain dog, Coton de
Basophilic leukemia
Tuléar, German shepherd, golden retriever, greyhound, Irish
188
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
wolfhound, Kerry blue terrier, papillon, Pembroke Welsh corgi,
Breed-related disorders
schnauzer, Shetland sheepdog, Chesapeake Bay retriever, and
 Scottish terrier.
Defective neutrophil function in Dobermans
The bleeding tendency of vWD is caused by functional defi-
ciencies of von Willebrand factor. vWF is a large plasma glyco-
 Defective neutrophil function in Dobermans is also called bac-
 protein necessary for platelet adhesion at the site of vascular
tericidal neutrophil defect. Inheritance (carriers, disease expres-
damage. The major site of vWF synthesis is the endothelial cell.
sion, and litter issues) has not been determined for this disease.
yWF subunits combine to form dimers then multimers. These
Neutrophils appear to phagocytize bacteria normally, but bacte-
multimers act as a carrier for the coagulation factor VIll. When
rial killing is impaired. Some affected animals may live for years
vascular injury occurs, vWF binds to the subendothelial collagen
with therapy; thus, it is suspected that the defect may be partial,
and supports platelet adherence and platelet plug formation.
as compared to complete, in those animals. The most common
There are three subtypes classified in dogs, based on the vWF
clinical syndrome is chronic rhinitis and pneumonia, evidenced
multimers, plasma vWF antigen concentration (vWF: Ag), and
 a      s 
age of presentation is 9 months.
multimer distribution, low plasma vWF : Ag, and mild to moder-
ate bleeding. Type 2 occurs when there is a disproportionate loss
Pharmacology, treatment, and contraindications
of high molecular weight multimers, a variable decrease in
Affected animals may respond well, though temporarily, to anti-
due to a total lack of vWF and results in severe bleeding.
microbial therapy. As repeated treatments are necessary, antibi-
otic choices should be based on culture and sensitivity results
Clinical signs
when possible. Samples should be obtained under sterile condi-
tions. Sulfa-based antibiotics should be used with caution in
Clinical signs are characterized by mucosal bleeding (e.g..
Doberman pinschers. This breed appears to be overrepresented
epistaxis, hematuria, GI bleeding, gingival bleeding, and pro-
with sulfa drug side effects such as blood dyscrasias, polyarthri-
longed estral bleeding in intact females), cutaneous bruising.
 fis, and decreased tear production.
and prolonged hemorrhage after injury or surgery. Petechial
hemorrhage is uncommon in this disease.
Diagnostic testing
Diagnostics
 The CBC is variable. RBC indices are primarily within normal
The diagnosis of vWD is made in patients with low plasma
limits. Neutrophilia with a left shift may be seen, and eosi-
yWF :Ag, a normal platelet count, normal coagulation tests, and
eosinophil counts. Serum biochemistry panels and urinalysis are
a prolonged buccal mucosal bleeding time. vWF antigen
also primarily within normal limits. Thoracic radiographs of
(vWF:Ag), the most common test used, is an enzyme-linked
affected dogs may have radiographic signs of cardiomyopathy
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The blood sample should be
-odos J euuouq jo uia mos  p
drawn directly into the citrated blood tube via a Vacutainer?
 ogy is performed on the affected lung tissue, results are consist-
blood collection needle (BD Diagnostics, Franklin Lakes, NJ).
ent with chronic pneumonia. Ciliary lesions (as may be seen
Once blood is drawn directly into a syringe, the clotting cascade
with ciliary dyskinesia) have not been identified.
begins and may cause inaccurate test results. Within 30 min, the
blood sample should be spun and the plasma separated and
Anesthetic and anaigesia
placed into another tube to be sent to the lab. Results are reported
as a percentage of normal. Each laboratory determines the refer-
As for any animal with significant pulmonary disease, anesthesia
ence range; however, in general, normal animals have greater
should be carefully planned. Ensuring a patent airway and pro.
than 50% vWF:Ag.
viding adequate oxygen supplementation are essential. If con-
current cardiomyopathy is present, judicious fluid administration
Treatment
during anesthesia is warranted.
Treatment of vWD includes control of the active sites of hemor-
rhage and the use of blood products (FWB 20mL/kg), FFP
Combined immunodeficiency in
Jack Russell terriers
acetate (deamino-8-d-arginine vasopressin [DDAVP]) can be
Bueus Aq ie Aeu anip s MA I adi ym shop u pasn
Inheritance is most consistent with an autosomal recessive
endothelial V2 vasopressin receptors, resulting in the release of
disease. There is no evidence for sex-linked inheritance, and
vWF. Desmopressin has been recommended as a presurgical
carrier animals are clinically normal. Some affected puppies may
treatment in dogs with type 1 VWD. The dose is 1 mcg/kg sub-
become ill and may die after vaccination with modified live vac-
cutaneously 1h prior to surgery. Close surgical monitoring is
cines as early as 8 weeks of age. Puppies that are not vaccinated
advised as additional blood products (FFP or whole blood) may
begin to show clinical signs of illness at 14-15 weeks of age,
be necessary.
including pneumonia, diarrhea, and neurological disease.
Chapter 7  Hematology
189
Treatment
Pharmacology and treatment
There is no known treatment for this disease and the genetic
Clinical presentation is variable, though some cases present soon
defect is uniformly fatal.
after vaccination and are treated with steroids for presumptive
vaccine reactions. When possible, therapeutic decisions should
Diagnostic testing
be based on culture and sensitivity, cytology, and/or histopathol-
Affected puppies have little to no detectable B lymphocytes and,
ogy results. Osteopathic manifestations of the disease may be
as a result, are severely lymphopenic on CBC. In animals with
painful, and therapy with NSAIDs and steroids has been
lymphopenia, serum immunoglobulins are also significantly
 reported. The concurrent use of steroids and NSAIDs should be
avoided due to increased risk of GI side effects. As most affected
necropsy is pursued, lymphoid tissue (spleen, thymus, lymph
 animals are young, nutritional calculations should take muscu-
node) is markedly reduced in affected puppies.
loskeletal growth into account. Nutrient-dense diets may be rec-
ommended to minimize the volume of diet that would need to
Birman cat neutrophil granulation anomaly
be fed to an animal with clinical illness.
This is an autosomal recessive trait identified in purebred Birman
Diagnostic testing
cats. Affected cats have azurophilic granules seen in the cyto-
 Leukocytosis with a neutrophilia is commonly seen on CBC.
plasm of neutrophils, and these granules must be differentiated
There is evidence that a neutrophil phagocytic defect may also
from other cytoplasmic inclusion bodies. Neutrophil function is
 be present; however, this has not been thoroughly elucidated.
normal and immunity is not impaired. Affected animals have no
There are no consistent changes noted on serum biochemistry
clinical signs.
analysis. However, when specific immunoglobulins are meas-
ured, significant decreases in IgG are noted in affected dogs.
Immunodeficiency of shar-peis
Other immunoglobulins (IgA, IgM) may also be decreased
below the standard reference range. Additional testing, includ-
Inheritance is unknown and dogs present with signs of illness at
ing histopathology, should be pursued depending upon the clini-
an average of 3 years of age. Affected dogs present with a variety
 cal presentation of the animal.
of recurrent illnesses, including cutaneous (pyoderma, demo-
decosis, otitis), intestinal (inflammatory bowel disease, ulcera-
Bibliography
tive colitis, adenocarcinoma), and respiratory diseases and fever.
Pharmacology and treatment
Section 1
Treatment should be directed based on results of diagnostic
1.
Colville T, Bassert JM. Clinical Anatomy and Physiology for
Veterinary Technicians, 2nd edition, pp. 205-246. St. Louis, MO:
evaluation, including histopathology. As there is no cure, therapy
is primarily supportive and aimed at disease control. Animals
Mosby Elsevier; 2008.
may be lethargic and febrile, so appropriate nursing care with
2.  Guyton AC, Hall JE. Textbook of Medical Physiology, 10th edition,
 Pp. 96-106, 162-174, 419-429. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders;
analgesic support is recommended.
2000.
3. Nelson RW, Couto CG. Small Animal Internal Medicine, 4th
Diagnostic testing
edition, pp. 1242-1244, 1260-1264. St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier;
Affected dogs have deficiencies in one or multiple immunoglob-
2009.
ulins (IgA, IgM, and IgG). Lymphocytes show abnormal
4. Evans HE, Christensen GC. Miller's Anatony of the Dog, 2nd
responses and proliferation indices, though specific laboratory
edition, pp. 802-841. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1980.
5.Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology,
testing is required to demonstrate these abnormalities. The
，6th
immunodeficiency affects both cell-mediated and humoral
edition, pp. 635-653. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2010.
immune responses.
Section 2
Immunodeficiency of Weimaraners
1. Stockham SL, Scott MA. Fundarentals of Veterinary Clinical
Pathology. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2008.
The mode of inheritance is unknown, though a genetic basis for
Kociba Gl. Erythrocytes. Veterinary Clinics of North America.
the disease is suspected on the basis of young age of presentation
Small Animal Practice 1989;19:627-635.
3. Alsaker RD, Laber J, Stevens J, Perman V. A comparison of poly-
-osiad re e (s si usad ie se u)
chromasia and reticulocyte counts in assessing erythrocytic
sition. There is no apparent gender predilection, so a sex-linked
trait is less likely. The most common clinical signs include
regenerative response inthe cat. Journal ofthe American Veterinary
Medical Association 1977;170:39-41.
pyrexia, vomiting and diarrhea, joint pain and swelling, long 
4.Weiss DJ. New insights into the physiology and treatment of
bone pain, subcutaneous swelling at injection sites, lymphaden-
acquired myelodysplastic syndromes and aplastic pancytopenia.
opathy, urinary tract infection, and pyoderma. Bronchopneu-
Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice
monia and meningitis have also been reported.
2003;33:1317-1334.
190
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 5. Lappin T. Ihe cellular biology of erythropoietin receptors. The
1999).Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
Oncologist 2003;8 Suppl 1:15-18.
2001;218:543-546.
6.
Giger U, Mason GD, Wang P. Inherited erythrocyte pyruvate
25.1
Helmond SE, Polzin DJ, Armstrong PJ, Finke M, Smith SA.
kinase deficiency in a beagle dog. Veterinary Clinical Pathology
Treatment of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia with individu-
1991;20:83-86.
ally adjusted heparin dosing in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internal
7.
Feldman BV, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, Schalm OW. Schalms Veterinary
Medicine [0891-6640] SE 2010;24(3):597-605.
Hernatology. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
26.
Weinkle TK, Center SA, Randolph JF, Warner KL, Barr SC, Erb
2000.
HN. Evaluation of prognostic factors, survival rates, and treat-
8.
 Harvey IW. Pathogenesis, laboratory diagnosis, and clinical impli-
:saop u euaue soua paepau-aunu oy sosood uau
cations of erythrocyte enzyme deficiencies in dogs, cats, and
151 cases (1993-2002). Journal ofthe American Veterinary Medical
horses. Veterinary Clinical Pathology 2006;35:144-156.
Association 2005;226(11):1869-1880.
9.
Weiss DJ. Bone marrow pathology in dogs and cats with non-
regenerative immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia and pure red
cell aplasia. Journal of Comparative Pathology 2008;138:46-53.
Section 3
10.
Thrall MA. Veterinary Hermatology and Clinical Chemistry.
 Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2004.
1.
Fenner WR. Quick Reference to Veterinary Medicine, 3rd edition,
11.
 Kessler M. Secondary polycythaemia associated with high plasma
Pp. 149-158. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins; 
erythropoietin concentrations in a dog with a necrotising pyelone-
2000.
phritis. Journal of Srmall Animal Practice 2008;49:363-366.
2.
Nelson RW, Couto CG. Small Animal Internal Medicine, 4th
12.
Hsia CC, Johnson RL, JR, Dane DM, Wu EY, Estrera AS, Wagner
edition, pp. 1228-1235. St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier; 2009.
HE, Wagner PD. Ihe canine spleen in oxygen transport: gas
3.
Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ. Schalm' Veterinary Hematology, 6th
exchange and hemodynamic responses to splenectomy. Journal of
edition, Pp. 263-365. Ames, ILA: Blackwell Publishing; 2010.
Applied Physiology 2007;103:1496-1505.
4.
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
13.
Gray HE, Weigand CM, Cottrill NB, Willis AM, Morgan RV.
7th edition, Chapters 801-809. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier;
Polycythemia vera in a dog presenting with uveitis. Journal of the
2010.
AmericanAnimal Hospital Association 2003;39:355-360.
 5. Latimer KS, Campagnoli RP, Danilenko DM. Pelger-Huet
14.B
Feldman BF, Sink CA. Practical Transfusion Medicine for the Small
anomaly in Australian shepherds: 87 cases (1991-1997).
Animal Practitioner. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia; 2006.
Comparative Haematology International 2000;10:9-13.
15.
Abrams-Ogg A. Practical blood transfusion. In: Manual of Canine
6.1
 Latimer KS, Duncan JR, Kircher IM. Nuclear segmentation,
and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine, eds. M Day, A
ultrastructure, and cytochemistry of blood cels from dogs with
Mackin, J Lilewood, pp. 263-303. Gloucester: British Small
Pelger-Huet anomaly. Journal of Comparative Pathology 1987;97:
Animal Veterinary Association; 2008.
61-72.
16. Mischke R. Plasma transfusion and automated plasmapheresis
 Latimer KS, Rakich PM, Ihompson DF. Pelger-Huet anomaly in
a  aa   e s
cats. Veterinary Pathology 1985;22:370-374.
Journal 2005;169(1):102-107.
8.
Hirsch VM, Cunningham TA. Hereditary anomaly of neutrophil
17.
Guillaumin J, Jandrey KE, Norris JW, et al. Assessment of a
granulation in Birman cats. American Journal of Veterinary
dimethyl sulfoxide-stabilized frozen canine platelet concen-
Research 1984;45(10):2170-2174.
trate. American Journal of Veterinary Research 2008;Dec;69(12):
9.
 Prieur DJ, Collier LL. Neutropenia in cats with the Chediak-
1580-1586.
Higashi syndrome. Canadian Journal of Veterinary Research
18.
Wardrop JK, Reine N, Birkenheuer A, et al. Canine and feline
1987;51:407-408.
blood donor screening for infectious disease. Journal of Veterinary
10.
 Prieur DJ, Collier LL. Inheritance of the Chediak-Higashi syn-
Internal Medicine 2005;Jan-Feb;19(1):135-142.
drome in cats. Journal of Heredity 1981;72(3):175-177.
19.
 Duval D, Giger U. Vaccine-associated immune-mediated hemo-
11.
Breitschwerdt EB, Brown TT, De Buysscher EV, Andersen BR,
lytic anemia in the dog. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Thrall DE, Hager E, Ananaba G, Degen MA, Ward MD. Rhinitis,
1996;10:290-295.
 pneumonia, and defective neutrophil function in the Doberman
20.
Goggs R, Boag AK, Chan DL. Concurrent immune-mediated
pinscher. American Journal of Veterinary Research 1987;48(7):
 haemolytic anaemia and severe thrombocytopenia in 21 dogs.
1054-1062
Veterinary Record 2008;163(11):323-327.
Foureman P, Whiteley M, Giger U. Canine leukocyte adhesion
21.
Carr AP, Panciera DL, Kidd L. Prognostic factors for mortality
 deficiency: presence of the Cys36Ser beta-2 integrin mutation in
and thromboembolism in canine immune-mediated hemolytic
an affected US Irish setter cross-breed dog and in US Irish red and
anemia: a retrospective study of 72 dogs. Journal of Veterinary
white setters. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2002;16(5):
Internal Medicine 2002;16:504-509.
518-523.
22.
 Scott-Moncrieff JCR, Reagan WJ, Snyder PW, Glickman LT.
13.
 Bauer TR, Allen JM, Hai M, Tuschong LM, Khan IF, Olson EM,
Intravenous administration of human immune globulin in dogs
Adler RL, Burkholder TH, Gu Y, Russell DW, Hickstein DD.
with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. Journal ofthe American
Successful treatment of canine leukocyte adhesion deficiency by
Veterinary Medical Association 1997;210:1623-1627.
foamy virus vectors. Nature Medicine 2008;14:93-97.
23.B
Burgess K, Moore A, Rand W, Cotter SM. Treatment of immune-
14.S
 Skelly BJ, Franklin RJM. Recognition and diagnosis of lysosomal
mediated hemolytic anemia in dogs with cyclophosphamide.
storage diseases in the cat and dog. Journal of Veterinary Internal
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2000;14:456-462.
Medicine 2002;16:133-141.
24.
Grundy SA, Barton C. Influence of drug treatment on survival of 
15.
 Pacheco JM, Traulsen M, Antal T, Dingli D. Cyclic neutropenia in
dogs with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia: 88 cases (1989-
animals. American Journal of Hematology 2008;83:920-921.
Chapter 7 Hematology
191
16.
Abkowitz JL, Holly RD, Hammond WP. Cyclic hematopoeisis in
of the third component of complement in the dog. Clinical
dogs: studies of erythroid burst-forming cells confrm an early
Irmunology and Immunopathology 1985;34:304-315.
stem cell defect. Experimental Hematology 1988;16:941-945.
33.
Ameratunga R, Winkelstein JA, Brody L, Binns M, Cork LC,
17.
Lothrop CD, Warren DJ, Souza LM, Jones JB, Moore MAS.
Colomabani P, Valle D. Molecular analysis of the third component
Correction of canine cyclic hematopoiesis with recombinant
of canine complement (C3) and identification of the mutation
human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. Blood 1988;72:
responsible for hereditary canine C3 defciency Journal of
1324-1328.
Immunology 1998;160:2824-2830.
18.
Hammond WP, Boone TC, Donahue RE, Souza LM, Dale DC. A
34.
Clercx C, Reichler I, Peeters D, McEntee K, German A, Dubois J,
comparison of treatment of canine cyclic hematopoiesis with
Schynts F, Scaff-Lafontaine N, Willems T, Jorissen M, Day MJ.
recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage-colony stimulating
Rhinitis/bronchopneumonia syndrome in Irish wolfhounds.
factor (GM-CSF), G-CSF, interleukin-3, and canine G-CSF Blood
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2003;17:843-849.
1990;76:523-532.
35.
Watson PJ, Wotton P, Eastwood J, Swift S, Jones B, Day MJ.
19.
Yanay O, Barry SC, Katen LJ, Brzezinski M, Flint LY, Christensen
Immunoglobulin defciency in Cavalier King Charles spaniels
J, Liggitt D, Dale DC, Osborne WR. Treatment of canine cyclic
with pneumocystosis pneumonia. Journal of Veterinary Internal
neutropenia by lentivirus-mediated G-CSF delivery. Blood 2003;
Medicine 2006;20:523-527.
102:2046-2052.
36.
Lobetti RG, Leizewitz JA. Pneumocystis carinii in the miniature
20.
 Krakowka S, Johnson G, Ciekot P, Hill R, Lafrado L, Kociba G. In
dachshund: case report and literature review. Journal of Small
mu m s ree yo sa sou 
Animal Practice 1996;37(6):280-285.
abnormalities and recurrent infections. Veterinary Immunology
and Immunopathology 1989;23:103-112.
21.
Hansen P, Clercx C, Henroteaux M, Rutten PM, Bernakina WE.
Section 4
Neutrophil phagocyte dysfunction in a Weimaraner 
with
recurrent infections. Journal of Small Animal Practice 1995;36:
1.O'Kelley BM, Whelan MF, Brooks MB. Factor VIlI inhibitors
128-131.
um op e u suaaq aadosod go juaani uo
22.
Harrus S, Waner T, Aizenberg I, Safra N, Mosenco A, Radoshitsky
hemophilia A. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
 M, Bark H. Development of hypertrophic osteodystrophy and
2009;19(4):381-385.
antibody response in a litter of vaccinated Weimaraner puppies.
2.
 Brooks M, DeWilde L. Feline factor XlI deficiency. Compendium
Journal of Small Animal Practice 2002;43:27-31.
2006;28(2, February):148-156.
23.
 Center SA, Randolph JF, Erb HN, Reiter S. Eosinophilia in the cat:
3.
Feldman BE, Zinkl JG, Jain NC. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology,
a retrospective study of 312 cases (1975-1986). Journal of the
5th edition, Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins;
American Animal Hospital Association 1990;26:349-358.
2000.
 24. Wilson SC, Ihomson-Kerr K, Houston DM. Hypereosinophilic
4.
Smith JW, Day TK, Mackin A. Diagnosing bleeding disorders.
syndrome in a cat. The Canadian Veterinary Journal 1996;37:
Compendium 2005;27(11, November):828-843.
679-680.
5.Berry CR, Gallaway A, Ihrall DE, Carlisle C. Ihoracic radio-
25.
Neer M. Hypereosinophilic syndrome in cats. Compendium of
 graphic features of anticoagulant toxicity in fourteen dogs.
Contimuing Education Small Animal Practice 1991;13:549-555.
Veterinary Radiology é Ultrasound 1993;34(6):391-396.
26.
Uivas AL, Tintle L, Argentieri D, Kimball ES, Goodman MG,
6.
Sheafor SE, Couto CG. Anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity in 21
Anderson DQ, Capetola RJ, Quimby FW. A primary immunode-
dogs. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 1999;
35:38-46.
Immunopathology 1995;74:243-251.
7. Waddell LS, Holt DE, Hughes D, Giger U. The effect of storage on
27.
 Felsburg PJ, Glickman LT, Jezyk PF. Selective IgA deficiency in
ammonia concentration in canine packed red blood cells. Journal
the dog. Clinical Immunology and Immunopathology 1985;36:
of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 2001;11(1):23-26.
297-305.
'8
Nelson RW, Couto CG. Small Animal Internal Medicine, 4th
28.
 Jezyk PF, Felsburg PJ, Haskins ME, Patterson DE. X-linked severe
edition, pp. 1248-1250. St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier; 2009.
combined immunodeficiency in the dog. Clinical Irmmunology and
9.
Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ. Schalm's Veterinary Hermatology, 6th
Imunopathology 1989;52:173-189.
edition, pp. 561-631. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2010.
29.
 Pullen RP, Somberg RL, Felsburg PJ, Henthorn PS. X-linked severe
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC. Textbook of Veterinary Internal
m  go a e u o a
Medicine, 7th edition, pp. 777-783. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
corgis. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 1997;
Elsevier; 2010.
33:494-499.
11.
 Pedersen HD, Haggstrom J, Olsen LH, Christensen K, Selin A,
30.
 De Ravin SST, Kennedy DR, Naumann N, Kennedy JS, Choi U,
Burmeister ML, Larsen H. Idiopathic asymptomatic thrombocy-
Hartnett J, Linton GF, Whiting-Iheobald NL, Moore PF, Vernau
topenia in Cavalier King Charles spaniels is an autosomoal
W, Malech HL, Felsburg PJ. Correction of canine X-linked severe
recessive trait. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2002;16:
Kdeia auaa denai oaa u aq aouayapoun paq
169-173.
Blood 2006;107:3091-3097.
12.
 Davis B, Toivio-Kinnucan M, Schuller S, Boudreaux MK. Mutation
31.
Bell TG, Butler KL, Sill HB, Stickle JE, Ramos-Vara JA, Dark MJ.
 in beta 1- tubulin correlates with macrothrombocytopenia in
Autosomal recessive severe combined immunodeficiency of Jack
Cavalier King Charles spaniels. Journal of Veterinary Internal
Russell terriers. Journal of Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation
Medicine 2008;22:540-545.
2002;14:194-204.
13.
 Putsche JC, Kohn B. Primary immune-mediated thrombocytope-
32.
Blum JR, Cork LC, Morris JM, Olson JL, Winkelstein JA. Ihe
nia in 30 dogs (1997-2003). Journal of the American Animal
clinical manifestations of a genetically determined deficiency
Hospital Association 2008;44:250-257.
192
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
14. Botsch V, Kuchenhoff H, Hartmann K, Hirshberger J. Retrospec-
24.1
Brooks MB, Catalfamo JL, Brown HA, et al. A hereditary bleeding
tive study of 871 dogs with thrombocytopenia. Veterinary Record
disorder of dogs caused by alack of platelet procoagulant activity.
2009;164:647-651.
Blood 2002;99:2434-2441.
15.I
 Dircks BH, Schuberth HJ, Mischke R. Underlying diseases and
25.
Breitschwerdt EB, Brown TT, DeBuysscher EV, Andersen BR,
clinicopathologic variables of thrombocytopenic dogs with and
Thrall DE, Hager E, Ananaba G, Degen MA, Ward MDW. Rhinitis,
without platelet-bound antibodies detected by use of a flow cyto-
 pneumonia, and defective neutrophil function in the Doberman 
metric assay: 83 cases (2004-2006). Journal of the American
pinscher. American Journal of Veterinary Research 1987;48(7):
Veterinary Medical Association 2009;235:960-966.
1054-1062.
16.
 Hammer AS. Ihrombocytosis in dogs and cats: a retrospective 
26.
 DeBey MC. Primary irmmunodeficiencies of dogs and cats.
study. Comparative Haematology International 1991;1:181-186.
Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 2010;
17. Rizzo F, Tappin SW, Tasker S. Thrombocytosis in cats: a retrospec-
40:425-438.
tive study of 51 cases (200 = 2005). Journal of Feline Medicine and
27.
 Bell TG, Butler KL, Sill HB, Stickle JE, Ramos-Vara JA, Dark MJ.
Surgery 2007;9:319-325.
Autosomal recessive severe combined immunodeficiency of Jack
18.
 Bass MC, Schultze AE. Essential thrombocythemia in a dog: case
Russell terriers. Journal of Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation
report and literature review. Journal of the American Animal
2002;14:194-204.
Hospital Association 1998;34:197-203.
28.
Hirsch VM, Cunningham TA. Hereditary anomaly of neutrophil
19.
Dunn JK, Heath MF, Jefferies AR, Blackwood L, McKay JS,
granulation in Birman cats. American Journal of Veterinary
Nichols PK. Diagnostic and hematologic features of probable
Research 1984;45(10):2170-2174.
essential thrombocythemia in two dogs. Veterinary Clinical
29.
Feldman BE, Zink JG, Jain NC. Schalms Veterinary Hematology,
Pathology 1999;28:131-138.
5th edition, Pp. 467-594, 953-1054. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott,
20.
 Hogan DF, Dhaliwal RS, Sisson DD, Kitchell BE. Paraneoplastic
Williams and Wilkins; 2000.
thrombocytocysis-induced systemic thromboembolism in a cat.
30.
Rivas AL, Argentieri D, Kimball ES, Goodman MG, Anderson
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 1999;35:
DW, Capetola RJ, Quimby FW. A primary inmmunodeficiency
483-486.
syndrome in shar-pei dogs. Clinical Immunology and Immunopa-
21.
Boudreaux MK, Crager C, Dillon AR, et al. Identifcation of an
thology 1995;74(3):243-251.
intrinsic platelet functiondefect inSpitz dogs. Journal of Veterinary
31.
Foale RD, Herrtage ME, Day MJ. Retrospective study of 25 young
Internal Medicine 1994;8:93-98.
Weimaraners with low serum immunoglobulin concentrations
22.
Boudreaux MK, Kvam K, Dillon AR, et al. Type I Glanzmann's
and inflammatory disease. Veterinary Record 2003;153:553-558.
thrombobasthenia in a Great Pyrenees dog. Veterinary Pathology
32.
Hansen P, Clercx C, Henroteaux M, Rutten VP, Bernadina WE.
1996;33:503-511.
Neutrophil phagocyte dysfunction in a Weimaraner with recur-
23.  Boudreaux MK, Catalfamo JL. Ihe molecularbasis fro Glanzmann's
rent infections. Journal of Small Animal Practice 1995;36(3):
thrombobasthenia in otterhounds. American Journal of Veterinary
128-131.
Research 2001;62:1797-1804.
Chapter
8
Gastrointestinal
Editors: Peter J. Bondy, Jr. and Ann Wortinger
Section 1 Clinical Signs and Examination of the Gl Patient -
Intestinal obstruction - Kara M. Burns 218
Kara M. Burns 193
Acute and chronic diarrhea - Ann Wortinger 224
 Section 2 Selected Diagnostics in Gastrointestinal Disease -
Infectious diarrhea - Kara M. Burns 228
Kara M. Burns 197
Diseases of the large intestine 235
Section 3 Gastrointestinal Disease 201
Inflammation of the large intestine - Kara M. Burns 235
Oral disease - Effen f. Lowery 201
 Section 4 Pharmacology - Krysta Deitz, Ann Wortinger and 
Esophageal disorders - Kara M. Burns 204
Linda Merrill 238
Gastric disease - Kara M. Burns 207
Section 5 Feeding Tubes - Ann Wortinger 242
Alimentary tract parasites - Kara M. Burns 213
 Section 6 Food Intolerance and Food Allergy - Ann Wortinger 251
Diseases of the small intestine 216
Section 7 Anesthesia and Analgesia Considerations in
Protein-losing enteropathy - Krysta Deitz 216
Gastrointestinal Disease - Katrina Lafferty 255
Short bowel syndrome - Krysta Deitz 217
SECTION 1 CLINICAL SIGNS AND
life-threatening disorders that, if not identifed and treated, can
lead to poor patient management and/or death of the pet.' It is
EXAMINATION OF THE GI PATIENT
 imperative that the health-care team approach all patients pre-
senting with GI concerns in a consistent, thorough manner. One
Gastrointestinal (GI) problems are one of the most common
of the most important steps in the process is a thorough physical
    n d   s d s
 examination, and that begins with an accurate history.
main challenge to the veterinary health-care team presented
with such a case is to determine whether this is an emergency
 or a potentially serious problem versus a chronic or intermittent
Patient history
problem.
While many cases of acute vomiting and/or diarrhea resolve
The first step in patient evaluation is to obtain a complete history.
       
starting with the signalment (ie., species, breed, age, gender,
Smat Anima nternat Medicine forVeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses, First Edition.Edited by Linda Meril
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
193
194
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
reproductive status, activity level, and environment).? Next,
 stool characteristics (e.g., fresh blood, mucus, or melena), to
questions to help assess GI signs should include the following:
 obtain a fresh stool sample for parasite and cytological examina-
 Duration and description of clinical signs
tion and to evaluate the mucosa for sensitivity and/or abnormal
texture.
Content of the vomitus
The pet's body condition scoring (BCS) and weight should be
Time in relation to eating
 documented at every visit as part of the physical examination.
Nature and frequency of vomiting (e.g., distinguish vomiting
BCS is a subjective assessment that is important when determin-
from retching, drooling, or regurgitation)
ing whether a dog or a cat is at a healthy weight and when sub-
 Nature and frequency of diarrhea (mucus or blood in stool,
stantiating a weight loss or gain in a pet suffering with GI
symptoms. It allows assessment ofa patient's fat stores and muscle
frequency, tenesmus?)
 on  s im  u si p s
 Dietary and environmental history
common BCS systems are the five- and nine-point scales. Both
A nutritional history should also be performed to ascertain the
rating scales use nine points, but the five-point scale is scored to
quality and adequacy of the food, the feeding protocol (e.g.
the nearest half-point, whereas the nine-point scale is scored to
whether the pet is fed at designated meals or has free choice, the
the whole point. It is important for all members ofthe health-care
amount of food given), and the type or types of food given to
team to use the same scoring system from the outset so as not to
the pet. When evaluating a pet presenting with GI signs, the
confuse or miscalculate the patient's body condition.
 technician should ask the owner the following questions:
.What brand and type of food do you feed your pet?
Clinical signs of gastrointestinal
 What brand and type of snacks or treats do you give your
disorders
pet?
pu yum os yi suaalddns ue iad no aia noA o 
When performing a history and physical examination on a
 potential GI patient, there are a number of clinical signs of which
 Is your pet on any chewable medications? If so, what are
they?
to be aware and to document (Table 8.1.1).
 Ad iad  o s m Jo  pe
What human foods does your pet consume?
Oral manifestations of Gl disease
 Does your pet have access to other sources of food?
Dysphagia (difficult or painful swallowing) may be present in an
animal due to a foreign body, pain, motility disturbance, mass,
It is also important to remember to discuss the potential that
trauma, or a combination of these. Dysphagia is most commonly
the pet could have eaten something from the trash or some-
indicative of a disorder in the oral cavity or in the pharynx, but
thing out of the ordinary (e.g., rodenticides, pesticides, human
esophageal disorders can cause dysphagia as well. The impor-
medications).
tance of taking a history is paramount as it is the history that
 most often differentiates oropharyngeal dysphagia from esopha-
Physical examination
 geal dysphagia. Oropharyngeal disorders typically include acute
gagging, increased frequency of swallowing, and exaggerated
A complete physical examination should be performed and the
swallowing movements. It is also common for food to be dropped.
patient's overall attitude, posture, and energy level should be
from the mouth as the pet tries to pick up food to eat. Patients
assessed. Patients with nausea will swallow frequently and may
with esophageal dysphagia do not drop food from the mouth
salivate. Patients with serious conditions such as foreign body
and do not exhibit the exaggerated swallowing motions seen
 obstruction, pancreatitis, or gastric neoplasia are often subdued
with oropharyngeal dysphagia.
upon examination. The mucous membranes should be observed
Halitosis is associated with a proliferation of bacteria second.
as findings may suggest loss of blood or dehydration. An oral
ary to tissue necrosis, tartar, periodontitis, or retention (orally
exam is necessary to rule out the potential of an oral or pharyn-
 or esophageally) of food or noxious substances (eating of feces).
geal mass or foreign body that may be contributing to the GI
Ptyalism (drooling) arises when animals are unable or are in
disease. Cardiac auscultation should be performed to assess rate
too much pain to swallow. It is also attributed to nausea and
and rhythm abnormalities that may occur with metabolic dis-
can be seen in patients suffering from hepatic encephalopathy,
turbances such as hypoadrenocorticism, infectious enteritis with
 hyperthermia, chemical or toxic stimulation of salivation, and
septic shock, or gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV). Careful
seizures.
assessment and palpation of the abdomen should be performed
and notice taken of generalized or localized pain. Remember to
Nature of vomiting
evaluate and note other abdominal factors such as organ size,
 presence of a mass, gastric distention, and altered bowel sounds.
When dealing with patients presenting with potential GI disor-
Rectal examinations should always be performed to examine
ders, it is imperative to distinguish regurgitation from vomiting.
Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
195
Table 8.1.1  Clinical signs of gastrointestinal disease
 in the vomitus that is bright red in appearance is indicative of
very recent or active hemorrhage.
Gastrointestinal
Definition of Gl sign
sign
Defecation
Anorexia
Loss of appetite/not interested in eating
 In addition to vomiting, diarrhea is one of the most common
Borborygmus
Rumbling sound in the gut, caused by
 reasons owners bring their pets to the veterinary hospital.
moving gas-fluid interface, from stomach
 Diarrhea is the passage of feces containing an excessive amount
through intestines
of water, thus resulting in an abnormal increase in stool liquidity
Constipation
Dry, hard feces; difficulty and straining to
and weight. Diarrhea best correlates with an increase in stool
defecate
weight; stool weights above normal for the species per day gener-
Diarrhea
 Passage of feces containing excessive
ally indicates diarrhea. This is mainly due to excess water, which
amount of water, increasing daily fecal
normally makes up 60-85% of fecal matter. In this way, true
weight
diarrhea is distinguished from diseases that cause only an increase
Dyschezia
 Difficulty or painful passing of feces
in the number of bowel movements (hyperdefecation) or incon-
Dysphagia
 Difficult or painful swallowing
tinence (involuntary loss of bowel contents). Some patients may
have an increase in the frequency of defecation or may exhibit an
Flatulence
 Presence of large amounts of intestinal
increased urgency to defecate. A pet owner may describe this as
air/gas, leading to distention of organs
very loose stools that appear to suddenly affect the pet or “come
Hematemesis
Vomiting of digested and/or fresh blood
Jo bupusiapun qanonol e ua o puodu si l b uo
Hematochezia
Bright red blood in feces
the owner's definition of diarrhea as it may not be the same as the
health-care team's definition. Specifc history-taking questions
Melena
Black, tarry stools as a result of digested
when investigating diarrhea can be found in Table 8.1.2.
blood 
Diarrhea is the trademark sign of intestinal dysfunction. It is
Obstipation
Intractable constipation, typically with
important for health-care team members to determine acute
progressive enlargement and hardening of
the feces
from chronic problems when assessing animals with diarrhea.
 Acute diarrhea is typically the result of diet, parasites, or infec-
Polyphagia
Excessive eating or ingestion of food
tious disease (e.g., parvovirus, coronavirus). Diarrhea is consid-
Ptyalism
Excessive salivation
 ered chronic when it has not responded to conventional therapy
Regurgitation
Passive, upward movement of ingested
within a 2- to 3-week time frame. All patients with chronic
material from the esophagus
diarrhea should be checked for parasites with multiple fecal flota-
tion tests looking for nematodes, Giardia, and Tritrichomonas.
Tenesmus
Ineffective and painful straining to pass
stool
Determination of the origination of the diarrhea, small intes-
tine (SI) or large intestine (LI), should be made. Increased fre-
 quency of defecation resulting in larger than normal amounts of
soft to watery stool is often seen in small bowel diarrhea. Weight
loss usually indicates small bowel disease, although severe large
Regurgitation refers to the passive, retrograde movement of
bowel diseases such as malignancy, histoplasmosis, and pythiosis
ingested material to a level above the upper esophageal sphinc-
may result in weight loss. Failure to lose weight or body condi-
ter. Typically, regurgitation happens before the ingested material
tion is typically indicative of large bowel disease. Animals with
reaches the stomach and is not an active process. Vomiting is the
Sis a   i sr aaS  ss ni
forceful discharge of ingested material from the stomach and
 associated with colonic involvement such as fecal mucus, marked
sometimes proximal small intestines. Vomiting involves three
tenesmus, and hematochezia.
stages: nausea, retching, and, subsequently, vomiting. Vomiting
Fresh blood (bright red in color) in the stool or evidence that
is a clinical sign—not a diagnosis.
the pet is straining to defecate is indicative of a large bowel dis-
Expectoration refers to the expulsion of material from the
order. Hematochezia (bright-red blood) typically originates in
respiratory tract and is generally associated with coughing.
the anus, rectum, or descending colon. Melena is described as
However, careful history taking is important as some dogs that
coal tar black stools that result from digested blood. Melena may
cough and gag excessively may stimulate themselves to vomit.
 originate from the pharynx, lungs (coughed up and swallowed),
 Hematemesis refers to vomiting with the presence of blood in
 esophagus, stomach, or upper Sl. Tarry stools are the result of
the vomitus and may involve the expulsion of digested blood
the bacterial breakdown of hemoglobin.
(commonly referred to as “coffee grounds") or fresh blood.
 Dyschezia is difficult and/or painful defecation, while tenes-
 Digested blood is indicative of erosions or ulcerations along the
ai ns pnd 1e qsd o si s
GI tract. Fresh blood can be altered in the stomach to the brown
with no effect. Dyschezia and tenesmus are most often associated
or black coffee ground appearance in a matter of minutes. Blood
with large bowel disorders. Owners may mistake tenesmus with
196
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 8.1.2 History-taking questions for patients presenting with diarrhea
1 Was the onset recent?
Was the onset acute?
3.
Any other animals at home? If yes, are others showing signs of diarrhea?
4.
Has the patient been to areas where there are large numbers of other animals? obedience, dog parks, pet stores, pet shows, and
$o on?
 5. Has there been access to drinking from a pond or streams?
What is the environment like where the pet spends its time?
7.
 What is the breed? Typical temperament of the pet?
8.
 Did the patient get into/ingest any of the following: tash, toxins, other pet foods, foods that have spoiled, and so on?
9. 
 Have any drugs been prescribed or administered recently that could result in diarrhea, for example, antibiotics?
10.
Have there been any changes in the pet's environment that may be stressful to the pet? New pet, change in family dynamics,
 alteration in home environment, boarding, day care, and so on.
11.
Has there been any change in diet?
Dry to can?
Raw food?
Treats?
People foods? Added? Part of diet?
12.
 Describe the diarrmea.
13.
What is the size and volume of the feces?
14.
 Consistency of the stool? Watery? Soft, formed?
15.
Are there any normal stools passed during the day?
16.
 Frequency of stools?
17.
Blood or mucus seen?
18.
Timing? Increased defecation? Unable to make it outside? Increased during nighttime? Urgency?
19.
If felinedoes the cat use litter box? Does it defecate near the box or away from the litter box?
20. 
 Other symptoms present? Lethargy, fever, vomiting?
constipation, so it is important to question the owner further to
(CNS) control an individual's hunger, satiety, and eating behav-
determine which clinical sign truly is manifesting in their pet.
ior. However, there are many factors that control the function
 Constipation is the infrequent and difficult evacuation of feces.
of the CNS regions. Polyphagia can be primary or secondary.
Obstipation is intractable constipation.
Primary polyphagia would be indicative of a CNS abnormality.
The cause of fecal incontinence or the inability to control
Secondary polyphagia is characterized by a systemic problem
defecation is typically a neuromuscular disease such as cauda
affecting the CNS. Secondary polyphagia is more common and
equina syndrome or lumbosacral stenosis. A partial rectal obstruc-
typically is concurrent with clinical signs ofthe underlying disease.
tion may also result in fecal incontinence.?
Weight loss may or may not be a sign of GI disease. Weight
loss can be attributed to one or a combination of many different
etiologies (see Table 8.1.3). If non-GI factors are present in a
Bowel auscultation
 patient with weight loss, the detection of the underlying disease
Borborygmus is described as a rumbling sound in the gut. The
pns sy a o de s pn pu ss
cause is a moving gas-fluid interface in the gut, and the sounds
be provided By using a muscle condition scoring system, the
originate in the stomach. Borborygmi commonly are heard in
health-care team will also be able to evaluate whether any weight
the dog and are very rarely heard in cats. Flatulence refers to the
 loss has caused a secondary muscle wasting.
excessive buildup of gas in the GI tract and oftentimes is associ-
 If no other disease process is discovered, then an approach
ated with eructation, borborygmus, or flatus. Eructation is
to determining the weight loss should begin with the deter-
known as the expulsion of gas from the stomach, whereas flatus
mination of when the weight loss began and the patient's
is the anal passage of intestinal gas.4
weight prior to the start of the weight loss. Almost any disease
can result in weight loss. If the patient exhibits a good appetite
Food consumption and caloric intake
while concurrently losing weight, then the rule-outs include
maldigestion, malabsorption, excessive utilization of calories
The consumption of food exceeding normal caloric intake is
(e.g., hyperthyroidism, lactation), or excessive loss of calories
known as polyphagia. Regions of the central nervous system
(e.g., diabetes mellitus). The accurate history and complete
Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
197
Table 8.1.3 Etiology of weight loss
physical examination can be crucial when determining the cause
of weight loss.
Food
Anorexia, which is the lack or loss of appetite for food, is
Quantity
  Not enough—multiple animals
another clinical sign that causes pet owners to frequently visit
Quality
the veterinary hospital. Hyporexia may actually be a more accu-
rate term to use as this is a reduction of appetite versus a com-
Poor
 Low caloric density
plete loss of appetite; furthermore, the differentiation of not
Inedible
wanting to eat as opposed to not being able to eat needs to be
made. There are a number of diseases that may result in the
Anorexia
 Inflammatory disease
patient losing the ability to eat, such as severe dental disease, a
foreign body in the mouth or pharyngeal area, and masticatory
 Alimentary tract disease
muscle myositis.6
Metabolic disease
Cachexia differs from anorexia in that cachexia is described
Central nervous system disease
 as weight loss, loss of muscle mass, and anorexia in a patient.
Cachexia
 It is important to note that cachexia is not caused simply
Psychological/behavioral disord ers
 by inadequate nutrient intake and that it differs from starvation
Dysphagia
 o   ssd d  
Oral pain
biochemical features that differentiate cachexia-induced mal-
 Oral mass
nutrition from starvation-induced malnutrition. First, inflam-
 Oral trauma
mation is a feature of cachexia. Cachexia causes marked
Neuromuscular disease
activation of the inflammatory cascade, characterized by an
 acute phase inflammatory response and an excessive production
Regurgitation/vomiting
of proinflammatory cytokines. Second, malnutrition from
Maldigestive disease
 cachexia is associated with a rise in resting energy expenditure,
 Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
which is increased secondary to altered protein, fat, and carbo-
Malabsorptive disease
hydrate metabolism. A marked loss of body muscle and adipose
· Small intestinal disease
tissue occurs and an insulin-resistant state may develop in
Organ failure
cachectic patients. Although the clinical appearance of the
Cardiac failure
patient may be similar to starvation, activation of the inflamma-
Hepatic failure
tory cascade and increased energy expenditure are not com-
Renal failure
 monly equated with starvation.7 Cachexia should be considered
Adrenal failure
for any pet that exhibits marked weight loss, severe muscle loss,
 and decreased appetite with a chronic inflammatory process or
Cachexia
Cancer
cancer.
Cardiac
Excessive utilization of calories
Conclusion
Lactation
Pregnancy
It has been established that GI problems are one of the most
Working
        s
 Cold environment 
forming a complete and accurate history and physical examina-
Fever/inflammation
 tion are crucial to the proper diagnosis and subsequent treatment
 Increased catabolism
 of the GI patient, as is the comprehension of the numerous signs
Hyperthyroidism
that pets experience when faced with a GI issue.
Increased loss of nutrients
 Diabetes mellitus
 Protein-losing neuropathy
SECTION 2 SELECTED
 Protein-losing enteropathy
DIAGNOSTICS IN
Neuromuscular disease
GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE
Lower motor neuron disease
Source: Compiled from Willard MD. Clinical Manifestations of gastrointestinal
It has already been established that a complete history and
disease. In: Small Animal Internal Medicine, 4th edition, pp. 351-373. St.
physical examination should be performed on each patient pre-
Louis, M0: Mosby; 2009; Medinger TL. Clinical evaluation of patients with
 senting with clinical signs of GI disease. Beyond the history and
chronic weight loss. In: Small Animal Gastroenteroiogy, ed. JM Steiner,
pp. 133-136. Germany: Schlutersche; 2008.
physical examination, a number of diagnostic evaluations may
be indicated.
198
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Laboratory evaluation
Metabolic alkalosis in patients with GI signs is not invariably
associated with outflow obstruction and has been encountered in
Clinical pathology testing
 dogs with parvovirus enteritis and acute pancreatitis. Diseases
characterized by acid hypersecretion, such as gastrinoma, may also
 In order to differentiate primary GI disease from non-GI disease,
be associated with metabolic alkalosis and aciduria. Venous blood
clinicopathological testing is utilized on patients presenting to
gases and plasma osmolality are often determined in animals sus-
the hospital with any type of GI sign. Clinicopathological testing
 pected of ethylene glycol ingestion, with the findings of metabolic
will also help to determine the metabolic consequences of GI
acidosis and a high osmolal gap (calculated by subtracting calcu-
disease.
lated from measured osmolality) supportive of ingestion.
 Prior to beginning any therapy, baseline blood and urine
Elevated BUN without the elevation of creatinine may indi-
samples should be obtained from the patient.' In sick patients,
cate gastric bleeding. Low albumin levels may be found in any
the swift evaluation of packed cell volume (PCV), total solids
dog with protein-losing gastroenteropathy or pythiosis, and dogs
(TS), blood glucose, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), urine specifc
or cats with gastric neoplasia. Also of note, elevated globulin
 gravity, glucose, ketones and protein, and plasma concentrations
concentrations have been observed in basenji gastroenteropathy,
 of sodium and potassium help to detect life-threatening disease,
 Pythium infection, and gastric plasmacytoma. Elevations in
such as renal failure and hypoadrenocorticism. The results of
creatinine, urea, calcium, potassium, glucose, liver enzymes,
this initial evaluation should serve as a guide to initial manage-
bilirubin, cholesterol, triglycerides, and globulin and decreases
ment pending more definitive testing.
 in sodium, calcium, urea, or albumin often predict non-GI causes
of vomiting.
 Coagulation testing is indicated in patients with melena or
Complete blood count
hematemesis to detect underlying coagulopathies and in those
Abnormalities in the complete blood count (CBC) are uncom-
with acute abdomen to detect disseminated intravascular coagu-
mon when dealing with primary gastric disease. Hemoconcen-
lation (DIC).
tration as a consequence of dehydration or shock typically is
 Infectious diseases associated with vomiting and diarrhea may
seen in conditions such as GDV, gastric ulceration, or gastric 
require fecal enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
obstruction. In dogs with hemorrhagic gastroenteritis, a hema-
testing for diagnosis to detect Giardia, parvovirus, or serologic
tocrit level greater than 55% is seen in conjunction with normal
testing for feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and feline immunodefi-
or decreased protein concentrations. Anemia, erythrocyte
cency virus (FIV).
 siop u psd aq  siso p ss
chronic gastric bleeding. Basophilic stippling of red cells is sug-
Urinalysis
 gestive of lead toxicity.
Urine should be evaluated for specific gravity, pH, glucose, casts,
Chemistries
crystals, and bacteria. A complete urinalysis is important. For
example, discovering white cell casts in the microscopic evalua-
 Biochemical abnormalities in primary GI disease are mainly
tion of the urine may aid in the diagnosis of pyelonephritis which
restricted to alterations in electrolytes and acid-base balance,
 can be responsible for GI clinical signs such as vomiting.
prerenal increases in creatinine and BUN, and occasionally
Additional clinical pathology tests are required to detect
hypoproteinemia. Vomiting of gastric and intestinal contents
hypoadrenocorticism (adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH]
typically results in the loss of chloride, potassium, sodium, and
s   s  s
bicarbonate-containing fluid. Dehydration is often accompanied
bile acids), hyperthyroidism in cats (T4), pancreatitis (amylase
by hypochloremia, hypokalemia, and hyponatremia.12
and lipase, pancreas-specifc, if possible), and intestinal disease
 Through the determination of acid-base status by measure-
(serum cobalamin and folate).
ment of total CO or venous blood gas analysis, the ability to
detect the presence of metabolic acidosis or alkalosis is enabled.
Microscopic fecal evaluation
Metabolic acidosis is generally more common than metabolic
alkalosis in dogs with GI disease.? When the gastric outflow tract
Fecal examination is an important part of the investigation of GI
or proximal duodenum is obstructed, the loss of chloride may
u r jo  e  pnasd aq a sn gs
exceed that of bicarbonate, thus resulting in hypochloremia,
buffered formalin mixed with an equal quantity of feces. Com-
hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis. Metabolic alkalosis is
mercial kits are also available and these kits use polyvinyl alcohol
enhanced by elevated HCO;  conservation due to volume and
as the preservative, which allows for the feces to be preserved
 potassium and chloride depletion. The end result is a preferential
for weeks to months.
conservation of volume at the expense of the extracellular pH.
 The renal reabsorption of almost all filtered bicarbonate and the
Direct fecal smear
  s     os g sa
an acid urine pH despite an extracellular alkalemia ("paradoxical
   o    s m 
aciduria")
protozoal trophozoite forms (e.g., strongyloides, giardia). The
Chapter 8  Gastrointestinal
199
addition of Lugol's iodine will kill the parasites and stain some
Bacteriologic examination
of the internal structures, which may aid in identification.
Routine culture
Fecal cytology
 It is not considered worthwhile to attempt to grow all the bacte-
The staining of fecal smears for undigested starch granules
ria from a fecal sample; however, the targeted identification of
(Lugol's iodine), fat globules (Sudan stain), and muscle fbers
 potential pathogens may be helpful. In animals with hemor-
(Wright's or Dif-Quik stain) may be indicative of malabsorption
rhagic diarrhea, pyrexia, an inflammatory leukogram, or neu-
but overall is nonspecific. Campylobacteriosis should be consid-
 trophils on rectal cytology, culturing the patient feces may be
ered when short, curved, gram-negative rods are seen. Entero-
 considered. The importance of a positive result should always
toxin production by Clostridium perfringens is a potential cause 
be interpreted in light of the clinical history because potential
of diarrhea and fungal elements (e.g., histoplasmosis) and sporu-
 pathogens may be present in clinically healthy animals. Addi-
lating clostridia may be seen in fecal cytology smears, but the
tionally, the fecal flora does not necessarily reflect the GI flora
significance is uncertain. The presence of a large number of
 and cannot be used to diagnose small intestinal bacterial over-
  ( h d a  ) sosa 
growth (SIBO). Feces can be cultured for fungi, such as Histo-
Quik-stained smears may be more significant (a positive fecal
plasma capsulatum, but fungal cultures are considered to be of
enterotoxin ELISA assay or reverse passive latex agglutination is
questionable value.
likely to be more significant).
When compared to routine fecal flotations, the ELISA test for
Rectal cytology
Microplate Assay, Meridian Diagnostics, Inc., and ProSpecT?
 Cryptosporidium Microplate Assay, Remel Inc.) in feces appears
When the rectal examination is completed, the gloved fnger
to be more sensitive.
manually abrades the rectal mucosa; the material on the glove is
When investigating Tritrichomonas foetus in feline feces, there
rolled onto a microscope slide and the smear stained. Although
are culture techniques (InPouch? TF, BioMed Diagnostics) and
neutrophils are seldom seen, if found, they are indicative of large
 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests. The culture technique is
intestinal disease, and an increased number of neutrophils may
easily done in the veterinary hospital and is reportedly sensitive
be suggestive of a bacterial problem, indicating the possible need
and specific.
for fecal culture. Fungal elements may also be identifed (e.g.
histoplasmosis). The test is fast and simple, but in all cases, con-
Molecular fingerprinting
frmatory tests are indicated.
 It is important to note that many intestinal bacteria are uncultur-
able and can only be identifed by comparative gene sequencing
Fecal flotation concentration
 of the bacterial 16S rRNA.3 This method can identify a single
 A fecal flotation concentration test is indicated in every pet
species or it can look at the pattern of the flora in both duodenal
presenting with GI signs. If parasitism is not the main cause of
fluid and feces.
the presenting sign, it is highly likely to cause additional prob-
lems in pets with GI signs. Concentrated salt or sugar solutions
Virologic examination
are the typical solutions used in fecal fotation tests. Correctly
formulated concentrated salt solutions are believed to be supe-
Diarrhea of a viral nature is usually acute and self-limiting and
rior to sugar solutions. The centrifugation concentration method
does not require a positive diagnosis. Electron microscopy can
is superior to the simple flotation method to detect low levels of
be used to identify the characteristic viral particles of rotavirus,
ova in a sample. When attempting to detect nematode ova and
coronavirus, and parvovirus. Fecal ELISA tests for parvovirus
Giardia cysts, a zinc sulfate solution should be used, resulting in
are also available and will be discussed further in this section. A
a more sensitive fecal exam. Examination of three samples by
commercially available ELISA can be used to detect Giardia
zinc sulfate flotation enhances detection of Giardia oocysts.
 antigen in feces, although PCR is likely to be more sensitive.14
 If negative, follow-up fecal evaluations should be performed
in suspect cases as some parasites intermittently shed small
Occult blood
numbers of ova or cysts.
This test is used to search for intestinal bleeding before melena
is seen. Unfortunately, it tests nonspecifcally for any hemo-
Fecal sedimentation
globin and is very sensitive, reacting with any dietary meat as
Fecal sedimentation detects fluke ova missed by other tech-
well as with patient blood. Therefore, the patient must be fed a
niques, especially the ova of Eurytrema spp., Platynosomum spp.
 meat-free diet for at least 72h for a positive result to have any
Amphimerus spp., and Heterobiltharzia. For a sedimentation test,
 significance. The sensitivity of different techniques used in this
 the feces is suspended in water, centrifuged, and the sediment is
analysis varies, thus making it very dificult to compare results
examined.
with any accuracy. Blood is not distributed homogenously
200
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
throughout the feces and a negative result could occur from a
identifying mural masses and partial obstructions and rarely
sampling error, especially in pets suffering from a lower intesti-
provide more information than good quality survey flms.
nal tract problem. Tests using guaiac reagents have been found
Enteroclysis (fluoroscopic contrast) provides additional infor-
to be more specifc and thus are preferred over other reagents.
mation, but this type of examination is technically demanding
and has not truly been adopted in the veterinary community.
Although contrast studies allow assessment of the intestinal
Alpha1-protease inhibitor
transit rate, this does not correlate closely to movement of
 ingesta assessed by scintigraphy. Additionally, dysmotility may
This test assays the presence in feces of alpha,-protease inhibitor
occur secondary to other causes, and studies provide limited
(c,-Pl), a naturally occurring endogenous serum protein that is
resistant to bacterial degradation if lost into the intestine.° In
etiologic information. Administration of barium may delay
s s  a e s ai  r
endoscopy for at least 24 h. If perforation is suspected, an iodine-
based contrast should be used.
are examined. The assay is only valid if there is no GI bleeding.
 Samples must be collected by voluntary evacuation since abra-
sion of the colonic wall during digital evacuation is enough to
Barium-impregnated polyethylene spheres
liberate C,-Pl. The test is of value for the diagnosis of protein-
losing enteropathy (PLE), correlating with testing by fecal
Barium-impregnated polyethylene spheres (BIPS) are solid-
radioactive chromium-labeled albumin excretion. It is likely a
phase radiopaque markers that are dispensed in capsule form to
 more sensitive marker of early disease than measuring serum
provide information on gastric emptying, intestinal transit, and
albumin.6-10
obstructive disorders. Given that the transit time of BIPS is
highly variable, their use for transit studies is limited. They may
be most helpful in the detection of partial obstructions.3.12
Imaging
 Historically, imaging of the intestinal tract has been limited
Ultrasonography
to plain and contrast radiographs. This has been dramatically
Ultrasonography may be performed in conjunction with initial
altered by the use of ultrasound and endoscopy. Scintigraphy.
 survey radiographs, although certain diagnosticians may opt to
 computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging
only use ultrasonography.
(MRI) scanning are rapidly being adopted, and “virtual endos-
The use of ultrasound may be indicated in animals with the
copy" by helical CT is becoming available.
following clinical signs: vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal effusion,
acute abdominal pain, anorexia of unknown origin, weight loss,
Plain radiography
and when an abdominal mass is palpated or suspected. Ultra-
During physical examination, there may be some structures that
 pancreatitis, infltrative disease, mesenteric lymphadenopathy,
are not easily accessible to palpation and some abnormalities
motility disorders, and intussusceptions that are difficult to
may not be palpable; therefore, imaging may be indicated as a
appreciate with radiography. In addition, effusions enhance the
 diagnostic tool. Survey or plain radiographs are most useful in
ultrasonographic contrast, as opposed to radiographs where
 the investigation of diarrhea associated with vomiting, abdomi-
effusions mask the details of the viscera. Another advantage of
nal pain, and palpable abnormalities. Diagnostic results are
improved if both lateral views are taken, although a single lateral
formed in real time with guidance from the ultrasound, thus
view may be adequate if combined with ultrasonography. The
value of plain radiographs in malabsorption is reportedly
Transabdominal ultrasound examination of the GI tract is
minimal, particularly if ascites is present, as the majority of detail
now a routine part of the investigation of GI disease, especially
is obscured by fluid. Generally, the aim is the detection of (acute)
in suspected cases of pancreatitis. A conventional abdominal
surgical disease (e.g., foreign bodies, free gas, displacement,
examination of the GI tract can image peristalsis, ileus, lumenal
masses, obstructions), decreased serosal detail, and ileus. Ileus
contents, layering of the bowel wall, and it can measure SI wall
 is an abnormal dilatation of an immotile segment of intestine,
thickness. It has excellent sensitivity for the detection of masses,
and the differential diagnosis depends on whether it is localized
radiolucent foreign bodies, lesions such as intussusceptions, and
 or generalized and whether an accumulation of gas or fuid is
intestinal  wall thickening and lymphadenopathy in chronic
present. Interpretation should be cautious ifthe patient hasbeen
inflammatory, lymphatic, and neoplastic enteropathies. Endo-
scopic ultrasound will allow the mucosal wall and adjacent
viscera, such as the pancreas, to be examined in more detail.
Intussusceptions are usually recognized in the transverse
Follow-through examinations
plane as multiple concentric rings and longitudinally as a thick,
GI studies using microfne barium suspensions can recognize
multilayered segment. Values for normal SI wall thickness have
ulcers and irregular mucosal detail. They may confrm the pres-
been reported for dogs and cats; thickness decreases from proxi-
ence of radiolucent foreign bodies but are of limited use in
 mal (5-6 mm) to distal (4-5 mm) but depends on body size, with
Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
201
the thickest being observed in the largest dogs. Disturbance
starch, triglyceride, and vitamin A) are no longer performed
of the normal fve-layered sonographic appearance (mucosal
because of a lack of sensitivity and specificity. The D-xylose test
surface, mucosa, submucosa, muscularis, serosa) is typical of 
 has also been abandoned due to its being nondiscriminatory in
neoplasia, while wall thickening can also result from other infl-
cats and its insensitivy in dogs. The differential absorption of two
trative disorders and edema. Ultrasound-guided fine needle
sugars (xylose/3-O-methyl-D-glucose) eliminates nonmucosal
aspiration for cytological examination is possible.
effects that blight other tests.
Endoscopy
Conclusion
Endoscopy is very commonly performed and is a relatively
The diagnostic tests for the GI tract section have provided a basic
simple and a minimally invasive means of examination. Endos-
copy allows for the collection of multiple tissue samples without
the GI signs outlined earlier. The next section will take a look at
actual disease conditions, clinical signs, treatment, and nursing
 an emerging technology, but currently, flexible endoscopy is the
care and, where applicable, will outline further diagnostic tests.
standard method. Optimal, well-maintained equipment and
operator experience are more important than pharmacological
manipulation in achieving successful small intestinal intubation.
SECTION 3 GASTROINTESTINAL
Foreign bodies below a certain size can be visualized and
DISEASE
removed endoscopically. The proximal SI is viewed during gas-
troduodenoscopy, and the distal SI can be sampled by passing
the endoscope retrograde through the ileocolic valve. Truly, only
Oral disease
the mid-jejunum cannot be examined adequately by routine
endoscopy. This limitation may not be signifcant given that
Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex
most cases of malabsorption involve diffuse disease. Enteroscopy
Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex (FEGC) is a common
uses a much longer, thinner endoscope with or without an over-
syndrome in cats that includes occurrence of a linear eosi-
sleeve and/or advancement balloons and can allow examination
nophilic granuloma, an eosinophilic plaque, or an eosinophilic
of most of the jejunum, as does a videoendoscopic capsule that
ulcer (indolent ulcer, rodent ulcer).' FEGC is the common ter-
passes from mouth to anus and transmits images by telemetry.
minology for this syndrome, although a definitive relationship
The SMART capsule allows collection of physiological data (pH,
 between the three lesions has not been determined. Typically,
pressure) by telemetry but does not provide images.'5 Abnormal.
 oral lesions consist of a linear granuloma or an eosinophilic ulcer
fndings on gross endoscopic examination include mucosal
 and intraoral lesions present as one or more defned, frm, raised
granularity and friability, erosions and ulcers, retained food,
 nodules. It is estimated that 80% of eosinophilic granulomas
mass lesions, and hyperemia/erythema. However, none of these
occur on the maxillary lips.
characteristics is pathognomonic for a particular disease condi-
The etiology of this complex remains unknown, although
tion, and fndings frequently do not correlate with histopatho-
associations have been determined with bacterial and viral infec-
logic results. A milky white exudate or dilated lymphatics are
tions and hypersensitivity and immune-mediated disorders.
suggestive of lymphangiectasia, and the presence of intraluminal
 parasites may be diagnostic in some cases.
Clinical signs
Cats typically present with increased salivation and changes in
Special tests
eating behaviors. Oral examination may reveal lesions on the
lips, chin, or intraoral structures, typically distinct and notably
 In cases of malabsorption, intestinal biopsy is usually necessary
 different from inflammatory lesions associated with gingivitis,
 to obtain a definitive diagnosis. However, exocrine pancreatic
periodontal inflammation, or stomatitis.
insuffciency (EPI) should be ruled out before biopsy because
signs of malabsorption are nonspecific and do not permit dif-
Diagnostics
ferentiation of cause. Thus, serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity
(TLI) measurement must be performed in all cases. It is well
y 'shuuy ienuo pue Aoisy uo paseq Aensn si sisou
documented that biopsies from up to 50% of patients are con-
CBC usually shows an eosinophilia and, although characteristic
sidered normal by light microscopy. Therefore, usually before
of this disease, should be differentiated from other causes of
biopsy, a number of indirect tests are performed to assess GI
eosinophilia. Biopsy with histopathology may be indicated to
damage, permeability, and dysfunction.
identify the lesions and to rule out oral neoplasm.
Treatment and patient care
Tests of intestinal absorption
Any underlying allergies should be identifed and controlled.
Aftempts to assess intestinal function by measuring the medi-
Lesions typically resolve in cats with underlying allergies
ated absorption of numerous substrates (e.g., lactose, glucose,
that are successfully managed. Corticosteroid therapy, either
202
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
intralesional, oral, or systemic, administered until the lesions
seems interested in food but is reluctant to eat or may only eat
resolve, is the standard mode of treatment. Significant improve-
moistened or softer foods. As the lesions become more severe,
ment should be noted in 2-4 weeks; however, it may take several
cats typically present with excessive salivation, halitosis, extreme
more weeks for the lesions to completely resolve.? In severe cases
changes in eating behavior, anorexia, and weight loss. Behavior
involving coalescing lesions on the tongue or palates, aggressive
changes including decreased activity and reluctance to groom
medical intervention may be necessary. Systemic antibiotic
 are commonly noted.
treatment may be indicated to control secondary bacterial infec-
Clinical examination should begin with an examination of the
tions in ulcerated lesions, and surgical resection may be indi-
regional lymph nodes and external head and facial tissues. Oral
cated for unresponsive lesions. Clients should be counseled that
examination can be difficult as affected cats may demonstrate
 lesions take several weeks to resolve, may recur, and ongoing
extreme aversion to any type of mouth manipulation and severe
control of any hypersensitivities (flea bite, food sensitivity, etc.)
 pain on opening the mouth. Initially, gentle retraction of the lips
 is important.
while keeping the cat's mouth closed should be performed. If
possible, the mouth is then carefully opened to examine
Anaigesia considerations
the gingival tissues and the oral mucosa. In severe cases, the
Cats with intraoral lesions may be painful and have difficulty
oral tissues may be prolifc, ulcerated, and bleed easily, and a
eating or swallowing. Supportive care and feeding moist foods
complete oral examination may require sedation or general
are helpful in recovery, administration of a topical chlorhexidine
anesthesia.
 gel may provide some relief. Untreated, unresolved, or recurring
 eosinophilic ulcers may become disfiguring but are typicaly not
Diagnostics
 pruritic or painful.
The history and clinical signs accompanied by the specific oral
pathology support a diagnosis of GSPC. Additional laboratory
Prognosis
testing that should be performed to evaluate and identify con-
Prognosis is variable. Lesions associated with hypersensitivity as
tributing or underlying conditions includes a CBC, biochemical
 an underlying cause are usually well managed with successful
profle, urinalysis, and serologic testing for FeLV and FIV. A
allergy management. When no associated cause is determined,
complete dental examination including dental radiographs
the lesions are more apt to recur; long-term therapy may be
should be performed to identify any potential causes/contributors
required, and these lesions have a less favorable prognosis.
such as periodontal disease, retained roots and tooth resorption.
 Biopsies of oral lesions should be obtained and submitted for
Feline gingivitis-stomatitis-pharyngitis
histopathology.
complex
Treatment and patient care
This painful oral disease is often seen in cats with clinical signs
Therapeutic options are targeted at meticulous plaque control
of inflammation of the oral tissues, which may be generalized or
and management of the inflammatory and immunologic
localized to specific areas such as the glossopalatine mucosa and
responses. The degree of treatment will depend on the severity of
fauces. Inflammation is often accompanied by ulceration and
the disease, the ability of the client to apply oral homecare medi-
proliferation of the oral mucosa, and histopathologically dense
cations, and the tolerance of the patient to oral manipulations.
 infltrations of lymphocytes and plasma cells are present. The
cause of this disease remains unknown; however, based on the
progression of processes including periodontal management,
cellular infltrate and tissue involvement, this disease is referred
meticulous plaque control, antibiotic, anti-infammatory and
 to by a variety of names including feline gingivitis-stomatitis-
analgesic administration, and tooth extraction. There is a lack of
pharyngitis complex (GSPC), lymphoplasmacytic gingivitis-
consensus on primary treatment for this disease and a more con-
stomatitis (LPGS), gingivostomatitis (GS), chronic ulcerative
 paradental stomatitis (CUPS), and similar variations.
lars and molars is emerging as the preferred treatment to provide
The degree of inflammation is variable and may involve the
the best long-term results. Careful extraction, including com-
gingiva, buccal mucosa, fauces, and pharyngeal areas. A specifc
plete root removal (which eliminates the plaque-retentive sur-
etiology remains unknown and is most likely multifactorial
faces), decreases the inflammatory response.
with an immune-mediated component resulting in an excessive
 If the client is unwilling to proceed with extractions, perio-
inflammatory response. Research studies evaluating associations
dontal therapy should be provided, including removal of
with feline viruses, bartonella, periodontal disease, and tooth
supra- and subgingival plaque and calculus deposits, treatment/
resorptive lesions have found positive associations but no direct
extraction of compromised teeth, topical and systemic antimi-
correlations.
control to control oral inflammation. Antibiotics are adminis-
Clinical signs
tered for 4-6 weeks, often in conjunction with corticosteroids
 Clinical signs vary and are typicaly progressive with the severity
and analgesics to reduce and manage the inflammation and pain.
of the inflammatory changes. Clients may notice that their cat
Response to more conservative medical management has been
Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
203
poor and is reported to lose effectiveness over time. In addition,
Clinical signs
client compliance is often poor as it is difficult for clients to
provide meticulous plaque control to their cats.
Often, oral tumors are unnoticed by the pet owner until an
 advanced stage of development is reached Clinical signs in dogs
Treatment recommendation should be made based on the
and cats with oral tumors range from no obvious symptoms to
current pathology laboratory results, patient presentation, and
client commitment. This disease can be diffcult to manage
halitosis, changes in eating behavior, salivation or bleeding, or a
noticeable growth observed by the pet owner. General physical
and a progression of therapeutic options may be necessary.
examination may reveal nasal congestion, asymmetrical facial
Therapy can be frustrating for the health-care team, the client,
 and the patient, and successful treatment may be control of
swelling, necrotic odor, regional lymph node enlargement,
the clinical signs that allows the cat to have an acceptable
weight loss or muscle atrophy, and an unthrifty appearance.
quality of life. Client support includes training on the applica-
tion of oral and topical medications as well as plaque control
Diagnostics
techniques.
A CBC, biochemical profle, and urinalysis should be performed
 Immediate inflammation and pain support should be pro-
to evaluate the patient's overall health status, and in feline
vided in severe cases where the patient is not eating. In these
patients, retrovirus tests are recommended to accurately assess
cases, most cats will require immunosuppressive doses of gluco-
the prognosis. A definitive oral examination under anesthesia is
corticoids to decrease the inflammation and to provide sufficient
 recommended to determine the exact location, physical appear-
pain reduction. Offering soft food or syringe feeding may be
ance, tooth mobility, tongue or bony structure involvement, and
necessary, and in severe cases, enteral nutrition may be required
 presence of any other abnormal oral conditions.
to maintain adequate energy intake and balanced nutrition.
 Diagnostic imaging, biopsy with histopathology, and clinical
staging of oral tumors are important in selecting the appropriate
Prognosis
treatment protocol and in determining the prognosis. The
 GSPC is a difficult disease to manage with a guarded prognosis.
tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) system is a systematic approach
Clients should be advised of the treatment options, associated
recommended for an accurate assessment. The TNM involves
response rates, and the potential need for more aggressive, long-
careful evaluation of the mass, regional lymph nodes, and distant
term therapy.
metastasis. The primary tool for determining the type and nature
of an oral tumor is incisional biopsy with histopathology and is
indicated for all oral masses and any suspicious oral lesions.
Neoplasms of the oral cavity
needle aspirates of oral masses are often contaminated with
Oral neoplasia accounts for approximately 6% of all canine
inflammatory cells and cellular debris and are therefore incon-
tumors and about 3% of all feline tumors. These tumors may
clusive. Fine needl biopsy with cytology should be performed
arise from any region of the mouth and include nonodontogenic
 on regional lymph nodes regardless of size. Excisional biopsy
and odontogenic tumor types. The most common nonodon-
of small oral masses and regional lymph nodes may also be
togenic tumor types include malignant melanoma, squamous
indicated.
 cell carcinoma, and fbrosarcoma. Odontogenic tumors are typi-
Diagnostic imaging includes intraoral dental radiographs and
cally rare and include epulides (acanthomatous ameloblasto-
 extraoral skull radiographs. These radiographs help identify the
mas), fbromas, and odontomas.
extent of the tumor and the involvement of tooth and bony
 Malignant melanoma is the most common type of oral tumor
structures. Thoracic and abdominal radiographs should be taken
in dogs and occurs more commonly in old, male, small breed.
 to determine if metastasis has occurred. Additional imaging
dogs. These tumors grow rapidly, are invasive, and have a high
 including ultrasound, CT, or MRI may be necessary to deter-
 rate of metastasis. Malignant melanomas are rare in cats and
mine the extent of involvement of soft tissues, lymph nodes, and
carry a poor prognosis in both species.
intranasal and periorbital structures.
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common oral tumor in
cats and the second most common oral tumor in dogs. Squa-
 mous cell carcinoma often originates on the gingiva and typically
Treatment and patient care
presents as a red, ulcerative, cauliflower-like growth. These
Treatment is determined by the stage and nature of the tumor.
tumors grow rapidly, are invasive, and infltrate deeply Regional
Surgical resection of malignant oral tumors and benign, locally
lymph node metastasis is common in cats, less common in dogs,
invasive masses is the preferred treatment. Adequate excision
and in both species, distant metastasis is infrequent.
with tumor-free margins and the absence of metastasis typically
Fibrosarcoma is the second most common oral tumor in cats
result in a curative outcome. Postsurgical care including pain
and is less common in dogs. These tumors generally occur in the
 management, wound care, and nutritional support is critically
gingiva of cats and in the gingival and hard palates of dogs, with
 important to minimize complications and to support successful
bony involvement very common. There is a low incidence of
 recovery and healing. In cases where surgical resection is not an
regional lymph node involvement with occasional metastasis to
ad a ae p rias n Ans ad 
pulmonary tissues.
formed to improve the patient's quality of life or to reduce the
204
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 size of the mass prior to the application of other therapeutic
setter, retriever breeds, and Siamese cats, although it is rarely
modalities.
seen in cats.6
If resection is not an option, either due to the invasiveness or
 Typically, patients present to the hospital after weaning for
nature of the tumor or if not elected by the client, radiation
 what owners perceive to be vomiting, when in fact the patient is
regurgitating. Others signs noted are coughing or fever second-
ineffective in the treatment of oral malignant tumors; however,
ary to aspiration pneumonia and possible weight loss.
 new protocols may be under investigation.
ldiopathic megaesophagus
Prognosis
 Idiopathic megaesophagus, also known as adult-onset primary
The success rate and prognosis are generally determined by the
megaesophagus, is a common form of megaesophagus, mainly
tumor type and the aggressiveness of the surgical resection with
seen in dogs. A defect in the afferent neural pathway responsive
the presence of tumor-free margins. Odontogenic tumors are
to esophageal distention is suspected.7α The age of onset is fre-
often cured with surgical resection. In dogs, the prognosis for
quently 8 years or older; however, it has been reported in younger
nonodontogenic tumors is good for squamous cell carcinoma,
patients.
fair for fbrosarcoma, and poor for malignant melanoma. Cats
Presentation is similar to congenital idiopathic megaesopha
 do not seem to tolerate aggressive surgical resections as well
as dogs, and prognosis for nonodontogenic tumors is generally
 a ie s ss n e  sno 
poor. Treatment options, prognosis, postsurgical physical
d    s    
appearance, functional outcomes, quality of life, and expected
on swallowing may be seen secondary to esophagitis, which can
survival time should be thoroughly discussed with the client.
develop due to the accumulation of food in the esophagus.
 Animals with megaesophagus are predisposed to aspiration
Esophageal disorders
pneumonia. However, there is one major difference seen with
idiopathic megaesophagus, and that is the loss of body condi-
The esophagus is a muscular tube (both striated and smooth)
tion.' Weight loss and emaciation take place secondarily to insuf-
with an upper esophageal sphincter and a lower esophageal
fcient food intake and/or insufficient food digestion. Inappetance
sphincter (also called the cardiac sphincter). They work in
may be the result of discomfort caused by regurgitation.
concert to transport food boluses by peristaltic waves, from the
mouth to the stomach. The esophagus is responsive to both
Acquired secondary megaesophagus
hormonal influences (e.g, gastrin, secretin) and innervation
(e.g., vagus nerve, branches of laryngeal, pharyngeal, and
Acquired secondary megaesophagus may result from a number
of systemic diseases, especially those that lead to diffuse neu-
glossopharyngeal).
romuscular dysfunction (e.g., myasthenia gravis, polymyositis,
polymyopathies, polyneuropathies, dysautonomia, and distem-
Megaesophagus
per).* Lead and organophosphate toxicity, thymoma, systemic
Megaesophagus is a syndrome manifested by the generalized
lupus erythematosus, hiatal hernia, hypoadrenocorticism, and
loss of motor function to the esophagus. This results in esopha-
esophagitis can also result in megaesophagus.
Many obstructive esophageal diseases (e.g., neoplasia, granu-
geal dilatation and loss of normal peristaltic motility. The loss of
motility can be severe, resulting in food and fluid accumulation
loma, vascular ring anomaly, stricture, periesophageal masses
and foreign bodies) can also lead to megaesophagus if they are
in the esophagus. Megaesophagus may be congenital, idiopathic,
of sufficiently chronic duration.1-36
 Or acquired (secondary to other disease processes).1-3
Congenital megaesophagus
Diagnostic testing
- jo a uo u si sos o
Megaesophagus generally is diagnosed based on the history,
physical examination, clinical signs, and thoracic radiography of
in puppies and kittens at the time of weaning. The site and
the patient. Once a diagnosis of generalized megaesophagus is
 pathogenesis of the lesion in congenital megaesophagus is
established, further diagnostic testing should be performed to
unknown. The congenital form, also known as esophageal weak-
identify an underlying etiology.
ness, may be due to a delay in maturation of the esophageal
Laboratory tests
neuromuscular system, which explains why young animals have
shown improvement when feeding is carefully managed. There
Diagnostic tests that may be considered to evaluate animals
does not appear to be evidence of demyelination or neuronal
with generalized megaesophagus include a CBC, biochemical
degeneration. It is suggested that the underlying defect may lie
panel, and urinalysis. Additional laboratory tests to rule out
in the vagal afferent innervation to the esophagus." Congenital
secondary causes of megaesophagus include blood lead level and
megaesophagus has been shown to be inherited in the wire-
cholinesterase activity (toxicity), creatine kinase concentration
haired fox terrier and the miniature schnauzer. A breed predis-
position also exists for the German shepherd, Great Dane, Irish
test and Tensilon? test (myasthenia gravis), antinuclear antibody
 Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
205
Patient care
The treatment of megaesophagus is dependent on the underlying
cause and any secondary disease conditions. Treatment may
include surgery (e.g., foreign body retrieval, surgical resection of
neoplasia, balloon dilatation), drug therapy (e.g., immunosup-
pression, anti-inflammatory, pyridostigmine), and antibiotic
therapy for aspiration pneumonia.
The key objectives of medical management of megaesophagus/
-sod se Aea se a aui a aaoi oi are un
sible, to minimize aspiration, and to maximize nutrient intake
to the GI tract. Medical management of generalized meg-
aesophagus involves modification of feeding practices. Foods of
differing consistency should be used to determine the best
texture for individual patients. A liquid or gruel consistency is
usually best for patients with cricopharyngeal dysphagia, esopha-
geal obstructive lesions, and/or esophagitis and may be effective
Figure 8.3.1 Ten-year-old mixed breed dog with severe
 in patients with megaesophagus. Dry food or moist food formed
megaesophagus (between arrows) (containing food) and resolving
 into large boluses may act as a stimulus (secondary peristalsis)
aspiration pneumonia.
to any remaining normal esophageal tissue, and some improve-
ment in esophageal performance may be noted when the swal-
lowing reflex is maximally stimulated. Gruels or liquids may not
stimulate secondary peristalsis, thereby increasing the risk of
test (systemic lupus erythematosus), and evaluation of adrenal
aspiration pneumonia.
and thyroid gland function.
Imaging
Esophageal obstruction
Survey neck and thoracic radiographs are indicated in suspected
Obstructions of the esophagus may be intraluminal, intramural,
cases of megaesophagus. The cervical esophagus may be dilated
 or periesophageal and may be congenital or acquired.
with air and the thoracic esophagus will contain large amounts
of food or fluid; however, it is considered normal for dogs that
intraiuminal obstruction
are excited or animals that are anesthetized to have some air in
the esophagus (Figure 8.3.1).
Most intraluminal obstructions are the result of foreign bodies,
 Positive contrast studies (ie., barium esophagram) may be
typically bones and fish hooks. Objects tend to lodge in the
required to differentiate esophageal obstructive pathology, stric-
thoracic inlet, at the base of the heart, and at the diaphragmatic
hiatus, which are the areas of least distensibility.?-4 Foreign
ture, hernia, diverticula, fistula, or vascular ring anomaly from
 megaesophagus.4 Barium sulfate or barium mixed with food
 bodies stimulate peristalsis and may result in severe ulcerative
esophagitis, esophageal perforation (causing pleuritis or medi-
can be utilized for the esophagram. If esophageal perforation is
 suspected, a water-based contrast agent should be utilized (e.g..
astinitis), or stricture formation.
iohexol).
Possible clinical signs of an esophageal foreign body are ano-
Videofluoroscopy is necessary for the diagnosis of functional
rexia, adipsia, lethargy and ptyalism (hypersalivation). Occa-
esophageal disorders (esophageal dysmotility) or cricopharyn-
 sionally, regurgitation is observed.
 geal dysphagia. An esophageal stricture is suspected when there
is an enlargement of the proximal esophagus with normal func-
Diagnostic testing
tion of the distal esophagus. Videofluoroscopy has some prog-
To definitively diagnose an obstruction in the esophagus, radi-
nostic value in megaesophagus not associated with esophageal
 ography should be performed. Survey radiographs are typically
dilation via assessment of the severity of peristaltic dysfunction.
diagnostic, as most foreign objects are radiopaque. However,
 Esophagoscopy is less reliable than radiography and fluoroscopy.
 radiolucent objects may require radiographic contrast for full
although it can be used to rule out underlying causes of meg-
visualization. Barium should be avoided if esophageal per-
aesophagus, such as esophagitis, stricture, neoplasia, and radi-
foration is suspected as this can cause granulomas should the
olucent foreign bodies.
barium leak into the mediastinum. In this case, an iodinated
compound should be administered. The option of using endos-
Additional diagnostics
copy to visualize the foreign body, if available, is preferable
If neurological or muscular pathology is suspected, additional
diagnostics to consider include electromyogram (EMG), nerve
as diagnosis and removal can often be accomplished in one
conduction velocities, and muscle biopsies.
procedure.
206
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Patient care
Total resolution of strictures may not be possible; however,
clinical signs can be kept to a minimum by dietary manipula-
Treatment involves removal of the foreign body by either endos-
fions such as feeding a soft or a liquefied diet and medical
 the object is deeply embedded or has perforated the esophageal
management.
wall. Esophageal foreign bodies can lead to complications such
Periesophageal obstructions
 as mediastinitis secondary to perforation, aspiration pneumo-
nia, stricture formation, or segmental hypomotility.
Periesophageal causes of esophageal obstruction include inflam-
mation, neoplasia, severe cardiomegaly, hilar lymphadenopathy,
Intramural obstructions
and vascular ring anomalies, which will be discussed here. Vas-
cular ring anomalies are congenital defects and persistent right
 Intramural esophageal obstruction is usually a result of stricture
aortic arch (PRAA) is the most common vascular ring anomaly
 formation. A circumferential stricture (e.g., a ring of scar tissue)
o s ss s vad -i si pe shp u as s i s)
may develop when esophageal erosions extend into the muscle
in Irish setters, German shepherds, and Boston terriers and has
layer of the esophagus, thus stimulating the production of fibrous
also been reported, albeit rarely, in cats. In cases of PRAA, the
aortic arch develops from the right rather than from the left
geal foreign body trauma and severe esophagitis from gastro-
fourth aortic arch. Consequently, the esophagus becomes con-
esophageal reflux (which may occur during anesthesia). The
stricted by a ring formed by the aorta on the right, the pulmo-
location, length, and number of strictures can vary, although
nary artery on the left, the ligamentum arteriosum dorsally, and
most commonly, single strictures are noted Strictures may also
the trachea ventrally. Food is unable to pass through the vascular
be the result of malignant disease.
ring and accumulates in the cranial esophagus, resulting in dila-
 The primary clinical sign is progressive regurgitation, espe-
tation and loss of esophageal motility.
cially after a meal. Ptyalism, repeated or exaggerated swallowing
Clinical signs of regurgitation and poor weight gain are
 attempts, and extension of the head and neck may also be noted.
typically frst observed in puppies during the weaning phase.
The animal usually appears healthy otherwise and has a good
Diagnostic testing
appetite.
 Positive contrast radiography and endoscopic visualization are
recommended for diagnosis. Esophageal dilatation may occur
Diagnostic testing
cranial to the stricture, and abnormal esophageal motility may
Thoracic  radiographs frequently  reveal  esophageal  dilation
also occur.I-3
cranial to the base of the heart, a normal esophagus caudal
to the heart, and a leftward deviation of the trachea near the
Patient care
cranial edge of the heart. A positive contrast esophagram, fluor-
Treating esophageal stricture(s) is multimodal. Surgical manage-
 oscopy, or endoscopy may be needed to fully characterize the
ment involves dilatation of the stricture using balloon catheter
anomaly.
 dilators (passed through an endoscope under direct vision or
Patient care
repeated dilation every 3-4 days and may potentially require up
Therapy involves surgical resection of the ligamentum arterio-
to six procedures to prevent restricturing. Surgical resection is
the option of choice for benign strictures but may be reserved
significant clinical improvement is seen in most patients (>90%)
for those cases in which no response is seen to medical treat-
following corrective surgery. If esophageal hypomotility or
ment or when the lesion is very near to the gastroesophageal
regurgitation is seen following corrective surgery, it is recom-
 junction.1-′ The risks from dilation surgery are excessive hemor-
mended that owners manage their pets with elevated feedings.
(a) aa abrdosa pue 
 Early diagnosis, normal or near normal BCS, no complicating
Medical management to prevent further reflux and to treat
diseases (e.g., aspiration pneumonia), and prompt surgical cor-
esophagitis if indicated, are started following dilatation or resec-
rection favor the outcome.
tion. Antibiotics may also be used if indicated. To increase the
intragastric pH and to minimize esophageal mucosa damage
from refluxed gastric secretions an Hz-receptor antagonist (e.g..
Key nutritional factors in patients
famotidine) and a proton pump inhibitor (PPl) (e.g., omepra-
with esophageal disease
zole) are commonly administered. Sucralfate (Carafate) is used
Patients with swallowing disorders are often debilitated and the
with esophagitis. It is also recommended that corticosteroids at
growth of very young patients may be underdeveloped. The
anti-inflammatory doses be administered after dilation to inhibit
health-care team needs to be mindful of the fact that in addition
the formation of new fbrous connective tissue. Decreasing
to the key nutritional factors discussed here, other nutritional
esophagitis by feeding the animal through a gastrostomy tube
factors may be important depending on the life stage and the
may also be indicated.
body condition of the patient.
Chapter 8  Gastrointestinal
207
Energy density
Feeding tubes
In patients with motility and obstructive disorders, a relatively
These suggestions will not work in all cases as upright feed-
high energy density is helpful in meeting the patient's caloric
 ing may be inadequate to control regurgitation or impractical
requirement in a small volume of food comparative to lower fat
because of the pet's temperament or the owner's schedule. In
foods. Foods with at least 25% dry matter (DM) fat and energy
those cases, placement of a gastrostomy or enterostomy tube is
densities of at least 4.5 kcal/g (18.8 k]/g) DM are recommended.
 recommended to bypass the esophagus entirely. This will involve
However, a lower fat content (≥15% DM for dogs and ≥20% DM
extensive counseling with the owner. Nasoesophageal (NE),
for cats) is a better option for cases of esophagitis due to gastric
 nasogastric, and esophagostomy tubes are not appropriate in this
reflux. It is important to note that high dietary fat delays gastric
 situation because they deliver food into the esophagus where it
emptying and reduces lower esophageal sphincter pressure,
 can be regurgitated. Patients with ongoing signs of malnutrition
which can lead to reflux of food and gastric secretions into the 
 at presentation should receive a large-bore gastrostomy feeding
esophagus. However, these patients also need relatively energy
 tube, if possible, and immediate alimentation via the tube until
dense foods (at least 4 kcal/g DM [16.7 k]/gl). For patients with
 adequate oral intake can be achieved. Gastrostomy tubes have
 esophagitis/gastroesophageal reflux, an energy dense, moderate
 been used successfully for long periods of time to maintain the
fat food is recommended Foods with these characteristics tend
nutritional status of dogs with megaesophagus. In those cases
to be highly digestible.
where owners are willing to feed their pet long term via a gas-
trostomy tube, a permanent button-type gastrostomy tube
Protein
should be considered. Even with the use of gastrostomy tubes,
Protein is required in amounts adequate for tissue repair and to
 regurgitation of saliva and food refluxed from the stomach may
support growth in young patients. In addition, dietary protein 
 still occur, which can result in aspiration pneumonia. For this
may play an essential role in reducing occurences of gastro-
 reason, some clinicians prefer feeding via enterostomy tube.
esophageal reflux secondary to protein stimulating an increase
 Owners should be counseled that regurgitation might not
 in gastroesophageal sphincter pressure. This effect is linked to
 entirely cease even if all food and water is administered through
dietary protein's stimulatory effect on gastrin and gastric acid
the gastrostomy tube. Many patients will continue to regurgitate
secretion. By increasing the pressure in the lower esophageal
fluid (most likely salivary secretions), but the likelihood of aspi-
sphincter, episodes of gastroesophageal reflux are decreased and
 ration pneumonia is reduced greatly.
the potential for further esophageal injury or aspiration pneu-
 As discussed, the feeding plan is often used in conjunction
monia is lessened. For these reasons, dietary protein content
with other therapeutic modalities including surgery (e.g., crico-
should be at least 25% DM for foods for adult dogs and at least
pharyngeal myotomy, esophageal stricture, vascular ring anomaly,
 35% DM for foods for adult cats.
 esophageal foreign bodies), esophageal ballooning (e.g., esopha-
geal stricture), endoscopy (e.g., foreign body removal), and
Feeding protocols
drugs (e.g., antibiotics, prokinetic agents, corticosteroids, PPIs,
In patients with swallowing or esophageal disorders, the current
H-receptor antagonists, mucosal protective agents).
feeding protocol of one to three meals per day, fed in a bowl on
the floor is rarely appropriate, and special feeding methods are
Gastric disease
often required. The key tools of nutritional management are a
change in the feeding method and a change to the appropriate
The stomach is a hollow, muscular (smooth) organ that stores,
a a e Ad sn Area ( ) po
mixes, and begins the digestive process. It is composed of four
in developing the feeding protocol and in communicating
regions: the cardia, where the esophagus connects to the body of
the importance of the changes to the owner. Small-volume, fre-
the stomach; the fundus is the upper curvature of the stomach
quent meals are recommended and gruel-type foods are often
(often gas filled); and the antrum, which connects to the duode-
num at the pylorus. The layers of the stomach are the serosal
necessary.
Feeding a high calorie food to a patient in an upright position,
(outer layer), muscularis (muscle layer), and the mucosa (inner
and maintaining this position for 20-30 min after feeding, pro-
layer). The functions of the stomach are under the complex influ-
vides ample time for gravitational flow of the food through the
ence of many hormonal and neural pathways that regulate
esophagus to the stomach. Upright feeding can be accomplished
gastric acid production, gastric motility, and the initial digestion
by several methods. The most common technique is to elevate
of proteins, fats, and micronutrients.
the food bowl so that the dog or cat has to sit down or stand on
its hind legs to eat. Pets can also be trained to eat on the stairs
Acute gastritis
or from a counter or stool. Another option is to cradle small
 dogs and cats in an upright position in the arms while eating.
One of the most common causes of vomiting in dogs and cats is
Dogs can be trained to sit after eating or to lie in sternal recum-
 acute gastritis. The prevalence of gastritis in the pet population
 bency on an inclined board for the required period of time. The
is unknown but is believed to be high, as many different insults
use of a Bailey chair (see http://www.caninemegaesophagus.org/
 can result in gastric mucosal inflammation.' Dogs are affected
index.htm) is another option.
with acute gastritis more often than cats. Factors to consider that
208
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 8.3.1  Acute gastritis etiology
Unless the pet was observed eating an irritating substance, the
diagnosis is a presumptive one based upon the history and physi-
Dietary
cal examination findings. Dependent on these findings, abdom-
Indiscretion
inal imaging may be recommended. If the clinical signs are
Spoiled food
mild and the patient's examination is unremarkable, support-
Intolerance/sensitivity
ive therapy may be instituted. Symptomatic care consists of
Foreign bodies
 parenteral fluid therapy if the patient is dehydrated, antinausea
Bones
medication, and the withholding of food and water for approxi-
Toys
mately 24h. At home, the owner observes the patient closely and
Hair balls
 continues any prescribed medication. If the patient's condition
Drugs and toxins
continues to improve after 24h, the reintroduction of small
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NsAIDS)
amounts of water is indicated. Water is the key nutrient in
Corticosteroids
patients with gastritis due to the risk of dehydration. If the
Heavy metals
hydration status of the patient is not closely monitored, the life-
Antibiotics
threatening state of dehydration may result. If after -12h the
patient is able to keep the water down, it is recommended to
 Plants
begin reintroducing small amounts of a bland diet. If the clinical
Cleaners
signs worsen or do not improve after a few days, a reexamination
Ethylene glycol 
and further diagnostics are indicated. At this time, a minimum
Bleach
 database (CBC, serum biochemistry profle, and a complete uri-
Herbicides
nalysis) is warranted.2-5
Fertilizers
 Petroleum distillates
Chronic gastritis
Organ oph osphates
Chronic gastritis is defined as intermittent vomiting that occurs
Systemic disease
for more than 1-2 weeks' duration. Vomiting of food or bile
Uremia
 is also the primary clinical sign of chronic gastritis. Decreased
Liver disease
appetite, weight loss, hematemesis, or melena may suggest the
Hypoadrenocorticism
 presence of chronic gastritis. Chronic gastritis is seen more often
Parasites
in cats than in dogs.
Ollulanus
 Physaloptera spp.
Diagnostic testing
Bacteria
Diagnosis is based on laboratory findings (to rule out metabolic
Bacterial toxins
causes of vomiting), radiography and/or ultrasonography, and
Helicobacter
endoscopic or surgical biopsy. Abnormal laboratory values that
may be seen include anemia, leukocytosis, eosinophilia, and
Viral
Parvovirus
hypoproteinemia. Survey radiographs seldom identify gastric
Distemper
lesions but will help to rule out foreign bodies. Contrast radio-
graphs may aid in the diagnosis by identifying a thickened
Infectious hepatitis
 gastric wall, mucosal ulceration, mass lesions, and/or evidence
Coronavirus
 of a delay in gastric emptying.
A definitive diagnosis of chronic gastritis is based on his-
topathologic examination of gastric biopsy specimens. The his-
may result in gastritis are dietary indiscretion; food intolerance
topathology (e.g., cellular infltrate, architectural abnormalities,
or allergy; ingestion of foreign material, chemicals, plant irri-
 and severity) and etiology, if identifed, determine the type
tants; viral or parasitic infections; and drugs (Table 8.3.1).
of chronic gastritis affecting the patient. Chronic gastritis may
The clinical sign most commonly associated with acute gas-
be lymphocytic-plasmacytic, eosinophilic, granulomatous, or
tritis is vomiting; typically, the vomitus contains food and bile.
atrophic. Lymphocytic-plasmacytic gastritis may be an immune
Animals with gastritis are usually not interested in food, and
and/or inflammatory reaction to a variety of antigens. Helico-
they may or may not feel nauseous. Abdominal pain and fever
       r  
seldom accompany gastritis--especially acute gastritis.
some animals (especially cats). Physaloptera rara has been asso-
ciated with a similar reaction in some dogs. Eosinophilic gastritis
Diagnostic testing and patient care
may represent an allergic reaction, most likely to food antigens.
Acute gastritis is a diagnosis of exclusion, so it is imperative to
Atrophic gastritis may be the result of chronic gastric inflamma-
obtain a thorough history; many patients respond to sympto-
tory disease and/or immune mechanisms. Ollulanus tricuspis
matic treatment and a definitive diagnosis is never ascertained.
may cause granulomatous gastritis in cats.
Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
209
 Even so, the cause of chronic gastritis in dogs and cats is not
    (]   s
fully understood. In some cases, an underlying etiology, such as
acid (e.g., secondary to a gastrinoma).
parasitism or a metabolic disorder (e.g., uremia, liver disease),
 Acute gastritis and gastroduodenal ulceration may be associ-
can be identified. In the majority of cases though, an immune-
ated with a number of metabolic disorders. Uremia potentially
mediated response is hypothesized to be responsible for inflam-
can result in diffuse GI tract hemorrhage from uremic toxins or
matory infltrates within the gastric mucosa.
 increased gastrin concentrations. Typically, the kidneys excrete
Chronic idiopathic gastritis is probably a subset of the inflam-
up to 40% of circulating gastrin, and clearance of gastrin is
matory bowel disease (IBD) syndrome or may arise as an adverse
decreased with chronic kidney disease resulting in increased
reaction to food antigens. Chronic idiopathic gastritis may be
 acid production. In dogs with chronic kidney disease, GI signs
localized or may occur with more diffuse IBD of the small or 
 and histopathologic changes have been noted.
large bowel. Once present, inflammation interferes with gastric
Liver disease is another cause of GI ulceration, which may
motility and reservoir function leading to vomiting. Nutrients,
manifest as hematemesis. Liver disease was one of the two most
 including proteins, can be lost through the inflamed mucosal
common risk factors (the other being treatment with non-
surface.
 steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs]) in a retrospective
study of 43 dogs with gastroduodenal ulceration. The pathogen-
Patienf care
The following treatment options should be considered when
tifactorial, and associated coagulopathies may worsen clinical
treating a pet with chronic gastritis. Lymphocytic-plasmacytic
signs. Potential mechanisms include altered gastric blood flow
 gastritis sometimes responds to dietary therapy (e.g., low fat, low
 due to portal hypertension, delayed epithelial turnover, gastric
fiber, elimination diets) alone. If dietary therapy alone is not
 hyperacidity, and hypergastrinemia.6
efficacious, corticosteroids (e.g., prednisolone, 2.2 mg/kg/day)
sd uoq a ie s ie p u-m e si H
can be used as a concurrent treatment option. Although corti-
NSAIDs may have a variety of adverse drug reactions. These
costeroids are required, dietary therapy may ultimately allow a
drug reactions include GI bleeding, ulceration, hepatotoxicity,
substantially decreased dose, thus avoiding glucocorticoid
and nephrotoxicity. The adverse GI effects occur because several
adverse effects. If corticosteroid therapy is necessary, the dose
 NSAIDs have a topical irritant effect on the gastric mucosa and
should be gradually decreased to find the lowest effective dose.
          
 and spontaneous gastritis and gastroduodenal ulcerations have
clinical response or the clinical signs may return and be more
been reported to occur in dogs prescribed these uncommon
difficult to control than they were initially. In rare cases, azathio-
 NSAIDs, including aspirin, indomethacin, naproxen, ibuprofen,
prine and cyclophosphamide have been used sporadically in
phenylbutazone, flunixin meglumine, piroxicam, sulindac, and
dogs. These drugs should not be used for treating chronic idio-
 meclofenamic acid The ulcerogenicity of NSAIDs is atributed
 pathic gastritis in cats. Concurrent use of Hz-receptor antago-
 to inhibition of the enzyme cyclooxygenase (COX) in the pros-
nists is sometimes beneficial.
 s no s  ui hs d sis u
 Canine eosinophilic gastritis usually responds well to a strict
 protective effects of prostacyclin and prostaglandin E.
elimination diet. If dietary therapy alone fails, corticosteroid
COX-1 is a constitutive form that is found in many tissues
therapy (e.g., prednisolone, 1.1-2.2 mg/kg/day) in conjunction
(e.g., gastric mucosa), where it is involved in the production of
with diet is usually effective.
 protective prostaglandins. COX-2 is primarily an inducible
Atrophic and granulomatous gastritis has been reported to be
enzyme that is involved in the production of inflammatory
more difficult to treat than lymphocytic-plasmacytic or canine
 mediators, including proinflammatory prostaglandins. Newer
eosinophilic gastritis. Diets low in fat and fiber may help control
NSAIDs have been developed to minimize the effects on COX-1
signs. Atrophic gastritis may respond to anti-inflammatory,
and consequently to decrease the adverse effects on gastric
antacid, and/or prokinetic therapy, with the latter being intended
mucosa. The newer NSAIDs are selective inhibitors of COX-2
 to keep the stomach empty, especially at night.24
 and generally are considered to be “gastric sparing" However,
despite the selective inhibition of COX-2, these newer NSAIDs
still carry the risk of GI ulceration and perforation. Newer
Gastrointestinal ulceration and erosions
veterinary-approved selective COX inhibitors include flunixin,
Acute gastritis is characterized by sudden-onset vomiting, result-
 meloxicam, carprofen, etodolac, ketoprofen, tepoxalin, previcox,
ing from gastric mucosal injury or inflammation. If hematemesis
 and deracoxib. Prescribing NSAIDs in patients with underlying
is present, it is safe to presume that gastroduodenal erosions or
renal or hepatic insufficiency may increase the risk of GI ulcera-
ulcerations are also present. Gastroduodenal ulceration takes
tive disease. Concurrent NSAID and corticosteroid use should
place following disruption of the gastric mucosal barrier, which
 also be avoided due to the risk of gastric injury.
 is a group of physical and chemical defense mechanisms. It is
GI ulcers are recognized complications of critical illnesses
these defense mechanisms that protect the gastric mucosa from
(e.g., hypotension, coagulopathy, sepsis) in people. They are
injury. If not protected, erosions or ulcers may develop. Disrup-
 believed to develop as a response to the stress of the critical
tion of the gastric mucosal barrier may involve direct injury,
Ad e si s iq gsa ssas, pi s are pue su!
 decreased mucosal blood flow, alterations in protective prostag-
defined process in veterinary patients. However, gastroduodenal
210
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
ulcerations have been noted in cats and dogs in conjunction with
fering from a chronic condition often have poor body condition
severe burns, heat stroke, multiple trauma, head injuries, and
and weight loss. Sporadic gastric bloating, nausea, partial or
spinal cord disorders.16 In addition, hypovolemic shock and
 sepsis may be complicated by the development of GI ulcers.
present with unrelenting or projectile vomiting, complete gastric
outflow obstruction should be suspected.
flow resulting in mucosal ischemia. Histamine release stimulated
by catecholamines worsened the mucosal damage. Gastrin-
Diagnostic testing
producing pancreatic tumors, histamine-producing tumors
Physical  examination  findings  are typically unremarkable
(e.g., mast cell tumors, basophilic leukemia), and a polypeptide-
beyond evidence of possible weight loss. However, body condi-
 producing pancreatic tumor have been associated with gastric or
tion should be assessed and used as a reassessment tool. Gastric
duodenal ulceration in dogs and cats.
distention and tympany may be evident in some cases. Patients
with unrelenting vomiting may be dehydrated, depressed, and
lethargic. Electrolyte abnormalities, resulting from continual
Gastric motility disorders
vomiting, may manifest as weakness.
After ingestion of a normal meal, on average, the stomach should
be empty in 6-8h for dogs and 4-6 h for cats.′ Gastric emptying
Laboratory evaluation
rates are influenced by the nutrient content of the food, formula-
 In patients with gastroparesis or gastric obstruction, hemato-
tion of the food, size of the meal, and the pet's body size. Gastric
logic and serologic findings are typically nonspecific and may be
motility disorders result from conditions that directly or indi-
more reflective of the underlying disorder. Chronic, persistent
 rectly disrupt one or more of the three functions of the stomach:
yomiting may precipitate dehydration, electrolyte disturbances
1.8
 Storage of ingesta
(hypokalemia, hypochloremia), and acid-base abnormalities. It
2.1
 Mixing and dispersion of food particles
is not uncommon to see prerenal azotemia secondary to dehy-
dration. Hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis with paradoxical
 3. Timely expulsion of gastric contents into the duodenum
aciduria may be present in dogs and cats with complete pyloric
Various processes can affect gastric emptying; however, not all
outflow obstruction.
disruptions lead to clinical signs.
 In general, delayed gastric motility can be divided into outflow
imaging
obstructions (e.g, stenosis, foreign bodies, hypertrophy of
Survey abdominal radiographs are often helpful for evaluating
 pyloric mucosa, granulomas, and neoplasia including both intra-
dogs and cats with gastric motility disorders. Findings include a
gastric and extragastric masses) or defective propulsion (e.g..
stomach distended by fluid, air, or food; gastric wall thickening
gastritis, ulcers, gastroenteritis, pancreatitis, and metabolic).
may also be recognized. The presence of food in the stomach
 Delayed gastric emptying may also be involved in the etiopatho-
12-18h after the last meal is indicative of an emptying disorder.
genesis of GDV.
GI contrast studies can confrm delayed gastric emptying if
Certain breeds are associated with gastric motility disorders.
liquid contrast media (i.e., barium sulfate) remains in the
 Congenital pyloric stenosis most often is encountered in brachy-
stomach. Gastroparesis or mechanical obstruction should be
cephalic dogs and Siamese cats. Chronic hypertrophic pyloric
suspected if contrast remains in the stomach longer than 4h in
 gastropathy usually affects small, purebred, middle-aged dogs,
such as the Lhasa Apsos, Maltese, shih tzus, and Pekingese.
tive of a typical meal; for that reason, it is recommended to feed
Young animals typically are at greater risk for gastric foreign
barium mixed with food or to administer radiopaque particles
bodies, while older pets are more likely to have neoplastic lesions
(e.g., BIPS) to more completely assess gastric function. Studies
that may lead to obstruction of gastric outflow. Young, large
have demonstrated that radiopaque markers exit the stomach at
breed dogs living in states that border the Gulf of Mexico may
a rate proportional to the disappearance of food (DM basis) in 
be infected with Pythium insidiosum (a fungus-like parasite),
dogs. Gl contrast studies also may identify thickened gastric
resulting in gastric pythiosis and possible gastric outflow
walls and intraluminal foreign bodies.
obstruction.
 Endoscopy frequently is preferred over radiographic studies
 in evaluating delayed gastric emptying and gastric outflow
Clinical signs
obstruction by allowing direct visualization of the outflow tract
 Delayed gastric emptying typically results in vomiting, regard-
and surrounding the mucosa. However, endoscopy should be
less of the cause. When taking a history from owners, vomiting
 performed before the administration of barium contrast media
of undigested or partially digested food more than 12h after the
as barium can make endoscopy much more difficult by obscur
pet eats may be reported. The onset of clinical signs may be
ing vision. In cases such as antropyloric or proximal duodenal
    s   
foreign bodies, endoscopy can be both a diagnostic and a cura-
pyloric gastropathy, or acute, as in the case of foreign body inges-
tive procedure (with endoscopic removal of the foreign body).
tion. In dogs and cats with congenital pyloric stenosis, clinical
Ultrasonography is a noninvasive method for evaluating both
 outflow obstructions and propulsion disorders, but the presence
Chapter 8  Gastrointestinal
211
of excessive gas in the stomach lumen can make imaging chal-
 performed endoscopically, the sample must be deep enough to
lenging and may negatively affect the resulting image quality. In
 ensure that submucosal tissue is included. Mucosal lymphomas
dogs, gastric contractions canbe visualized using ultrasonogra-
and nonscirrhous adenocarcinomas often produce GI ulceration/
phy, allowing for the evaluation of liquid- and solid-phase gastric
erosions; therefore, endoscopically obtained tissue samples are
emptying in dogs.
 a   s sre   a
some cases. Polyps are usually obvious endoscopically, but a
Patient care
biopsy specimen should always be obtained and evaluated to
Care of patients with delayed gastric emptying or outflow
ensure that adenocarcinoma is not present."
obstruction is based on the cause of the disorder. Surgical and
Patient care
medical care may both be required. The administration of proki-
netics (e.g., metoclopramide, cisapride) may be indicated. Close
Unfortunately, the majority of adenocarcinomas are advanced
monitoring of hydration status and electrolytes is warranted,
before clinical signs manifest, thus resulting in difficult (or
especially in cases of protracted vomiting. Total parenteral nutri-
 impossible) surgical excision. Leiomyomas and leiomyosarco-
fion (TPN) or partial parenteral nutrition (PPN) may be neces-
mas are more likely to be resectable than adenocarcinomas.
sary in patients that are NPO due to prolonged nausea and
Gastroduodenostomy may palliate gastric outflow obstruction
vomiting.
caused by an nonresectable tumor. Except for dogs and cats with
lymphoma, chemotherapy is rarely helpful.
 Unless diagnosed very early, the prognosis for adenocarcino-
Infiltrative gastric disease
Neoplastic infiltrations such as adenocarcinoma, lymphoma,
leiomyosarcomas can be alleviated surgically. It does not appear
leiomyomas, and leiomyosarcomas in dogs and lymphoma in
to be necessary to resect gastric polyps unless they are causing
outflow obstruction.
mucosal disruption. Usually, gastric lymphoma is a diffuse
lesion, but it can produce distinct masses. The cause and signif-
Pythiosis
cance of benign gastric polyps are unknown at this time and
seem to occur mostly in the antrum.2
Pythiosis is a fungal infection caused by P insidiosum. This
Dogs and cats with gastric tumors are generally asymptomatic
 species is predominantly found along the Gulf Coast area of the
until the disease is advanced. The most common sign is anorexia,
 southeastern United States. Any area of the alimentary tract or
s on ss h u uis ixu an si 
 skin may be affected. The fungus typically causes intense submu-
 neoplasia usually signifes advanced disease or gastric outflow
 cosal infltration of fibrous connective tissue and a purulent,
obstruction. Adenocarcinomas are typically infiltrative and
eosinophilic, granulomatous inflammation causing gastric
decrease emptying by impairing motility and/or obstructing the
ulcerations/erosions. This infltration prevents peristalsis, result-
outflow tract. Weight loss may be due to nutrient loss or to
ing in stasis.
 cancer cachexia syndrome. Hematemesis intermittently is seen,
 Seen typically in dogs, the clinical signs of pythiosis are vomit-
but leiomyomas seem to be the tumor most likely to cause severe
ing, anorexia, diarrhea, and/or weight loss. Gastric outflow
acute upper GI bleeding. Other bleeding gastric tumors are more
obstruction frequently occurs commonly resulting in vomition.
likely to cause iron defciency anemia and melena even if GI
If the colon is involved, tenesmus and hematochezia are seen.
blood loss is not obvious. Polyps infrequently cause clinical signs
Diagnostic testing
or cat without noticeable blood loss is suggestive of GI bleeding:
Laboratory
this is typically caused by a tumor.
To aid in the diagnosis, serological, cytological, or histological
Diagnostic testing
tests may be performed. ELISA and PCR tests are available to
look for antibodies or antigen, respectively. Gastric, intestinal,
Imaging
or colonic biopsy samples need to include the submucosa
 Plain and/or contrast imaging may reveal gastric wall thicken-
because the organism is more likely to be in the submucosa than
ing, decreased motility, and/or mucosal irregularities. Ultra-
 in the mucosa. Such diagnostic biopsy specimens can be pro-
sonography can be utilized to detect gastric masses and
 cured by way of rigid endoscopy, but full-thickness samples may
mesenteric lymphadenopathy. Endoscopically, these areas may
 be indicated. Cytological analysis of a tissue sample obtained by
 a ou uuxa si iesonu ad se redde
 scraping an excised piece of submucosa with a scalpel blade may
without ulceration or erosion.
be diagnostic. The organisms can be sparse and dificult to find
histologically even in large tissue samples.
Biopsy
Patient care
 Ultrasound-guided aspiration of thickened areas in the gastric
wall or enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes may be diagnostic for
 Complete surgical excision provides the best chance for a cure.
adenocarcinoma or lymphoma. When biopsy of such lesions is
Itraconazole (5 mg/kg administered orally q 12h) or liposomal
212
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
amphotericin B (2.2mg/kg per treatment) may benefit some
more than 30% for dogs and 40% for cats).' Products of protein
animals.? Immunotherapy has recently become available, but
digestion (peptides, amino acids, and amines) increase gastrin
 critical evaluation of the efficacy of this therapy is not currently
and gastric acid secretion.
available.
Recommendations of "hypoallergenic" or elimination foods
Pythiosis often spreads to or involves structures that cannot
for patients with chronic idiopathic gastritis are made because
be surgically removed (e.g., root of the mesentery, pancreas sur-
 go ssn s u aroi e Ad on pa are suue area
rounding the bile duct), resulting in a grim prognosis.
gastritis. Potentially, elimination foods may be used successfully
without pharmacological intervention because mild to moderate
Key nutritional factors in patients with
chronic gastritis may respond to dietary management alone.
Ideally, elimination foods should avoid protein excess (16-26%
gastric disease or gastric motility disorders
for dogs; 30-40% for cats). Also, elimination foods should have
Water
high protein digestibility (≥87%) and should contain a restricted
number of novel protein sources to which the patient has never
Water is the most important nutrient for patients with acute or
been exposed.1
chronic vomiting due to the potential for life-threatening dehy-
dration. Dehydration results from excessive fluid loss combined
Fat
with the patient's inability to replace those losses. Patients with
Animals with chronic vomiting are often underweight due to
persistent nausea and vomiting should be supported with sub-
cutaneous or intravenous fluids as oral fluids will not suffice to
inadequate caloric intake. As stated previously, the energy
density of foods is related to dietary fat content. Increasing
replace loss in most cases. The hydration status of patients with
dietary fat normally results in increased caloric intake when
 persistent vomiting should be closely monitored and dehydra-
tion should be corrected with appropriate parenteral fluid
consuming the same amount of food. However, both solid and
therapy. Once vomiting has resolved, water should be offered in
liquid foods with increased fat levels usually have slower gastric
 small amounts initiall at room and body temperatures (as
emptying times than similar foods with lower fat content. Fat in
 colder water delays gastric emptying). If well tolerated, water can
the duodenum stimulates the release of cholecystokinin, a
be made available free choice.
hormone that stimulates the release of bile from the gallbladder,
which can delay gastric emptying. Accordingly, foods for cats
Electrolytes
and dogs with gastric emptying, motility disorders, gastritis, or
gastroduodenal ulcers should not provide excess fat.'It is recom-
Gastric and intestinal secretions differ from extracellular fluids
mended that foods with 15% or less (dogs) or 25% or less (cats)
in electrolyte composition, so the loss of these fluids may result
DM fat are appropriate for patients with gastric emptying or
 in systemic electrolyte abnormalities. Dogs and cats with vomit-
motility disorders.
 ing and diarrhea may have abnormal serum potassium, chloride,
 and sodium concentrations. Whether or not this occurs depends
Fiber
on several factors, such as the severity of the disease, the nutri-
tional status of the patient, and the site of the disease process as
Gelling agents such as gums or hydrocolloids found in some
well as the absence or presence of an acid-base disturbance.
moist food are added to enhance the aesthetic characteristics of
the food for the owners. Pet foods containing gel-forming soluble
priate fuid therapy and nutritional management of these
fbers should be avoided in patients with gastric emptying and
   r   
motility disorders because they increase the viscosity of ingesta
natremia or hyponatremia are the electrolyte abnormalities most
and subsequently slow gastric emptying. Such fibers include
commonly associated with acute vomiting and diarrhea, while
pectins and gums (e.g, gum arabic, guar gum, carrageenan,
severe or chronic GI disease typically results in a depletion of
psyllium gum, xanthan gum, carob gum, gum ghatti, and gum
potassium as the concentration of this electrolyte in gastric and
  st   s aq s  (
intestinal secretions is high.
crude fber) of insoluble fiber (powdered cellulose) in dry foods
 Electrolyte disorders should be corrected initially with appro-
u ro oa   p u p  on p
priate parenteral fluid and electrolyte therapy. Foods for patients
show that the ratio of slowly to rapidly fermentable fibers is
with acute gastroenteritis should contain levels of potassium,
important. As a result of the variability of fiber types on gastric
chloride, and sodium above the minimum allowances for normal
emptying, the crude fber content of foods for patients with
dogs and cats. Recommended levels of these nutrients are 0.8-
 gastritis and gastroduodenal ulcers should not exceed more than
1.1% DM potassium, 0.5-1.3% DM chloride, and 0.3-0.5%
5% DM.
DM sodium.' Once the patient has recovered, the food should
 contain levels appropriate for the patient's life stage.
Energy density
 It has been established that patients with chronic vomiting are
Protein
often underweight due to inadequate caloric intake. To ensure
It is suggested that foods for patients with acute gastritis and/or
the intake of suffcient energy with small amounts of food,
gastroduodenal ulcers should not contain excess protein (no
the energy density of the food should be moderately increased
Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
213
(4.0-4.5kcal/g [DM]). High energy density foods may help
Dogs, and rarely cats, acquire whipworms which produce a
 patients maintain or regain body weight and condition but will
 wide spectrum of mild to severe colonic disease that can include
also require higher dietary fat levels, which can adversely affects
 hematochezia and PLE. Severe trichuriasis may cause severe
gastric emptying and should be avoided.
hyponatremia and hyperkalemia, mimicking hypoadrenocorti-
cism. Marked hyponatremia might even be responsible for CNS
Food forms
signs (e.g., seizures).2 The feline whipworms, Trichuris campan-
 In cats and dogs, larger meals are emptied more slowly from the
ula and Trichuris serrata, are very rare and typically do not
 stomach as compared to smaller meals. Liquids are emptied
 produce clinical signs.
 In dogs presenting with bloody stools or other colonic dis-
from the stomach more quickly than solids due to lower digesta
eases, T. vulpis infection should be considered Diagnosis is
osmolality with water being emptied the fastest. High osmolality
fuids are emptied more slowly than dilute fluids, with solids
made through observation of the ova in a fecal flotation test. Ova
being the slowest to be emptied. Cold meals slow gastric empty-
are relatively dense and float only in properly prepared flotation
ing: therefore, food should be offered between room and body
solutions; furthermore, ova are shed intermifttently and some-
fimes can be found only if multiple fecal examinations are per-
temperature (70-100°F [21-38°C]).
The ideal food form for patients with gastric emptying disor-
formed. Up to 50% of dogs presenting with whipworm infestation
ders would be small, frequent meals of liquid or semiliquid con-
and diarrhea are ova-negative.? It is also possible to visualize
 adult T. vulpis through colonoscopic evaluation.
sistency. Moist foods are recommended in patients with gastritis
 and/or ulcerations because they reduce gastric retention time.
Due to the potential difficulty in diagnosing T. vulpis, it is
practical to empirically treat dogs with chronic large bowel
Acid load
disease with fenbendazole (50 mg/kg PO qd × 3 days) before
proceeding to endoscopy. If a dog is treated for whipworms, it
-n n pidxa  Pos (t'z < Hd eed e cat) ee
should be treated again in 3 weeks and then again in 3 months
iting patients lose hydrogen and chloride ions in excess of
to kill worms that were not in the intestinal lumen at the time
sodium and bicarbonate. Hypochloremia continues the alkalosis
 of the first treatment. Febantel/pyrantel is an alternative treat-
by increasing renal bicarbonate reabsorption. Mild alkalemia is
ment for whipworm infections. Regular administration of
common, but severe alkalemia is not when dealing with gastritis
milbemycin for heartworm prevention also has been shown to
 or upper duodenal obstruction.
the prognosis for recovery is good.
Acidemia (ie., a plasma pH < 7.35) may occur in vomiting
 patients if the vomited gastric fluid is relatively low in hydrogen
and chloride ion content (e.g., during fasting) or if concurrent
Roundworms
loss of intestinal sodium and bicarbonate occurs. It is recom-
Roundworms are common in both dogs (Toxocara canis and
mended to correct severe acid-base disorders with parenteral
Toxascaris leonina) and cats (Toxocara cati and T. leonina). Dogs
fluid and electrolyte therapy. Foods for patients with acute vom-
and cats can obtain roundworms from ingesting the ova (either
iting and diarrhea should avoid excess dietary acid load. Foods
directly or via paratenic hosts). T. canis is often obtained trans-
that normally produce alkaline urine are less likely to be associ-
placentally from the mother; T. cati may use transmammary
ated with acidosis.
passage, and T leonina can use intermediate hosts. The parasite
can burrow through the wall of the GI tract, entering the blood
vessels, and migrate to the lungs or other organs, and, as men-
Alimentary tract parasites
tioned, can be transmitted through the colostrum. Migration
through the host's tissue by immature larval forms can cause
Whipworm
hepatic fibrosis and signifcant pulmonary lesions. Adult round-
Whipworm (Trichuris vulpis) infection can cause acute, chronic,
worms live in the small intestinal lumen and migrate against the
or intermittent signs of large bowel diarrhea. Whipworms are a
flow of ingesta. They can cause inflammatory infltrates (e.g.
parasite of the cecum and large bowel and have a direct life cycle.
 eosinophils) in the wall of the intestine.25 Female adults pass ova
Female adults pass ova in the feces (diagnostic stage), which
 in the feces (diagnostic stage), which mature in the environment
mature in the environment into the embryonated, infective 
 into the embryonated, infective stage.
stage. Animals acquire the infection by ingesting ova, and once
Roundworms can cause or contribute to diarrhea, stunted
 ingested, the life cycle repeats. The adults burrow into the colonic
 growth, poor hair coat, and poor weight gain, especially in young
 r rm, a a am so  
 animals. A runt with a “potbelly" appearance is suggestive of
embeds into the mucosa and feeds on blood and tissue fluids.
 severe roundworm infection. At times, roundworms may gain
This parasite infection can cause inflammation, bleeding, and
 access to the stomach, in which case they may be produced in
 yomitus. If roundworms are numerous, they may cause obstruc-
of all ages. Ova may survive and remain infectious in the envi-
tion of the intestines or the bile duct.
ronment for up to 5 years; therefore, whipworm infections are
Diagnosis is relatively easy because ova are produced in large
typically the result of exposure to contaminated ground.
numbers and readily float in fecal flotation tests. On occasion,
214
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
neonates develop clinical signs of roundworm infestation, but
suggestive of hookworm infestation. Eosinophilia is an ancillary
ova cannot be found in the feces. In these cases, transplacental
but common finding on the CBC of patients with hookworm
migration of immature larva results in large worm burdens,
parasites.
causing clinical signs in these animals before the parasites mature
Various anthelmintics are effective with the following com-
 and are able to produce ova.6.7
monly prescribed doses: fenbendazole 50 mg/kg PO qd × 3 days;
Various anthelmintics are effective, but pyrantel (10 mg/kg) is
febantel 10-20mg/kg PO qd ×3 days; pyrantel pamoate
typically prescribed as a first line of defense because it is safe for
 5-10 mg/kg PO once.5.7 Treatment should be repeated in approx-
young dogs and cats, particularly those with diarrhea. Affected
imately 3 weeks to kill parasites entering the intestinal lumen
animals should be retreated at 2- to 3-week intervals to kill
from the tissues. The use of heartworm preventives containing
 roundworms that were initially in the host's tissues but migrated
pyrantel or milbemycin helps to minimize hookworm infesta-
 into the intestinal lumen since the previous treatment.
fions. In anemic puppies and kittens, blood transfusions may be
High dose fenbendazole therapy (i.e., 50 mg/kg/day from day
 40 of gestation until 2 weeks postpartum) has been suggested to
 55 of pregnancy reduces transcolostral transmission to puppies.
reduce the somatic roundworm burden in bitches and to lessen
Hookworms are a potential human health hazard (i.e., cutane-
transplacental transmission to puppies. Newborn puppies can be
ous larval migrans) and it is imperative that owners are educated
treated with fenbendazole (100 mg/kg for 3 days), which kills
of this zoonotic risk The prognosis in mature dogs and cats is
 more than 90% of prenatal larvae. This treatment can be repeated
 good but can be guarded in severely anemic puppies and kittens.
 2-3 weeks later. Preweaning puppies should be treated at 2, 4, 6,
Owners of puppies or kittens that are severely stunted in their
and 8 weeks of age to lessen contamination of the environment.
growth from hookworm infections should be advised that they
T. canis and T. cati pose a zoonotic risk (i.e., visceral and ocular
may never attain their anticipated body size.
larval migrans); preventing environmental contamination can
help decrease this potential.? Preweaning kittens should be
Tapeworms
treated at 6, 8, and 10 weeks of age. The prognosis for recovery
is good unless the animal is already severely stunted when
 There are several tapeworms known to infect dogs and cats, with
treated, in which case it may never attain its anticipated
the most common being Dipylidium caninum. Tapeworms
body size.
usually have an indirect life cycle; the dog or cat is infected when
it eats an infected intermediate host. Fleas and lice are intermedi-
Hookworms
ate hosts for D. caninum, whereas wild animals (e.g., rabbits) are
 intermediate hosts for some Taenia spp.
Ancylostoma spp. and Uncinaria spp. are more common in dogs
Aesthetically offensive, tapeworms are rarely pathogenic in
than in cats. Infestation is usually from one of two routes, via
small animals, although it should be mentioned that Mesoces-
ingestion of the ova or through transcolostral transmission.
toides spp. can reproduce in the host and cause disease such as
Also, although not as common, freshly hatched larvae may also
abdominal effusion. The most common sign in infested dogs and
penetrate the skin. The adults live in the small intestinal lumen,
cats is anal irritation associated with shed segments “crawling"
where they attach to the mucosa. Plugs of intestinal mucosa
 on the area. A segment may enter an anal sac and cause inflam-
 and/or blood are ingested, depending on the worm species. In 
mation, but this is very uncommon. Very rarely, large numbers
severe infestations, hookworms may be found in the colon. The
 of tapeworms cause intestinal obstruction or vomiting.
mature female lays ova that are expelled in the feces (diagnostic
Taenia spp. and especially D. caninum eggs are typically con-
phase); then in the environment the larva hatch (rhabditiform
fned in segments not detected by routine fecal flotations. This
larva) and grow into third-stage larva (flariform, infective
is a very important part of client education on parasites as
stage).
owners may become confused why a fecal flotation test does not
 Dogs are more severely affected than cats. Young animals may
 diagnose all worms in their pets. Echinococcus spp. and some
have life-threatening blood loss or iron deficiency anemia,
Taenia spp. ova may be found in the feces. Tapeworms are
melena, frank fecal blood, diarrhea, and/or failure to thrive.
usually diagnosed when tapeworm segments (e.g, “rice grains")
- Aq pso asss Ard a iaa are sop ru
 are observed on the feces or in the perineal area.
worms unless they harbor a massive infestation. However, these
Praziquantel and episprantel are effective against all species of
worms may still contribute to disease caused by other intestinal
tapeworms. Prevention of tapeworms involves controlling the
problems.
 intermediate hosts (i.e., fleas and lice for D. caninum). Echinococ-
Finding ova in the feces using fecal flotation is diagnostic and
cus spp. are also considered to be a human health hazard, so
relatively easy because hookworms are prolific egg producers.
treatment, prevention (through fea, lice, and rodent control),
However, 5- to 10-day-old puppies may be exsanguinated by
and education are indicated.
feeding hookworms obtained transcolostrally before ova appear
in their feces. Such prepatent infections rarely occur in older
Strongyloidiasis
animals that have received a sudden, massive exposure. Diagno-
sis is suggested by signalment and clinical signs in these animals.
Strongyloides stercoralis and Strongyloides planiceps infect dogs,
Iron deficiency anemia in a puppy or kitten free of fleas is highly
principally puppies, occurring most commonly in crowded con-
Chapter 8  Gastrointestinal
215
ditions. Strongyloides felis and Strongyloides tumefaciens infect
Cryptosporidia
cats. These parasites produce motile larvae that can penetrate
unbroken skin or mucosa (infective stage). Subsequently, the
The Cryptosporidium spp. are obligate intracellular protozoan
animal may be infested from its own feces even before the larvae
parasites that infect enterocytes. Cryptosporidium parvum may
are evacuated from the colon. Because of this, animals can
 sio s  is r s p
quickly acquire large parasitic burdens. Most animals are infested
from infested animals. The oocysts may also be carried in water.
after being exposed to fresh feces containing the motile larvae
Thin-walled oocysts are produced, which can rupture in the
 a s n ss  (ssd s)
intestine and produce autoinfection. The organism infests
shelters and pet stores.2.5 The clinical signs of strongyloidiasis
the brush border of small intestinal epithelial cells, leading to
are mucoid or hemorrhagic diarrhea and lethargy. Respiratory
diarrhea in the animal.
signs (ie., verminous pneumonia) may be present if parasites
Diarrhea is the most common clinical sign in dogs and cats;
however, many cats infested with Cryptosporidium spp. are
 have penetrated the lungs.
S. stercoralis can be diagnosed by finding the larvae in fresh
feces, either by direct fecal examination or by Baermann sedi-
under 6 months of age, but a similar age predilection has not
been recognized for cats.25
mentation. Strongyloides larvae must be differentiated from
Oslerus spp larvae. It is important to use fresh feces because old
 Diagnosis requires finding the oocysts in the feces or a posi-
feces may contain hatched hookworm larvae, which resemble
tive ELISA test. C. parvum is the smallest of the coccidians and
those of Strongyloides spp.
is therefore easy to miss on fecal examination. Examination
Effective anthelmintics such as fenbendazole, thiabendazole,
should be performed at Xl000 magnification. The use of acid-
and ivermectin should be used to treat strongyloides. The owner
fast stains on fecal smears and fluorescent antibody techniques
must be educated that this parasite is a human health hazard
submit the feces to a laboratory experienced in diagnosing crypt-
because larvae penetrate unbroken skin. Immunosuppressed
osporidiosis. When submitting the fecal sample, the laboratory
people are at risk for severe disease if they become infected. The
 prognosis is guarded in young animals with severe diarrhea and/
must be notifed that the feces may contain C. parvum as this is
 potentially infective for people. The ELISA is more sensitive than
or pneumonia.
fecal examination. A PCR-based test developed for the detection
s ao q  d ss   ds ddi o
Coccidiosis
tive than the available immunoassays.
 po r sd  o a ds 
 In dogs and cats, there are no known reliable treatments.
intestine, predominantly seen in young cats and dogs, and more
Immunocompetent people and cattle often spontaneously elimi-
   an si d   u  s 
nate the infestation, but whether cats and dogs also eliminate the
infective oocysts from the environment, and the coccidia invade
infestation is unknown. Most young dogs with diarrhea associ-
and destroy villous epithelial cells.
ated with cryptosporidiosis die or are euthanized. Many cats
se u m  i  aq  i
have asymptomatic infestations, and those with diarrhea have an
matic, older animal, or they may be responsible for mild to
unknown prognosis.
severe diarrhea, sometimes with blood. Rarely, a kitten or puppy
loses enough blood to require a blood transfusion. Conversely,
Trichomoniasis
small numbers of oocysts do not ensure that the infestation is
insignificant.
a   p  on se s  si
Coccidiosis is diagnosed by finding oocysts on fecal flotation
Tritrichomonas suis, an intestinal pathogen. Animals most likely
examination. These oocysts should not be confused with giardial
become infected by the fecal-oral route.
cysts. In coprophagic dogs, special attention should be paid to
Trichomoniasis typically  is associated with large bowel
the potential presence of coccidian oocysts from other animals.
diarrhea, which rarely contains blood or mucus. While cats of
Occasionally, Eimeria oocysts will be seen in the feces of dogs
 any age, breed, or gender can become infected, this intestinal
that eat deer or rabbit excrement.
 pathogen is seen more frequently in young cats that are housed
 If coccidia are believed to be a problem, sulfadimethoxine or 
in community or densely populated situations (e.g., cafteries,
      os s
shelters). Exotic cat breeds (e.g., Somalis, ocicats, Bengals) seem
sulfa drug does not eradicate the coccidia but rather inhibits it
 to have a higher percentage of clinical signs.
in order for body defense mechanisms to reestablish control.
T. foetus colonizes the surface of the mucosa in the colon,
Amprolium (25 mg/kg administered orally q 24h for 3-5 days)
which leads to chronic large bowel diarrhea. Affected cats are
can be used in puppies but is not approved for use in dogs. It is
typically otherwise normal, but there may be anal irritation,
not to be used in cats as it is potentially toxic. Toltrazuril (15 mg/
 defecation in inappropriate places, or fecal incontinence.
kg q 24h for 3 days) has been found to decrease oocyst shedding.
 Although it may persist for months, the diarrhea typically
 at least temporarily.? The prognosis for recovery is usually good
unless there are underlying problems that allowed the coccidia
 infected cats most likely will represent with bouts of diarrhea
to become pathogenic in the first place.
after being exposed to stress.29
216
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Diagnosis requires identifying the motile trophozoite in the
required for definitive diagnosis of the underlying cause for most
feces. Care must be taken as Tritrichomonas trophozoites can be
cases of PLE.1
mistaken for Giardia trophozoites. Diagnosis can be made by the
 Certain breeds appear to be predisposed: basenji, soft-coated
identification of trophozites on a direct fecal smear, fecal culture,
wheaten terrier, shar-pei, rottweilers, Yorkshire terriers, and
PCR analysis of fecal material, or by colonic mucosal biopsy.?
Lundehund."2
Timely examination of fresh feces diluted with warm saline solu-
tion is the easiest technique, but it is insensitive. Fecal culture
Clinical signs
using the pouch technique developed for bovine venereal tricho-
moniasis is more sensitive.?
Chronic, intermittent small bowel diarrhea, anorexia, vomiting.
 Ronidazole (30-50 mg/kg q 12h for 14 days) is the only drug
and weight loss are all common clinical signs of PLE. Occasion-
currently known to safely and effectively eliminate Tritri-
ally, affected dogs will not have diarrhea, weight loss, or vomit-
chomonas and to resolve the diarrhea associated with the infesta-
ing. When serum albumin is below 2.0g/dL, ascites and edema
tion. However, neurological signs have been reported with its
can develop. The owner may notice a distended abdomen due
use; discontinuing the drug has been reported to stop the adverse
to ascites. Fluid accumulation can also occur in the pleural
effects. If trichomoniasis is diagnosed, it is important to rule out
space, causing dyspnea, tachypnea, and decreased lung sounds.
other causes of diarrhea (e.g., C. perfringens, diet, Cryptosporid-
 Enteric loss of antithrombin may lead to a hypercoagulable state,
ium spp.) because treatment for one of these other causes may
which can cause thromboembolic disease. Dyspnea can be seen
cause resolution of the diarrhea. Treatment can reduce the
when pulmonary thromboemboli occur. Rarely, thromboemboli
number of organisms and improve clinical signs; however, it
can occur in the CNS, causing seizures or twitching.
seldom eliminates the infection.? As previously stated, most
 affected cats will eventually resolve the clinical signs of tricho-
 moniasis, although diarrhea may recur if the patient undergoes
Diagnostics
stressful events.
A database on these patients should include CBC, serum bio-
chemistry profile, urinalysis, +/- urine protein : creatinine ratio,
serum bile acid assay, abdominal and thoracic radiographs,
Diseases of the small intestine
abdominal ultrasound, fecal flotation, abdominal efusion anal-
ysis (if present), and serum cobalamin and folate measurements.
The SI is the part of the digestive tract from the pylorus of the
stomach to the ileocolic valve where it joins to the Ll. It is
ment (parvoviral testing in puppies) or diseases endemic to an
roughly divided into three segments (proximal to distal): the
area (rectal scrape or urine antigen testing for histoplasmosis).
 duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum. There are four layers to
 Diagnosis of PLE is made on the basis of clinical signs and a
the SI: The serosal layer is the outer most, followed by the mus-
finding of low albumin and globulins. Occasionally, increased
cularis, the submucosa, and the inner most layer, the mucosa.
globulins and a low albumin can occur with PLE. This can be
The SI, working with the microfora of the gut, functions to
seen with histoplasmosis and immunoproliferative enteropathy
digest (e.g., breaks down carbohydrates and continue the diges-
ssop ud ran Aq pasnno uae moT zrluasq s u
tion of proteins and fat) and to absorb nutrients, and serves as a
should be ruled out with a urinalysis and urine protein:creati
physical and immune barrier to prevent exposure to any harmful
nine ratio. Low albumin due to liver disease is ruled out in many
 elements. Peristaltic waves provide for mixing of the ingesta and
cases with normal pre- and postprandial serum bile acids. Once
for propelling the ingesta onward through the GI tract. The SI
these other etiologies of low albumin are ruled out, a diagnosis
 both secretes and is under the influence of hormones.
of PLE may be made by exclusion. Other common abnormali-
ties on serum biochemistry include low cholesterol, low calcium
(total and ionized should be measured), and low magnesium.
Protein-losing enteropathy
 Lymphopenia can be seen on CBC.12 Cobalamin (vitamin Bn2)
 PLE is a general term applied to GI disease whereby serum pro-
is frequently decreased due to poor absorption in the ileum
teins (albumin and globulins) are lost due to leakage into the
from diffuse disease. Fecal α,-PI may be measured to confirm
 intestinal lumen. Blood chemistry typically reveals a panhypo-
protein loss in the feces, especially in cases where there is con-
 proteinemia. In contrast, decreased protein due to renal disease
current renal protein loss or hepatic insuffciency.' Survey
(due to loss of albumin through a damaged glomerulus) or liver
-d a a no peu aq A sden 
disease (due to lack of production of albumin by the liver)
neal effusion. Chest radiographs are usually normal but can
usually results in only hypoalbuminemia.
show pleural effusion or evidence of histoplasmosis or meta-
There are many underlying causes for PLE, which include (but
static neoplasia. Abdominal ultrasound may show enlarged
are not limited to) IBD (lymphoplasmacytic, eosinophilic, or
mesenteric lymph nodes, intestinal wall thickening, and abdom-
granulomatous enteritis), lymphangiectasia, parvovirus, histo-
inal effusion. Analysis of abdominal effusion, if present, reveals
plasmosis, phycomycosis, giardiasis, intussusception, GI erosion/
 a pure transudate.
 o  n r i  
 To definitively diagnose the underlying cause of PLE, intesti-
disease is uncommon in the cat.' Biopsy of the GI tract is
 nal biopsy is required. Biopsy may be obtained via endoscopy.
Chapter 8  Gastrointestinal
217
laparoscopy, or laparotomy. Due to the diffuse nature of most 
 phagia.4 Chronically, the patient may experience persistent
underlying causes associated with PLE and the risks associated
 Si Asdo oiossoua ae mo on anp ueq nood m
 levels, malnutrition, hypergastrinemia, and steatorrhea (excess
often preferred as a means to obtain intestinal biopsies for defini-
fat in the stool).?4 Over the following several months, as intesti-
tive diagnosis,2 unless abdominal ultrasound reveals a lesion
 nal hyperplasia and adaption may occur, clinical improvement
that cannot be reached with the scope (distal small intestinal
 can be seen.?-4 This is manifested by decreased defecation fre-
thickening or mass lesion), a surgical lesion is found (intussus-
quency, with more formed stool, leading to less water loss. The
ception), or a liver biopsy is needed to determine if hepatic
patient may regain weight but may still not reach optimal
disease as a cause of low albumin is present.' Additionally,.
weight.24
endoscopy allows the clinician to visualize the mucosa.'
Diagnostics
Treatment
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs and length of intestine
 Treatment includes identifcation and removal or management
 resected. Particularly in the immediate postoperative period, the
of the underlying cause when possible (e.g., immunosuppressive
patient may experience hyponatremia, hypokalemia, azotemia,
drugs for IBD, surgery for intussusception, antifungals for his-
 and metabolic acidosis.4 GI contrast studies can show dilated
toplasmosis, and chemotherapy for GI lymphoma).12 Hypoco-
 intestinal segments and decreased intestinal transit time.4 Blood
work at this time may continue to show anemia and hypoalbu-
Additional supportive care may be necessary (fuid therapy.
 minemia.4 Clinical signs of SBS may persist when the remaining
 transfusion), especially prior to diagnostic procedures such as
intestines are unable to undergo adequate compensatory changes.
gastroduodenoscopy.
Diarrhea and steatorrhea persist in these patients and can be
 severe, especially if the ileocolic valve has not been preserved.?
Prognosis
The response of a particular patient to extensive bowel loss is
Prognosis is dependent on the underlying cause but is consid-
 unpredictable and is not always related to the amount of bowel
ered guarded to poor in most cases.
that has been resected.?-4
Anesthetic complications
Treatment
Hypotension is the main complication when anesthetizing
 Treatment is directed at maintaining adequate nutritional
animals with PLE. Colloidal support with hetastarch or other
 support, minimizing electrolyte abnormalities, and controlling
colloids prior to and during the anesthetic procedure is recom-
 diarrhea.24 During the initial post-op period, ideal nutritional
 mended. Careful blood pressure monitoring during the proce-
 support may be provided via TPN. PPN can also be utilized.
dure is necessary. Drugs that are highly protein bound should
odu are poddns aoaa pue adera pin snouanu
not be used or should be used with extreme caution and require
 during the initial period after resection to maintain hydration
dose reduction.
and to minimize electrolyte abnormalities.4 Sodium and potas-
sium levels should be evaluated at least every 24h.4 Limited oral
 intake should be started as early as possible after surgery to help
Short bowel syndrome
stimulate intestinal adaptation.?4 In the initial phase, elemental
Extensive surgical resection of the SI with associated clinical
     s   a o s  
signs results in short bowel syndrome (SBS). The amount of
 NE or gastrostomy tube. Some animals with SBS will have an
intestine that must be removed before SBS develops has not been 
 increased appetite soon after surgery. Care should be taken to
 clearly defined in veterinary medicine. In humans, it is thought
 not feed these animals large amounts as this can contribute to
that removal of ≥50% of the SI leads to SBS. SBS in animals
diarrhea.24
frequently results when 75% or more of the SI is resected.? The
Low fat, highly digestible diets should be fed long term.
decreased absorptive surface area of the SI that results from
 Supplementation with parenteral vitamin Bi (cobalamin) is rec-
extensive resection often causes inadequate digestion 
and
 ommended long term. Other fat-soluble vitamins should be sup-
malabsorption.2-4 Common causes for extensive bowel resection
 plemented indefinitely. Calcium, zinc, and magnesium may also
in veterinary medicine include intestinal foreign bodies, volvu-
need to be supplemented long term.24
 lus, intussusception, trauma, infarction, and fungal infection.2-4
Additionally, gastric acid hypersecretion can occur, which can
 be an important contributor to diarrhea. This is managed with
Clinical signs
the use of H-receptor antagonists such as famotidine. Intestinal
Clinical signs after extensive bowel resection include very loose,
bacterial overgrowth is common and should be managed with
watery diarrhea, malabsorption, and weight loss2-4 During the
antibiotics (metronidazole and amoxicillin or enrofloxacin ini-
frst 24-48h post-op, diarrhea may be severe and may lead to
 tially; choices for long-term management include metronidazole
dehydration and abrupt weight loss due to significant water loss.
 and tylosin). Occasionally, pancreatic enzyme replacement is
Severe diarrhea may also lead to electrolyte imbalances such as
 useful (Pancrezyme ) if extensive resection of the duodenum has
hyponatremia and hypokalemia.4 As post-op shock subsides, 
 disrupted the pancreatic duct. Persistent, loose, watery diarrhea
animals with SBS become more alert and may develop poly-
 can be treated with an antidiarrheal such as loperamide. Other
218
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
treatments that have been found to be beneficial include urso-
presents with an insidious onset of vomiting and intermittent
deoxycholate (UDCA). In one experimental study, dogs receiv-
diarrhea.
 ing UDCA (300 mg every other day) experienced significant
 improvements in fecal characteristics, body weight, and overall
Diagnostic testing
nutritional state versus the control group.? Hydrophilic laxatives
may decrease fluidity of existing bowel content and may increase
A complete history is crucial when a foreign body is suspected
as the cause of an obstruction. Abdominal palpation, plain
fecal bulk Compounds that may be tried for this purpose include
abdominal radiographs, or ultrasonographic imaging can be
methylcellulose (Citrucel), psyllium (Metamucil), and calcium
polycarbophil (Fiberalr).24 The animal's nutritional status and
diagnostic if they reveal a foreign object, mass, dilated intestinal
loops, or obvious obstructive ileus. Abdominal ultrasonography
food tolerance should be closely monitored long term to avoid
is preferred as the more sensitive technique and can reveal
starvation.4
dilated or thickened intestinal loops that are not obvious on
Prognosis
palpation or radiographs due to poor serosal contrast caused by
 Factors involved in determining the clinical course are status of
abdominal fluid or lack of abdominal fat. The sensitivity of the
the ileocolic valve (if resected, symptoms are consistently worse),
ultrasound will be lessened by gas-filled loops of bowel. In cases
where it is difficult to distinguish obstruction from physiological
extent and site of bowel resection, functional capacity of remain-
 ing bowel and other digestive organs, degree of adaptation that 
ileus, abdominal contrast radiographs may be considered. Many
intestinal foreign bodies cause hypochloremic, hypokalemic
occurs in the remaining intestine,? and client determination to
metabolic alkalosis, a metabolic change that is suggestive of
 pursue management with signifcant cost. A decision to eutha-
gastric outflow obstruction.6.7
 nize should not be made too hastily as time is needed for remain-
If a foreign object is found and an intestinal obstruction is
ing intestines to adapt.? The prognosis seems to be better in
diagnosed, surgical intervention is warranted. If an abdominal
 patients with early aggressive management.? Persistent malab-
mass or an obvious obstructive ileus is found, a presumptive
sorption and steatorrhea are associated with a poor prognosis if
diagnosis of obstruction is made, and further diagnostics may
enough time has passed for adaptation of the intestinal tract to
be needed to completely characterize the obstructive process.
occur. This is especially common in patients whose ileocolic
 Fine needle biopsy and cytological evaluation of an intestinal
valves have not been preserved.2
mass prior to surgery may be warranted to rule out certain dis-
In one retrospective study, most animals had diarrhea or loose
eases (e.g., lymphoma).
stools for a few weeks to months postoperatively and then devel-
 Once intestinal obstruction is diagnosed, routine preanes-
oped normal fecal consistency or had only mild clinical signs
thetic laboratory tests should be performed as serum electrolyte
that were deemed acceptable to the owner.?
and acid-base abnormalities are common in vomiting animals.
 The animal should be stabilized and then promptly prepared for
treated on an individual basis and that care should be taken to
surgery. Vomiting of gastric origin classically produces a hypoka-
 not make a hasty decision regarding euthanasia.
lemic, hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis and paradoxical aci-
duria, whereas vomiting caused by intestinal obstruction may
Intestinal obstruction
produce metabolic acidosis and varying degrees of hypokalemia.
Simple intestinal obstruction
cause of the vomiting is known, making serum electrolyte and
Simple intestinal obstruction {ie., the intestinal lumen is
acid-base determinations important in therapy planning.
. If
septic peritonitis is absent and massive intestinal resection is not
obstructed without peritoneal leakage, severe venous occlusion,
 or bowel devitalization) is usually caused by foreign objects in
necessary, the prognosis is usually good.
dogs and linear foreign bodies in cats. Infltrative disease, intus-
Neoplasms of the small intestine
 susception, and torsion are also possible etiologies.6.7
Overall, tumors of the SI are not common but are usually malig-
Clinical signs
nant when found. In cats, lymphomas (most common), adeno-
Vomiting with or without anorexia, depression, or diarrhea are
carcinomas, and mast cell tumors are the most common, whereas
common clinical signs. Abdominal pain is not typically noted
in dogs, adenocarcinomas, smooth muscle tumors, and other
upon physical examination. The clinical findings of intestinal
stromal cell tumors are more common. Other neoplasia of the
obstruction are related to the site, severity, and cause of the
SI are rare but have been noted (e.g., intestinal fbrosarcomas
obstruction. A complete upper intestinal obstruction can result
[dogs], hemangiosarcomas [cats], schwannomas, neuroendo-
 in severe acute vomiting, which may lead to dehydration and
crine tumors, carcinoids, and plasma cell tumors).° Small intes
fluid loss. If the intestines become devitalized and septic perito-
  s r   a sde isu 
nitis results, the obstruction becomes complicated and the
with the mean age being approximately 9 years of age. However,
animal may be presented in a moribund state or in septic shock
it should be noted that some tumors, such as leiomyosarcomas,
(systemic inflammatory response syndrome [SIRS]). Partial
have been seen in very young animals; therefore, age should not
obstructions are more of a challenge to diagnose as the pet
Exclude a diagnosis of SI cancer.26.9
Chapter 8  Gastrointestinal
219
Alimentary lymphoma
Patient care
Alimentary lymphoma (lymphosarcoma, malignant lymphoma)
 Cats with well-differentiated small cell lymphomas, treated with
is a neoplastic proliferation of lymphocytes in the intestinal
prednisolone and chlorambucil, may do as well as cats with IBD
tract; it can be either focal or diffuse disease. In cats, it may
that receive the same therapy. There is a much better prognosis
be caused by FeLV, but the etiology in dogs is unknown.
 in cats with low grade small cel lymphoma as compared with
 Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis (LPE) has been suggested to
the intermediate or high grade lymphoma. A more aggressive
be prelymphomatous in some animals, but the frequency of
form of intestinal lymphoma, lymphoblastic large cell, also is
malignant transformation of LPE to lymphoma is unknown.?
 more resistant to treatment. The long-term prognosis is very
Alimentary lymphoma appears to be more common in cats,
 poor, but some cats with well-differentiated intestinal lymphoma
and the incidence of intestinal lymphoma is increasing. The
extraintestinal forms of lymphoma (e.g., arising from the lymph
 Chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, hydroxydoxorubicin, On-
nodes, liver, spleen) are more common in dogs. Intestines
 covin, prednisone [CHOP] protocol 21-day cycle)" may be of
affected by alimentary lymphoma may appear grossly normal or
value in dogs, but this value has been questioned as some patients
may exhibit nodules, masses, difuse intestinal thickening
have become quite illif given aggressive chemotherapy.6
(resulting from infltrative disease), dilated sections, and/or focal
constrictions. Mesenteric lymphadenopathy is often noted, but
Intestinal adenocarcinoma
it is not constant, and it is important to note that IBD can cause
 mild to moderate mesenteric lymphadenopathy. A PLE may
Adenocarcinoma is a malignant neoplasia of the epithelium
also occur.
 arising from glandular tissue that can be further characterized
Chronic, progressive weight loss, anorexia, small intestinal
 by the tissue of origin. Both the gastric form and the intestinal
diarrhea, and vomiting are typically the presenting signs. Inap-
form of adenocarcinoma are seen. Intestinal adenocarcinoma
 may affect either the SI or LI. Both adenoma and adenocarci-
e A siao pe ssad o mos aesid ae sui
 noma are more common in the canine LI than in the SI, with
this to the aging process.
the converse being true in cats." In dogs SI carcinoma has a
 predilection for the duodenum, whereas the jejunum and ileum
are more commonly affected in cats. Adenocarcinoma is most
Diagnostic testing
common in older dogs (mean age 9 years) and cats (mean age
11 years).*
The diagnosis of alimentary lymphoma is through the identifica-
tion of neoplastic lymphocytes, which may be obtained by fine
Diagnostic testing
needle aspiration cytology or histopathology via biopsy. His-
topathologic evaluation of intestinal biopsy specimens is the
Clinical signs at presentation are weight loss and vomiting
most reliable diagnostic method. Biopsy samples may be col-
caused by partial or complete intestinal obstruction. Dogs with
 intestinal adenocarcinoma occasionally present with acute signs
lected via endoscopy (partial thickness) or surgery (full thick-
 of obstruction. Physical examination fndings aid in the diagno-
ness). When collecting endoscopic biopsy samples, it is of utmost
sis as a palpable mass is found in approximately half of all
importance to obtain multiple, deep samples. A sample that is
 cases.1112 If significant ulceration has occurred (local infltra-
not sufficiently deep may lead to the erroneous diagnosis of LPE
instead of lymphoma. On histopathology, lymphocytes found in
tion), melena and anemia may be present. If the intestinal wall
the submucosa are not specific for lymphoma; lymphocytes can
is perforated, clinical signs associated with peritonitis or intra-
be also found in the submucosa of cats with IBD. However, cats
 onstrating neoplastic epithelial cells. Endoscopy, surgery, and
with IBD generally do not have the dramatic numbers that can
be found in some cases with lymphoma. Occasionally, neoplastic
ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration may be diagnostic.
lymphocytes are found only in the serosal layer, thus necessitat-
Adenocarcinomas are locally infltrative and may extend to the
ing full-thickness surgical biopsy specimens. If collecting full-
serosa and mesentery and may metastasize to local lymph nodes
thickness biopsy samples, it is important to biopsy the ileum
and/or the peritoneal cavity. Carcinomatosis as well as metasta-
because many patients (especially cats) do not have lymphoma
sis to the liver, testes, skin, and other organs have been reported.?
in the duodenum.
Diagnostic imaging, particularly ultrasound, may delineate a
Animals with extremely well-differentiated lymphocytic lym-
mass lesion. Ultrasound-guided fine needle aspirations may be
 diagnostic, although adenocarcinomas may not exfoliate well
phoma may be impossible to distinguish from those with LPE
using routine histopathology, even with multiple full-thickness
and a definitive diagnosis via percutaneous or surgical biopsy
biopsy samples. This seems to be more of a problem in cats. In
may be needed.
these cases, diagnosis often depends on finding evidence of lym-
Patient care
phoma in other organs (e.g., liver) or in running immunohisto-
chemical studies to determine if the lymphoid population is
Surgical resection, if feasible, is the treatment of choice, but the
monoclonal. Paraneoplastic hypercalcemia occasionally occurs
 prognosis is usually grave due to local metastasis at the time of
but is neither sensitive nor specific for lymphoma.
diagnosis." Remission times from surgery of up to 2 years have
220
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
been reported, but survival time is usually less than 6 months.
The second most common form of idiopathic IBD is eosino-
  q o n  a s sa 
 philic enteritis (EE). Architectural changes coupled with mucosal
feline intestinal epithelial tumors and may play a role in future
infltration of eosinophils on histopathology characterize the
therapy; standard adjunctive chemotherapy has not been dem-
 inflammation. There is no age predilection for EE but Dobermans,
 onstrated to be effective.6.8,12-14
rottweilers and German shepherds may be overrepresented.
Granulomatous enteritis is uncommon and is characterized
Intestinal leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas
by mucosal infiltration of macrophages resulting in the forma-
Intestinal leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas are connective
tion of granulomas. It has been suggested that intracelular bac-
tissue tumors that usually form a distinct mass and are primarily
terial infection similar to the attaching and invading Escherichia
found in the SI and stomach of older dogs. Leiomyomas and
coli seen in the histiocytic ulcerative colitis of boxers may under-
leiomyosarcomas originate from the smooth muscle and are
lie these conditions.
reportedly the most frequent mesenchymal tumors affecting the
Proliferative enteritis is a rare inflammatory enteritis charac-
canine GI tract.6.9
terized by segmental mucosal hypertrophy of the intestine. An
Primary clinical signs are intestinal hemorrhage, iron def-
underlying infectious etiology has been suggested (e.g., Lawso-
ciency anemia, melena, and obstruction. These tumors can also
nia intracellularis, Campylobacter spp., and Chlamydophila).
cause hypoglycemia as a paraneoplastic effect.?
Clinical signs
Diagnosis requires identification of neoplastic cells, often at
the time of surgical resection. Evaluation of ultrasound-guided
  d  s  r 
fine needle aspiration may be diagnostic, but these tumors do
yomiting and diarrhea in dogs and in cats, but an individual case
not exfoliate as readily as many carcinomas or lymphomas. For
may present with other GI signs (e.g., appetite changes, lethargy.
this reason, surgical biopsy is often necessary. Surgical excision
weight loss, abdominal pain) (see Table 8.3.2). Clinical signs may
may be curative if there are no metastases. Metastases make
d e 1m o m m p m A  o p 
the prognosis poor, although some animals are palliated by
cipitating reason. In general, the clinical signs are associated with
chemotherapy.
the affected region of the Gl tract. Patients with inflammation
in the gastric region or upper SI commonly present with vomit-
Inffammatory bowel disease
  sn iods si s uis ad a s 
IBD describes a chronic, immune-mediated group of disorders
Diarrhea may be the result of large intestinal inflammation or
 of the SI and/or the LI that is distinguished by persistent, recur-
chronic SI inflammation. Anorexia is typically thought of as the
rent GI signs and histological evidence of intestinal inflamma-
tion. The term IBD can be overused and the disease may be
although polyphagia may be present in the patient with weight
overdiagnosed. A number of diseases are associated with chronic
loss. Changes in appetite may not even be reported in milder
intestinal inflammation, and the failure to eliminate other causes
cases of IBD. Postprandial pain may be present in some patients
of mucosal inflammation coupled with the difficulties in the
and may need to be managed, even without any other clinical
interpretation of histopathologic specimens exacerbates the
problem. The etiology of IBD is unknown, hence the term idi-
ciated with more severe inflammation and/or EGE. Severe,
opathic, but environmental, genetic, and immune factors may
chronic disease may also be associated with weight loss and PLE.
play a role in the disease process. Histological variation in the
Taking a thorough history is the crucial frst step in the diag-
nostic proces as sometimes, an obvious precipitating event (e.g..
appearance of the inflammation suggests that idiopathic IBD is
not a single disease but a group of disorders. The terminology
stress, dietary change) is uncovered. Educating owners on the
use of a pet diary may be helpful in discovering these events and
used reflects the predominant cell type of inflammation present
and the affected location in the GI tract. The most common form
will also prove useful in monitoring a response to therapy.
of IBD is LPE, followed by eosinophilic gastroenteritis (EGE)
Etiology
and the rarer forms, granulomatous enteritis and neutrophilic
infiltration.26.15
The etiology of small animal IBD remains unknown, even with
the extensive research in the human analogues of Crohn's disease
Manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease
and ulcerative colitis. Suggested factors include environmental
(e.g., drugs, diet, altered flora in the gut), genetic (i.e., shown to
LPE is the most common manifestation of intestinal inflamma-
tion.? Mucosal infltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells
be an issue in human disease), and immune response. The altered
immune response may include such factors as the response to
coupled with architectural changes characterizes the inflamma-
tion on histopathology. German shepherds, shar-peis, and pure-
antigens formed by the microflora of the gut during the digestive
bred cats may be predisposed to LPE, and the basenji and
 process and a disruption in the mucosal barrier.
Ludenhund have a severe, hereditary form of LPE (basenji
Diagnostics
enteropathy and diarrheal syndrome in Ludenhund). LPE is
 most often seen in older animals but has rarely been reported in
The diagnosis of idiopathic IBD is made by ruling out all
younger animals.
other etiologies (e.g., parasitic, infectious, diet-responsive, and
Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
221
Table 8.3.2  Inflammatory bowel disease signs
histological severity and serum concentrations of C-reactive
 proteins. CIBDAI and FIBDAI may also be utilized to monitor
Vomiting
response to treatment.18-23
· Bile
· Food
Laboratory assessment of the minimum database
 Cats—with or without hair
The diagnosis of IBD starts with the exclusion of other causes of
Dogs-with or without grass
inflammation. The minimum database should include the CBC,
Hematemesis
serum chemistries, urinalysis, and serial fecal flotation tests.
Small intestinal-type diarrhea
 The CBC is typically within normal limits, although occasion-
Large volume
ally, neutrophilia, eosinophilia, anemia, or thrombocytopenia
Watery
may be noted No changes are typically seen on serum chemis-
· Melena
tries either, but hypocholesterolemia, hypocalcemia, and
Large intestinal-type diarrhea
hypomagnesemia may be found, and in dogs, a mild elevation
Hematochezia
   s n  aq  s  
Mucoid
 mia and hypoglobulinemia are noted.5.16
Frequency
 Fecal examination is important to rule out parasitic causes
Tenesmus
of inflammation (e.g., hookworms, whipworms, and Giardia).
However, even if fecal tests are negative, empirical treatment for
Thickened bowel loops
 occult Giardia infection is recommended in all cases. 6
Abd ominal discomfort/abdominal pain
Additional laboratory diagnostics
Excessive borborygmus and flatulence
Additional fecal tests may be indicated depending on the clinical
Weight loss
 presentation (e.g., fecal culture, acid fast stain, rectal scraping).
Alterations in appetite
 Polyphagia
in/rule out other causes of inflammation. Both folate and cobala-
 Decreased appetite/anorexia
min are affected by intestinal absorption and serum concentra-
Eating grass
tions will reflect these alterations. Folate is absorbed in the
 Pica
 proximal intestine and cobalamin is absorbed in the distal Sl.
Hypoproteinemia
Low blood levels of either can help to localize the inflammatory
Ascites
response or, if both are depressed, can indicate diffuse inflam-
 Subcutaneous edema
mation. However, it is important to remember that inflamma-
Hydrothorax
tion does not necessarily indicate IBD.
Other diagnostic tests that may be utilized in cases where the
Source: Hall EJ, German AJ. Diseases of the small intestine. In: Textbook
diagnosis is in question (e.g., poor response to therapy, discern-
of Veterinary internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman,
ing IBD from lymphoma), and newly emerging diagnostic tests
pp. 1526-1572. St. Louis, M0: Elsevier; Hall EJ, German AJ. Inflammatory
 include detection of perinuclear antineutrophilic cytoplasmic
bowel disease. In: Smal Animal Gastroenteroiogy, ed. JM Steiner,
pp. 312-329. Germany: Schlutersche; 2008.
 antibodies (pANCAs) or increased serum acute phase proteins
(to detect inflammation), altered GI hormone concentrations,
 increased intestinal permeability, fecal excretion of calprotectin,
immunohistochemistry or flow cytometry (to analyze immune
antibacterial-responsive conditions), ruling out intestinal and
extraintestinal disease (e.g., tumor, pancreatitis), demonstrating
cell subsets), reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
 intestinal inflammation on histopathology, and pairing these
(RT-PCR) (to measure cytokine mRNA expression), and clonal-
fndings with the clinical signs. Infection that is not diagnosed
ity testing (to distinguish lymphoma from severe IBD).
remains a possibility, particularly after the identifcation of
Imaging
adhering and invading E. coli in histiocytic ulcerative colitis of
boxers and human Crohn's disease.?
Plain radiographs may be useful for detecting diffuse disease and
Clinical indices, used in human medicine, are a clinical
 to discern gross anatomical disease, but ultrasonographic exami-
scoring system that measures quantifiable and repeatable meas-
ures of disease. Canine and feline IBD activity indices, (CIBDAI
ticularly in cats. Intestinal wall thickness, changes to the layers
and FIBDAI), respectively, have been developed. Six GI signs
 of the SI, mesenteric lymphadenopathy, and pancreatitis can all
(attitude, appetite, vomiting, stool consistency, stool frequency,
 be imaged and evaluated with ultrasound. In addition, real-time
and weight loss) are scored on a scale of 0-3 (0 = none, 3 = severe).
 guided aspirations, if indicated, are possible and may be useful
The composite score is used to stage the disease from clinical
 in diagnosing certain conditions (e.g., lymphoma). Increased
insignificant disease (0-3), to mild (4-5), moderate (6-8), or
intestinal wall thickness is noted in some but not all cases of
severe IBD (>9). The CIBDAI has been shown to correlate with
 idiopathic IBD; this is particularly true in the dog.'6
222
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Biopsy and histopathology
frequently utilized. An initial dosage of 1-2 mg/kg is given orally
every 12 h for 2-4 weeks and then tapered slowly over the subse-
Intestinal biopsy is necessary to document intestinal inflamma-
quent weeks to months. If possible, patients should be weaned off
tion and to characterize the inflammatory cell type; however, the
of glucocorticoids and their use reserved for relapse or at least
diagnosis of IBD is not made on histopathology alone. Biopsy
reduced to a low dose given every 48 h. Monitoring for the adverse
 can be accomplished with either endoscopic or surgical biopsy
effects of glucocorticoids is indicated, keeping in mind that feline
 i a si aossu (de o sidossredn)
patients tolerate long-term therapy with less adverse effects
biopsy technique but has limitations both in the depth of the
than dogs.
sample (not full thickness) and in the sampling locations (gastric,
Other medications used in the treatment of IBD are budeso-
 proximal duodenum or colon). Scope diameter is another limita-
nide, sulfasalazine, azathioprine, 5-aminosalicylate (mesala-
tion, being more of an issue in cats and in small dogs. Full-
mine), cyclophosphamide, and cyclosporine. In addition,
thickness surgical biopsy may be indicated, especially in cases
probiotics and prebiotics may reduce intestinal inflammation,
with multiorgan involvement, but may be contraindicated in
although no canine or feline trials have been run.
patients with PLE.
The gold standard for the diagnosis of intestinal inflammation
Prognosis
is the histopathologic assessment of biopsy material. The current
s! pue saqeea Aueu seu Ta oedoi ioy sisouoid su
limitations of histopathologic interpretation of intestinal biop-
sies may limit the histopathologic diagnosis. One limitation is
dependent on species, degree of severity, cell type, area affected,
focal or diffuse disease, and responsiveness to therapy. In addi-
the variability in specimen quality; this may be especially true
tion, since the diagnosis of idiopathic IBD is a diagnosis by
for endoscopic samples due to small sample size, instrumenta-
exclusion, it is theorized that some positive and poor outcomes
tion, and the skill of the operator. The experience level of the
are actually attributable to misdiagnosis rather than failure to
pathologist can also affect interpretation as the current set of
respond to therapy. In general, the more severe the disease, and
standards (inflammation, architectural changes, increased cel-
if
 concurrent pancreatic disease, hypocobaliminemia, or
lularity, evidence of cellular damage) have not been universally
adopted and the differentiation between normal specimens, IBD,
The health-care team must remember that clinical improve-
and lymphoma can be difficult.&15.16
ment, histological improvement, and response to therapy may
Treatment and patient care
not correlate.
The treatment of IBD, regardless of cell type or location, involves
Key nutritional factors for IBD
therapy with a combination of dietary modification and medical
Water
management that is tailored to the severity of clinical signs
 and client compliance. Empirical treatment with antipara-
Dehydration is a frequent problem in patients with IBD. Reduced.
siticides is recommended for all patients. Medical manage-
water consumption is often aggravated by fuid losses from vom-
ment typically begins with antibacterials and, if indicated, an
iting and/or diarrhea. Whenever possible, fluid balance should
immunosuppressive medication is utilized. Mild cases of IBD
be maintained via oral consumption of fluids. However, dehy-
often respond to diet therapy and metronidazole alone, espe-
drated patients and those with persistent vomiting often need
cially in cats.? Severe cases (where clinical signs or mucosal
parenteral fuid administration.24
inflammation are severe) may require early intervention with
Electrolytes
immunosuppressives.
Patients with IBD need a highly digestible diet (decreases the
Serum electrolyte concentrations should be assessed regularly to
intestinal antigenic load and thus may reduce mucosal inflamma-
allow early detection of abnormalities as vomiting and diarrhea
 tion) and one that meets their dietary requirements. In order to
persist. A common finding in IBD patients is hypokalemia. Thus,
eliminate adverse food reactions, the diet should also be antigen
foods containing 0.8-1.1% DM potassium are preferred for dogs
 limited and based on a single-source protein preparation.
and cats with IBD. Initially, potassium levels should be restored
The treatment of patients with antimicrobials is usually indi-
with intravenous potassium supplementation. IBD patients often
cated, at least short term, except in very mild cases that may be
lose large amounts of sodium through fluid feces; however,
controlled with dietary therapy alone. Metronidazole is the frst
sodium deficits may be masked by dehydration.
choice not only for its broad spectrum anaerobic antibacterial
Energy density and fat
and antiprotozoal effects but also for its inhibition on cell-
mediated immunity. Other antibacterials (e.g., oxytetracycline,
When managing patients with chronic enteropathies, energy
tylosin, trimethoprim-sulfa) may also have immunomodulatory
dense foods are favored. Energy dense foods allow for smaller
effects and some efficacy.
yolumes of food, which minimize GI distention and secretions.
 Immunosuppression and the control of inflammation is used
Unfortunately, energy dense foods are also high in fats. High
in chronic and acute episodes of IBD, although due to adverse
fat foods may contribute to osmotic diarrhea and GI protein
effects with long-term use, it is utilized only as a last resort. Oral
 os   si r   s
glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone and prednisolone) are the most
therapy with a food with moderate energy density (4.0-4.5 kcal/g
Chapter 8Gastrointestinal
223
[16.7-18.8 k]/g] DM). The fat levels should be as follows: 12-15%
Digestibility
 DM for dogs and 15-25% DM for cats. Only if the patient can 
tolerate them should foods with higher fat levels be offered.24
The feeding of highly digestible (fat and digestible [soluble] car-
bohydrate ≥90% and protein ≥87%) foods provides a number
Fiber-enhanced foods are typically lower in fat and thus have
 of advantages when managing dogs and cats with IBD. Highly
lower energy density levels than highly digestible foods. The DM
digestible foods are associated with reduced osmotic diarrhea
 energy density of fiber-enhanced foods for IBD should be at least
(secondary to fat and carbohydrate malabsorption) and reduced
3.2 kcal/g for dog foods and at least 3.4kcal/g for cat foods. In
fiber-enhanced foods, the fat content for dogs and cats with IBD
intestinal gas (due to carbohydrate malabsorption), and smaller
 amounts of protein are absorbed intact (leading to decreased
should be 8-12% and 9-18% DM, respectively. Dogs and cats
 antigen loads). Furthermore, the proximal gut is able to absorb
with GI disease tolerate dietary fat differently. Cats in general can
 tolerate much higher concentrations of dietary fat than dogs.4.25
nutrients more completely from low residue foods. Foods for
IBD patients should be free of lactose so as to avoid the compli-
cation of lactose intolerance. Digestibility percentages of protein,
Protein
fat, and carbohydrate in fiber-enhanced foods should be at least
 Fecal losses may contribute to protein malnutrition in dogs and
 80, 80, and 90%, respectively.24
 cats with IBD. Protein sources that have a high biological value
and are highly digestible (≥87%) should be used. If patients are
Vitamins
not experiencing high protein loss, protein should be provided
In patients with IBD, the intake of water-soluble and fat-soluble
at levels suficient for the appropriate life stage (at least 25% for
vitamins is critical. Typically, water-soluble vitamins have been
adult dogs and 35% for adult cats [DM]).
significantly reduced or depleted by diarrheic losses and the large
 Dietary antigens are assumed to play a role in the pathogen-
fluid flux through the patient. 4 Dogs and cats with chronic enter-
esis of IBD; therefore, hypoallergenic novel protein elimination
opathies may have cobalamin (vitamin B,2) deficiency, which can
foods or foods containing a protein hydrolysate are often uti-
result in severe metabolic abnormalities including increased
serum methylmalonic acid and disturbances in serum amino acid
levels.3 Hypocobaliminemia usually results when specific cobala-
 min receptors in the ileum become damaged secondary to inflam-
can be lower. Ideal elimination foods should (1) avoid protein
matory disease. Ongoing GI losses and a reduction in cobalamin
 91 (7) (s1 9 %-08 11 50 1 %97-91) 955
 consumption further exacerbate the deficiency. It is important to
protein digestibility (≥87%), and (3) contain a limited number
assess serum cobalamin in patients with chronic small intestinal
of novel protein sources to which the patient has never been
disease, and patients found to be deficient (cobalamin level
exposed or contain a protein hydrolysate.24
<300 ng/L) should receive weekly subcutaneous cobalamin
therapy (250 μg in cats and 500 μg in dogs) for 4-6 weeks or until
Fiber
- i-    u a o u s i
Beet pulp, soy fiber, inulin, and fructooligosaccharides (FOSs)
nance, once or twice monthly therapy may be required Absorp-
have been confirmed by in vitro fermentation to generate volatile
tion of dietary folate (Vitamin Bs), which is present in foods in the
fatty acids. These fatty acids are considered beneficial in patients
polyglutamate form, may be inhibited secondary to disease of the
with IBD of the distal SI and colon.30-32 Fermentable fbers may
 proximal Sl, including chronic inflammatory disease of the small
also serve as prebiotics, which promote the growth of beneficial
bowel. Low values are a result of jejunal mucosal damage, reduced
bacterial organisms such as Bifdobacterium and Lactobacillus, at
folate absorption, and depletion of folate stores.24
 the expense of more pathogenic microbes such as Desulfovibrio
 In patients with steatorrhea (increased fat in the stool), loss of
and Clostridium spp. In commercial products, these fbers are
fat-soluble vitamins may be signifcant (e.g., vitamin K-deficient
incorporated at rates of 1-5% DM.24
coagulopathies may occur in patients with IBD) and parenteral
There are several physiological characteristics in fber that
 administration of fat-soluble vitamins may be necessary. If a
are beneficial in the management of small bowel diarrhea as
vitamin K-responsive coagulopathy is suspected, vitamin K, at a
 increased fber content normalizes intestinal motility, water
dosage of 0.5-1.0 mg/kg subcutaneously is recommended. The
balance, and microflora. Transit time through the small bowel
dietary intake of vitamins is often sufficient when the disease
 can be normalized with the addition of fber, thus slowing a
 responds to treatment and fat absorption is reestablished.24
hypermotile state and/or improving a hypomotile state to rees-
Zinc
tablish normal peristaltic action. Fiber also provides intralumi-
nal stimuli, which help to reestablish the coordinated actions of
 In humans, zinc deficiency is a well-recognized complication of
hormones, neurons, smooth muscle, enzyme delivery, digestion,
 IBD as the SI is the primary site of zinc homeostasis."5 Zinc may
and absorption.24 Finally, dietary fber adds nondigestible bulk,
       
which buffers toxins and holds excess water. Moderate levels
water and electrolyte absorption, and regeneration of the gut
(7-15% DM) of insoluble fber (e.g., cellulose) are suggested;
 epithelial surface.24 The veterinary health-care team should con-
however, this level of fber reduces the energy density and digest-
sider supplementing dietary zinc intake if dogs and cats with
ibility of a food.
 IBD are exhibiting dermatitis or poor hair coat quality.
224
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Acute and chronic diarrhea
additional water is pulled into the intestinal tract.'2 This type of
diarrhea can be seen with EPI, small intestinal diseases such as
 Diarrhea is defined as a change in the frequency, consistency, or
 SIBO and viral diseases that cause villus atrophy such as parvo-
volume of bowel movements or stools. There are four major
virus and coronavirus. Diseases that cause severe inflammation
mechanisms for diarrhea; they are osmotic, altered mucosal
can change the permeability of the intestinal tract, increasing
 permeability, abnormal motility, and secretory diarrhea. Under
ao nou pa u assd u s s ansd s
normal circumstances, absorption exceeds secretion; when this
to an increase in fluid loss but can also create a PLE.?
P jo s sre sad jd a roo jou so
diarrhea, which can cause rapid dehydration.
Altered mucosal permeability
Diarrhea can present as either a small bowel disorder involy-
ing the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum or as a large bowel dis-
The intestinal tract is composed of epithelial cells, lymphatic and
 order involving the colon. Presenting signs are the easiest way
blood vessels, and the local immune system. When any of these
to distinguish the two causes. Small bowel diarrhea typically
fail to perform properly, the water and other nutrients typically
 presents as diarrhea with weight loss, poor body condition, vom-
found in the intestines are not able to pass through the intestinal
 iting, borborygmus, and flatulence. Large bowel diarrhea typi-
wall as they normally would and diarrhea can result. Failure can
cally presents as diarrhea with mucous and blood, tenesmus,
result from diseases that cause erosions, ulcerations, inflamma-
severe cramping, discomfort, and dyschezia (straining to defe-
tion, or infltration of the mucosa. Causes can be NSAID
O1
cate) (Table 8.3.3).1
other drug uses, infectious agents (e.g., bacteria and viruses),
IBD, and cancers (e.g., especially with diffuse cancer such as
Causes of diarrhea
lymphoma).
 Diarrhea can be caused by anything that disrupts the normal
Abnormal Gl motility
function of the intestinal tract, usually affecting one of the four
mechanisms of action.
Abnormal motility can be seen either as an ileus, causing a “pipe
Osmotic diarrhea
tinal tract, or as increased peristaltic contractions pushing the
Osmotic diarrhea is associated with retention of water within
ingesta through the intestinal tract prior to complete absorption
 the intestine due to failure in absorption or digestion and when
of water.' The pipe effect can be seen secondary to infiltrative
Table 8.3.3  Acute and chronic diarrhea tables
Acute causes
Chronic causes
Dietary
Dietary
 Dietary indiscretion
 Adverse reaction to food
 Foreign bodies
· Carbohydrate intolerance in cats
 Garbage/compost toxicity
 Contaminated raw food diets
Infectious agents 
Infectious agents 
Bacteria
 Bacteria and small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
 Parasites
·Fungi
Rickettsia
· Parasites
· virus
Miscellaneous
Miscellaneous
Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis
 Juvenile diarrhea of cats
 Pancreatic exocrine insufficiency
Toxin or drug induced
IBD
 Chemotherapeutic agents
Lymphoplasmacytic eosinophilic, lymphocytic, suppurative gastroenteritis/enteritis
Laxatives
· NSAIDs in dogs
Neoplasia
 Lymphosarcoma
 Mast cell tumor
Source: Davenport DJ, Remillard RL, Carroll M. Large bowel diarrhea: colitis. In: Smalf Animai Cinicai Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Thatcher, RL
Remilliard, P Roudebush, BJ Novotny, pp. 1101-1107. Marceline, M0: Walsworth Publishing;: 2010.
Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
225
disease (e.g, IBD), severe abdominal pain, parvoviral enteritis,
access to garbage, dead animals, or abrasive materials. Cats that
or postoperative due to ileus from anesthesia or analgesia.
 hunt can also be exposed to salmonella from the birds they eat.4
Increased peristaltic contractions can be seen with IBD. A
Husbandry issues also need to be evaluated. Vaccination and
change in intestinal motility can also predispose the patient to
anthelmintic administration records should be reviewed to see
developing SIBO.
if they are current. The health of other pets and people in the
house should be questioned A positive answer to any of these
Secretory diarrhea
 questions would increase the likelihood of the involvement of an
Secretory diarrhea is relatively uncommon in dogs and cats com-
 pared to people and food animals. Crypt epithelial cells lining 
 Determining the laboratory tests that would be most helpful
the intestinal tract produce intestinal fuid, while enterocytes
in diagnosing the cause of the diarrhea is dependent on the
lining the villous tips are responsible for absorption of nutrients
 presenting signs. It is important to determine if the condition is
and water. Factors that can affect the production of intestinal
self-limiting, as with dietary indiscretion, or life threatening, as
fluid are hormones within the body, bacterial enterotoxins,
with parvoviral infection. Signs consistent with a life-threatening
certain medications, deconjugated bile acids (i.e., those that have
 problem would include abdominal pain, dehydration, depres-
not be “conjugated"” with albumin in the liver), and hydroxy fatty
sion, fever, and red and white blood cells in the stool.' Initial
acids (such as butyric acid and acetic acid).' In people, this type
diagnostics often include assessment of dehydration through a
 PCV and TS and fecal examination for parasites and bacteria not
of diarrhea is typically seen with bacterial and viral infections
such as cholera, dysentery, and salmonella infections.
commonly seen in the stool.4 Centrifugation of fecal flotation
samples is the preferred method for the detection of parasitic
Acute versus chronic diarrhea
ova. A dried and stained fecal smear is required for the assess-
 ment of bacterial populations. If the veterinarian suspects a pan-
Acute diarrhea is usually caused by diet, parasites, or infec-
creatic enzyme deficiency, a 12-h fasted serum sample should be
fious diseases (e.g., Satmonella or E. coli). Chronic diarrhea
 collected to evaluate the TLI (trypsin-like immunoassay). B12
is more commonly caused by maldigestion of nutrients (e.g.
(cobalamin) and Ba (folate) levels are commonly run with TLI
 EPI), non-protein-losing malabsorption and protein-losing
to evaluate GI bacterial populations and whether they are in
malabsorption.
adequate numbers to produce these vitamins normally. These
 Differentiation between non-protein-losing and protein-
 tests, while not giving an assessment of the EPl, do indicate
losing enteropathies is determined by evaluating the plasma
overall GI health. Serum chemistry can be used to evaluate other
albumin levels. In non-protein-losing disease, plasma albumin
organ dysfunctions that may be present.
levels will be within normal limits. In patients with protein-
losing diseases with normal hepatic and renal function, plasma
 unless there is a suspicion for intestinal foreign body. Mucosal
albumin levels are ≤2.0-2.2 g/dL.
changes do not produce significant radiographic changes, and
 Acute cases of diarrhea may be a component of a chronic
the presence of ileus and air within the intestines is nonspecific.
disease, meaning the signs started and presented as an acute
Ultrasound can be more helpful as the individual layers of the
disease, but the causative disease has been present for a long
intestinal walls may be evaluated to determine if they are within
 period of time, as seen with parasitic infections.
 normal limits. This can help to rule in or rule out inflammatory
There are no definitive time limits assigned to acute or chronic
conditions where wall thickness changes can occur Unfortu-
diarrhea, though generally, acute diarrhea is seen as a disease
 nately, ultrasound is not able to identify what is causing these
that has a length of symptoms usually less than 7-14 days, while
changes but may be helpful in pinpointing what area is affected.
chronic diarrhea is often measured in weeks to months.*
Endoscopic (partial thickness) or surgical biopsies (full thick-
ness) may be required to thoroughly evaluate the changes that
Diagnostics
are occurring in the intestines (Figure 8.3.2).
Obviously, not all causes of diarrhea will be responsive to dietary
Patient care
 manipulation, but nutrition is still important for all animals
 presenting with diarrhea. The most important step in the diag-
 In general, the more of the clinical signs that are present, the
nosis and treatment of both acute and chronic diarrhea is a
 more aggressive the therapy that will be required. If a history of
complete physical exam and history, playing close attention to
 dietary indiscretion is uncovered and the patient is stil eating
the number, characteristics, and frequency of defecations seen
and is not clinically dehydrated, usually time will take care of the
 by the owner. BCS and weight also need to be evaluated. Large-
irritation causing the diarrhea. Switching the animal to a highly
volume, fluid stools are more typical of small bowel diarrhea.
digestible, low residue food for 5-7 days may help the inflamed
 Bloody or tarry stools could indicate a potentially life-threatening
 intestinal tract absorb the nutrients in the food while the healing
 condition such as intestinal bleeding or an ulcer.4
process is ongoing.
 Careful attention should be paid to the dietary history as diet-
Typically, the digestibility of an intestinal diet should be >87%
induced diarrhea is one of the most common etiologies seen in
 overall, with >87% digestibility for protein content and >90%
dogs and cats. This can include recent diet changes to a moist,
digestibility for the fat and carbohydrate content. If using a fiber-
high fat or meat-based diet, as well as feeding table scraps, and
 enhanced diet, overall digestibility will be affected. Digestibility
226
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
monly seen, but GI signs can appear on their own or in conjunc-
tion with skin changes.? Intestinal changes are reversible with
appropriate treatment and removal of the inciting food item.
 Normal intestinal function can return in approximately 6-8
weeks. Dietary changes include switching to a novel protein diet
or to a modified protein diet, such as the hydrolyzed protein
diets. When using novel or modified protein diets, it is important
to offer a diet that the animal has not been exposed to before,
and this would include foods given as treats and table foods.
While not actually a dietary sensitivity, some cats are carbo-
hydrate intolerant and will develop a diarrhea from high carbo-
hydrate diets; a low carbohydrate diet often will resolve the
problem. The lower the level of carbohydrates, the better, and
there are some foods with as low as 15% carbohydrates available.
Figure 8.3.2  Histopathologic image of normal intestinal villi via
To find a low carbohydrate diet, look for ones that are high in
endoscopy. Image courtesy of Dr. Barb Powers, Colorado State
 protein and moderate to high in fats.
University.
While intestinal cancers are not responsive to dietary manipu-
lation (with the exception of high levels of fish oils in some forms
of lymphoma), the inclusion of a high quality diet will aid the
should be no lower than 80% for protein and fat, while the
patient in healing, responding to the chemotherapeutic agents,
digestibility of carbohydrates remains the same (at least 90%).4
and will ensure adequate nutrients in a form the body can
Sometimes, a secondary bacterial or fungal infection (e.g..
utilize.'
 compost gut) will develop because of the dietary indiscretion. A
Medications
fecal culture is required to identify either bacterial or fungal
infections. Since the intestinal tract is already populated with
Anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive drugs (e.g, corti
bacteria and fungi, identifying causative pathogens is difficult
costeroids, cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, chlorambucil) are
and often unrewarding. Cases of suspected bacteria or fungal
commonly used in the treatment of intestinal diseases that cause
 infection should be empirically treated with the appropriate anti-
diarrhea. In patients with SIBO, antibiotics (metronidazole, tet-
biotics or antifungals if cultures are not pursued. This type of
racycline, tylosin, or sulfasalazine) are used concurrently with
diarrhea may not clear up on just dietary manipulation and
anti-inflammatory and diet therapy to improve the overall treat-
medical therapy will be needed for full recovery.
ment effectiveness.6
Food poisoning, secondary to bacterial infection, can be life 
Corticosteroids (prednisone, prednisolone, and budesonide)
threatening. Food poisoning is not always the result of dietary
indiscretion. The feeding of raw food diets can introduce bacte-
The efficacy of corticosteroids in the management of intestinal
ria into the intestinal tract. There have been documented cases
disease relates primarily to their anti-inflammatory and immu-
 of both animals and humans dying because of food poisoning..
nosuppressive properties; appetite stimulation is a secondary
 The bacterial infection, as well as potential endotoxins, needs to
benefit. In cases of chronic administration, the dose should be
be treated. The introduction of a highly digestible bland diet is
slowly decreased over 4-6 months. Relapses can occur if the
also indicated. The addition of probiotics may also be beneficial
dose reduction occurs too quickly and sometimes are so severe
in reestablishing the proper bacterial population in the SIs.
that corticosteroids alone can no longer control the signs associ-
 Obviously, foreign body obstruction will not be responsive to
ated with a relapse of the disease. In these situations, stronger
dietary manipulation. Radiographs and abdominal ultrasound
immunosuppressive agents, such as azathioprine, cyclophospha-
offer some help in locating foreign bodies, but unfortunately, not
mide, or cyclosporine may need to be added.6
all foreign bodies show up on abdominal radiographs. Some-
It is ideal that steroids not be given without a definitive patho-
times, endoscopic or surgical identifcation and removal may be
logical diagnosis. Changes in the intestines that can obscure
the only option. The reintroduction of a highly digestible diet
diagnosis can occur even with a short course of use and will
following surgery is essential for tissue healing and to restore
 objects an animal will eat, limiting their access to foreign bodies
Antibiotics: metronidazole, tetracycline, tylosin
Metronidazole, tetracycline, and tylosin are antibiotics that can
(e.g, retrievers) and with animals who are “repeat offenders"
be used alone, in combination, or in conjunction with the anti-
The judicious use of a basket muzzle may be needed.
inflammatory/immunosuppressive agents. Metronidazole can
Ae o  e aq a p aq  as A
cause nausea, anorexia, and, occasionally, vomiting and diarrhea.
(rarely) or by food sensitivity. There is no breed, age, or sex
Hepatic and encephalopathic problems can occur in sensitive
 predisposition to either condition. The problem can occur at any
time and without a change in food. Dermatologic signs are com-
bitter tasting. If the animal does not swallow the pill the first
Chapter 8  Gastrointestinal
227
time, considerable drooling can occur. This can cause the pill to
Table 8.3.4 Protein energy source comparison
dissolve too quickly, preventing redosing with the same pill.
Protein type
Except for the hepatic problems, the side effects of tetracycline
Biological
Percentage of
Protein
value
protein (%)
quality
and tylosin are similar to those of metronidazole.6
Acid Neutralizers
Egg
94
45-49
Excellent
Gastric reflux, esophagitis, and gastritis can commonly occur
Casein 
80
80
Good
secondary to chronic gastric or intestinal inflammation. This
Beef, lamb,
74
29
Good
increased acidity can also exacerbate inflammation in the duo-
pork, chicken
denum.' Famotidine and cimetidine are useful in cases of severe
Soybean meal
73
48
Good
GI inflammation, gastric reflux, and esophagitis. Both are readily
Rice (white)
64
7
 Adequate
available over-the-counter. Cimetidine must be administered
more frequently in dogs and in cats than in humans. Ranitidine
Collagen
G
88
Poor
also provides gastric motility actions in cats; this has not been
 evaluated in dogs.6
Source: Gross KL, Jewell DE, Yamka RM, et al. Macronutrients. In: Small
Animal Cinicai Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Thatcher, RL
Role of the veterinary technician and
Remilliard, P Roudebush, BJ Novotny, pp. 49-104. Marceline, M0: Walsworth
Publishing; 2010.
client education
Most, if not all, of the care for a patient with diarrhea can and
should be provided by the veterinary technician. Ensuring that
bonds are located at the terminal or omega end of the molecule
 n       sd 
and are given an “n" designation within the molecule. The main
are in a positive nutritional status is equally important for their
fatty acid families include the n-3, n-6, and n-9 fatty acids. In
long-term recovery.
common usage,the “n" is replaced with the term “omega*" hence
 Technicians are also important in client education. Many
the common classification of omega-3, omega-6, and omega-9
fimes, this is not “simple diarrhea" Ensuring that the clients
fatty acids. The n-3 and n-6 fatty acids are essential fatty acids
understand the pathophysiology of the disease as well as the goal.
(EFAs) because they cannot be synthesized from other fats in the
of treatment recommendations will help increase client compli-
animal. The n-9 fatty acids can be synthesized in the body from
ance and, ultimately, patient outcome.
the n-3 and n-6 fatty acids. Fats elongate during digestion rather
than breaking down during digestion, so the longer fatty acids
Key nutritional factors in patients with small bowel
are easier for the body to produce than the shorter ones. Fatty
diarrhea
acids also cannot be converted from one family to another.9
Increasing the amount of n-3 fatty acids found in the diet,
Protein manipulation
specifically eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic
Protein quality determines the availability of the various amino
acid (DHA), has been found to help decrease the inflammatory
acids for utilization by the body. The highest quality protein is
responses of the animal. The n-6 EFAs are seen as proinflamma-
egg with a biological value of 100; all other proteins are com-
tory, and by increasing the amount of n-3 in a diet, the n-6's have
pared to this. Protein quality is determined by the amino acid
less space available to exert their negative effects.9
that is found in the lowest quantity and this is termed the limit-
Altered n-3:n-6 fatty acid ratios can be found in many of
ing amino acid (see Table 8.3.4).
the commercially available intestinal and critical care diets. By
Every species has a different essential amino acid profle. Cats,
adjusting the fatty acid ratios in the foods rather than adding
as obligate carnivores, have a larger amino acid profle and have 
supplements, the animal receives the correct EFAs and has better
 absorption of these nutrients.?
acid and fatty acid requirements, they must have a meat-based
Fiber manipulation
source of protein in their diets.4.7
 Protein energy malnutrition can occur when feeding a diet
Dietary fbers predominately affect the large bowel, though they
that is inappropriate for the age or disease state of the animal.
can also affect gastric, small intestinal, and pancreatic structure
 This can be seen when a cat is fed a canine diet, when a pregnant
 and function. Fibers in diets are responsible for modifying
or nursing animal is fed a maintenance diet, or when a restricted
gastric emptying time, ensuring normal intestinal motility and
protein diet is fed during a disease state requiring increased
 intestinal transport time, buffering toxins, binding and holding
protein intake.
excess water within the intestinal tract, supporting the growth
of normal intestinal bacterial flora, buffering gastric acidity after
Fatty acid manipulation
 transport into the intestinal tract, altering the viscosity of the
Fats are classified by their physical state of matter while at room
intestinal contents, and ading nondigestible bulk to the diet.0.
temperature and by the location of the first set of double bonds
Carbohydrates and fibers can be divided into three classes
that occur within the molecule. Lipids are a solid at room tem-
 a s   s n a  o 
anop sul amieiaduai uooi je pmbi e are siey pue ainieiad
highly fermentable fbers, such as guar gum and pectin, which
228
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
can aggravate diarrhea by increasing the osmolality within the
the primary problems with probiotics is getting live organisms
intestinal tract. This can cause additional fluid to be pulled into
past the gastric acids. Most, but definitely not all, bacteria are
the intestinal lumen. These carbohydrates can be found in some
killed by the high acidity found in the stomach.
of the canned and saucy foods.1011
When using probiotics on a patient, ensure that the product
Moderately fermentable fibers, though not actually digested
has been evaluated in animals; ascertain if significant numbers
well by the animal, can be broken down by the intestinal bacte-
of the bacteria have been documented to survive the stomach's
rial flora into short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), such as butyric
high acidity and if they will grow in the host animal. There are
 acid and acetic acid. Butyric acid is a significant energy source
a number of veterinary products available that meet these crite-
for the enterocytes lining the intestinal tract. One class of mod-
ria. While there are usually no problems associated with admin-
erately fermentable fbers that has received much aftention is the
istering probiotics, they are an expensive source of protein if the
d      s
bacteria do not survive.
energy for the enterocytes but they can also exert a “prebiotic"
effect on the bacterial flora. This prebiotic effect selects for the
Lymphoma versus severe IBD in cats
 presence of certain bacteria over others, helping to maintain an
Occasionally, the clinician is unable to distinguish between well-
optimal bacterial population within the gut. Pea fiber, beet pulp.
differentiated lymphosarcoma and severe IBD despite excellent
 and oat fber are examples of moderately fermentable fibers.1011
biopsies and competent histological evaluation.  For these
 Nonfermentable or slowly fermentable fbers are typically
patients, aggressive medical treatment protocols should be
added to foods to dilute calories and to provide bulk Cellulose,
tried, including prednisolone, metronidazole, chlorambucil, and
 peanut hulls, and soybean hulls are examples of nonfermentable
dietary manipulation. Chlorambucil should probably be initi
fbers. Though these fbers are not very water soluble, they do
ated at the same time as the prednisolone so as to avoid acquired
have significant water-holding capacity and can be useful in
chemotherapy resistance in lymphosarcoma, which occurs with.
some fiber-responsive diarrheas.10.11
 prednisolone therapy alone.'2
Many diets contain a combination of these fber sources to
 provide the best of each, without the problems associated with
Conclusion
the use ofa single fber source. Other diets may contain minimal
The therapy of choice for treating a patient with diarrhea is
fber sources to increase digestibility and to decrease stool
volume.
 dependent on a number of conditions. By performing a complete
physical exam, gathering a good diet history and conducting all
Digestibility
appropriate laboratory tests, the veterinary health-care team can
The term "highly digestible" does not have a regulatory defini-
better define the right treatment plan for each patient.
tion, but the term is generally used to describe a diet that has
 protein digestibility of ≥87%, and fat and carbohydrate digesti-
Infectious diarrhea
bility of ≥90%. Veterinary therapeutic diets formulated for
Canine parvoviral enteritis
patients with intestinal disease usually contain meat and carbo-
hydrate sources that have been highly refined to increase digest-
Canine parvovirus (CPV) is a small, nonenveloped DNA virus
ibility.41 The digestibility of diets fed to patients with intestinal
that is highly resistant in the environment. There are two types
disease should be higher than normal because digestion and the
 of parvoviruses that infect dogs. Canine parvovirus-1 (CPV-1)
absorption of nutrients are often compromised. Additionally,
is a somewhat nonpathogenic virus that may be associated with
since tissue damage and immune function may be side effects of
gastroenteritis, pneumonitis, and/or myocardlitis in puppies 1-3
the disease process, the use of high quality nutrients is even more
weeks of age. Canine parvovirus-2 (CPV-2) is responsible for
important.411
classic parvoviral enteritis. CPV-2 usually causes clinical signs
Digestibility can be found in the product reference guide for
5-12 days after the dog is infected via the fecal-oral route.
 most therapeutic diets. If this information is not available, call
S  ai sap pe s ad aa
the client service representative for additional help. If a feeding
(e.g., bone marow progenitors, intestinal crypt epithelium).13.4
trial has not been done on the food, digestibility information will
The virus has mutated since it was frst recognized, and the
not be available.
most recently recognized mutation, CPV-2b, may be more path-
Probiotics
ogenic in some dogs. CPV-2b and the even more recently identi-
fied CPV-2c can also infect cats. The clinical signs are dependent
 Probiotics are a class of supplements that can be used in animals
upon the virulence of the virus, the size of the inoculum, the
n n      s  
patient's defenses, the age of the patient, and the presence of
are beneficial to the animal. Probiotics may be recommended
 other enteric pathogens (e.g., parasites). Doberman pinschers,
rottweilers, pit bulls, Labrador retrievers, and German shepherds
tablish healthy numbers of beneficial bacteria (rather than allow-
may be more susceptible to parvoviral infection than other
a ss  s  n  , a 
breeds. Viral destruction of intestinal crypts may produce villus
immune system may also affect the bacterial numbers in the
collapse, diarrhea, vomiting, and intestinal bleeding, leading to
intestines and may benefit from a course of probiotics. One of
bacterial invasion; however, some animals may have mild or
Chapter 8Gastrointestinal
229
even subclinical disease. Many dogs are initially presented
 quate potassium, unrecognized sepsis, and unsuspected concur-
because of depression, anorexia, and/or vomiting (which can 
rent GI disease (e.g., parasites, intussusception). Close attention
resemble foreign object ingestion) without diarrhea. Diarrhea is
 and monitoring of the patient to avoid these pitfalls can favora-
often absent for the first 24-48 h of illness and when diarrhea 
 bly affect the prognosis and outcome.
does occur, it may or may not be bloody. Secondary to inflam--
It is beneficial to administer plasma if the serum albumin
mation, intestinal protein loss may be present, causing hypoal bu-
concentration is less than 2.0g/dL. Colloids such as hetastarch
minemia. Vomiting is prominent and the severity may cause
 may be substituted for plasma; however, they usually do not
esophagitis and dehydration. Transient or prolonged neutrope-
 contain antibodies that might be beneficial. Antibiotic therapy
nia may be present due to damage to bone marrow progenitors,
 is warranted if there is evidence of infection (e.g., fever, septic
thus making the animal susceptible to serious bacterial infec- 8
 shock) or if the patient is at risk of infection (i.e., severe neutro-
 tion. This is especially true if the damaged intestinal tract allows
 penia). It is reasonable to administer a frst-generation cepha-
bacteria access to the body (via bacterial translocation through 
 losporin if the animal is neutropenic but afebrile. If the animal
the GI wall). Fever and septic shock (i.e., SIRS) are common in
 is in septic shock (i.e., SIRS), then an antibiotic combination
severely ill dogs but are often absent in less severely affected
 with a broad spectrum aerobic and anaerobic spectrum is rec-
animals. It is important to note that puppies infected in utero or
 ommended (e.g., ticaricillin or ampicillin plus amikacin or enro-
 before 8 weeks of age may develop myocarditis.
floxacin). Aminoglycosides should be avoided until the patient
is rehydrated and renal perfusion is reestablished. Remember to
Diagnostic testing
 Diagnosis is often tentatively made on the basis of a complete
 breed dogs as cartilage damage may occur. Severe vomiting com-
history and physical examination. Neutropenia is suggestive but
plicates therapy and may require administration of antiemetics
is neither sensitive nor specific for CPV enteritis since salmonel-
 such as dolasetron, ondansetron, or maropitant. If esophagitis
 losis or any overwhelming infection can cause similar changes
 occurs, H-receptor antagonists may be useful.
in the CBC. Regardless of whether diarrhea occurs, infected
Feeding small amounts of liquid diet via an NE tube appears
dogs shed large numbers of viral particles in the feces (i.e., >10*
to help the intestines to heal more rapidly. Care must be exer-
particles/g). Therefore, ELISA for CPV-2 in the feces is the best
cised if placing an NE tube in a puppy that is stil omiting as
diagnostic test although vaccination with a modified live parvo-
the tube can be vomited up from the esophagus and can end up
viral vaccine may cause a weak positive result for 5-15 days after
 in the trachea. A bland diet may be fed once vomiting has ceased
vaccination. It is important to remember that the ELISA result
for 18-24h. Parenteral nutrition can be lifesaving for patients
may be negative if the assay is performed early in the clinical
that are not able to keep food down via the oral route or for
course of the disease; this test should be repeated in dogs that
 patients unable to accept any enteral nutrition. PPN is an easier
seem likely to have parvoviral enteritis but that initially have
 option for many situations as the nutrition can be administered
 negative fndings. Shedding decreases rapidly and may be unde-
through a peripheral catheter and acts as fuid resuscitation
tectable 10-14 days after infection. The real benefit to testing is
as well.
that either a presumptive diagnosis of parvoviral enteritis is con-
In order to minimize the spread of parvoviral enteritis, both
frmed or other diseases that can mimic parvovirus but require
veterinary personnel and the pet owner need to understand the
different therapy (e.g., salmonellosis, intussusception) must be
modes of transmission of the disease: (1) Parvovirus persists for
considered. 14-16
long periods of time (i.e., months) in the environment, making
 Electron microscopic evaluation of feces detects the presence
ps au so dse () nsodxa pd o n 
 of the virus, but CPV-1 (which is usually nonpathogenic except
virulent CPV-2; (3) maternal immunity sufficient to inactivate
perhaps in neonates) is morphologically indistinguishable from
vaccine virus may be present in some puppies; and (4) dilute
CPV-2. Definitive diagnosis requires demonstration of CPV-2
bleach (1: 32) is one of the few readily available disinfectants that
virus or viral antigens either in feces or in tissues (e.g., intestine,
kills the virus, but it can take 10min to achieve effectiveness.
 tongue) postmortem."5 Also on necropsy, intestinal biopsy will
Client education on the severity and contagiousness of parvovi-
demonstrate typical histological lesions (ie., crypt necrosis).
rus should be provided. The home environment should be
cleaned and disinfected prior to discharge of the animal from
Patient care
the hospital, and the owners should be encouraged to be consci-
Fundamentally, the treatment of canine parvoviral enteritis is
entious about the disposal of feces. At home, the animal should
similar to any severe, acute, infectious enteritis. Fluid and elec-
be isolated from other susceptible animals for 2-4 weeks follow.
 trolyte therapy is crucial and is typically combined with antibiot-
ing discharge.
ics. With appropriate care of sufficient duration, the outcome is
Vaccination of puppies should begin at 6-8 weeks of age. The
usually positive. However, very young puppies, dogs in severe
 antigen density and immunogenicity of the vaccine as well as
-id ppr arou e aa  sq ua pue os sas
the amount of antibody transferred from the bitch determine
nosis. Common treatment problems include inadequate fluid
therapy (common), overzealous fluid administration (especially
 cines generally are not as successful as attenuated vaccines, and
in dogs with severe hypoproteinemia), failure to administer 
 giving a series of these vaccinations is typically best for the
glucose to hypoglycemic patients, failure to supplement ade-
230
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
in producing a long-lasting immunity. When the immune status
Patient care
of the pup is unknown, it is recommended to administer three
Cats with parvoviral infection are treated in much the same
doses of an attenuated vaccine, 3-4 weeks apart between 6 and
way as described for dogs with the disease. Supportive therapy
16 weeks of age. If a vaccination needs to be administered prior
 to 5-6 weeks of age, an inactivated vaccine is safer. All puppies 
with parenteral fluid therapy is a must when treating FPV.
should be revaccinated 1 year later, then at intervals of 3 years.13-
A major difference between dogs and cats centers on immu-
15 Regardess of the vaccine used, there appears to be a 2- to
 nization: Parvoviral vaccine seems to engender a better protec-
tive response in cats than in dogs. However, kittens younger
3-week window during which the puppy is susceptible to parvo-
than 4 weeks of age should not be vaccinated with modified
 sss q p i p o s
live virus vaccines or risk the occurrence of cerebellar hypo-
Adults that were previously not vaccinated usually receive two
 plasia. The vaccine cannot be administered orally, but intra-
doses 3-4 weeks apart.
nasal administration has been found to be effective. See
There is no strong evidence that parvoviral vaccination should
feline vaccination recommendations in Chapter 12 for more
information.
tions. However, modified live vaccinations should not be admin-
As with dogs, many affected cats live with aggressive support-
istered to patients younger than 5 weeks of age or those suspected
of incubating or being affected with distemper. If parvoviral
ive care and if overwhelming sepsis is prevented.
enteritis develops in one dog in a multiple-dog household, it is
Canine coronaviral enteritis
practical to administer booster vaccinations to the other dogs.
However, in this instance, the vaccination of preference is an
Canine coronaviral enteritis occurs when coronavirus invades
inactivated vaccine in case the other dogs are incubating the
and destroys mature cells on the intestinal villi, causing diarrhea
infection at the time of immunization. The client must be edu-
and, occasionally, vomiting. Because the intestinal crypts remain
cated to keep a new puppy elsewhere if bringing this puppy into
intact, villi are able to regenerate more quickly in dogs with
a house with a dog that has recently had parvoviral enteritis. See
coronaviral enteritis than in dogs with parvoviral enteritis. A
canine vaccination recommendations in Chapter 12 for more
distinguishing feature of canine coronaviral enteritis is that bone
information.
marrow cells are not affected.
 CPV is a serious disease, but dogs that are treated in a timely
Usually, coronaviral enteritis is not as severe as classic parvo-
fashion with proper therapy typically survive, especially if they
viral enteritis; it rarely causes hemorrhagic diarrhea, septicemia,
survive the frst 4 days of clinical signs. Dogs that have recovered
or death. Dogs of any age may be infected. Typically, clinical
from CPV-2 enteritis develop long-lived immunity of at least 20
signs are seen for less than 1 to 1% weeks. It is important to
months and potentially lifelong. Whether immunization against
remember that any small or very young dog may die as a result
CPV-1 will be needed is unknown.
of dehydration or electrolyte abnormalities caused by diarrhea;
therefore, evaluation and treatment, if indicated, is important.
Feline parvoviral enteritis
 Dual infections with parvovirus and coronavirus may produce
Feline parvoviral enteritis, more commonly known as feline dis-
a high incidence of morbidity and mortality.
 temper or feline panleukopenia, is caused by feline panleukope-
 nia virus (FPV), which is distinct from CVP-2b. FPV is a very
Diagnostic testing
stable virus without an envelope that has the ability to survive
Canine coronaviral enteritis is usually much less severe than
in the environment for up to a year. However, CPV-2a, CPV-2b,
 and CPV-2c can infect cats and cause disease 13.14
many other enteritises. Thus, it is seldom definitively diagnosed.
 Many infected cats never demonstrate any clinical signs of the
Most dogs are treated symptomatically for acute enteritis
dlisease. The virus is shed in the feces for up to 6 weeks postinfec-
obtained early in the course of the disease can be diagnostic.
tion. The virus typically spreads from the tonsils to other lym-
However, this virus is fragile and easily disrupted by inappropri-
phoid tissues, then to the bone marrow, and to intestinal crypt
ate handling of the feces. A history of contagion and the elimina-
cells. Clinical signs in affected cats are usually similar to those
 tion of other causes are reasons to suspect canine coronaviral
described for dogs with parvoviral enteritis. Kittens affected in
enteritis.
utero may develop cerebellar hypoplasia.15
Diagnostic testing
Patient care
 Diagnosis of feline parvovirus enteritis is similar to that as
 Fluid therapy, motility modifers, and time should resolve most
described for CPV. The ELISA test for fecal canine CPV is also
cases of coronaviral enteritis. Symptomatic therapy is usually
a good test for feline parvovirus. However, it is important to note
successful except, perhaps, for very young animals. A vaccina-
that the test may be positive for only 1-2 days after infection,
tion is available, but the value of this vaccination is uncertain,
and by the time the cat is clinically ill, this test may not be able
except perhaps in animals at high risk of infection (e.g, those in
 to detect viral shedding in the feces. A presumptive diagnosis
infected kennels or dog shows).
can be made based on clinical signs and a severe leukopenia
The prognosis for recovery in an animal suffering from canine
(50-3000leukocytes/mL).
coronaviral enteritis is usually good.
Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
231
Feline coronaviral enteritis
and cats. Demonstrating the bacteria, or the toxin produced by
the bacteria, in the patient's feces is insufficient to definitively
Infections in adults are often asymptomatic, whereas kittens may
 diagnose a particular organism as the causative agent of intesti-
have mild, transient diarrhea and fever. Deaths are rare, and the
 nal disease.
prognosis for recovery is excellent. This disease is important
 The diagnosis of bacterial enteritis can be made if the finding
because affected animals seroconvert and may become positive
of clinical disease is consistent with a particular organism, there
on feline infectious peritonitis serologic analysis. It is theorized
 is evidence of the organism or its toxin, thereby eliminating
that mutation by the feline coronavirus may be the cause of feline
 other causes of the clinical signs, and appropriate therapy pro-
infectious peritonitis. Testing is done through PCR evaluating
duces the expected response. Ifa fecal culture is to be performed,
titers. However, a positive titer only indicates exposure to coro-
the veterinary laboratory should be consulted ahead of time
navirus and may not necessarily indicate actual disease.
as to the appropriate media and protocol for the submission
Feline leukemia virus: associated panieukopenia
 of the sample. In many cases, the best chance of making a defini-
tive diagnosis involves following the guidelines described and
FeLV-associated panleukopenia (myeloblastopenia) may be
using molecular techniques on isolates to demonstrate toxin
caused by coinfection with FeLV and FPV.3 Histological com-
production.
 parison of the intestinal lesions of myeloblastopenia resembles
Campylobacteriosis
marrow and lymph nodes are not consistently affected as they
There are several species of Campylobacter. Typically, Campylo-
are in cats with parvoviral enteritis.
 bacter jejuni is the species associated with GI disease. However,
 Owners will present their cats with signs of chronic weight
in certain cases, Campylobacter upsaliensis has been implicated.
loss, vomiting, and diarrhea (often characteristic of large bowel
These organisms prefer high temperatures (i.e., 39-41°C); con-
disease). Anemia is also commonly noted in affected cats.
sequently, poultry is probably a reservoir. Campylobacter infec-
Diagnostic testing
tions appear less frequently in cats than in dogs. These organisms
 may be found in the intestinal tract and feces of healthy dogs
 Finding FeLV infection in a cat with chronic diarrhea is sugges-
and cats.17
tive of the disease. Neutropenia and anemia is typically noted on
Symptomatic campylobacteriosis is primarily diagnosed in
the CBC of these cats. Histological lesions of FPV in a cat with
animals younger than 6 months old, living in crowded condi-
FeLV are definitive for diagnosis.
tfions (e.g., kennels, humane shelters) or as a nosocomial infec-
Patient care
tion. Although clinical signs are variable, mucoid diarrhea (with 
 or without blood), anorexia, and/or fever are the primary signs.
Symptomatic therapy involves fluid/electrolyte therapy, antibiot-
 Campylobacteriosis tends to be self-limiting in dogs, cats, and
 ics, antiemetics, and highly digestible bland diets. Elimination of
 in humans; however, it occasionally causes chronic diarrhea.
d  s  s pn d 
Occasionally, classic Campylobacter forms such as “commas"
 poor diet) may be beneficial.
 or “seagull wings" may be found during cytological examination
 Unfortunately, this disease has a poor prognosis due to other
 of a fecal sample. This cytology is thought to be specifc but of
 FeLV-related complications.
uncertain sensitivity. PCR analysis of the feces is also available.
 If campylobacteriosis is suspected, erythromycin (11-15 mg/
Feline immunodeficiency virus:
kg administered orally q 8h) or neomycin (20mg/kg adminis-
associated diarrhea
tered orally q 12 h) is usually effective. β-Lactam antibiotics (i.e.,
FIV may be associated with severe, purulent colitis. The patho-
penicillins, first-generation cephalosporins) are reportedly inef-
genesis is unclear and may involve multiple mechanisms.
fective.1 The length of treatment needed for a cure has not been
Severe large bowel disease is common and can occasionally
definitively established. The animal should be treated for at least
result in colonic rupture. These cats will present with the appear-
1-3 days beyond resolution of clinical signs. It is important to
ance of being very ill, whereas most cats with chronic large bowel
 remember that antibiotic therapy may not eradicate the bacteria,
disease caused by IBD or dietary intolerance seemingly feel fine.
and reinfection is probable in kennel conditions. Chronic infec-
The severe purulent colitis in conjunction with the detection of
tions may require prolonged therapy.
antibodies to FIV allows for a presumptive diagnosis.
Therapy is supportive and includes fluids/electrolytes, an-
there are cases in which there is convincing evidence of trans-
fiemetics, antibiotics, and/or highly digestible bland diets. The
mission from pets to people. Infected dogs and cats should be
long-term prognosis is very poor, although some cats can be
isolated and individuals working with the animal, its environ-
maintained for months.
ment, or its waste products should wear protective clothing.
Thorough hand washing after handling the animal or any objects
Bacterial diseases
 in close proximity is indicated.
The following bacterial diseases all have certain aspects in
With appropriate antibiotic therapy and removal from the
 contaminated environment, the prognosis for these patients
cussed below may be found in the feces of clinically normal dogs
232
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Saimonellosis
C. perfringens may result in an acute, bloody, self-limiting
nosocomial diarrhea; an acute, potentially fatal hemorrhagic
There are a number of Salmonella serotypes that may cause
diarrhea; or a chronic large bowel or small bowel (or even both)
disease. These serovars occur across the globe and have the
diarrhea—with or without blood or mucus. Disease associated
 potential to infect not only mammals but also birds and rep-
tiles.l4 Satmonella typhimurium is one of the serovars that is
with C. diffcile is not well characterized in small animals but
may include large bowel diarrhea, especially after antibiotic
more commonly associated with disease. The bacteria may origi-
therapy.
nate from infected dogs or cats shedding the organism or from
 Finding spore-forming bacteria on fecal smears is not diag-
contaminated food sources (especially poultry, swine meat,
nostic. Commercially available toxin assays for C. difficile toxin
and eggs).
have not been validated for the dog or cat, and results do not
 Salmonella spp. may generate acute or chronic diarrhea, sep-
always correlate with the patient's clinical condition. The basis
ticemia, and/or sudden death, especially in pediatric or geriatric
for presumptive diagnosis lies in determining that the patient
animals. Salmonellosis in young animals can produce a syn-
drome that closely mimics parvoviral enteritis (including severe
mia, elimination of other causes, and resolution of signs when
 neutropenia), which is one reason that ELISA testing for parvo-
 treated appropriately.
virus is useful in ruling in/out this disease.
aq A re a as si ass sud  
 Culture of Satmonella spp. from normally sterile areas (e.g.
treatment with tylosin or amoxicillin. A positive response is
blood), identification by PCR, or fecal isolation of Salmonella
expected soon after initiating treatment. In some patients, clini-
serotypes in a patient with clinical signs can be used for
cal signs resolve after a 1- to 3-week course of therapy. It is
dliagnosis.13.15
important to remember that antibiotic treatment does not neces-
Treatment of salmonellosis is dependent upon the severity of
sarily eliminate the bacteria, and some animals may need therapy
the clinical signs. In animals with diarrhea as the sole presenting
to continue indefinitely. Tylosin (20-80 mg/kg/day, divided, q
sign, only supportive fuid therapy may be needed. Antibiotic
12 h) or amoxicillin (22 mg/kg q 12h) seem to be effective and so
treatment may promote bacterial resistance and a carrier state;
far have been shown to have minimal adverse effects. Eventually,
thus, it is not recommended when Salmonella bacteria are
some animals can be maintained with once-daily or every-other-
isolated from healthy infected animals or stable animals with
day antibiotic therapy. Metronidazole is not as consistently effec-
diarrhea. In animals with severe hemorrhagic diarrhea, marked
tive as tylosin or amoxicillin. Some dogs with chronic diarrhea,
 depression, shock, persistent pyrexia, or sepsis, parenteral anti-
seemingly caused by C. perfringens, respond well to fber-
biotics need to be given. The choice of antibiotic should be
supplemented diets. The prognosis in these cases is good, and
 governed by sensitivity testing when possible, but fluoroquinolo-
there appears to be no obvious public health risk, but anecdotal
 nes appear to be effective against many Salmonella spp. Therapy
evidence of transmission between people and dogs does exist.
initially should be given for 10 days, but prolonged therapy may
If disease caused by C. diffcile is suspected, supportive fluid
be required. The feces should be recultured on several occasions
to ensure that the infection has been eliminated.18 Aggressive
and electrolyte therapy may be necessary dependent upon the
severity of signs in the animal. Metronidazole typically is effec-
 plasma therapy should be considered as it is often beneficial in
tive in killing this bacterium, but a sufficiently high dose to
septicemic patients.13
achieve adequate metronidazole concentrations in the feces is
Infected animals are a risk to public health (especially for
needed for effective therapy. Vancomycin is often used to treat
infants and older adults) and should be isolated until they are
asymptomatic. When signs disappear, it is prudent to reculture
the treatment of dogs or cats.
the feces to ensure that shedding has stopped. It is necessary to
Dogs suffering from diarrhea caused by C. perfringens have
 properly educate all individuals in contact with the animal, its
an excellent prognosis, but if diagnosed with C. difcile, the
environment, and its waste products. Such persons should wear
prognosis is uncertain.
 protective clothing and should wash all contaminated surfaces
with disinfectants such as phenolic compounds or bleach (1:32
Miscellaneous bacteria
dilution).
Yersinia enterocolitica, Aeromonas hydrophila, and Plesiomonas
The prognosis in Salmonella-affected patients is usually good
if diarrhea is the only clinical sign but is guarded in septicemic
shigelloides have been shown to cause acute or chronic entero-
colitis in dogs and/or in cats as well as in people. However, these
 dogs and cats.
bacteria are uncommonly diagnosed in the United States.
Y. enterocolitica is primarily found in swine (which may serve
Clostridial diseases
as a reservoir) and in cold environments. Due to its ability to
C. perfringens and Clostridium difficile can be found in clinically
grow in cold temperatures, it is also a cause of food poisoning.
 un s u e sio on sade inq s re
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) may seemingly be associated
for C. perfringens to produce disease, environmental conditions
with canine and feline diarrhea, although it does not appear to
must be such that the bacteria have the ability to produce toxin
be especially common.
and that the toxin is produced. Clostridial disease is mostly
 ss o  a  aq   i t
'saop us pazuaosal
Yersiniosis frequently affects the colon and results in chronic
Chapter 8Gastrointestinal
233
large bowel diarrhea. Abdominal pain may also be present as this
 colonic biopsy specimens is usually diagnostic, but special stains
symptom is reported to occur in humans.
may be necessary. Fundic examination of the eye occasionally
It would be reasonable to culture for Y. enterocolitica if animals
reveals active chorioretinitis. Abdominal radiographs may show
present with persistent colitis, especially if they have been in
 hepatosplenomegaly, and thoracic radiographs sometimes reveal
contact with pigs.
pulmonary involvement (e.g., miliary interstitial involvement
 Supportive therapy should be initiated and the affected animal
and/or hilar lymphadenopathy). Cytological evaluation of
should be isolated from other animals. Persons in contact with
hepatic or splenic aspirates may be diagnostic. Rarely, a CBC
the affected animal and/or its environment and waste products
 may demonstrate yeast in circulating WBCs. Thrombocytopenia
should be advised to wear protective clothing and to follow
 may occur. Cytological examination of bone marrow or of buffy
cated; however, in cases of EHEC, their use has not shortened
 serologic tests and fecal culture for the yeast are unreliable.
clinical disease. Even so, appropriate antibiotics as determined
q q si r o   si h
by culture and sensitivity are often utilized (e.g., Y. enterocolitica
empiric corticosteroid therapy for suspected canine colonic IBD.
 is often sensitive to tetracyclines). The preferred length of anti-
 Corticosteroid therapy diminishes the animals defenses and
 psns s h ia uisa uag ou s aer s
 may allow a previously treatable case to rapidly progress and kill
treatment should be continued for 1-3 days beyond clinical
the animal. Treatment with itraconazole by itself or preceded by
remission.
 amphotericin B is often effective. Treatment should be continued
 Jn pool aq on sieadde inq uau si sisouod su
long enough (ie., at least 4-6 months) to lessen chances for
bacteria can be identifed by culture and the infection treated
 relapse.
appropriately.
 Many animals can be cured if treatment begins relatively early.
Multiple organ system involvement and CNS involvement
Histoplasmosis
worsens the prognosis.
Histoplasmosis is a mycotic infection caused by H. capsulatum.
This infection can affect the Gl, respiratory, and/or reticuloen-
Giardiasis
dothelial systems, as well as the bones and eyes. It occurs in a
Giardia sp. is a protozoan that causes giardiasis. Animals become
number of areas but is mainly found in animals from the Mis-
infected when they ingest cysts shed from infected animals,
sissippi and Ohio River valleys. It is typically seen in young dogs
and cats, and it is acquired through the inhalation or ingestion
typically through water. Organisms are principally found in
the SI, where they interfere with digestion through uncertain
of microconidia. Please refer to Chapter 11, Section 2 for more
mechanisms.
information.13.14
Animals present with signs that vary from mild to severe
Alimentary tract involvement is primarily found in dogs;
 diarrhea, which may be persistent, intermittent, or self-limiting.
diarrhea (with or without blood or mucus) and weight loss are
Typically, the diarrhea is of “cow patty" consistency, without
the commonly seen and reported signs. It is important to note
blood or mucus. There can be substantial variation in the pres-
that the lungs, liver, spleen, lymph nodes, bone marrow, skeletal
 entation of clinical signs. Some animals experience weight loss;
 system, and/or eyes may also be affected. Symptomatic alimen-
 s         s
tary involvement is much less common in cats; respiratory dys-
diarrhea in some patients, making diagnosis difficult. In cats,
function (e.g., dyspnea, cough), fever, and/or weight loss are seen
more often in cats. In GI histoplasmosis, the colon is usually the
there may be an association between shedding giardial oocysts
 and shedding either cryptosporidial or coccidian oocysts.
most severely affected segment. Diffuse, severe, granulomatous,
ulcerative mucosal disease can produce bloody stool, intestinal
Diagnostic testing
protein loss, intermittent fever, and/or weight loss. Small intes-
tinal involvement may be seen, but this is infrequent. The disease
Giardiasis can be diagnosed by fnding motile trophozoites in
may linger for long periods of time, causing mild to moderate,
saline smears of fresh feces or duodenal washes, by finding cysts
nonprogressive signs. On occasion, histoplasmosis may result in
with fecal fotation techniques, or by fnding giardial proteins in
 ss n  q   s  
feces using an ELISA test. Zinc sulfate solutions appear to be the
appearing colonic mucosa.
 best fecal flotation medium for identifying cysts, especially when
centrifugal flotation is performed (as other solutions may cause
the organism on cytological smears from lymph node aspiration,
distortion). It is recommended to perform at least three fecal
 rectal scrapings, or histological samples. Dogs from endemic
examinations over the course of 7-10 days before discounting
areas with chronic large bowel diarrhea are especially suspect.
giardiasis. Some fecal ELISA techniques (e.g., SNAP Giardia
PLE is common in dogs with severe histoplasmosis, and
Test', Idexx Laboratories) appear to have excellent sensitivity and
 hypoalbuminemia in dogs with large bowel disease is suggestive
are easier than centrifugal fecal flotation examinations. Perform-
of the disease, regardless of the location.
 ing washes of the duodenal lumen (endoscopically or surgically
A rectal examination may reveal thickened rectal folds; these
by instilling and then retrieving 5-10 mL of physiological saline
can easily be scraped with a dull curete or syringe case cap
 solution from the duodenal lumen) or cytological evaluation of
to obtain material for cytological preparations. Evaluation of
the duodenal mucosa occasionally reveals Giardia organisms
234
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
when other techniques do not. Trophozoites and cysts may also
if losses are not replaced through sufficient dietary intake of
be found on stained fecal smears.
potassium. Electrolyte disorders should be corrected initially
o ae ana pe p reud ae 
Patient care
for patients with colitis should contain levels of sodium, chlo-
 It is often diffcult to identify Giardia organisms (especially in
ride, and potassium above the minimum allowances for normal
animals that have had various symptomatic antidiarrheal medi-
dogs and cats. Recommended levels of these nutrients are 0.3-
cations), and the response to treatment is often the retrospective
0.5% DM sodium, 0.5-1.3% DM chloride, and 0.8-1.1% DM
s  n e  s r i
potassium.0
Quinacrine is effective but is no longer available. Metronidazole
Protein
has few adverse effects and seems reasonably effective (approxi-
mately 85% cured after 7 days of therapy); however, clinical
 Protein should be provided at levels suffcient for the appropriate
response to metronidazole therapy may occur in animals without
life stage of the patients unless PLE is present. Thus, DM protein
ee d s (s e
levels in foods for adult dogs and cats should be between 15%
tive as metronidazole and is available as a suspension, thus
and 30% and between 30% and 45%, respectively.* Protein levels
 making it easier to treat infected kittens. Albendazole (3 days of
for growing puppies and kittens should be in the ranges of 22-
S) arozepuaqua pue (sies u Adeiat jo saep s 'shop ul Adeiau
32% and 35-50% DM, respectively. High biological value,
days of therapy in dogs or cats) are also effective, and recent data
highly digestible (≥87%) protein sources are ideal. The use of
suggest that ronidazole may also be effective. None of these
elimination foods are recommended because of the suspected
 drugs are 100% efective, meaning that failure to respond to drug
 role of dietary antigens in the pathogenesis of chronic colitis.19.20
therapy does not rule out giardiasis.
 In some cases, elimination foods may be used successfully
 It can be difficult to eliminate Giardia spp. for a variety of
without pharmacological intervention.
reasons. Giardia organisms may apparently become resistant to
Fat
    d  
may make it dificult to eliminate the organism; and reinfection
Compared with the processes involved with other macronutri-
is easy because giardial cysts are rather resistant to environmen-
ents, fat digestion and absorption are relatively complex and may
tal influences, and only a few are needed to reinfect a dog or
be disrupted in patients with GI disease. The action of bacterial
person. Client education on prevention includes bathing the
flora on unabsorbed fats in the colon resulting in hydroxy fatty
patient (to remove cysts from the fur and perineal area) and
cleaning the environment (quaternary ammonium compounds
Thus, foods indicated for patients with colitis and many other
and pine tars are effective disinfectants for the premises). These
GI diseases often contain low to moderate amounts of fat (i.e.,
techniques may be very important to the successful treatment in
8-15% DM for dogs and 9-25% DM for cats). However, dogs
many patients. Finally, sometimes other protozoal agents (e.g..
and cats digest fat very efficiently and the process is rarely dis-
Tritrichomonas) are mistaken for Giardia. Vaccination is not
rupted except in malassimilative disorders. Therefore, colitis
recommended (see vaccine recommendations).
 po s   s p aq s
 The prognosis for recovery is usually good, although in some
when greater caloric density is required.0
cases, the organism is difficult to eradicate. More information is
Fiber
available in Chapter 11.
 Dietary fiber predominantly affects the large bowel of dogs and
Key nutritional factors in patients with large bowel
cats. Beneficial effects of dietary fber include (1) normalizing
diarrhea
colonic motility and transit time, (2) buffering toxins (e.g., bile
acids and bacterial enterotoxins) in the GI lumen, (3) binding
Water
or holding excess water, (4) supporting growth of normal GI
 m sd n n n  a si r
microflora, (5) providing fuel for colonocytes, and (6) altering
large bowel due to the potential for life-threatening dehydration.
the viscosity of GI luminal contents.
Dehydration results with from excessive fluid loss combined
 Fibers are often categorized as soluble, insoluble, or mixed.
with the patient's inability to replace those losses. Patients with
Mixed fbers include beet pulp, brans (rice, wheat, or oat), pea
chronic diarrhea and mild acute diarrhea should be monitored
and soy fibers, soy hulls, and mixtures of soluble and insoluble
for signs of dehydration, but usually, the oral route is sufficient
fbers. Insoluble fbers include purified cellulose and peanut
for their needs. Parenteral fluid therapy may be indicated when
hulls. Soluble fber sources include fruit pectins, guar gums, and
the patient presents with moderate to severe diarrhea.
psyllium.
Various types and levels of dietary fiber have been advocated
Electrolytes
for use in patients with large bowel diarrhea or colitis. Some
veterinarians recommend low fiber foods (5% DM crude fber)
 chronic enteric diseases because the potassium concentration of
to enhance DM digestibility and to reduce quantities of ingesta
       
presented to the colon. Results have also been seen when using
 large bowel diarrhea or colitis will be particularly profound
moderate levels (10-15% DM crude fiber) to high levels (>15%
Chapter 8  Gastrointestinal
235
DM crude fiber) of insoluble fiber.' If a food with an increased
 extract fluid and electrolytes, fermentation, and to store feces
fber level is being considered, a crude fiber content of at least
7% DM is advisable. These strategies have been used successfully
 and the mucosa. The LI is innervated by the vagus and pelvic
in managing patients with colitis and each strategy is patient 
 nerves, and the blood supply is through the cranial and caudal
dependent.
mesenteric arteries.
Small amounts (1-5% DM fiber) of a mixed-fiber (i.e., soluble/
insoluble) type can also be added to a highly digestible food.
 Many clinicians select foods enhanced with insoluble fber as
Inflammation of the large intestine
their first food option in the management of acute and chronic
Acute colitis/proctitis
colitis and large bowel diarrhea.
Acute colitis can be attributed to many causes (e.g., bacteria, diet,
Digestibility
parasites) or it may be idiopathic in origin. The underlying cause
Feeding highly digestible (fat and digestible carbohydrate ≥90%
is seldom diagnosed as this problem tends to be self-limiting.
and protein ≥87%) foods offer several advantages for managing
Acute proctitis (inflammation of the lining of the rectum) most
likely has similar causes but, in addition, can be the resultant of
dogs and cats with long-standing inflammatory colitis. Nutrients
from highly digestible, low residue foods are more completely
passage of a rough foreign object that traumatizes the rectal
mucosa.?
 Animals with acute colitis often present feeling well despite
ated with (1) reduced osmotic diarrhea due to fat and carbohy-
drate malabsorption, (2) reduced production of intestinal gas
large bowel diarrhea (i.e., hematochezia, fecal mucus, tenesmus).
due to carbohydrate malabsorption, and (3) decreased antigen
These animals tend to have an increase in the frequency of def-
loads because smaller amounts of protein are absorbed intact.
ecation and often a reduced volume of feces despite the increased
 Fiber-enhanced foods inherently have somewhat lower digesti-
"need" to defecate. Although reported in both cats and dogs,
bility values. These foods should have protein and fat digestibili-
 o  a so n  ao s si s
fies of at least 80% and carbohydrate digestibility of at least
is not a frequently reported sign. The major clinical signs of acute
90%.10
proctitis are constipation, tenesmus, hematochezia, dyschezia,
and/or depression.
Acid load
A rectal examination is a very important part of the physical
examination as animals with acute colitis may have rectal dis-
Acidemia (ie., normal anion gap hyperchloremic acidosis) is
 comfort and/or hematochezia. The elimination of obvious causes
common in patients with acute large bowel diarrhea because
 such as diet and parasites and subsequent resolution of the
fluid secreted in the caudal SI and LI contains bicarbonate con-
 problem with symptomatic therapy leads to a presumptive diag-
centrations higher than those in plasma and sodium in excess of
 nosis. Colonoscopy and biopsy are required to make a definitive
chloride ions. Hypovolemia (i.e., severe dehydration) com-
 diagnosis; however, colonoscopy and biopsy are not often indi-
pounds the acidosis in some patients. Severe acid-base disorders
 cated unless the patient's initial presentation is severe. Rectal
are best corrected with appropriate parenteral fluid therapy.
examination of animals with acute proctitis may reveal rough-
Foods for patients with acute colitis should, as a rule, produce
ened, thick, and/or obviously ulcerated mucosa. Proctoscopy
an alkaline urinary pH. These foods preferably contain buffering
 and rectal mucosal biopsy are definitive for diagnosis but, again,
salts such as potassium gluconate and calcium carbonate.
are seldom indicated. 12
Omega-3 fatty acids
Because acute proctitis and colitis are usually idiopathic
 in nature, symptomatic therapy is typically warranted. With-
Omega-3 (n-3) fatty acids derived from fish oil or other sources
holding food for 24-36h lessens the severity of clinical signs.
may have a beneficial effect in controlling mucosal inflammation
The animal should then be fed small amounts of a bland diet
 s       sd 
 or a low residue formulation. After resolution of the clinical
 evidence that dietary omega-3 fatty acid supplementation may
signs, the animal may be gradually returned to its original diet.
 modulate the generation and biological activity of inflammatory
Any areas of anal excoriation should be cleansed, and an
mediators.
antibiotic-corticosteroid ointment should be applied.  Most
animals recover within 1-3 days. For proctitis, stool softeners
Vitamins
such as lactulose or dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate (DsS) may be
 Folic acid supplementation is recommended for patients receiv-
necessary
ing long-term sulfasalazine therapy."
Treatment for proctitis also includes antibiotic therapy
(e.g., metronidazole) and anti-inflammatory medications. Anti-
Diseases of the large intestine
inflammatory medications such as prednisolone and the ami-
nosalicylates are recommended. Sulfasalazine and olsalazine can
The LI begins at the ileocolic junction and terminates at the anus;
also be used; however, both of these (particularly sulfasalazine)
it is composed of the cecum, ascending, transverse, and descend-
are associated with side effects such as keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
ing colon, and the rectum. The main functions of the LI are to
Topical therapies such as Proctofoam-HC, which contains a local
236
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
anesthetic and hydrocortisone, have also been recommended for
plasia in cats are the descending colon (39%) and the ileocolic
 proctitis but may be difficult for owners to apply.
sphincter (28%). Unlike dogs, cats with colonic tumors have a
high rate (63%) of local metastasis, which is associated with
Chronic colitis
decreased survival time.4
Chronic colitis is typically attributable to Clostridium spp., para-
Adenocarcinoma
sites, dietary intolerance, and fber-responsive diarrhea. As dis-
  aa    p d  a s
These tumors can extend into the lumen or can be infltrative
clinically normal dogs. However, in some patients, C. perfringens
and produce a circumferential narrowing. In cats, the most
and C. difcile may result in diarrhea. For C. perfringens to
 common large intestinal tumor is adenocarcinoma; the age of
 produce disease, the bacteria must possess the ability to produce
toxin, and environmental conditions must be such that toxin is
Presenting signs may include hematochezia, dyschezia, and/
produced.
or intermittent rectal bleeding not associated with defecation.
Chronic colitis may be the reason that most cases have been
 Infiltrative tumors are likely to cause tenesmus and/or constipa-
tion secondary to obstruction. Cats typically present with weight
One common type of chronic colitis is lymphocytic-plasmacytic
loss, anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea.256
 s m sd   m so ( sn
Rectal examination, as part of the complete physical examina-
diarrhea (i.e., soft stools with or without blood or mucus). In
tion, is useful in identifying colorectal masses because most
cats with LPC, hematochezia is the most common clinical sign,
colonic neoplasms arise in or near the rectum. Digital examina-
and diarrhea is the second most common sign. Feline LPC may
fion is the best screening test.
occur by itself or concurrently with LPE.
Histopathologic evaluation is often preferable to cytological
The diagnosis of chronic colitis is through exclusion of other
analysis. This is due to epithelial dysplasia (possibly being present
 causes and through documenting mucosal histological changes.
in benign lesions), which may cause a false-positive cytological
When diagnosing chronic colitis in cats, it is important to
diagnosis of carcinoma. Moderately deep biopsies obtained with
remember that Tritrichomonas can cause substantial mono-
rigid biopsy forceps are usually required to diagnose submucosal
nuclear infltrates into feline colonic mucosa.?
carcinomas and to differentiate benign polyps from carcinomas
-o Xdeia u aron e e saed uosou Ar
(invasion of the submucosa is an important feature of rectal
allergenic and fiber-enriched diets have been found to be very
adenocarcinomas). Imaging may be used to detect sublumbar
helpful in both dogs and cats. Reportedly, the most intractable
lymph node enlargement or pulmonary involvement (i.e., metas-
feline LPC cases are ultimately determined to be related to diet.?
tases) but is not typically helpful in the visualization of the colon
 The majority of cats with LPC also respond well to prednisolone
 due to gas and bone interference.
and/or metronidazole. Sulfasalazine is rarely needed Steroids,
Complete surgical excision is the treatment of choice and
metronidazole, sulfasalazine (Azulfidine), mesalamine, or olsala-
 may provide excellent long-term outcomes for patients with
zine may be used in dogs with moderate to severe LPC. The
a single mass. Nevertheless, most malignancies cannot be sur-
 prognosis for patients with chronic colitis or LPC tends to be
 gically cured because of their location in the pelvic canal,
better than for patients suffering from small bowel IBD.
extent of local invasion, and/or tendency to metastasize to
regional lymph nodes. The prognosis for unresectable adenocar-
Large intestinal cancers
In dogs, tumors of the LI are more common than tumors of the
may be palliative for some dogs with nonresectable colorectal
stomach or SI. Large intestinal cancer, when found, is more com-
adenocarcinomas.25.6
monly diagnosed in middle age or older dogs. Most colonic
Rectal polyps
tumors of dogs are malignant and include adenocarcinomas,
lymphosarcomas, and GI stromal tumors (leiomyosarcoma,
Rectal polyps are benign adenomatous growths. Polyps are
 neurofbrosarcoma, fbrosarcoma, and ganglioneuroma). Most
rare but are more commonly reported in dogs. Clinical signs
colonic neoplasias develop in the descending colon and rectum,
include hematochezia (and this may be considerable) and tenes-
mus. Obstruction secondary to polyps in the rectum is very
cecum. Local tumor invasion apparently occurs at a slower rate
uncommon.
with canine colonic neoplasia as compared to intestinal neopla-
Rectal polyps are usually detected during rectal palpation. It
sia, and metastasis to distant sites is relatively uncommon.
s  se  sd  n n s
Benign colonic neoplasia such as adenomas, adenomatous
adenomatous polyps resemble sessile adenocarcinomas (because
polyps, and leiomyomas are much less common than malignant
they are so large that the narrow, stalk-like attachment cannot
 tumors. Malignant transformation of adenomatous polyps to
 aq  sod s a  ss an 
carcinoma in situ and invasive adenocarcinoma has been dem-
 pated throughout one segment of the colon, usualy within a few
onstrated in dogs. In cats, adenocarcinoma is the most common
centimeters of the rectum. Histopathology must be performed
tumor of the LI (46%), followed by lymphosarcoma (41%), and
for diagnosis to distinguish polyps from malignancies.
mast cell tumors (9%). The mean age of cats affected with colonic
neoplasia is 12.5 years. The most common sites of colonic neo-
and has been reported to be curative. A thorough endoscopic or
Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
237
 imaging evaluation of the colon should be done prior to surgery
 manual extraction of fecal matter has the best chance of relieving
to rule out the presence of any additional polyps. If polyps 
 the obstruction and this may be a multiday process.
are incompletely excised, they will return and will need to
To aid in the prevention of future fecal impaction, the addition
 be re-excised at some point in the future. Multiple polyps within 
of fiber to a moist diet (e.g., Metamucil, pumpkin pie filling) and
a defined area may necessitate segmental colonic mucosal
medicating with osmotic laxatives (e.g., lactulose) and/or proki-
resection.25.6
ence suggests that cisapride is useful in stimulating colonic
Megacolon
propulsive motility in cats affected with mild to moderate idio-
Megacolon is hypertrophy and dilation of the colon and is asso-
pathic constipation. However, cats with long-standing obstipa-
ciated with chronic constipation and obstipation. The cause is
 tion and megacolon are not likely to show much improvement
not completely understood, but most cases are either idiopathic,
with cisapride therapy. Cisapride was withdrawn from the
orthopedic, or neurological in origin. A review of cases in the
American, Canadian, and certain Western European countries
literature found that 96% of cases of obstipation are accounted
 in July 2000 after reports of cardiac side effects in people. Two
for by idiopathic megacolon (62%), pelvic canal stenosis (23%),
 new prokinetic agents, tegaserod and prucalopride, are in differ-
nerve injury (6%), or Manx sacral spinal cord deformity (5%).7
 ing stages of drug development and may prove useful in the
Other theories involve behavior (i.e., refusal to defecate) or
therapy of GI motility disorders of several animal species.4.10
altered colonic neurotransmitters.28
Tegaserod is a potent partial nonbenzamide agonist at 5-HT4
Idiopathic megacolon is predominantly a feline disease,
 receptors and a weak agonist at 5-HTp receptors. Tegaserod has
although on occasion, dogs are affected. Affected animals may
definite prokinetic effects in the canine colon, but it has not yet
be depressed and anorectic and are often presented because of
been studied in the feline colon. Prucalopride is a potent 5-HT4
infrequent defecation.  Upon physical examination,  colonic
receptor agonist that stimulates giant migrating contractions
impaction is often found. Other signs are dependent upon the
(GMCs) and defecation in the dog and cat." There are no data
severity and pathogenesis of the constipation. In cats with severe
available on its usefulness in cats with megacolon.
megacolon, signs such as dehydration, weight loss, abdominal
 Lubricant enemas are not recommended because they are not
 pain, and mild to moderate mesenteric lymphadenopathy may
helpful, as they do not change fecal consistency. At home, owners
be seen.
should make sure that litter boxes are plentiful, clean, and in low
Although most cats with obstipation and megacolon are not
 traffic areas in order to prevent litter box aversions. If this con-
    e     
 servative therapy fails or if the client is unable to comply, colec-
serum chemistry, urinalysis), these tests should nonetheless be
 performed in all cats with constipation. Metabolic causes of con-
stools for a few weeks, but some may have soft stools for the rest
stipation, such as dehydration, hypokalemia, and hypercalcemia,
of their lives. Following the recommendations above and if
may be detected in some instances. Basal serum T4 concentra-
treated early, many cats respond well to conservative therapy and
tion and other thyroid function tests should also be considered
have a fair to good outcome.
in cats with recurrent constipation and other signs consistent
with hypothyroidism.4
Key nutritional factors for patients with chronic
Abdominal radiography should be performed in all consti-
constipation and obstipation
pated cats to characterize the severity of colonic impaction and
to identify predisposing factors, such as intraluminal radiopaque
Key nutritional factors for chronic constipation differ from key
nutritional factors for obstipation and the differences will be
foreign material (e.g., bone chips), intraluminal or extraluminal.
outlined below.
mass lesions, pelvic fractures, and spinal cord abnormalities.
Ancillary studies may be indicated in some cases. Extraluminal
Water
 mass lesions may be further evaluated by abdominal ultrasonog-
raphy and guided biopsy, whereas intraluminal mass lesions are
 Maintaining normal hydration status is important for managing
best evaluated by endoscopy. Finally, colonic biopsy is necessary
patients with chronic constipation or obstipation. Water is a key
to diagnose suspected cases of aganglionic megacolon (Hir-
nutrient and its intake is often overlooked. A variety of methods
schsprung disease), a congenital condition described once in a
should be used to encourage water intake. These include provid-
young cat."
ing multiple bowls of potable water in prominent locations in
the pet's environment, feeding moist (>75% water) rather than
behavioral, metabolic, and anatomic causes. A complete neuro-
dry forms of foods, adding small amounts of flavoring sub-
logical evaluation should be performed, with special emphasis
stances such as bouillon or broth to water sources, and offering
on caudal spinal cord function, to identify any neurological
ice cubes as treats or snacks. Adding canned pumpkin and/or
causes of constipation.
sweet potato to the current food has been successfully imple-
Impacted feces must be removed, and this can be accom-
 mented in some cases of constipation. These canned vegetables
plished through the use of rectal suppositories, enemas, or
consist primarily of water (90%), which adds a significant quan-
through manual extraction. Due to the severity of the constipa-
tity of water to the digesta. Beneficial effects resulting from
fion, multiple warm water retention and cleansing enemas with 
  s    d s  d 
238
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
increase in total daily water consumption, although fiber intake
may contribute to obstipation. Foods for patients with megaco-
is also increased.
lon should have no more than 5% DM crude fiber.
Fiber
Digestibility and caloric density
Many patients with constipation improve clinically when the
 For patients suffering from obstipation (including feline mega-
fiber content of their food is increased. Dietary fbers are poorly
colon), wherein colonic motility patterns are completely abol-
digestible polysaccharides, derived from a variety of sources.
ished, feeding a highly digestible food (fat and digestible [soluble]
 psa e m ( d pe  q
 sugar beet pulp, cereal grains, cellulose, soy hulls, peanut hulls,
density (≥4.0kcal/g [≥16.7k]/gl DM) will provide adequate
        
nutrition and distinctly reduce the fecal mass.4 A food's energy
water content, colonic motility, and intestinal transit rate, all of
density and digestibility are inversely related to its fiber content.
which may benefit patients with constipation. Both fermentable
Reducing fiber results in increased caloric density, which in turn
and nonfermentable fiber sources have been advocated for the
helps to meet the patient's requirements in a small volume of
management of constipation. '3 Fiber acts as a bulk-forming laxa-
food. Calorically dense foods can markedly reduce the burden
tive. Insoluble fibers (e.g., purifed cellulose, peanut hulls) nor-
of home management (i.e., administering stool softeners and
enemas) for pet owners. Fecal production is reduced to such an
increasing colonic water content, diluting luminal toxins (e.g..
extent that owners can generally remove feces by cleansing
bile acids, ammonia, and ingested toxins) and increasing the rate
enemas once or twice weekly. The energy density and digestibil-
of passage of digesta. This change in colonic transit time reduces
ity of a food are not as important in constipated patients.
colonocyte exposure to toxins while softening the stool and
increasing the frequency of defecation. Several gel-forming
fbers have been recommended as an aid in managing constipa-
SECTION 4 PHARMACOLOGY
tion in people and in animals. Soluble (fermentable) fbers (fruit
q   n are (sd  ra sd
Antacids
producing SCFAs, which promote colonic health. These fibers,
whether added to or incorporated into food, are reported to
Antacids reduce gastric acid production, thereby increasing gastric
swell to form emollient gels and facilitate passage offecal matter.4
pH. These drugs are used in the treatment of gastric ulcers and
However, fermentable fibers may not be as laxative as insoluble
erosions due to drugs such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatories
or mixed fibers because they have little ability to increase fecal
and steroids, uremic gastritis, esophagitis, esophageal reflux
bulk or dilute luminal toxins. Flatulence, diarrhea, and abdomi-
disease, gastrinomas, and mast cell tumors. 12 Increased acid pro-
nal cramping are potential adverse effects to be aware of when
duction can occur secondarily to chronic gastric or intestinal
using fermentable, gel-forming fibers. These adverse effects can
inflammation and may also exacerbate inflammation in the duo-
be reduced by a gradual transition to fber supplementation,
denum.? The two classes of antacids generally utilized in veteri-
slowly increasing the level of added fermentable fiber until effi-
d ud p sise nda- ae  r
cacy is achieved with minimal side effects. Such fibers should be
inhibitors.
added at no more than 5% of the total food because soluble fibers
can significantly reduce the availability of minerals, including
Hz-receptor antagonists
zinc, calcium, iron, and phosphorus. Ingredients such as beet
 pulp, brans (rice, wheat, or oat), pea fiber, soy fibers, soy hulls,
H-receptor antagonists competitively inhibit histamine at the
or mixtures of soluble and insoluble fiber sources are intermedi-
level of the H, receptor of the gastric parietal cell, thereby reduc-
ate in their fermentability and have moderate attributes of both
ing gastric acid output."2 Examples of antacids in this class
fermentable and poorly fermentable fibers. They are referred to
include cimetidine, ranitidine, and famotidine.
as mixed fbers.
For patients with chronic constipation that still have some
Cimetidine (Tagamet@)
level of colonic motility, the crude fber content of a food should
Adverse effects with this drug are uncommon. However, cime-
be at least 7% DM initially, and the fiber source should be insolu-
fidine inhibits the hepatic microsomal enzyme system, causing
ble or mixed. Fiber sources can be added to a patient's current
reduced metabolism, longer serum half-lives, and increased
food, but it is generally better to switch to a fber-enhanced
serum levels of several drugs if given concurrently.'? The follow-
food. Feeding additional dietary fiber is preferable to the use
ing drugs may be affected: beta blockers, lidocaine, diazepam,
of laxative medications alone. Dietary fiber is more physio-
logical, better tolerated, and often more effective than nonfber
metronidazole, and theophylline, among others.
laxatives.
Ranitidine (Zantac?)
The motility patterns of patients with obstipation are com-
pletely abolished (e.g., severe end-stage megacolon in cats). In
Ranitidine inhibits gastric acid secretion to a greater extent than
these patients, fiber-enhanced foods and fber supplements are
cimetidine.'In addition, ranitidine has prokinetic activity and
        
increases lower esophageal pressure.12
Chapter 8  Gastrointestinal
239
Famotidine (Pepcid?)
amplitude of the gastric contractions, relax the pyloric canal, and
increase the contraction in the proximal SI. This drug has proki-
 Famotidine is similar in potency to ranitidine, but it has no
 netic activity4' and therefore should not be used in animals with
prokinetic effects.'2 It can cause bradycardia with rapid intrave-
GI obstruction from foreign bodies, perforation, or GI hemor-
 rhage. It is often used as a constant rate infusion (CRI). Potential
sis when given to cats.? Famotidine for injection should be stored
adverse effects include hyperreactivity and occasional drowsi-
in the refrigerator.2
ness and sedation.
 This is often the drug of choice for motility disorders in dogs.
Proton pump inhibitors
Cats appear to be less sensitive to the effects of metoclopramide
 PPIs inhibit the H+/K+ ATPase enzyme at the parietal cell surface,
due to decreased receptors sites in the CRTZ in the brain.′ Rani-
thereby inhibiting transport of hydrogen ions into the stomach. 12
 tidine may be a better motility agent in cats.6
They are more potent at inhibiting gastric acid secretion than
the Hz-receptor antagonists.12 The drug used most commonly in
H-histaminergic receptor antagonists
veterinary medicine in this class is omeprazole (Prilosec").
Dimenhydrinate and diphenhydramine (Dramamine" and
Omeprazole (Prilosec)
Benadryl, respectively) are examples of drugs in this class.
 Dimenhydrinate has been used for motion sickness in dogs. In
Omeprazole can inhibit the cytochrome P450 enzyme system,
causing reduced hepatic clearance of specific drugs such as
addition, nausea and vomiting associated with vestibular disease
diazepam, which may enhance its effects or may cause toxicity?
 can be managed with dimenhydrinate. These drugs should be
There is a delay in inhibition of gastric acid secretion of 3-4 days
used with caution in patients with hypertension, hyperthy-
after starting treatment with omeprazole, so it is recommended
roidism, cardiovascular disease, and angle closure glaucoma.
to use an H, antagonist concurrently with omeprazole during
 Potential adverse effects of drugs in this class include sedation,
the first few days if rapid inhibition of gastric acid is needed.
 urinary retention, and occasional GI effects.5
 PPIs are recommended as the frst line of treatment for patients
with excessive gastric acid secretion due to mast cell tumors and
5-HT; serotonergic receptor antagonists
gastrinomas.
The two drugs commonly used from this group are dolasetron
 and ondansetron (Anzemet? and Zofran", respectively). Drugs
Antiemetics
 in this class are potent antiemetics and are used when other
Antiemetics are widely used in veterinary medicine to sympto-
antiemetics do not control vomiting. Ondansetron works best
matically treat vomiting due to a variety of causes. Underlying
against acute vomiting from peripheral causes, such as with cis-
 causes for which antiemetics are prescribed include primary GI
-s a aq  s - ss u
disease (e.g., IBD and motility disorders), pancreatitis, uremia,
tive to the effects of ondansetron. The expense of Zofran limits
drug-induced vomiting, and motion sickness. The antiemetic
 its use in veterinary medicine.45
chosen depends on the underlying disease process and how
yomiting is stimulated, species differences, and adverse effects of
5-HT4 receptor agonists
the drug. The classes of antiemetics used in veterinary medicine
 include C-adrenergic antagonists, D-dopaminergic antagonists,
The main example in this group is cisapride, a potent promotility
H,-histaminergic antagonists, 5-HT serotonergic receptor antago-
drug. Cisapride is different from metoclopramide in that it does
nists, 5-HT4 receptor agonists, and NK-1 receptor antagonists
not cross the blood-brain barrier. It has no known central
 antiemetic effects; rather, it acts to enhance gastric emptying and
to stimulate smooth muscle contraction throughout the GI tract.
α-Adrenergic antagonists
It can be used for GI stasis and reflux esophagitis. The drug is
The commonly used drug in this group is chlorpromazine (Tho-
 no longer available and must be obtained from a compounding
razine?). Chlorpramizine acts on several receptors (including
pharmacy. Cisapride is contraindicated in patients with GI
serotonergic and histaminic), mainly in the chemoreceptor
 obstruction, hemorrhage, and perforation.5
trigger zone (CRTZ).4 Drugs in this class can cause hypotension,
cardiac rate abnormalities, and hyper- or hypothermia." Con-
NK-1 receptor antagonists
traindications for use include hypotension or shock
Maropitant (Cerenia?) is approved for use in dogs, in both inject-
D2-dopaminergic receptor antagonists
able (SQ) and oral formulations. It is used for a wide variety
of causes of vomiting, including motion sickness, which requires
Metoclopramide (Reglan?) is the most commonly used drug in 
 a higher dose.47 It works well for both peripheral and central
 causes of vomiting.* Cerenia injections SQ have been associated
stimulating gastric, biliary, or pancreatic secretions. Metoclopra-
 with pain, and recent evidence suggests that refrigeration of the
mide given 30 min prior to a meal will increase the tone and drug prior to injection may help.
240
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Anti-inflammatory and
 tant that a CBC and platelet count be performed regularly (every
immunosuppressive drugs
30-90 days) for any animal receiving this medication. Since cyclo-
phosphamide can be absorbed through the skin and is excreted
Anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive drugs are used in
unchanged in the urine, owners should be instructed to wear
the treatment of intestinal diseases. In some instances, these
 gloves when administering this drug and when cleaning up urine.?
medications are used concurrently with antibiotics and diet
therapy to improve the overall treatment effectiveness.
Cyclosporine (Atopica?, Neoral@, Sandimmune?,
Cyclosporine-A@)
Corticosteroids (prednisone, prednisolone,
Cyclosporine has been used to treat immune-mediated diseases
and budesonide)
in small animals. Cyclosporine primarily inhibits cellular immu-
nity. Cyclosporine is primarily metabolized by the liver and
 The efficacy of corticosteroids in the management of intestinal
excreted into the bile. It is contraindicated for use in dogs with
disease relates primarily to their anti-inflammatory and immu-
malignancies, in dogs and cats with renal or liver disease, and in
nosuppressive properties; appetite stimulation is a secondary
pregnant or nursing patients as it can cause adverse fetal effects
benefit. In cases of chronic administration, the dose should be
and can be found in the milk The adverse effects of cyclosporine
slowly decreased over 4-6 months. Relapses can occur if the
are primarily GI and may include vomiting, anorexia, and
dose reduction occurs too quickly and sometimes are so severe
diarrhea (which typically occurs within the first week oftherapy).
that corticosteroids alone can no longer control the signs associ-
With extremely high blood levels (>3000 ng/mL), nephrotoxicity
 ated with a relapse of the disease. In these situations, stronger
and hepatoxicity is possible. Cyclosporine administration has
immunosuppressive agents, such as azathioprine, cyclophospha-
been associated with the development of neoplasia in humans
 mide, or cyclosporine, may need to be added.6
and in dogs.0
It is ideal that steroids not be given without a definitive patho-
The dosing of cyclosporine is varied depending on the form
logical diagnosis. Changes in the intestines that can obscure
chosen. The Neoral/Atopica or modifed forms have a higher
diagnosis can occur even with a short course of use and will
bioavailability in small animals and are recommended for use
render endoscopic biopsies useless.
over Sandimmune. Cyclosporine should be administered on an
Prednisone and prednisolone
empty stomach; liquid forms have limited palatability, so they
may need to be mixed with juices/broths for administration.
Prednisone is the primary anti-inflammatory agent used to treat
 Oral absorption of cyclosporine can vary among patients. Ther-
intestinal inflammation. It is preferred because of its low cost,
apeutic drug monitoring ensures the dose administered is achiey.
easy availability, and its efficacy. The side effects are dose related
ing therapeutic levels (usually 300-500 ng/mL) while not
 and include increased thirst and appetite, increased urination,
reaching toxic levels. A trough level can be measured 72 h after
weight gain, muscle weakness (seen as exercise intolerance, a
starting treatment and is performed on blood obtained immedi-
 potbelly appearance, and muscle wasting), and possible agitation
ately before the next dose is due. Routine monitoring of drug levels
 s    s s s  
(e.g., every 2-4 weeks) is likely not necessary once the effective
in cats and resolve as the dose of medication is slowly decreased
 dose is achieved but is recommended if treatment effcacy is poor
over time. A certain percentage of cats (-15-20%) lack the glu-
or if adverse effects are suspected. Serial CBC and serum bio-
tathione pathways in their livers to convert prednisone to the
chemical panels should also be performed at least every 3 months
 active form of the medication (prednisolone); because of this, it
or in accordance to guidelines for the disease being treated.
is good medical practice to use prednisolone instead of pred-
nisone when treating any cat (since there is no reliable way of
Azathioprine
knowing which cats can convert this and which ones cannot).
Azathioprine is typically used for dogs that are either not respon-
Budesonide
sive to or are having problems with the side effects of corticos-
teroids. Azathioprine takes 2-3 weeks to become fully effective,
Budesonide is a poorly absorbed topical steroid that has been
and thus corticosteroids should not be tapered off for at least
 developed for use in humans with GI inflammation. When given
1 week after starting azathioprine treatment. Azathioprine can
 orally, the site of action remains in the GI tract with fewer sys-
also cause bone marrow suppression, so CBC and platelet counts
temic effects than seen with other oral steroid medications. This
need to be monitored on a regular basis, preferably monthly. GI
can be very helpful in diabetic animals and those with severe
systemic side effects.8
sider monitoring for these adverse effects with periodic blood
chemistries or if clinical signs are noted. This drug is toxic for
Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan@)
bone marrow in cats and should be used with extreme caution.
Cyclophosphamide is an immunosuppressive medlication that
Chlorambucil
may be used in patients that are nonresponsive to corticosteroids
or in cases in which corticosteroids cannot be used (i.e., diabetes
Like azathioprine, chlorambucil takes 2-3 weeks to become fully
mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism). Side effects include bone
effective and should be reserved only for those cases where
Chapter 8  Gastrointestinal
241
severe disease is present or lack of response is seen with steroid
Tylosin
use. It has a much less toxic effect in cats, and if serial CBC and
 platelet counts are monitored for myelosuppression, it is much
This macrolide antibiotic is used primarily for chronic colitis. It
safer for use than cyclophosphamide.6
is also used in cases of SIBO, antibiotic enteropathy, and diarrhea
caused by C. perfringens, and as an adjunctive treatment for IBD.
 The adverse effects are mild and include anorexia and diarrhea.
Sulfasalazine
The anti-inflammatory sulfasalazine is a salicylate, not a corti-
Gastromucosal protectants
costeroid. It is most useful in the treatment of colonic IBD as
Sucralfate is a locally acting treatment for ulcers and may also
colonic bacterial cleavage is necessary to release the active form
 of the drug. Animals taking sulfasalazine can develop keratocon-
be a gastromucosal protectant. This medication works best if
 administered on an empty stomach and in an acidic environ-
junctivitis sicca (dry eye), anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
and abdominal pain. Since many of the GI signs are present
ment. For this reason, it is best to administer sucralfate at least
already, proper monitoring and a thorough patient history can
0.5h prior to H, antagonist or antacids. Sucralfate may reduce
the bioavailability of other medications, and separating concur-
control these problems.
rent medication administration by up to 2h is advised. The use
of sucralfate slurry, made by dissolving the tablet (or partial
Antibiotics
tablet) in 3-5 mL of water, may be advantageous. The exact mode
of action for sucralfate is unknown, but it is believed to react
 Many antibiotics may be prescribed for patients with GI disease
with stomach acid to form a paste-like complex that binds selec
and this chapter will not specifically cover them all (e.g., amoxi-
 tively to proteins at the ulcer site by way of electrostatic interac-
cillin, enrofloxacin). Of these antibiotics, metronidazole, tetra-
tions. It may also have cytoprotective effects. Adverse effects are
cycline and tylosin are antibiotics that can be used alone in
uncommon; rarely, constipation may occur.
combination with or in conjunction with the anti-inflammatoryy
immunosuppressive agents.
Digestive enzymes
Pancreatic enzymes in the form of pancrelipase pancretin (more
Erythromycin
       
Erythromycin is a macrolide antibiotic that is also used as a
d xa  i   i  pd aq  (
creatic enzyme deficiency. The enzymes help to digest and absorb
enhances gastric emptying by inducing antral contractions and
 fats, proteins, and carbohydrates. Usually in powder form
may be used in patients with gastric reflux esophagitis.? It is
 (although tablets and capsules are available), this medication is
available in both oral and injectable forms. Adverse effects
 mixed with the food; some manufacturers advise to allow the
 include pain on IM injection, thrombophlebitis on IV injection,
food to stand for 15-20 min prior to feeding. Adverse effects are
and possible intestinal distress (increased gastric emptying of
- i aed are pue sesp i m uas ao Ann
larger food particles).
tress. If given in tablet form, food and/or water should be given
afterward to prevent oral or esophageal ulceration. Humans
 handling this medication should avoid inhalation of the powder
Metronidazole
and may develop skin irritation; hand washing is advised after
handling.
Metronidazole is both an antibacterial (anaerobes) and an anti-
protozoal medication available in both injectable and oral forms.
Adverse effects include lethargy, nausea, anorexia, and, occa-
Laxatives
sionally, vomiting and diarrhea. Hepatic and encephalopathic
problems can occur in sensitive animals or when doses are too
Hydrophilic laxatives
high. Metronidazole is very bitter tasting. If the animal does not
These over-the-counter laxatives may decrease fluidity of exist-
swallow the pill the first time, considerable drooling can occur
This can cause the pill to dissolve too quickly, preventing redos-
 ing bowel content and increase fecal bulk Compounds that may
ing with the same pill.
be tried for this purpose include methylcellulose (Citrucel),
 psyllium (Metamucil), and calcium polycarbophil (Fiberal).
Tetracycline
Emollient laxatives
This antibiotic may be utilized in cases of SIBO, primarily in
These laxatives, also called surfactant stool softeners, are usually
dogs as cats do not tolerate it very well. Tetracycline should not
 dioctyl sodium, calcium, or potassium sulfosuccinate. They are
be used in young animals as it can cause discoloration of the
anionic detergents that reduce surface tension, which enhances
teeth. The adverse effects are similar to metronidazole.
fat absorption and impairs water absorption.2 This allows the
242
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
water to penetrate the ingesta, thereby softening the stool. They
feces.? Lactulose should be used with caution in patients with
are available over-the-counter in oral, suppository, and enema
diabetes mellitus as there is free lactose in the syrup. The solution
forms. These laxatives should be used with caution in animals
is slightly sweet, which may make administration difficult in
with preexisting dehydration or electrolyte imbalances as these
cats. The dose is adjusted based on efficacy (e.g., consistency of
conditions may be exacerbated. Common names are D-S-S? and
the stool).
Colace? and these laxatives are often in disposable enemas such
as Enema-DSS".
SECTION 5 FEEDING TUBES
Lubricant laxatives
Addressing the nutritional needs of our hospitalized and critical
Mineral oil and white petrolatum are the most commonly uti-
lized lubricants; they are also found in hair ball remedy products
care patients can dramatically improve their outcomes, and it
may also allow them to return home sooner. Oral enteral nutri-
such as Laxatone? and Kat-A-Lax*. If the liquid form is admin-
tion is the ideal route, but if the patient is unable or unwilling to
istered orally, the use of a stomach tube is advised to avoid the
 consume at least 85% of their calculated resting energy require-
 possibility of aspiration lipid pneumonitis.212 The majority of the
ments (RERs), then another feeding route needs to be utilized.
oil will pass through the GI tract into the colon. Lubricant laxa-
tives act by easing the passage of stool and inhibiting water
absorption by the colon. Mineral oil or petrolatum may also be
Feeding tubes
administered as an enema, either as is or diluted with warm
water; the dosage varies based on the size of the patient, the
When oral nutrition is not an option, what other options are
degree of constipation, the response to previous enemas, and
available? There are a number of feeding tube options available;
clinician preferences.
the choice of tube will be dependent on the condition of the
patient, the disease being addressed, the expense of adminis-
tration, the availability of intensive care facilities, the preferred
Osmotic laxatives
food, and the anticipated length of feeding assistance
The osmotic laxatives work by stimulating colonic fluid secre-
(Table 8.5.1).
tion, thereby increasing bulk and water content of the ingesta.
 The best feeding tubes for prolonged use are made of poly-
Lactulose is the most common osmotic laxative used; colonic
 urethane or silicone. For short-term feeding, usually less than 10
bacteria metabolize the lactulose forming acids which exert
days, polyvinylchloride (PVC) tubes can be used. These are not 
osmotic pressure, drawing fluid into the colon.? Lactulose is also
appropriate for long-term feeding because they tend to become
utilized in patients with hepatic encephalopathy due to its acidi-
 stiff with prolonged use, causing additional discomfort for the
fication effects, which draws ammonium from the blood into the
 patient. Silicone is softer and more flexible than other tube mate-
colon where it is trapped as ammonium ions and expelled in the
rials and has a greater tendency to stretch and collapse. Poly-
Table 8.5.1
Tube feeding comparisons
Type of tube
Con dition
Disease
ICU costs
Food type used
Length of time
Nasoesophageal
Not recommended for
Short-term anorexia,
Liquid ± thinning
Short term,
8
or nasogastric
patients that are
supplement oral
required, CRl, or
in-hospital use only
vomiting or those with
intake
bolus
(3-7 days)
respiratory disease
Esophagostomy
Not recommended for 
Hepatic lipid osis,
好好
Liguid, recovery
Long term.
patients that are
anorexia, oral surgery
diet, or gruel 
in-hospital and
vomiting or those with
or trauma, cancer
commercial diet
at-home use, (1-20
respiratory disease
based on tube
weeks, depending
size, CRl, or bolus
on tube type used)
Gastrostomy
Can be used on
Pancreatitis, hepatic
好好好
Liquid, recovery
Long-term use, can
patients that are
lipidosis, anorexia,
diet, or gruel
be permanent,
vomiting or that have
esophageal strictures,
commercial diet
depending on tube
respiratory diseases
 oral surgery or
based on tube
type used
trauma, cancer
size; CRl or bolus
Jejunostomy
Can be used on
Pancreatitis,
Liquid diet, CRI
Short term,
patients that are
intestinal
or bolus
 in-hospital use only
vomiting or that have
anastomosis, coma
(3-10 days)
respiratory disease
 Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
243
urethane is stronger than silicone, allowing for thinner tube
walls and a greater internal diameter despite the same French
size. Both the silicone and polyurethane tubes do not disinte-
grate or become brittle in situ, providing a longer tube life. The
French unit measures the outer lumen diameter of a tube and is
equal to 0.33mm.
While assisted feeding (force feeding) can be used to provide
the necessary nutrition, this is usually too stressful to the patient,
not to mention also stressful to the owner. Seldom is this method
able to deliver the volume of nutrients necessary to meet the
patients' needs on a regular basis.
Nasoesophageal and nasogastric tube
placement
NE tubes are useful for providing short-term nutritional support,
Figure 8.5.1  Nasoesophageal tube in a cat receiving CRl infusion of
usually less than 10 days. They can be used in patients with a
diet.
functional esophagus, stomach, and intestines. NE tubes are
 contraindicated in patients that are vomiting, comatose, or lack
a gag reflex.12
To place a nasogastric tube, follow the same procedure but
Supplies needed include lidocaine drops (ophthalmic drops
measure the length to 3-4in. past the last rib. Nasogastric tubes
can be used); 5- to 8-Fr tube with length sufficient to reach the
 increase the risk of gastroesophageal reflux, increasing the inci-
distal esophagus, sterile lubricant, suture or glue, Luer slip cath-
dence of esophageal strictures. This is due to passage through
eter plug, and Elizabethan collar.
the cardiac sphincter of the stomach, allowing reflux of gastric
The length of tube to be inserted is determined by measuring
acids into the esophagus.
from the nasal planum along the side of the patient to the caudal
Due to the small internal diameter of these tubes, only liquid
margin of the last rib. This indicates the ideal tube placement;, 
 enteral diets can be used. They can either be fed through a
 mark this area with either a piece of tape or a permanent marker.
 syringe pump as a continuous rate infusion or bolus fed If
After instilling a few drops of the lidocaine into the nose, wait
    d s e  
10-15 min for full analgesic effect. A sterile catheter of sufficient 
 equipment every 24h to help prevent bacterial growth within the
length (8Fr X 42in. in dogs >15kg, 5Fr × 36 in. in dogs <15 kg)
 system. Tube clogging is a common problem; a syringe pump
is advanced into the nose. The tube should be passed with the
 may help to decrease the incidence as will flushing well before
tip directed in a caudoventral, medial direction into the ventro-
 and after bolus feeding. If the tube becomes clogged, replace-
lateral aspect of the external nares. The head should be held in
 ment may be necessary. Diluting the liquid with water may also
a normal static position. As soon as the tip of the catheter reaches
 help, though this further decreases the caloric concentration of
the medial septum at the floor of the nasal cavity in dogs, the
         
external nares are pushed dorsally; this opens the ventral meatus,
 needs.
ensuring passage of the tube into the oropharynx. In cats, the
 When removing, the tube may be simply pulled out after the
tube can be inserted initially in a ventromedial direction and
glue or sutures are removed Ensure that the tube is kinked prior
continued directly into the oropharynx. The tube is inserted
 to removal to decrease the chance of inadvertently aspirating
until the tape tab or marked area is reached. To evaluate proper
fluid into the lungs during removal.
tube placement, 3-15 mL or sterile water or saline can be injected
through the tube and the animal evaluated for coughing. Cough-
Esophagostomy tube placement
ing would indicate the tube is placed in the lungs, not the
esophagus. Lateral radiographs may also be taken to confrm
Esophagostomy tube placement does require anesthesia to be
tube location. After confrmation of position, the tube is secured
performed, but it does not need to be to a surgical depth of
with either glue or sutures at the external nares and along the
 anesthesia. The animal should be deep enough to allow place-
dorsal midline along the bridge of the nose. Continue to direct
 ment of a mouth gag to protect the placer's hand and equipment.
the tube over the head and secure with a bandage around the 
 The patient should be heavily sedated or anesthetized, intubated,
neck Place the catheter plug into the catheter. An Elizabethan
 and placed in lateral recumbency (usually, right lateral is easier
collar is used in most animals to prevent inadvertent removal of
for placement if you are right-handed). The entire lateral cervical
the tube (Figure 8.5.1).1-3
 region from ventral midline to near dorsal midline is clipped and
 Complications include epistaxis, lack of tolerance of the pro-
 surgically prepped.
cedure, and inadvertent/intentional removal by the patient.
 Supplies needed include large Kelly or Carmalt forceps, scalpel
These tubes should not be used in vomiting patients or in those
 blade, appropriately sized tube, tape or suture to secure, and Luer
with respiratory disease.1-4
slip catheter plug.
244
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
does not need to be a surgical depth of anesthesia. Endoscopic
placement allows for visualization of the esophagus and stomach
as well as biopsy collection from the stomach and proximal
duodenum and foreign body removal. Blind placement allows a
gastrostomy tube to be inserted without the investment in an
endoscopic unit. Surgical placement is useful during surgical
ssd q no aos  m  a a
through the esophagus due to trauma or esophageal strictures.
Supplies needed include an endoscope, endoscopic grabbers,
Pezzer catheter, 14-ga. needle or catheter, 1-2 lengths of #2
suture material -3 f long, catheter guide, sterile lubricant, and
Luer slip catheter plug.
 For percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube place-
ment, the patient is anesthetized, placed in right lateral recum-
bency. The lef flank is clipped and surgicall prepped from
1-2in. above the last caudal rib to 2-3 in. beyond the last caudal
rib. The area should be 4-6in. in diameter. A 20- to 24-Fr Pezzer
Figure 8.5.2 Esophagostomy tube placement.
catheter is used for placement; these are available singly and as
kits. The endoscope is advanced into the stomach and is used to
 One technique uses a large curved Kelly or Carmalt forceps
insuflate air. This helps to ensure that the spleen or omentum
inserted into the proximal cervical esophagus. The tip of the
does not become entrapped between the stomach and the body
forceps is turned laterally and pressure is applied in an outward
wall. An assistant digitally palpates the external body wall -1-
direction, causing a bulge in the cervical tissue so the instrument
2 cm behind the ninth rib; the palpation can be seen internally
tip can be seen and palpated externally. A small skin incision,
and can be used to confrm correct placement of the feeding
just large enough to accommodate the feeding tube, is made over
tube. When the site is confrmed, a 14-ga. needle or catheter is
introduced into the stomach through the body wall; a length of
is forced bluntly through the esophagus; in larger dogs, a deeper
#2 suture is threaded through the needle into the stomach and
 grasped with endoscopic grabbers; and the string and scope are
the esophagus. The tube is premeasured as with an NE tube,
removed from the stomach. Ensure that assistants maintain a
except the exit is in the mid- to caudal esophagus. A convenient
hold on their end of the suture and that it does not get pulled
landmark would be the wings of the atlas; the exit hole should
thorough as the scope is removed. The catheter guide is slid onto
be in line with this reference point. The distal tip of the tube is
the suture and used to secure the Pezzer catheter (it helps to
grasped with the forceps, pulled in to the esophagus and out
bevel the end of the Pezzer catheter to help it fit into the catheter
through the mouth, then turned around and redirected into the
guide). Using the 14-ga. needle, push it through the Pezzer cath-
esophagus. The tube is secured with tape and sutures. A light
eter then thread the suture through the needle; remove the
bandage is applied around the neck; whether to apply triple
needle and secure the suture. Pull everything tautly; apply the
antibiotic ointment to the site is an individual choice. Place the
sterile lubricant to the feeding tube liberally, and using frm and
catheter plug into the catheter (Figure 8.5.2).1-4
steady pressure, pull the catheter guide with the Pezzer catheter
There are also tube placement systems commercially available
attached through the body wall; it may be necessary to use a
 for esophagostomy tube placement.
scalpel blade to enlarge the hole in the body wall to allow passage
Complications include tube displacement due to vomiting or
of the tube assembly. It is important to maintain firm and steady
removal by the patient, skin infection around the exit site, and
pressure throughout the entire passage of the feeding tube from
biting off of the tube end by the patient after vomiting.
the mouth through the body wall. Once the tube is through the
Depending on the technique used and the size of the patient,
body wall, pull the mushroom tip firmly against the stomach
an 8- to 20-Fr catheter may be used; the large bore of these
wall; in most animals, this can be felt from the outside. An
catheters allow for feeding of a gruel recovery diet, sometimes
external tube assembly should be made to prevent the tube from
without dilution with water. These catheters are also easy for
migrating back into the stomach; be sure to leave a little extra
clients to use and to maintain as long as vomiting is not a problem.
room (-1 in.) to allow for tube movement and for weight gain.
When removing, the tube may be simply pulled out after the
 Place the Luer plug into the catheter (Figure 8.5.3).1-4
sutures are removed. The exit hole is allowed to heal by second
A minimum of 12 h is needed for a temporary stoma to form
intension. A light bandage may be applied for the first 12h.
before feeding can begin; the feeding tube should be left in place
for a minimum of 7-10 days to allow a permanent stoma to form
before removal. The tubes can be left in a long term (1-6 months)
Gastrostomy tube placement
without replacement; when replaced with another PEG tube, a
Gastrostomy tubes can be placed either endoscopically, blindly,
low profle silicone tube, or a foley-type feeding tube, the stoma
or surgically. All three techniques require general anesthesia; this
can be used for the rest of the patient's life (Figure 8.5.4).
Chapter 8Gastrointestinal
245
FEMALE
JADE RATTENBURY
JADE RATTENBURY
T0-6B-21
13-49R-01
HCRT+4
04
PEAK
PEG TUBE
FEMALE
PEG TUBE
FEMAL
JADERATTENBURY
JADERATTENBURY
Figure 8.5.3 View via gastroscopy of PEG tube placement. Image courtesy of Dr. Jennifer Rewerts from Michigan Veterinary Specialists.
Complications associated with PEG tubes include those seen
from tube placement such as splenic laceration, gastric hemor-
rhage, and pneumoperitoneum. Delayed complications can also
 be seen, such as vomiting, aspiration pneumonia, tube removal,
tube migration, and peritonitis and stoma infection.'
 Blind percutaneous gastrostomy tube placement involves
  d o  n   
large plastic or steel tube is used instead of the endoscope and a
frm wire is used instead of the suture. The catheter is the same
as in the endoscopic insertion technique. Reported complica-
tions are the same as for PEG tubes, though the risk of splenic,
stomach, or omental laceration is greater. Contraindications to
using the blind technique include severe obesity, which would
 make palpation of the end of the tube difficult, and esophageal
disease.
Figure 8.5.4 Author's cat (Benny) at home with PEG tube in place.
 Surgical placement has been largely superseded by endoscopic
placement because of the ease and speed of placement, lower
cost, and decreased morbidity. A surgical approach may be
246
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
indicated in obese animals, in those with esophageal disease, or
in an upward motion. Some force may be required for this. It is
when laparotomy is already scheduled. To place a surgical gas-
also helpful to ensure that the patient has been fasted, and to
trostomy, a larger incision is needed into the stomach, and the
place a towel over the tube site to catch any gastric contents that
exit location is sometimes hard to locate because of the position
may be removed along with the feeding tube. If the tube has been
 on the surgical table. Surgical placement involves placing purse
in longer than 16 weeks, the incidence of tube breakage is much
 string sutures around the catheter to secure it as well as attaching
the stomach to the body wall.
Aa  sd r u aosa aq n p
 Gastrostomy tube placement is the technique of choice for
pass retained parts; smaller patients may need to have them
long-term enteral support. These tubes are well tolerated by the
retrieved.
patient, produce minimal discomfort, allow feeding of either
q on Aiossa aq ose A sa 
 gruel recovery diets of blenderized commercial foods, and can
this would require anesthesia. The feeding tube is cut off at the
be easily managed by owners at home.? Patients are able to eat
normally with gastrostomy tubes in place and can easily be used
as a nutritional supplement until the patient is totally self-
feeding. For patients that are difficult to medicate and require
long-term medications, many medicines can also be given
through the feeding tube. Gastrostomy tubes can also be used
for rehydration therapy as with renal failure. It is typically less
 stressful for clients to administer fluids through a feeding tube
 as opposed to under the skin or intravenously. An additional
benefit to this use is that regular tap water can be used, further
reducing the cost to the clients. The major disadvantage of gas-
 trostomy tubes is the need for general anesthesia and the risk of
peritonitis (Figure 8.5.5).2
 For animas requiring long-term management, the initial
Pezzer catheter can be replaced with either low profle silicone
tubes or with foley-type gastrostomy tubes. Both of these types
can be placed through the external stoma site without the endo-
scope. Sedation or anesthesia may be necessary based on the
individual patient (Figures 8.5.6-8.5.8).
For removal, if the tube has been in place 16 weeks or less, the
Figure 8.5.6  Low profle feeding tube in place.
tube may be simply removed. This is best accomplished by
placing the patient in right lateral recumbency. The tube is
grasped with the right hand close to the body wall, with the leff
hand holding the animal. Pull firmly and consistently to the right
Figure 8.5.5 Great Dane with feeding tube in place for over 3 years.
Note mature stoma site.
Figure 8.5.7 Foley-type feeding tube.
Chapter 8  Gastrointestinal
247
Figure 8.5.9 PEG tube site 24h after removal.
7-10 days to allow adhesions to form around the tube site and
 to prevent leakage back into the abdomen.24 Completely chang-
Figure 8.5.8  Low profle (button-type) feeding tube.
 n i      a 
growth within the system. Clogging is a common problem; a
syringe pump may help to decrease the incidence as will flushing
well every 4 h.
When removing, the tube may be simply pulled out after the
level of the skin and pushed into the stomach from the outside.
Using the endoscopic grabbers, the remaining parts are grabbed
sutures are removed. The exit hole is allowed to heal by second
and removed through the esophagus (Figure 8.5.9).
intension. A light bandage may be applied for the first 12 h.
 The exit site is cleaned well with soap and water and then
dried. Antibiotic ointment may be applied to the site, with the
Conclusion
primary purpose to stop the flow of gastric contents out of the
The enteral route is the preferred method of nutritional support
hole rather than protect from an infection. The exit hole is
allowed to heal by second intension. A light bandage may be 
in patients with functional GI tracts. Many tube and food choices
applied for the first 12 h or however long the animal will allow.
are available and can be tailored to fit the individual patient and
condition. Do not let ignorance or fear prevent you from provid-
ing your patients with nutritional support; appropriate nutrition
Jejunostomy tube placement
should not be treated as an afterthought.
Jejunostomy feeding is indicated when the upper GI tract must
be rested or when pancreatic stimulation must be decreased.
Feeding tube management
 Jejunal tubes can be placed either surgically or threaded through
and complications
a gastrostomy tube for transpyloric placement. Standard gastro-
jejunal tubes designed for humans are unreliable in dogs due to
A complete feeding plan should be done for each animal in
frequent reflux of the jejunal portion of the tube back into the
which a feeding tube has been placed with written feeding direc-
stomach. Investigation is ongoing involving endoscopic place-
tions given to the owner.56 Since many owners are unfamiliar
ment of transpyloric jejunal tubes through PEG tubes. This tech-
with the use of syringes and the feeding procedure itself, plan on
nique requires skill and patience to be successful in animals.
 an extended discharge for each animal. This appointment should
Supplies needed for placement include 5- to 8-Fr PVC tubing.
include instructions on care of the feeding tube, how to feed,
suture, and Luer slip catheter plug.
amount and frequency of the feedings, and potential complica-
 Due to the small diameter of these tubes and the location,
tions; this typically takes 30-45 min.
liquid enteral diets are recommended. Because the jejunum has
There are multiple veterinary recovery diets that are available
minimal storage capacity compared to the stomach, continuous
 in a gruel form, which easily pass through most of the larger-
rate infusion using a syringe pump is the preferred method of
 bore feeding tubes (12 Fr and higher). Sometimes, adding as little
delivery.
as 1-2 tablespoons of water (15-30mL) to the can of food will
Common complications include osmotic diarrhea and vomit-
 greatly increase ease of passage. However, it should be noted that
ing. It is recommended that the jejunal tube be left in place for
 adding excessive amounts of water will dilute the diet and result
248
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
in lower calories (kilocalories) per milliliter. If needed, home-
Use with extreme caution .
made gruel diets can be prepared from commercial diets. The
Supplies:
disadvantage of using these diets is not knowing the caloric
amount found in each milliliter of the final mixture or the fnal
10-Fr polypropylene catheter
volume achieved after mixing. Additional math is required to
10- to 12-mL Luer slip syringe
calculate the caloric content of the final product. The total
1-in. tape
yolume achieved after mixing with water is measured, and this
 amount is divided by the kilocalories per can or cup used to
 Cut a bevel on the end of the polypropylene catheter—this
   n  m s id   
will be sharp! Measure the length of the catheter to either
 per millimeter (kcal/mL) amount. These diets also tend to fall
the site of the obstruction or the outside of the body wall.
out of suspension after they have been mixed with water if not
Mark with a piece of 1-in. tape. Do not pass the cut catheter
well blended and increases the possibility of tube blockage due
im s  ad m h-m oq a isd
to larger food particles in the mixture.
2.
 Fill the syringe with warm water then pass the cut catheter
to the level of the obstruction. Attach the syringe to the
Mechanical complications
polypropylene catheter and use your fingers to pinch around
the end of the feeding tube to prevent backflow. Flush the
Mechanical complications include both tube obstruction and
water into the catheter with force. You may need to aspirate
 premature removal or dislodgement of the tube from the site of
 and flush repeatedly.
placement. The most common problem, tube obstruction, can
3. If the plug has been in the tube for >12h, you may need to
 carefully “ream? out the plug with the beveled end of the
blending of food.67 Food should never be allowed to sit in the
catheter; continue to try to flush the water through the
tube and the tube should be flushed with warm water after every
 feeding, administration of medications, or whenever GI contents
catheter.
are aspirated through the tube, as when checking residuals.
4. This technique has always worked for me, and I have never
 had to replace a tube because it was plugged. The sooner the
When using the feeding tube to administer medications, only
one medication at a time should be given through the tube, and
clients bring the animal in, the better (Figures 8.5.10 and
some advise that it should be given separately from the food68
8.5.11).
 This will help to prevent drug-to-drug interactions as well as
Premature tube removal or dislodgement is best prevented by
drug-to-food interactions, as not all medications and enteral
choosing the most appropriate tube for the animal, properly
foods are compatible with one another. Certain medications can
securing the tube, and by judicious use of collars and wraps
form solid obstructions in feeding tubes after mixture and prior
when appropriate. Other factors that may influence premature
to getting to the stomach Therefore, even though it is common
tube removal or dislodgement are durability of the particular
practice to administer certain medications with food, it may not
tube, pruritus from site infection, activity level of the patient,
be advisable. If administered in this fashion, instruct clients to
owner compliance, damage to the tube from animal bites, and
crush all pills in a mortar and pestle prior to adding to the food.
balloon breakage. Whenever the location of the tube is in doubt,
There may be increased difficulty in passing the food through
it should be checked radiographically. While most tubes are
the feeding tube if the holes in the feeding tube become clogged,
due to either insufficient flushing after feeding or the accumula-
tion of hair swallowed while grooming. If after massaging the
length of the tube to break up any obstructions it is still
 obstructed, the first attempt to open the tube is to try to flush
the clog out using warm water and the feeding syringe. Hold the
tube frmly and push the water with moderate force. If the clog
is not bad, this technique may work If it is still clogged, try
switching to a carbonated beverage (anecdotally, colas work the
best). Instill the cola into the feeding tube and allow it to sit for
a period of time (approximately 5 min). As an alternative, some
 practitioners have suggested the use of pancreatic enzymes
mixed with water and various other mixtures instilled into the
tube to break up the clog.6.9
This following technique is used by the author for stubborn
a Jo i a u aa Aia aq on uad s pue so
clogs. This technique is used after the above techniques have
failed to relieve the clog in a feeding tube. This tube unplugging
 za   o  a aq  l
tubes and 20 Fr or larger esophagostomy tubes:
Figure 8.5.10 Bevel cut to polypropylene catheter.
Chapter 8  Gastrointestinal
249
 Constipation is not an unusual complication seen in patients
  a i  s ss s s  
muscle loss and metabolic derangement, the development of
constipation is not unexpected. Adding lactulose to the diet will
often solve this problem, 1-2 mL per meal; adjust as needed to
maintain stool consistency.*9
Metabolic complications
There are two types of metabolic complications that patients
with feeding tubes can develop. The frst is the result of the
 patient's inability to assimilate certain nutrients. This can best
o sss  ro e  a  
 the patient before developing the nutritional plan. The other type
 of metabolic complication is called refeeding syndrome. For
 more information on the refeeding syndrome, please refer to
Chapter 14.
Figure 8.5.11  Example of what not to do. The catheter has passed
Metabolic complications of any type are less likely to occur if
through the end of the feeding tube. This could result in puncture of
estimated caloric needs are conservative. Current recommenda-
the stomach wall.
tions are to initiate feeding at caloric amounts equal to the
patient's calculated RERs without the addition of any "illness
requirements."6.9
radiopaque, a sterile contract media (e.g., Omnipaque) can be
infused through the tube to check for leaks into the peritoneal
Infectious complications
or thoracic cavity.?1 Barium should not be used to check tube
placement due to the irritating effect of barium when outside of
The types of infectious complications that can occur in tube-
the GI tract.
fed patients include contamination of the enterally fed for-
mulas, peristomal cellulitis, septic peritonitis, and aspiration
pneumonia.
Gastrointestinal complications
 Microbial contamination of the food is easily avoided by fol-
Some of the GI complications seen with tube feeding are related
lowing basic hygiene in the preparation and storage of the food.
to the feeding itself. Food that is administered too quickly, in too
 Blenderized foods should be prepared daily, and opened com-
large of a quantity or at the wrong temperature, can all cause
 mercial liquid diets should be kept refrigerated and discarded
nausea, vomiting, or abdominal discomfort. These signs can also
 after 48h. When food is being delivered via a syringe pump, no
be related to the patient's underlying disease process or to a
more than 6-h worth of food should be set up at a time. One of
 complication of medications the patient is receiving.8.10
the biggest sources of contamination is inadequate cleaning of
Liquid enteral diets are typically very low residue and are
likely to cause a soft stool, if not actual diarrhea, in a normal
 Syringes, containers, and tubing used for preparing, storing, and
animal, let alone in one who is already ill. Likewise, most recoy-
 delivering food should be discarded after use. Items that are
ery diets, in both liquid and gruel forms, are high in fat; a patient
reused, such as blenders and storage containers, should be
with impaired fat digestion and absorption may develop steator-
cleaned thoroughly and preferably sterilized each time they are
rhea when fed these diets.6
used. The equipment used to deliver the food should also be
 Another cause of diarrhea not typically thought of is the medi-
replaced every 24 h. This includes the syringes and delivery tubes
cations that we are giving to the animals, whether they are orally
 and, if the food is hung, the administration bag.
administered or administered through the feeding tubes. Many
Peristomal cellulitis can be seen with esophagostomy, gastros-
liquid oral forms of medications are hypertonic or contain sorb-
Aq papioe aq Aensn ueo su saqn Auonsounfef pue uo
ital (a nonabsorbable sugar) and may cause, at least in part,
ensuring that the tube is not secured too tightly to the body wall
and by keeping the site clean and protected. Septic peritonitis
 resolve the diarrhea. Aliquots of pumpkin can be prepared ahead
can develop in patients where the gastrostomy or jejunostomy
 of time in ice cube trays and stored in a freezer bag until needed.
tube has become dislodged or removed before a permanent
The total amount of each feeding will need to be adjusted
stoma had formed (Figure 8.5.12).91 Less commonly, but more
accordingly.
of a concern, is the development of septic peritonitis associated
We also need to remember that a number of commonly used
with dislodgement of the stomach from the gastric portion of
antibiotics, analgesic agents, and other drugs can cause nausea,
the feeding tube without any external evidence of problems. In
vomiting, and GI ileus. This can contribute to the discomfort our
these situations, the patient is fed through the feeding tube;
 patients are feeling.
however, instead of the food being delivered into the stomach,
250
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Very few patients do poorly with their feeding tube after dis-
charge, particularly if good communication is established with
the owners and regular rechecks are scheduled. Rechecks should
be scheduled with the technician managing the case. This author
prefers rechecks every 2 weeks until the tube is removed, but
individual clinician, client, or patient preference may dictate a
different recheck schedule. If the tube will be in place long term
(months to years), these rechecks can become less frequent once
the animal stabilizes and the owners become more comfortable
with tube maintenance and management.
Potential postdischarge complications
Granulation tissue normally forms around the tube site on the
outside and may be quite pink and can even bleed when
handlled.&? It is important to let clients know to expect this and
Figure 8.5.12  Peristomal cellulitis.
that it is normal. This is the tissue that allows the hole to close
after the tube is removed. Cats with dark hair coats (including
tabbies) will often have hair growth in a dark ring around the
it is deposited in the abdominal cavity. These patients often
tube site, and it may be thicker than the surrounding hair. Many
display marked and rapid abdominal pain. Proper tube selection
clients will think that this is necrosis and become very con-
s q no q a d ss nd d 
cerned; a quick warning to expect this will greatly ease their
 aan a as  r s s  ao se  si
minds.
the stomach lumen but not so small so as to easily become dis-
What do you do about the patient that insists on chewing on
 placed out of the stomach and into the abdomen. Some clinicians
its tube? A simple solution is to place a baby's T-shirt or onesie
add a second “inner flange" to avoid premature removal, dis-
on a cat; usually, an infant's size 6-9 months works well. For
lodgement, or displacement. Body wraps, shirts, or Elizabethan
large patients, larger shirts can be used. Use a T-shirt that has a
collars may be necessary to prevent the patient from accidentally
ftted neck, not the lap shoulders type. Once the T-shirt is on,
or intentionally prematurely removing the tube. Ensuring that a
place a piece of 1-in. porous tape near the end of the feeding
mature stoma has formed prior to tube removal can help to
tube, tuck the tube up under the T-shirt, and use a safety pin to
prevent peritonitis. Patients that are malnourished or are receiv.
pin the tape to the T-shirt. This makes removal easier for feeding
ing medications that impair wound healing may take longer to
and decreases the risk of pinning through the tube and damag-
 develop a mature stoma than would healthy patients.
ing it.
Aspiration pneumonia can be seen in patients that have previ-
Once the patient goes home, tube feedings are continued even
ously developed aspiration pneumonia, laryngeal paralysis, or
after the patient begins oral self-feeding. Owners are given
prior surgery for laryngeal paralysis, patients with impaired
instructions to always have fresh food and water available for the
mental status, patients with neurological injuries, patients with
convalescing patient. When the desired weight is reached, tube
reduced or absent cough or gag reflexes, and those on mechani-
feedings are decreased by 25-50% depending on the oral intake.
The tube can be removed after the patient has reached its desired
prepylorically puts them at risk of aspiration of food. Viable
weight, has recovered from the trauma, or has fnished chemo-
alternatives would include jejunostomy tubes (although even
therapy treatment and has been totally self-feeding for 2 weeks
these patients are at risk for retrograde reflux into the stomach)
without showing any signs of weight loss. Many feeding tubes
and parenteral nutrition. Lastly, caution should be used when
can be maintained long term, and the same stoma hole can be
feeding patients with NE or esophagostomy tubes using CRI.6
used for repeated tube placements.
 These types of tubes can be regurgitated and the tip of the tube
could relocate in the pharynx and place the patient at risk for
pulmonary aspiration.
Conclusion
Typicaly, animals feel much better and the owners are very
Hospital management
happy with the results they see when using a feeding tube.
Patients should be allowed out to exercise for 20-30 min approx-
Feeding tubes do require routine daily care such as cleaning
imately 1 h before feeding, two to three times daily. This can be
around the tube site and flushing of the feeding tube with water,
started even while the CRI feedings are being done; just discon-
but the tubes need not be used every day to feed the patient. The
     s     a n
use of feeding tubes can give many clients the benefit of enjoying
cise has been found to greatly enhance both gastric motility and
their pet for a longer period of time and ofhaving a better quality
patient attitude.?
of life for both of them.
Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
251
SECTION 6FOODINTOLERANCE
Table 8.6.1 Primary dermatologic responses
AND FOOD ALLERGY
Severe generalized pruritus without lesions
Military dermatitis
An adverse reaction to food is an abnormal response to an
Pruritus with self-trauma centered around head, neck, ears
 ingested food or food additive.' These reactions can be divided
up into immunological and nonimmunological in origin. An
Traumatic alopecia
immunological reaction is caused by an antibody immune
Moist dermatitis
complex or a cell-mediated immune reaction. An adverse reac-
Scaling dermatitis
tion that is nonimmune based can be caused by enzyme deficien-
cies, food toxicities, or pharmacological reactions to food
Source: Roudebush P, Guilford wG, Shanley KU. Adverse reactions to food. In:
ingredients.2
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 4th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Thatcher, RL
Adverse food reactions are a common cause of chronic GI
Remillard, P Roudebush, pp. 431-453. Topeka, KS: Mark Morris Institute;
disease.? In cats, this is the second most common dermatologic
2000.
disorder, after fea allergy hypersensitivity, and is seen more
commonly in cats than in dogs.4
Nonimmunological reactions to foods can be seen with nutri-
 Physical defenses against hypersensitivity to food antigens
ent excesses (vitamin A or D toxicosis), food contamination with
include effective mucosal barrier and oral tolerance generated by
bacteria, metabolites or endotoxins, specifc foods (e.g., onions,
the cellular immune system gut-associated lymphoid tissue
chocolate), and toxic food preservatives (benzoic acid, propylene
(GALT). An effective mucosal barrier includes effective digestive
glycol in cats).
 enzymes, adequate mucus layer, as well as intact and functioning
epithelial cells and immunoglobulin A.' This interaction between
Clinical signs
luminal factors of dietary and bacterial origin and the gut wall
 itself is important in preventing food allergies.?
Clinical signs may affect more than one body system, with the
Exogenous food antigens (including peptides, glycoproteins,
most common sites being dermatologic (pruritus) and GI (pri-
lectins, and microorganisms) have the ability to interact with
marily vomiting and diarrhea). GI signs with concurrent cuta-
the gut wall and to induce reactions as well as regulatory and
neous signs may also be seen. GI signs are seen in 10-15% of
 counter-regulatory processes. Interactions of luminal factors
dogs and cats presenting with cutaneous signs. A peripheral
with the gut wall influence digestion (secretion, absorption,
eosinophilia is also seen in 20-50% of feline cases.'
motility), immune functions (exclusion of antigens, regulation
Clinical response to treatment can be slow, and risk of reoc-
 of the GI immune system, antigen processing, sensitivity,
 allergy), and neuroendocrine processes.
owner compliance is essential to successful treatment. Eosi-
nophilic granulomas and respiratory and other GI signs can be
Diagnostics
seen in addition to the above-mentioned vomiting, diarrhea, and
dermatologic signs. Concurrent hypersensitivities (e.g., flea bite
The clinical feature most sensitive for diagnosis of food allergies
is concurrent GI signs and cutaneous signs.4
and management and is seen in up to 30% of cats with food
Elimination trials remain the gold standard for diagnosis. A
allergies.14
positive response to an exclusion diet with subsequent relapse
 Allergies may develop after prolonged exposure to one brand,
with challenge of the food product is diagnostic.? Intradermal
 one type, or one form of food. Adverse reactions may develop
skin testing tends to be unreliable and no evidence is available
after a single exposure as immune amplification is not necessary
to justify the use of this test for the diagnosis of food allergies.4
(Table 8.6.1).
Radioallergosorbent testing (RAST) and ELISA are likewise
unreliable for diagnosis of food hypersensitivity, especially with
Causes
 concurrent dermatologic disease.14
Risk factors associated with development of food allergies are
Treatment
difficult to document but include certain foods or food ingredi-
ents, poorly digestible protein sources, diseases that increase
For an adverse food reaction, removal of the inciting cause will
intestinal mucosal permeability (e.g., viral enteritis), selective
usually resolve the problem (if you can identify the source). The
immunoglobulin A deficiency, certain breeds (Irish setters), age
 inciting cause can be poor quality ingredients (rancid fat), bacte-
(less than I year old), and concurrent allergic diseases.' Accord-
rial enterotoxins or fungal mycotoxins, or an inability to digest
ing to Drs. Case and Daristotle, German shepherd dogs, Chinese 
the ingested product (foreign bodies).5
shar-peis, and Irish setters with adverse food reactions have an
Many clients complain of a transitory diarrhea associated with
 increased incidence of developing GI signs that may accompany
a sudden diet change. Initially, with sudden diet changes, the
the dermatologic signs typically seen.2
animal may be unable to digest or absorb certain nutrients until
252
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
the brush border enzymes adapt to the new diet as these enzymes
this may include chicken, turkey, venison, duck, rabbit, lamb, or
are produced in response to the presence of specific substrates
fish; soy (a vegetable protein) can be used if properly processed.3
in the diet. In some cases, they may be unable to produce the
Poorly digestible protein sources retain their inherent antigenic-
 necessary enzymes, as seen with lactose intolerance in some
ity during the heat processing of the food and should be avoided.?
adult animals.5
 a p se d s Ai e 
trials is ideal.
Elimination diets
Gluten is a protein found commonly in grains, primarily
wheat, rye, and barley. It is a cause of food intolerance in humans
 The ingredients found to most commonly cause hypersensitivity
   n      q s 
reactions in cats is fish, beef, and dairy products in -89% of the
  p d u u aa s a  ss
cases. For dogs, the list includes beef, dairy products, and wheat
animal, then there is no reason to exclude them from an elimina-
in -65% of the cases, and chicken, egg, lamb, and soy in -25%
tion diet as gluten allergies are rare in dogs and cats.
 of the cases.12 There may be single or multiple sensitivities
 Though not commonly thought of as a protein, the gelatin
found.?
used in some medications as well as in the encapsulation of
The primary requirements for an elimination diet are that it
is complete and balanced, has high digestibility in the SIs, and
that it is minimally digestible does not affect its antigenic
has limited ingredients.? This can either be a homemade diet, a
potential.
A detailed diet history should help to guide to which diet
Protein hydrolysates
ingredient the animal has not previously been exposed. Be sure
to ask about treats as well as any table foods the animal may be
o sisd o a pnd are s u
fed. The elimination diet should ideally include only food items
dietary proteins. This produces peptides that, in theory, are less
to which the animal has not previously been exposed. Ask about
likely to interact with the immune system because they are small
other animals in the environment, specifically for past exposure
enough not to be recognized by nor trigger a reaction by the
to the novel food source (pet rabbits, ducks, etc.). Selection of
immune system. By decreasing the molecular weight of the pro-
an appropriate elimination diet can be challenging in some
teins, digestibility is also increased. Because of the predigestion
 animals, and a hydrolyzed protein diet may be a consideration.
of the proteins, the actual base source of the protein no longer
There are a number of sources for balanced homemade diets.
matters.16 More work needs to be done to confrm that these
Unbalanced diets should not be fed for longer than a few weeks,
proteins are truly hypoallergenic in dogs and cats.
especiall to young animals.? No raw meats should be fed in any
Diets with protein hydrolysates are usually reserved for
homemade diet as potential for contamination is high.4
animals with adverse food reactions, allergies, or maldigestion
In multiple pet households, if they are all the same species, all
problems. Unlike elimination diets, the commercial diets using
may be fed the elimination diet. If other dietary restrictions exist,
 protein hydrolysates are complete and balanced, decreasing the
 then a strict food quarantine must be established. Outdoor cats
concern for dietary imbalance.'6
will need to be transitioned to strictly indoors to eliminate
hunting and seeking of alternate food source behaviors.?
The new diet should be fed as the sole source of nutrition for
Carbohydrates
at least 3-4 weeks with GI signs, and potentially for as long as 3
months for dermatologic conditions. A typical trial lasts at least
As with proteins, a single-source diet is ideal. The carbohydrates
6-8 weeks; after this time, the owners may start reintroducing
most commonly selected include corn, potato, rice, and tapioca.?
 a e aa pus s a o s po
m s ud o ss pd ue re sua aaoqe pou s
days, if a reaction is seen that food is considered a causative
as carbohydrates. Their inclusion in a diet should be based on
ingredient. Many clients are unwilling to try the reintroduction
exposure.
food trials once the clinical signs have resolved, which is not a
Carbohydrate intolerance can be seen and most commonly
problem as long as the animal and the clients are satisfied with
involves lactose. The lack of the enzyme lactase can cause
the diet.
diarrhea, bloating, and abdominal discomfort.' It is usually
 Lastly, a new diet may have positive effects on intestinal diges-
related to volume consumed rather than to just exposure.
tion by decreasing potentially harmful bacteria and thereby
decreasing the concentration of bacterial metabolites found in
Fats
the gut. Increased digestibility may also be helpful in the man-
agement of other GI diseases.
Fats are an important source of calories, especially in an eli-
mination diet. Usually, fats are not seen as allergenic, but they
Proteins
may contain small amounts of either plant or animal proteins
dependent on their source.? For most animals, this is not a
Single-source protein choices are ideal, with usually only one
concern, but for extremely sensitive animals, this should be a
ingredient selected for the diet. Depending on the diet history,
consideration.
Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
253
Minerals and trace elements
defenses must be working optimally to cope with the onslaught
of foreign substances and pathogens to which they are constantly
These are essential to make a diet complete and balanced, but
exposed.10
some sources of mineral salts may contain small amounts of
This defense involves the coordination of three different
protein. It is important to look at the extender and carrier for
 systems within the intestines. The first is the resident intestinal
a    p d se s a
microflora, which provides an environment that favors the
found in them.
 growth and functioning of beneficial bacteria. The second is the
intestinal mucosa, which provides a protective barrier against
Conclusion
 pathogenic bacteria. Last is the GALT, which provides the cel-
lular protection for containment of bacteria within the intestinal
As with most things, once the source of the problem has been
tract.'0
identified, avoidance is the most effective treatment. Animals
term. It is important to know that the food has undergone
Prebiotics
feeding trials and, if possible, that those trials were conducted
Typically, prebiotics are a type of carbohydrate called oligosac-
on animals with either dermatologic or GI disease.' Feeding
charides, though by definition, noncarbohydrates can also be
trials done on healthy animals may not adequately represent the
classifed as prebiotics. The ones used most frequently are clas-
digestibility and absorption of a diseased GI tract.
sified as soluble fbers. These were first identified as a functional
food in 1995 by Marcel Roberfroid. In 2007, Dr. Roberfroid
Prebiotics and probiotics
clarifed that only two classes of FOSs fully meet the definition
 of a prebiotic. These are oligofructose and inulin.1
According to the currently adopted definition by the Food and
Oligofructose is a short-chain prebiotic (two to eight fructose
Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Health Organi-
links per saccharide molecule) that undergoes fermentation
zation (WHO), probiotics are “live microorganisms which when
 fairly quickly in the colon, providing nourishment to the bacte-
administered in adequate amounts confer a health benefit on the
ria of that area. Examples of food sources for FOSs are soybeans
  u a sd s 
oats, beets, and tomatoes.
that selectively stimulate the growth and activities of specific
 Inulin is a longer-chain prebiotic (9-64 fructose links per sac-
bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract and exert beneficial effects
charide molecule) that tends to be fermented more slowly, ben-
on the host."α The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) defines
efiting bacteria farther down the colon. Inulin is composed of
nutraceuticals as “nondrug substances produced in a purified or
the same fructose base as is FOs but is a much larger molecule.
extracted form and administered oraly to provide agents
The length of the molecule will affect the digestibility and there-
required for normal body structure and function with the intent
fore its availability for use by the intestinal bacteria. It can also
of improving health and well-being."9
be broken down into the FOSs by the intestinal bacteria to
Prebiotics and probiotics are either bacteria or substances that
 provide both FOS and inulin. Inulin can be found in Jerusalem
 benefit bacteria in the intestinal tract. There are millions of bac-
 artichoke, jicama, and chicory root.
teria that typically reside in the SIs and LIs of normal, healthy
These two fbers are seen as minimally digestible because
animals that help with digestion of food, maintain intestinal
of their beta-bond base connecting the fructose molecules.
mucosal integrity, participate in metabolism, as well as local and
 Dogs and cats lack the enzyme in their intestines to break
down the beta bond; instead, they break down alpha saccha-
 or dietary changes affect these beneficial bacteria, imbalances
ride bonds. The resident bacteria of dogs and cats do have the
can occur, causing changes in the digestion of food, mucosal
ability to break this beta bond, which produces SCFAs. The
integrity, metabolism, and immunity (both local and systemic).
 SCFAs seen most commonly include acetate, proprionate, and
One other common cause of changes within the GI microflora
butyrate.
is the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics to treat infections.
 Plants have more than one type of carbohydrate in them, so
When the GI microflora is disturbed, potentially harmful and
 both FOS and inulin can be found in varying amounts in the
pathogenic bacteria can become more prolific and can cause
same plant. Conversely, neither type may be found in other
antibiotic-induced diarrhea.'
carbohydrates. The addition of fiber to the diet may or may not
provide prebiotic effects, depending on the types of fibers found
The intestines
in the product. All fbers are carbohydrates, but not all carbohy-
drates are fibers. Different fibers provide different benefits. Cel-
The intestines are seen as the largest component of the immune
lulose is minimally digestible and will usually only provide
system in the body, comprising -70% of the total immune
 bulking, whereas chicory or beet pulp does not provide much
system. The mucosal barrier found in the intestines helps to
 fber but does make for happy bacteria in the guts.
block the entrance of most pathogenic bacteria into the body 
 The SCFAs produced by the breaking of the beta bond
while allowing the entrance of permeable nutrients.'* As most 
(through bacterial fermentation) serve as an energy source to
pathogens enter the body through the mouth, these intestinal
the colonocytes, act to lower the colonic pH, and stimulate
254
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 8.6.2  Intestinal bacteria
Though yogurt and a number of other bacterial fermented prod.
ucts contain benefcial bacteria, these bacteria seldom survive
Beneficial
Pathogenic
the stomach and therefore do not provide any benefit to the
intestinal bacteria. The beneficial effects of probiotics depend
Lactobacilli
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
on the number of live bacteria that make it to the intestines and
Eubacteria
Proteus species
are able to transiently colonize there.0
Biffdobacteria
Staphylococci
The primary bacterial populations that are seen to benefit cats
and dogs are the lactic acid bacteria, especially lactobacilli, bif-
Enterococci
Clostridia
dobacteria, and enterococci. These bacteria use fermentation to
Veillonella
transform some sugars into organic acids, particularly lactic and
acetic acids. These acids serve to lower the pH in the intestinal
Source: Kelly M. The Role of Probiotics in Gt Tract Heaith. St. Louis, MO:
 tract and inhibit the growth of pathogenic bacteria.10
Nestle Purina Pet Care;2006
Probiotics can benefit the intestinal microflora in a number of
ways. They can increase fecal bacteria counts of good bacteria
while decreasing the numbers of pathogenic bacteria. Some pro-
sodium and water absorption.? One SCFA in particular, butyrate,
biotics have been shown to minimize adherence of pathogenic
serves as the primary energy source for colonocytes but may also
bacteria to the intestinal epithelial cells, thereby minimizing the
directly enhance cell proliferation of normal cells while sup-
establishment of pathogenic bacteria populations.
 pressing proliferation of transformed cells. Since FOS and inulin
 Probiotics can also help to control diarrhea caused by bacte-
 are both fbers, there can be negative side effects to their addition
rial overgrowth or parasitic infection. This uses the principles of
to the diet. Both FOS and inulin have been shown to cause a
competitive exclusion, competition for nutrients and binding
decrease in the intestine's ability to break down and digest pro-
sites, and an increase in specifc and nonspecifc immune
 teins when fibers are at higher levels in the diet.?
response." One of the biggest challenges for manufacturers of
 Studies have shown that there are generally positive effects
probiotic products is survivability of the bacteria. Most com-
when FOSs and fructose-based inulins are added to the diet.!2
mercially available products suffer tremendous loss of activity
These effects can be seen in the gut microflora, host health (as
during storage. After 5-6 months of storage, virtually no live
evaluated through gut integrity and bacterial colonization),
organisms are present. Those bacteria that are present still have
animal performance (as evaluated through digestion), body
to survive the gastric pH and the duodenal bile acids before they
weight gain, and feed efficiency when FOSs and fructose-based
can colonize the SIs. To address these concerns, some manufac-
inulins are added to the diet (Table 8.6.2).12
the bacteria, while others provide a variety of bacteria to cover
Probiotics
more bases.
Probiotics, rather than encouraging the growth of beneficial bac-
Conclusion
teria and suppressing the growth of pathogenic bacteria, actually
introduce these beneficial bacteria into the environment. To be
Prebiotics are used as both a source of nutrition for the colono-
able to function as a probiotic, certain criteria must be met by
cytes and as a fiber source for the animal; inclusion in the diet
the bacteria being used. They must be able to
is relatively easy. This is because adding a fiber to the diet during
manufacturing is much easier than adding actual bacteria to the
survive the acid and bile found in the GI tract;
diet. The fiber source used should be listed on the ingredient
adhere to the intestinal cells and transiently colonize various
panel but may not state whether it is a source of FOS or inulin.
areas within the GI tract;
 Increasing your familiarity with the different fber sources used
exclude or reduce pathogenic bacterial adherence;
and their relative FOS and inulin contents can help when evalu-
produce acids, hydrogen peroxide, and/or bacteriocins that
ating a diet. When in doubt, contact the manufacturer for further
antagonize the growth of pathogens;
information.
coaggregate to help achieve normal balanced microflora
Unlike the prebiotics, the use of probiotics is more of a tran-
sient process based on need rather than a long-term process.
population; and
Ideally, through ingestion, the bacterial population most benefi-
 be safe, noninvasive, noncarcinogenic, and nonpathogenic to
cial to the animal and the one that supports the best intestinal
the animal.0
health will take up residence. But when this does not occur,
Initially, the Gl tract of a newborn is sterile but is colonized
or when challenges are expected that could affect intestinal
within hours of birth. These bacteria find their individual niches
health, probiotics can be easily added into the diet to help
within the intestinal tract and reach a state of equilibrium. Once
support the bacterial populations there. There have been no
this neonate “grace period" is over, introduction of bacteria is
detrimental effects seen with long-term prebiotic or probiotic
significantly more difficult due to the gastric acidity and the
use, as opposed to the detrimental effects seen with the long-
introduction of bile acids to the chyme leaving the stomach.
term use of antibiotics.
Chapter 8  Gastrointestinal
255
SECTION 7 ANESTHESIA AND
Opioid agonists such as morphine, hydromorphone, oxymor-
 phone, and fentanyl are better choices for painful, long, or inva-
ANALGESIA CONSIDERATIONS IN
sive procedures such as abdominal exploratory or esophageal
GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE
foreign body removal. Morphine and hydromorphone, when
given intramuscularly, often cause emesis and excessive saliva-
tion. When given intravenously, the incidence of vomiting is
Patients with GI disorders often require general anesthesia in
 order to facilitate complete examination, obtain necessary diag-
dramatically decreased (if giving morphine IV, it should be done
very slowly to prevent sudden histamine release) but is still a
nostic testing or imaging, or in cases where surgical intervention
possibility. Fentanyl given IV is the best choice for any case
is required. Specific considerations regarding the type of GI dys-
where risk of vomiting would be detrimental.
function should be made for each step in the anesthetic process
All opioid agonists can cause depression of the cardiovascular
from premedication and induction to maintenance and moni-
and respiratory centers and are known to slow GI transit time.
 toring, and to the recovery and postoperative phases.
This category of drug does provide sedation and excellent anal-
gesia for varying periods of time. All can be given intraopera-
Premedication
tively as CRIs (though it may be cost prohibitive to do so with
 oxymorphone) and are reversible.
When creating an anesthetic plan, the premedication combina-
tion typically consists of a sedative and an analgesic. The sedative
Induction
or analgesic chosen will depend greatly on the type and severity
 of the GI issue and the personality of the patient.
 The most common choices for anesthetic induction are propofol,
 Standard choices for sedatives include benzodiazepines, phe-
ketamine/diazepam, and etomidate. Propofol is a sedative-
nothiazines, and alpha-2 adrenergic agonists. Benzodiazepines
hypnotic that is relatively safe for use in most patients. It does
(diazepam and midazolam) provide adequate sedation but no
cause transient apnea and a dose-dependent cardiovascular
 analgesia for most patients with relatively calm personalities and
depression. In cats, it is known to cause Heinz body formation
have the benefit of little negative effect on cardiovascular, respi-
 following repeated administration.
ratory, or GI systems. Benzodiazepines are able to be reversed
Ketamine/diazepam is readily available and relatively inex-
using flumazenil.
aq a ai sd i  sn  s si i 's
 Phenothiazines, acepromazine being the most commonly
reports of ketamine-related seizures in some patients, so this
used, provide good sedation (but again, no analgesia) for most
particular combination should be avoided if there is any epileptic
patients, particularly those that are aggressive or extremely
history or known seizure activities). Ketamine does cause an
anxious. They are potent antiemetics, which may be benefi-
increase in cardiac contractility, which can lead to an increase in
cial  when considering  the gastrointestinally compromised
heart rate and blood pressure.
patient. They may also decrease sensitivity to some ventricular
Etomidate is an imidazole derivative that has a minimal car-
arrhythmias. Phenothiazines have little effect on respiratory
function but can result in dramatic reduction in cardiovascular
to be used for traumatized or extremely critical patients. Etomi-
output. It may cause some decrease in the time of gastric
date can cause suppression of adrenal functioning and acute
emptying.
hemolysis. Most importantly, when considering this agent for
Alpha-2 adrenergic agonists, most commonly dexmedetomi-
 gastrointestinally dysfunctional cases, it often causes nausea,
dine, provide excellent sedation for most patients and provide
 retching, and vomiting at induction particularly if the patient is
very minor analgesia (not enough for any surgical purpose).
 not appropriately sedated or if underdosing of the drug occurs.
Other potential effects include profound bradycardia, vasocon-
 Intubation of patients should be done quickly and the cuff of
striction, and cardiac sensitization to arrhythmias. GI effects
the endotracheal tube checked and inflated as soon as possible.
 include decreased gastric motility and emesis in some dogs and
To check the seal of an endotracheal tube cuff, intubate the
in most cats. Alpha-2 adrenergic agonists are reversible.
 patient and secure the tube. Close the pop-off valve and squeeze
the reservoir bag. Watch the manometer gauge—the needle
ate opioid analgesic. There are many choices available for a
should hold at 20-25 cm H,O. If the needle falls or air can be
variety of different situations. Butorphanol is an agonist-
heard escaping around the endotracheal tube, the cuff should be
sp og is pd e si udq  ps
 inflated slightly and the process repeated until an adequate seal
provide some sedation and are less likely to cause vomiting. They
is achieved Lubricating the endotracheal tube cuff prior to intu-
can cause decreased GI motility but less markedly than other
 bation can facilitate a less traumatic intubation and may prevent
opioids. Both drugs can be reversed but with difficulty as they
the passage of liquid into the trachea. This group of patients is
bind with very high affinity to receptor sites. The analgesia pro-
 at high risk of regurgitation under anesthesia, and it is important
vided is mild and, in the case of butorphanol, very short-acting
 to avoid aspiration of any fluid or material. It is advisable to
(30-60 min), so these drugs are only appropriate for short, rela-
check the cuff again after full anesthetic depth has been reached
tively painless procedures like endoscopy, diagnostic imaging, or
as further muscle relaxation may occur, allowing additional air/
minor biopsies.
 gas to escape around the endotracheal tube.
256
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Considerations should be made if the patient has any comor-
all be consequences associated with GI dysfunctions. Depending
bidity that could make intubation difficult, such as an oropha-
on the severity of the case, additional analgesia may be needed.
ryngeal mass or esophageal foreign body displacing the trachea;
CRIs of fentanyl or morphine-lidocaine-ketamine are often
in challenging cases, supplies for a tracheostomy should be ready.
used, as are fentanyl patches and IV or IM doses of opioid
analgesics.
Maintenance anesthesia
Noncritical cases may not need any additional analgesia or
 may be sent home with butorphanol (which is only appropriate
Isoflurane, sevoflurane, or desflurane are all acceptable choices
for cases where the duration of discomfort is not expected to
for anesthetic maintenance in these patients. In volvulus cases,
be very long) or NSAIDs. EXTREME caution should be used
nitrous oxide is not an acceptable option because the gases will
when administering NSAIDs to patients with GI abnormalities.
ssd      a  n a
NSAIDs mediate inflammatory processes by blocking the actiyv-
within the stomach and GI tract.
ity of COX enzymes in the body. However, COX enzymes also
function as GI protectors and are necessary for maintaining the
Monitoring
health ofthe GI tract. NSAIDs are strictly contraindicated in any
patient that is dehydrated, hypovolemic, has evidence of coagu-
Abdominal distention can impair cardiac function and impede
lation disorders, or any suggestion of gastric lesions, ulcerations,
appropriate ventilation requiring mechanical ventilation for
 or intestinal compromise.
adequate gas exchange. Once decompression has occurred, it
should be significantly easier to ventilate the patient.
Bibliography
Many patients thatsuffer dehydration from excessive vomiting/
diarrhea or those with a GDV may have electrolyte imbalances
and/or acid-base disturbances. These abnormalities should be
Section 1
corrected before anesthesia if at all possible. If stabilization is not
1.
Tams TR. Handbook of Small Animal Gastroenterology, 2nd
possible prior to anesthesia, aggressive fluid therapy with appro-
edition, St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2003.
priately balanced solutions should begin immediately. Electro-
2.
Burns KM. Managing overweight or obese pets. Veterinary
lyte panels and, if possible, arterial blood gas parameters should
Technician 2006;27(6):385-389.
be checked regularly during the intraoperative period.
3.
Willard MD. Clinical manifestations of gastrointestinal disorders.
As ventilation and tissue perfusion can be impaired in bloated
In: Small Animal Internal Medicine, 4th edition, eds. RW Nelson,
or metabolically disturbed patients, end tidal carbon dioxide and
CG Couto, pp. 351-373. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2009.
 Oxygen saturation should be closely monitored.
Matz ME. Flatulence. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman, pp. 210-212. St. Louis,
 Respiratory disturbances causing acidosis or alkalosis occur
when a patient is hyperventilating (in response to pain, fever,
MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
Behrend EN. Polyphagia. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal
or overcompensation with manual/mechanical ventilation) or
Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman, pp. 175-179.
hypoventilating (as a result of drug administration, CNS trauma,
St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
or  restricted thoracic movement).  Metabolic disturbances
6.
Forman MA. Anorexia. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal
causing acidosis or alkalosis occur in response to electrolyte
Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Etinger, EC Feldman, pp. 172-175.
imbalances. Acidosis is common in conjunction with shock,
St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
sepsis, pancreatitis, hypoxemia, and some toxins. Alkalosis com-
7.
Schermerhorn T. Cachexia. In: Textbook of Veterinary Medicine,
7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman, pp. 124-126. St. Louis,
steroid therapy, or bicarbonate therapy.
MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
Cardiac arrhythmias are extremely common in volvulus cases
and may be seen in patients with severe electrolyte imbalances,
Section 2
so electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring is strongly recom-
1.5
Simpson KW. Diseases of the stomach. In: Textbook of Veterinary
mended Cardiac output can be affected by distention and dehy-
Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman,
 dration, so for critical cases, arterial blood pressure monitoring
Pp. 1504-1526. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2010.
is advised.
Cornelius LM, Rawling CA. Arterial blood gas and acid-base
values in dogs with various diseases and signs of disease. Journal
Recovery
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 1981;178:992.
3.1
Hall EJ, German AJ. Diseases of the small intestine. In: Textbook
Serious cases should be recovered and maintained in a critical
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC
Feldman, pp. 1526-1572. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2010.
care unit for continued fluid support and postoperative monitor
4.
Desario C, Decaro N, Campolo M, et al. Canine parvovirus infec-
tion: which diagnostic test for virus? Journal of Virological Methods
surgical cases and ECG monitoring may be necessary. It is also
2005;126:179.
essential to monitor for both electrolytes and acid-base distur-
5.
Animal Internal Medicine, 4th edition, eds. RW Nelson, CG Couto,
acidosis/alkalosis, respiratory impairment, and hypovolemia can
pp. 374-394. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2009.
Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
257
6.
 Williams DA. Evaluation of fecal alphal protease inhibitor con-
9.Salisbury SK. Principles of oncologic surgery. In: Cancer in Dogs
centration as a test for canine protein-losing enteropathy. Journal
and Cats Medical and Surgical Managerment, ed. WB Morrison,
of Veterinary Internal Medicine 1991;5:133.
Pp. 209-225. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia Jackson; 2002.
7.
 Fetz K, Steiner JM, Ruaux CG, et al. Development and validation
of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for the me as-
Section 3.2
urement of feline alphal-proteinase inhibitor in serum and feces.
1.
Tams TR. Diseases of the esophagus. In: Small Animal Endoscopy,
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2004;18:424.
3rd edition, eds. TR Tams, CA Rawlings, Pp. 118-158. St. Louis,
8.
Fetz K, Steiner JM, Ruaux CG, et al. Increased fecal alphal-
 proteinase inhibitor concentrations in cats with gastrointestinal
MO: Elsevier/Mosby; 2011.
2.
Willard MD. Disorders of the oral cavity, pharynx, and esophagus.
disease. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2005;19:474.
In: Srmall Anirmal Internal Medicine, 4th edition, eds. RW Nelson,
9.
Melgarejo T, Williams DA, Asem EK. Enzyme-linked immuno-
CG Couto, pp. 414-426. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2009.
sorbent assay for canine alphal-protease inhibitor. Armerican
 Marks SL. Diagnosis and management of esophagel disorders.
Journal of Veterinary Research 1998;59:127.
 2011. Proceedings of the North American Veterinary Conference,
10.
 Murphy KF, German AJ, Ruaux CG, et al. Fecal alphal-proteinase
inhibitor concentration in dogs with chronic gastrointestinal
January 15-19, 2011, Orlando, FL.
disease. Veterinary Clinical Pathology 2003;32:67.
4.
 Jergens AE. Diseases of the esophagus. In: Textbook of Veterinary
 Konde LJ, Green PA, Pugh CR. Radiology and ultrasonography of
Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman,
11.
thedigestive system.In:HandbookofSmallAnimalGastroenterology,
Pp. 1487-1499. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2010.
5.
Holland CT, Satchell PM, Farrow BR. Selective vagal afferent dys-
2nd edition, ed. TR Tams, Pp. 51-96. St. Louis, MO: Saunders;
function in dogs with congenital megaesophagus. Autonomic
2003.
Tams TR. Gastrointestinal symptoms. In: Handbook of Small
Neuroscience 2002;99(1):18-23.
12.
 Davenport DJ, Leib MS, Remillard RL. Phar yngeal and esophageal
    a    
disorders. In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition,5th edition, eds.MS
St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2003.
Hand, CD Thatcher, RL Remillard, R Roudebush, BJ Novotny,
13.
 Tams TR, Webb CB. Endoscopic examination or the small intes-
pp. 1013-1022. Topeka, KS: MMI; 2010.
tine. In: Small Animal Endoscopy, 3rd edition, eds. TR Tams, CA
Rawlings, Pp. 27-40. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier/Mosby; 2011.
7.
Moore LE. Esophagus. In: Small Aniral Gastroenterology, ed. IM
Steiner, pp. 139-150. Hannover, Germany: Schlutersche; 2008.
14.
DeNovo RC. Diseases of the stomach. In: Handbook of Small
Animal Gastroenterology, 2nd edition, ed. TR Tams, pp. 159-194.
8.
Gaynor AR, Shofer FS, Washabau RJ. Risk factors for acquired
St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2003.
megaesophagus in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary
 Andrews F, Denovo R, Reese R, et al. The evaluation of the wireless
Medical Association 1997;211:1406-1412.
15.
capsule (SmartPill) for measuring gastric ermptying and Gl transit
9.
 Bexfield NH, Watson PJ, Herrtage ME. Esophageal dysmotility
in normal dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2008;
in young dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2006;20:
1314-1318.
22:751.
10.
 Sherding RG, Johnson SE. Esophagoscopy. In: Small Animal
Endoscopy, 3rd edition, eds. TR Tams, CA Rawlings, pp. 41-198.
Section 3.1
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier/Mosby; 2011.
11.
 Tams TR, Spector DJ. Endoscopic removal of gastrointestinal
1. Smith MM. Oral and salivary gland disorders. In: Textbook
foreign bodies. In: Srmall Animal Endoscopy, 3rd edition, eds. TR
of veterinary internal medicine, 6th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger,
Tams, CA Rawlings, p. 245-292. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier/Mosby;
EC Feldman, Pp. 1294-1295. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders;
2011.
2005.
2.
DeBowes L. Feline caudal stomatitis. In: Krks' Current Veterinary
Section 3.3
Therapy, 14th edition, ed. JD Bonagura, pp. 476-478. St. Louis,
MO: Saunders; 2009.
1.
 Davenport DJ, Remillard RL, Jenkins C. Gastritis. In: Srall Animal
3.
Robson M, Crystal MA. Gingivitis-stomatitis-pharyngitis. In: The
Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Ihatcher, RJ
Feline Patient, 4th edition, ed. GD Norsworthy, Pp. 199-201.
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2011.
KS: MMI; 2010.
4.
Lyon KE Gingivostomatitis. In SE Holmstrom, ed., Veterinary
2.
Willard MD. Disorders of the stomach. In: Small Animal Internal
Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 2005;35:
Medicine, 4th edition, eds. RW Nelson, CG Couto, pp. 427-439.
891-911.
St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2009.
5.
 Schmidt BR, Crystal MA. Oral neoplasia. In: The Feline Patient,
DeNovo RC. Handbook of Small Animal Gastroenterology, 2nd
4th edition, ed. GD Norsworthy, pp. 361-363. Ames, IA: Blackwell 
edition, pp. 159-194. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2003.
Publishing; 2011.
NeigerR.Disease ofthe stomach. In: SmallAnimallGastroenterology,
6.
Verstraete FJM. Mandibulectomy and
.maxillectomy. In SE
ed. JM Steiner, Pp. 159-175. Hannover, Germany: Schlutersche;
Holmstrom, ed., Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small
2008.
Animal Practice 2005;35:1009-1039.
 Simpson KW. Diseases of the stomach. In: Textbook of Veterinary
7.
Cherry B. Malignant oral cancer: open wide for early detection.
Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman,
The NAVTA Journal 2010;Summer:48-54.
Pp. 1504-1526. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2010.
8.
 McEntee M. Summary of results of cancer treatment with radia-
 Henderson AK, Webster CRL. Disruption of the mucosal barrier
tion therapy. In: Cancer in Dogs and Cats Medical and Surgical
in dogs. Compendium 2006(May);28(5):340-356.
Managerment, ed. WB Morrison, pp. 389-424. Jackson, W Y: Teton
7.
Twedt DC. Gastric or gastrointestinal motility disorders. In: The
NewMedia; 2002.
5 Mimute Veterinary Consult, 3rd edition, eds. LP Tilley, FWK
258
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Smith, Pp. 494-495. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &
7.
Triolo A, Lappin MR. Acute medical diseases of the small intes-
Wilkins; 2004.
tine. In: Handbook of Small Animal Gastroenterology, 2nd edition,
8.1
Davenport DJ, Remillard RL, Jenkins C. Gastritic motility and
ed. TR Tams, pp. 195-210. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2003.
ermptying disorders. In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th
8.
Hall EJ, German AJ. Diseases of the small intestine. In: Textbook
edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Thatcher, RJ Remillard, P Roudebush,
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC
BJ Novotony Pp. 1041-1046. Topeka, KS: MMI; 2010.
Feldman, pp. 1526-1572. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2010.
9.
Tams TR. Handbook of Small Animal Gastroenterology, 2nd
9.
Henry CJ. Neoplastic diseases of the small intestine. In: Srmall
edition, pp. 97-117. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2003.
Anirmal Gastroenterology, ed. JM Steiner, pp. 211-215. Hannover,
10.
Armbrust LJ, Hoskinson J, Lora-Michiels M, et al. Gastric empty-
Germany: Schlutersche; 2008.
ing in cats using foods varying in fiber content and kibble shapes.
10.
Couto CG. Disorders of the intestinal tract. In: Small Amimal
Veterinary Radiology e Ultrasound 2003;44:339-343.
Internal Medicine, 4th edition, eds. RW Nelson, CG Couto,
Pp. 1174-1185. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2009.
Section 3.4
11.
Birchard SJ, Couto CG, Johnson S. Nonlymphoid intestinal neo-
plasia in 32 dogs and 14 cats. Journal of the American Animal
1.
Allenspach K. Diseases of the large intestine. In: Textbook of
Hospital Association 1986;22:533-537.
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC
Feldman, pp. 1573-1594. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2010.
12.
Crawshaw J, Berg J, Sardinas IC, et al. Prognosis for dogs with
nonlymphomatous, small intestinal tumors treated by surgical
Willard MD. Disorders of the intestinal tract. In: Small Arirmal
excision. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
Internal Medicine, 4th edition, eds. RW Nelson, CG Couto,
1998;34:451-456.
Pp. 441-476. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2009.
Beam SL, Rassnick KM, Moore AS, et al. An immunohistochemi-
Sherding RA. Diseases of the large intestine. In: Handbook of Small
cal study of cyclooxygenase-2 expression in various feline neo-
Animal Gastroenterology, 2nd edition, ed. TR Tams, pp. 251-285.
plasms. Veterinary Pathology 2003;40:496.
St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2003.
14.
Esplin DG, Wilson SR. Gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas meta-
4.
Leib MS. Large intestine. In: Small Aniral Gastroenterology, ed.
static to the testes and associated structures in three dogs. Journal
 JM Steiner,pp. 217-240. Hannover, Germany: Schlutersche; 2008.
of the American Animal Hospital Association 1998;34:287.
5.
Allenspach K, Gaschein FP. Small intestinal disease. In: Small
15.1
Hall EJ, German AJ. Inflammatory bowel disease. In: Small
Animal Gastroenferology, ed. JIM Steiner, pp. 187-202. Hannover,
Anirmal Gastroenterology, ed. JM Steiner, pp. 312-329. Hannover,
Germany: Schlutersche; 2008.
Germany: Schlutersche; 2008.
6.
Triolo A, Lappin MR. Acute medical diseases of the small intes-
Allenspach K, Wieland B, Grone A, et al. Chronic enteropathies
tine. In: Handbook of Small Animal Gastroenterology, 2nd edition,
in dogs: evaluation of risk factors for negative outcome. Journal of
ed. TR Tams, Pp. 195-250. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2003.
Veterinary Internal Medicine 2007;21:700.
7.1
Hall EJ, German AJ. Diseases of the small intestine. In: Zextbook
17.1
 Jergens AE, Moore FM, Haynes JS, et al. Idiopathic inflarmmatory
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC
bowel disease in dogs and cats: 84 cases. Journal of the American
Feldman, pp. 1526-1572. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2010.
Veterinary Medical Association 1992;201:1987-1990.
8.5
Scorza AV, Brewer MM, Lappin MR. Polymerase chain reaction
18.
Gaschen L, Kircher P, Stussi A, et al. Comparison of ultrasono-
for the detection of Cryptosporidiurm spp. in cat feces. The Journal
 graphic findings with clinical activity index (CIBDAI) and diag-
of Parasitology 2003;89:423-426.
nosis in dogs with chronic enteropathies. Veterinary Radiology eé
Sucholdoski JS. Tritrichomonas foetus infection. In: Small Animal
Ultrasound 2008;49:56.
Gastroenterology, ed. JM Steiner, Pp. 225-226. Hannover,
19.
Crandell JM, Jergens AE, Morrison JA, et al. Development of a
Germany: Schlutersche; 2008.
clinical scoring index for disease activity in feline inflammatory
Section 3.5
bowel disease. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2006;20:788.
 Jergens AE. Clinical assessment of disease activity for canine
1.1
 Peterson PB, Willard MD. Protein-losing enteropathies. Veterinary
inflammatory bowel disease. Journal of the American Animal
Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 2003;33(5):
Hospital Association 2004;40:437.
1061-1082.
21.
Jergens AE, Schreiner CA, Frank DE, et al. A scoring index for
2.
 Tams T. Chronic diseases of the small intestine. In: Handbook of
disease activity in canine inflammatory bowel disease. Journal of
Small Animal Gastroenterology, 2nd edition, ed. T Tams, pp. 211-
Veterinary Internal Medicine 2003;17:291.
250. St. Louis, MO: W.B. Saunders; 2003.
22.
McCann TM, Ridyard AE, Else RW, et al. Evaluation of disease
3.
Gorman SC, Freeman LM, Mitchell SL, Chan DL. Extensive small 
activity markers in dogs with idiopathic inflarmmatory bowel
bowel resection in dogs and cats: 20 cases (1998-2004). Journal of
disease. Journal of Small Animal Practice 2007;48:619.
the American Veterinary Medical Association2006;228(3):403-407.
23.
MiNSTER M, Horauf A, Bilzer T. Assessment of disease severity
4.
 Kouti VI, Papazoglou LG, Rallis T. Short-bowel syndrome in dogs
and outcome of dietary, antibiotic, and immunosuppressive inter-
and cats. Compendium : Continuing Education for Veterinarians
ventions by use of the canine IBD activity index in 21 dogs with
2006;28(3):182-195.
inflammatory bowel disease. Berliner und Munchener tierarztliche
5.
Imamura M, Yamauchi H. Effects of massive bowel resection
Wochenschrift 2006;119:493.
on metabolism of bile acids and vitamin D, and gastrin release in
24.
 Davenport DJ, Jergens AE, Remillard RJ. Inflammatory bowel
dogs. The Tohoku Journal of Experimental Medicine 1992;168:
disease. In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds.
515-528.
MS Hand, CD Thatcher, RJ Remillard, P Roudebush, BJ Novotony,
Willard MD. Disorders of the intestinal tract. In: Small Animal
pp. 1065-1076. Topeka, KS: MMI; 2010.
Internal Medicine, 4th edition, ed. RW Nelson, CG Couto, pp.
25.
Lewis LD, Boulay JP, Chow FHC. Fat excretion and assimilation
441-483. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2009.
by the cat. Feline Practice 1979;9:46-49.
Chapter 8 Gastrointestinal
259
26.
 Nelson RW, Dimperio ME, Long GG. Lymphocytic-plasmacytic
1.
 Davenport DJ, Remillard RL. Acute gastroenteritis and enteritis.
colitis in the cat. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand,
Association 1984;184:1133-1135.
CD Ihatcher, RL Remilliard, P Roudebush, BJ Novotny, pp. 1053-
27.
 Nelson RW, Stookey LJ. Nutritional management of idiopathic
1061. Marceline, MO: Walsworth Publishing; 2010. 2010.
chronic colitis in the dog. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine
 LeJeune JT, Hancock DD. Public health concerns associated with
1988;2:133-137.
feeding raw meat diets to dogs. Journal ofthe American Veterinary
28.
 Guilford WG, Jones BR, Markwell PJ, et al. Food sensitivity in cats
Medical Association 2001(November 1);219(9):1222-1225.
with chronic idiopathic intestinal problems. Journal of Veterinary
 Nelson RW, Couto CG. General therapeutic principles. In: Small
Internal Medicine 2001;15:7-13.
Animal Internal Medicine,4thedition, eds. RW Nelson, CG Couto,
29.
Allenspach K, Rifenacht S, Sauter S, et al. Pharmacokinetics and
GR Grauer, EC Hawkins, Pp. 395-412. St. Louis, MO: Mosby;
clinical efficacy of cyclosporine treatment of dogs with steroid-
2009.2009.
refractory inflammatory bowel disease. Journal of Veterinary
7.
Case LP, Carey DP, Hirakawa DA, Daristotle L. Protein and amino
Internal Medicine 2006;20:239-244.
acids. In: Canine and Feline Nutrition, 2nd edition, pp. 23-28.
30.
 Sunvold GD, Fahey GC, Jr., Merchen NR, et al. Dietary fber
St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2000b. 2000.
for cats: in vitro fermentation of selected fber sources by cat fecal
Gross KL, Jewell DE, Yamka RM, et al. Macronutrients. In: Small
inoculum and in vivo utilization of diets containing selected fiber
Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Ihatcher,
sources and their blends. Journal of Animal Science 1995;73:
RL Remilliard, P Roudebush, BJ Novotny, pp. 49-104. Marceline,
2329-2339.
MO: Walsworth Publishing; 2010. 2010.
31.
 Sunvold GD, Fahey GC, Jr., Merchen NR, et al. Dietary fber
9.
Case LP, Carey DP, Hirakawa DA, Daristotle L. Fats. In: Canine
for dogs: IV. In vitro fermentation of selected fber sources by
and Feline Nutrition, 2nd edition, pp. 19-22. St. Louis, MO:
dog fecal inoculum and in vivo digestion and metabolism of
Mosby; 2000c. 2000.
fiber-supplemented diets. Journal of Animal Science 1995a;73:
10.
 Davenport DJ, Remillard RL, Carroll M. Large bowel diarrhea:
1099-1109.
colitis. In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS
32.
 Sunvold GD, Fahey GC, Jr., Merchen NR, et al. In vitro fermenta-
Hand, CD Thatcher, RL Remilliard, P Roudebush, BJ Novotny,
tion of selected fibrous substrates by dog and cat fecal inoculum:
Pp. 1101-1109. Marceline, MO: Walsworth Publishing; 2010c.
influence of diet composition on substrate organic matter disap-
2010.
pearance and short-chain fatty acid production. Journal of Animal
11.
Case LP, Carey DP, Hirakawa DA, Daristotle L. Carbohydrates. In:
Science 1995b;73:1110-1122.
Canine and Feline Nutrition, 2nd edition, pp. 16-18. St. Louis,
33.
 Ruaux CG, Steiner JM, Williams DA. Metabolism of amino acids
MO: Mosby; 2000a. 2000.
in cats with severe cobalamin deficiency. American Journal of
12.
Jergens AE. (2005) Canine and feline inflammatory bowel disease—
Veterinary Research 2001;61:1852-1858.
what's new. AAHA Proceedings CD.
34.
 Ruaux CG, Steiner JM, Williams DA. Early biochemical and clini-
13.
Willard MD. Disorders of the intestinal tract. In: Small Anirmal
o suis rm siin  uadons qos in asa 
Internal Medicine, 4th edition, eds. RW Nelson, CG Cuoto,
gastrointestinal disease and severe hypocobalaminemia. Journal of
pp.441-476.St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2009.
Veterinary Internal Medicine 2005;19:155-160.
14.
Allenspach K, Gaschein FP. Small intestinal disease. In: Small
35.
Hendricks KM, Walker A. Zinc deficiency in inflammatory bowel
Animal Gastroenterology,ed. JM Steiner,pp. 187-202. Hannover,
disease. Nutrition Reviews 1988;46:401-408.
Germany: Schlutersche; 2008.
36.
Allenspach K, Gaschen FP. Small intestinal disease. In: Small
15.
Hall EJ, German AJ. Diseases of the small intestine. In: Textbook
Animal Gastroenterology, ed. JM Steiner, pp. 187-202. Hannover,
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC
Germany: Schlutersche; 2008
Feldman, pp. 1526-1572. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2010.
37.
Martin L, Matteson V, Wingfeld W. Abnormalities of serum mag-
16.
 Triolo A, Lappin MR. Acute medical diseases of the small intes-
 nesium in criticall il dogs: incidence and implications. Journal
tine. In: Handbook of Small Animal Gastroenterology, 2nd edition,
of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 1994;4:15-20.
ed. TR Tams, pp. 195-250. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2003.
38.
Toll J, Erb H, Birnbaum N, et al. Prevalence and incidence of
17.
 Sandberg M, Bergsjo B, Hofshagen M, et al. Risk factors for
serum magnesium abnormalities in hospitalized cats. Journal of
Campylobacter infection in Norwegian cats and dogs. Preventive
Veterinary Internal Medicine 2002;16:217-221.
Veterinary Medicine 2002;55:241-253.
Van Immerseel F, Pasmans F, De Buck J, et al. Cats as a risk for
Section 3.6
transmission of antimicrobial drug-resistant Salmonella. Emerging
Infectious Diseases 2004;10:2169.
1.
 Davenport DJ, Remilliard RL. Introduction to small intestinal
German AJ. Diagnostic Tree: large bowel diarrhea. North American
disease. In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS
Veterinary Conference Clinician's Brief. 2006: pp. 54-55.
Hand, CD Ihatcher, RL Remilliard, P Roudebush, BJ Novotny,
20.
Guilford WG. Effect of diet on inflammatory bowel diseases.
Pp. 1047-1049. Marceline, MO: Walsworth Publishing;: 2010.
Veterinary Clinical Nutrition 1997;4:58-61.
Simpson IW, Anderson RS, Markwel PJ. Dietary management of
21.
Graham-Mize CA, Rosser EJ. Bioavailability and activity of pred-
clinical diseases. In: Clinical Nutrition of the Dog and Cat,eds. JW
nisone and prednisolone in the feline 
patient.
Veterinary
Simpson, RS Anderson, PJ Markwell, pp. 59-62. Cambridge, MA:
Dermatology (2004) Issue 15(s1):10. 2004.
Blackwell Publishing; 1993.
3.
 Nelson RW, Couto CG. Clinical manifestations of gastrointestinal
Section 3.7
disorders. In: Small Animal Internal Medicine, 4th edition, eds.
RW Nelson, CG Couto, GR Grauer, EC Hawkins, pp. 360-361. St.
1.
Leib M. In: Small Anirmal Gastroenterology, ed. JM Steiner,
Louis, MO: Mosby; 2009. 2009.
pp. 230-236. Hannover, Germany: Schlutersche; 2008.
260
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
2.
Willard MD. Disorders of the intestinal tract. In: Srall Aniral
7.1
Ramsey DS, Kincaid K, Watkins JA, Boucher JF, Condor GA,
Internal Medicine, 4th edition, eds. RW Nelson, CG Couto,
Eagleson JS, Clemence RG. Safety and efficacy of injectable and
Pp. 441-476. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2009.
Craven M. Rectoanal disease. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal
randomized clinical trial for treatment of vomiting in dogs.
Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman, pp. 1595-
Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics 2008;31(6):
1608. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2010.
538-543.
4.
Allenspach K. Diseases of the large intestine. In: Textbook of
 Jergens AE. 2005. Canine and feline inflammatory bowel disease-
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC
what's new. AAHA proceedings CD.
Feldman, pp. 1573-1594. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2010.
9.
 Davenport DJ, Remillard RL. Acute gastroenteritis and enteritis.
5.1
 Henry CJ. Neoplastic diseases of the large intestine. In: Snall
In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand,
Arirmal Gastroenterology, ed. IM Steiner, pp. 236-240. Hannover,
 CD Thatcher, RL Remilliard, P Roudebush, BJ Novotny pp. 1053-
Germany: Schlutersche; 2008.
1061. Marceline, MO: Walsworth Publishing; 2010.
6.
 Sherding RA. Diseases of the large intestine. In: Handbook of Srmall
10.
Blackwood L, German AJ, Stell AJ, O'Neill T. Multicentric lym-
Amimal Gastroenterology, 2nd edition, ed. TR Tams, pp. 251-285.
phoma in a dog after cyclosporine therapy. Journal of Small Anirmal
St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2003.
Practice 2004;45(5):259-262.
7.
Washabau RJ, Hasler A. Constipation, obstipation, and megaco-
11.
Al-Ghazlat S.. Immunosuppressive therapy for canine immune
lon. In: Consultations in Feline Medicine,3rd edition,ed. JR Agust,
mediated hemolytic anemia. Compendium 2009;31(1).
pp. 104-112. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 1997.
12.
 Allenspach K. Diseases of the large intestine. In: Textbook of
8.
Washabau RJ.Feline megacolon. In:Small Animal Gastroenterology,
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC
sas a a -o d aans  a
Feldman, p. 1594. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2010.
2008.
9.
Haricharan RN, Georgeson KE. Hirschsprung disease. Seminars
in Pediatric Surgery 2008;17(4):266-275.
Section 5
10.
Hall JA, Washabau RJ. Diagnosis and treatment of gastric motility
disorders.Veterinary Clinics of North America.Small Animal
Marks SL. Enteral and parenteral nutritional support. In: Text-
Practice 1999;29(2):377-395.
book of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Vol. 1., 5th edition, eds.
11.Prins NH, Briejer MR, Schuurkes JA. Characterization of the con-
SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman, Pp. 275-282. Philadelphia, PA: W.B.
traction to 5-HT in the canine colon longitudinal muscle. British 
Saunders; 2000.
Journal of Pharmacology 1997;120(4):714-720.
2.0
Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR et al. Nutritional man-
12.
 Davenport DJ, Remillard RL, Jenkins C. Gastritis. In: Small Animal
agement of gastrointestinal disease. In: Strombeck's Smal Arimal
Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Ihatcher, RJ
Gastroenterology, 3rd edition, pp. 904-908. Philadelphia, PA: W.B.
Remillard, P Roudebush, BJ Novotony, Pp. 1025-1032. Topeka,
Saunders; 1996.
KS: MMI; 2010.
3.9
Saker KE, Remillard R. Critical care nutrition and enteral-
13. Davenport DJ, Remilliard RL, Carroll M. Constipation/obstipation/
assisted feeding. In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition,
megacolon. In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds.
eds. MS Hand, CD Ihatcher, RL Remillard, P Roudebush, BBJ
MS Hand, CD Ihatcher, RL Remilliard, P Roudebush, BJ Novotny,
Novotny, Pp. 439-471. Marceline, MO: Walsworth Publishing;
pp. 1116-1126. Topeka, KS: MMI; 2010.
2010.
14.
Lembo A, Camilleri M. Chronic constipation. The New England
4.
Willard M. Ihe GI system. In: Essentials of Srmall Aniral Internal
Journal of Medicine 2003;349:1360-1368.
Medicine,eds. RW Nelson, CG Couto,p. 305-309. St. Louis, MO:
Mosby; 1992.
 Donoghue S. Nutritional support of hospitalized patients.
Section 4
Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice
1. DeNovo RC. Diseases of the stomach. In: Handbook of Srmall
1989;19(3):475-493.
Arimal Gastroenterology, 2nd edition, ed. T Todd, pp. 159-194.
Michel KE. 2006. Monitoring the enterally fed patient to maximize
St. Louis: W.B. Saunders; 2003.
benefits and minimize complication. In: IVECCS Proceedings,
 Plumb DC. Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook, 5th edition, Ames,
pp. 495-498.
IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2005.
7.
 Dimski DS, Taboada, J. Feline idiopathic hepatic lipidosis. In: The
3.
 Nelson RW, Couto CG. General therapeutics principles Sm. Anim
Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Animal Practice: Liver
IM, 4th edition, pp. 405-406.
Disease, ed. DS Dimski, Pp. 357-373. Philadelphia, PA: W.B.
4.
 Elwood C, Devauchelle P, Elliott J, Freiche V, German AJ, Gualtieri
Saunders; 1995.
M, Hall E, den Hertog E, Neiger R, Peeters D, Roura X, Savary-
Hill RH. Critical care nutrition. In: Waltham Book Clinical
Bataille K. Emesis in dogs: a review. Journal of Small Animal
Nutrition of the Dog e Cat, eds. JM Wills, KW Simpson, pp. 39-
Practice 2010;51(1):4-22.
57. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell; 1994.
5.1
 Narishetty ST, Galvan B, Coscarelli E, Aleo M, Fleck T, Humphrey
9.
 Remillard RL, Armstrong Pl, Davenport DJ. Assisted feeding in
W, McCall RB. Effect of refrigeration of the antiemetic Cerenia
hospitalized patients; enteral and parental nutrition. In: Small
(maropitant) on pain on injection. Veterinary Therapeutics
Animal Clinical Nutrition, 4th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Ihatcher,
2009;10(3):93-102.
RL Remilliard, P Roudebush, pp. 351-399. Marceline, MO:
6.
 Nelson RW, Couto CG. General therapeutic principles. In: Small
Walsworth Publishing; 2000.
Animal Internal Medicine, 4th edition, eds. RW Nelson, CG Couto,
10.
Guilford G, Center S. Nutritional management of gastrointestinal
GR Grauer, EC Hawkins, Pp. 395-412. St. Louis, MO: Mosby;
disease. In: Strommbeckss Small Anial Gastroenterology, 3rd
2009.
edition, pp. 889-910. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1996.
Chapter 8  Gastrointestinal
261
Section 6
>
.Weese JS, Arroyo L. Bacteriological evaluation of dog and cat diets
that claim to contain probiotics. The Canadian Veterinary Journal
1.
 Roudebush P, Guilford WG, Shanley KJ. Adverse reactions to
2003;44(March):212-216.
food. In: Snall Animal Clinical Nutrition, 4th edition, eds. MS
Pan X, Chen F, Wu T, Tang H, Zhao Z. Prebiotic oligosaccharides
Hand, CD Ihatcher, RL Remillard, P Roudebush, pp. 431-453.
change the concentrations of short-chain fatty acids and the
Topeka, KS: Mark Morris Institute; 2000.
microbial population of mouse bowel. Journal of Zhejiang
2. Case LC, Carey DP, Hirakawa DA, Daristotle L. Nutritionally
University. Science. B 2009;10(4):258-263.
responsive dermatoses. In: Canine and Feline Nutrition, 2nd
9.
 Lerman A, Lockwood B. Nutraceuticals in veterinary medicine.
edition, pp. 443-450. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2000.
Pharmacy Journal 2007;278:51.
3.
German A, Zentek J. Ihe most common digestive diseases: the
10.
Kelly M. The role of probiotics in GI tract healh. St. Louis, MO:
role of nutrition. In: Encyclopedia of Canine Clinical Nutrition, eds.
Nestle Purina Pet Care; 2006.
P Pibot, V Biourge, D Elliott, pp. 115-118. Aimargues, France:
11.
Roberfroid M. Prebiotics: the concept revisited. The Journal of
Aniwa SAS; 2006.
Nutrition 2007;137:830s.
4.
 Mueller RS, Dethioux F Nutritional dermatoses and the contribu-
12.
Verdonk JMAJ, Shim SB, van Leeuwen P, Verstegan MWA.
tion of dietetics in dermatology. In: Encyclopedia of Feline Clinical
Application of inulin-type fructans in animal feed and pet food.
Nutrition, eds. P Pibot, V Biourge, D Elliott, p. 58. Aimargues,
The British Journai of Nutrition 2005;93 Suppl 1:s125-s138.
France: Aniwa SAS; 2008.
5.  Nelson RW, Couto CG. Disorders of the intestinal tract. In: Small
Section 7
Anirmal Internal Medicine, 4th edition, eds. RW Nelson, CG Couto,
p. 442. St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier; 2009.
1.
Grimm K, Ihurmon J, Tranquilli WJ. Lumb and Jones Veterinary
 Sinpson KW. Ihe role of nutrition in the pathogenesis and the
Anesthesia and Anaigesia, 4th edition, Ames, IA: Blackwell
 management of exocrine pancreatic disorders. In: Encylopedia of
 Publishing Inc; 2007.
Canine Clinical Nutrition, eds. P Pibot, V Biourge, D Elliot, p. 171.
Aimargues, France: Aniwa SAS/Royal Canin; 2006.
Chapter
Liver
Editors: Jocelyn Mott and Ann Wortinger
Section 1 Hepatic Disease 263
Section 2 Posthepatic Disease 276
Acute hepatitis - Jo Ann Morrison 263
Feline cholangitis complex - Jocelyn Mott 276
Chronic hepatitis - Jo Ann Morrison 265
Biliary cysts - Marcefla D. Ridgway 278
Copper-associated chronic hepatitis - Danier J. MacArthur
Extrahepatic biliary obstruction - Marcella D. Ridgway 279
and Marcella D. Ridgway 266
Gallbladder mucocoeles - Marcella D. Ridgway 280
Hepatic lipidosis - Ann Wortinger 268
Section 3 Nutrition in Liver Disease - Ann Wortinger 282
Toxic hepatopathy - Maureen McMichael 270
 Section 4 Anesthesia and Analgesia Considerations in Hepatic
Hepatocutaneous syndrome - Jo Ann Morrison 272
Disease - Katrina Lafferty 284
Congenital vascular anomaly - Jo Ann Morrison 274
Liver neoplasia - Rachel Sternberg and Virginia Coyle 275
SECTION 1 HEPATIC DISEASE
Clinical Signs
The clinical signs of acute hepatitis may have a very rapid onset;
Acute hepatitis
therefore, affected animals may present on an emergency basis.
Clinical signs may include vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, leth-
Acute hepatitis is defined as acute hepatic inflammation. This
 argy and depression. Jaundice and dehydration may be detected
may be due to viral, bacterial, protozoal, or fungal agents, or to
on physical examination. Animals may also be painful on
immune-mediated diseases.
 abdominal palpation and hepatomegaly can be present in some
cases.
With severe disease, affected animals may present with evi-
Anatomy and physiology
 dence of derangements in coagulation (prolonged bleeding
The liver is a metabolically active organ with numerous func-
 from venipuncture sites, epistaxis, melena) and/or with central
fions critical for survival. Due to its unique anatomic position
neurological signs (dull mentation, blindness, obtunded, coma-
and blood supply, it acts as the main filter for portal blood from 
 tose, seizure activity) consistent with hepatic encephalopathy
the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Thus, it is the main site for drug 
(HE). Animals with acute hepatitis due to infectious agents
metabolism and immunologic surveillance. As such, the liver is
such as bacteria, parasites, or viruses may also be febrile at
also susceptible to various toxic entities and infectious agents.
presentation.
Smat Anima nternat Medicine forVeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses, First Edition.Edited by Linda Meril
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
263
264
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Diagnostic testing
samples should routinely be collected for histopathology, aerobic
and anaerobic (in cats) bacterial culture and sensitivity, and
Laboratory
fungal culture (where appropriate). Options for obtaining the
 s sd a m h an nsi iso s
 ee s  s o rss
markedly elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT). This is con-
sistent with recent and ongoing hepatocyte damage. Significant
techniques. Ascites and prolonged coagulation profles may be
elevations in alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and total bilirubin may
contraindications to ultrasound-guided liver biopsy, necessitat-
also be seen and may be severe. With significant hepatic impair-
 ing surgical biopsies instead.
ment, decreased blood urea nitrogen (BUN), albumin, and cho-
lesterol may be present. This is most likely due to decreased
Pharmacology
 hepatic ability in functions such as protein synthesis, protein
The management of acute hepatitis may vary signifcantly.
breakdown, and bile acid production. Hypoglycemia can be the
result of an overwhelming infection or decreased hepatic
depending on the underlying etiology of the disease. Supportive
function.
care and, in some cases, aggressive measures, are likely to be
required in the majority of cases. General supportive measures
 If jaundice is present, a fasting blood ammonia level should
consist of crystalloid (for correction of dehydration and replac-
be performed to confrm hepatic dysfunction or to help deter
ing ongoing fluid losses) and colloid fluid support (for animals
mine if an animal is encephalopathic. In the absence of jaundice,
unable to maintain oncotic pressure due to hypoalbuminemia),
fasting and postprandial bile acids may be performed and may
normalization and maintenance of plasma electrolyte levels,
be elevated. Bile acids would not be recommended if visible
icterus is seen. Isosthenuria and bilirubinuria may be seen on
antioxidant therapy, and antacid and antiemetic medications.
Additional therapies may include intravenous dextrose if
urinalysis. Various compositions of urine crystals may also be
noted.
hypoglycemia is present, vitamin K administration, and plasma
Hematocrit or packed cell volume (PCV) may be normal,
lactulose for HE, antibiotics in cases of bacterial hepatitis, and
increased if dehydration is severe, or decreased if blood loss has
even specific antidote or chelation therapy in cases of toxic hepa-
occurred due to hemorrhage secondary to diminished coagula-
tion factors. White blood cells may be normal, increased due to
titis. Immunosuppressive therapy may be indicated when an
inflammation or response to infection, or decreased if infection
is becoming overwhelming.
scribed multiple medications, and the potential for drug interac.
The number and morphological characteristics of mature and
tions and toxicities may be higher with severe liver disease due
to decreased metabolism and excretion of metabolites. Close
band neutrophils should be determined. With significant inflam-
monitoring for medication side effects and client education is
matory disease, toxic changes may be seen in mature neutrophils
inperative.
in the form of increased vacuoles and Dohle bodies. Similarly.
platelets may be normal, increased as a response to hemorrhage,
 or decreased due to consumption or possible disseminated intra
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
vascular coagulation (DIC). Prothrombin time (PT) and partial
specific to acute hepatitis
thromboplastin time (PTT) may be prolonged as a result of
 consumption in DIC or a lack of hepatic production of coagula-
tion factors. D-dimers may be elevated and could provide addi-
which may be exacerbated by vomiting. Analgesic therapy
tional evidence for DIC. When appropriate, serum should be
should be considered when abdominal pain is documented or
submitted for leptospirosis serology.
     s  
lism. During anesthetic events, particular aftention should be
Imaging
paid to monitoring blood glucose levels, blood pressure, and
body temperature. Dextrose infusions, pressor support, and
external warming may be required.
megaly may be demonstrated by extension of the liver past the
caudal rib margin and with caudal deviation of the gastric axis.
GI contents should be evaluated radiographically for foreign or
Nutritional considerations
potentially toxic material that may exhibit different densities
Animals with acute hepatitis may have life-threatening diseases,
from normal stomach contents. On ultrasound, the liver may
but this does not decrease the need for adequate nutritional
appear normal or may be diffusely altered in echotexture. If the
support. There may also be an increased risk for feline patients
animal is jaundiced, the galbladder and biliary tree should be
 to develop secondary hepatic lipidosis due to decreased appetite
 assessed for evidence of obstruction.
or total anorexia. Whenever possible, the enteral route should
Biopsy
be used for nutritional support. Feeding tubes should be utilized
if animals will not ingest at least 85% of the recommended
 Coagulation status should always be assessed prior to biopsy to
calories as calculated by resting energy requirement (RER). The
limit bleeding complications. Tissue and, where appropriate, bile
type of tube (nasoesophageal, nasogastric, esophagostomy, per-
Chapter 9  Liver
265
cutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube [PEG] tube, or jejunos-
imaging
tomy tube) to be placed depends on patient size, ability to
Abdominal radiographs may demonstrate microhepatica with
tolerate sedation or anesthesia, and cardiovascular status. Total
 or partial parenteral nutrition may be pursued if the animal does
cranial displacement of the gastric axis and other abdominal
 organs (spleen, intestines). If ascites is present, the abdominal
not tolerate enteral feedings or is not consuming at least 85%
viscera may be effaced with a soft tissue/fluid effect and abdomi-
of RER.
nal detail may be very poor.
In chronic hepatitis, the liver should appear diffusely affected
Chronic hepatitis
and abnormal on abdominal ultrasound. Normal tissue architec-
 ture is lost and the liver parenchyma may appear irregular and
The key components of the disease appear to include a subclini-
 nodular. The liver capsule loses its expected smooth appearance
cal phase of variable length, advanced disease at the time of
pue ippeaea sul cdunq-adunt, no juempun sauoaq pue
diagnosis, and an overall poor response to therapy. The response
 biliary tree should be assessed for evidence of obstruction if the
 to therapy may be prolonged with early identification and inter-
 animal is jaundiced. If ascites is present, in most cases, the fluid
vention, while in the subclinical phase. The etiology of the
 will appear hypocellular to acellular; however, hemorrhage may
disease is unknown. Several canine breeds (Dobermans, cocker
be present, causing the fluid to be more cellular than otherwise
  n    (a   s
expected. Fluid may be sampled via abdominocentesis for cyto-
 increased susceptibility to chronic hepatitis, and there may be a
logical analysis, protein content, and cell count. Due to the con-
genetic component to the disease.
cerns for possible hemorrhage, a smaller-gauge butterfly catheter
should be used for abdominocentesis and fluid should be col-
Clinical signs
lected under sterile conditions.
The clinical signs of chronic hepatitis relate to a loss of normal
Biopsy
liver function, so clinical signs are variable. Signs are typically
yague and nonspecifc (polyuria and polydipsia [PU/PD], weight 
Hepatic biopsy is required for the diagnosis of chronic hepatitis
loss, vomiting, and anorexia), though the presence of jaundice
and the coagulation status should always be assessed prior to
With progressive disease, the liver will become small and irregu-
bacterial culture and sensitivity (liver and bile samples), and
 copper quantification. This requires larger amounts of tissue,
lar, and abdominal effusion may be present. Ascites may be a
result of portal hypertension or a result of loss of oncotic pres-
dures. Ultrasound-guided techniques are generally not indicated
sure due to low serum albumin. HE, characterized by central
for this disease. This is due to the limited amount of tissue
neurological signs, and coagulopathies may also be seen with
severe disease.
that can be obtained via ultrasound-guided biopsy. Ascites and
 prolonged coagulation profles are also contraindications to
ultrasound-guided liver biopsy.
Diagnostic testing
Laboratory
Treatment and pharmacology
 The most consistent laboratory fnding with chronic hepatitis
Chronic hepatitis is a medically managed disease and while
is an elevated ALT, especially in the subclinical stage of the
therapy is primarily supportive, animals may be on multidrug
disease. Elevations in ALP and total bilirubin are seen more 
 therapies. It is generally not possible to avoid medications that
consistently in the clinical stage of the disease. Additional labo-
 have some degree of hepatic metabolism. In addition, dosing
ratory findings include decreases in BUN, albumin, cholesterol,
 strategies may be affected by loss of lean body mass, presence of
and glucose. Changes in serum electrolytes (hyperkalemia,
 ascites, and changes in drug binding due to hypoalbuminemia.
hyponatremia) may represent third spacing of fluids if ascites
 It is prudent to monitor animals closely for signs of drug toxici-
is present. Specific liver function testing (fasting and postpran-
 tfies or untoward drug interactions. Client education regarding
dial bile acids or fasting ammonia level) may be significantly
 pharmacological side effects is vital.
abnormal, though these changes are not specific for chronic
 Multidrug protocols are commonly employed. Antioxidant 
hepatitis. Isosthenuria is a common finding on urinalysis, and
 medications increase hepatocyte concentrations of glutathione
bilirubinuria and ammonium urate or biurate crystals may also
 and are generally well tolerated. Oral absorption is variable,
be seen.
depending on the formulation used Ursodiol (ursodeoxycholic
The complete blood count (CBC) may be normal or may show
 acid) is a hydrophilic bile acid that increases bile flow in cases
a nonregenerative anemia, consistent with chronic disease. A
 with cholestasis. It is contraindicated with biliary obstruction
 and can cause GI side effects (inappetence, diarrhea). Chelating
and PTT may be prolonged due to lack of hepatic production of
 agents (e.g., penicillamine) may be useful in cases with signif-
 q s pos d o g s 
 cant metal (copper) accumulation based on results from tissue
formed prior to invasive procedures.
quantification as discussed above. Colchicine is an antifbrotic
266
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
agent that may be helpful in cases with hepatic fbrosis and
Anatomy and physiology
cirrhosis identifed on histopathology. The efficacy of this medi-
cation is relatively unknown in the veterinary field, but myelo-
Copper is an essential nutrient that is a component of many
 suppression has been identifed in human patients. If affected
proteins and serves as a cofactor for critical enzymes involved in
animals have bleeding tendencies, oral or injectable vitamin K
hematopoiesis, pigmentation, neurotransmission, maintenance
therapy may be beneficial. Additionally, animals may benefit
of connective tissues (cardiovascular system, lung, bone), oxida-
 from antinausea and antiemetic therapy as discussed elsewhere.
tive metabolism, and free radical scavenging. Dietary copper is
For animals with HE, lactulose therapy (orally or via enema) is
absorbed in the intestine, especially in the small intestine.
recommended. Dosing should be adjusted to avoid diarrhea.
Absorbed copper is complexed to albumin and transported to
the liver, which is the central organ for copper metabolism.
Copper is taken up from the bloodstream into hepatocytes,
which may handle the now intracellular copper by a number of
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
routes, including (1) formation of ceruloplasmin (copper-
Anesthesia will generally only be pursued for obtaining liver
 protein complex) and export from the liver to the circulation to
samples for analysis. If a coagulopathy is present, transfusions of
serve as a carrier of copper to other tissues, (2) utilization within
plasma and therapy with vitamin K may be indicated. There is a
the hepatocyte including mitochondrial enzyme systems, (3)
risk for hemorrhage with hepatic biopsy, so whole blood or
excretion of excess copper into the bile for elimination from the
 packed red blood cell transfusions may also be necessary. Post-
body in the feces, or (4) metallothionein-bound storage in hepa-
 procedural PCVs should be routinely monitored.
tocytes. Because copper is a reactive substance (oxidant), it is
maintained in the body complexed to other compounds to
control its reactivity, and its absorption is somewhat regulated
Nutritional considerations
by intestinal metallothionein (a metal-binding protein). Abnor-
 For animals with a primary or secondary copper disorder, the
 increased intestinal and hepatocellular uptake of copper, abnor-
 most significant component of nutritional therapy is limiting
mal intracellular copper metabolism, or defects in elimination
for animals with HE, though protein malnutrition may result
of copper via biliary excretion. In patients with CACH, the
underlying abnormality is most likely a genetic defect causing
from aggressive protein restriction. Changes in lean body mass
 and serum albumin should be monitored. Additional supple-
abnormal copper transport or storage. The specific defect has
mentation with antioxidants, zinc, and vitamin K may be
been defined only in the Bedlington terrier breed, where a muta-
 tion in the COMMD1 gene results in defective biliary excretion
beneficial.
of copper. Excess intracellular copper causes oxidative injury to
hepatocytes and triggers inflammation (hepatitis), which causes
further liver damage and promotes collagen deposition (fibrosis,
Copper-associated chronic hepatitis
cirrhosis), potentially progressing to liver failure. Additionally,
Copper-associated chronic hepatitis (CACH) is a disease in
during periods of active hepatocellular necrosis, excess copper
which an abnormal accumulation of copper in hepatocytes
can be released from hepatocytes into the circulation in high
causes toxic injury and incites inflammation and hepatocellular
enough levels to cause hemolytic anemia. This is sometimes
clinically seen in the Bedlington terrier.
necrosis, which progresses to chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis. In
CACH, copper accumulation is the primary abnormality and
results in secondary hepatic injury and hepatitis, as distin-
Clinical signs
 guished from other forms of hepatic disease, in which copper
-da po auanbaso e se siooo pue lnpuos si uoeno
Affected dogs may remain clinically normal in the initial stages
titis, hepatocellular dysfunction, and cholestasis. CACH is prin-
   sd  o e 
cipally a disease of dogs, although one affected cat has been
erally, the clinical signs are those of liver dysfunction. Initially,
reported, and there are distinct breed predispositions, support-
the signs may be subtle and nonspecifc, such as inappetence and
lethargy, which may wax and wane. Owners often do not recog-
dogs. Hereditary copper toxicosis has been best described in the
 nize these vague early changes and may later present the patient
Bedlington terrier, where the genetic defect has been identifed
as having an “acute" disease when the chronic liver injury and
as a mutation in the COMMD1 (previously called MURR1)
       s   s
clinical signs develop. In more advanced disease, intermittent to
persistent anorexia, depression, weight loss, vomiting, diarrhea,
Skye terriers, Labrador retrievers, and Dalmatians. Other breeds
PU/PD, icterus, and ascites may be manifested. Less commonly,
(Doberman pinschers, cocker spaniels) are reported to have
some dogs (Bedlington terriers) present with acute fulminant
disease resulting from acute hepatic necrosis, precipitated by
 trations, but it is unclear in these breeds if the copper accumula-
periods of extreme physiological stress (whelping, intercurrent
tion is primary or secondary.
disease). Bedlington terriers may present with hemolytic anemia
Chapter 9  Liver
267
associated with these episodes of acute hepatic necrosis. Patients
 that has already accumulated in the liver coupled with treatment
with advanced liver disease may also show neurological abnor-
 to reduce absorption of additional copper from the intestine.
malities (mental dullness, circling, head pressing) consistent 
Therapy to reduce copper concentrations in the liver consists of
with HE.
 administration of chelating agents that bind copper and facili-
tate its urinary excretion. Penicillamine or trientene may be
Diagnostic testing
used. Chelator therapy results in a decrease in accumulated
 copper, which may take months to years to show a signifcant
Laboratory
effect, and lifelong treatment may be needed. Serial hepatic
 copper level determinations should be done to demonstrate a
Clinicopathologic abnormalities are similar to those associated
with liver disease in general. Elevated serum ALT is the most
 absorption of additional copper include dietary zinc administra-
consistent finding and is often evident in the earlier stages of
 tion, low copper diets, and selected water sources. Dietary zinc
disease before clinical signs appear. Milder elevations of ALP are
 supplementation induces intestinal  metallothionein,  which
sometimes present. Other less consistent findings include low
binds dietary copper to prevent its absorption. Copper then
BUN, hypoalbuminemia, hyperbilirubinemia, elevated serum
bile acids, and abnormal coagulation. These parameters reflect
remains bound to the metallothionein until the intestinal cell is
sloughed and eliminated in the feces, carrying the bound copper
the degree of liver dysfunction. The CBC commonly shows leu-
from the body. Zinc and penicillamine should not be used con-
kocytosis, thrombocytopenia, and mild anemia. Urinalysis may
currently. Zinc therapy is typically reserved for maintenance
demonstrate bilirubinuria and, in patients with severe liver dys-
 treatment of patients completing chelator therapy or for treating
function, ammonium biurate crystals. Blood copper levels are
asymptomatic patients. Animals receiving zinc supplementation
not helpful in identifying or monitoring affected animals. Bed-
should have zinc levels monitored to prevent zinc toxicity
lington terriers can be tested for the COMMD1 mutation, which
and resulting hemolytic anemia. Animals with CACH should
o s o a  o a e  
in this breed by genetic testing of a mouth swab sample (VetGen
injury, addition of antioxidant agents (N-acetylcysteine [NAC],
Veterinary Genetic Services, http://www.vetgen.com). Absence
 of this mutation does not rule out copper-associated disease.
S-adenosylmethionine [SAMe], silymarin, vitamin E) to the
treatment protocol may be considered. Additional treatment for
Imaging
the degree to which liver damage has advanced.
There are no imaging findings that are specifc for CACH. Ultra-
 Because reducing hepatic copper levels is a diffcult and slow
 proces and because associated liver injury may not be reversible
associated with inflammation and/or reduced liver size as a
result of hepatocyte loss and cirrhosis. Patients with advanced
 terriers can be genetically screened as puppies for the COMMD1
disease may have portal hypertension and ascites, which can
 mutation linked to copper toxicosis. A positive result indicates
 manifest as decreased serosal detail on abdominal radiographs.
that the individual is at risk, but a negative result does not mean
that the patient will be unaffected. Other breeds at risk can have
Biopsy techniques
their liver copper levels measured via biopsy as early as 12
Definitive diagnosis requires liver biopsy for histopathology and
months of age. Dogs with abnormal results in initial screening
quantifcation of liver copper. Care should be taken to obtain
can be placed on a high zinc, low copper diet to minimize hepatic
fissue samples of sufficiently large size for inclusion of six to eight
i i  u  a o  e ao
portal triads on histopathology and for quantitative copper anal
levels requiring chelation therapy.
ysis (1 g). Special stains (rhodanine or rubeanic acid) are used to
In
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
atitis, copper accumulation occurs frst in centrilobular regions
Animals with impaired liver function may decompensate when
(zone 3) with associated mononuclear to mixed inflammatory
anesthetized and are prone to development of cerebral edema.
portal copper accumulations that occur secondary to primary
Nutritional considerations
hepatitis and cholestasis. Fibrosis or cirrhosis may also be identi-
fed. Copper concentrations should be evaluated using breed-
 Diets for animals with CACH should exclude copper-rich foods
specific reference ranges whenever possible as normal liver
such as organ meat, eggs, shellfish, and legumes. Commercial
copper concentrations vary between breeds.
prescription diets formulated for patients with liver disease
(Royal Canin Hepatic Support, Hil's 1/d) are appropriately
Pharmacology and treatment
 s d so  a  q s o
need to be supplemented with low copper proteins (dairy based,
Specifc treatment of CACH is directed at reducing levels of the
egg whites, white meat from poultry). Avoid water from copper
toxic principle, copper. This entails treatment to remove copper
 naddo mot ansse on pasn aq A nam paog sadid
268
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
in the liver eventually interferes with hepatic function and liver
Hepatic lipidosis
failure results.4.6
In situations of less than absolute starvation (marginal food
The disease may be idiopathic or it may develop secondary to
intake), adaptation to fatty acid metabolism is also lost and
some other underlying medical problem. Many affected cats were
Excessive hepatic triglyceride accumulation results.? This is
formerly obese and significant weight loss of up to 25% of body
important because ingestion or force feeding of some diets with.
weight may occur by the time they are presented for complaints
insufficient calories or intravenous administration of dextrose
of anorexia and weight loss. Hepatic lipidosis is the most com mon
will worsen hepatic triglyceride storage. Feeding a balanced diet
hepatobiliary disorder affecting cats in the United States.4 The
with sufficient caloric and protein content is essential to facilitate
disease typically affects middle-aged cats but ranges from 0.5 to
15.0 years. There is no breed predisposition for this disease.46
The disease is characterized by extensive vacuolation of hepa-
o s u a ii s m s u 
Anatomy and physiology
liver tissue contains lipids. This lipid is stored as vacuoles in the
The liver is responsible for a variety of important functions
liver tissue. Lipid vacuolation of more than 50% is consistent
within the body, including metabolism of carbohydrates and
a  I't s)  s   
fats, synthesis of proteins and vitamins, storage of vitamins and
iron, production of coagulation factors, and removal and excre-
Clinical signs
tion of toxins.7 The liver is involved in many crucial biological
functions, as such, a cat with liver disease may show a wide
The history usually discloses a cat that has been either totally or
variety of signs including lethargy, anorexia, weight loss, weak.
 e s    s e d e   A
 ness, jaundice, vomiting, diarrhea, and behavioral changes.
upon presentation, but the absence of jaundice does not rule out
Etiology
hepatic lipidosis. There may be intermittent vomiting, diarrhea
or constipation, and dehydration. Palpable liver margins may be
Factors that may be associated with the onset of hepatic lipidosis
found on physical exam. The clinical signs vary based on any
include stress, obesity, anorexia, cancer, changes in the diet,
secondary disease processes and on the duration of the illness.
nutritional deficiencies, or any other disease that affects the cat's
Cats may be unkempt, lethargic, weak, and may have weight loss
With severe disease, HE may be seen with head pressing, depres-
disease but is most often seen secondary to other diseases such
sion, and ptyalism.9
as diabetes mellitus, pancreatitis, renal disease, inflammatory
bowel disease, and cancer. Hepatic lipidosis is caused by severe
Diagnostic testing
 im i o  d  ( 
Laboratory
dosis in dieting cats, weight loss should not exceed 1 lb/month,
Laboratory evaluation demonstrates biochemical changes that
 or 10% of their body weight per month (depending on their
are consistent with hepatic lipidosis. The serum alkaline phos-
starting weight).
phatase (SAP), ALT, and AST will be elevated with the gamma-
Anorexia can cause mobilization of free fatty acids from the
glutamyl transferase (GGT) normal to low. The serum bilirubin
adipose tissue. Free fatty acids are taken up by the liver and
'T u ia si l  pasea aq Aensn m sa
converted to ketone bodies, or if glycerol is available, reassem-
         s
bled into triglycerides. Triglycerides are further converted into
enough, there may be spillover of direct bilirubin in the urine
lipoproteins if enough protein is available for use. Ketone bodies
causing the presence of bilirubin crystals in the urinalysis. Unlike
and lipoproteins are used by the brain and muscle for 5% of their
dogs, any bilirubin in the urine of cats is signifcant.?
energy requirements during absolute starvation.8
 Healthy obese cats have excessive hepatic lipid accumulation
imaging
because the normal liver has the ability to extract fatty acids and
On ultrasound examination, a normal liver will be isoechoic to
to convert them into triglycerides at a rate greater than that
the kidney (the same echogenicity) and hypoechoic to the sur-
required for their use in energy or lipoprotein dispersal.6& Since
rounding fat. In patients with hepatic lipidosis, the liver will be
obese cats have the underlying tendency favoring hepatic lipid
hyperechoic, with respect to the falciform fat and the kidney46
accumulation due to the release of large amounts of fatty acids
 s  sq  si   re a )
from the adipose stores during periods of rapid weight loss.
the ultrasound findings of a diffuse hyperechoic hepatopathy.
Reduced availability of lipotropic proteins, amino acids, and
 other nutrients during periods of marginal food intake or ano-
Biopsy
rexia can further limit lipoprotein synthesis and promote hepatic
 Definitive diagnosis of hepatic lipidosis requires examination of
lipid accumulation. This excessive accumulation of triglycerides
either aspirations or biopsies of the liver.
Chapter 9  Liver
269
KITTY
FOCU4B
Figure 9.1.1  Normal fat vacuoles in the liver. Image courtesy of Dr
Barb Powers, Colorado State University Histopathology Laboratory.
Figure 9.1.3 Ultrasound image showing echogenicity comparison of
falciform fat and a fatty liver. Image courtesy of Dr. Ned F. Kuehn,
Michigan Veterinary Specialists.
The cytology or biopsy results for hepatic lipidosis show a
highly vacuolated cytoplasm consistent with lipid accumulation,
resulting in a vacuolar hepatopathy. The pathologist should grade
the lipidosis as mild, moderate, marked, or severe. This will be
one of the best prognostic indicators for the recovery of the cat.
The more severe the changes, the poorer the prognosis.467
Treatment and pharmacology
Regardless of the etiology, the basic treatment for hepatic lipi-
dosis remains the same. Many cats will be dehydrated and com-
 s  o q m i a
fluids, type dependent on electrolyte status, are used to correct
the dehydration.571o Normal nutrition must be restored to
 reverse the disease. If the disease is caught early enough, appetite
Figure 9.1.2  Increased fat vacuoles consistent with moderate hepatic
stimulants may be used to reestablish adequate nutrition. Cypro-
lipidosis. Image courtesy of Dr. Barb Powers, Colorado State University
heptadine and mirtazapine are used most commonly. Any
Histopathology Laboratory.
underlying or concurrent disease should also be addressed to
ensure this is not negatively affecting appetite. As liver failure
Fine needle aspiration (FNA) of the liver is performed for
progresses, it exerts a strong appetite-suppressant effect, placing
cytological evaluation. This can be done without anesthesia if the
the veterinary health-care team in a diffcult position. The cat
cat will remain stil during the procedure. Ultrasound-guided
 needs to eat to reverse the disease, but the disease itself is sup-
biopsy is performed under sedation or anesthesia if the cat is
pressing the appetite, making self-feeding more unlikely.? Since
fractious or too mobile. Also, the larger-sized biopsy samples are
most cats refuse to eat, it is often necessary to place a feeding
preferred if there are any questions as to whether hepatic lipido-
 tube in order to provide adequate nutritional support.
sis is the primary problem. Ultrasound-guided biopsy does
Feeding tubes should be placed as soon as possible after diag-
require profound sedation or general anesthesia. Because the
 nosis. If placing a PEG tube, feeding should not begin for at least
liver is responsible for the production of coagulation factors, a
12h to allow formation of a temporary stoma around the tube.
clotting profle should be performed prior to any biopsy to
This is not necessary when placing an esophagostomy tube as
ensure the patient has the ability to form a blood clot after the 
biopsy has been completed."
can be found in Chapter 8.
270
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
At this time, the cat will shift from catabolic metabolism to
effects of these substances. The liver receives a major portion of
 anabolic metabolism; in doing this, it will shit from using
the venous drainage from the abdominal cavity and therefore
protein as the preferred energy source to using carbohydrates
receives direct delivery of toxins and chemicals that have been
and fats.46
absorbed via the GI tract. Drug-induced liver injury can affect
 By providing adequate nutrition, the liver will be allowed to
any part of the liver and can mimic any form of spontaneous
liver disease. The most common pathophysiological response is
fed through the feeding tube for the entire time it takes the cat
necrosis. In addition to hepatocellular necrosis, cholestasis, lipi-
  i      
dosis, and steatosis can all be seen.
 energy requirements (DERs) should be calculated as you would
for any other critical care patient, with your initial calculation
Toxic substances
done at the patients current weight, progressing up to the
There are hundreds of known hepatic toxins and the specifc
amount for the desired weight.
pathophysiology is not necessarily known in all cases. This
Generally, these cats require 7-10 days of hospitalization to
allow the food to be slowly increased until they are receiving
section will focus on a few of the most common toxins affecting
dogs and cats with a treatment section that will be helpful for
their calculated daily kilocalorie requirements per day. A quicker
any cause of hepatic failure.
increase in feeding can be done if finances necessitate, but the
incidence of complications increases signifcantly with a shorter,
The most common hepatic toxins witnessed in clinical prac-
fice include the anticonvulsants phenobarbital and diazepam,
 more aggressive feeding schedule.
The slow increase in food is necessary due to villus atrophy
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (particularly
and ileus in the GI tract. Nausea is often seen secondary to the
carprofen), acetaminophen, aflatoxins, and xylitol. The mecha-
nism of toxicity is slightly different in each case, but the end
reintroduction of food. The faster the food is given, the worse
points, acute hepatic damage, are similar.
the nausea can be. This can be due to the GI changes or may be
secondary to the liver disease. GI motility agents such as meto-
clopramide and ranitidine can be used to help with the ileus.
Drug-related hepatopathies
When the cat is receiving 100% DER of food divided into
Anticonvuisants
three equal feedings, it can be discharged from the hospital to
the care of their owners. As the liver function recovers, the
Phenobarbital toxicity seems to be an idiosyncratic reaction in
appetite will gradually improve and the cat will begin to eat a
dogs that can occur anytime in relation to starting the drug, even
 regular diet on its own. The degree of recovery is related to and
years later. Most dogs that will develop toxicity do so within the
measured by the increase in appetite. When the cat is consist-
frst year of starting the drug. Initial clinical signs are generally
ently eating normal amounts of food, without supplemental tube
related to impaired drug metabolism and manifest as sedation
feeding and without weight loss, the tube can be removed. In
and ataxia. In some cases, stopping the drug leads to complete
this author's experience, waiting to remove the tube for 2 weeks
resolution of symptoms. Necropsy changes reported include cir-
 rhosis or nodular vacuolar hepatopathy.
also want to recheck blood work to ensure that the values have
(s  n ) so  u a s  i
returned to normal levels.
and appears to be more common with the oral form of the drug.
Role of the veterinary technician
biliary epithelium. Clinical signs are generally reported within 1
week of administration. Some cats that have survived have had
After the initial diagnosis, the patient's recovery from hepatic
increases in ALP and GGT for months after the incident.
lipidosis is primarily nursing related. As technicians, we need to
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
be able to assess response to feeding, anticipate common com-
plications, and direct owners in at-home care. After discharge
and anaigesics
from the hospital, the primary care is transferred to the owners
NSAIDs, particularly carprofen, can cause an idiosyncratic cyto-
but should still be overseen by the technician. This supervision
toxic hepatopathy in dogs. The severity varies considerably, and
needs to include regular recheck examinations and frequent
most dogs have been on the drug for over 2 weeks when clinical
phone calls to monitor progress and to help prevent setbacks in
signs appear.
recovery. This process should be like a well-choreographed
Acetaminophen is oxidized by cytochrome P450 to its toxic
 dance between the hospital staff, the owners, and the patient in
metabolite, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine (NADPQI). This
order to ensure a successful outcome in the management of this
toxin causes a centrilobular necrosis if it is not eliminated by glu-
disease.
 tathione. Glutathione is an essential antioxidant required by the
liver for detoxification purposes and is composed of three amino
Toxic hepatopathy
acids: glutamine, glycine, and cysteine. Cysteine is the rate
limiting amino acid as the other two are thought to be ubiquitous.
The liver's central role in drug and toxin metabolism and elimi-
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) provides the cysteine available for the
nation makes it a particularly vulnerable organ to the negative
body to be able to produce glutathione in most mammals.
Chapter 9  Liver
271
Contaminants
Diagnostic testing
Aflatoxin, a fungal toxin, was a contaminant in many commer
Laboratory testing
cial dog foods in 2005. It caused inconsistent increases in liver
Diagnostic testing is aimed at evaluating if and to what extent
m lue Arun renon pidi reodan pue sazu
liver injury has occurred, not necessarily identifying a specific
toxin. A CBC, biochemistry panel, and coagulation panel are
essential frst steps in aftempting to diagnose liver injury. On a
Human food additives
S p soa   e d a
terol are five markers that indicate the functionality of the liver,
Xylitol is a sugar substitute found in many candies, gum, and
and evaluation of these markers can be very helpful in diagnos-
eadde jou saop i unnsuo uunt no apeu soo 
 ing failure. Sequential evaluation of liver enzymes along with
to cause insulin release in people but does cause a profound
 bilirubin is very helpful to follow the progression of liver disease
insulin release in dogs. The toxicity is thought to be related to
 and resolution of injury; however, ALP and GGT can often
increased reactive oxygen species (i.e., free radicals) causing cel-
remain elevated for weeks after clinical improvement. Serum bile
lular damage and, eventually, necrosis. The toxicity seems to be
acids may be helpful in diagnosing and monitoring hepatic
biphasic with the first clinical signs (within 1h of ingestion)
injury if the bilirubin is normal.
being related to acute hypoglycemia, which is often accompa-
nied by seizures. Anywhere from 9 to 72h later, many dogs
Imaging
develop acute, severe hepatic failure.
Abdominal radiographs and ultrasound are frequently required
imaging modalities to evaluate the liver and abdominal cavity
Inappropriate consumption
 more thoroughly. Abdominal radiographs may show hepatome-
There are numerous substances that can cause hepatoxicity if
 galy and free abdominal fluid. Abdominal ultrasound may reveal
ingested. The cycad (sago) palm is an indoor/outdoor plant that
 changes in echogenicity and is very helpful to evaluate the biliary
contains cycasin, a liver toxin, in high concentration in the seeds.
 tract.
 Ingestion of as little as one to two seeds has been reported to
cause death in dogs. GI signs (vomiting and diarrhea) often
Biopsy
precede the classic signs of hepatic failure (abdominal pain,
 Liver biopsy may be helpful to characterize the hepatic lesion
icterus, dull mentation, seizures, and coma). Laboratory tests 1
histologically and may be especially helpful in cases of chronic
may not become abnormal for 24-48 h after ingestion. Throm-
 carprofen or phenobarbital toxicity when unsure if the cause
bocytopenia and alterations in white blood cell counts may be
 is hepatotoxicity, chronic active hepatitis, or a combination of
seen along with elevated liver enzymes and total bilirubin,
the two.
 decreases in total protein and blood glucose, and prolongations
in the PT.
Treatment and pharmacology
Several types of mushrooms can cause hepatotoxicity if
ingested in suficient numbers. Owner often reports observation 
 If the toxin was ingested within 1-2h and the patient is con-
of the animal eating “wild" mushrooms. Clinical signs usually
 scious, emesis is recommended. If the toxin was ingested over
begin with GI disturbances (vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal.
2h ago and the patient is conscious, administration of activated
 pain) and then proceed to include hepatic failure.
charcoal is recommended. Caution is recommended when
inducing emesis followed by administration of activated char
Clinical signs
coal as the animal will frequently vomit the charcoal and may
In the early stages, clinical signs are generally nonspecifc. Hepa-
enema is recommended.
totoxins can cause vague GI symptoms within hours after inges
 Eliminating the offending toxin or drug is paramount to treat-
tion. Anorexia, lethargy, and vomiting appear to be common and
 ing the toxicity. A thorough history to determine any and all
may be associated with circulating hepatotoxins. In many cases
 medications the patient has received, including over-the-counter
of mild toxin ingestion, the clinical signs are self-limiting and do
 supplements, is indicated. All drugs should be checked for their 
      ss   d 
 potential effects on the liver before continuing to administer
 e ae s r ae  ss  
 them in an animal showing signs of liver toxicity.
will frequently develop along with coagulopathy, hypoglycemia,
A constant rate infusion (CRI) of a balanced crystalloid solu-
and encephalopathy. In many cases, abdominal distention will
 tion (e.g., Normosol-R) will assist in maintaining hydration and
occur from ascites. Severe generalized or partial focal seizures 
 in biliary and renal excretion of toxins. Supplementation of the
can occur due to hypoglycemia and/or toxin accumulation. The
fluids with B complex vitamins (2 mL/L) and other additives
one exception is xylitol, which causes rapid, severe hypoglycemia
(e.g., potassium chloride, dextrose) as needed is helpful.
that frequently leads to seizures and a subsequent onset of liver
 Glutathione is the most important antioxidant used by the
failure.
liver. It acts to prevent free radical damage and is an essential
272
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
      n s  n
behavior or a change in clinical signs that may, if caught early,
ione levels can be increased via the administration of NAC or 
 be reversed or minimized before permanent damage is done.
SAMe. The products listed here have not been associated with
Veterinary technicians should always trust their intuition as they
any adverse events when given in the appropriate dose. NAC can
will often suspect changes that are occurring before overt and
be administered intravenously through a nonpyrogenic 0.2-mm
obvious clinical changes. This comes from a combination of
flter, at 140 mg/kg, diluted 1 :2 in 0.9% NaCl, and given over 1h.
experience and spending many hours over many days with an
 Subsequent doses should be decreased to 70 mg/kg and given
individual patient. Alerting the primary clinician to suspected
every 6h for a minimum of 48h. SAMe can be given orally at
changes may help avert a downward spiral.
 20 mg/kg on an empty stomach, q 24h. Silymarin and its main
active ingredient, silibinin, are derived from milk thistle. Silib-
Client education
inin helps to prevent toxic liver damage and aids in faster liver
regeneration.
Clients are often unaware that seemingly harmless, over-the-
The liver produces most of the coagulation factors needed to
counter substances (e.g., Tylenol) or foods (e.g., baked goods or
form a stable fbrin clot and has a central role in glucose metabo-
candy with xylitol) are extremely toxic. Ideally, an information
lism. Complete hepatic failure may be accompanied by hypogly-
 ia  s a e il  e  
cemia and bleeding. Depending on the presence of these clinical
created or downloaded to give to the client. At the time of dis-
signs, the animal may need to have a dextrose infusion (i.e.,
charge, an information sheet on the clinical signs associated with
- p (so ss u sxp oz 
liver failure should be sent home with the clients so they can
istration of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) to replace coagulation
 monitor their pet appropriately. All client educational materials
factors. Administration of vitamin K, (2.5 mg/kg SC q 12 h) is
need to be documented in the medical record.
also helpful. If the animal is actively bleeding and administration
of FFP has not helped the bleeding, it may be alleviated by the
Hepatocutaneous syndrome
administration of cryoprecipitate, which has a higher concentra-
tion of fbrinogen.
Hepatocutaneous syndrome (HCS), also known as superfcial
necrolytic dermatitis, in most animals is associated with signifi-
 cant hepatic disease of unknown etiology, though a minimum
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
of cases have been seen in conjunction with glucagon-secreting
There are significant risks associated with the administration of
 tumors. Clinical signs refer to the cutaneous manifestations of
the disease or signs of the underlying hepatic dysfunction,
blood glucose, and albumin, will be normalized prior to
including amino acid dysregulation and hypoalbuminemia.
induction.
Clinical signs
Nutritional considerations
Animals with HCS may present with dermatologic lesions or
Nutritional support is essential for animals recovering from
with signs of hepatic disease. The dermatologic lesions are
acute hepatic toxicity and protein restriction should be limited
usually localized to mucocutaneous junctions, on and around
 to animals that are showing clinical or laboratory (e.g., increased
footpads, and over anatomical pressure points. The footpad
ammonia) evidence of HE. Enteral nutrition is superior if the
lesions may make affected animals reluctant to walk and animals
animal can handle it.
may be painful on palpation of the affected skin. Lesions are
 sm    o  
Monitoring in hospital
9.1.4). Signs of hepatic disease are variable and include polyuria,
polydipsia, vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, depression, anorexia,
The most important monitoring parameter will be the serial
and weight loss .
physical exam. Mentation, appetite, abdominal pain, and energy
level are all essential tools to assist in prognosis. Animals will
often improve clinically before their blood work improves. In
Diagnostic testing
addition to monitoring the heart rate, respiratory rate, and body
Laboratory
temperature, evaluation of blood pressure, perfusion (pulse
quality, extremity temperature, urine output), oxygenation
HCS is seen with chronic, severe liver disease and there is also
 parameters (pulse oximetry), and body weight are also essential
an association with glucagon-secreting tumors and diabetes
and should be monitored at least every 12 h.
mellitus in advanced stages. The laboratory abnormalities are
similar to those that are seen with chronic liver disease such as
liver enzyme elevations and/or hyperbilirubinemia and/or
Role of the veterinary technician
hypoalbuminemia. Additional findings with HCS may include
The veterinary technician is often the “frontline? person who has
leukocytosis due to the pyoderma associated with skin lesions.
the most “face" time with the patient. The veterinary technician,
Hypoalbuminemia may also be exacerbated with excessive cuta-
therefore, is often the first person to detect subtle changes in 
 neous losses of protein.
Chapter 9  Liver
273
Figure 9.1.4  Dog with HCS showing alopecia and erythematous
Figure 9.1.5  Same dog as in Figure 9.1.4 showing resolution of
lesions at the mucocutaneous junctions of the oral cavity.
previous mucocutaneous lesions.
Imaging
considered poor to grave, there have been reports of animals
having prolonged survival times with aggressive, multimodal
As with chronic liver disease, abdominal radiographs may show
therapy (Figure 9.1.5). However, providing an intravenous
peritoneal effusion and microhepatica. Abdominal ultrasound
 protein load, via amino acid infusions, has the potential to pre-
reveals a characteristic “Swiss cheese" appearance to the liver.
cipitate a neurological crisis in the form of HE. Additional com-
This is considered by some to be a pathognomonic finding for
ponents of therapy include zinc (for hepatic and cutaneous
HCS.
components) and, potentially, antibiotic therapy for pyoderma
Biopsy
where appropriate.
Coagulation status should always be assessed prior to biopsy to
limit bleeding complications. Options for obtaining the neces-
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
sary diagnostic samples include surgical laparotomy and mini-
The cutaneous lesions in animals with HCS may be painful and
analgesic therapy should be considered. As with other forms of
techniques do not provide adequate tissue amounts for the
severe liver disease, agents with minimal hepatic metabolism
required analysis for HCS. Ascites and prolonged coagulation
should be utilized when available and appropriate. Local or
 profles may also be contraindications to ultrasound-guided liver
topical anesthesia may be a consideration for cutaneous lesions.
biopsy. Approaches and limitations for hepatic biopsy are similar
If animals show reluctance to walk, footpads or booties may be
to those for chronic hepatitis. In addition to hepatic biopsy, skin
beneficial.
biopsies are also required for a diagnosis of HCS. Skin biopsies
should be obtained in affected areas, avoiding obviously necrotic
Nutritional considerations
fissue, and at interfaces of affected and nonaffected skin. Skin
from affected animals has a characteristic “"red, white, and blue"
If animals with HCS are encephalopathic (central neurological
appearance on histopathology. Samples should also be obtained
signs, elevated fasting blood ammonia level), then dietary
for tissue culture. Superficial swabs of skin are not appropriate
 protein should be restricted. However, animals with HCS have
samples. Rather, a portion of deep tissue should be submited
clinical illness due to amino acid loss and dysregulation. There-
for bacterial culture and sensitivity. Tissue samples may be sub-
fore, additional protein restriction may be problematic. Intrave-
mitted in sterile red top tubes, Petri dishes, or culturettes. Tech-
 m  n  e d s o s
nicians should inquire oftheir microbiology laboratory regarding
 provide a nutritional benefit to affected animals. Nutritional
the preferred transport of tissue samples for analysis.
requirements, starting with basal energy and protein require-
 ments, should be calculated. Supplemental zinc may be provided
by the diet or may be an additional oral medication. Dietary
Pharmacology and treatment
antioxidants and omega-3 fatty acids are indicated as omega-3
 In addition to supportive measures for chronic liver disease,
fatty acids may particularly beneft the cutaneous lesions.
animals with HCS may benefit from intravenous infusions of
 Diarrhea is an uncommon component of the disease, but in
amino acids. Many of the cutaneous lesions are a result of amino
  q     si hl  
acid loss and dysregulation. While the prognosis for HCS is 
 assist in the control of GI signs.
274
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Nursing considerations
condition. Neurological signs such as lethargy, depression, sei-
zures, blindness, and head pressing represent HE and may be
Animals with HCS have severe, life-threatening disease and
reported more commonly after eating. Polyuria, polydipsia, and
require extensive nursing care. Debilitation may be significant,
lower urinary tract signs (hematuria, pollakiuria) are also seen.
animals may be in pain, and some will show profound neuro-
Ptyalism (excessive salivation) may be more commonly noted
logical signs. Special attention should be paid to meeting nutri-
in cats.
tional goals and providing pain relief While animals are
undergoing amino acid therapy for HCS, they should receive
especially close monitoring with serial neurological examina-
Diagnostic testing
tions, focusing on mentation status. If mentation status worsens
Laboratory
during amino acid infusion, therapy for HE should be adminis-
 tered immediately as this is a life-threatening condition. Therapy
The most common finding on the CBC is a microcytic anemia.
should include immediate discontinuation of amino acid infu-
This is due to mechanisms not completely understood but may
sions and, potentially, administration of lactulose via oral route
include abnormalities of iron metabolism. A normal serum bio-
or enema.
chemistry panel does not rule out a Pss, but common abnor-
malities include decreases in BUN, glucose, cholesterol,
Client education
creatinine, and albumin. ALT and ALP may be mildly elevated
or may be normal. Total bilirubin is more commonly found in
Clients need to be aware of the long-term prognosis for HCS.
the normal range. Isosthenuria and ammonium urate or biurate
 Even if therapy is successful in the short term, prolonged sur-
crystals may be findings on a urinalysis.
vival is not a realistic goal. Therapy and hospitalization may be
 The fasting and postprandial bile acid profle is considered the
extensive and complications with therapy can arise and can be
life threatening. Intensive nursing care may be required in the
animal with a Pss, is an elevation in both fasting and postpran-
hospital and at home. Repeated and realistic client education is
dial samples. The postprandial sample is typically more elevated
imperative. Quality of life issues may arise and honest commu-
than the fasting sample, but both may be >100 μmol/L in an
nication is essential.
animal with a PSS.
Congenital vascular anomaly
imaging
Congenital vascular anomalies, more commonly known as por-
 The most consistent finding on abdominal radiographs is micro-
tosystemic shunts (PSSs), are abnormal vascular channels that
hepatica. Other radiographic findings may include renomegaly
divert blood from the portal vein to other vessels (e.g., caudal
and potentially cystic calculi, although the majority of urate
vena cava, azygos vein). This aberrant communication allows
uroliths are radiolucent. Abdominal ultrasound done by a skilled
blood to reach the systemic circulation without traveling through
ultrasonographer will be successful in identifying a congenital
the liver. Thus, certain substances (ammonia, bile acids, etc.) are
 PSS in >85% of cases. Computed tomography (CT) scan, portal
 present in higher concentrations than would be normally found
scintigraphy, and contrast portography are other imaging options
in the circulation.
where available.
 Congenital shunts are found much more commonly in dogs
than in cats. As a general rule, congenital shunts tend to be single
Treatment and pharmacology
 and smaller breed dogs more commonly exhibit extrahepatic
The recommended therapy for congenital PSS is surgical liga-
shunts. Yorkshire terriers are the most commonly affected breed.
tion. Multiple samples of liver should be taken for analysis at the
time of surgery. Prior to invasive procedures, the coagulation
Anatomy and physiology
status of the patient should be ascertained via PT and PTT.
Anatomically, the portal vein drains blood from the abdominal
Additionally, a presurgical protein C level may provide diagnos-
viscera (spleen, intestines) and courses to the liver. The portal
tic and prognostic information. Protein C is a vitamin K-
blood then flows through the liver for metabolism and detoxifi-
dependent glycoprotein affecting blood clotting factors, such as
cation, before distribution to the systemic circulation.
prothrombin, factor VII, factor IX, and factor X. With concur-
 PSSs are named for the vessels they join. For example, a PSS 
rent diagnostic testing, protein C helps differentiate PSS from
between the portal vein and the caudal vena cava would be
other hepatobiliary diseases (such as microvascular dysplasia)
named a portocaval shunt.
and can be used to monitor the success of treatment.
 Medical stabilization prior to surgery is recommended to
Clinical signs
reduce anesthetic and surgical complications. Lactulose is used
 to lower blood ammonia levels and is the initial treatment for
Clinical signs are variable, but the most commonly reported
HE. This medication is typically given orally, but if the animal is
include small body stature, failure to thrive, and poor body
unable to swallow (or is comatose), then lactulose may be
Chapter 9  Liver
275
administered rectally as an enema. Lactulose acidifies colonic
Clinical signs and physical exam findings
contents causing ammonia to migrate from the blood into the
 colon where it is trapped and excreted in the feces. Antimicrobial
Nearly one-third of dogs and one-half of cats with hepatobiliary
therapy is prescribed to reduce ammonia-producing bacteria in
tumors are asymptomatic, and cats with malignant tumors are
the GI tract. If clinical signs include seizures, then anticonvul-
more likely to show clinical signs than those with benign
tumors.61Many of the clinical signs are nonspecifc and include
sant therapy with potassium bromide is recommended, as this
 medication has no hepatic metabolism. Coagulation support
may be indicated and may consist of oral or injectable vitamin
ascites, and seizures. Seizures are generally associated with
K therapy.
q auman aq  xa psid T no eso
may reveal icterus, an abdominal fluid wave, or a cranial abdom-
inal mass, which is palpable in up to three-fourths of dogs and
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
cats with liver tumors.12.14,15.17-21
 Internal and external warmings should be utilized to maintain
patient temperature. Caution should be exercised with external
Diagnostic testing
warming as patients may be of poor body condition and may be
Laboratory
prone to burns over pressure points.
It is important to perform a thorough clinical evaluation, includ-
ing a CBC, serum chemistry profle, and urinalysis in all dogs and
Nutritional considerations
cats suspected of having neoplastic hepatobiliary disease. Mild to
Those animals with congenital PsSs, and particularly those with
moderate anemia may be present, but hematologic abnormalities
signs of HE, benefit from dietary protein restriction. The amount
with hepatobiliary tumors; however, this finding is not specific
of protein restriction should be balanced with the protein needs
of a growing animal. Long-term, signifcant protein restriction
for hepatic neoplasia.?? Elevations in ALP and ALT as well as
may not be indicated or necessary if medical and surgical treat-
hypoglycemia and hypoproteinemia occur more commonly in
ments are successful. A diet should be mildly copper restricted,
occurs more consistentlyin dogs with metastatic liver tumors.2023
ally recommended. Commercial diets are available as are recipes
Azotemia is often present in cats with hepatobiliary tumors, and
for nutritionally complete homemade diets.
ALT, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and total bilirubin tend
 to be higher in cats with malignant versus benign tumors.16.21
Imaging
Liver neoplasia
Abdominal radiographs can be useful to evaluate hepatomegaly.
 Primary hepatic and biliary tract tumors
A common radiographic pattern observed with hepatobiliary
in dogs and cats
Primary hepatobiliary tumors are uncommon in companion
animals and account for only about 2% of canine and feline
ing the liver occur more frequently than primary liver tumors in
dogs, and the majority of primary hepatobiliary tumors in dogs
aeso d d su yr r
more common than metastatic disease in cats, and up to 65% of
 primary hepatobiliary tumors in cats are benign.12.15.16
Primary liver tumors can arise from the hepatocyte (hepato-
cellular adenoma or carcinoma), biliary epithelium (biliary
adenoma or carcinoma), neuroendocrine cells (carcinoid), or
stromal cells (sarcoma). Hepatocellular carcinoma accounts for
more than 50% of all primary liver tumors in dogs and is the
second most common liver tumor in cats.13.17 Biliary adenomas,
also called biliary cystadenomas due to their cystic appearance,
are most common in cats, accounting for more than 50% of
feline liver tumors (Figure 9.1.6).12
3
 s     
8
liver tumors: massive, nodular, and diffuse. Massive liver tumors
Figure 9.1.6  Hepatic neoplasia. Appearance of a biliary adenoma
are defined as a large tumor affecting a single liver lobe, whereas
from a cat following liver lobectomy surgery. Surgical resection was
nodular and diffuse tumors involve multiple liver lobes.1718
curative in this cat. Image courtesy of Dr. Laura Garrett.
276
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
0531970
Fr0.37190.
 Tru-Cut-type needlle is most commonly used under ultrasound
apd
be obtained.31.36 Histopathology provides a definitive diagnosis
 in up to 83-90% of liver biopsy samples.7
Prognosis and treatment
If anatomicaly feasible, liver lobectomy surgery remains the
recommended treatment for cats and dogs with a liver tumor
 l u e jo % oi d g auiedde iss e s 
be resected without impairing hepatic function, and complete
regeneration of the parenchyma can occur within 8 weeks fol-
8.81cm
lowing surgical resection.? Surgical excision of massive liver
tumors may provide prolonged disease-free intervals in dogs and
LIVER
Figure 9.1.7 Hepatic neoplasia. Ultrasound image of a
carcinoma is associated with prolonged survival. 19
Plo-jear-ll ue ui jownl jaal aaissew patenes pue snoauabolaiay
 Prognosis is poor for cats with malignant liver tumors and for
mixed breed dog that was presented for evaluation of elevated liver
dogs with nodular and diffuse malignant liver tumors.4.16.21 Sys-
enzymes. The tumor was confined to the papillary process of the
temic chemotherapy is considered relatively ineffective for treat-
caudate lobe of the liver. Following liver lobectomy, the histological
diagnosis of the hepatic mass was hepatocellular carcinoma.
ing hepatobiliary tumors.12
SECTION 2 POSTHEPATIC DISEASE
tumors is a cranial abdominal mass with caudal and lateral dis-
placement of the stomach.24 Abdominal ultrasound is more
useful than radiographs to evaluate the liver parenchyma itself
Feline cholangitis complex
and to guide aspiration of abnormal regions (see Figure 9.1.7).?25
However, benign lesions, such as nodular hyperplasia, and some
Anatomy and physiology
malignant lesions may have a similar appearance ultrasono-
Feline inflammatory liver disease is termed feline cholangitis
 graphically in dogs. 10:26
complex and is the second most common hepatic disorder in
Contrast-enhanced
 ultrasonography using Sonovue?
or
cats. Recently, the disease has been renamed from feline cholan-
Sonazoid, second-generation contrast agents administered intra-
giohepatitis complex to feline cholangitis complex. The disease
venously, can aid in differentiation between malignant liver
in cats is a primary cholangitis with inflammation centered on
o pasq ense iu aiaan m saou uaaq pue si
the intrahepatic biliary system. In some cases, inflammation
evaluation of echogenicity of the nodules following contrast
 does extend into the hepatic parenchyma, but it is an extension
 administration.2729 Advanced imaging modalities such as CT
of the cholangitis.
 and MRI can further assist the clinician in localizing hepatic
Feline cholangitis complex has been classified into several
lesions and in determining potential for resectability (relation-
groups based on liver pathology. A neutrophilic cholangitis with
ship to the caudal vena cava and gallbladder). MRI has also been
acute and chronic forms occurs and is thought to result from
 n p uq umia  o p
ascending infections from the intestine. Neutrophilic cholangitis
lesions in dogs.30
is often associated with pancreatitis and/or inflammatory bowel
Cytology and histology
disease. Another group is the lymphocytic cholangitis. The etiol-
ogy of lymphocytic cholangitis is unknown; however, an
FNA of hepatic masses is relatively easy to perform and is usually
immune-mediated mechanism is suspected. The fnal group is
associated with minimal complications. Most FNAs are obtained
chronic cholangitis associated with infestation by liver flukes.
under ultrasound guidance using a 1.5-in. disposable 20- to 22-
ga. injection needle attached to a 6- or 12-mL syringe.31 Overall,
Clinical signs
the sensitivity of cytology for diagnosing hepatic tumors is low;
however, a correct diagnosis can be obtained in up to 60% of
Clinical signs associated with feline cholangitis complex can be
liver aspirations.32-34
quite variable with an acute or a chronic onset. Cats with acute
 Biopsy samples of the liver may be necessary for definitive
neutrophilic cholangitis are often febrile, lethargic, vomiting.
diagnosis. A coagulation profle and platelet count should be
and anorexic. Jaundice and abdominal pain may or may not be
 present. These cats tend to be middle-aged or older.
incidence of major complications is reduced in patients that have
 In contrast, cats with lymphocytic cholangitis tend to be
greater than 80,000/μL platelets and normal coagulation param-
young, with 50% of them being less than 4 years of age.' Jaundice
  e su  as s  oi d s
is the most common clinical sign. Ascites may also be present
niques can be used to obtain liver tissue for histopathology. A
and is often indicative of end-stage liver disease or cirrhosis.
Chapter 9  Liver
277
Some cats may have no clinical signs of disease other than weight
 prior to biopsying the liver. Liver biopsies can be obtained by
loss.
ultrasound-guided, laparoscopic, or surgical techniques.
Hepatomegaly may be evident in some cats with cholangitis
Generally larger tissue samples are more likely to be diagnos-
 complex. Evidence of bruising or bleeding may also be present
tic than smaller ones. Both laparoscopy and surgery allow the
 in cats with concurrent coagulopathies.
clinician to obtain good-sized and diagnostic liver biopsies.
Ultrasound-guided liver biopsies may be diagnostic in feline
cholangitis, but small sample size can be an issue.? Hepatic tissue
Diagnostic testing
should be collected for histopathology and aerobic and anaero-
Laboratory
 bic culture and sensitivity.
Cholecystocentesis should also be performed and bile submit-
There can be several different changes in the complete blood cel
 ted for cytology and aerobic and anaerobic culture and sensitiv-
count (CBC), chemistry panel, urinalysis, and bile acids, which
 ity in cats suspected to have neutrophilic cholangitis.
can be supportive of the feline cholangitis complex. The CBC
may be normal or may show an inflammatory neutrophilia. A
left-shifted neutrophilia with or without toxic changes is often
Pharmacology and treatment
an indication of concurrent inflammatory or infectious disease.
Antibiotics are the mainstay of treatment for neutrophilic
Nonregenerative anemia consistent with anemia of chronic
cholangitis. A broad-spectrum antibiotic should be instituted
disease may also be documented.
until culture and sensitivity results return. Beta lactams, fluoro
 Elevations in liver enzymes are common in feline cholangitis
quinolones or cephalosporins, and metronidazole are commonly
complex. Serum alanine transaminase (ALT) often has a moder-
used.? Antibiotic treatment should be continued for 2 months or
 ate to marked increase compared to a mild to moderate increase
longer.
 in serum ALP and GGT. If biliary obstruction is present, as
Glucocorticoids are indicated when cats with neutrophilic
is possible with concurrent pancreatitis or cholelithiasis, then
cholangitis do not respond to antibiotics after 2-3 weeks or
GGT and ALP may be markedly increased. Hyperbilirubinemia
when cats have been diagnosed with lymphocytic cholangitis.
is a common biochemical abnormality. Hyperglobulinemia
 Immunosuppressive doses are initiated with lymphocytic cholan-
with or without hypoalbuminemia may occur in lymphocytic
gitis and then tapered depending on response. In some cases,
cholangitis.
additional immunosuppressive drugs may be necessary. Anti-
Bile acids (pre- and post-) are a liver function test that is
inflammatory doses of prednisone are used in cases of non-
usually abnormal with feline cholangitis complex. Urinalysis
antibiotic-responsive cases of neutrophilic cholangitis.
may show bilirubinuria. Some cats develop bilirubinuria before
Ursodeoxycholic acid has immunomodulating, antifbrotic,
the onset of hyperbilirubinemia. Coagulation panels often reveal
anti-inflammatory, and choleretic effects (increases fluidity of
at least one abnormality in the PT or PTT. These prolongations
bile secretions).? This drug is often beneficial for cats with
in coagulation may be due to vitamin K malabsorption or to
cholangitis. Ursodeoxycholic acid should not be given in cases
 decreased hepatic production of coagulation factors.
with complete bile duct obstruction.
 Very ill cats often require hospitalization with intravenous
Imaging
fluids and supportive care. Cats with ascites may require diuret-
ics such as furosemide and spironolactone and periodic abdomi-
 Diagnostic imaging such as abdominal radiographs and abdom-
inal ultrasound are critical to further assess feline cholangitis
nocentesis for control.
Any underlying or concurrent diseases should be addressed
and to help identify any other concurrent diseases. Abdominal
 as well. Surgery may be recommended for bile duct obstruction
radiographs often divulge hepatomegaly and, less commonly,.
cholelithiasis, ascites, and/or pancreatitis. Abdominal ultra-
 or removal of inspissated bile.
sonography allows detailed evaluation of hepatic parenchyma
and the biliary system. Cats with cholangitis may have none to
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
variable echogenicity changes in the hepatic parenchyma. Ultra-
sound can differentiate between focal hepatic disease and more
 ing on the method used to procure the sample. Anesthetic agents
diffuse hepatic disease. Abdominal ultrasound can also detect
 other concurrent diseases such as extrahepatic bile duct obstruc-
with minimal hepatic metabolism are recommended.
Some cats with neutrophilic cholangitis will have abdom-
tion, pancreatitis, cholelithiasis, and cholecystitis.
inal pain, and the use of analgesics such as buprenorphine is
recommended.
Biopsy
The definitive diagnosis of feline cholangitis complex is obtained
Nutritional considerations
through liver biopsy and cholecystocentesis. Biopsy rather than
 FNA of the liver is recommended as the pathologist needs to
A complete, balanced, palatable, highly digestible diet with mod-
examine the liver architecture to determine the diagnosis. Any
 erate to high protein levels is recommended for cats with cholan-
underlying coagulopathies should be identified and addressed
 gitis unless there is concurrent renal impairment or HE. Cats
278
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
with HE or renal impairment will require a protein-restricted
intraluminal bile duct obstruction. Bile duct obstruction may
diet. Enteral nutrition is preferred unless the cat is anorexic.
also occur as a result of extraluminal compression of the biliary
Feeding tubes may need to be placed in order to nutritionally
tract by large cysts. In these patients, clinical signs are those of
support some anorexic cats.
yomiting). Cysts that impede portal blood flow by compression
Biliary cysts
of portal vessels may cause portal hypertension and ascites.
In congenital polycystic disease, hepatic fibrosis is a common
A biliary cyst is a benign cystic dilation of a bile duct structure.
fnding and may result in portal hypertension, ascites, and
It is an uncommon lesion that can occur in the liver of dogs and
acquired PSS formation. Ascites may also occur due to cyst
 cats. Biliary cysts arise from bile ducts that lack normal wall
rupture, releasing cystic fluid into the abdominal cavity. Cysts
strength or lack normal connections to the biliary tree. These
may become secondarily infected, resulting in systemic signs of
dilations or blind ducts accumulate fluid to form cystic struc-
lethargy, fever, and vomiting. Animals with congenital polycystic
tures. Biliary cysts may be congenital or acquired and may occur
 disease may present at an early age (months) with signs of renal
as solitary or multiple lesions. Acquired cysts (secondary to
insufficiency.
trauma, inflammation, or obstruction) are usually solitary. Con-
genital cysts are often multiple.
Diagnostic testing
Multiple cysts (polycystic form) may occur in association with
polycystic disease of other organs, especially the kidneys: This
Biliary cysts are usually an incidental finding in patients evalu.
ated for another disease process and must be distinguished from
may be seen as a heritable congenital/developmental disorder in
Persian cats (autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease with
hepatic cysts associated with parasitic or neoplastic lesions,
liver cysts seen in up to 70% of affected animals) and in cairn
congenital polycystic conditions affecting multiple organs, and
and West Highland white terrier dogs (autosomal recessive poly-
hepatic abscesses.
cystic disease): Affected animals often have significant hepatic
Laboratory
fibrosis and may develop portal hypertension, acquired PSSs,
and ascites.47
 Fluid aspirated from cystic lesions in the liver should be evalu-
ated for evidence of infection or neoplasia. Biliary cyst content
is usually clear serous fluid, but blood or bile may be present (if
Anatomy and physiology
present, it is usually associated with acquired cysts). A CBC,
The biliary tree serves to carry bile from its site of production
serum chemistry, and urinalysis may be normal or may show
(hepatocytes) to the duodenum, where bile constituents are
evidence of renal insufficiency in patients with congenital poly-
important for aiding digestion/absorption of nutrients, espe-
cystic disease. Elevated ALT may be seen as a result of pressure
cially fats. In the normal biliary tree, microscopic bile canaliculi,
necrosis of hepatocytes adjacent to cysts, and elevations of
which carry bile from cords of hepatocytes within hepatic
bilirubin, ALP, and GGT are expected in patients with bile duct
lobules, unite to form interlobular bile ducts, which then join to
obstruction.
form intrahepatic lobar ducts.
Imaging
Lobar ducts transport bile to the left and right hepatic ducts,
which join with the cystic duct serving the gallbladder and with
Ultrasonography is sensitive and specific for diagnosing larger
the common bile duct, which enters the duodenum. Biliary cysts
cysts, which appear as focal circular thin-walled anechoic struc-
are abnormal dilatations of intrahepatic and/or extrahepatic bile
tures, and for evaluating the extent of involvement (focal or
duct structures. Cyst formation may result from abnormal pro-
difuse, concurrent renal lesions) and the presence or absence of
liferation of biliary epithelium or abnormal remodeling of
biliary obstruction. Cysts associated with congenital polycystic
embryonic duct tissue (congenital cysts) or may result from bile
disease may be microscopic and may not be evident with ultra-
duct obstruction, distension, or injury secondary to refluxed
sonography. Imaging diagnoses should be confirmed with other
pancreatic secretions (congenital or acquired cysts)
techniques to rule out neoplasia or parasitic disease.
Biopsy
Clinical signs
eipe 1opue iss jo uoedse snosuensiad papia-punose
Biliary cysts are usually asymptomatic. When present, clinical
cent hepatic parenchyma for cytological evaluation is adequate
signs are usually referable to compression of adjacent tissues or
for the diagnosis of biliary cyst.
secondary infection of the cysts and include intermittent abdom-
  ss s  ss   d n
Pharmacology and treatment
palpable as an abdominal mass and must be distinguished from
neoplastic lesions.
Asymptomatic cysts do not require treatment. Cysts that are
Abdominal distension is sometimes noted and may be due to
problematic because of impingement on adjacent tissues (dia-
hepatomegaly, ascites, or the presence of a large cyst. Cysts that
phragm, hepatic vascular or biliary structures) or causing
occur within the common bile duct or hepatic duct may cause
 n s    q  d 
Chapter 9  Liver
279
contents to reduce the volume of the cyst, but recurrence
der, and the common bile duct. The distal common bile duct
rates are high and introduction of infection is a possible
 runs adjacent to the pancreas. In cats, the common bile duct and
complication.
the pancreatic duct fuse before entering the duodenum; in dogs,
If the cyst contents rapidly reaccumulate, the patient may be
the common bile duct and the pancreatic duct enter the duode-
 treated by repeated aspiration of the cyst, by surgical or laparo-
scopic deroofing (fenestration) of the cyst (lesion may still recur
flow is blocked, the retained bile fluid causes distension of the
and procedure is contraindicated if cyst contains bile), or by
biliary tree and liver swelling, accumulation of wastes normally
surgical excision of the cyst or affected liver lobe. Intracystic
eliminated via bile, and secondary injury to liver cells by retained.
bile constituents (bile acids, copper). Bilirubin accumulates
treating humans. Polycystic conditions are often diffuse and are
 because of the inability to eliminate it into the intestine, leading
not amenable to surgical management, although fenestration 
 to a yellow discoloration of the serum (icterus) and tissues (jaun-
techniques may be used to limit compression injury to tissue
dice). Additionally, failure to deliver bile to the intestine results
adjacent to larger cysts.
in impaired digestion and absorption of fats, leading to diarrhea,
and poor absorption of fat-soluble vitamins. This can result in
Anesthetic and analgesia considerations
vitamin K deficiency and subsequent defects in clotting because
vitamin K-dependent clotting factors (factors II, VII, IX, X)
Cysts that impinge on the diaphragm or that are associated with
cannot be activated.
Clinical signs
centesis or cyst aspiration should be considered if respiratory
function is compromised. Patients with biliary obstruction may
The most common clinical signs of EHBO are jaundice, inap-
have bleeding tendencies as a result of fat-soluble vitamin
petence, lethargy and vomiting. Some patients may be febrile.
(vitamin K) malabsorption, which should be corrected before
With complete biliary obstruction, fecal color may be abnor-
surgery.
 mally light (acholic) because of the absence of bile pigments,
which gives feces its normal brown color. Hepatomegaly may be
noted on physical examination and abdominal pain may be
Extrahepatic biliary obstruction
present due to distention of bile ducts and liver swelling or may
Extrahepatic biliary obstruction (EHBO) is a condition that
be referable to the underlying disease process causing the bile
arises when bile flow through the extrahepatic elements of the
 duct obstruction (e.g., pancreatitis).
biliary tree is blocked, leading to retention of bile constituents,
liver distension, and secondary injury to liver cells.
Diagnostics
The most common cause of EHBO is pancreatitis (swelling of
Anatomy and physiology
the pancreas causes extraluminal compression of the common
-di a m q h e se ss i a 
bile duct) followed by neoplasia (pancreatic or hepatobiliary
duced by the hepatocytes and secreted into the bile canaliculi)
 mass causing extraluminal compression or intraluminal obstruc-
flows into the interlobular ducts, the lobar ducts, the left and
tive mass). Other causes include gallbladder mucocoele (GBM)
 cholelithiasis (gallstone), biliary cyst, intestinal mass or foreign
right hepatic ducts, and eventually, the cystic duct. From the
cystic duct, the bile can either continue on to the duodenum via
body obstructing the duodenal papilla, common bile duct
the common bile duct or be stored in the gallbladder. The gall-
 entrapment in a diaphragmatic hernia, parasite infestation of the
 bladder is located between the right medial and the quadrate
common bile duct (liver fluke), or stricture of the common bile
lobes of the liver It is a thin-walled structure made up of four
duct secondary to trauma or inflammation
layers. The gallbladder contracts when stimulated by cholecysto-
Laboratory
kinin (CCK) (a peptide hormone of the duodenum) and in
response to vagal parasympathetic stimulation. This causes the
Hyperbilirubinemia is the most consistent clinicopathologic
bile to pass through the common bile duct and the sphincter of
abnormality, and serum bilirubin elevations may be quite severe
 Oddi into the duodenum. Other hormones involved in emptying
in patients with complete obstruction (20- to 50-fold increase).
the gallbladder are gastrin and motilin. Somatostatin inhibits the
Marked increases in cholestatic liver enzymes (ALP and GGT)
contraction of and facilitates the filling of the gallbladder. In the 
and hypercholesterolemia are also common findings. Increased
duodenum, bile (bile acid) is an important component for the
ALT may be present, reflecting secondary injury to hepatocytes
 proper digestion and absorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins.
by retained bile salts and other toxic bile constituents. ALT eleva-
Bile also carries waste products including bilirubin, excess cho-
tions are usually milder than the changes in cholestatic enzyme
lesterol, and copper. These are removed from the body by secre-
levels but may be marked in some patients. On a CBC, a signifi-
fion into the bile and are eliminated in the feces.
cant number of patients show a leukocytosis with a mature
The extrahepatic components of the biliary tree include the
neutrophilia; anemia is less common but may occur secondary
left and right hepatic ducts, the cystic duct serving the gallblad-
 to coagulopathy and bleeding (regenerative) or as anemia of
280
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
chronic disease (normocytic normochromic nonregenerative).
Gallbladder mucocoeles
Patients with EHBO should be tested for coagulation disorders
d po  q s    o
Gallbladder mucocoeles (GBM) are a noninflammatory condi-
and activated partial thromboplastin (aPTT) (PT is the first to
tion in which the gallbladder becomes distended by an abnormal
be prolonged) or by proteins induced by vitamin K antagonism/
accumulation of mucus and inspissated bile, which forms a
absence (PIVKA) test.
 gelatinous mass in the gallbladder lumen.
GBM is principally a disease of dogs, although the condition
Imaging
has been reported in a domestic shorthair cat'5 and in a ferret.16
 Ultrasonography may provide evidence of the presence of EHBO
 They rarely occur in humans. GBM is most commonly diag-
and may help elucidate the underlying cause of the obstruction
nosed in older adult small- to medium-sized dogs. There appears
(e.g, pancreatitis, mass compressing the common bile duct,
to be a breed predisposition to GBM in Shetland sheepdogs and
cholelith). Ultrasonographic findings that support a diagnosis of
cocker spaniels,17.18 athough other breeds and mixed breed dogs
EHBO include distension of the common bile duct (85-97% of
may be affected. Breed predisposition to GBM may be secondary
cases), gallbladder distension (45-60% of cases), tortuous bile
to other heritable problems such as familial hyperlipidemia.
 ducts, and distension of hepatic ducts.1l The absence of ultra-
Hyperlipdemia, through high biliary cholesterol levels, promotes
d   no aa pu saop se e
more viscous bile and may stimulate mucin secretion, thereby
with chronic disease resulting in fibrosis, the common bile duct
increasing bile viscosity and the potential for impaired gallblad-
may not distend in EHBO. In patients with long-standing bile
 der emptying, both of which are thought to predispose to muco-
duct dilation from EHBO, biliary distension may persist even
coele formation.
after the obstruction has been relieved and therefore is not in
 Several studies have supported an association of hyperadren-
itself indicative of current obstruction. Ultrasonographic fnd-
ocorticism (HAC) and GBM: One study reported the odds of
ings should always be interpreted in light of concurrent clinical
GBM in dogs with HAC to be 29x that of dogs without HAC.19
 status and clinicopathologic findings.
It has been shown that people with HAC have altered bile com-
 position and abnormal gallbladder motility, but it is unknown
Treatment and pharmacology
if similar abnormalities occur in dogs with HAC. There is no
evidence that hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, or chronic
 Patients should be stabilized with intravenous fluid therapy to
 pancreatitis predispose to the development of GBM. Concurrent
correct dehydration and appropriate pain management. Coagu-
S sd    i n nsd si ss 
lopathies are treated with parenteral administration of vitamin
association may be coincidental or may be the result of second-
 K,. Definitive treatment of EHBO is directed at the underlying
ary cholestatic liver injury caused by GBM-related biliary
cause of the obstruction. In patients with partial biliary obstruc-
obstruction.
tion secondary to pancreatitis, the obstruction may resolve as
pancreatic inflammation and swelling resolve with supportive
Pathophysiology
treatment is surgical. The biliary obstruction must be relieved by
Normally, the gallbladder serves to store bile during fasting
removing the obstruction (e.g., duodenal foreign body, mass
periods. With meals, the presence of fatty acids and amino acids
resection) or by performing a diversionary procedure connect-
in the duodenal lumen trigger the duodenal release of CCK,
ing the biliary tract to the intestine in a manner to divert bile
which in turn stimulates gallbladder contraction and emptying
flow around the site of obstruction (cholecystoduodenostomy,
of stored bile into the duodenum. In the duodenum, bile con-
cholecystojejunostomy).9.10.12
stituents aid in the digestion and absorption of dietary fats.
Restoring patency of the common bile duct by placement of
Galbladder epithelial cells secrete mucin and concentrate
 intraluminal stents has also been successful in managing patients
stored bile by the absorption of water from the gallbladder
with extraluminal compression secondary to pancreatitis or neo-
lumen. Delayed gallbladder emptying (primary motility disorder
plastic masses.' Percutaneous ultrasound-guided aspiration of
allowing for excessive dehydration of gallbladder bile) or changes
the gallbladder contents has been described as an alternative
in mucin production may result in more viscous bile, both of
 e s     s  s
which impair bile flow from the gallbladder and may predispose
secondary to acute pancreatitis.14
to GBM.
The underlying cause of GBM in dogs is unknown. In people,
mucocoeles develop secondary to gallbladder outflow obstruc-
Anesthetic and analgesia considerations
tion, most often associated with choleliths. In dogs, biliary
 Patients with biliary obstruction may have bleeding tendencies
 obstruction, cholecystitis, and bacterial infection do not appear
as a result of fat-soluble vitamin K malabsorption, which should
to be inciting factors. Dogs may, instead, develop GBM due to a
be corrected before surgery. Additionally, patients with obstruc-
 primary dysfunction of mucus-secreting cells in the gallbladder
tive jaundice are at an increased risk for endotoxemia, hypoten-
mucosa, resulting in secretion of excessive amounts of mucus.
 sion, cardiac dysfunction, and renal ischemia and have a greater 
Cystic mucosal hyperplasia of the gallbladder is a consistent
risk of anesthetic complications.
biopsy finding in dogs with GBM. Progressive accumulation of
Chapter 9  Liver
281
excess mucus may cause increased intraluminal pressure, pres-
sure necrosis of the gallbladder wall, gallbladder rupture, and
Gn
E/A
bile peritonitis. Gallbladder hypomotility with subsequent
biliary stasis has also been implicated as a possible factor in the
development of GBM. EHBO sometimes occurs secondary to
GBM as a result of extension of the accumulated mucus and
inspissated bile into the cystic duct and the biliary tree.
Clinical signs
Dogs with GBM usually present with vague nonspecific signs of
for a relatively short time (mean of 5-8 days but up to 3 weeks)
at the time of presentation. Abdominal pain and diarrhea
are reported in approximately one-fourth of cases, and, less
commonly, dogs show abdominal distension as a result of
Figure 9.2.1  Ultrasonographic image of a gallbladder mucocoele in a
organomegaly or ascites (pancreatitis, bile peritonitis). GBMs
Shetland sheepdog.
 may present with signs of biliary obstruction with acute abdomi-
 nal pain and icterus. A smaller proportion of dogs have a history
of PU/PD, which probably relates to concurrent disease (endo-
imaging
crinopathy, renal disease) rather than the gallbladder disease
itself.
Abdominal radiography may show hepatomegaly or abdominal
 A signifcant number of dogs (23-44%) with GBM are asymp-
fluid and occasionally a mass-like effect in the right cranioven-
tomatic, especially in the earlier stages of development of the
tral abdomen produced by a distended gallbladder, but this
mucocoele, and the GBM is identifed as an incidental fnding
 rarely contributes to establishing a diagnosis of GBM.
during abdominal ultrasonography performed to evaluate
Abdominal ultrasonography is a sensitive and defnitive test
another disease.
for GBM and is the diagnostic procedure of choice. A diagnosis
 Physical examination may be normal, especially in asympto-
of GBM is confirmed by the ultrasonographic finding of immo-
matic dogs, but hepatomegaly, abdominal pain/discomfort 
(87%), and icterus (56.5%) are common in clinically ill dogs.
 echogenic material in the gallbladder lumen, often with a char-
Fever is present in about 25% of clinical cases. Abdominal dis-
acteristic finely striated or stellate ("kiwi fruitr") appearance con-
Iapea m so a-ozzr us ss are sae pue uoisu
 sidered being pathognomonic for GBM (Figure 9.2.1).
rupture may present with fever, acute severe abdominal pain,
 If the gallbladder is ruptured, echogenic peritoneal fluid may
and septic shock
be found around the gallbladder. Focal thinning or discontinuity
of the gallbladder wall is a good predictor of gallbladder rupture,
but, in many dogs with GBM, gallbladder rupture is present but
Diagnostic testing
not detected on ultrasound examination. Other variable ultra-
GBMs are being diagnosed in dogs with increasing frequency,
 sonographic findings include thickened gallbladder wall and bile
probably due, at least in part, to the now widespread use of
duct dilation (20% of dogs).
clinical signs of GBM are usually nonspecifc and could relate to
Other diagnostic tests
a myriad of other conditions, a suspicion of GBM usually arises
Abdominocentesis and abdominal fluid analysis should be per-
only after initial diagnostic test results indicate biliary disease.
formed in patients with ascites to evaluate for bile peritonitis. A
canine pancreatic lipase (cPLI) assay is indicated to assess for
Laboratory findings
concurrent pancreatic disease. Aerobic and anaerobic culture of
 bile collected via ultrasound-guided percutaneous gallbladder
Most dogs have elevated liver enzyme (ALT, ALP, AST, and
 aspiration or at surgery should be performed to direct antibiotic
GGT) levels (80-95% of all dogs) and hyperbilirubinemia (60-
65%); approximately 40% show hypoalbuminemia. Leukocytosis
treatment.
is seen in roughly 50% of cases, and about one-third are anemic.
Biopsy findings
The severity of the laboratory abnormalities is not predictive of
outcome. Generally, no biochemical or hematologic parameter
Cystic mucinous hyperplasia of the gallbladder mucosa is con-
has been shown to predict severity or outcome in GBM cases,
sistently present. Thickening of the gallbladder wall may or may
although gallbladder rupture may be associated with greater
not be noted. Inflammation (cholecystitis) or bacterial infection
elevations of liver enzymes and bilirubin and with more severe
of the gallbladder is uncommon in dogs with GBM. Concurrent
leukocytosis.1720-22
hepatitis or other hepatopathies are common.
282
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Treatment
bile stasis and because many dogs with GBM have concurrent
inflammatory hepatic diseases.
Surgical
Patients must be closely monitored for complications such as
Clinically ill dogs should be stabilized with fluid therapy to
gallbladder rupture. Owners opting for medical management
correct dehydration and electrolyte imbalances, antiemetics to
must be advised of the potential for acute decompensation
control vomiting, and treatment of peritonitis when present.
because of gallbladder rupture, EHBO, or sepsis.
GBM is generally considered to be a surgical disease, with com-
In patients managed medically, gallbladder rupture remains a
plete removal of the diseased gallbladder (cholecystectomy) con-
potential complication, but, in the limited published reports of
medically managed dogs, it appears to be infrequent and to
sidered to be the treatment of choice.
 occur within 2 weeks of diagnosis. In dogs monitored ultrasono-
Patients with known or suspected gallbladder rupture should
be treated as surgical emergencies because of the risk of septic
graphically, complications were uncommon and GBM is often
bile peritonitis. Patients without clinical evidence of rupture may
resolved within 2-6 months. Once resolved, GBM almost never
be scheduled routinely. Most (80%) of the affected gallbladders
recurs. Complete resolution of clinical signs, normalization of
show microscopic evidence of rupture or gallbladder wall necro-
bilirubin levels, and improvement in liver enzyme levels are
sis even when ultrasonography and surgical observation did not
expected, but many recovered dogs have persistent elevations of
show evidence of rupture; therefore, resection of the diseased
liver enzymes, which may reflect concurrent hepatic disease or
gallbladder is preferable to biliary diversion techniques, which
HAC. In dogs with bile duct dilation, the common bile duct may
have a higher postoperative mortality rate. GBM is associated
remain distended, but dogs remain clinically normal.
with high perioperative mortality (20-40%), especially in the
immediate postoperative period. Patients should remain hospi-
Nutritional considerations
talized for careful monitoring and treatment of common com-
plications such as bile leakage, bile peritonitis, postoperative
Dogs with hyperlipidemia should be fed a fat-restricted diet
 pancreatitis, sepsis, and pneumonia.
(7-15%) such as
Duration of hospitalization following surgery is generally 1-7
 Hill's Prescription Diet Canine r/d
days (mean 3.5 days). Most complications occur immediately
Hill's Prescription Diet Canine w/d
post-op but have been reported up to 3 weeks after surgery. In
surviving dogs, clinical pathological abnormalities improve or
 Iam's Veterinary Formula Weight Loss Restricted-Calorie
 resolve within 2 weeks to 3 months. GBM carries a good long-
Canine Formula
term prognosis ifthe patient survives the perioperative period.2123
 Purina Veterinary Diet EN Gastroenteric
·
 Purina Veterinary Diet OM Overweight Management
Medical
 Purina Veterinary Diet HA Hypoallergenic
As noted earlier, delayed gallbladder emptying or changes in
 Royal Canin Veterinary Diet LF Canine Gastrointestinal
mucin production may result in more viscous bile. While GBM
Low Fat
has traditionally been treated surgically, multiple reports of suc-
cessful nonsurgical management of dogs with GBM have
Conclusion
asymptomatic or mildly affected patients with no indication of
In the future, additional studies are needed to address potential
gallbladder rupture. The key features of medical treatment are
roles for gallbladder dysmotility and endocrine disease in the
choleretics (ursodiol 10-15 mg/kg PO divided into two doses per
development of GBM. In addition, further elucidation of the
 day), fat-restricted diet if hyperlipidemic, and ultrasonographic
 pathogenesis of GBM and its predisposing factors is needed to
monitoring. Although bacterial infection is rarely present in
inform recommendations for prevention, which will hopefully
GBM, antibiotics are commonly used in the medical manage-
improve outcomes for affected dogs. Finally, the significance of
ment of GBM because of concerns that biliary stasis could pre-
biliary sludge as a possible preliminary stage of GBM, if biliary
dispose to secondary bacterial infection by enteric organisms.
sludge should be treated, and if treatment for biliary sludge will
Additionally, antibiotics are used because of grave consequences
help to prevent the possible progression to GBM should be
should the gallbladder rupture and establish septic peritonitis.
addressed.
Ideally, culture of bile collected by FNA should direct antimi-
crobial choice; otherwise, empiric treatment should include
broad-spectrum coverage using antibiotics with good distribu-
SECTION3NUTRITIONIN
tion into bile. Reported regimens include ampicillin or amoxicil-
LIVER DISEASE
lin alone, ampicillin or amoxicillin and enrofloxacin, ampicillin
or amoxicillin and enrofloxacin and metronidazole, ampicillin
 or amoxicillin and metronidazole, and cefazolin alone. Hepato-
The liver is essential for the digestion, absorption, metabolism,
protectants such as SAMe are often administered due to the
and storage of nutrients required by the body.' Because of this,
 potential for hepatic injury by bile acids retained secondary to
liver disease can result in secondary malnutrition, which further
Chapter 9  Liver
283
aggravates the disease process and can negatively affect the ulfi
A high quality protein (high biological value) is better digested.
mate outcome of treatment.?
 and has an amino acid profle closer to what the animal requires.
Early and aggressive nutritional intervention can decrease
Whether the protein is animal or plant based is not as important
morbidity and mortality? Potential causes for malnutrition can
as the quality of the protein. Milk- and soy-based protein tend
include (1) anorexia, nausea, and vomiting: (2) impaired nutri-
to be better tolerated than animal-based proteins because of
ent digestion, absorption, and metabolism; (3) increased energy
their increased digestibility.'
requirements; and (4) accelerated protein catabolism and
Cats, unlike dogs, are unable to downregulate their enzymes
impaired protein synthesis.3
responsible for breaking down proteins into their base amino
Liver disease can be divided into acute and chronic forms,
acids. Because of this, cats maintain a higher protein require-
with chronic being the most common form seen in dogs and
ment at all times compared with dogs.?
(1) to maintain normal metabolic processes, (2) to correct any
electrolyte disturbances, (3) to avoid toxic by-product accumula-
Fats
tion, and (4) to provide necessary substrates to support hepato-
 Fats are important in liver disease because they are essential for
cellular regeneration.2.3
fatty acid and triglyceride synthesis, phosopholipid and choles-
The liver is the primary site for detoxification of endogenous
terol production, lipoprotein metabolism, and bile acid
and exogenous substances absorbed by the GI tract. This ability
synthesis.3
plays a role in the development of HE. Unfortunately, plasma
 The use of nonprotein calories is important to prevent the
ammonia levels correlate poorly with the degree of HE seen in
utilization of amino acids for energy and to decrease the need
the patient.' Delayed or altered drug metabolism can also be 
for gluconeogenesis. This can best be accomplished through the
 ss i s e u   s ra m s
use of fats as they provide almost three times the amount of
administration frequency.?
calories when compared to proteins or carbohydrates. Fat intake
The liver synthesizes the majority of the circulating plasma
should only be decreased when severe cholestatic disease is seen
 proteins and is the only site for the synthesis of albumin. Because
 or with fat malabsorption.?
of this, albumin can be used as an indirect marker for liver func.
Severe cholestatic disease causes a decrease in the production
tion. The plasma concentration can reflect the hepatic synthesis,
of bile acids, which results in malabsorption of fats, fat-soluble
rate of degradation, pathological excretion, and volume distri-
vitamins, and some minerals.
bution of albumin within the body? The liver is the primary
Medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs) such as coconut and
organ for glycogen storage and glucogenolysis, as well as for the
 palm kernel oils are not recommended, especially in cats, due to
storage of fat-soluble vitamins and the synthesis of coagulation
  r aq   d s 
factors.!2
development of hepatic lipidosis in cats because of their refusal
When introducing food to an animal with liver disease, care
to eat the food.2.3
must be taken to not over whelm the remaining metabolic capac-
ity of the liver. Alternately, negative protein/energy balance can
have a harmful infuence on hepatocelular regeneration and
Carbohydrates
repair. This can be due to a decrease in the immune response
and altered intermediary metabolism resulting in the promotion
Carbohydrates should not be more than 35% of the calories
of HE and an increased incidence of mortality.2
found in the diet due to a limited ability to digest, absorb, and
The use of appetite stimulants such as anabolic steroids and
metabolize the resulting monosaccharides. With cirrhosis, this
 is even more important.? The liver plays a key role in the use of
benzodiazepine derivatives should be used cautiously due to the
potential for hepatotoxicity.? Force feeding and appetite stimu-
the monosaccharides glucose, fructose, and galactose. In humans,
lants are not recommended in cats in order to avoid food aver-
glucose intolerance is seen more commonly than hypoglycemia
sions.? The best course of action is to select a highly palatable
with severe hepatic dysfunction.
diet with high energy density. This allows the animal to eat small
amounts of food and still meet their energy requirements.? If
Fiber
they are unable to meet at least 85% of their calculated RERs on
a daily basis, feeding intervention needs to be considered.
Moderate amounts of fber can have beneficial effects in the
management of liver disease. Soluble fibers (fructooligosaccha-
rides [FOSs]) are fermented by the colonic bacteria, causing a
Protein
decrease in the local pH. This results in a decrease in the produc-
   ss m  s  s sn 
tion and absorption of ammonia from the colon. Soluble and
seen. Ifthis is the case, protein levels can be decreased to 20-25%
insoluble fibers also bind bile acids in the small intestinal lumen,
of the calories being fed (metabolizable energy [ME]).2 Inap-
 promoting excretion from the body rather than reabsorption
into the bloodstream.2
causes catabolism of endogenous protein, decreased muscle
Insoluble fbers, such as those found in lignin and cellulose,
mass, and increased potential for HE.
help to increase GI transit time. This can decrease the incidence
284
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
of constipation and helps to absorb and remove intestinal toxins
SECTION 4 ANESTHESIA AND
from the body.2
ANALGESIACONSIDERATIONS
Vitamins and minerals
IN HEPATIC DISEASE
Vitamin deficiencies are common with liver disease, especially
The liver is one of the most important and versatile organs in the
the B complex vitamins. As these vitamins are essential for the
body and is heavily involved in the processes important to each
hepatic metabolism of nutrients, supplementation of the diet
phase of general anesthesia. When hepatic function is compro
may be necessary. Additional supplementation with Bi2 (cobala-
mised, it can be something of an obstacle course choosing
an appropriate anesthetic protocol for surgical or diagnostic
 aq s    x  o  n
purposes.
separately.
The fat-soluble vitamin stores in the liver are usually sufficient
for several months, but with chronic disease, these, too, may
Premedication
become depleted.? Decreases can also be seen with cholestatic
 disease as absorption is dependent on the presence of the bile
 Biotransformation and breakdown of most drugs occur prima-
rily in the liver, whereas actual clearance of the drugs from the
salts in the intestines.?
body usually occurs through the renal system. Much of the
breakdown process is dependent on blood flow to the liver, so
Feeding plan
Diet plans are best formulated on an individual basis. Considera-
Benzodiazepines are considered the safest choice for tranqui-
tion needs to be given to the type and origin of the liver disease
and the extent of the dysfunction seen.' Additional information
litfle effect on the cardiovascular system; thus, hepatic blood
onde a un pu aq uo aseas ia a on sioas
flow is not affected. However, this class of drug is broken down
chapter (Table 9.3.1).
  as n   sd   a 
Early, adequate, and aggressive utritional support is essential
tion could have more exaggerated sedation and extremely pro-
for the long-term survivability of the patient. Typically, commer-
longed recoveries from benzodiazepine administration. In these
cial, therapeutic diets are selected by the clinician as it is difficult
cases, much lower doses should be used.
to create a balanced homemade diet that will meet the animal's
 sd  s n    a sn
 needs over a prolonged period of time.? If significant nutrient
hepatic disease except in patients with HE. All opioids come
modifcations are necessary, select a therapeutic diet closest to
with the associated risk of bradycardia and decreased cardiac
the nutrient distribution desired and supplement accordingly.
output, but this side effect can be nullified by the use of an anti-
There is no one diet that is ideal for all liver diseases; let the
cholinergic, such as atropine or glycopyrrolate, when needed.
patient and the disease guide your diet selection. In cases where
Morphine, hydromorphone, oxymorphone, and fentanyl are all
the animal is unable or unwilling to eat the selected diet, assisted
appropriate choices for painful procedures. Fentanyl as a CRI
feeding through the use of feeding tubes is recommended.
may be the best choice because it can be titrated to effect and is
quickly eliminated from the system. Butorphanol and buprenor-
phine have the least amount of respiratory or cardiovascular
depression and are good choices for minimally invasive proce-
Table 9.3.1   Goal of liver diets
dures. Opioids can be fully reversed using naloxone; full mu
opioids can be partially reversed using butorphanol.
 The basic goals for a diet in patients with liver disease
Phenothiazines, such as acepromazine, should be not be used
primarily because of their hypotensive effects. This category of
Maintain metabolic balance
drugs may also interfere with platelet aggregation. Alpha-2
 Provide nutrients for healing and regeneration of damaged
adrenergic agonists, such as xylazine and dexmedetomidine, are
tissues
also a poor choice due to initial vasoconstriction, which is fol-
 Correct and/or prevent malnutrition
lowed by potentially profound vasodilation. Both states may
 negatively affect hepatic blood flow.
Decrease the need for hepatic *"work" through the use of highly
digestible foods
Avoid production of hepatotoxic and neurotoxic compounds
Induction
Eliminate underlying cause
The most common induction agents are propofol, ketamine/
diazepam, and etomidate. Propofol is very rapidly eliminated
Source: Roudebush P, Davenport DJ, Dimski DS. Hepatobiliary disease. In
from the body. Propofol is primarily metabolized by the liver,
Smalf Animal Cinical Nutrition, 4th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Thatcher, RL
although other sites of extrahepatic metabolism, such as the
Remillard, P Roudebush, pp. 811-835. Topeka, KS: Mark Morris Institute;
2000.
lungs, contribute. Thus, propofol is considered relatively safe as
Chapter 9  Liver
285
an induction agent in patients with liver disease. Propofol can
of these inhalant anesthetics are metabolized by the liver Inha-
cause apnea and transient hypotension, but these side effects can
lants can cause vasodilation and hypotension, which may affect
be lessened with slow administration.
hepatic blood flow. This can be combated by using opioid anal-
Ketamine/diazepam can be used for induction also. Both
 gesics to decrease inhalant requirements and by maintaining
drugs are heavily metabolized by the liver and thus take much
appropriate fluid support.
longer to be eliminated with hepatic compromised patients. As
Nitrous oxide can also be used in patients with liver dysfunc.
there have been reports of ketamine-related seizures in some
tion. When used with inhalant anesthetics, it can decrease the
 patients, this particular combination should be avoided if there 
 concentration of inhalant required and can potentially offset
 is any epileptic history or known seizure activities.
 associated hypotension.
Etomidate has little effect on the respiratory or cardiac systems
and is rapidly metabolized by both the liver and plasma
Monitoring
esterases.
 All the induction drugs are metabolized by the liver to some
nd s n d e   m 
degree, therefore repeated boluses are not recommended.
anesthetic complications. Patients with ascites or fluid in the
Anesthesia should be maintained using inhalant anesthetics
 a  d   a  
(Table 9.4.1).
ventilation. Slow, partial removal of abdominal fuid may be
indicated and if performed, IV isotonic crystalloids and/or col-
Maintenance anesthesia
loids (depending on the albumin concentration) should be
administered. End tidal carbon dioxide and oxygen saturation
Isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane are all good choices for
should be closely monitored. If the patient is not able to sponta-
 maintaining anesthesia in hepatic cases. Very nominal amounts
neously ventilate adequately (this would be indicated if the CO2
is greater than 45 mmHg or the oxygen saturation is less than
95%), then assisted or mechanical ventilation is needed.
Hypoalbuminemia is commonly seen with liver dysfunction
Table 9.4.1
1 Anesthetic and analgesic drug dosages for hepatic
and can cause dramatic hypotension. If albumin is low (below
patients
1.5g/dL), plasma oncotic pressure is low and the force keeping
Drug
Canine
Feline
fluid within the vascular system is decreased. Patients are at an
 increased risk of pulmonary edema. Measuring arterial blood
Midazolam
0.1-0.3 mg/kg IvF
0.05-0.3 mg/kg
 pressure is recommended and aggressive fluid therapy delivered
or IM
Iv or IM 
 as needed. Colloidal support may be needed during anesthesia
Morphine
0.5-2mg/kg IM or
0.05-0.2 mg/kg
 and caution should be used to avoid fluid overload. Monitoring
SQ
IM or SQ
central venous pressure is the best way to achieve an accurate
Hydromorphone
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
Same as canine
picture of volume. However, some signs of fluid overload include
hypertension, pitting edema, increased or “bounding" pulse
Oxymorphone
0.1-0.2 mg/kg Iv,a
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
quality, crackles heard in the lungs, and decreased oxygen
IM, or SQ
Iv,2 im, or SQ
saturation.
Fentanyl
5-45 mcg/kg/hr
2-20mcg/kg/
Patients with low albumin often require lower doses of anes
CRI IV only
hr CRI IV only
thetic drugs. Many drugs, such as propofol, are highly protein
Butorphanol 
0.2-0.4 mg/kg Iv,a
Same as canine
bound, and in a hypoalbuminemic patient, this means that there
IM, or SQ
is less protein available to bind to the drug and thus more active
Buprenorphine
 50-200 mcg/kg IV,a
50-100 mcg/kg
drug circulating in the system.
IM, or SQ
Iv,2 Im, or SQ 
 Hepatic impairment can have detrimental effects on clotting
Same as canine
function and production of coagulation factors. A coagulation
Propofol
Up to 6 mg/kg IV
only
profle should be run before any surgery or liver biopsy occurs.
Arterial blood pressure and heart rate monitoring can be early
Ketamine/
10 mg/kg ketamine
Same as canine
indicators of a hemorrhagic episode. While arterial blood pres-
diazepam 
plus 0.5 mg/kg 
diazepam IV only
sure monitoring is the gold standard, it is not always available.
All patients undergoing anesthesia should have some form of
Ketamine/
10 mg/kg ketamine
Same as canine
blood pressure monitoring and should have peripheral pulse
midazolam
plus 0.22 mg/kg
midazolam IV only
quality routinely assessed If an arterial line is not feasible, then
oscillometric or Doppler ultrasound monitoring is needed. If the
Etomidate
1-2 mg/kg Rapidly
Same as canine
IV
[MAP] below 60 mmHg) and tachycardic (heart rate above 240
in cats, 220 in neonatal canines, 180 in small dogs, and 160 in
 when administered Iv, lower dosage should always be used.
Source: Plumb D. Veterinary Drug Handbook, 5th edition. Ames, IA: Blackwell 
average sized dogs), it could indicate hypovolemia. It is recom-
Publishing: 2005.
 mended that FFP and/or whole blood be on hand if necessary.
286
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 Hypoglycemia is present in many hepatic cases and periodic
Guilford G, Center S. Nutritional management of gastrointestinal
glucose monitoring under anesthesia is recommended.
If
disease. In: Strombeckss Small Animal Gastroenterology, 3rd
hypoglycemia occurs (glucose reading below 60 mg/dL), an
edition, eds. DR Strombeck, WG Guilford, SA Center, pp. 889-
910. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1996.
intravenous dextrose bolus (given slowly) and the addition of
2.5-5.0% dextrose to crystalloid fluids is indicated.
7.1
Roudebush P, Davenport D, Dimski D. Hepatobiliary disease. In:
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 4th edition, eds. T Hand, R
Elimination of drugs given before and during anesthesia is
Remillard, pp. 816-833. Topeka, KS: Mark Morris Institute; 2000.
dependent on metabolism. Hypothermia (temperatures below
Marks SL, Rogers QR, Strombeck DR. Nutritional support
96°) can cause a decrease in the rate of metabolism and can lead
in hepatic disease part 1 & 2. Compendium on Contirming
Education for the Practicing Veterinarian 1994;16(8, 10):971-979.
 coagulation, which may already be abnormal in patients with
1287-1296.
9.
Center SA. Chronic liver disease: current concepts of disease
eratively and combative measures taken if the patient becomes
mechanisms. Journal of Small Animal Practice 1999;40:106-114.
hypothermic (hot water circulation mats or blankets, convective
10.
Feeney DA, Johnston GR, Hardy RM. Two-dimensional, gray-
air warming units, or warmed fluids are all useful tools).
scale ultrasonography for assessment of hepatic and splenic neo-
plasia in the dog and cat. Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association 1984;184:68-81.
Recovery
11.
Hammer AS, Sikkema DA. Hepatic neoplasia in the dog and cat.
Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 1995;
Many patients with hepatic disease will need to recover in a
25:419-435.
critical care unit so they have continued monitoring, fuid
12.
Liptak IM. Hepatobiliary tumors. In: Withrow e MacEwen's Srmall
 therapy, and postoperative analgesia.
Animal Clinical Oncology,4th edition, eds. SJ Withrow, DM Vail,
Temperature should be closely monitored and maintained in
Pp. 483-491. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2007.
the postoperative period to aid in the metabolism of circulating
13.
Cullen IM, Popp JA. Tumors of the liver and gallbladder.
 anesthetic drugs. Blood glucose levels should also be watched
In: Tumors in Domestic Anirmals, 4th edition, ed. DJ Meuten,
 and dextrose added to fluids if necessary.
pp.483-508. Ames, IA: Iowa State Press; 2002.
In patients that are hypotensive, arterial (preferred) or systolic
14.
Balkman C. Hepatobiliary neoplasia in dogs and cats. Veterinary
blood pressure monitoring should be continued until the patient
Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 2009;39:
is normotensive. Central venous pressures can be monitored
617-625.
15.
 Patnaik AK. A morphologic and immunocytochemical study of
through jugular central lines to prevent overhydration.
   s   
Continuous rate infusions of fentanyl or morphine-lidocaine-
405-415.
ketamine are standard for painful cases as they can be given at
16.
 Lawrence HJ, Erb HN, Harvey HJ. Nonlymphomatous hepatobil-
very low doses and maintain a constant level of analgesia. Fen-
iary masses in cats: 41 cases (1972 to 1991). Veterinary Surgery
 go so e   a se as o a sd p
1994;23:365-368.
analgesics. Noncritical cases may not need any additional anal-
17.
Patnaik AK, Hurvitz AI, Lieberman PH, et al. Canine hepatocel-
 gesia or may be sent home with butorphanol or buprenorphine.
lular carcinoma. Veterinary Pathology 1981;18:427-438.
NSAIDs should not be given to patients with hepatic dysfunc-
18.
Patnaik AK, Hurvitz AI, Lieberman PH. Canine hepatic neo-
tion. They are specifically contraindicated in patients with liver
plasms: a clinicopathological study. Veterinary Pathology 1980;17:
disease, as well as in patients with hypotension or coagulation
553-564.
disorders.
19.
 Liptak JM, Dernell WS, Monnet E, et al. Massive hepatocellular
carcinoma in dogs: 48 cases (1992-2002). Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association 2004;225:1225-1230.
Bibliography
-au pue Aed jo saa siooedou  aquns
static neoplastic disease ofthe liver in dogs. Journal ofthe American
Veterinary Medical Association 1978;173:267-269.
Section 1
21.
 Post G, Patnaik AK. Nonhematopoietic hepatic neoplasms in cats:
1.
 Meertens NM, Bokhove CAM, van den Ingh TSAM. Copper-
21 cases (1983-1988). Journal ofthe American Veterinary Medical
associated chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis in a European shorthair
Association 1992;201:1080-1082.
cat. Veterinary Pathoiogy 2005;42:97-100.
22.
Alvarez L, Whittemore J. Liver enzyme elevations in dogs: physiol-
2.
Rothuizen J, Bunch SA, Charles JA, et al. WSAVA Standards for
ogy and pathophysiology. Compendium on Continuing Education
Clinical and Histological Diagnosis of Canine and Feline Liver
for the Practicing Veterinarian 2009;31(9):408-414.
Disease. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2006.
23.
McConnell MF, Lumsden JH. Biochemical evaluation of meta-
3.
Hoffmann G. Copper-associated liver diseases. Veterinary Clinics
static liver disease in the dog. Journal of the American Animal
of North America. Small Animal Practice 2009;39:489-511.
Hospital Association 1983;19:173-178.
4.
Dimski D, Taboada J. Feline idiopathic hepatic lipidosis.
in
24.
Evans SM. Ihe radiographic appearance of primary liver neoplasia
Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 1995;
in dogs. Veterinary Radiology 1987;28:192-196.
25(2):357-373. ISSN: 0195-5616.
25.
Guillot M, DAnjou MA, Alexander K, et al. Can sonographic
5.
Donoghue S. Nutritional support of hospitalized patients.
-ss um sp u sae a jo ssa au iad suu
Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 1989;
 p  a    
19(3):475-493.
50(5):513-518.
Chapter 9  Liver
287
26.
Stowater JL, Lamb CR, Schelling SH. Ultrasonographic features of
(2002-2006). Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2009;23:
canine hepatic nodular hyperplasia. Veterinary Radiology 1990;31:
72-80.
268-272.
45.
 Raffan E, McCallum A, Scase TJ, Watson PJ. Ascites is a negative
27.
 O'Brien RT, Iani M, Matheson J, et al. Contrast harmonic ultra-
fo juno saop u seday suo u ioneipu susouaond
sound of spontaneous liver nodules in 32 dogs. Veterinary
Veterinary Internal Medicine 2009;23:63-66.
Radiology e Ultrasound 2004;45(6):547-553.
46.
 Rutgers HC, Harte JG. Hepatic disease. In: Waltharm Book of
28.
 Kanemoto H, Ohno K, Nakashima K, et al. Characterization
Clinical Nutrition of the Dog e Cat, eds. M Wills, KW Simpson,
of canine focal liver lesions with contrast-enhanced ultrasound
 pp. 265-269. Tarrytown, NY: Elsevier; 1994.
using a novel contrast agent—Sonazoid. Veterinary Radiology e
Grubb TL. Anesthesia for patients with special concerns. In: Small
Ultrasound 2009;50(2):188-194.
Anial Anesthesia and Analgesia, ed. G Carroll, pp. 193-239.
29.
 Nakamura K, Takagi S, Sasaki N, et al. Contrast-enhanced ultra-
Ames, IA: Blackwell; 2008.
sonography for characterization of canine focal liver lesions.
48.
 Scherk MA, Center SA. Toxic, metabolic, infectious, and neoplas-
Veterinary Radiology e Ultrasound 2010;51(1):79-85.
tic liver diseases. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 6th
30.
Clifford CA, Pretprius ES, Weisse C, et al. Magnetic resonance
edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, ED Feldman, pp. 1464-1478. St. Louis,
imaging of focal splenic and hepatic lesions in the dog. Journal of
MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2005.
Veterinary Internal Medicine 2004;18:330-338.
49.
McMichael MA. Handbook of Veterinary Emergency Protocols:
31.
 Rothuizen J, Iwedt DC. Liver biopsy techniques. Veterinary
Dog and Cat. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia; 2008.
Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 2009;39:
50.
 Byrne KP. Metabolic epidermal necrosis-hepatocutaneous syn-
469-480.
drome. Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice
32.
 Roth L. Comparison of liver cytology and biopsy diagnoses in
1999;29(6):1337-1355
dogs and cats: 56 cases. Veterinary Clinical Pathology 2001;30:
51.
 Jacobsen LS, Kirberger RM, Nesbit JW. Hepatic ultrasonography
35-38.
Cohen M, Bohling MW, Wright JC, et al. Evaluation of sensitivity
drome: new concepts. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine
and specificity of cytologic examination: 269 cases (1999-2000).
1995;9(6):399-404.
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 2003;222:
52.
Tobias KM, Rohrbach BW. Association of breed with the diagnosis
964-967.
of congenital portosystemic shunts in dogs: 2400 cases (1980-
34.
Wang KY, Panciera DL, Al-Rukibat RK, et al. Accuracy of
2002).Journai of the American Veterinary Medical Association
ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of the liver and cyto-
2003;223(11):1636-1639.
logic findings in dogs and cats: 97 cases (1990-2000). Journal of
Mehl ML, Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Kass PH, Adin CA, Flynn AK,
the American Veterinary Medical Association 2004;224:75-78.
De Cock HE, Gregory CR. Evaluation of ameroid ring constrictors
35.
 Bigge LA, Brown DJ, Penninck DG. Correlation between coagula-
:saopu sums suassood edaqexa aus ioy uauai
tion profile findings and bleeding complications after ultrasound-
168 cases (1995-2001). Journal ofthe American Veterinary Medical
guided biopsies: 434 cases (1993-1996). Journal of the American
Association 2005;226(12):2020-2030.
Animal Hospital Association 2001;37:228-233.
54.
 Proot S, Biourge V, Teske E, Rothuizen J. Soy protein isolate versus
36.
Vasanjee SC, Bubenik LJ, Hosgood G et al. Evaluation of hemor-
sAsonod [euauos ym saop ioy iap uanoid mol paseq-leau
rhage, sample size, and collateral damage for five hepatic biopsy
temic shunts. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2009;23:
 methods in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 2006;35:86-93.
794-800.
37.
 Barr F Percutaneous biopsy of abdominal organs under ultra-
55.
Toulza O, Center SA, Brooks MB, Erb HN, Warner KL, Deal W.
sound guidance. Journal of Small Animal Practice 1995;36:
Evaluation of plasma protein C activity for detection of hepato-
105-113.
fo pouunof ssop u suunus sjuasisouod pue aseasip Aieq
38.
Trout NJ, Berg J, McMillan MC et al. Surgical treatment of
the American Veterinary Medical Association 2006;229(11):
hepatobiliary cystadenomas in cats: five cases (1988-1993).
1761-1771.
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 1995;206:
56.
Cellio LM, Dennis J. Canine superficial necrolytic dermatitis.
505-507.
Compendium 2005;27(11):820-825.
39.
 Kosovsky JE, Manfra-Marretta S, Matthiesen DT, et al. Results of
 r  s   aa 
Section 2
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 1989;25:
203-206.
1.
Harvey AM, Gruffydd-Jones TJ. Feline inflammatory liver disease.
40.
Dunayer EK, Gwaltney-Brant SM. Acute hepatic failure and coag-
In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Vol. 2, 7th edition,
ulopathy associated with xylitol ingestion in eight dogs. Journal
eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman, Pp. 1643-1648. St. Louis, MO:
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 2006;229(7):
Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
1113-1117.
Cole TL, Center SA, Flood SN, et al. Diagnostic comparison of
41.
Cooper J, Webster C. Acute liver failure. Compendium 2006;28(7):
'sies pue saop ui iaail aul jo suauoads Asdonq aapam pue apaau
498-515.
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 2002;
42.
Weiss DJ, Gagne J, Armstrong PJ. Inflammatory liver diseases in
220(10):1483-1490.
cats. Compendium 2001;23(4):364-372.
3.
 Sartor LL, Trepanier LA. Rational pharmacologic therapy of hepa-
43.
Shih JL, Keating JIH, Freeman LM, Webster C. Chronic hepatitis
tobiliary disease in dogs and cats. Compendium of Continuing
in Labrador retrievers: clinical presentation and prognostic
Education 2003;25:432-447.
factors. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2007;21:33-39.
4.
 Bosje JT, van den Ingh TS, van der Linde-Sipman JS. Polycystic
44.
 Poldervaart JH, Favier RP, Penning LC, Van Den Ingh TSGAM,
kidney and liver disease in cats. Ihe Veterinary Quarterly
Rothuizen J. Primary hepatitis in dogs: a retrospective review
1998;20:136-139.
288
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
5.Eaton KA, Biller DS, DiBartola SP et al. Autosomal dominant
19.Mesich MLL, Mayhew PD, Paek M, Holt DE, Brown DC.
polycystic kidney disease in Persian and Persian-cross cats.
Gallbladder mucoceles and their association with endocrinopa-
Veterinary Pathology 1997;34:117-126.
thies in dogs: a retrospective case-control study. Journal of Small
6.McAloose D, Casal M, Patterson DF, Dambach DM. Polycystic
Animal Practice 2009;50:630-635.
kidney and liver disease in two related West Highland white
20.1
Besso JG, Wrigley RH, Gliatto IM, Webster CRL. Ultrasonographic
terrier litters. Veterinary Pathology 1998;35:77-81.
7.
McKenna SC, Carpenter JL. Polycystic disease of the kidney and
mucocele. Veterinary Radiology e Ultrasound 2000;41:261-271.
liver in the cairn terrier. Veterinary Pathology 1980;17:436-442.
21.
Worley DR, Hottinger HA, Lawrence HJ. Surgical management of
8.1
 Rothuizen J. Diseases of the biliary system. In: BSAVA Manual of
gallbladder mucoceles in dogs: 22 cases (1999-2003). Journal ofthe
Canine and Feline Gastroenterology, 2nd edition, eds. EJ Hal, JW
AmericanVeterinary Medical Association 2004;225:1418-1422.
Simpson, DA Williams, p. 277. Quedgeley, Gloucester, UK: British
22.
Crews LJ, Feeney DA, Jessen CR, Rose ND, Matise I. Clinical, ultra-
Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2005.
sonographic, and laboratory findings associated with gallbladder
9.Mayhew PD, Holt DE, McLear RC, Washabau RJ. Pathogenesis
disease and rupture in dogs: 45 cases (1997-2007). Journal of the
and outcome of extrahepatic biliary obstruction in cats. Journal of
American Veterinary Medical Association 2009;234:359-366.
SmallAnimal Practice 2002;43:247-253.
Amsellem PM, Seim HB, MacPhail CM et al. Long-term survival
10.
 Buote NJ, Mitchell SL, Penninck D et al. Cholecystoenterostomy
and risk factors associated with biliary surgery in dogs: 34 cases
for treatment of extrahepatic biliary tract obstruction in cats: 22
(1994-2004). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
cases (1994-2003). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association 2006;229:1451-1457.
Association 2006;228:1376-1382.
24.1
Reed WH, Ramirez S. What is your diagnosis? Journal of the
11.
Gaillot H, Penninck D, Webster CRL, Crawford S. Utrasonographic
American Veterinary Medical Association 2007;230:661-662.
features of extrahepatic biliary obstruction in 30 cats. Veterinary
25.
Walter R, Dunn ME, dAnjou M-A, Lecuyer M. Nonsurgical reso-
Radiology é Ultrasound 2007;48:439-447.
lutionof gallbladder mucocele intwodogs. Journal ofthe American
12.
Fahie MA, Martin RA. Extrahepatic biliary tract obstruction: a
Veterinary Medical Association 2008;232:1688-1693.
retrospective study of 45 cases (1983-1993). Journal of the
American Animal Hospital Association 1995;31:478-482.
Section 3
13.
Mayhew PD, Weisse CW. Treatment of pancreatitis-associated
1.1
 Rutgers C, Biourge V. Nutrition of dogs with liver disease. In:
extrahepatic biliary tract obstruction by choledochal stenting in
Encyclopedia ofCanine Clinical Nutrition,eds.P Pibot, V Biourge,
seven cats. Journal of Small Animal Practice 2008;49:133-138.
D Elliott, pp. 134-152. Aimargues, France: Aniwa SAS; 2006.
14.
Herman BA, Brawer RS, Murtaugh RJ, Hackner SG. Iherapeutic
2.1
 Rutgers C, Biourge V. Nutritional management of hepatobiliary
aa ui sisauasoishsaou papina-punosenm snaueinnad
and  pancreatic
diseases. In: Encyclopedia of Feline Clinical
dogs with extrahepatic biliary obstruction and pancreatitis.
Nutritior, eds. P Pibot, V Biourge, D Elliott, pp. 140-157.
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 2005;227:
Aimargues, France: Aniwa SAS Aimargues; 2008.
1782-1786.
3.
 Roudebush P, Davenport DJ, Dimski DS. Hepatobiliary disease.
15. Bennett SL, Milne M, Slocombe RF, Landon BP. Gallbladder
In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 4th edition, eds. MS Hand,
mucocoele and concurrent hepatic lipidosis in a cat. Australian
CD Thatcher, RL Remillard, P Roudebush, pp. 811-835. Topeka,
Veterinary Journal 2007;85:397-400.
KS: Mark Morris Institute; 2000.
16.
Reindel JF, Evans MG. Cystic mucinous hyperplasia in the gall-
bladder of a ferret. Journal of Comparative Pathology 1987;97:
Section 4
601-604.
17. Pike FS, Berg J, King NW, Penninck DG, Webster CRL. Gallbladder
1.
Grimm K, Thurmon J, Tranquilli WJ. Lumb and Jones Veterinary
mucocele in dogs: 30 cases (2000-2002). Journal of the American
Anesthesia and Anaigesia, 4th edition. Ames, IA: Blackwell
Veterinary Medical Association 2004;224:1615-1622.
 Publishing; 2007.
18.
Aguirre AL, Center SA, Randolph JF et al. Gallbladder disease in
2.
Thurman J, Tranquilli W, Benson G. Essentials of Srmall Animal
Shetland sheepdogs: 38 cases (1995-2005). Journal ofthe American
Anesthesia and Analgesia, 1st edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippencott,
Veterinary Medical Association 2007;231:79-88.
Williams, and Wilkins; 1999.
Chapter 10
 Urinary and Renal Diseases
Editors: Ale Aguirre and Tracy Darling
Section 1 Urinary Anatomy and Physiology - Ale Aguirre 289
Section 6 Urinary Imaging - Lawren Durocher 319
Section 2 Clinical Signs - Shauna Blois 291
Section 7 Renal and Urinary Disease Pharmacology -
 Section 3 Urinary Diseases - Ale Aguirre 292
Manin Forman 324
Section 4 Urinary Diagnostics and Therapeutic Implications -
Section 8 Anesthetic and Analgesic Considerations -
Elisabeth Snead 302
Tracy Darling 335
Section 5 Urinary Tract Biopsy Techniques - Elisabeth Snead 315
Section 9 Nutritional Considerations - Shauna Blois 336
SECTION 1 URINARY ANATOMY
bladder is a reservoir where urine is stored until it can be voided.
The bladder has a body and neck The urethra arises from the
AND PHYSIOLOGY
neck of the bladder and ushers urine outside the body. The ure-
thral sphincter is located just beyond the bladder in the proximal
The kidneys are reddish brown organs that mark the start of the
urethra. It is this sphincter that maintains urine in the bladder
urinary tract. They are located dorsally in the abdomen within the
until it is released by conscious urination. In male dogs, the
retroperitoneal space. The kidneys are covered by a fibrous capsule
 prostate completely surrounds the neck of the bladder and the
and are held in place by connective tissue. The left kidney lies at
proximal urethra. The urethra passes through the penis and
the level of the 13th rib. The right kidney is located farther crani-
 sd a s d a oq a s a
ally under the ribs and touches the liver. The kidneys have three
 provides support and protection. In the female, the urethra
major components. The cortex, or the outer layer, filters blood and
courses caudally until it enters the vestibule. The vulva marks
starts the process of urine formation. The medulla is located cen-
the end of the urinary tract in the female.
trally within the kidney. It is in the medula that urine gradually
becomes concentrated. The renal pelvis, or the most central part
Physiology
of the kidney, is an open space where urine collects before it exits
the kidneys. Urine flows from the renal pelvis into the ureters. The
Urine is formed and concentrated by filtering blood through
   n s   s   
millions of nephrons, the functional units of the kidney. The
ureters enter the bladder at the trigone (Figure 10.1.1).
nephron consists of a glomerulus, Bowman's capsule, a proximal
The urinary bladder is a balloon-shaped organ situated in the
tubule, the loop of Henle, a distal tubule, and the collecting ducts
caudal abdomen and is held in place by several ligaments. The
(Figure 10.1.2).
Smat Anima nternat Medicine forVeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses, First Edition.Edited by Linda Meril
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
289
290
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
The glomerulus is a modified capillary bed that flters blood.
The glomeruli are located in the cortex of the kidney. High blood
pressure (BP) in the glomerular capillaries forces plasma through
RenalCaps
RenalCortex
small pores in the capillary walls. The glomerular filtration rate
(GFR) is a term used to describe how fast plasma is fltered
through the glomerulus. The glomerular filtration system is
RenalPelvis
completely permeable to water and small dissolved substances
(electrolytes, amino acids, glucose, and urea). However, larger
nalMedulla
molecules like proteins are unable to pass through the filter.
Albumin is approximately the same size as the pores in the filter.
In a normal animal, albumin stays in the plasma. However, when
Ureter
disease of the glomerulus ensues, it is often the frst protein
to be found at high levels in the urine. Criteria that determine
 if a substance is going to be filtered include its size and electri-
cal charge. The glomerular capillaries have a negative electrical
charge and therefore repel proteins since they are of the same
charge. Most electrolytes are positively charged or are of small
enough size that they easily transverse the barrier. The fluid that
completes its journey through the glomerulus enters Bowman's
capsule and is known as the ultrafiltrate.23
Bladde
 From Bowman's capsule, the ultrafltrate flows into the renal
tubules. The tubules are responsible for maintaining fluid
balance, electrolytes, acid-base status, and for the excretion of
UreteralOrifice
Trigone
waste products and drugs. The proximal convoluted tubule is a
continuation of Bowman's capsule. The proximal tubule has spe-
cialized cells that work to return many of the filtered substances
Urethral Sphincter
Urethra
back to the blood. Approximately 60-65% of the fltered sub-
Figure 10.1.1  Diagram displaying the nomal anatomical structures
stances are reabsorbed in the proximal convoluted tubule. These
of the urinary system.
include amino acids, glucose, and many of the electrolytes.
Proximal Tubule
Distal Tubule
Glomerulus
Bowman'sCapsule
Collecting Duct
Loop of Henle
Figure 10.1.2  Diagram displaying the
nomal anatomical structures of the nephron.
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
291
Secretion also occurs in the proximal convoluted tubule, and it 
 lower urinary tract infections (UTIs), urethral obstruction, neo-
is primarily responsible for eliminating drugs and hydrogen
 plasia, and feline idiopathic cystitis.
ions, which are important for maintaining a normal blood pH.
 Hematuria (RBCs in the urine) can arise from upper or lower
Following modification in the proximal convoluted tubule,
urinary tract disorders and may be macroscopic (grossly visible)
the ultrafltrate enters the loop of Henle. The loop of Henle
 or only observed microscopically. Macroscopic hematuria must
begins in the cortex and descends into the medulla. It then
be differentiated with a sediment examination from other causes
makes a sharp U-turn before heading back to the cortex. The
of discolored urine (including hemoglobin or myoglobin in the
loop of Henle is instrumental in the formation of concentrated
urine; termed hemoglobinuria or myoglobinuria, respectively).
urine. Water passively moves out of the descending loop of
The timing of the appearance of blood in the urine stream can
 Henle due to a concentration gradient in the interstitium sur-
 indicate the general location of the source. Urethral disorders
rounding the nephron. Sodium and chloride are actively pumped
can cause hematuria at the beginning of the urine stream.
out of the tubules in the ascending limb under the influence of
 Hematuria in the later part of the urine stream is more sugges
aldosterone, a hormone secreted by the adrenal glands. The
tive of disorders in the bladder or kidneys. Additionally, hema-
movement of sodium out of the ascending tubules helps to main-
 turia concurrent with clinical signs of pollakiuria, stranguria,
tain the interstitial concentration gradient.
 and/or dysuria can help localize a disorder to the lower urinary
 Specialized cells in the ascending loop of Henle, known as the 
tract. Hematuria can also arise from systemic coagulation disor-
 macula densa, are responsible for the secretion of erythropoie-
 ders and from disorders of the genital tract. Heat stroke and
tin. Erythropoietin is a hormone essential for new red blood cell
excessive exercise can lead to hematuria, hemoglobinuria, and/
(RBC) production and for preventing premature RBC death.
or myoglobinuria.
Once the ultrafltrate has been modifed in the loop of Henle,
 Normal urine output for cats and dogs is 20-40 mL/kg/day.
it enters the distal convoluted tubule in the cortex of the kidney.
 Polyuria (PU) occurs when urine output is greater than normal.
 Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) is secreted by the pituitary gland
 The true definition of PU is urine output >40-50 mL/kg/day.
but exerts it effect in the distal convoluted tubule. Its primary
This is usually diffcult to measure, and a clinically useful defini-
function is to reabsorb large quantities of water, thereby regulat-
 tion of PU is observation of an increase in urine volume output.
ing urine volume. A deficiency of ADH results in severe polyuria
 For example, PU may be noted by dogs asking to go outside
(PU) and is known as diabetes insipidus (DI). Hydrogen, potas-
more frequently and producing large volumes of urine (not to
sium, and ammonia are eliminated by secretion into the distal
be confused with pollakiuria—which also results in more fre-
tubule.
quent urination, but only small volumes of urine are produced).
From the distal convoluted tubules, the ultrafltrate then
Owners of polyuric cats may find that the litter box needs to be
enters the collecting duct system. The collection ducts carry
cleaned more frequently.
urine from the cortex through the medulla to the renal pelvis.
Polydipsia (PD), an increase in water intake, usually accom-
a o psp Aa se rae aisd sq si 
panies PU as a compensatory mechanism. The true defnition of
renal pelvis. The collecting ducts work to further absorb electro-
PD is water intake >80-100 mL/kg/day. Clinically, water intake
lytes, water, and bicarbonate, thereby regulating electrolyte and
can be measured or PD may be noted by owners having to fill
acid-base balance.
water dishes more frequently. Primary polyuric conditions (e.g..
secondary to renal insufficiency or endocrine disorders) are
more common than primary polydipsic conditions (e.g., psycho-
SECTION 2 CLINICAL SIGNS
 genic PD). However, the two conditions usually exist concur-
rently (e.g., primary PU with compensatory PD).
The complete evaluation of a patient with a primary complaint
When urine output falls below the normal level, the patient
suggestive of renal or urinary disease often begins with the client
can be described as having oliguria. Anuria is a term to describe
interview. Specific questions to investigate the status of the
 the patient with no urine output. Oliguria and anuria can result
urinary system should include those pertaining to water intake
from acute kidney injury. Additionally, bilateral ureteral obstruc-
(frequency and volume) as well as descriptive characteristics of
tion or urethral obstruction can cause oliguria or anuria.
the patient's urination (ease of urination as well as color, quan-
tity, and frequency of urination). Disorders of the upper and
 control of urination, resulting in leakage of urine. Urinary incon-
lower urinary tract can produce nonspecifc clinical signs includ-
ing anorexia, gastrointestinal (Gl) disturbances, and weight loss.
the normal urethral sphincter mechanism or from pressure in
 Several signs can be helpful in localizing disorders, and the fol-
the bladder becoming greater than the urethral pressure.
lowing terminology is useful in describing clinical signs associ-
 Urinary incontinence must be distinguished from inappropri-
ated with disorders of the urinary tract.
 ate urination associated with PU, dysuria, or pollakiuria. Signs
Lower urinary tract disorders often present with a combina-
 suggestive of true urinary incontinence can include urination
tion of clinical signs including pollakiuria (frequent episodes of 
while sleeping or observing that the animal does not appear to
be aware of the leakage of urine (e.g., not posturing to urinate).
(difficulty urinating). These clinical signs can be suggestive of
 It should be noted that disorders resulting in PD/PU can exac-
 many disorders that affect the bladder and the urethra, including
 erbate urinary incontinence.
292
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 Common causes of urinary incontinence in younger animals
shape of the kidneys, while others may cause problems while
include ectopic ureter(s) or other congenital abnormalities.
leaving the kidney architecture intact. Some disorders are better
detected in blood work, while others are best identified in urine
 spayed females, are typically affected by hormonal responsive
samples. Often, the initiating cause of the CKD cannot be identi-
urethral sphincter mechanism insufficiency (also known as ure-
fed. However, a thorough investigation to find an underlying
thral mechanism incompetence).
cause is beneficial. Potentially treatable disease processes include
Some disorders of the urinary tract can lead to systemic clini-
pyelonephritis, obstructing kidney or ureteral stones, lymphoma
cal signs. Specifically, acute kidney injury may be associated with
(especially in cats), and glomerular diseases. Therapy should be
anorexia, lethargy, and depression. These signs are often a feature
directed toward the inciting cause if possible. Treating the
of chronic kidney disease (CKD), also known as renal insuffi-
underlying disease process may not reverse the existing damage,
ciency (CRI), with poor body condition being a feature, espe-
but it may help to limit further kidney injury.
cially in more advanced stages. GI signs such as vomiting and
There are several consistent findings in patients with CKD.
diarrhea may accompany the clinical signs of acute and CKD.
Most canine and feline patients lose the ability to concentrate
This can be due, in part, to the lack of gastrin clearance by the
their urine when more than two-thirds of the kidney function
has been lost. Creatinine and BUN generally rise with approxi-
and secondary ulceration. Advanced azotemia can produce
mately three-fourths loss in function. Proteinuria and hyperten-
uremic oral ulceration. This is most commonly a feature of feline
 o uissd  u ai ji a e And u
CKD and can present as halitosis as well as ulcerative lesions on
CKD. Cats with chronic kidney disease often far outlive their
the tongue and/or gingiva.
canine counterparts.
A thorough history with an accurate description of the
The International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) has proposed
patient's clinical signs, when presenting with renal or urinary
a four-tier system for staging CKD in order to better determine
problems, will assist the clinician in formulating the diagnostic
a patient's prognosis and treatment (Table 10.3.1).2
plan. This may be especially helpful to the process when deter-
 In its simplest form, the stage is determined by the level of
mining if the problems are behavioral or medical in nature.
kidney function, particularly creatinine. However, the patient's
clinical status also plays an important role in the classification
scheme despite the strict cutoff points for laboratory values.
SECTION 3 URINARY DISEASES
Stage 1 includes dogs and cats with PU and PD, but with normal
blood creatinine. Patients with stage 2 disease are polyuric and
Chronic kidney disease
 is      
patients in stages 1 and 2 may have very high BP, which could
 Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is the most commonly recog-
include hyphema (blood in the eye), sudden blindness due to
nized renal disorder in dogs and cats. CKD is defined as kidney
retinopathy and retinal detachments, lethargy, and weakness.
 damage or decreased kidney function that has persisted for at
Patients with significant protein loss in the urine may show signs
least 3 months. Kidney disease, kidney insuffciency, kidney
of weight loss and a poor hair coat. Careful monitoring is advised
failure, azotemia, and uremia are all terms that have been previ-
in these patients to see if the disease is progressing. Patients with
ously used to describe disorders of the kidney, but CKD is the
 preferred terminology. CKD generally refers to an irreversible
 decreased appetite, PU, and PD. However, many of the signs
and progressive loss of kidney function. Unlike acute renal
improve or resolve with symptomatic therapy. The disease is
failure (ARF), patients with CKD have already sustained perma-
generally progressive in these patients, so careful monitoring
nent injury and have exceeded the maximal amount of compen-
and adjustment of medications is necessary. Stage 4 disease
satory glomerular hypertrophy. In most patients, the kidney
results in clinical signs that are diffcult to control with therapy.
function slowly declines over several months to years as the
kidney damage continues. CKD is managed with supportive
Table 10.3.1  Stages of chronic kidney disease in dogs and cats
care, which often helps to slow the progression of the disease.
 With appropriate management, dogs and cats can often survive
Serum creatinine values (mg/dL)
for long periods of time with a good quality of life.
Uremia and azotemia are important terms used when describ-
Stage
Dogs
Cats
ing kidney disease. Azotermia classically describes blood work
Stage 1
<1.4
<1.6
changes, particularly elevations in blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
and creatinine. In contrast, uremia is a descriptive term that
Stage 2
1.4-2.0
1.6-2.8
encompasses the clinical signs associated with declining renal
Stage 3
2.1-5.0
2.9-5.0
function. Important clinical signs include vomiting, lethargy.
Stage 4
>5.0
>5.0
anorexia, weight loss, halitosis, and neurological abnormalities.
CKD encompasses a wide variety of kidney problems. Some
of the disorders are congenital, while others arise during the
Source: Brown S. Evaluation of chronic renal disease: a staged approach.
Compendium on Continuing Education for Veteninanians 1999; 21:752-763;
patient's life. Some diseases result in changes to the size and
http://www.iris-kidney.com.
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
293
CKD often progresses rapidly when patients enter stage 4. Evalu-
 include mental dullness, lethargy, weakness, anorexia, and im-
ating quality of life issues in these patients is important.
There are a variety of clinical signs associated with CKD both
manifests more severely in young growing patients. Changes in
in dogs and in cats. PU and PD are the predominant signs noted
bone density are most frequently observed, and the bones of the
   q   s    
skull and the mandible are often affected. Bone is reabsorbed
s sd     
from these areas, leading to a soft jaw (rubber jaw) and freely
as part of their disease. Vomiting, gastric ulceration, halitosis,
movable teeth. In particularly severe cases, the jaw can actually
diarrhea, and intestinal bleeding are increasingly more common
fracture. Distortion of the face may also be seen due to the depo-
 in the advanced stages of CKD. Weight loss, muscle tremors,
sition of fibrous tissue where bone has been reabsorbed.
hypothermia, and muscle wasting are other important physical
exam findings. Neurological consequences of CKD may include
Acute renal failure
difficultly walking or stumbling, altered mentation, lethargy, and
seizures. Cats with low potassium due to their kidney disease may
Acute renal failure (ARF)is defined as a rapid loss ofkidney func-
manifest with cervical ventroflexion and a plantigrade stance.
tion leading to the accumulation of nitrogenous waste, fluid
Other signs of hypokalemia include muscle tremors, cramps,
imbalances, and electrolyte disturbances. Approximately 75% of
weakness, and pain. Anemia occurs in patients with CKD because
the kidney function must be altered to increase creatinine. Thus,
 of decreased erythropoietin, a hormone produced by the kidneys
 even a mild rise in creatinine may signal important disruptions in
that is vital in RBC production. Pale gums, lethargy and lack of
kidney function.? As opposed to CKD, acute renal failure is
appetite are important warning signs. Alterations in the calcium
potentiall reversible either by resolution of the injury or by
and phosphorus balance in patients can lead to renal secondary
 adaptation of the kidney (hypertrophy) or by both mechanisms.
 hyperparathyroidism particularly in young dogs and cats.
 Renal azotemia can be categorized as prerenal, renal, or pos-
trenal.4 In some patients, the categories overlap.
Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism
The origin of renal secondary hyperparathyroidism is multifacto-
Prerenal azotemia
rial but may have devastating effects in its advance stages. Phos-
Prerenal azotemia occurs because of insufficient blood flow to
phorus is retained in the blood as renal function declines.
the glomeruli preventing adequate fltering and removal of
 Phosphorus retention is the principal driving force for renal sec-
uremic toxins. Dehydration, hypotension, anesthesia, hypoad-
 ondary hyperparathyroidism because it induces the production of
 renocorticism, trauma, surgery, and shock are just a few of the
 parathyroid hormone (PTH). PTH enhances the release of calcium
 disorders that can reduce perfusion to the kidney. Prerenal azo-
from bone, aids in the reabsorption of calcium from the renal
temia causes a rise in BUN and creatinine, but unlike the other
tubules, and augments the absorption of calcium from the intes-
categories, the urine is generally very concentrated. Prerenal
tines. The combination of hyperphosphatemia and increased
Aq pue soa pn usuadan Aq paean isq si eoz
calcium absorption leads to the formation of calcium phosphorus
 restoring normal BP.
crystals in soft tissues, joints, and vessels. The kidney, stomach,
Renal azotemia
important to note that renal secondary hyperparathyroidism often
starts before phosphorus levels rise outside the normal range.
Renal azotemia results from injury to any part of the kidney
Calcitriol is the most active form of vitamin D. Calcitriol is
(glomeruli, tubules, interstitium, or vessels). Most cases of ARF in
formed in the renal tubular cells. PTH promotes the formation
this category are due to decreased perfusion, toxins, medications,
of calcitriol, and calcitriol in return reduces PTH production
 or infection. Perfusion problems arise for the same reason as
through a negative feedback system. High phosphorus levels
 those described for prerenal azotemia but are typically more
reduce the formation of calcitriol in the renal tubules. Without
 severe and occur for a long duration, resulting in renal azotemia.
the negative feedback of calcitriol, PTH levels rise, leading to
Toxins can damage any part of the kidney. Potential toxins
renal secondary hyperparathyroidism. As CKD progresses, there
 include ethylene glycol (antifreeze), lilies (in cats), grapes, and
are fewer and fewer renal tubular cells to produce calcitriol,
 raisins. Some medications can inadvertently injure the kidneys.
leading to further increases in PTH. Therefore, declining calci-
The renal tubule is particularly sensitive to the adverse effects of
triol levels play an important role in the development of renal
medications. ARF can arise from the use of non-steroidal anti-
secondary hyperparathyroidism.
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), amikacin, gentamicin, ampho-
-aedid Ars n u sno p 
tericin B, chemotherapy drugs, and diuretics, to name a few
roidism include impaired intestinal absorption of the calcium
(Table 10.3.2).
due to low levels of calcitriol. Uremic toxins also accumulate as
 Infectious causes of renal azotemia include pyelonephritis,
renal function declines. Uremic toxins limit the effectiveness of
calcitriol to inhibit PTH secretion.
bacteria Leptospira interrogans, which has a predilection for
 Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism can result in a variety
e Ah si  u n p od 
of visible derangements throughout the body. Clinical signs may
from slow-moving or standing water. Wildlife such as raccoons,
294
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 10.3.2  Causes of acute renal failure
endemic in many parts of the United States and Europe. Lyme
disease is transmitted by the bite of an Ixodes tick Lyme disease
Antibiotics
typically causes fever, lethargy and polyarthritis. However, many
Trimethoprim-sulfa
 s  e    
Gentamicin
ropathy (PLN) and rapidly progressive ARE.? The mechanism
by which Borrelia injures the kidney is likely inflammatory
Amikacin
 g       
Polymyxin 
more information on leptospirosis and Lyme disease, please see
Rifampin 
Chapter 11.
Medications
Postrenal azotemia
Amphotericin B
Postrenal azotemia arises most commonly from obstruction or
Cyclosporine
rupture of the urinary tract. Uroliths or crystalline sludge may
Allopurinol 
 obstruct the ureters or urethra, leading to postrenal azotemia.
 Penicillamine
Obstruction induces back pressure on the kidneys, thereby
reducing glomerular fltration. If the obstruction is long-
NSAIDS
standing, then direct kidney injury or renal azotemia may occur.
Diuretics
Neoplasia, particularly of the lower urinary tract, may also lead
Heavy metals
to obstruction. Rupture of the urinary tract allows leakage of
the uremic toxin into the abdomen and surrounding tissues.
Lead
Although glomerular fltration continues, uremic toxins enter
Mercury
the abdomen and quickly diffuse into the bloodstream. Treat-
Chromium
ment for postrenal azotemia is centered on alleviating the
obstruction or correcting the rupture.
Arsenic
Historical fndings for patients with ARF are variable and are
Toxins
often determined by the length of time that has transpired since
 Ethylene glycol (antifreeze)
the onset of the insult In the early stages of ARF, the patient may
be completely normal. As the injury and uremia progress,
Grapes
 patients often become anorexic and begin to vomit. Lethargy.
Raisins
weakness, and diarrhea are common. The patient may initially
Lillies (cats)
be polyuric, but oliguira or anuria may develop as the severity
of the insult increases. Neurological side effects may also occur
Mushrooms
particularly with toxin ingestion.
Snake venom 
Physical examination findings are often determined by the
Spider venom 
severity of ARF. Halitosis and oral ulceration are noted with
severe azotemia. Enlarged kidneys and renal pain may be noted
Chemotherapeutics
on abdominal palpation. Bradycardia occurs particularly with
Cisplatin 
 sd aq a n d sr a  s
Carboplatin 
the case of obstruction. A rectal examination may reveal a pro-
static or urethral mass causing obstruction. Stones can occasion-
Doxorubicin 
ally be palpated in the bladder or urethra.
Azathioprine
Methotrexate
Urinary tract infections
UTIs most commonly arise from organisms ascending into the
urinary tract from the skin or tissues surrounding the external
opossums, and skunks carry the organism and spread the disease
urinary opening. Bacteria are the most frequently documented
by shedding it in their urine. Water sources may be contami-
A ssn pue iuy iq en aeu  apau i suod
nated by infected urine, but soil, food, and bedding have also
also cause infections. Individual terms have been developed to
been shown to be a source of the disease.56 The peak incidence
describe the location of the infection. They include pyelonephri-
Occurs between July and November.? Leptospirosis organisms
fis (infection of the kidney), ureteritis (infection of the ureter),
induce kidney injury by colonizing and multiplying directly in
cystitis (infection of the bladder), urethritis (infection of the
the renal tubules and interstitum as well as by a direct toxic effect
urethra), prostatitis (infection of the prostate), and vaginitis
on renal cells and secondary inflammation. Lyme disease is
(infection of the vagina). UTIs are more frequently identifed in
caused by the bacterial organism Borrelia burgdorferi and is
females. The urethra is shorter in females, predisposing them to
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
295
considered to have complicated UTIs. Patients with complicated
UTIs generally require longer durations of treatment; 4-6 weeks
of therapy and multiple antibiotics are frequently necessary.
Several other terms have been developed to describe the
nature of UTIs. A relapsed infection is a UTI caused by the same
organism within days to weeks of finishing antibiotics. Reinfec-
tion is another UTI following an initial infection, but with a
different organism. A superinfection occurs in a patient that is
already on antibiotics for a UTI when a second infection with a
different organism is isolated. Patients with indwelling urinary
catheters are at high risk for superinfections.
Many patients with UTIs demonstrate a number of signs.
Symptoms most frequently include pollakiuria, hematuria, and
stranguria. Many patients will urinate inappropriately in the
house. A foul odor or cloudy urine may be associated with infec-
tion. Frequent licking of the perivulvar area may be observed by
Figure 10.3.1  Urine sediment stained with Dip Quick from a patient
with a lower urinary tract infection. Chains of bacteria are readily seen
some owners.
 Physical examination findings in patients with UTIs are
along with degenerative neutrophils. The patient was diagnosed with
an Enterococcus UTI.
usually lacking. Some patients may have perivulvar dermatitis or
evidence of perivulvar saliva staining. Palpation of the abdomen
 is often unremarkable, but caudal abdominal pain may be noted.
A hooded vulva may be observed in patients with recurrent
ascending infection. The vestibule and the vagina also have resi-
infections.
dent populations of bacteria in close proximity with the urethra.
 In cats, urinary infections are more likely in patients over the
Pyelonephritis
age of 10 years.9
 Approximately 70% of UTIs are caused by a single organism.0
Pyelonephritis is defined as an infection of the renal pelvis
The most common gram-negative organisms include Escherichia
(Figure 10.3.2).
coli, Proteus, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas, and Enterobacter." The
Pyelonephritis often results in more severe symptoms when
most common gram-positive organisms include Staphylococcus,
compared with a traditional lower UTI and its treatment is often
Streptococcus, and Enterococcus (Figure 10.3.1).
more complicated. Pyelonephritis generally results from an
UTIs can arise for a variety of reasons. Particularly virulent
ascending bacterial bladder infection, but hematogenous spread
organisms have the ability to overcome normal host defense
 is possible particularly in patients with discospondylitis or
mechanisms. Adaptations that make bacteria more likely to colo-
 sepsis. E. coli is the most commonly isolated bacteria causing
nize the urinary tract may include protective outer layers (cap-
sules, cell walls), structures to increase aftachment and movement 
 tes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism, and chronic kidney disease.
in the urinary tract (fmbriae, flagella), ability to break down
 Pyelonephritis can be acute or chronic in nature. Patients with
  pe suodepe out pue (auond asa) ean
them antibiotic resistant (plasmid-mediated resistance). If the
 suggestive of abdominal pain, lethargy, and vomiting. Foul-
 host defense mechanisms are weakened, then normal resident 
 smelling urine and inappropriate urination may be noted by
bacteria can invade and cause infection. Natural host defenses 
 some owners. Patients tend to be polyuric and polydipsic rather
against infections include concentrated acidic urine, normal
commensal bacterial populations inhabiting the distal urinary
 Advanced cases may present with oliguria or anuria suggestive
tract, frequent normal volume urinations, complete bladder
 of severe ARF. Physical exams in patients with acute disease may
emptying, and antibacterial secretions in the urinary tract
(defensins).
 in patients with chronic pyelonephritis may vary from no pre-
 UTIs may be complicated or uncomplicated. Uncomplicated
 senting complaints to signs of chronic renal failure (vomiting.
UTIs occur in patients that lack structural, neurological, or func-
weight loss, and poor hair coat). Physical exam findings in these
tional abnormalities that may predispose them to infection.2
patients may be unremarkable or the kidneys may palpate small
Most uncomplicated UTIs can be treated successfully with a 10-
and irregular.
to 14-day course of an appropriate antibiotic. Signs of infection
quickly improve within the frst few days of starting antibiotics.
Urolithiasis
Complicated UTIs occur in patients with underlying disease
 processes that make them more susceptible to infection. Cush-
Uroliths, also known as calculi or stones, in the urinary
ing's disease, diabetes mellitus, and CKD are all well-known risk
tract result from supersaturation of urine with particular
296
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
stone-forming substances or crystalline components. The
bladder is a common place for uroliths to form since urine is
stored there for long periods of time, thereby giving the compo-
nents more time to interact. The kidney is another frequent
location for stone (nephrolith) formation (Figure 10.3.3).
The higher the concentration of urolith components and the
longer they are in contact with each other, the higher the risk of
stone formation. Uroliths form around a nidus, which can
consist of white blood cells (WBCs), bacteria, organic matrix, or
crystals. It is possible for the nidus to be made of a lifferent type
of crystal than the rest of the stone. Uroliths can grow slowly
layer by layer or they can increase in size when larger crystals
come together and conglomerate. Other contributing factors to
urolith formation include diet, frequency of urination, genetics,
current medications, and the presence of a UTI.
Many dogs and cats with concentrated urine develop crystals,
but only a small fraction of those patients ever develops a true
has crystals in its urine does not mean that that patient will go
on to develop uroliths.
Preventing or dissolving uroliths is based on the principles of
increasing urine flow and minimizing the particular compo-
nents that form a urolith. Interestingly, there are certain compo-
nents of the urine that actually inhibit the formation of crystals
and uroliths. Inhibitors of urolith formation may be either
ou  ( )  no (sd) n
much is known about urolith inhibitors, this may be a potential
therapeutic area in the future.
Figure 10.3.2
2Ultrasonographic image of a dog with severe
Patients with bladder or urethral stones tend to manifest with
pyelonephritis. The renal pelvis is markedly dilated (dotted white line
signs of lower urinary tract disease. Stranguria, pollakiuria, and
between plus marks). Sediment is also seen ventrally in the dilated
dysuria are common. Hematuria, malodorous urine, and inap-
pelvis (white arrow).
propriate urination may also be signs that are observed by
2009D
B
AcqTm:08
LKID
Figure 10.3.3 Ultrasonographic images of cats with nephroliths (black arrows). (A) Cat with a markedly dilated renal pelvis and central
nephrolith. (B) Cat with nonobstructing diverticular nephroliths.
Chapter 10  Urinary and Renal Diseases
297
 owners. In rare cases, patients can present for a complete urinary
source of struvite urolithiasis because they are able to hydrolyze
obstruction (anuria) or bladder rupture (lethargy, vomiting.
urea to form ammonia and bicarbonate. Ammonia goes on to
 bloated abdomen), particularly if a stone lodges in the urethra.
 precipitate with magnesium and phosphate to form a stone.
Physical exam findings in patients with bladder and urethral
Bicarbonate increases the pH of the urine making struvite
stones can vary widely. Many patients lack any significant physi-
 stones more likely to precipitate. Staphylococcus, Klebsiella, Pseu-
cal findings. In very compliant patients, uroliths may be felt in
domonas, and Proteus are among the most common urease-
the bladder on deep palpation of the caudal abdomen. Ifa urolith
 producing bacteria that are isolated on culture.'5 Bacteria become
 is lodged in the neck of the bladder or the urethra, then a large
incorporated into the urolith as it grows. Recurent urinary
firm and often painful bladder may be detectable. Blood or
 infections are common in patients with uroliths and vice versa;
blood-tinged urine may be present around the vulva or the
patients that get recurrent infections are at high risk for struvite
penile urethra. A urethral stone can occasionally be palpable in
uroliths. Sterile struvite uroliths are extremely rare in dogs but
the perineal region of male dogs or on rectal exam in females.
have been known to occur. * In contrast, feline struvite uroliths
 In rare cases, an abdominal fluid wave can be observed if the
are usually not infection induced.
bladder has ruptured.
The etiology of struvite urolithiasis is likely multifactorial and
includes gender, breed, and dietary factors. Most struvite uro-
liths are radiopaque and can therefore be seen on abdominal
Struvite urolithiasis
radiographs. They can be smooth, spiculated, spherical, and
 Struvite uroliths are formed primarily of magnesium ammo-
 often conform to the shape of the urinary tract where they lodge
nium phosphate and smaller amounts of calcium phosphate. In
(Figure 10.3.4).
dogs, struvite uroliths form most commonly as a result of UTIs.
Struvite uroliths account for approximately 41% of analyzed
Urease-producing bacteria have long been incriminated as a
 stones,7 and they most frequently occur in the lower urinary
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 10.3.4 Different canine urinary stones. (A) Struvite stones. (B) Calcium oxalate stones. (C) Ammonium urate stones. (D) Silica stones.
298
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
tract. Approximately 71-85% of struvite uroliths occur in female
Ammonium urates are radiolucent and are therefore not
dogs."α A longer urethra and a lower incidence of UTIs in male
 readily seen on abdominal radiographs. Urate uroliths are not
dogs likely explain the female predominance. Breed predilec-
frequently associated with infection, but urease-producing bac-
tions include mixed breed dogs, miniature schnauzers, Lhasa
 teria increase the incident of urolith formation. Approximately
apsos, bichon frises, shih tzus, miniature poodles, and cocker
6.4% of all analyzed stones are purine based.17 A diet high in
spaniels.17
purine and acidic urine tends to increase the formation of these
uroliths.
 The Dalmatian and English bulldog are overrepresented.
Calcium oxalate urolithiasis
Genetic defects in urate metabolism have been identifed in the
 Dalmatian and are highly suspected in the English bulldog.23:24
Calcium oxalate uroliths are formed primarily from calcium,
Although all purebred Dalmatians seem to carry the defect, only
oxalate, and varying amounts of calcium phosphate. Calcium
approximately 25% ever develop uroliths.25 A few other breeds
 Oxalate uroliths can be smooth, lobulated, or spiculated.
seem to be at increased risk and include Yorkshire terriers, mini-
These uroliths tend to form on the surface of cellular debris
ature schnauzers, and shih tzus.23.26
in the urine or on other crystals. Calcium oxalate uroliths form
most frequently in the lower urinary tract of dogs and cats.
are also at higher risk of developing urate uroliths. In these
However, most feline nephroliths and ureteroliths are composed
patients, the liver is unable to convert ammonia to urea and uric
of calcium oxalate. Neutered male dogs form more oxalate
acid, leading to higher levels of these substances in the urine.
uroliths than females (approximately 70% males and 30%
females).18.19 Overweight patients are at increased risk Certain
breeds are known to form calcium oxalate uroliths more readily
Other uroliths
and include miniature schnauzers, Lhasa apsos, Yorkshire terri-
Several other uroliths have been observed in the urinary tract
ers, bichon frises, Pomeranians, shih tzus, cairn terrier, Maltese,
but are exceedingly rare. Cystine, calcium phosphate, and silica
 miniature poodles, and Chihuahuas. 18.20
uroliths occur in a very small population of patients.
Most calcium oxalates are radiopaque and can therefore be
Drugs and their metabolites have also been known to form
seen on abdominal radiographs. Calcium oxalate uroliths do not
uroliths. Ciprofloxacin, primidone, and tetracycline uroliths
form as a result of bacterial infection of the urinary tract.
have been previously identifed.27
However, like all uroliths, calcium oxalates may be secondarily
infected. The occurrence of calcium oxalate uroliths in dogs and
 i n          
Prostatic diseases
estimated that approximately 41% of the stones that are removed
 The prostate is a bilobed organ that completely encircles the
from patients are calcium oxalate.'" It is thought that the fre-
proximal urethra and neck of the urinary bladder in male dogs.
quent use of struvite prevention diets may be shifting the dynam-
ics toward the formation of oxalate uroliths.
The prostate is surrounded by a thick capsule. The prostate is the
 In humans, citrate, magnesium,pyrophosphate,glycosaminogly-
only accessory sex organ that produces fluid which nourishes,
can, nephrocalcin, and Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein (THM)
protects, and prolongs sperm survival during it journey in repro-
inhibit the formation of calcium oxalate uroliths.2′ Although not
duction. A testosterone derivative is responsible for the growth.
and development of the prostate. In a neutered male, the prostate
well studied, it is thought that these components also likely play
 a role in dogs. Citrate complexes with calcium and forms a more
is typically very small.
soluble product than calcium oxalate. Magnesium may also
complex with oxalate, limiting the formation of calcium oxalate
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
crystals. As a result, citrate and magnesium are important in the
dietary management of calcium oxalate uroliths.
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is the most common clinical
abnormality of older intact male dogs.28 In BPH, the prostate
gradually enlarges over a dog's lifetime as a result of the influence
Urate urolithiasis
of testosterone and its derivatives. The constant hormonal influ-
ence can lead to the formation of cysts and fluid within the
Urate uroliths are composed of uric acids and its principal salt,
prostate. It is estimated that 80% of intact male dogs over the age
ammonium urate. Purines comprise two of the four nucleotide
of 5 have BPH.2 Unlike humans, BPH tends not to cause any
bases that make up DNA and RNA, but like all nitrogenous
significant signs unless the prostate becomes infected with bac-
wastes, they are still subject to degradation. Uric acid is one of
teria. The prostate is symmetrically enlarged and is nonpainful
the final breakdown products of purine metabolism. Ammo-
on rectal exam.
nium urates tend to be small stones that are smooth and round.
They also tend to have a greenish hue.
Prostatitis
Urates are most commonly found in the lower urinary tract.
Most patients that develop urate uroliths tend to be young to
Prostatitis, or infection of the prostate, is the second most
middle-aged. They occur more often in males than in females.22
common prostatic disorder. Prostatitis can be acute or chronic
Chapter 10  Urinary and Renal Diseases
299
in nature. Acute prostatitis is a rare disorder in dogs. In acute
 incidence of calcium oxalate stones seems to be rising and now
 prostatitis, the prostate tends to be normal in size, but it is often 
comprises approximately 40% of analyzed stones.173 Nonob-
a e si sd  odd n uo d ara
 structive disease occurs in both female and male cats. Approxi-
disorder that is often found in patients with BPH. Patients with
 mately 92% of cats have spontaneous resolution of their signs in
chronic prostatitis can have normal to large prostates on rectal
5-7 days.34.35
Exam. The prostate may or may not be painful on palpation. Mild
 Clinical signs of lower urinary tract disease in cats may wax
asymmetry may also be noted if one side of the prostate is more
 and wane. Signs may include inappropriate urination, strangu-
severely affected.
ria, and hematuria. Many patients are pollakiuric and some may
present for anuria.
Prostatic infections
 Physical exam findings may be negligible in most patients
with nonobstructive disease. The most common finding on
 Infections of the prostate most frequently arise from ascending
examination in patients with obstructive disease is a large turgid
urethral infections. However, hematogenous infections may also
bladder. Occasionally, stones are palpable in the bladder. In
occur. Most prostatic infections are due to E. coli, but Pseu-
males, the penis can be rigid and purple with prolonged
domonas, Proteus, Staphylococcus, and Streptococcus may also be
obstruction.
 isolated.8 Chronic prostatitis is often suspected when a male
patient has recurrent UTIs with the same organism following the
Ectopic ureters
discontinuation of antibiotics. In these patients, the prostate acts
as a reservoir for infection. Antibiotics that cross the blood-
A ureter that opens in a location other than the bladder trigone
 prostate barrier and achieve high concentration in the prostatic
is considered ectopic. Developmental defects in the fetus result
fluid are needed to eliminate the infection.
in a variety of ureteral abnormalities. The location of the ureteral
opening can vary widely and may occur anywhere along the
Lower urinary tract disease in cats
urethra, vagina, or uterus. Ectopic ureters may be unilateral or
bilateral. Extramural ectopic ureters completely bypass the
Lower urinary tract disease in cats has had a variety of names
urinary bladder and directly insert at a more distal location.
over the years. Synonyms include feline lower urinary tract
Intramural ectopic ureters enter the bladder trigone on the
disease (FLUTD), feline urological syndrome (FUS), and feline
external surface but tunnel through the bladder wall to exit at
idiopathic cystitis or feline interstitial cystitis (FIC). FIC is cur-
 more distal locations, particularly in the urethra (Figure 10.3.5).
rently the most commonly used term to identify the disorder.
An ectopic ureter may have one or more openings at its final
FIC affects approximately 4.6% of cats in the United States.29
 destination. Anatomic abnormalities of the urethra, vagina, and
Approximately 45% of cats with FIC will have a recurrence of
vestibule are common in female patients with ectopic ureters.
their disease within weeks to months of diagnosis.3* Indoor cats
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence (USMI) occurs
commonly in patients with intramural ectopic ureters and is
and inactivity are also described risk factors. Environmental
issues including the number of litter boxes, the type of litter,
ureter.
exposure to toys, and the hierarchy of the cats in the household
Ectopic ureters are most frequently diagnosed in female
have also been implicated in the pathogenesis of the disease.
 patients. Although ectopic ureters occur in males, the longer
Recent relocation to a new house, construction, changes in fur-
urethra and urethral sphincter likely result in fewer clinical signs
niture, and visiting houseguests are known stressors that trigger
 and diagnosed cases. A genetic basis is likely because particular
symptoms in some patients. Therefore, the pathophysiology of
 FIC is multifactorial and involves complex interactions between
huskies, Labrador retrievers, golden retriever, Newfoundlands,
the anatomic, hormonal, and environmental factors.
 English bulldogs, West Highland white terriers, fox terriers, Skye
The role of infectious organisms in FIC has been investigated.
terriers, and miniature and toy poodes363 Ectopic ureters have
Viral disease does not seem to be the cause of the disorder in a
 been reported in cats but are exceedingly rare.?
large majority of cats."1 Despite the widely held belief that many
Owners of patients with ectopic ureters frequently report
FIC cats have a UTI, an important study showed that less than
 intermittent or continuous dribbling of urine. Many owners
2% of cats are found to have bacteria in their urine when a urine
 resort to the use of diapers to avoid constantly cleaning up urine.
culture was performed at the time of diagnosis.2 Therefore,
The incontinence associated with ectopic ureters occurs regard-
 infectious organisms are unlikely to play a role in the majority
less of whether the patient is awake or asleep.
of cats with FIC.
Physical examination findings may include a urine-soaked
FIC occurs most commonly in young to middle-aged indoor
 perineum or evidence of urine staining. A perivulvar dermatitis
cats. FIC can be obstructive or nonobstructive. Obstructive
 and saliva staining may also be noted. Erythema of the vulva
feline idiopathic cystitis occurs most frequently in male cats. The
 may occur and is often the result of urine scalding. Some patients
narrow penile urethra of male cats predisposes to obstruction
have normal physical exams.
with plugs, stones, or by urethral spasms. Urethral plugs are
  s     
typically composed of struvite crystals and a protein matrix. The
tory urography or ultrasonography. However, both methods
300
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
(A)
（8
Figure 10.3.5 Ureteral orifice as seen from the bladder during cystoscopy. (A) Nomal ureteral orifce.(B) An intramural ectopic ureter tunneling
in the bladder wall with multiple openings in the bladder neck.
have a tendency to underdiagnose the problem. Recent studies
maraners, German shepherds, and roftweilers.*? A few cases are
have compared traditional imaging to that of contrast-enhanced
actually congenital and are associated with poor development of
computed tomography (CT) scans, fluoroscopy, and cystoscopy
the urethral sphincter muscle. These patients may show signs as
for the detection of ectopic ureters. Contrast-enhanced CT scans
early as a few months of age. USMI is rare in males and appears
and cystoscopy were found to be the most successful in identify-
to be unrelated to castration. A few female cats have been identi-
 ing the type and location of ectopic ureters.9.40
fed with the problem.43
Ectopic ureters have long been a surgical disorder. Surgery
 Owners frequently report puddles of urine where the patient
remains the treatment of choice for extramural ectopic ureters.
has been resting or sleeping. The amount of urine varies widely
In these patients, the ureter must be relocated to the bladder.
and may range from a few drops up to a large volume. Patients
However, recent advances in minimally invasive technology
have now afforded new options in the treatment of intramural
they are completely awake or moving around. The urine is gener-
ectopic ureters. Laser ablation of the tissue dividing the tun-
ally concentrated. No odor or blood should be noted when
 neling ectopic ureter from the urethra and the bladder has
examining the urine.
been shown to be effective in correcting intramural ectopic
 iq an r ae sg xa ris
ureters. With surgery and laser ablation, the problem remains
include a small to large pool of urine after sleeping or lying
that the urethral sphincter muscle may be compromised by
down. The perineum may be urine soaked and there may be
either the ectopic ureter itself or with the correction procedure.
 perivulvar dermatitis or evidence of saliva staining.
Some patients require medical management for sphincter
Urethral sphincter incompetence may be confrmed with a
 incompetence or urethral collagen injections to help maintain
urethral pressure profle. A normal sphincter will result in a focal
continence.
pressure spike on the profle. In patients with sphincter incom-
petence, this pressure spike is greatly reduced or absent. The
equipment to perform profle studies is only available in some
Urethral sphincter mechanism
referral hospitals; therefore, the diagnosis is often made on the
incompetence
patient's clinical history.
Several medical therapies are available for patients with
USMI is the most common cause of incontinence in middle
sphincter incompetence.  Various alpha-adrenergic agonists
aged female dogs. The sphincter is a muscular segment in the
 proximal urethra that holds urine in the bladder. The sphincter
commonly used for their ability to increase urethral smooth
is under control of the sympathetic nervous system, but estrogen
muscle tone. Phenylpropanolamine is effective in approximately
influence is also important in maintaining normal function.
85-90% of female dogs with USMI.445 Estrogens (diethyl-
Sphincter incompetence often follows an ovariohysterectomy
stilbestrol [DES] and estriol) are commonly used in the treat-
   s   si  n
ment of the disease because of their ability to increase urethral
responsive incontinence. It is estimated that up to 20% of spayed
closure pressure. Estrogens also increase the density and respon-
 aq oi aas saop paanq sareT ipaioane aie saop aea
increased risk as are boxers, giant schnauzers, Dobermans, Wei-
effective in approximately 50-65% of patients.* Because estro-
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
301
 gens increase the number of adrenergic receptors, females that 
 age or older.49 Females are affected more offen than males.
are refractory to a single medication may respond better to com-
 Beagles, Walker hounds, collies, and English foxhounds are
bination therapy. Patients that fail to respond to combination 
 at increased risk 49.5 In cats, Abyssinians, Siamese, and Orien-
therapy should ideally have a pressure profle performed.
 tal shorthairs have a predisposition to the disease.51 With
Cystoscopic injections of bulking agents have been investi-
 the acquired form of the disease, amyloid is primarily depos-
gated in patients with refractory incontinence. Collagen is
 ited in the glomerulus and leads to profound proteinuria. In
injected into the periurethral tissue, which narrows the lumen,
 patients with heritable amyloidosis, Chinese shar-peis and
allowing for more effective urethral sphincter closure. Approxi-
Abyssinians, amyloid is deposited primarily in the interstitium.
tad yo a s m 2idi sp yo - Ar
 The heritable disease manifests at a younger age and as CKD,
 Repeated injections are required in some patients months to
 but proteinuria is typicall lacking.52
years down the line.
A number of complications may arise in patients with chronic
 PLN. Weight loss can be gradual in patients with moderate pro-
Protein-losing nephropathy
teinuria or may be dramatic in patients with severe disease
Hypertension is also commonly identifed and may result in
 PLNs comprise a variety of disorders affecting the microscopic
retinal detachment and sudden blindness in patients with PLN.
subunits of the kidney, the nephrons. The glomerulus, renal
Blood clots, or thromboembolic disease, rank as the most severe
tubule, and interstitium are components of the nephron that are
 and life-threatening complication of glomerulonephritis. Blood
 most commonly affected. In a normal kidney, serum proteins are
clots to the brain or lungs are a common cause of death in
 patients with PLNs. Fluid retention in the tissues, or edema,
In patients with PLN, serum proteins leak into the urine, indicat-
often occurs in patients when the albumin is less than 1.5 g/dL.
ing either an insufficiency of absorption or impaired fltration.
 Pitting edema is readily recognized in the distal limb and on the
Albumin is the predominant protein in the urine of dogs and
ventral abdomen.
cats with proteinuria. Severe or prolonged PLNs may lead to
 Physical exam findings in patients with PLN are often unre-
CKD in dogs. PLNs are rare in cats. Amyloidosis and glomeru-
markable in the early stages. In more advanced cases, evidence
lonephritis are the two most commonly recognized PLN
of muscle wasting and weight loss may be noted. Many patients
disorders.
have a dull or thin hair coat. Retinal hemorrhage and focal to
complete retinal detachments can be seen on an ophthalmic
examination. In severely affected patients, pale mucous mem-
Glomerulonephritis
branes, pitting edema, or ascites may be noted. Poor profusion
Glomerulonephritis is characterized by inflammation of the
of the limbs may be observed in patients with thromboembolic
glomeruli and often involves the deposition of immune com-
disease.
plexes within the glomerular capillary walls. The deposition
 of immune complexes leads to proliferation and thickening of
Urinary neoplasia
the glomerulus and eventual glomerular cell death. Proteinuria
predominants early in the disease process, but patients may
The most common tumor affecting the urinary tract of dogs
 progress to CKD if sufficient numbers of glomeruli are lost. The
and cats is transitional cell carcinoma (TCC, as it is more com-
immune complexes in glomerulonephritis are thought to be
monly known).53 TCCs tend to arise from the bladder neck
 produced as a result of chronic inflammation, chronic infection,
(trigone) or the urethra. Squamous cell carcinomas and leiomy-
 aa ar q i oe aq  s
patients with the disease. Hereditable forms of glomerulone-
compared to TCC.54 Genetics and exposure to pesticides and
phritis exist, which suggests genetic aberrations as an underly-
insecticides have been associated with increased risk of tumor
 sd n sa s u sd s   
 development.55 Scottish terriers, West Highland white terriers,
 glomerulonephritis is quite wide, but most patients tend to be
 Shetland sheepdogs, beagles, and dachshunds have a known
weilers, greyhounds, Bernese mountain dogs, English cocker
to TCC.
spaniels, and soft-coated wheaten terriers are at an increased
 Stranguria, pollakiuria, and hematuria are the most common
risk 48
 symptoms of patients with bladder and urethral tumors. Most
patients have to urinate more frequently or, in rare cases, patients
Amyloidosis
may present with oliguria or anuria if the tumor obstructs the
outflow of urine.
Amyloidosis can be a systemic disease, but has a predilection
 Physical exam findings may be minimal or may reveal a large
for the kidney and liver. In renal amyloidosis, beta-pleated
 distended bladder. A rectal exam should always be performed in
sheets of amyloid A protein are deposited in the kidney. Amyloid
 patients that are straining to urinate or have blood in their urine.
is thought to be deposited as a result of chronic inflammation, 
 A rectal exam may reveal a thickened irregular urethra. Enlarged
chronic infection, or neoplasia, but hereditary forms of the 
sublumbar lymph nodes may also be palpable dorsal to the
           
bladder.
302
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 The most common tumor affecting the prostate is prostatic
Collection methods
adenocarcinoma.57 TCCs have also been known to develop
within the prostate. Prostatic tumors may occur in both intact
Urine can be collected by one of three possible methods: cysto-
and castrated male dogs. Castration does not prevent the devel-
centesis, urinary catheterization, or by free catch. It is very
opment of prostatic carcinomas and may actually increase the
risk.5* Prostatic adenocarcinomas are virtually unheard of in
affect the interpretation of the results. In general cystocentesis is
cats. Most patients are older than 10 years of age at the time of
the preferred method of collection because there are fewer con-
diagnosis.57 Although bladder and prostate cancers are malig-
founding factors to take into account when interpreting the
nant, they typically do not spread until late in the disease. Meta-
results. However, there are some exceptions to this general rule.
static sites include sublumbar lymph nodes, lumbar vertebrae,
For instance, a free-catch sample may be preferable to a sample
and lungs.59
collected by cystocentesis or catheterization in cases where
Clinical signs of patients with prostatic tumors are similar to
hematuria is being investigated or if a TCC of the bladder is
patients with TCCs. Stranguria, hematuria, and pollakiuria pre-
suspected. A midstream free-catch sample is also preferable if
dominate. Physical exam findings often include a large, frm
there is a contraindication for performing a cystocentesis. In
prostate. The prostate is typically asymmetric or irregular.
some cases, it is useful to compare urinalysis results from samples
collected first by free catch and then by cystocentesis (e.g., when
However, a normal-sized prostate does not exclude a carcinoma.
 Sublumbar lymphadenopathy may also be palpable dorsal to the
trying to localize the origin of hematuria, pyuria, or proteinuria
bladder.
within the urogenital tracts).
'seo pue shop qoq ul arei Aiaupaanxa ane siou Aaup
Free catch
However, most renal tumors are malignant when they do
develop. Lymphoma is the most common kidney tumor in cats,
When collecting a free-catch urine sample, a midstream sample
and a large percentage of affected cats are feline leukemia virus
is preferable; there is less bacterial contamination from normal
(FeLV) positive." Renal carcinomas and adenocarcinomas are
urogenital flora. Samples collected into a sterile container from
the most common tumors in dogs.61 Male dogs are slightly more
the midstream may still have false-positive urine culture results
likely to be affected A genetic predisposition is known particu-
due to contamination from external hairs on the prepuce or
larly in German shepherds.6 Tumors tend to be bilateral in cats
vulva. Urine samples brought in by owners are rarely suitable for
and in German shepherds.
urine culture and obtaining a free-catch midstream urine sample
Clinical signs for patients with kidney tumors include weight
from a cat can be challenging. The use of a litter pan with non-
loss, anorexia, and vomiting. Hematuria may occur but is
absorbent liter or a litter box specifically designed to capture
     s a i 
urine (e.g., Smart Cat Box") may be helpful for collecting urine
u remaaii aq o spua Aaup au uoded pupqe uo
for a urinalysis when culture is not required.
carcinoma or adenocarcinomas and is more likely to be smooth
Urinary catheterization
in the case of lymphoma. Skin nodules are common in German
shepherds with kidney tumors.62
Collection of urine by urethral catheterization is straightfor ward
in most male dogs, but heavy sedation is typically required in
cats and in female dogs, making this an impractical collection
SECTION 4 URINARY
method in many cases. Catheterization to collect a urinary
DIAGNOSTICS AND
sample is also appropriate if the patency of the urethra needs to
be assessed. The risk of creating a UTI from catheterization is
THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS
higher in female dogs compared with male dogs, and hematuria
can occur if the proper technique is not followed These factors
Urinalysis
may need to be accounted for when interpreting the results of a
urinalysis. It is also good practice to discard the first few mililit-
A urinalysis is an essential component to the workup of a patient
ers of urine when urine is collected by catheterization as this may
with suspected disease involving the urinary system or in any
be contaminated by debris carried into the bladder by the cath-
patient that is systemically sick from any cause. Not only is a uri-
eter. See Chapter 14 for more information on urinary catheteri-
 nalysis invaluable in helping to determine the underlying cause of
zation techniques.
azotemia (e.g., prerenal vs. renal), but there are also cases where
Cystocentesis
the only useful diagnostic clues are provided by the urinalysis
(e.g., proteinuria and glucosuria without hyperglycemia).
Collection of urine by cystocentesis is considered the gold stand.
A fresh (within 3h of collection), nonrefrigerated urine
ard when a urine culture is required to rule out a UTI. Cysto-
sample should ideally be used for analysis. Crystals can form
centesis samples can be collected in most awake feline and
with refrigeration, and casts and celular elements degenerate
canine patients provided there are no clear contraindications.
rapidly at room temperature. If analysis will be delayed, the urine
Absolute contraindications  for performing a cystocentesis
should be refrigerated and allowed to return to room tempera-
include a suspected coagulopathy, a pyoderma involving the
ture prior to completing the urinalysis.
ventral caudal abdominal skin, a suspected devitalized bladder
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
303
wall secondary to prolonged urethral obstruction, and an unco-
and assessment of their biochemical renal parameters (BUN and
operative patient that cannot be manually restrained for the 
creatinine).
procedure. See Chapter 14 for more information on urinary
Based on the USG, urine can be categorized as isosthenuric
cystocentesis techniques.
or hyposthenuric. Iosthenuric urine has a concentration that is
similar to that of plasma (USG of 1.008-1.015). The presence of
Components of a urinalysis
persistent isosthenuria may be suggestive of primary CKD,
Cushing's disease, diabetes mellitus, or hypercalcemia. Hypo-
There are three components to a urinalysis: physical examina-
sthenuric urine has a concentration less than that of plasma, result-
tion, chemical (dipstick) analysis, and sediment evaluation.
ing in a specific gravity of <1.008. The presence of hyposthenuria
does not distinguish between causes of PU and PD. Hyposthenu-
Gross examination of urine
ria can be the result of central diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic
 Normal urine is yellow due to the presence of urochrome pig-
diabetes insipidus, medullary washout, and psychogenic PD.
 ments. Normal urine should also be clear and transparent.
However, hyposthenuria eliminates CKD because hyposthenuria
Cloudy urine indicates turbidity from increased cells, crystals,
requires functional kidneys to create extremely dilute urine.
protein, lipid (cats especially), sperm, and/or mucus. Dilute
 It must be stressed that normal cats and dogs can have a USG
urine is often pale yellow. However, urine color should never be
that is isosthenuric or hyposthenuric, so without a reliable
used in place of a urine specific gravity (USG) for the assessment
 history of PU/PD, this finding should not be overinterpreted.
of urine concentration. Discolored (e.g., red, orange, or blue)
urine can be attributed to a variety of endogenous or exogenous
Chemical analysis: dipstick
pigments or compounds. For example, bilirubin can impart an
orange to green color to urine; increased RBCs or pigmenturia
Urine dipstick analysis is a convenient method of assessing
from the abnormal presence of hemoglobin or myoglobin in the
several biochemical aspects of urine. Dipstick analysis can be
urine will impart a red color to urine. In addition, certain drugs
done on a fresh unspun urine sample. If the urine is turbid or
bloody, then the urine should be centrifuged and the superna-
(e.g., mitoxantrone chemotherapy, sulfonamides) or dietary con-
stituents (e.g., beets) can also discolor urine. When abnormal
tant should be used for dipstick analysis.
urine color is reported, a thorough history of the pet's diet,
 medications, and environment should be gathered. In addition,
Urine pH
 inspection of the color of the patient's serum and the supernatant
The urine pH dipstick pad can measure urine in the 5-9 pH
of their urine after centrifugation may be helpful for investigat-
range. The pH of normal cat and dog urine is typically within
ing the underlying cause, especially when trying to differentiate
the 5.5-7.5 range. However, urine pH can be affected by diet,
pigmenturia from true hematuria as the cause of red-colored
urine. If hematuria is responsible, RBCs will setle out in spun
in isolation. Causes of acidic urine (pH < 5.5) can include a
urine, leaving a clear supernatant. The serum of the patient
meat-based diet, metabolic or respiratory acidosis, catabolic
(spun hematocrit or blood tube) will also be clear and transpar-
state, and administration of acidifying drugs (potassium phos-
ent. If pigmenturia is the cause of the discoloration, the urine
phate, ammonium chloride, etc.). Causes of alkaline urine
supernatant will remain discolored. The serum will be discolored
asan Aq pasneo In e ‘sun panois pio apnioul (sz < Hd)
if hemoglobinuria is the causative agent but not if myoglobinuria
 producing bacteria, exclusive consumption of a vegetarian diet,
is responsible.
metabolic or respiratory alkalosis, and medications (acetozola-
 Urine has a normal mild odor that is imparted by the presence
mide, bicarbonate). Urine pH can be important if the patient has
of volatile fatty acids. Common causes of abnormal odor include
uroliths since the pH can influence the solubility of various types
ketonuria (sweet odor), very concentrated urine, or infected
 of urinary crystals and therefore can influence their detection in
urine.
the urine sediment analysis.
 USG, performed preferably on the supernatant of centrifuged
urine, is used to assess the concentrating ability of the kidneys
Urine glucose
and is measured with a refractometer. The USG can range from
1.001 to 1.080, but specifc gravities >1.030 (dogs) and >1.035
The regent test strip on the urine dipstick is specifc for glucose.
(cats) are indicative of adequate tubular function in a dehydrated
 The test pad provides a semiquantitative assessment of the
or concurrently azotemic animal. Storage of urine does not affect 
glucose concentration in the urine above a concentration of
measurement of the USG. It is important to realize that because 
 80 mg/dL. Normal urine should not have any detectable glucose.
the USG varies with many nonrenal factors (diet, water intake,
 Glucosuria can occur with concurrent hyperglycemia when the
O shop io Ds eou, ann ou si ae (saseasip reuarxa
 renal threshold for glucose (dogs about 180 mg/dL and cats about
determine the clinical significance of a USG, it is important to
 300 mg/dL) is exceeded. This can occur with diabetes mellitus,
 d     i  e  g
 stress or excitement in cats, or following IV dextrose adminis-
taking into account their hydration status, history of fluid losses 
 tration. Glucosuria that occurs with concurrent normoglyc-
(vomiting, diarrhea, polyuria, burns, etc.), prior treatments (e.g..
 emia can be caused by a renal tubular defect secondary to severe
diuretics, steroids, fluid therapy), suspected disease processes,
 acute tubular necrosis from renal ischemia, pyelonephritis,
304
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
nephrotoxins, or from a renal tubular metabolic defect such as
evaluate the color of serum after centrifugation of a microhema-
Fanconi's syndrome.
tocrit tube (see earlier section).
False-positive reactions for occult blood or hemoglobin may
Urine ketones
occur if the sample is contaminated with oxidizing agents (e.g..
The urine from normal dogs and cats should be negative for
disinfectants, if urine is collected from a table or floor). False-
ketones. Ketone bodies are formed when there is increased fatty
 negative reactions may occur if RBCs have settled to the bottom
acid catabolism as a result of a shift in energy production. This
 of a urine sample and only the unspun supernatant is analyzed.
occurs most commonly with diabetic ketoacidosis. However,
In this situation, a disparity between the dipstick and sediment
starvation, high protein or low carbohydrate diets, and disorders
evaluation is expected. The opposite disparate reaction, with a
associated with hypoglycemia may also lead to increased ketones
positive occult blood dipstick and a negative sediment analysis,
in the urine.
can occur if RBCs are lysed in dilute (USG < 1.008) or alkaline
urine.
Urine biirubin
Protein
The urine from normal cats should always be negative for
bilirubin, while small amounts of bilirubin in dogs may be con-
The dipstick reagent pad that detects protein is semiquantitative
sidered normal. Biliruburia may occur whenever there is either
and only detects albumin. Changes in the color of the pad cor-
excessive formation of bilirubin (e.g., immune-mediated hemo-
respond to estimated protein concentrations, and results are
     l  
reported as trace (5-20 mg/dL), 1+ (30mg/dL), 2+ (100 mg/dL),
bilirubin (e.g., acute liver failure or biliary obstruction). Bi-
3+ (300 mg/dL), or 4+ (1000mg/dL). Very alkaline or highly
lirubinuria usually occurs before clinical evidence of icterus is
concentrated urine may cause false-positive results. The reagent
noted. When there is excessive formation or impaired hepato-
test pad cannot detect globulins or Bence Jones proteins seen in
biliary excretion of bilirubin, bilirubin is readily filtered by the
some cases of lymphoma and multiple myeloma. Pigmenturia
glomerulus and the renal tubular threshold for reabsorption is
can interfere with the reagent pad and with the estimation of
easily overwhelmed, leading to increased amounts in the urine.
protein concentrations.
The significance of proteinuria for all qualitative and semi-
Urobilinogen
quantitative tests must always be interpreted in light of the USG
This test is of questionable clinical value. In theory, a negative
and the urine sediment findings. If the urine sediment is inactive
(i.e., there are no signs of inflammation or infection), then a
result on the dipstick could reflect complete biliary obstruction.
 In reality, the reagent strip cannot detect an absence of urobilino-
 positive dipstick result for proteinuria should be confirmed with
gen. Increased amounts of urobilinogen can be seen with liver
a sulfosalicylic acid (SSA) turbidimetric test or confirmed and
disease or hemolytic anemia; however, the correlation is poor.
quantified with a urine protein creatinine ratio (UPC). Regard-
less of the level of proteinuria detected, protein loss at any level
Occult blood
is always more significant in the presence of dilute urine.
The urine from normal dogs and cats should be negative for
Leukocytes
blood, but a false positive can result from sample collection.
 Hematuria may ocur with hemorrhage from sampling trauma,
Analysis for the detection of WBCs in the urine, also known as
pyuria, is more reliable on a sediment evaluation than as a color
reproductive tract disease, or diseases of the urinary tract.
change on a reagent test pad. Significant numbers of WBCs in
Increased RBCs are expected on the sediment examination for
the urine indicate active inflammatory disease somewhere in the
cases with true hematuria. Most urine dipsticks have a test pad
 labeled occult blood that can detect between 5 and 20 RBC/mL
urinary tract or possibly in the genital tract. The urine dipstick
 of urine. Large numbers of intact RBCs will cause a homogenous
reagent pad has a very low sensitivity in dogs and therefore a
high rate of false-negative results. A positive result is indicative
color change on the blood reagent test pad. Results for occult
of pyuria in dogs, but a negative result does not rule out pyuria.
blood may be described in semiquantitative terms based on the
 degree of color change using some urine dipsticks.
In cats, the test has low specificity (i.e., a high rate of false posi-
tives), so it is not considered diagnostically useful.
Hemoglobinuria can also lead to positive reaction for occult
 blood on the dipstick. Hemoglobinuria can occur if intact RBCs
Nitrites
hemolyze in the urine (e.g., in dilute urine with a USG < 1.008
and in alkaline urine), or if hemoglobin levels in the blood are
The nitrites test is not suitable for use in small animal patients.
elevated (e.g., IMHA, zinc toxicosis, genetic disorders, infectious
 Nitrites are produced by bacteria in urine. However, this test
agents, hypophosphatemia).
p  so pe s  ss  pa p si ds
Myoglobinuria that occurs with trauma (e.g., crush injury),
ing UTIs.
toxins, or ischemic injury of muscles (rhabdomyolysis) can also
Dipstick USG
lead to a positive reaction for occult blood on the dipstick To
distinguish hematuria from hemoglobinuria or myoglobinuria,
This method is not very useful because the highest value typi-
cally detected is between 1.025 and 1.030, which is below the
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
305
 USG cutoff point for adequate renal concentrating ability in dogs
Epithelial cells
and in cats. Even with less concentrated urine samples, the test
is still not very accurate in dogs and in cats.
It is normal to see occasional small epithelial cells in the sedi-
ment of a urine sample. Squamous cells in a free-catch urine
Urine sediment examination
sample most often are insignificant and result from normal
sloughing of uroepithelial cells from the distal urethra or genital
Urine sediment examination is always done on a centrifuged
tract. Increased numbers of epithelial cells can be seen in asso-
urine sample. A standardized volume of urine should be centri-
ciation with infection, inflammation, irritation, and neoplasia of
ds au ug  (da t-on) ds mo e pe p
tant is then decanted off and the remaining sediment is
 the urinary or urogenital tract.
Increased numbers of transitional epithelial cells can originate
resuspended in 0.5 mL of the spun urine. A drop of sediment is
 from the urothelium of the renal pelvis, ureters, urinary bladder,
then pipetted onto a clean microscope slide and a coverslip
applied. Examination of unstained urine samples is preferable;
 or proximal urethra. Low numbers are acceptable, but high
 numbers indicate mucosal disruption from inflammation or
however, one drop of a commercial sediment stain (e.g., Sedi-
 neoplasia. Transitional cells are very reactive and can display
Stain°) can also be added to a drop of resuspended urine sedi-
 atypical features, making it diffcult to distinguish inflammation
ment to enhance contrast. Microscopic evaluation at low and
 high power is indicated for both unstained and stained samples.
from malignancy. Because of this, urine cytology is not consid-
 ered ideal for confrming the diagnosis of TCC of the urinary
Cellular elements are quantifed by counting the number per
bladder. If an increased number of transitional cells are seen in
high power field The method of urine collection should be
the urine sediment, then imaging (e.g., ultrasound or contrast
 noted as this will influence the interpretation of the sediment
cystourethrogram) of the urinary tract is indicated.
findings.
A veterinary bladder tumor antigen test (VBTA) can also be
Cellular elements
used as a possible screening test for TCCs. However, this test is
 s   aq     s  
RBCS
non-neoplastic disorders of the urinary tract.
Normal urine contains very few RBCs (0-5 RBCs/hpf) and
Sperm
 increased numbers indicate hematuria. Hematuria may be
microscopic or macroscopic and can be caused by urinary (e.g..
Sperm are commonly seen in the urine of intact male dogs and
trauma, urolithiasis, neoplasia, inflammatory disease, parasites,
cats.
idiopathic renal hemorrhage) and nonurinary diseases (e.g.
Bacteria
coagulopathy).
In some cases, comparison of the urine sediment findings
Normal urine is sterile. However, >10* rods and >10? cocci must
from samples collected by free catch and by cystocentesis may
be present per milliliter in order to be microscopically visible.
be helpful for localizing the source of bleeding within the urinary
So the microscopic absence of bacteria on a sediment evaluation
tract. Iatrogenic hematuria may result from cystocentesis, and if
does not rule out a UTI. Any bacteria seen on a sample collected
suspected, this should be accounted for when interpreting the
results. Resubmission of a free-catch sample a few days later can
ment of a sample collected by free catch or catheterization is
clarify if the hematuria is from the cystocentesis or not.
more difficult to interpret because the bacteria can represent
normal flora. To confirm a suspicion of bacteriuria, it is advisable
White blood cells
to stain an air-dried sample of the urine sediment with either a
Low numbers of WBCs (<5/hpf) in the urine sediment are
Gram or modified Wright's stain. Both of these staining tech-
 i   (   
 niques are superior for detecting bacteriuria compared to micro-
is indicative of inflammation from either an infection or sterile
scopic examination of an unstained urine sediment sample. If a
inflammatory process within the urinary tract. For free-catch
UTI is suspected, urine should be collected by cystocentesis for
samples, pyuria can indicate inflammation anywhere in the
culture and sensitivity unless there are clear contraindications to
urinary tract as well as in the genital tract (e.g., vagina, vulva, or
avoid a cystocentesis.
 prepuce). Pyuria in a patient with clinical signs compatible with
Microbes other than bacteria
lower urinary fract inflammation (e.g., stranguria, pollakiuria,
hematuria, dysuria), or systemic signs suggestive of upper
 Yeast and fungi are occasionally seen in the urine sediment
urinary tract inflammation (anorexia, fever, lethargy, vomiting.
examination, especially in samples collected by free catch. These
PU), should prompt a culture of the urine. In addition, for
 usually represent contaminants (from the stain or from the skin,
 patients with medical or anatomical conditions known to pre-
if the sample was collected by free catch). However, if an animal
dispose them to UTIs (e.g., patients with diabetes mellitus or
 is immunosuppressed or has been on long-term antibiotics, then
hyperadrenocorticism, patients with spinal injuries, or patients
the presence of yeast or fungi could be signifcant. Fungal organ-
on long-term corticosteroids therapy), a urine culture may
isms can also be identifed in the urinary bladder of patients
be warranted even in the absence of pyuria on the urine
with systemic mycoses (e.g., blastomycosis or aspergillosis).
sediment.
An enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for detection of blastomyces
306
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 dermatitidis galactomannan antigen in body fuids, including
Waxy casts
 i ro si in r  q s 
Waxy casts may represent the final stage of degeneration of
humans, and this test is also now currently used to aid in the
granular casts and are most often seen with very severe and long-
early diagnosis of blastomycosis in dogs.
standing renal disease. While cylindrical, waxy casts possess a
Casts
higher refractive index than granular casts; they are also more
rigid, demonstrating sharp edges, fractures, and broken-off ends.
Casts are cylindrical molds of the renal tubules composed of
aggregations of matrix mucoprotein and varying cell types and
Fatty casts
 numbers. Small numbers of hyaline or granular casts seen on
 These are a type of granular cast with increased lipid inclusions;
low power (one to two per low power feld [lpfl) are normal.
they are most often seen in patients with nephrotic syndrome
Increased numbers of casts, referred to as cylinduria, can be seen
and diabetes mellitus. They can be normal in cats.
with diseases affecting the kidneys (e.g, pyelonephritis, ischemic
damage to the kidneys associated with hypovolemic shock). The
Urine crystals
different types of casts that can be seen in the urine sediment
include hyaline, cellular (epithelial, white cell, or red cell), granu-
Crystals can form in the urine when the composition (e.g., pH,
lar, waxy, and fatty casts. The significance of each type of cast is
USG, mineral composition) of the urine favors oversaturation of
outlined below. Monitoring for casts is indicated for patients
certain minerals. Visualization of urine crystals in the sediment
receiving a potentially nephrotoxic drug, as detection of casts
examination will also depend on the urine pH and temperature.
can provide the earliest evidence of drug-induced tubular injury.
Significance of crystalluria depends on the type of crystal and
All types of casts degenerate with urine storage, so sediment
other clinical findings (Table 10.4.1).
Caution should be used when interpreting the significance of
analysis of fresh urine samples is essential if casts are to be
detected.
crystals seen in stored urine as they may be artifacts of delayed
processing. Caution must also be used in interpreting the sig-
Hyaline casts
nificance of some types of crystals (e.g., struvite, amorphous, and
These are the most common type of cast and are composed
calcium oxalate) that can be found in the urine from normal
primarily of Tamm-Horsfall mucoproteins (THMs) that are
patients without signs of lower urinary tract disease. Overinter-
secreted by tubular epithelial cells. Small numbers may be seen
preting the importance of crystals in this setting commonly leads
with fever, dehydration, or heavy exercise. They are also common
to inappropriate use of diets formulated for preventing crystal-
with renal diseases associated with proteinuria. Hyaline casts are
luria and uroliths formation.
n pusun ue u pass asa aq us pun jnedsu
Miscellaneous sediment findings
 sample. Using Sedi-Stain will make them appear pink and more
visible.
Contaminants such as plant grains or pollens, starch granules
 Given the ubiquitous presence of Tamm-Horsfall protein,
(from surgical gloves), and cat litter can occasionally be seen in
 other cast types are formed via the inclusion or adhesion of other
the sediment. This is especially true from cases where the urine
 elements to the hyaline base.
was collected by free catch.
Cellular casts
Lipiduria
These casts can contain epithelial cells, RBCs, or WBCs and are
Increased lipid droplets can be normal in urine, especially in
always abnormal. Epithelial cell casts signify severe tubular
cats. However, increased fat droplets can also been seen in the
disease from toxins or hypoxia. This cast is formed by inclusion
urine of patients with diabetes mellitus or nephrotic syndrome.
 or adhesion of desquamated epithelial cells from the tubule
Complete blood count and serum
RBCs within casts is always pathological and is strongly indica-
biochemistry profle
tive of glomerulonephritis or vasculitis from various causes.
They can also be associated with renal infarction. WBC casts
Complete blood count
suggest inflammation. They are seen most commonly in patients
with acute bacterial pyelonephritis but can be seen with other
Hematology is mainly used to assess for evidence of anemia,
forms of interstitial nephritis. Bacterial casts are also occasion-
dehydration, and inflammation in patients with diseases
that primarily or secondarily involve the kidneys or that cause
in association with loose bacteria, WBCs, and WBC casts.
hematuria.
A complete blood count (CBC) will allow assessment of
Granular casts
the degree of anemia in patients with CKD or in patients with
These casts contain debris associated with tubular cell necrosis
severe hematuria. A nonregenerative, normocytic, normochro-
and degeneration; increased numbers indicate tubular injury
mic anemia is common in patients with moderate to severe
  e    ix 
CKD (IRIS stage IHI or IV). The pathogenesis of this anemia is
shaped and of a higher refractive index than hyaline casts.
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
307
Table 10.4.1 Urine crystal types, characteristics, and significance
Crystal type
Characteristics and significance
Bilirubin 
"Red or yellow elongated spicules"; low numbers may be normal in a dog, but if there are high numbers or if
seen in urine from a cat, they signify liver disease or hemolysis.
Struvite
"Prism or coffin lid" crystals; form in alkaline urine, most often seen in normal dogs but also may be present with
png peou aq osge Aeu Aaun 'sieo ui 'lin leeeg sunpoidaseain e ym uoeosse ui siseiuon suaunouo 
can be associated with urolithiasis.
 Calcium oxalate
"Envelopeshaped" crystals; can be normal in dogs and cats, but if there is support for ARF and large numbers 
dihydrate
are present, ethylene glycol should be considered.
 Calcium oxalate
monohydrate
Ammonium
saop ueewjea u! punoy uato 'suun aueyje u! woy Alensn inq Hd Aue u! wioy ueo Aayn iadeys aldde uoul,
urate
and in some English buldogs. Concurrent urolithiasis may or may not be present. Urates also occur in animals 
with severe liver insufficiency (e.g., portosystemic shunts, liver failure).
Cystine
"Hexagon" crystals; forms in acidic urine and is never a normal finding. Its presence indicates that the kidneys
are not reabsorbing certain amino acids properly due to an error in metabolism. Documented in many canine
 breeds, but the Newfoundland, English bulldog, and dachshund are predisposed. Also reported in cats.
Amorphous
are xanthine crystals that occur following administration of allopurinol for urate urolithiasis.
Cholesterol
Rare crystal type in animals and has been seen in normal dogs.
 Drug crystals 
The most common drug crystal is the sulfonamide crystal, which forms in acidic urine. Other drugs that can form
crystals in urine include radiographic contrast dyes, ampicillin, and primidone.
Source: http://ahdc.vet.cornell.edu/clinpath/modules/ua-rout/crystsed.htm.
The principal cause of the anemia is erythropoietin deficiency
CBC is also important for ruling out idiopathic or secondary
resulting from irreversible kidney damage. Other factors that
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia as the cause of hematuria
 contribute to the anemia include decreased RBC life span due to
in a patient.
 constant exposure to uremic toxins, circulating inhibitors of
erythropoiesis caused by uremia, decreased erythropoiesis from
Serum biochemistry profile
 iron deficiency or nutritional abnormalities, hemorrhage from
uremic gastritis, or increased bleeding tendency due to uremic
A serum biochemistry profle can be used to assess the degree
thrombopathy.
of azotemia, hypoalbuminemia, as well as electrolyte distur-
Alternatively, a CBC can permit detection of polycythemia
bances that can occur with diseases that affect the kidneys.
that can occur as a result of a paraneoplastic syndrome associ-
Elevations in serum urea and creatinine concentrations (azo-
ated with excessive erythropoietin secretion by some renal neo-
temia) are used clinically to assess renal GFR. Azotemia of renal
plasms (e.g, lymphoma, fbroma, or renal carcinoma) or can
 origin only provides a crude estimate of GFR because blood
occur as an appropriate response to sustained renal hypoxia (e.g.
work abnormalities do not begin to occur until >75% of the
unilateral renal artery thrombosis).
nephrons are lost or injured. This is especially true early in the
A leukocytosis with or without a left shift, plus or minus toxic
 course of kidney disease when large changes in GFR cause only
change, can be seen with infections of the kidneys (e.g., bacterial.
minimal increases in the concentrations of urea and creatinine.
or fungal pyelonephritis) or the prostate (e.g., acute or chronic
In contrast, small changes in GFR can create large increases in
prostatitis). An inflammatory leukogram may also be seen with
the concentrations of urea and creatinine late in the course of
a uroabdomen or neoplasms of the urogenital tract. Infections
renal failure.
of the lower urinary tract (i.e., the bladder and urethra) do not
Urea is considered a crude estimate of GFR for several reasons.
commonly cause abnormalities on the CBC except in rare cases
First, production of urea by the liver and subsequent excretion
(e.g., emphysematous cystitis with rupture).
by the kidneys does not occur at a constant rate. Second, some
Thrombocytopenia may be seen in septic animals, in patients
urea is reabsorbed by the renal tubules after filtration has already
with certain infections that may involve the kidney (e.g., lept-
occurred. Finally, the serum urea concentration is affected by too
ospirosis), and in animals with prostatitis or renal neoplasms. A
many nonrenal factors. For example, levels may be increased
308
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
postprandially, following a GI bleed, with a high protein diet, in
have urine specifc gravities >l.045, and some animals with
states of increased protein catabolism (e.g., fever, starvation, sep-
glomerular disease and renal azotemia may have USGs > 1.035
 ticemia) and following administration of some catabolic drugs
(dogs) or >1.040 (cats). In addition, animals with other causes
(e.g., steroids). Decreased serum urea can be seen with a low
of PU/PD may have a reduced USG (<1.030 dogs and <1.035
 protein diet, liver insufficiency (failure or portosystemic shunt),
cats) but may be azotemic from prerenal causes.
or following administration of anabolic steroids that decrease
 protein catabolism.
 Serum creatinine concentrations provide a better crude index
Interpretation of serum urea/creatinine
 of GFR because it is produced at a constant rate from the deg-
concentrations
radation of phosphocreatine in muscle; it is freely filtered by the
Renal azotemia occurs when the total GFR of the kidneys is
glomerulus; it is not reabsorbed by the renal tubules; and it is
reduced to <25% of normal. However, azotemia is a relatively
affected by fewer nonrenal factors. Muscle wasting and muscle
crude measure of renal GFR and is fairly insensitive for the
necrosis can affect serum creatinine values, but diet does not
detection of early renal disease. Trends in serial BUN and creati-
affect serum creatinine. As a biochemical indicator of GFR, it
nine values are important in monitoring renal function.
has an advantage over urea in that it is not affected by the renal
With prerenal azotemia, the azotemia is usually a consequence
tubular flow rate.
of reduced renal perfusion (e.g., severe dehydration and hypovo-
Another limitation for using elevations in urea and creatinine
lemia). Other less common causes of prerenal azotemia include
to assess GFR is that they cannot distinguish between prerenal,
GI fluid loss, high protein diets, extensive tissue necrosis, and
renal, and postrenal causes of azotemia. The magnitude of
the administration of some drugs (e.g., glucocorticoids). If azo-
increase in urea and creatinine concentrations cannot predict
 temia is entirely prerenal in origin, then the kidney function is
 acute versus chronic disease, progressive versus nonprogressive
completely normal; however, prerenal azotemia maybe superim-
 dlisease, or the cause of the underlying renal problem.
posed on renal or postrenal azotemia. The key feature of prerenal
Assessment of the severity of renal disease and the localization
azotemia is that the degree of azotemia will be only mild to
of the underlying cause for azotemia should ideally always be
moderate (creatinine < 4mg/dL, BUN < 80 mg/dL), and the
done by evaluating the USG prior to fluid therapy and must take
concurrent USG should be >1.030 in dogs and >1.035 in cats. If
into account any clinical signs of dehydration. A history of fluid
the USG is greater than these minimums in a cat or dog that is
losses from vomiting, diarrhea, and severe PU, and physical
dehydrated, then it is suggestive of adequate kidney function. If
examination fndings such as sunken eyes, exaggerated skin tent,
 prerenal azotemia is severe and is not corrected in a timely
prolonged capillary refil time, tachycardia, or poor peripheral
fashion, then decreased renal perfusion may give rise to renal
pulses provide evidence of possible dehydration or hypovolemia.
ischemia and, ultimately, renal azotemia.
Urine should ideally be collected prior to the administration of
With renal azotemia, the azotemia results from ARF and
drugs that may induce diuresis because the resulting dilute USG
or CKD. Prerenal or postrenal azotemia may exist simulta-
can delay attempts to localize the cause of azotemia and possibly
neously. The key feature of renal azotemia is that it is accom-
delay the diagnosis of renal disease.
panied by a USG that is <1.030 in a dog or <1.035 in a cat,
 By using information about the hydration status and the USG,
although the degree of azotemia can be variable. It is not uncom-
it is often possible to determine the underlying cause of azotemia
mon for the USG to be in the isosthenuric range (1.007-1.015),
 in a patient. See Table 10.4.2 for criteria on the classification of
but it does not drop below 1.007. An exception to the rule
azotemia as prerenal, renal, or postrenal. There are a few impor-
includes any patient with a disease that impairs the ability
tant exceptions to the general rules. Cats with renal failure can
of the kidney to concentrate urine (leading to PU/PD) and
Table 10.4.2 Localization of azotemia
Clinical feature
 Prerenal azotemia
Renal azotemia
 Postrenal azotemia
Azotemia
Mild to moderate
Mild to marked 
Mild to marked
Possible evidence of dehydration
on physical examination
Urine specific gravity
>1.030 dogs
<1.030 dogs
variable
>1.035 cats
<1.035 cats
Often 1.007-1.015
Physical signs of urinary tract obstruction
Absent
Absent
Present
and/or signs of urinary tract rupture
Response to fluid therapy
Azotemia resolves in 1-2 days
Partial or no
Complete, partial to no
resolution of azotemia
resolution of azotemia
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
309
is associated with prerenal azotemia (e.g., diabetes mellitus,
the hypocalcemia in cats with a urethral obstruction is not
hypoadrenocorticism).
With postrenal azotemia, the azotemia occurs when there is
phatemia may contribute.
interference with excretion of urine from the body as a result of
Mild hypercalcemia can be seen with prerenal azotemia
either an obstruction in the excretory pathway that affects both
resulting from dehydration and is also recognized in a small
kidneys or a tear or rupture of the excretory pathway (uroabdo-
 proportion of cats and dogs with CKD. Hypercalcemia seen with
 men). The magnitude of postrenal azotemia can vary, but typi-
         
cally, the values are markedly elevated. If the cause of postrenal
 calcium but not ionized calcium. Severe hypercalcemia from
 azotemia is not corrected, renal damage can result. Typically,
 other causes (e.g., cancer, granulomatous disease, hypervitami-
 clinical fndings include a distended turgid bladder, unproduc-
ae on pea ose ues (spierediadq Ared io  sisou
tive stranguria, hydronephrosis, or fluid-flled abdomen with a
or chronic renal failure or can predispose a patient to calcium-
history of recent trauma.
based uroliths.
Electrolyte abnormalities with
Other biochemical abnormalities
urinary diseases
Hypoalbuminemia, hypercholesterolemia, and possibly eleva-
Because of the kidneys' central role in water balance and electro-
tion of triglycerides are serum biochemical abnormalities that
lyte homeostasis, electrolyte abnormalities are not uncommon
can be seen in patients with glomerular disease. When these
with diseases that affect the kidneys. Electrolyte abnormalities
biochemical changes are accompanied by peripheral edema or
may result from GI signs associated with uremia (vomiting
body cavity effusions, nephrotic syndrome exists.
and diarrhea), from the increased loss of electrolytes in the
Mild to severe metabolic acidosis is common with ARF or
urine of patients with renal disease that have severe PU/PD,
CKD. A low bicarbonate concentration on the serum biochem-
or from anuria that results in decreased renal excretion of
istry panel is expected with metabolic acidosis. The metabolic
electrolytes.
acidosis associated with renal failure results from the limited
ability of the failing kidney to secrete excess hydrogen ions,
and hyperphosphatemia are all common electrolyte abnormali-
decreased tubular bicarbonate reclamation, and disordered renal
ties seen with different disorders that affect the kidneys.
ammonia production in the surviving nephrons. Chronic acido-
Hyperkalemia may be seen with ARF, uroabdomen, urethral
sis can promote nausea, anorexia, vomiting, weight loss, and
obstruction from a tumor, uroliths, or protein mucus plugs.
 protein malnutrition, all of which can be detrimental for the
Hyperkalemia can also be seen in patients with chronic renal
patient.
failure. It is important to remember that moderate to severe
hyperkalemia can lead to life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias.
Proteinuria
Hypokalemia is a relatively common abnormality with CKD,
especially in cats (10-30% incidence). Hypokalemia results from
Proteinuria refers to any type of protein (e.g., albumin, globulins,
inadequate intake and increased renal loss (PU). Hypokalemia
Bence Jones proteins) detected in the urine. Proteinuria, when
can result in muscle weakness (stiff gait, ventroflexion of the
it occurs, can be classifed as prerenal, renal, or postrenal based
neck), decreased renal responsiveness to ADH, and possibly pro-
on the underlying cause. Proteinuria may also be classified as
gression of renal injury, especially in cats. Hypokalemia is also
 physiological or pathological. Quantifcation of proteinuria is
common in patients with postobstructive diuresis following cor-
 indicated for suspected glomerular disease.
rection of a urethral obstruction.
Hyperphosphatemia is another abnormality that can be seen
Prerenal proteinuria
on the biochemistry panel for patients with prerenal, renal, and
 or postrenal azotemia. The elevation in the serum phosphorous
Prerenal proteinuria can occur with strenuous exercise, seizures,
concentration typically correlates well with the degree of azo-
 or a fever. The mechanism responsible for physiological pro-
 temia. The importance of hyperphosphatemia is that it helps
teinuria is not completely understood; however, transient renal
 initiate development and progression of secondary renal hyper-
vasoconstriction, ischemia, and congestion may play a role.
parathyroidism and may predispose a patient to metastatic cal-
 Other causes of prerenal proteinuria occur when pathological
cification of soft tissues when the product of the serum total
disease states release proteins small enough to be filtered by the
calcium and phosphorus is greater than 60.
glomerulus (e.g., hemoglobin, myoglobin, immunoglobulin
Severe hypocalcemia, characterized by low ionized calcium,
light chains). IMHA, rhabdomyolysis, and dysproteinemias
can be seen with acute renal failure secondary to ethylene glycol
associated with either lymphoma or plasma cell neoplasia are
toxicity. Mild hypocalcemia, typically with normal ionized
examples of disease states that can lead to such pathological
calcium, is also common in cats and in dogs with moderate to
prerenal proteinuria. In such cases, proteinuria results when the
 amount of the low molecular weight proteins filtered by the
urethral obstructions, and in this setting, hypocalcemia may
 glomeruli overwhelms the reabsorptive capacity of the proximal
exacerbate the cardiac effects of hyperkalemia. The etiology of
tubules.
310
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Postrenal proteinuria
analysis and the SSA turbidimetric test; and two quantitative
methods, the UP:C ratio and the measurement of 24-h urine
Postrenal proteinuria most frequently occurs in association with
 protein excretion. Regardless of which method is used, urine
lower urogenital tract inflammation or hemorrhage. The urine
protein detection or concentration must always be interpreted in
 sediment findings usually show evidence of underlying inflam-
light of the urine sediment and the concentration of the urine as
mation (e.g, pyuria, hematuria, bacteriuria, and increased
measured by the USG. The more dilute the urine, the more
numbers of transitional epithelial cells). A urine culture may be
 potentially significant the proteinuria (e.g., 1+ protein with a
required to conclusively rule out a UTI as a possible cause of
1.020 USG is potentially much more significant than 1+ protein
postrenal proteinuria.
with a 1.045 USG). The urine sediment (ideally with urine culture
results) can be useful for determining the underlying cause of the
Renal proteinuria
 proteinuria (e.g., inflammatory disease vs. glomerular disease).
The two semiquantitative methods used to detect proteinuria,
Renal proteinuria most commonly results from one of two major
the urine dipstick analysis and the SSA turbidimetric test, are
mechanisms. The first and most important is a disruption of the
both subject to false-negative and false-positive results. These
 glomerular filtration barrier, which results in an increased
tests are best viewed as screening tests, and if they indicate the
amount of protein in the renal filtrate. The second is impaired
presence of renal proteinuria/albuminuria, then further testing
 reabsorption of filtered plasma proteins by the proximal renal
 to quantify the amount of urine protein excretion should be
 tubular epithelial cells as a result of tubulointerstitial disease. In
pursued. Many laboratories use the SSA turbidimetric test to
some cases, tubulointerstitial proteinuria may be accompanied
confrm positive reactions for protein on a urine dipstick test.
by normoglycemic glucosuria and increased fractional excretion
 For feline urine samples, both the urine dipstick and the SSA test
of electrolytes. Renal tumors and pyelonephritis are other causes
perform poorly as screening tests for the detection of proteinuria
of renal proteinuria.
and appear to be of minimal diagnostic value because of an
In healthy animals, properties of the glomerulus are important
unacceptably high number of false-positive results. On the basis
for restricting the filtration of albumin, blood cells, and other
of these data, detection of albumin in the urine of feline patients
large proteins on the basis of size, charge, and shape. Disease
 s   e    s 
states that involve or target the glomeruli (e.g., glomerulonephri-
species-specific microalbuminuria ELISA test (e.g., E.R.D.-
tis, amyloidosis) can alter the size and or charge selectivity of the
HealthScreen Urine test) enables detection of low concentra-
glomerular filtration barrier and can lead to proteinuria. Such
tions of albumin in urine, also referred to as microalbuminuria.
Microalbuminuria is defined as urine albumin between l and
indirectly targets the glomerular filtration barrier or with vascu-
30mg/dL. These concentrations cannot be routinely detected
 lar injury or inflammation that leads to secondary damage to
using the urine dipstick method.
   ( s i) sa 
Proteinuria detected by the use of the urine dipstick or SSA
 glomerular disease is proteinuria in the face ofan “inactive? urine
screening tests (or both) is often confirmed and quantitated by
sediment (lack of inflammatory changes) and lack of evidence
the use of either a UP: C ratio or an immunoassay for albuminu-
of prerenal sources of proteinuria. Renal proteinuria that is mod-
 ria. Both the UP:C and urine albumin: creatinine ratios pre-
 erate to severe is almost always from glomerular disease.
formed on spot urine samples have been shown to accurately
In a healthy patient, the renal tubules will almost completely
reflect the quantity of protein or albumin, respectively, that is
 reabsorb any smaller proteins that are filtered by the glomeruli.
excreted in the urine over a 24-h period. Given the reliability of
This reabsorption occurs through an active process termed endo-
the tests, it has eliminated the previous requirement to collect
cytosis. When the rate of endocytosis is exceeded, excess protein
urine for 24h in order to quantify proteinuria.
will not be resorbed by the tubule and will subsequently be lost
The UP:C ratio can also be multiplied by 20 to give the mil-
in the urine. Tubular proteinuria may occur with excessive pro-
ligram per kilogram of protein that is being lost in the urine per
duction of small-molecular-weight proteins like Bence Jones
day. Dogs and cats are considered to be negative for proteinuria
 proteins or with damage to tubular epithelial cells (e.g., nephro-
when the UP:C is <0.2. If the UP:C ratio is between 0.2 and 0.4
toxic damage, chronic tubulointerstitial disease). The magnitude
for a dog and between 0.2 and 0.3 for a cat, the patient is con-
of proteinuria is usually mild with tubular proteinuria (<1 g/day),
sidered to have borderline proteinuria. If the UP: C ratio is ≥0.5
and the proteins lost are typically composed of only low molecu-
and ≥0.4 for dogs and cats, respectively, and pre- and postrenal
 lar weight proteins (polypeptides and amino acids).
causes of proteinuria have been ruled out, then the patient is
As a result of the mechanisms discussed, only a very small
considered to have overt proteinuria that is consistent with
 amount of protein is normally present in urine of normal dogs
either glomerular or tubulointerstitial renal disease. A UP:C
 and cats. Albumin is the predominate protein that is lost in
pe ieuad papiaoid uae dop e 1o ieo e 1a ui 0'z< oa
diseases that affect the glomerulus and lead to proteinuria.
postrenal causes have been ruled out, is strongly suggestive of
glomerular disease. Proteinuria that is believed to be a result of
Detection of protein in urine
glomerular disease, determined to be persistent on three or more
Detection of proteinuria can be done by one of four possible
Occasions 2 weeks or longer apart, is considered highly signif-
mechanisms: two semiquantitative methods, the urine dipstick
 cant and warrants further investigation for the underlying cause.
Chapter 10  Urinary and Renal Diseases
311
 In these patients, nonspecifc treatments for glomerular disease
Table 10.4.3Diseases or conditions associated with systemic
are indicated if no underlying cause is found. Severe proteinuria
hypertension
(UPC > 4-5) determined to be of glomerular origin warrants
Hypertension 
immediate investigation for an underlying cause and nonspecific
treatments if no underlying cause is found.
Dogs
Cats
 In the past, it has been recommended that urine be collected
by cystocentesis for the determination of the UP: C ratio in order
Chronic kidney disease
Chronic kidney disease
to avoid inaccurate results because of postrenal diseases such as
urethral tumors or vaginitis. However, results of a recent study
Acute kidney disease
indicate that dogs with inactive urine sediment can also be cor-
Hyperadrenocorticism
rectly classified with proteinuria according to the IRIS staging
Idiopathic
Idiopathic
system when urine samples are collected by free catch.
latrogenic
latrogenic
It has been reported that UP:C ratio measurements on the
same urine using different methodologies (dry vs. wet chemis-
Diabetes mellitus
 Diabetes mellitus
tries) may not be comparable. So, if measurements are being
Obesity
Obesity
done serially in the same patient for monitoring purposes, it is
advisable to use the same lab and test each time. For patients
 Primary hyperaldosteronism 
Primary hyperaldosteronism
with confrmed proteinuria resulting from glomerular disease,
Pheochromocytoma
Pheochromocytoma
any change in the magnitude of proteinuria assessed by serial
Hypothyroidism
 Hyperthyroidism
measurements of a UP:C ratio must be interpreted in light of
the patient's serum creatinine concentration. This is important
because proteinuria may decrease with progressive renal disease
as the number of functional nephrons decreases. Decreasing
uted to a clinical disease, condition, or medication (exogenous
 proteinuria in the face of stable serum creatinine suggests
glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and phenylpropanolamine)
improving renal function, whereas decreasing proteinuria in the
(see Table 10.4.3). Secondary hypertension is the most common
face of increasing serum creatinine suggests disease progression.
cause of high BP in dogs and in cats. A diagnostic workup
Special procedures such as immunoelectrophoresis and
including a CBC, serum biochemistry profle, urinalysis,
 protein electrophoresis are available to confrm Bence Jones pro-
 imaging, and possibly testing for certain endocrine disorders is
teinuria with multiple myeloma. Urine protein electrophoresis
 often required to establish if there is an underlying cause for the
can also be used to distinguish tubular and glomerular proteinu-
 hypertension. Only after this is done, and no underlying cause
ria if required.
 is identified, can it be concluded that the patient has idiopathic
hypertension.
Significance of proteinuria
 Sustained increased systemic arterial blood pressure (SBP)
results in injury to other tissues; this is commonly referred to as
The complications of moderate to severe proteinuria associated
end-organ damage. The kidney, eyes, heart, and brain are con-
with glomerular disease may include hypoalbuminemia, edema,
sidered the organs most at risk for severe injury from sustained
ascites, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, and hypercoagula-
hypertension.
bility. Preliminary evidence in dogs and in cats suggests that
 proteinuria can cause glomerular and tubulointerstitial damage
As far as the kidney is concerned, sustained increases in
SBP affects the glomerular capillary beds leading to injury
and can result in progressive nephron loss in patients with pre-
and possibly the loss of nephrons; this is typically manifested
as glomerular atrophy, proliferative glomerulonephritis, and
 mild proteinuria (UP:C > 0.43) has been shown to be a negative
 glomerulosclerosis. In a patient with preexisting kidney disease,
 prognostic indicator for survival. Proteinuria has also been asso-
 this damage will enhance the decline in renal function and may
ciated with an increased risk of mortality attributable to all
 lead to proteinuria.
causes in cats. In dogs with naturally occurring CKD, the relative
 Routine measurement of BP should be a part of the physical
risk of uremic crises and risk of mortality was approximately
three times greater in dogs with UP:Cs greater than 1.0 com-
monly associated with systemic hypertension (including CKD)
 pared with dogs with UP:Cs less than 1.0.
tension can be clinically silent. BP should also be measured on
Blood pressure
a regular basis in any patient, regardless of their age, that
has a disease(s) known to potentially cause hypertension (e.g.-
Hypertension refers to a sustained increased in systemic arterial
kidney disease, diabetes mellitus). Measurement of BP is also
BP. Hypertension can be classified as either primary or second-
 indicated in any cat or dog with clinical signs or physical exami-
d  d s  i   
     s 
hypertension that occurs in the absence of an identifable cause.
(e.g, epistaxis, deranged mentation, sudden blindness) and in
Secondary hypertension exists when hypertension can be attrib-
 any patient prescribed a medication that is known to affect BP.
312
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
In addition to the variability associated with BP instrumenta-
When an indirect BP measurement device is used in a feline or
tion, the personality of the pet and the pet's tolerance of handling
 canine patient, it should have been designed and validated for use
and restraint, there is also some variance in BP with respect to
in that species. A standard protocol should always be followed to
breed, body condition score (lean vs. obese), age, and health
help ensure accuracy of results and to allow for reliable compari-
status of the patient.
son of serial measurements in the same patient. Having one or
 It has been recommended to categorize hypertension based on
two technicians do all the measurements also helps ensure accu-
the patient's risk of developing subsequent end-organ damage. If
racy. These individuals should be properly trained on how to use
the BP is <150/95 mmHg, then there is minimal risk for develop-
the device and should be skilled at low stress restraint and han-
ing end-organ damage and can therefore be classifed as mild.
dling of animals. Measurements should be done in a quiet room
Antihypertensive therapy is not recommended for a patient with
and should only be taken after the pet has had 10-15 min to accli-
mild hypertension. Risk for end-organ damage is still considered
matize to their new surroundings since stress and anxiety can
mild if the BP is 150-159/95-99 mmHg. Close monitoring is
produce falsely elevated readings ("the white coat effect"). The
recommended, but antihypertensive medication is not necessar-
patient should be restrained in a comfortable position in either
ily indicated. Ifthe BP is between 160-179/100-119 mmHg, then
lateral or sternal recumbency. The cuff location will need to be
there is a moderate risk for end-organ damage. Most animals in
determined on an individual patient basis. If the cuff is placed on
this category, particularly those with evidence of end-organ
the forelimb, it should be at the level of the radius. If it is placed
damage or secondary hypertension, are candidates for antihyper-
on the hind limb, the cuff should be placed proximal to the hock.
tensive therapy. If the BP is >180/120 mmHg, hypertension is
If the tail is used, the cuff is placed near the base of the tail.
considered severe and antihypertensive therapy is always indi-
An appropriately sized cuff should cover approximately 40%
cated because the risk of end-organ damage is very high. Under-
of the circumference of the limb or the tail. The cuff size, site of
lying diseases that may be causing secondary hypertension
the cuff placement, and the patient's stress level should be noted
should be identifed and treated whenever possible while con-
in the medical record for future reference. The cuff, despite its
tinuing to monitor BP in any animal with a BP > 160/100 mmHg.
location on the limb or tail, should be at or near the level of their
right atrium. This may involve elevating the limb during meas-
Incidence and implication of hypertension
urement if the patient is sitting down. The cuff needs to be snugly
associated with renal disease
wrapped around the limb or tail and the sphygmomanometer
attached. A series of three to seven consecutive measurements
Systemic hypertension is common in dogs and in cats with renal
disease. It has been reported to occur in 60-69% of cats with
should be taken, and the individual values for the diastolic,
mean, and systolic pressures should be averaged. In most cases,
A uisua s-g' m sop o %eh 0n Te u pue z C
the first measurement may need to be discarded. Measurements
be present at any stage of CKD. Serum creatinine concentrations
that are widely disparate are unlikely to be reliable. If the meas-
do not directly correlate to BP. Therefore, hypertensive cats and
urements do not seem accurate, the procedure should be repeated
 s       s
later the same day when the animal is less stressed or on another
to mildly elevated BUN and creatinine.
occasion. For some patients, having their owner present may
Possible mechanisms involved in renal disease associated
have a calming effect and may facilitate acquisition of the meas-
hypertension  include increased vascular responsiveness to
urements, but in other cases, the exact opposite is true. When
noradrenaline, increased cardiac output, increased peripheral
vascular resistance, renal secondary hyperparathyroidism, and
using a Doppler device, only the systolic BP should be recorded.
Recent evidence, particularly in cats, suggests that systolic BP is
increased activity of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
the most important determinant of hypertensive tissue damage.
Once hypertension has developed, it accelerates injury to the
Using this device, 5-10 readings are typically recorded and an
kidneys, resulting in a vicious cycle of glomerulosclerosis and
further loss of nephrons. Increased intrarenal vascular resistance
 at the site of application of the Doppler crystal and ultrasound
as a result of glomerulosclerosis may further exacerbate the
gel applied to the appropriate site. The Doppler crystal is placed
development of hypertension associated with renal disease.
 over the palmar or plantar artery distal to the cuff and proximal
Dogs with renal failure and high systolic BP have been
to the metacarpal or metatarsal pad on the caudal aspect of
reported to be more likely to develop a uremic crisis, to die, or
the foot.
to undergo continued decline in renal function. In one study,
The normal BP reference ranges for dogs are as follows, based
dogs with more severe hypertension had significantly lower
 on an average of five studies using an oscillometric device for the
GFRs, higher UP:C ratios, and higher renal lesion scores than
measurement of the BP:
dogs with less severe hypertension.
140 mmHg systolic; 100 mmHg mean, and 80 mmHg diastolic
Measurement of blood pressure
The normal BP reference range for cats is as follows, based on
Measurement of SBP can be accomplished directly by intra-
an average of four studies using a Doppler device for the meas-
arterial catheterization or indirectly by devices that incorporate
urement of the BP:
 a compressive cuff. In the clinical setting, indirect devices are
most commonly utilized.
140 mmHg systolic
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
313
any bacterial growth on culture should be considered signifcant.
Urine culture
However, for some patients with lower urinary tract disease,
collection of a sample by cystocentesis may be difficult, and it
Bacterial UTIs are quite common in dogs; it is estimated that
may be necessary to collect urine for culture by catheterization
14% of all dogs will develop at least one UTI during their life-
or from the less desirable midstream free-catch voided sample.
time. In contrast, the incidence of bacterial UTIs in cats is quite
 In those cases, ideally, the external genitalia of the patient should
low, especially relative to the increased incidence of lower
 be cleaned and the perivulvular fur clipped prior to collection
urinary tract signs. Older cats (>10 years of age) are much more 
to lessen the chances of contamination of the urine sample.
likely than younger cats to develop a UTI. Most UTIs in dogs
 Urinary catheterization in male dogs can typically be done
and cats are caused by a single pathogen (75%); polymicrobial
without sedation. However, sedation is typically required in
infections with two (18%) or three (6%) uropathogens are less
female dogs and cats. Sterile lubrication and a sterile catheter
common. Normal aerobic bacterial flora of the skin and colon
should always be used and the procedure should be performed
cause most UTIs, and the route of infection is usually ascending
aseptically.
from the perineum, vagina, or prepuce. Hematogenous infection
Urine must be collected into a sterile container if it is to be
 (spread by blood) and direct extension from penetrating wounds
used for culture. Care must be taken to collect, preserve, and
are less common routes of infection. E. coli is the most com-
transport the urine sample in a sealed container to avoid con-
mon bacterial isolate of UTIs in dogs and cats. Other common
tamination, proliferation or death of bacteria. Processing of the
bacterial isolates include coagulase-positive Staphylococcus spe-
urine for culture should begin as soon as possible since death of
cies, Kebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Entero-
some fastidious bacteria may occur within an hour of collection.
bacter species, and Proteus mirabilis. Anaerobic, viral, parasitic,
 If the urine cannot be cultured immediately, the samples should
and fungal UTIs are very rare.
be refrigerated at 4°C. Samples can be stored for 6-12h if
Patients with any of the following conditions are predisposed
 processing is delayed. Freezing of urine samples should be
to develop a UTI: anatomic abnormalities involving the urinary
avoided because this can destroy bacteria. If a Mycoplasma or
 system (e.g., “pelvic bladder” USMI), spinal disorders causing
 Ureaplasma infection is a concern, special culture media is
urine retention, urolithiasis, neoplasia, previous urinary tract
required (consult your local laboratory).
catheterization, patients on immunosuppressive drugs, or pa-
In some cases, tissue biopsies from the urinary tract (bladder
fients that have certain endocrinopathies (diabetes mellitus,
 mucosa or renal biopsies) collected under aseptic conditions
hyperadrenocorticism). Even in the absence of clinical signs
may be cultured, and positive cultures of any bacteria are indica-
 suggestive of a UTI, a urine culture may be warranted in these
tive of a UTI regardless of the number of bacteria present. For
patients.
 patients with urolithiasis, it is recommended that a bladder
Most UTIs involve the lower urinary tract. Most animals
mucosal biopsy as well as the center of an aseptically retrieved
with lower UTIs will present for pollakiuria, hematuria, and
urolith be cultured for bacteria. This is important even in cases
dysuria, but these patients lack systemic signs of illness Findings
where a prior urine culture has been negative.
on the urine sediment examination generally support the suspi-
cion of a UTI, including pyuria, hematuria, proteinuria, and
Types of urine cultures
bacteriuria.
UTIs that involve the upper urinary tract often result in non-
There are basically two types of urine cultures: quantitative and
specific systemic signs including partial or complete anorexia,
qualitative.
vomiting, weight loss, fever, depression, and possibly abdominal
  q d si an n  
 pain. The presence of casts (especially WBC casts or rarely bacte-
 MacConkey (gram-negative) and/or blood agar plates. Follow-
rial casts) is reliable evidence of renal inflammation, but they are
ing incubation, individual colonies are identified on the basis of
 not commonly seen with pyelonephritis. Other laboratory find-
 colony morphology, Gram staining, and standard biochemical
 ings may include neutrophilic leukocytosis with or without a leff
 reactions. The number of bacteria (colony-forming units per
shift or a nonregenerative anemia if the infection is chronic.
milliliter of urine) is estimated in order to allow differentiation
 Prerenal or renal azotemia may be seen with pyelonephritis but
 of uropathogens from possible contaminants. The collection
is not expected with simple cystitis. Findings on the urine sedi-
 method needs to be accounted for when interpreting quantita-
 ment that are consistent with inflammation such as pyuria, pro-
tive urine culture: >10? organisms/mL for cystocentesis or cath-
teinuria, hematuria, or bacteriuria are also common.
eterization samples is significant. The threshold for samples
 When evaluating the significance of bacteriuria seen on urine
 collected by free catch is higher with >10? organisms/mL urine
sediment examination, the method of collection of the urine
being signifcant. The definition of significant bacteriuria based
sample must always be taken into account. Cystocentesis is the
 on quantitative urine cultures is lower for cats because cats seem
gold standard method for urine collection when a urine culture
to be more resistant to UTIs than dogs.
is indicated. A cystocentesis is preferred over other methods of
 A qualitative urine culture involves isolating and identifying
urine collection because there is decreased contamination from
bacteria in urine; it does not include quantifying bacterial
the lower urinary outflow tract, skin, or external environmental
numbers. After 48 h, the growth of bacteria is recorded as either
sources. If the urine sample is collected by cystocentesis, then
positive or negative only.
314
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Faise-positive bacteriuria or cuiture resuits
with a monoflm of the bacterial isolate. After inoculation and
incubation at 38°C for 18-24h, antimicrobial susceptibility is
Although detection of bacteria on the sediment examination of
estimated by measuring zones of inhibition of bacterial growth
fresh urine should prompt consideration of a UTI, this is best
surrounding each disk. Zones of inhibition are then interpreted
verified by a urine culture. A false-positive urine sediment
in light of established standards, and susceptibility is recorded
finding of bacteriuria with a subsequent negative culture may be
as resistant, susceptible, or intermediate. The biggest drawback
explained by the misidentification of debris or small crystals that
with this method is that the concentration of an antimicrobial
can  resemble  bacterial  organisms.  Bacterial  contamination
(except nitrofurantoin) in paper disks is comparable to the
during sampling (e.g, needle penetrates a loop of intestine
typical serum concentration of the drug. Drugs that are found
during cystocentesis) or before analysis (e.g., sample is contami-
to be resistant by the agar disk diffusion method may still be
 n is o  ( a on s  
effective in the urinary tract if the antimicrobial is excreted in
finding of bacteriuria and a false-positive culture result.
higher concentrations in the urine (e.g., ampicillin, cephalexin).
Because of differences in the ability of various antimicrobials to
Faise-negative bacteriuria or culture resuits
diffuse through agar, the antimicrobial disk surrounded by the
i in   n s i
largest zone of inhibition is not necessarily the drug most likely
events during collection, storage (e.g., prolonged refrigeration),
to be effective.
or transport (e.g., heating or freezing). Appropriate sample han-
The second method for determining antimicrobial sensitivity
 dlling is imperative when samples are shipped for processing.
for uropathogens is the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)
Antibiotic use before urine collection may also inhibit bacterial
method. Uropathogens are inoculated and incubated in wells
 growth. Therefore, urine should be collected for culture before
containing serial twofold dilutions of antimicrobial drugs at con-
 i    s  a n
centrations achievable in tissues and urine. MIC is defined as the
being treated with an antimicrobial drug that is suspected of
lowest antimicrobial concentration (or highest dilution) that
allows no visible bacterial growth of the isolate. Determination
being ineffective, the drug should be discontinued for approxi-
 of the MIC for a pathogen with respect to a specific antimicrobial
mately 3-5 days before a sample for culture and sensitivity is
is currently considered the gold standard technique for deter-
collected.
Commercially available urine culture collection tubes con-
mining antimicrobial sensitivity and resistance patterns. If the
taining a preservative, when combined with refrigeration, may
urinary concentration of an antibiotic is four times the MIC for
the infecting bacteria, then the drug will be at least 90% effective.
  s   o   sd asd o pas 
laboratory is to be delayed. There are also commercially available
If the urinary concentration is less than four times the MIC, then
blood agar and MacConkey agar plates that can be inoculated
the drug will be minimally effective and should be considered
and incubated for 24h if the urine sample cannot be shipped
resistant.
immediately. When using in-house culture media, a calibrated
Follow-up and therapeutic urine cuitures
bacteriologic loop or microliter mechanical pipette is used to
Culture of urine at strategic times during antimicrobial therapy
transfer exactly 0.01 or 0.001 mL of urine to the culture plates.
The urine is streaked over the plates using conventional methods.
(so-called “therapeutic urine cultures") is an effective method of
 so  so po o ss  o
assessing therapeutic success.
MacConkey agar provides information that aids in the identifi-
The potential benefits of therapeutic urine cultures include
cation of bacteria.
verification of proper antimicrobial administration by the owner,
In-house urine culture and susceptibility kits have recently
early detection of bacterial resistance to the antibiotic chosen,
become available (IndicatoRx*"). These kits can only identify
and timely detection of a persistent infection. Negative therapeu-
bacteria as one of the primary gram-negative uropathogens (e.g.
tic culture results during antibiotic administration are consistent
E. coli, Klebsiella, Enterobacter spp., and Proteus spp.). Antimi-
with successful eradication of infection. Persistence of clinical
crobial sensitivity is predicted based on typical resistance pat-
signs should prompt further evaluation of the patient (e.g., radi-
terns for each isolate. These kits are limited in their inability to
ographic and ultrasonographic imaging, cystoscopy) for con-
identify more unusual bacteria that may be causing a urinary
comitant nonbacterial disorders.
infection.
Culture results that remain unchanged (i.e., the same bacteria
exhibiting susceptibility to the current antimicrobial drug)
 during appropriate antimicrobial therapy indicate that the anti-
Antimicrobial sensitivity
microbial drug is not reaching the site of infection. Incomplete
When treating a UTI, choosing an antimicrobial agent is based
 or infrequent administration of the antibiotic and unwillingness
on bacterial susceptibility testing whenever possible.
of patients to accept medications are a common cause for inad-
There are two basic methods for determining the antimicro-
equate tissue delivery of an apparently effective medication. In
bial sensitivity for different uropathogens. The frst and more
some situations, antimicrobial administration is sufficient, but
commonly used is the Kirby-Bauer or disk diffusion method.
 intestinal absorption is impaired In these patients, consideration
 Paper disks impregnated with different antimicrobial drugs at
should be given to other concurrent medications that may be
particular serum concentrations are placed on the agar plate
 interfering with the oral bioavailability of the antibiotic. Antacids
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
315
containing aluminum, magnesium, and calcium can decrease 
 ment of abdominal malignancies in small animals. Advantages
 oral absorption of some antibiotics (e.g., tetracyclines).
o su punni pien 'ssea peui apnu asdoq rao
 For patients with recurrent infections (e.g., a relapse, a rein-
 cytology versus histology results, and reduced incidence of clini-
fection, or a persistent infection), response to antimicrobial
 cal complications. Although cytological evaluation of lesions
therapy should be considered effective only if a properly col-
 within the urinary system is not always diagnostic, the informa-
lected urine culture is negative for growth while the patient is
tion obtained can be used to either direct further diagnostics
on the antimicrobial. Relying on urine sediment findings to
(e.g., culture or biopsy), prevent ineffective surgical intervention
determine if a UTI has been eradicated is unwise because low
(e.g., detect metastatic neoplasia), or differentiate between two
numbers of bacteria can be missed on a urine sediment evalua-
diagnoses (e.g., abscess vs. cyst; lymphoma vs. feline infectious
fion. If hematuria, pyuria, and proteinuria are detected on a
 peritonitis [FIP]).
urinalysis despite initiation of antimicrobial therapy, a therapeu-
 FNA cytology has been used primarily to diagnose inflamma-
tic urine culture should be performed.
 tory or neoplastic disorders of the kidney, urinary bladder, and
 For a simple cystitis where no major predisposing factors are
 prostate, but other focal lesions elsewhere in the urinary tract
detected, follow-up should include a urinalysis and possibly a
 can also sometimes be aspirated for the purposes of establishing
urine culture 3-5 days after the patient has completed the course 
a diagnosis.
of antibiotics. For complicated UTIs and pyelonephritis, it is
 FNA of the kidneys to obtain cells for cytological evaluation
ideal to repeat the urine culture 3-5 days after initiating therapy.
 is a simple, rapid, and relatively inexpensive procedure with a
5-7 days after finishing antibiotics, and again 30-60 days follow-
 low incidence of complications. Renal FNA is most useful when
 evaluating solitary or multifocal renal masses, diffuse renomeg-
 ing defects in host defenses be identifed and treated in patients
aly without hydronephrosis, or when investigating a diffuse renal
with recurrent or complicated UTIs.
echotextural change detected on ultrasound.
Renal cytology is most useful when lymphoma, carcinoma,
Fungal urinary tract infections
metastatic or disseminated neoplasia, FIP, abscess, fungal infec-
tion, or a cyst is considered likely. Ultrasound-guided pyelocente-
Fungal UTIs (funguria) are rare, but Candida albicans, dissemi-
sis can be performed to collect urine for culture if infectious
nated Cryptococcus, blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, or aspergil-
 pyelonephritis is suspected. Renal cytology is not useful in the
losis may colonize the urinary tract.
diagnosis of most congenital (polycystic kidney disease) and
 Candida infections have been reported in cats and dogs that
hereditary anomalies (e.g., dysplasia). It is also unlikely to be
are either immunosuppressed (immunosuppressive medications,
helpful in cases of suspected renal amyloidosis, glomerulonephri-
diabetes mellitus) or thathave been on long-term broad-spectrum
tis, chronic or acute interstitial nephritis, or for the investigation of
antibiotic therapy. These infections may be symptomatic or
diseases involving the renal vasculature (infarcts, hemorrhages).
asymptomatic.
FNA of the kidneys is not recommended when there is evidence of
Because free-catch urine samples will frequently contain
urinary obstruction/hydronephrosis and is very unlikely to be
fungal contaminants, diagnosis of a fungal UTI relies on the
 helpful when evaluating the cause of small or atrophied kidneys.
isolation of the organism from a cystocentesis sample and a posi-
For disorders of the urinary bladder, FNA may be used to
tive fungal culture.
collect a urine sample (cystocentesis) directly from the bladder
If a systemic mycosis is suspected, the urine sample must be
for culture or cytology and for sampling masses that involve the
sent to a laboratory equipped to handle such pathogens.
bladder wall. For disorders of the prostate, FNA cytology can be
used to differentiate between prostatic neoplasia and BPH, for
Conclusion
the temporary drainage of a prostatic or paraprostatic cyst, and
for interventional drainage and ablation (using alcohol or tea
Collection of urine by cystocentesis is ideal if a bacterial UTI is
 tree oil) of prostatic cysts and abscesses.
suspected. A quantitative urine culture is preferable whenever
 FNA of the kidney, bladder, prostate, or of any discrete mass
possible. Treatment of UTIs should be based on the result of
within the urinary system can be done with or without negative
bacterial sensitivity findings from a properly collected and proc-
pressure (suction). In most cases, ultrasound guidance will be
essed urine sample.
needed and is preferred because it allows the architecture of the
urinary tract to be evaluated; it permits identification of some
SECTION 5 URINARY TRACT
contraindications for biopsy (e.g., renal or prostatic abscess,
hydronephrosis); it allows more accurate guidance of the needle
BIOPSY TECHNIQUES
into a focal lesion and helps avoid inadvertent aspiration of the
renal medulla in the case of a kidney aspirate or of the vascula-
Aspiration biopsy
ture supplying the urinary tract. Percutaneous blind aspiration
 of the kidney can be done with manual kidney immobilization
Percutaneous fine needle aspiration (FNA) with or without
in cats and is also sometimes possible in dogs with unilateral or
ultrasound guidance is widely used to establish a cytological
 bilateral renomegaly. This technique is best reserved for cases
 with difuse lesions that result in renomegaly because focal
316
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
lesions may be missed. With blind FNA, there is an increased
 Patients whose management is most likely to be altered by the
risk of inadvertent puncture or laceration of major blood vessels.
results of a renal biopsy include those with glomerular disease
Regardless of which technique is used, multiple aspirations in
(PLN), renal neoplasia, or ARE. Renal biopsy is very unlikely
 lifferent areas of the kidney, prostate, or a mass are recom-
to benefit patients with suspected end-stage renal disease. All
mended to maximize cellular yield and diagnostic potential and
patients must undergo renal imaging with ultrasound and/or CT
to differentiate between primary and secondary inflammations.
prior to biopsy to avoid biopsying patients with clear contrain-
For focal or discrete masses, aspiration of both the central and
dications (e.g., small atrophied kidneys or those with obstructive
peripheral areas is recommended; frequently, the center of a
ureteroliths or nephroliths). Also, renal biopsy should only be
 mass may consist of necrotic debris or inflammatory cells, result-
performed after extensive evaluation of the patient to rule out
ing in a nondiagnostic sample. Pronounced inflammation incited
any contraindications for biopsy (e.g., severe anemia, clotting
by a tumor may actually mask an underlying neoplastic process.
disorders). This involves collection of information on the
Once the mass or structure (e.g., kidney) being aspirated has
patient's minimum database (ie., complete history, physical
been entered, negative pressure (suction) is applied with an
examination findings, routine blood work, and urinalysis fnd-
attached syringe and the needle is moved in and out rapidly
ings) as well as measurement of systemic BP and assessment of
15-20 times, being careful not to go deeper with each pass of the
a coagulation profle (prothrombin time [PT] and partial throm-
 needle. Suction should be kept constant during sampling and
boplastin time [PTT]).
released before removing the needle from the lesion. FNA
There are several methods by which renal biopsy can be per-
without suction can also be performed by just using a needle
formed. Regardless of the method used, only the renal cortex
without a syringe attached or by using a fine needle capillary
should be biopsied; biopsy of the renal medulla should be
technique (also known as Zajelda's technique) to help reduce
avoided due to the greater risk of hemorrhage from laceration
blood contamination.
of vessels and because it is also associated with an increased risk
 It should be noted that many renal lesions and some tumors
of creating large areas of infarction and fibrosis.
 of the urinary tract exfoliate poorly, limiting a cytological diag-
Percutaneous renal core biopsy is typically done with the
 nosis. As such, obtaining a sample of adequate cellularity can be
patient anesthetized or heavily sedated and ideally is performed
an issue. Negative results do not exclude disease. Also, renal
using ultrasound or CT guidance. Laparoscopic or keyhole sur-
tissue is highly vascular, so significant blood contamination can
gical renal biopsies through a flank incision are alternative
occur. Adequate patient restraint and a nonaspiration technique
methods by which a core renal biopsy can be obtained. Surgical
can reduce blood contamination.
biopsy, through a laparotomy incision, can be used to obtain a
One serious complication or controversy with both FNA and
wedge biopsy of the kidney. Surgical biopsy is the preferred
needle biopsy of any intra-abdominal tumor is the risk of seeding
method in canine patients weighing <5kg where the risk of
the tumor along the needle tract. Needle-tract implantation after
complications is greater. This is also the most suitable method if
a FNA of adenocarcinomas and TCCs of the kidney has been
the patient is undergoing a laparotomy for other reasons.
reported in people, and there are rare reports of this following
Absolute contraindications for renal biopsy include an uncon-
percutaneous ultrasound-guided FNA in dogs with TCC of the
trolled coagulation disorder or severe anemia, uncontrolled
bladder, urethra, or prostate. Without rigorous follow-up, the
hypertension (which will increase the likelihood of severe hem-
incidence of tumor implantation along the needle tract with
 orrhage), extensive pyelonephritis, renal or perirenal abscess or
FNA and/or biopsy may be underestimated in our patients as
multiple large renal cysts, and small end-stage kidneys from
they may die before metastasis becomes apparent. However,
suspected CKD and hydronephrosis.
seeding of tumors has also been reported following surgical
Relative contraindications for renal biopsy include unilateral
 resection of a TCC of the urinary bladder in a dog, so this com-
renal neoplasia due to the risk of biopsy-induced metastasis and
plication is not isolated to FNA or biopsy. Because this is a rare
a patient with a solitary kidney if the procedure is deemed to
 complication, the estimated risk of seeding a tumor along a
pose substantial risk (e.g., decreased renal function) that would
needle tract is only 0.009% in people; many clinicians still advo-
outweigh the value of the information obtained from the biopsy.
cate common use of this technique for diagnostic purposes. The
Complications associated with renal biopsy can be classified
use of larger bore needles (>l-mm outer diameter), an increased
as minor (gross hematuria, silent hematoma), major (clinically
 s rn a p sssd aau jo ru
evident hematoma, requiring embolization or transfusion, iatro-
carcinoma) may be associated with a higher incidence of this
genic infection), and catastrophic (requiring surgery, loss of
complication.
parenchymal functional mass, unintended perforated or trauma
to another abdominal organ, and death). The overall incidence
Biopsy
of complications varies. The skill of the person(s) performing the
biopsy, the thoroughness of patient screening for contraindica-
 Renal biopsy, regardllss of the method by which it is preformed,
tions, and the appropriate selection of patients that will benefit
is indicated only when the results are likely to alter patient man-
from a biopsy are the factors most likely to affect the complica-
agement by providing either an accurate histological diagnosis,
tion rate.
by aiding in prognostication, or by facilitating decisions regard-
 Microscopic hematuria is an expected fnding after renal
ing response to therapy after renal transplantation.
biopsy; this is typically self-limiting and is expected to resolve
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
317
within 48-72 h of biopsy. Macroscopic hematuria is less common
False-negative biopsies are usually due to an insufficient
but in veterinary studies is seen in 1-4% of dogs and cats fol-
 amount of tissue, sampling of a necrotic area, the presence of
lowing renal biopsy. Hematuria that persists longer than 24h
 blood contamination, or simply missing the lesion. Unsatisfac-
after the procedure warrants evaluation of the kidneys and
 tory biopsies in cases of suspected neoplasia are more common
biopsy site. Severe hemorrhage that requires transfusion support
with smaller tumors because of the increased diffculty in target-
can occur if there is accidental laceration ofthe renal vasculature
        
or another vascular organ, and in one study this was the most
centers can also result in false-negative results.
common reported complication occurring in 9.9% and 16.9% of
dogs and cats, respectively.
Equipment
A disposable spring-loaded biopsy needle (E-Z Core Single
Renal core needle biopsies
Action Biopsy Devise", Products group International, Inc.,
Ultrasound-guided renal core biopsy is the method of choice in
Lyons, CO) is preferred. They are available in various sizes (14,
dogs that weigh >5kg and for all cats with no contraindications
16, 18, and 20 ga.) and various lengths (6, 9, or 15 cm). Automatic
for renal biopsy. Blind percutaneous core biopsy of the kidneys
spring-loaded biopsy guns (e.g., Bard Biopsy", C. R. Bard, Inc.,
 Murray Hill, NJ) that use disposable needles of the appropriate
should be avoided.
d si  n a s   m si u
 gauge and length are also available. These are less suitable for
ferred over the left kidney for renal biopsy because it is more
renal biopsies because there is less control over the depth of the
stable (the caudate lobe of the liver provides resistance to move-
biopsy. Manual trucut needles can also be used but are less than
 ment during the biopsy procedure). However, in some cases, the
ideal due to the greater risk of trauma associated with sample
left kidney will be biopsied because it is more accessible. This is
 collection. Resterilized needles are not recommended because
often the case in deep-chested dogs where the right kidney is
they dull quickly.
 located more cranially under the rib cage. In cats, both kidneys
are located more caudally in the abdomen, so either kidney can
CT-guided renal biopsy
typically be localized and immobilized for renal biopsy.
 All patients should be heavily sedated or anesthetized for
 If an ultrasound-guided biopsy fails to yield a useful sample, a
renal biopsy. Failure to adequately immobilize the patient
CT-guided biopsy can be attempted or a surgical biopsy of the
increases the likelihood of a serious complication. In addition,
kidney can be performed. Advantages of CT guidance over ultra-
having the patient anesthetized during the procedure has been
sound are that gas and other structures do not obscure visibility;:
associated with procurement of better quality biopsy samples.
there is excellent spatial resolution; there is better needle visuali-
 For biopsy of the right kidney, the patient is placed in left lateral
 zation; and it is easier to avoid necrotic areas. The disadvantages
recumbency, and for biopsy of the left kidney, the patient is
 of CT guidance are higher cost, exposure to radiation, and lack
 placed in right lateral recumbency. Clip and surgically prepare
 of real-time monitoring during actual needle insertion.
the skin overlying the biopsy site. Once the site of entry for the
 biopsy needle is determined using ultrasound, a small stab inci-
Keyhole renal biopsy
sion is made through the skin with a scalpel blade. Only the
renal cortex should be biopsied; the medulla should never be
Laparoscopic (see below) and keyhole renal biopsies are two
biopsied due to the risk of severe hemorrhage. Using ultrasound,
 alternative methods by which a percutaneous needle renal biopsy
the normal renal cortex can easily be differentiated from the
 can be performed, and both allow direct visualization of the
medulla. However, identification may be more diffcult in 
 kidney for biopsy. A keyhole renal biopsy can be used if ultra-
severely diseased kidneys. The tip of the needle is guided toward
 sound or CT is not available. Access to the kidney that will be
the renal capsule at either the cranial or caudal pole of the
 biopsied is made through an ipsilateral paralumbar incision. The
kidney and is inserted through the renal capsule with the needle
incision must be large enough to allow insertion of the index
parallel to the long axis of the kidney before activation of the
fnger to help immobilize the kidney against the epaxial muscu-
needle throw. Penetration through the capsule before activation
lature. The biopsy needle is inserted through the body wall
of the spring-loaded needle prevents sliding of the needle along
through a separate small stab incision. The tip of the needle is
the capsule and reduces the risk of tearing the renal capsule. The
  a jo s a  ood  o 
needle must be kept in a shallow position just below the renal
stabbed just through the capsule. It is important to make sure
capsule within the renal cortex. Penetrating too deeply beyond
the angle is such that the needle will pass only through the renal
the renal capsule will reduce the amount of renal cortex biopsied
cortex. Closure of the incision through the abdominal wall is
and increases the risk of entering the medulla. Ideally, at least
routine.
two quality biopsy samples should be obtained. After each
biopsy, digital pressure should be applied to the kidney transab-
Cystoscopic biopsies
dominally for 5min to minimize hemorrhage. Ultrasound
should be used to monitor for any active hemorrhage at the
Cystoscopy allows visualization of the vestibule, urethra, urinary
biopsy site postprocedure.
bladder, and the ureteral openings. Compared with a traditional
318
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
cystotomy, the magnified images seen with cystoscopy have the
biopsied via transurethral cystoscopy (see below). If this tech-
potential to be more revealing and superior for localizing small
nique is used for urolith removal, an imaging procedure such as
 iq ons  sis ss oe i ao si
radiography or urethrocystoscopy should be performed after the
 require general anesthesia. In addition to allowing visualization
 procedure to ensure complete removal of all uroliths.
 and biopsy of lesions within the lower urinary tract, cystoscopy
Contraindications for laparoscopy include peritonitis, exten-
has many other applications. These include resection of masses
sive abdominal adhesions, hernias, obesity, coagulopathies, and
(e.g., obstructive polyps), removal of uroliths using stone baskets
operator inexperience. Complications of laparoscopy include the
creation of air emboli, pneumothorax, subcutaneous emphy-
and allows for injection of bulking agents submucosally within
sema, the introduction of gas into a hollow viscus, damage to
the proximal urethra for the treatment of urinary incontinence.
internal organs from the introduction of the Verress needle or
Cystoscopy is best used in conjunction with other diagnostic
trocar, and cardiac arrest in addition to the complications already
tests. A urinalysis and other noninvasive imaging should be
outlined for renal biopsy.
performed prior to cystoscopy to avoid artifacts from contami-
nation or minor trauma to the lower urinary tract associated
Surgical biopsies
with cystoscopy. The main disadvantage of cystoscopy is the
need for general anesthesia and cost of the equipment; however,
Surgical biopsy of the kidney may be the preferred method in
the procedure is typically quick and minimally invasive. Poten-
dogs that are small (<5 kg) or in animals that either have isolated
tial complications of cystoscopy include iatrogenic infection,
areas in the kidney that need to be avoided during the biopsy
 urethral or bladder trauma causing hemorrhage, or perforation.
procedure (e.g., large cysts) or are undergoing laparotomy for
 Proper technique and selection of equipment appropriate to the
another reason. Likewise, surgical biopsy may be safer in some
 patient are the best ways to minimize the risk of injury. Biopsies
 animals that have other factors that make biopsy risky.
 obtained using a cystoscopic approach are small and this may be
 Surgical wedge biopsy specimens are larger and therefore
should be superior in quality to needle biopsy samples. A surgi-
 post cystoscopy.
cal biopsy of the kidney can be obtained through a paracostal
incision, if only one kidney needs to be examined and biopsied,
Laparoscopic biopsy
or through a cranial midline abdominal incision if other intra-
abdominal organs or if both kidneys need to be examined and
 Laparoscopy is an endoscopic procedure performed under sterile
   s sdoss p e sn s
and into the cortex. A monofilament absorbable suture material
 port cannula. Direct visualization and inspection of the kidneys
(e.g., 4-0 PDS) in a simple continuous paftern is used to close
 and the serosal surface of the bladder is possible after the estab-
the defect in the renal capsule. The wedge biopsy specimen can
lishment of a pneumoperitoneum. Direct visualization also
be cut with a scalpel blade into multiple slices for submission for
 permits precise control when performing a renal biopsy. Laparo-
light, electron, and immunofluorescence microscopy.
scopic biopsy is less invasive and when done by an experienced
Surgical biopsies of a bladder mass can also be performed after
 as       
an open laparotomy and cystostomy. This has the disadvantage
s  an a oe   s
of being more invasive than other procedures discussed but can
 related patient morbidity. If indicated, other abdominal organs
allow for complete and possibly curative excision of a mass in
 can also be inspected and biopsied, which is an advantage over
some circumstances, which is unlikely with the other biopsy
   os sd  
techniques described. A surgical biopsy may also permit better
hemostasis and allows biopsy of other organs in the abdomen if
compared with ultrasound or CT. Direct pressure can be applied
indicated for diagnosis or staging of a tumor (e.g, excisional
s i  n s ios   e 
biopsy of draining lymph nodes).
 Laparoscopy has also been used to assist in the removal of
 uroliths and foreign bodies from within the urinary system in
 dogs and people, respectively. Candidates for laparoscopic-
Traumatic urinary catheterization
a   on r m si  aoso pis
Catheter biopsy of the lower urinary tract in dogs is an estab-
expelld by urohydropropulsion and those unlikely to resolve by
lished technique. Sedation is required to place the urinary cath-
medical dissolution. This technique minimizes injury to tissues
eter in a female dog and is recommended for most patients
caused by traditional open cystotomy and laparotomy. A variety
undergoing this procedure.
of surgical instruments such as bladder spoons, calculi baskets,
 Biopsies of bladder and urethral mucosal lesions may be
and forceps to grasp and extract calculi can be used with this
obtained by placing the side holes of a urinary catheter against
technique. Another use of laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy
the lesion, applying suction using a syringe to draw tissue into
i sass iapp o saisdoq uo pue suxa on aq pom
the catheter, and then withdrawing the catheter while maintain-
 male dogs. This would be an alternative to doing a traditional
ing suction. Ultrasound guidance enables real-time accurate
 determination of biopsy catheter position. The tissue fragments
flexible endoscope. In female dogs, bladder masses are usually
obtained are usually large enough for histological examination.
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
319
This technique is simple, minimally invasive, and requires no
 to induce a diuresis and to flush out any blood clots that form
   a s anss ia zs
within the kidney to reduce the chance ofa clot obstructing the
placed in formalin and are submitted for histological examina-
renal pelvis or ureter.
tion; smaller samples can be smeared or squashed on micro-
scope slides and stained for cytology. Once the biopsy is obtained,
the lesion can be observed ultrasonographically for signs of
SECTION 6 URINARY IMAGING
hemorrhage. Technical pitfalls encountered with this technique
include limited size of the biopsy specimen and difficulty in
There are many different options for imaging the urinary tract.
accurately placing the catheter so that the side holes lie against
The best option for each patient depends on the goals of the
the lesion. Surgical biopsy may be required if a traumatic biopsy
study, the differential diagnoses, the portion of the urinary tract
is nondiagnostic. Other disadvantages of this technique com-
under consideration, and the patient's status.
s o  a a   s n 
cosal tissue or biopsy extraluminal lesions, such as enlarged
regional lymph nodes. However, compared to ultrasound-guided
Radiology
needle aspiration, the catheter biopsy technique offers several
advantages. First, it is less invasive than a surgical biopsy and
Basic radiographs can give information as to whether or not
there is limited potential for either perforation of the bladder
radiodense stones are present in the urinary tract (although not
wall or peritoneal hemorrhage. Second, there is no potential for
 all urinary stones are visible on radiographs), the relative size of
tumor seeding along a biopsy tract as has been described with
the kidneys and bladder, and the presence of free abdominal
FNAs of urinary tract neoplasms in dogs and humans.
fluid (evidenced by loss of serosal detail). Basic radiographs
 (noncontrast) of the abdomen are extremely dependent upon
 good technique. The presence of stool in the colon can make it
Sample handling
 difficult to see the urinary tract and radiopaque material in the
Smears for cytology need to be prepared immediately and gentle
feces can be mistaken for stones. Therefore, an enema may be
 technique is very important especially in renal aspiration biopsy
recommended prior to routine radiographs. The patient should
cases. If the smears are not made rapidly, clots will form and
 be properly positioned, which may include the use of sedation,
possibly obscure tumor cells and compromise the diagnosis.
 tape, sandbags, or physical restraint. The appropriate settings for
 Concurrent submission of a CBC taken in a conscious patient
a  s  s ss  rd a
just prior to renal aspiration may permit the cytologist to better
two orthogonal views are recommended (conventionally, right
differentiate between peripheral blood contamination of the
lateral and ventrodorsal [VD]). The entire abdomen (from at
sample and true inflammation.
least the 10th rib to the caudalmost aspect of the animal) should
  aq  ss dq  ss sn
 be included in the radiograph. When looking for stones (espe-
cytological evaluation. This can aid in the rapid diagnosis of
 cially in male cats), it is important to include the entire caudal
infectious agents or neoplasia. It is always advisable to contact
aspect of the patient because stones may be present in the penis.
the intended analyzing laboratory prior to collection for optimal
Visualization of the bladder can be improved in obese animals
sample preparation technique recommendations. Also, renal
 by pressing on the bladder area with a large wooden spoon or
biopsies should always be sent to a pathologist with expertise in
by placing a belly wrap (such as a few layers of vet wrap around
o as es e t) suoe Adossu i onoedoau
the middle of the abdomen). Oblique views may be necessary to
culture) may be suffcient for patients with suspected ARF, but
look for small bladder stones superimposed on the vertebral
glomerular disease specimens should be evaluated by light, elec-
column (Figure 10.6.1).
tron, and immunofluorescent microscopy. One sample, or a
piece of a wedge biopsy, should be fxed in formalin for light
Contrast radiology
microscopy; another sample or piece of a wedge biopsy should
be fixed in 4% formalin plus 1% glutaraldehyde in sodium phos-
Sometimes, basic radiographs are not sensitive enough to detect
 phate buffer for electron microscopy; and the final piece should
 problems in the urinary tract. In these situations, contrast radio-
 be either frozen or immersed in Michel's solution for immun-
 graphs are needed. These procedures are more sensitive for
ofluorescence microscopy.
 fnding radiolucent stones, ectopic ureters, tears in the urinary
tract, and tumors. Most of these procedures will be performed
Postbiopsy nursing care
in stable patients as part of a thorough workup of urinary tract
 issues. However, sometimes, these procedures need to be done
All patients undergoing renal biopsy should be kept quiet and
      s s  s  s 
observed in the hospital for 24h after the procedure, as most
 cases, the veterinarian will decide how to change the procedures.
complications occur within this time period. Close monitoring
 In all contrast procedures, adequate patient preparation will
of mucus membrane color, capillary refill time, BP, and serial
 greatly increase the diagnostic utility. This involves withholding
hematocrits and total solids can assist in identifying complica-
food for 12-24h and a cleansing enema prior to the radiographs.
 tions. Intravenous fluids should also be administered postbiopsy
 Survey radiographs should always be taken initially to establish
320
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 10.6.2  A laterl abdominal view of a positive contrast
cystourethrogram in a cat with a history of urinary obstruction. No
obvious obstruction is apparent, but the bladder wall is thickened.
Image courtesy of Dr. Ale Aguirre.
Figure 10.6.1  Lateral radiograph of a shih tzu with a large distended
bladder. Multiple calculi are visible in the bladder. Image courtesy of
Dr.Ale Aguirre.
phy is used only to visualize the bladder; the urethra cannot be
evaluated because the urinary catheter is present. These proce-
dures generally require heavy sedation and/or anesthesia since
optimal positioning and radiographic technique. In procedures
urinary catheterization can be painful and difficult to perform
involving a urinary catheter, the urine should be evacuated prior
(especially in male cats and female dogs). A urinary catheter
to introducing the contrast.
is sterilely placed and survey radiographs are taken. Once the
positioning and technique are determined, 3.5-13.1 mL/kg of
Excretory urography
aquaeous contrast is injected so that the bladder is completely
Excretory urography is used to look for ectopic ureters and
distended.2 The urinary catheter is then left in place (a Foley
 tumors and to evaluate kidney function. This is the only contrast
catheter may be considered to prevent accidental removal of the
 procedure that evaluates kidney function and structure. It is also
urinary catheter). The syringe should remain connected to the
the only contrast procedure that requires IV contrast. The con-
urinary catheter so that contrast material does not leak out onto
trast is excreted quickly, so it is important to have the proper
the fur. If the contrast leaks out, make sure to clean it up com-
technique and positioning determined prior to injecting con-
pletely as it can soak into the fur, making interpretation of the
 trast. Contrast (600-880 mg/kg of iodine) is injected quickly IV.
radiographs difficult. Lateral, VD, right and left oblique radio-
The patient should be monitored for anaphylactic reactions,
graphs are taken. Occasionally, there will be some retrograde
including increased heart rate, breathing difficulties, and hives;
contrast taken up by the ureters. In order to visualize the urethra,
if these signs are seen, discontinue injecting the contrast and
cystourethrography is performed. The easiest method is to
 alert the veterinarian immediately. Perivascular leakage of con-
simply remove the urinary catheter, to express the bladder, and
 trast generally only causes localized swelling. An IV catheter
to take radiographs while there is still contrast within the urethra.
should ideally be used to limit such a complication. Lateral and
The preferable method is to place a Foley catheter into the distal
VD views are taken at 1, 5, 15, and 30 min. If there is signifcant
urethra (inserted only about 1-2in.), to inject the contrast, and
renal compromise, later views may be needed to give the kidneys
then to take radiographs. Only 10-15 mL of contrast is bolused
enough time to take up contrast. A belly band or spoon may be
 at a time with this method.? A Foley catheter is mandatory to
used to improve visualization of the ureters. If fluoroscopy is
make sure the contrast does not leak out around the catheter.
available, it may be used to visualize the ureteral openings but
Pulling the hind legs cranially can make it easier to visualize the
must be performed within 3-5 min of giving contrast. If visuali-
 penile urethra in male patients (Figure 10.6.2).
zation of the ureters is difficult, oblique views may be required
 Double contrast cystography utilizes the difference between
to prevent superimposition of the bladder over the ureters.
the contrast medium and air to visualize bladder wall thickening.
 Removing the urine from the bladder (via urinary catheteriza-
 d s   e  s  ss
tion) and injecting air into the bladder can also help visualize
the bladder. Contrast medium is injected (0.5-1.0 mL per cat,
the ureteral openings.
1-3 mL per dog <12kg, 3-6 mL per dog >12 kg), and the patient
Cystography
is rolled so that the contrast fully coats the bladder wall.? While
 palpating the bladder, air or carbon dioxide is injected into the
 Unlike excretory urography, cystography requires that the con-
urinary catheter to fill the bladder. Carbon dioxide is preferred
 trast be given directly into the bladder rather than IV. Cystogra-
because of the reduced risk of an air embolism, but carbon
Chapter 10  Urinary and Renal Diseases
321
dioxide is not always available. Four views of the abdomen are
taken (VD, right lateral, right oblique, and left oblique).
7-3PRS
Miscellaneous contrast procedures
A123
Occasionally, the vagina needs to be evaluated for abnormalities.
1.93cr
 In this case, a foley catheter is placed into the vestibule and
inflated. The vulva should be held closed (forceps can be used)
and contrast is injected in 20-30mL boluses.? Radiographs
should be taken immediately. Therefore, inject the contrast while
the patient is in lateral recumbency, take the radiograph, reposi-
fion the patient in VD, and immediately take another radio-
 graph. Oblique views are usually not necessary.
Cest
Ultrasound
RIGHTKIDNE
Abdominal ultrasound is a useful tool for identifying structural
problems of the upper and lower urinary tract including stones,
tion of the renal pelvis), and evaluating for the presence of
Figure 10.6.3  Sagittal view of the right kidney with a renal mass and
a smaller renal cyst (+marks, 1.93 cm). Image courtesy of Dr. Lee Yanik,
obstructions. However, it is not useful for visualizing the urethra
Animal Imaging Consultants.
due to its pelvic position. Typically, the patient is placed in dorsal
recumbency when imaging the urinary tract, although left and
right lateral recumbencies may also be used based on ultra-
 on the abdomen prior to performing the ultrasound. If possible,
A523
 a o di m  sd e n
0.39
urine in the bladder, which facilitates imaging of the urinary
-me a sis m isisse ose s po r
ing visualization of the bladder.
Editor's Note: Ultrasonography performed by veterinary techni-
cians is a controversial topic in some circles of veterinary medicine.
By including this material, I,Linda Merrill,risk ofending some in
the profession.Nonetheless,Iamafrmbelieverintheever-evolving
scope of practice for veterinary technicians. I believe the veterinary
technician specialist is ina unique position to explore this area of
LTURETER
advanced technicat skills without straying into the area of diagno-
sis. I encourage continuing education for allinterested parties. This
Figure 10.6.4 Sagittal view of the left ureter, which is dilated
findings in urinary tract ultrasonography will be summarized.
proximal to an ureterolith (+marks, 0.39 cm). The urolith casts a typical
shadow. Image courtesy of Dr. Lee Yanik, Animal Imaging Consultants.
Renal imaging
Ultrasongraphically, the kidney is composed of (from exterior to
trative disease), which can result in alterations in the corti-
interior) the capsule, renal cortex, medulla, and the hilar region
comedullary ratio (see Figure 10.6.5). Finally, renal or ureteral
consisting of the renal sinus and the peripelvic fat. The hilar
 calculi and fluid in the perirenal, retroperitoneal, or subcapsular
region of the renal pelvis contains the collecting system (renal.
 space can be observed.
 pelvis and ureters) and the renal vessels. Ultrasound allows for
 Both kidneys must be examined in three planes: dorsal long
imaging of the renal shape, architecture, and measurement of
axis, sagittal long axis, and transverse. Images of the renal pelvis
renal size. Abnormalities of size include small or large kidneys
 lateral to the pelvis, medial to the pelvis, cranial to the pelvis,
and complete agenesis (lack of a kidney). Abnormalities of shape
 and caudal to the pelvis should be obtained. Also, at least two
include renal masses, renal cysts (abscess, hematoma, granu-
 planes of any lesion seen should be imaged.
loma, cystic neoplasia), and dilated ureters (see Figures 10.6.3
and 10.6.4). In addition, changes to the structure or echogenicity
Urinary bladder
of the kidneys may reveal renal infarcts, pyelectasia, increased
cortical echogenicity (e.g., glomerulonephritis, amyloidosis,
 Ultrasound evaluation of the urinary bladder allows for visuali-
CKD), and decreased cortical echogenicity (e.g., necrosis, infl-
zation of the bladder wall and of the contents of the bladder.
322
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
A523
Figure 10.6.5
5A sagittal view of the left kidney demonstrating
pyelectasia. Image courtesy of Dr. Lee Yanik, Animal Imaging
Figure 10.6.7  A sagittal ultrasound image of a cat's urinary bladder
Consultants.
Asaunos abewl ,'abpnis, juapuadap-Alaejb pue papuadsns buimoys
of Dr. Ale Aguirre.
PRC3
CA123
A523
U.BLADD
U.BLADDER
Figure 10.6.6  A sagittal view of a urinary bladder with a transitional
cell carcinoma arising from the bladder wall (edges marked by three
Figure 10.6.8A sagittal image of the urinary bladder showing
arrows). Image courtesy of Dr. Lee Yanik, Animal Imaging Consultants.
suspended material. Image courtesy of Dr. Lee Yanik, Animal Imaging
Consultants.
 Bladder wall imaging and measurement allows for evaluation of
bladder wall thickness (e.g., increased in cystitis), the layering of
each of the trigone, to the right of center and to the left of center;
the bladder wall, and the identification of bladder polyps and
And at least three images in the transverse plane—one each of
bladder masses (size, shape, and location) (see Figure 10.6.6).
the trigone, middle, and of the fundus of the bladder. If calculi
 Imaging of the contents of the bladder can identify bladder
are suspected, include an image made in the standing position.
calculi, urinary sediment, crystalline material, and hematuria
 Include at least two planes of any lesion seen.
(see Figures 10.6.7-10.6.9). Although difficult to image, patent
urachal diverticula, ectopic ureters, and ureteroceles can be
Prostate and caudal abdomen
 observed in some patients.
 The urinary bladder is ideal for imaging, but a suficient quan-
In the male dog, evaluation of the prostate may also be indicated.
tity of urine must be in the bladder in order to be accurately
This allows for observation of the size, shape, and architecture
assessed. A complete scan of the urinary bladder includes the
of the lobes of the prostate. However, their location in the pelvic
following views: at least three images in the sagifttal plane—-one
canal and the reproductive status ofthe patient can make imaging
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
323
4-3PS
Figure 10.6.9  A sagittal image of the urinary bladder with a large
calculus. Note the shadow cast by the stone (black arrows). Image
courtesy of Dr. Lee Yanik, Animal Imaging Consultants.
Figure 10.6.11 A cystoscopic view of calcium oxalate calculi in the 
apex of bladder. Image courtesy of Dr. Ale Aguirre.
to be of sufficient length and of small enough diameter to be
AIC
LA523
0.73 cn
          n n s
shaved and sterilely prepped. Since this is a sterile procedure, the
cystoscope should be gas sterilized prior to use and it should be
handled sterilely throughout the procedure. Cold fluids (0.9%
saline) should be attached to the influx port. An extension set
needs to be aftached to the efflux port and the other end placed
in a bucket or other receptacle to catch urine. The camera is
attached to the cystoscope, as is the light source. The veterinarian
will introduce the cystoscope while keeping another hand
clamped around the vulva or penis to prevent leakage. The fluids
help with visualization of the bladder and dilation of the urethra.
Cold saline helps to control bleeding, which may occur secondar-
Figure 10.6.10 A sagittal image of the proximal urethra and prostate
ily to the introduction of the cystoscope. Biopsies of abnormal
(+marks, 0.73 cm) with a urinary calculi in the urethra, just proximal to
fissues can be performed using the cystoscope as long as it con-
the prostate (arrow). Image courtesy of Dr. Lee Yanik, Animal Imaging
tains a biopsy port. In this procedure, the sterile biopsy instru-
Consultants.
ment is introduced through the port, manipulated to the area of
interest, and a biopsy sample taken. The cystoscope can also be
challenging. Both sagittal and transverse images should be
used to inject collagen into the urethra to treat urinary inconti-
viewed (Figure 10.6.10).
nence. The patient may have some blood in the urine for a day
 Routine scanning of the caudal abdomen may also aid in the
after the procedure and may have some perivulvar irritation due
assessment of lymph nodes, ascites, and hernias, to name a few
to the prepping (Figure 10.6.11).
conditions.
Computed tomography
Cystoscopy and vaginoscopy
CT is used for evaluating the urinary tract in some referral insti
Cystoscopy is an endoscopic examination of the lower urinary
tutions. Some studies have shown it to be the preferred technique
tract. It is used to directly visualize the urethra, bladder, and the
for finding ectopic ureters.4 CT can also be used for diagnosing
openings of the ureters. This can aid in the diagnosis of ectopic
tumors and stones of the urinary tract. Anesthesia or heavy seda-
ureters, bladder diverticuli, stones in the bladder and urethera,
and tumors. The scope cannot be introduced into the ureters
patient is placed in sternal recumbency in the machine and the
unless the dog is very large or the ureters are extremely dilated.
CT scan is performed. Intravenous iodinated contrast can be
A rigid cystoscope is used in female dogs, and the size of the 
used to help visualize structures but at half the dose (400 mg
scope is determined by the size of the dog and by what scope is
iodine/kg) as that used for excretory urography.? If the dog is
available. In male dogs, a flexible scope can be used, but it has
 401b or more, two catheters should be placed. The contrast is
324
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
rapidly excreted, so it should be injected quickly and the CT
performed immediately. Make sure that the patient is completely
 anesthetized prior to injecting the contrast. A drop in BP follow-
ing injection of the contrast is normal (see Figure 10.6.12 and
Table 10.6.1).
SECTION 7 RENAL AND URINARY
DISEASE PHARMACOLOGY
Urinary problems are broadly separated into upper (renal
disease) and lower (remainder of the urinary tract) disorders.
Renal disease is defined as any condition resulting in a decrease
in function or injury to the kidneys. It includes acute disorders
(ARF), chronic disorders (CKD), and protein loss through the
   e i   t (t) s
tion or injury to the ureters, urinary bladder, or urethra. Medical
management targets the disease process (e.g., antibiotics to treat
a bacterial pyelonephritis causing ARF) or a complication of the
disease process (e.g., hypertension secondary to a PLN).
For any medication to be effective, the drug needs to be deliv-
ered to the site of action (e.g., the pelvis of the kidney with bacte-
rial pyelonephritis), in an active form and in an appropriate
 concentration. For patients with ARF, renal blood flow can be
Figure 10.6.12
A CT scan of a dog's abdomen. The kidneys and
 reduced, which decreases the ability of certain drugs (e.g., thi-
ureters are enhanced following the administration of intravenous
azide diuretics) to reach the kidneys.' Situations that negatively
 contrast. Image courtesy of Dr Ale Aguirre.
impact the ability of drugs to work at the site of action include
 a change in pH (e.g., metabolic acidosis), protein content in the 
Table 10.6.1
 Comparison of modalities when imaging the urinary tract
Procedure
Stru ctures
Sedation
Contrast
Dose
Contrast media
visualized
indicated
route
 Basic radiographs
 Entire abdomen
No
No
NA
 Excretory urogram
Kidneys, bladder,
No
600-880mg iodine/kg
lodinated contrast media
ureters, urethra 
Cystogram
Bladder
Yes
Urinary
3.5-13.1mL/kg
lodinated contrast
catheter
 media—diluted 100 mg 
iodine/mL
Cystourethrogram
Bladder, urethra.
Yes
Urinary
10-15mL boluses
lodinated contrast
catheter
 media—-diluted 100 mg 
iodine/mL
Double contrast
Bladder
Yes
Urinary
0.5-1.0mL per cat;
lodinated contrast
cystogram
catheter 
1-3mL per dog <12 kg;
media—diluted 400 mg
3-6 mL per dog >12 kg
iodine/mL
Vagin ourethrogram
Vagina, distal
Yes
Urinary
 20-30mL boluses
lodinated contrast 
urethra 
catheter 
media—diluted 100 mg
iodine/mL
Abdominal
Entire abdomen
 Possibly
No
NA
NA
ultrasound
CT scan 
Entire abdomen
Yes—anesthesia
IV
1.4 mL/lb
lodinated contrast media
 NA, not applicable.
Chapter 10  Urinary and Renal Diseases
325
renal tubules (e.g., with PLN), or concurrent medications (e.g..
Table 10.7.1 lists medications that are potential nephrotoxins.
-  a   n ss  (
Table 10.7.2 lists medications commonly used in the treatment
tory disorders, the therapy can be modifed by increasing the
of patients with renal disease that may require modifcation of
 dose, by changing how the drug is administered (e.g., given IV
dosage depending on the type and degree of renal impairment.
or as a constant rate infusion), or by adding additional and/or
IRIS has proposed a staging system for dogs and cats with
CKD. The staging system is based on serum creatinine (two
rotic syndrome, diuretic dose increases of two- to threefold or
or more measurements, over several weeks) (see Table 10.3.1).
decreasing the dosing interval may increase responsiveness.
Substaging by level of proteinuria and BP is also utilized to
At a minimum, the goal with any medication is to “do
no
further classify the severity of kidney disease (see Tables 10.7.3
harm." In the case of ARF, CKD, and PLN, certain medications
and 10.7.7 below). Table 10.7.3 is useful for modifying drug
at standard or, in some cases, any dosage can exacerbate the
dosages in those patients with reduced kidney function.? A
underlying disease process.
 more precise alternative is to make adjustments based on drug
Table 10.7.1  Potential nephrotoxic medications in dogs and cats
Class
Examples
Class
Examples
Antifungals/antivirals
Amphotericin B
Miscellaneous
 Angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors (ACEls)
Acyclovir
Allopurinol 
Foscarnet
Antimicrobials
Aminoglycosides (e.g., Amikacin)
Apomorphine
Calcium, EDTA
Aztreonam 
Cimetidine
Carbapenems
 Dextran 40
Cephalosporins
Mannitol
 Fuoroquinolones
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
Nafcillin
drugs
 Penicillins
Penicillamine
 Polymyxin 
 Streptokinase
 Rifampin
 Thiacetarsemide
 Sulfon amid es
 Thiazide diuretics
Tetracyclines
Cholecalciferol
 Tobramycin
 Meth oxyflurane
vancomycin
Lipid-lowering agents 
Antiprotozoals
 Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
Lithium
Sulfadiazine
 Phosphorus-containing urinary
Thiacetarsamide
 acidifiers
 Pentamidine
 Tricyclic antidepressants
Dapsone
Source: Complied from Langston C. Acute uremia. In: Textbook of Veterinary
Immun osu ppressants/
 Azathioprine
Intemal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SE Ettinger, EC Feldman, p. 1972.
chemotherapeutics
Canada: St. Louis, M0: W.B. Saunders; 2010; Polzin DJ. Chronic kidney 
Cyclosporine
disease. In: Textbook of veterinary intemal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SE
Bisph osph on ates
Ettinger, EC Feldman, p. 1972. Canada: St. Louis, M0: W.B. Saunders; 2010;
 Stokes JE. Diagnostic approach to acute azotemia. In: Kirk's Current
Carboplatin 
Veterinary Therapy, 14th edition, eds. JD Bonagura, DC Twedt, p. 856. St.
Louis, M0: Saunders Elsevier; 2009.
Cisplatin 
Doxorubicin
Interleukin-2
Methotrexate
Table 10.7.2
2 Medications that may need dosage alterations in patients with decreased renal function and medications that do not need dosage
alterations in patients with decreased renal function
Drug
Route
Standarddose
Modified dosage based on IRiS staging
Stage I
Stage Il
Stage IlI 
Stage IV
Amikacin
IV
15-30mg/kg
11-22mg/kg
7.5-15mg/kg
3.75-7.5mg/kg
3.75-7.5mg/
q24h
q24ha
q24ha
q24ha
kg q24h-E0Da
Amoxicillin
Iv, P0
10-20mg/kg
NA
NA
10-20mg/kg
10mg/kg
q24 h
q24h
q24h
Ampicillin
IV
10-20 mg/kg
NA
10-20mg/kg
10-20mg/kg
10mg/kg Iv
q8-12h
q12h
q12-24h
q24h
Atenolol
PO
0.25 mg/kg
NA
0.19mg/kg
0.125 mg/kg
0.06mg/kg
q12-24 h
q12-24h
q12-24h
q24h
Azithromycin
PO
5-10mg/kg
NA
NA
NA
NA
q24 h
 Benazepril
PO
0.25-0.5mg/
NA
NA
0.2-0.3 mg/kg
0.125 mg/kg
kg q12-24h
q24h
q24h
Cefazolin
10-30 mg/kg
NA
7.5-22.5mg/kg
5-15 mg/kg
 5-15 mg/kg
q8h
q8h
q12h
q24h
Ceftriaxone
IV
15-20mg/kg
N.A
NA
12-16mg/kg
7.5-10mg/kg
q12-24 h
q24hb
q24hb
 Diltiazem 
Iv, P0
0.5-1.5mg/kg
NA
NA
NA
NA
q8h
Doxycycline
Iv, P0
5-10mg/kg
NA
NA
NA
NA
q12 h
Enalapril
PO
0.5mg/kg
NA
0.375-0.5 mg/
0.25-
0.25mg/kg
q12-24 h
kg q12-24h
0.375 mg/kg
q24h
q12-24h
Enrofloxacin
Iv, Im,
2.5-5mg/kg
NA
1.25-2.5mg/kg
1.25-2.5mg/kg
0.825-
PO
q12 h
q12h
q24h
1.65mg/kg
q24h
Famotidine
Iv, P0
0.5-1mg/kg
NA
0.5mg/kg
0.5mg/kg
0.5 mg/kg
q12-24 h
q24h
q24h
q24h
Fluconazole
PO
5-10mg/kg
NA
5-10 mg/kg
5-10 mg/kg
5-10 mg/kg
q12-24h
q24h
q24E0D
q EOD-ETD
Imipenem
IV
5-10mg/kg
5.75mg/kg
2.5-5mg/kg
2.5-5mg/kg
1.25-2.5mg/
q8h
q8h
q8h
q8-12 h
kg q12-24h
Ketoconazole
PO
5-10mg/kg
NA
NA
NA
NA
q12 h
Metoclopramide
Iv, P0
0.2-0.4mg/kg
NA
0.15-0.3mg/kg
0.1-0.2mg/kg
0.1-0.2mg/
q8h
q8 h
q8h
kg q8h
Mirtazapine
PO
3.75 mg per
NA
1.88mg per cat
1.88mg per cat
1.88mg per
cat q 24 h
q48h
q48h
cat q 48 h
Metronid azole
Iv, P0
10-15 mg/kg
NA
NA
NA
5-12.5mg/kg
q8-24h
q8-24h
Ondansetron
PO
0.1-1 mg/kg
NA
NA
0.05-0.5mg/kg
0.025-
12-24h
q12-24h
0.25mg/kg
q12-24h
Prazosin
PO
1-4mg per 
NA
NA
1-2mg / dog
0.75-1.5mg /
dog q12-24h
q12-24h
dog q12-24h
Propranolol
PO
0.1-0.2mg/kg
NA
NA
NA
0.08-
q8h
0.16mg/kg
q8h
326
Chapter 10  Urinary and Renal Diseases
327
Table 10.7.2 (Continued)
Drug
Route
Standard dose
 Modified dosage based on IRIS staging 
Stage I
 Stage Il
 Stage Ill
 Stage IV
Ranitidine
Iv, P0
0.5-2 mg/kg
NA
0.25-1 mg/kg
0.25-1mg/kg
0.25mg/kg
q8-12h 
q8-12 h
q12-24h
q24h-E0D
Spironolactone
PO
1-2 mg/kg
1mg/kg
0.5mg/kg
0.25mg/kg
C.l.
q12 h
q12h
q24h
q24h
Tramadol
PO
1-4 mg/kg
1-4 mg/kg
0.5-2mg/kg
0.5-1mg/kg
0.5-1mg/kg
q8-12h
q12h
q 12 h
q8-12 h
q12-24h
Vancomycin
IV
10-20 mg/kg
10 mg/kg
5mg/kg
1.25-2.5mg/kg
1.25-2.5mg/
q6-12h
q12ha
q 12-24ha
q12-24ha
kg q 24 h-E0Da
 Preferable to monitor serum levels.
* Reduce further with hepatic insufficiency.
IRIS, International Renal Interest Society; NA, no adjustment required; PO, by mouth; Iv, intravenous; EOD, every other day; ETD, every third day; C.l.,
Contraindicated
Source: Compiled from Karriker M. Drug dosing in renal failure and the dialysis patient. In: Proceedings of the Advanced Renal Therapies Symposium, pp. 8-12.
New York; 2006; Plumb DC. Piumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook, 6th edition. Ames, IA: Blackwell; 2008; Cowgill LD, Kallet A. Systemic hypertension. In: Current
Veterinary Therapy Ix, Small Animal Practice, ed. Rw Kirk, p. 360. Philad elphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1986.
Table 10.7.3
Intemational Renal Interest Society (IRIS) chronic kidney
 patient's hydration status. The fluid deficit is then calculated
disease (CKD) substaging system based on urine protein to creatinine
using the following formula:
ratio
Percentage dehydrated x body wt (kg) = fluid deficit in liters.
Substage
Dog
Cat
The calculated fluid deficit is given intravenously, often rapidly,
<0.2
 over 4-6h. Following treatment for dehydration and repeating
Non-proteinuric (NP)
<0.2
a physical examination to ensure replacement fluid needs, an
Borderline proteinuric (BP)
0.2-0.5
0.2-0.4
hourly fluid rate is calculated based on maintenance require-
Proteinuric (P)
>0.5
>0.4
ments (40-60 mL/kg/day) and on an estimation of ongoing
losses through PU, vomiting, and diarrhea. Replacement fluid
Source: http://www.iris-kidney.com/pdf/IRI$2009_Staging_ CKD.pdf.
choices include 0.9% NaCl, lactated Ringer's solution (LRS),
 Normosol-R (Norm), and Plasma-Lyte 56. In patients with mild
hypernatremia or cardiac insufficiency where there is a concern
for impending congestive heart failure, a low sodium fluid type,
 clearance.? Drug clearance may be estimated by measuring GFR.
 The drug dosage is adjusted by the percentage reduction in GFR
such as 0.45% NaCl/2.5% dextrose or half-strength LRS in 2.5%
(the ratio of the patient's GFR to normal GFR). This percentage
dextrose, can be utilized. It is important to closely monitor for
signs of over- or underhydration in any patient on IV fluids.
is used to adjust dosing regimens by increasing the dosing inter-
These include changes in body weight, decreased urine output,
val (best for drugs with a wide therapeutic range and long plasma
the development of tachypnea, tachycardia, coughing, clear
halflife) or by decreasing the dosage (best for drugs
with a
nasal discharge, chemosis, or increased bronchovesicular sounds
 narrow therapeutic range and a short plasma half-life).2
with or without pulmonary crackles. A progressive elevation in
 central venous pressure can also be an indication of overhydra-
Fluid therapy and correction
tion. Following correction for dehydration, an appropriate urine
of electrolyte imbalances
pn aouuauu huba sjuaed no '/y/t z-I s mndino
 administration as part of their long-term therapy, fluids contain-
 Fluid therapy is commonly indicated in patients with ARF and
ing lower sodium content are recommended. Examples include
decompensated CKD, and in certain patients with PLN. Admin-
Normosol-M, Plasma-Lyte 56, 0.45% NaCl/2.5% dextrose, and
istering fluids permits correction of dehydration, electrolyte and
half-strength LRS in 2.5% dextrose.
acid-base disorders, and initiates diuresis.? Initial calculations
for fluid replacement is based on the presence and degree of
dehydration (Table 10.7.4).
Potassium
Besides the physical examination assessment for dehydration,
laboratory and diagnostic tests (hematocrit, total protein, urine
Potassium is one of the main electrolytes that is frequently
output, and central venous pressure) can aid in determining a
managed with fluid therapy. Patients with renal disease can be
328
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 10.7.4
1 Assessment of hydration status based on physical examination
Hydration status
Clinical signs
Skin
Eyes
 Mucous membranes 
Heart rate
<5%: Normal hydration
Turgor < 2s
Moist, normal
Moist, pink, CRT < 2s
 Normal for species
position
6-8%: Mild dehydration
Turgor > 3s, inelastic and leathery:
Duller than
Tacky to dry, CRT < 2s
Normal to possibly
twist disappears immediately
 normal, sunken 
increased
8-10%: Moderate
Turgor > 3s, inelastic and leathery;
Duller than
Tacky to dry, CRT
Heart rate
dehydration
twist disappears slowly
 normal, sunken
normal to increased
increased 
10-12%: Severe
Turgor remains, no elasticity; twist
Dry, deeply
 Dry, cyanotic, CRT
Heart rate
dehydration
remains
sunken
prolonged or absent
 increased, pulse
weak
12-15%: Shock
 Death is imminent
CRT, capillary refll time.
Source: Jack CM, Watson PM. Veteninary Technician's Daily Reference Guide, 2nd edition, p. 360. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2008.
hyperkalemic, normokalemic, or hypokalemic. Marked hyper-
lemia in patients receiving IV fluids. The dosing of KCl is ideally
kalemia is a life-threatening emergency that can result in death
based on serum potassium levels, but the infusion rate should
by inducing multiple types of arrhythmias. ECG changes may
not exceed 0.5 mEg/kg/h (Table 10.7.6).5
include peaked T waves, bracycardia, prolonged PR intervals,
When patients are receiving maintenance fluids, a total of
flattened and then absent P waves, widened QRS complexes, and
20-30 mEq KCl per liter of fluid is typically suffcient.
ultimately, if the hyperkalemia is severe enough, ventricular
fibrillation and atrial standstill.'
Initial therapy for patients with electrocardiographic abnor-
Calcium and phosphorus
malities due to hyperkalemia usually entails the administration
 In patients with moderate to severe ARF and/or CKD, hyper-
of calcium gluconate IV. Although calcium gluconate blocks the
pathological effects of hyperkalemia on the heart, it does not
 lower serum potassium.4 Short-term lowering of the serum
calcium X phosphorus is greater than 60-70, sof tissue and renal
mineralization develops, which results in progression of CKD.
potassium can be accomplished with sodium bicarbonate, dex-
The first step in lowering mild to moderate hyperphosphatemia
trose injections in nondiabetic patients, and/or regular insulin
is restriction of dietary phosphorus, which may be accomplished.
combined with dextrose injections (see Table 10.7.5). Sodium
with most diets designed for cats and dogs with kidney disease?
bicarbonate is beneficial for the treatment of moderate hyperka-
lemia and metabolic acidosis. A standard mEq/kg dosing can be
(see Table 10.9.1). When dietary therapy is not successful in
maintaining a serum phosphorus less than 6 mg/dL (or reducing
utilized for the treatment of hyperkalemia (see Table 10.7.5) or a
the calcium phosphorus product to less than 60-70), then
dose can be determined by calculating the bicarbonate deficit.
     s -so
The bicarbonate deficit is determined by the following equation:
parathyroidism may be administered (see Table 10.7.5). This is
particularly important in patients with severe CKD or ARE.
0.3 x body wt (kg) x base deficit = bicarbonate deficit
Phosphate-binding agents should be administered with food to
reduce GI upset and to maximize binding of phosphorus in the
and
D aniaaid are suonedaid paensdesua o spnbi gi
 s  si  q x  as si
 20 - serum bicarbonate or total CO, concentration
be crushed for better efficacy.? Some authors state magnesium-
= bicarbonate deficit.
[Maalox*]) should be avoided.° Of the calcium-based phosphate
Usually in patients with severe acidosis, one-fourth to one-third
binders, calcium carbonate is more likely to cause hypercalcemia
of the deficit is administered IV, either over a few hours or as a
and should be used with caution in patients with preexisting
bolus with fuids. The balance of the defcit is given over an
additional 4-6 h.34 The acid-base status is then reevaluated to
calcium- and aluminum-based agents can be utilized concur-
 see if additional bicarbonate therapy is warranted.
rently.? In cats and dogs with a phosphorus level less than 6 mg/
Potassium chloride (KCl) is a common fluid additive that is
dL, calcitriol may be used to suppress renal secondary hyperpar-
used in the treatment of hypokalemia or to maintain normoka-
athyroidism (see Table 10.7.5)."
Table 10.7.5  Drugs used in the management of acute renal failure and chronic kidney disease
Drug
Standard dose
Adverse effect
Therapies to treat hyperkalemia
Calcium gluconate 10% solution 
0.5-1.0 mL/kg IV slow bolus
Arrhythmias
Sodium bicarbonate
0.5-2 mEq/kg IV slow bolus 
Hypernatremia, hypokalemia, decreased 
ionized calcium
Dextrose
0.1-0.5 g/kg IV or 1-2 mL/kg 25% solution
Hyperglycemia, hyperosmolality
 Regular insulin/dextrose
0.25-0.5 U/kg insulin with 1-2g dextrose per
Hypoglycemia
unit insulin given, IV
 Therapies to treat nausea/vomiting
Cimetidine (Tagamet)
5.0mg/kg P0, IM, IV q6-8h
Altered drug metabolism
Ranitidine (Zantac°)
0.5-2 mg/kg P0, IV q 12h
 Rare, agranulocytosis, vomiting
Famotidine (Pepcid)
0.5-1 mg/kg P0, IV, SC, IM 
 Bradycardia (IV), agranulocytosis,
q 12-24 h
vomiting
Misoprostol (Cytotec^)
 1-5 μg/kg P0 q6-8h
Gl upset, uterine contraction
Sucralfate (Carafate")
0.25-1gram P0 q8-12h
Constipation (d)
Aminopentamide hydrogen sulfate
0.1-0.4mg SC, IM q8-12 h
Dry mouth, dry eyes, blurred vision,
(Centrine")
 urinary hesitancy/retention 
Metoclopramide (Reglan)
0.2-0.4 mg/kg P0, SC, IM q 8h
Anorexia, vomiting, depression,
 mydriasis, neurological signs 
Chlorpromazine (Thorazine*)
0.2-0.4 mg/kg Sc, IM q8h (d); 0.5mg/kg Iv,
CNS depression, vomiting, diarrhea,
IM, sc q6-8h (c)
 anorexia, paradoxical excitement (c)
Dolasetron mesylate (Anzemet")
0.6-1 mg/kg P0 q 12 h
Dose related EcG interval prolongation
Ondansetron (Zofran*)
0.6-1 mg/kg P0, IV q 12 h (d); 0.1-0.15 mg/kg
Constipation, extrapyramidal clinical
slow IV q6-12h
signs, arrhythmias, hypotension 
Maropitant citrate (Cerenia)
1 mg/kg SC q24h, 2mg/kg P0 q24h (d);
Swelling/pain at injection site, diarrhea,
extra label use at same dose (c)
anorexia
 Therapies to manage hyperphosphatemia/hyperparathyroidism
Aluminum hydroxide (Amphogel,
30-90 mg/kg/day P0
Gl upset, constipation, aluminum toxicity
Alu-caps")
with advanced CKD
 Aluminum hydroxide/magnesium
30-90 mg/kg/day P0
 Gl upset, constipation, aluminum toxicity
hydroxide (Maalox)
with advanced CKD
Aluminum carbonate (Basalgel°)
30-90 mg/kg/day P0
 Gl upset, constipation, aluminum toxicity
with advanced CKD
Calcium acetate (PhosLo)
60-90 mg/kg/day P0
Hypercalcemia
Calcium citrate (Citracal")
60-90 mg/kg/day P0
Hypercalcemia
 Calcium carbonate
90-150mg/kg/day P0
Hypercalcemia
Sevelamer (Renagel)
 25-40 mg/kg P0 q 12 h
Potentially Gl upset 
Lanthanum carbonate (Fosrenol)
30-90 mg/kg per day
Potentially Gl upset 
Epakitin?
1gm/5kg P0 q12h with a meal
Hypercalcemia
Calcitriol (Rocaltrol)
If creatinine 2-3 and P < 6mg/dL =
Hypercalcemia (particular concern with
2.5-3.5 ng/kg/day P0
calcium-based P binders, e.g., calcium 
carbonate)
If creatinine >3 and P < 6 mg/dL, obtain PTH
level = 3.5 ng/kg/day P0
(Continued)
329
330
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 10.7.5
(Continued)
Drug
Standard dose
Adverse effect
Therapies to stimulate appetite
Diazepam
0.05 to 0.15 mg/kg IV (c)
Avoid Po administration due to
 behavioral changes, hepatic failure
Oxazepam (Serax)
0.25-0.5 mg/kg P0 q12-24h
Sedation, ataxia
Cyproheptadine (Periactin")
0.2mg/kg P0 q12h (d), 0.35-1mg/kg P0
Sedation, mucous membranes dryness,
q12h (c)
parad oxical agitation (c)
Mirtazapine (Remeron?)
3.75 mg P0 q24 (c)
Increased vocalization and affection
Assorted therapies
Sodium bicarbonate
8-12mg/kg P0 q8-12h (d)
Hypernatremia, hypokalemia, decreased 
1mEq/cat P0 q8-12h (c)
ionized calcium 
Potassium citrate (Cytra K Liquid")
35mg/kg P0 q8 h
 Metabolic alkalosis, decreased ionized
calcium, hyperkalemia 
Potassium gluconate
2 mEq per 4.5kg P0 q12h
Hyperkalemia
Azodyl"
If <2.3kg, 1 cap P0 q24h;
 Possible vomiting and diarrhea
If 2.3-4.5 kg, 1 cap P0 q12 h;
If >4.5kg, 2 cap AM, 1 cap PM P0
Rubenal
If 8-12 kg, 0.5 tab P0 q 12 h;
None listed
If 13-25kg, 1 tab P0 q12h;
If 26-45kg, 2 tab P0 q12h;
If >45kg, 3 tab P0 q12 h 
Essential fatty acids/omega fish oil
Due to the unique composition of each
If contains vitamin A the acute toxicosis
(Dermapet Eicosaderm? and OFA
 product, see actual label directions
may result
plus EZ-C caps"; FA. caps; Omega
EFA capsules°)
CKD, chronic kidney disease; c, cat; d, dog; creat, creatinine; P, phosphorus; Po, by mouth; SC, subcutaneous; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; h, hour; d, day;
BW, body weight.
Source: Modified from Lane IF. Treatment of urinary disorders. In: Small Animal Clinical Phammacoiogy Therapeutics, ed. DM Booth. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders;
2001.
Table 10.7.6 Potassium supplementation based on serum potassium
Metabolic acidosis
concentrations
As kidney function in patients with CKD deteriorates or in
 Serum potassium 
 Recommended concentration 
 patients with ARF, additional complications frequently develop.
concentration (mEq/L)
in fluid (mEq/L)
Metabolic acidosis can result from an inability to excrete acids
via the kidneys. In addition to causing progressive renal damage,
3.5-5.5
20
 metabolic acidosis may also cause inappetence, vomiting, and
3.0-3.5
30
weight loss. Patients with a total serum TCO, of less than 15-
2.5-3.0
40
17 mmol/L should receive oral alkalization therapy (see Table
10.7.5). Those with total serum TCO, ofless than 10-12 mmol/L
2.0-2.5
60
should be administered parenteral alkalization therapy (see
<2.0
80
Table 10.7.5).? A 1 mEq/mL bicarbonate solution can be made
from household baking soda (5 or 6 tablespoons of baking soda
to 1 L of water = 1 mEq/mL).'Other therapies include potassium
citrate, calcium carbonate, or acetate (see Table 10.7.5).′ In addi-
tion to metabolic acidosis, patients with kidney failure will com-
monly be inappetent due to a multitude of other causes including
Chapter 10  Urinary and Renal Diseases
331
dehydration, uremia, anemia, lingual and gastric ulceration,
Table 10.7.7  Nomal blood pressure ranges and stages of
electrolyte abnormalities, and possible effects of the medications
hypertension in dogs and cats
being administered.
Blood
Systolic
Diastolic
Potential
pressure stage
ad aptation?
Inappetence
Normal
120
80
None
Therapy for inappetence involves correction of any underlying
complications (if possible), withdrawal of certain medications
Minimal risk
<150
95
<10mmHg
(if appropriate), optimizing administration of food (including
above RR
 introducing new diets slowly, in small amounts, and in a quiet,
Low risk
150-159
66-96
10-20mmHg
low stress environment), administration of appetite stimulants,
above RR
and, in certain cases, use of enteric feeding tubes.? Gastric ulcer-
Moderate risk
160-179
100-119
20-40mmHg
ation can be treated with a histamine (H2) blocker, a synthetic
above RR
prostaglandin analogue (misoprostol), and/or a mucosal pro-
 Severe risk
2180
≥120
≥40 mmHg
tectant (sucralfate) (see Table 10.7.5). As with other medications,
above RR
any H2 blocker excreted via the kidneys requires a dose reduc-
tion with kidney failure. Cimetidine inhibits the metabolism of
 Although not widely available currently, it is ideal to use normal blood
certain drugs (e.g., calcium channel blockers) and should be
pressure ranges determined for specific breeds and to compare
avoided in certain combinations. Since sucralfate is most effec-
measurements to the upper limits of the normal range. Certain breeds (e.g..
sight hounds) have a higher reference range.
tive in an acidic gastric environment, it should be administered
RR, reference range.
30min prior to antacid medications.? A number of appetite
Source: Modified from IRIS. Staging of CKD. http://www.iris-kidney.com/
stimulants have been tried in patients with kidney failure. None
education/en/education06.shtml; 2009.
 iq sq au-t aa o radde s ss o
certain cases, do provide short-term benefits. They appear to
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) have been
work best in combination with other therapies and dietary
 shown to reduce proteinuria in dogs and in cats with PLN, to
 manipulations to improve appetite. The newest appetite stimu-
slow the progression of CKD in dogs and potentially in cats, and
lant to be evaluated is mirtazapine (Remeron?). This medication
 are helpful in controlling hypertension in cats and dogs.13-15 One
 avoids the sedation side effect noted with the benzodiazepines,9.10
 of the proposed mechanisms by which ACEI slows the progres-
is more cost-effective, and may be more effective than cyprohep-
sion of CKD is by reducing glomerular hypertension. However,
tadine. Mirtazapine is an antidepressant that antagonizes alpha-
excessive reduction in renal perfusion and GFRs, especially with
2 adrenergic and serotonin 5-HT2 receptors. It is given once
 preexisting CKD, may cause ARE. To avoid this complication,
 daily in nonazotemic patients and every other day in azotemic
ACEIs are started at a low dosage and are slowly increased, while
patients (see Tables 10.7.2 and 10.7.5).9.10
  gn     
metabolite of benazepril is eliminated principally via biliary
Hypertension
excretion in cats, compared to renal excretion for enalapril.
Therefore, benazepril does not require dose reduction for mod-
Hypertension is a common complication of renal disease in cats
erate CKD.14 Newer medications that result in angiotensin recep-
and dogs and has been reported in more than 60% of these
tor blockage (e.g., losartan) are being evaluated for the treatment
d po sa pe pu pss s srr g, sd
of hypertension.
 si  (e   s  s oq  
Calcium channel blockers (e.g., amlodipine, nifedipine) are
designed to slow the progression of CKD and to help manage
commonly used in the treatment of hypertension in dogs and in
 hyperphosphatemia. These diets are also designed to be moder-
cats. They reduce BP by peripheral vasodilation and are effective
 ately restricted in sodium and are the first step in the manage-
 in cats with once-daily therapy. 6 Unlike ACEI, calcium channel
 ment of mild systemic hypertension. For patients with repeatable
 blockers may improve renal perfusion and GFR; in addition,
moderate to severe hypertension (>160-200 mmHg), pharmaco-
 they contain cytoprotective qualities that may beneft patients
with ARF or CKD.? Amlodipine results in an approximately
is evidence of hypertensive damage to the eyes (e.g., retinal
a threefold increase in renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
detachment), brain (e.g., seizures), or heart (e.g., left ventricular
activation, which is blunted by concurrent use of an ACE1.17
hypertrophy). Antihypertensive therapy is often based on the
Hydralazine is a direct-acting smooth muscle relaxant that is
underlying etiology, the potential risk versus benefits for the
similar to calcium channel blockers. It induces peripheral
patient, and the clinician's preference. T
Table10.7.8 lists
vasodilation, thereby reducing BP. In renal transplantation cats
 medications that have been used to treat hypertension. Hyper-
 an on s  s a  
tensive cats with concurrent tachycardia may benefit from a beta
and the frequency of neurological complications. A beta
blocker (e.g., atenolol); however, dogs with ARF or CKD appear
blocker (e.g., atenolol) may be needed if reflex tachycardia devel-
 to have minimal beneft from beta blockers or diuretics (e.g.)
ops. For patients with severe and/or life-threatening hyperten-
furosemide).12
sion, nitroprusside, a potent intravenous vasodilator of both
332
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 10.7.8
Medications used in the treatment of hypertension in dogs and cats
Drug
 Standard dose
Adverse effect
Furosemide (Lasix)
2.5-5mg/kg P0, IV, IM q 12-24 h
 Fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, prerenal
azotemia, ototoxicity
Spironolactone (Aldactone*)
1-2 mg/kg P0 q12h (c)
 Mild fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, azotemia,
acidosis
Propranolol (Inderal")
2.5-5mg/cat P0 8-12h (c)
Bronchoconstriction, hypotension, bradycardia,
congestive heart failure
Atenolol (Tenormin*)
 2mg/kg/day (c),
Bron choconstriction, hypotension, bradycardia,
congestive heart failure
0.25-2 mg/kg/day (d)
Enalapril (Vasotec)
0.25 mg/kg P0 q24h to 0.5 mg/kg P0 q 12 h
Hypotension, decreased renal perfusion, hyperkalemia,
Gl upset, rarely myelosuppression, seizures 
Benazepril (Lotensin*)
0.25-0.5 mg/kg P0 q12-24 h
Hypotension, decreased renal perfusion, hyperkalemia,
 Gl upset, rarely myelosuppression, seizures
Amlodipine (Norvasc)
0.625-1.25mg/cat P0 q 12-24 h (c);
Hypotension, cardiac arrhythmias, Gl upset
0.05-0.25 up to 1mg/kg P0 q 24h (d)
Hydralazine (Apresoline°)
0.5-2mg/kg P0 q8-12 h (d); 2.5 mg/cat P0
Hypotension, reflex tachycardia, sodium/water
q12-24h (c)
retention, Gl upset 
Nitroprusside sodium
1-2 mcg/kg/min (d);
Hypotension, nausea
(Nitropress)
0.5mcg/kg/min (c)
c, cats; d, dogs; Po, by mouth; IM, intramuscular; Iv, intravenous.
Table 10.7.9 Antimicrobial agent-specifc factors that influence
lists five antimicrobial agent factors that influence selection. Bac-
selection for urinary infections
terial infections of the urogenital system are far more common
than fungal or viral infections and can be confined to one site or
1.
 Easy to administer
to multiple sites.? Except for a simple, frst-time UTI in middle-
2.
Associated with few, if any, adverse effects
aged female dogs, it is best to determine antibiotic therapy based
Affordability
on bacterial identifcation and antimicrobial sensitivity. Urine
4.
 Able to attain urine concentrations (e.g., prostatitis) that
exceed the bacterial minimum inhibitory concentration 
bial therapy (or after antibiotics have been discontinued for 3-5
(MIC) by ≥4-fold
days), although sterile catheterization can provide valid results.
5.
 Unlikely to adversely affect gastrointestinal flora
The collected urine needs to be transported in a sterile container
and processed as rapidly as possible to avoid bacterial prolifera-
tion, contamination, or bacterial death.2 If laboratory process-
arteries and veins, may be considered.19 In all patients receiving
 ing of the urine sample is delayed by greater than 30 min, then 
antihypertensives, serial monitoring of BP and renal and cardiac
the sample should be refrigerated at 4°℃.20
function is critical to ensure the hypertension is controlled and
In certain circumstances, antimicrobial therapy needs to be
to avoid potentially serious complications.
initiated empirically before urine culture and sensitivity results
are available. For these patients, the initial antimicrobials chosen
are based on common isolates that cause UTIs in dogs and cats,
Antimicrobials
such as E. coli, Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., and Ente-
Antimicrobials are commonly used in the therapy of urinary
      n   n s
concentration should be administered, such as amoxicillin,
agent is based on many patient factors including the type, sen-
cephalexin, or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (see Table 10.7.10).
sitivity, and anatomic site of the infection, the presence or
For uncomplicated UTIs, these frst-line antimicrobials should
absence of clinical signs, neuter status, concurrent disorders,
be chosen rather than second-line drugs, such as amoxicillin-
imaging study results (e.g., presence of urinary bladder stones),
clavulanic acid (Clavamox?), fluoroquinolones (e.g., Baytril), or
and reoccurrence or persistence of the infection. Table 10.7.9
extended-release cephalosporins (e.g., cefovecin). Empiric use of
Chapter 10  Urinary and Renal Diseases
333
Table 10.7.10 Antimicrobial agents commonly used in urinary conditions
Drug
Administration
Standard dose
Adverse effect
route
Amikacin
IV
15-30mg/kg q24 h
Nephrotoxicity, ototoxicity, neuromuscular blockade 
Amoxicillin
PO, IV
10-20mg/kg q24 h
Anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea
Ampicillin 
IV
10-20 mg/kg q8-12 h
Hypersensitivity reactions (fever, bone marrow
disorders)
Amoxicillin-
PO
12.5-13.75 mg/kg q12 h
Anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, hypersensitivity
clavulanic acid
reactions
(Clavamox)
Cefazolin
IV
10-30mg/kg q8h
Hypersensitivity reactions (fever, bone marrow
disorders)
Cefovecin
SC
8mg/kg q14 d
Hypersensitivity reactions (fever, bone marrow
(Convenia")
 disorders), injection site pain
Ceftriaxone
IM, Iv
 15-50mg/kg q12 h
Hypersensitivity reactions (fever, bone marrow
(Rocephin°)
Cephalexin
PO
30-40mg/kg q8h
Salivation, tachypnea, excitability, nephrotoxicity.
hypersensitivity reactions
Chloramphenicol
PO
45-60 mg/kg q8h
Dose-related, reversible bone marrow suppression,
 aplastic anemia (human)
Clindamycin
PO, SC, IM
 5-11mg/kg q12h
Vomiting, diarrhea, esophageal injuries 
Doxycycline
PO, IV
5-10mg/kg q12h
Vomiting, esophageal injuries (stricture)
Enrofl oxacin
 Po, IM, Iv
2.5-5mg/kg q12 h
Vomiting, anorexia, ocular toxicity causing
 blindness, potential cartilage abnormalities 
Gentamicin
SC, IM, IV
6-8mg/kg q24 h
Nephrotoxicity, ototoxicity, neuromuscular blockade
Nitrofurantoin
PO
4-5mg/kg q6-8h
Vomiting, hepatopathy
Imipenem-
SC, IV
5-10mg/kg q8h
Vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, CNs toxicity,
 cilastatin sodium
hypersensitivity
Penicillin G
IM, Iv
25,000-40,000U/kg q12-24 h
Hypersensitivity reactions (fever, bone marrow
disorders)
Tetracycline
PO
16mg/kg q8h
Vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, discoloration to teeth
in young animals
Trimethoprim/
PO
30mg/kg q24h
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, acute hepatitis,
sulf adiazine
hypothyroidism, acute hypersensitivity
vancomycin
IV
10-20mg/kg q6-12 h
Nephrotoxicity, ototoxicity
 PO, by mouth; SC, subcutaneous; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; h, hour; d, day; Bw, body weight; CNs, central nervous system.
these second-line antimicrobials is discouraged, due to the rapid
the risk for infection can include CKD, endogenous or exoge-
 development of resistance and the inherent resistance of gram-
nous hyperadrenocorticism, and diabetes mellitus. These patients
are treated with a 4- to 6-week course of antimicrobials based
cated UTIs are usually treated with a 10- or 14-day course of
on urine culture and sensitivity results.2 Intact male dogs with
antibiotics with resolution of clinical signs within 2 days.20
UTIs are assumed to have prostatitis and are treated with anti-
In contrast to uncomplicated UTIs, complicated UTIs are often
microbials based on urine, prostatic wash, prostatic brush, or
 treated for a longer duration and potentially with diferent anti-
 needlle aspirate culture results. It these cases, it is very important
microbials. Most cats, intact dogs, and cats or dogs with poly-
that the antibiotic be able to penetrate the physiological barrier
poid cystitis, emphysematous cystitis, magnesium ammonium
of the prostate. Examples of such antibiotics include fluoroqui-
phosphate (struvite) urolithiasis, or pyelonephritis are consid-
nolones, trimethoprim-sulfonamide, or chloramphenicol.2 In
ered to have complicated UTIs. Medical issues that may increase
addition to a longer course of antibiotics, some cases of polypoid
334
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
cystitis may require surgery to remove the deep-seated bacterial
rently unknown. An important component in the treatment of
infection.? Emphysematous cystitis (an accumulation of gas
a complicated or recurrent UTI is ensuring eradication of the
within the urinary bladder wall and lumen secondary to gas
infection during therapy. This is accomplished by submitting
   i s  s q 
urine cultures while on antibiotics, and again 5-7 days postcom-
 cats with diabetes mellitus and often requires long-term antibi-
pletion of antibiotics.
otics to eradicate the infection. In dogs, greater than 90% of
magnesium ammonium phosphate uroliths are induced by
Urinary incontinence
urease-producing bacteria, such as Staphylococcus spp. or Proteus
spp., and can be dissolved with a combination of long-term
Urinary incontinence is an involuntary escape of urine during
the storing phase of the urinary cycle.22 One of the frst steps in
tal antibiotics,fluid therapy, and supportive care are often needed
differentiating diseases that cause urinary incontinence is to esti-
 o uo sh   p a s nd a 
mate the size ofthe urinary bladder following voiding. In patients
hospitalization for chronic pyelonephritis, the antibiotic should
with overflow incontinence due to lower motor neuron or upper
be continued for up to 6-8 weeks.20
motor neuron disorders, the urinary bladder is still large even
 In addition to antimicrobials, several ancillary therapies have
after voiding. In contrast, the urinary bladder is typically small
been advocated for UTIs. These therapies are most commonly
after urinating with USMI ("spay incontinence"), detrusor
used in the prevention, rather than the treatment, of UTIs. They
include urinary antiseptics (e.g., methenamine), which decrease
based on the underlying condition and can include both medica-
the hospitability of urine for most bacteria pathogens without
tions and surgery. For patients with lower motor neuron disease,
harming the patient. Cranberry juice has also been used to
 treatment involves manual bladder expression three to four
prevent UTIs by inhibiting the aftachment of bacteria in the
times daily and, in some cases, medications to stimulate bladder
urinary mucosa; however, the benefit in dogs and in cats is cur-
contractility (e.g., bethanechol) (see Table 10.7.11 for dosing
Table 10.7.11 Medications used in the therapy of urinary incontinence
Drug
Administration
Standard dose
Adverse effect
route
Bethanechol
PO
 5-25mg (total dose) q8h 
Vomiting, diarrhea, salivation, anorexia,
bradycardia, arrhythmias, hypotension
Baclofen
PO
1-2 mg/kg q8 h 
 Sedation, weakness, pruritus, salivation
 Phen oxybenzamine
P0
0.25mg/kg q12-24 h
Hypotension, hypertension, miosis, increased
IOP and heart rate
 Prazosin
PO
1mg per15 kg of Bw q12-24h
Hypotension, lethargy, dizziness, vomiting.
diarrhea
Diazepam
PO
0.2 mg/kg or 2-10 mg total
 Sedation, excitement, irritability, weakness,
dose q8h
depression
Dantrolene
PO
1-5 mg/kg q8-12 h
Hepatotoxicity, weakness, sed ation, dizziness,
vomiting, constipation 
Phenylpropanolamine
PO
1.0-1.5 mg/kg q8-12 h
Restless; increased heart rate, BP, I0P;
hepatic glycogenolysis
Diethylstilbestrol (DES)
P0
0.1-1mg q24h x 3-5d; then
Bone marrow suppression, alopecia, behavior
1mg/wk
changes, signs consistent of estrus
Testosterone cypionate
IM
2.2 mg/kg q4-8 weeks
 Prostate enlargement 
Imipramine
PO
5-15 mg q12h
 Sedation, seizures, constipation, vomiting.
tachycardia, bone marrow suppression
Flavoxate
PO
100-200mg (total dose) q6-8h
Weakness
Oxybutynin 
PO
2-5mg (total dose) q8-12h
Diarrhea, constipation, urine retention,
 hypersalivation, sed ation
Propantheline bromide
PO
7.5-30mg (total dose) from q8
 Dry mouth and eyes, urinary hesitancy,
to 24 h
elevated heart rate, constipation
'annssaid pooia da rainssaid neinooenui doi hublam Apog 'ma ep 'p tinoy 'y teinosnwenun 'wi unnow Aa od
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
335
information).? Since manual bladder expression is diffcult in 
 in serum proteins, which can make them sensitive to toxicity
patients with upper motor neuron disease, treatment with
when administered drugs that are highly protein bound.
baclofen, a skeletal muscle relaxant, is utilized. The patient may
Anemia secondary to CKD can impair the body's ability to
still need to be aseptically catheterized three to four times daily?2
mic, which in turn can contribute to prolonged anesthetic
are treated with smooth muscle relaxants (flavoxate, oxybutynin,
recoveries and coagulation abnormalities. Correction of severe
dicylomine, and propantheline bromide).
 Patients with USMI are treated with medication to increase
 sible before administering anesthesia to any patient.
urethral tone (e.g., phenylpropanolamine, DES, testosterone 
 Many anesthetics are well-known for their hypotensive
cypionate or methytestosterone [in male dogs], and, less fre-
effects. This is due to peripheral vasodilation, myocardial
quently, imipramine) (see Table 10.7.11 for dosing informa-
depression, and other factors. Anesthetic-induced hypotension
 tion°). Cases of USMI that are nonresponsive to medical therapy
can be detrimental to any patient in part due to its effect on
have been successfully treated with either surgery (colposuspen-
 renal function. The decreased renal perfusion caused by hypo-
sion, urethral imbrication) and/or minimally invasive proce-
tension can induce renal tissue ischemia and can exacerbate
dures (urethral submucosa collagen injection, urethral artifcial
patients already affected with existing renal dysfunction. Fluid
sphincter).22
administration prior to and during anesthesia can help to
combat the physiological changes associated with anesthesia.
Identifying hypotension is one of the frst steps in mitigating its
harmful effects. Serial BP measurement should be performed
SECTION 8 ANESTHETIC AND
during anesthesia on patients with renal disease, and abnor-
ANALGESIC CONSIDERATIONS
malities in BP should be addressed promptly to avoid prolonged
hypotension. BP under anesthesia can be measured indirectly
by the Doppler or oscillometric methods, and directly by arte-
Patients with urinary tract disorders, and more specifcally
rial catheterization. Direct arterial blood pressure measurement
renal diseases, can have impaired metabolism and excretion
(DABP) by arterial catheterization should be considered in
abilities, putting them an increased risk for adverse events
critically ill or high risk patients. DABP has the advantage of
when administered certain medications and anesthetics.
In
giving continuous readings even during times of severe hypo-
tension, arrhythmia, and other extreme hemodynamic events.
ence advancement of their disease when administered certain
There are several methods of addressing anesthetic hypoten-
analgesics and anesthetics. Patients with urinary tract diseases
sion, and the method chosen is based on a number of factors
often require the administration of anesthesia for diagnostic
 including the volume status of the patient, product availability.
and treatment procedures, making it important for nursing
 and veterinarian preference. Common methods include the
staff to understand how anesthetics can affect the renal patient.
administration of crystalloid solutions, synthetic colloids, blood
In addition, many urinary tract disorders are painful
or
 products, and synthetic inotropic medications. Care must be
cause discomfort, and patients may beneft from analgesic
 taken not to volume overload these patients, especially those
intervention. Proper drug selection and monitoring can help
at risk for hypervolemia, such as those with concurrent car-
to mitigate potential adverse effects and can increase the quality
diac disease. Monitoring of central venous pressure in high
of life.
risk patients can assist the anesthetist in preventing volume
overload.
Most inhalant agents can cause a dose-dependent vasodila-
Anesthesia
tion, which can lead to hypotension. A common strategy used
 to prevent hypotension is by the use of multimodal pharmaceu-
Patients with urinary tract disorders can present with several
ticals in the form of premedications, local and regional anesthet-
factors that can increase their risk for anesthetic-related com-
ics, induction agents, and continuous infusions of drugs, which
plications. Patients with urethral and ureteral obstruction or
 can allow for lower inhalant flow rates. Induction agents and
renal insufficiency will have impaired excretory ability. Drugs
other medications should be chosen and dosed carefully to
primarily metabolized or eliminated by the urinary system
 prevent overdose in renal patients. Drugs that are mainly or
should be avoided or administered at lower doses to avoid pro-
partially excreted by the kidney include ketamine (in cats), pro-
longed effects or toxicity. Patients with chronic renal disease 
puog ud aay ae ie siia euado pue onod
often suffer from a chronic state of hypovolemia due to dehy-
 include propofol, diazepam, midazolam, and acepromazine and
dration, and when severe, anesthesia should be postponed if
 should be used with caution in patients with decreased serum
 possible until this can be corrected with fluid administration.
 proteins. Dose adjustments may be required when administering
Electrolyte and acid-base disturbances such as metabolic acido-
 these induction agents to patients with urinary disorders that
sis, hypokalemia, and hyperkalemia are common and can pre-
can affect the excretory function of the kidneys. Total intrave-
dispose patients to life-threatening arrhythmias or can potentiate
 nous anesthesia (TIVA) is becoming more widely used in small 
nephrotoxicity. Patients with PLNs can suffer from a decrease
animal practice and can be used as an alternative to inhalant
336
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
anesthesia in critically ill or high risk animals when the risks of
SECTION 9 NUTRITIONAL
hypotension are a concern.
CONSIDERATIONS
Pain management
Chronic kidney disease
Patients with disorders of the urinary tract can experience pain
Dietary therapy is an integral component in the treatment of
from mild to severe. The pain from these disorders can also be
patients with CKD and should be used in conjunction with
 acute, chronic, or a combination of both. Patients with urinary
appropriate medical therapy. Diets for patients with CKD should
calculi, urinary neoplasia, and idiopathic cystitis can experience
provide adequate nutrition while ameliorating disturbances in
 acute or chronic discomfort from inflammation in the urinary
electrolyte, acid-base, vitamin, mineral, and hydration status.
bladder causing pollakiuria, hematuria, and stranguria. Patients
Appropriate dietary therapy for canine and feline CKD can
with CKD can suffer from painful uremic ulcers of the oral
improve quality of life and increase survival time. -3 Commercial
mucous membranes or the GI tract, which can cause discomfort
diets formulated for CKD patients are usually restricted in
and poor appetite. Recognition and resolution of pain and
protein, phosphorous, and sodium; enhanced in levels of fatty
discomfort can play an integral role in restoring the quality of
acids, antioxidants, B vitamins, and soluble fber; are either
life for these patients. As previously described, many pharma-
neutral or slightly alkalinizing; and are calorie dense. Addition-
ceuticals can be harmful to patients with renal dysfunction and
ally, diets designed for feline CKD patients often have increased
 dose adjustments should be considered in patients with dimin-
potassium supplementation. Of these dietary components, only
ished excretory function.
protein, phosphorous, fatty acids, and antioxidants have been
Opioids are commonly used analgesics in veterinary medi-
extensively studied in canine and feline CKD patients.
cine. These drugs are excreted in the urine and may cause pro-
longed effects in patients with renal dysfunction. They are still
Caloric intake
considered a mainstay for the inpatient treatment of pain in
The first dietary goal for CKD patients is to provide suficient
renal patients when dosed and administered appropriately. It has
been shown that dogs as well as cats can aftain therapeutic
caloric intake. Patients with CKD are often anorexic secondary
plasma levels of buprenorphine by transmucosal administration,
to their renal disease but are thought to have caloric requirements
and this is often dispensed for the treatment of moderate pain
similar to those of healthy dogs and cats. The energy require-
in veterinary patients. Fentanyl transdermal patches are often
ments for a patient with CKD can be calculated as follows:4
used for moderate to severe pain in dogs and cats, but contro-
versyexists about the reliability of absorption in animals, making
Dogs: 132 X body wt (kg).75 = kilocalories per day
it imperative to monitor them for breakthrough pain.
and
NSAIDs are widely used by veterinarians for their anti-
inflammatory and analgesic effects. NSAIDs in some cases can
Cats: 50- 60 x body wt (kg) = kilocalories per day.
cause alterations in renal blood flow, which can lead to ARF. This
 can be potentiated by the administration of NSAIDs to patients
Maintenance energy requirements will vary among individuals,
with hypovolemia and hypotension. Cats appear to be particu-
and these calculations only provide a starting point. Energy
larly sensitive to the renal effects of NSAIDs. It is generally
requirements should also be estimated based on the approximate
accepted that NSAIDs should not be administered to patients
caloric intake of the pet when it was healthy, as well as serial
with existing renal disease, hypotension, or dehydration. When
evaluation of body weight and body condition scores.
 these drugs are used in at-risk patients, appropriate fluid therapy
 I is preferable that the caloric requirements of a CKD patient
to maintain renal perfusion and close monitoring of renal
are met with a renal-specifc diet. Clients can be given small
 parameters is essential.
portions (e.g., one can and a small portion of kibble) of several
 Local and regional anesthetic and analgesic techniques can be
 di  s id  oi ao oi s ai, yo s
used to treat or prevent pain, can reduce or eliminate inhalant
the chances of fnding a palatable option for the CKD patient
requirements in patients, and can provide lasting analgesia pos-
and in turn will help improve compliance. Feeding strategies to
 tanesthesia. Common techniques described for urinary patients
help stimulate appetite (e.g., warming food) should be used to
include incisional blocks, bladder and urethral infusions, topical
improve compliance. Additionally, introducing a diet when sys-
applications, and epidural administration. Careful calculation of
temic clinical signs such as vomiting are controlled is preferable.
 s n d o n  sp s re
Examples of commercially available diets for CKD are included
drugs in sensitive animals (especially cats). Some animals expe-
in the Table 10.9.1.
rience urinary retention after epidural administration of mor-
phine, which can be detrimental to patients with certain urinary
Protein
disorders. Careful monitoring of epidural patients including
bladder expression or urinary catheter placement may be
Diets designed for CKD patients should have controlled protein
required in some patients.
restriction. It is not certain if protein restriction actually slows
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
337
Canine
Feline
Royal Canin Veterinary Diet Canine Renal Low Protein (LP)
Royal Canin Veterinary Diet Feline Renal Low Protein (LP)
Royal Canin Veterinary Diet Canine Renal Medium Protein (MP)
Royal Canin Veterinary Diet Canine-Reduced Protein
Royal Canin Veterinary Diet Feline-Reduced Protein
Hills Prescription Diet Canine k/d
Hill's Prescription Diet Feline k/d
lams Veterinary Formulas Canine Renal Early Stage?
lams Veterinary Formulas Feline Multi-Stage Renal
Purina Veterinary Diets Canine NF
Purina Veterinary Diets Feline NF
 Only available in dry kibble.
the progression of renal injury in dogs and cats with CKD.56
 is more common in cats with earlier stages of CKD, with hyper-
Excess protein intake in CKD patients leads to an increase in
 kalemia becoming more frequently observed with the progres-
nitrogenous waste and uremic toxin production and in subse-
sion of CKD to an oliguric or anuric state.
protein restriction is detrimental to the patient. Appropriate
Sodium
protein restriction will stabilize or reduce the degree of azotemia
while avoiding signs of protein malnutrition such as alterations
 Dietary sodium restriction in CKD patients is controversial.
 in body weight or tissue mass, anemia, and serum hypoalbu-
Sodium levels affect circulating volume and sodium retention as
minemia. If signs of protein malnutrition are evident, the dietary
 a consequence of CKD can theoretically be linked to hyperten-
 protein should be increased to the point where these abnormali-
 sion. Increased dietary sodium has not been shown to affect BP
ties resolve.
 in dogs or in cats with CKD.13-16 In one study of cats with natu-
rally occurring CKD, sodium restriction was associated with
Phosphorous
dietary sodium chloride promoted the progression of feline
m s pue sio u u u e si esod
CKD. Phosphate retention is an important factor in the progres-
 sodium content (or mild sodium restriction) is appropriate for
sion of CKD and has been associated with decreased survival in
cats and dogs with CKD.
associated with the development of renal secondary hyperpar-
Fatty acids and antioxidants
athyroidism. Dietary phosphorous restriction is recommended
as the first step in controlling serum phosphorous levels. Protein
 Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) and antioxidants
is a major source of phosphorous; hence, protein-restricted diets
are common components to some diets designed for CKD
are usually phosphorous restricted as well. Dietary phosphorous
patients. Omega-3 PUFA supplementation can preserve renal
restriction alone may be sufficient to normalize phosphorous
function, decrease renal inflammation, and lower BP. Cats
levels as well as to decrease PTH levels.2 If dietary therapy alone
offered a renal diet with added PUFAs had an increased survival
does not normalize phosphorous levels after 2-4 weeks, the addi-
compared with cats offered renal diets without PUFA supple-
tion of phosphate binders is recommended.
kidney tissue in dogs with induced renal failure." The ideal
quantity or ratio of omega-3 to 6 PUFAs has not yet been deter-
Potassium
mined. Antioxidant therapy (e.g., vitamin E) may be beneficial
Hypokalemia is a common finding in cats with CKD but is rare
 in reducing oxidative stress associated with renal disease, but
extensive studies evaluating their efficacy have not been per-
in dogs with CKD. Serum potassium levels likely underestimate
formed in veterinary medicine.
gression of renal decline as well as muscle weakness. Some diets
for feline CKD patients include potassium supplementation, but
Acid-base
conate) may be required. However, some cats with CKD are
Metabolic acidosis is a common consequence of CKD, especially
hyperkalemic, and the decision for potassium supplementation
 in later stages of the disease.9 Diets designed for patients with
should be based on initial serum potassium levels. Hypokalemia
 CKD are neutral to slightly alkalinizing. Oral alkalinizing agents
338
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
(e.g, potassium citrate, sodium bicarbonate) may be needed in
 A common clinical question remains: At what stage should a
patients with marked metabolic acidosis, and treatment should
 renal diet be introduced to a patient with CKD? Current evi-
be based on serum bicarbonate or total CO, levels.
 dence shows that protein-restricted diets are indicated in dogs
with stage III and IV CKD, as well as in cats with midstage II-IV
Water intake
CKD. While evidence does not support or refute protein restric-
tion in stage I CKD, the other benefits of commercial renal diets
Dehydration results from PU secondary to CKD, and patients
likely warrant their use in this group of patients. For example, if
may fail to consume adequate amounts of water. To help prevent
a patient in stage II CKD is hyperphosphatemic, dietary phos-
chronic dehydration, adequate fresh water should be available.
phorous restriction may be achieved with a low protein diet.
Additionally, feeding moist or canned diets, adding water to
Stage I CKD patients with proteinuria and suspected glomerular
food, offering flavored water, and using water drinking fountains
disease likely benefit from protein-restricted diets as well.
can promote dietary water intake.
Current evidence supports phosphorous restriction in dogs with
stage II-IV CKD and is considered appropriate for cats with
Feeding tubes
stage II-IV CKD. Dietary supplementation with omega-3 PUFAs
should be considered in dogs and cats with stage I-IV CKD, as
Ensuring adequate caloric intake in patients with CKD can be
well as stage I patients with proteinuria.
challenging. Esophagostomy (E), percutaneous endoscopic gas-
trostomy (PEG), or surgically placed gastrostomy (G) tubes can
be utilized to supplement nutritional requirements in the par-
Urolithiasis
tially or completely anorexic animal. These feeding tubes can
Urolith formation occurs when the urine becomes supersatu-
also be used to supplement fluid intake in these patients. Gas-
rated with calculogenic crystalloid substances. Dietary therapy
trostomy tubes (either PEG or G-tubes) may be easier to main-
for the treatment and prevention of urolithiasis focuses on pro-
 tain on a long-term basis when compared with E-tubes.4 One
 u s a go g aee ie pmous Aps suu
moting undersaturation of the urine with calculogenic crystal-
study maintained or increased their body weight after tube
loids as well as on increasing their solubility. This can be achieved
placement, but stomal site infections were common. Other com-
by altering urine pH to increase the urine solubility of calculo-
plications include accidental removal of the feeding tube and
genic crystalloids and by decreasing the saturation of calculo-
 displacement of the tube into the abdominal cavity causing peri-
genic crystalloids. In the case of struvite or urate uroliths, dietary
manipulation can help dissolve the uroliths. Specifc dietary
tonitis. The study concluded that G-tubes were safe and effective
 in improving caloric intake in dogs with CKD.20
therapy can also help prevent the recurrence of many types of
uroliths (Tables 10.9.2 and 10.9.3).
Evidence supporting the use of renal diets
Dietary water intake
 The benefits of renal diets for dogs and cats with CKD have been
demonstrated in double-blinded randomized controlled clinical
Decreased urine volume can be a risk factor for the development
trials (RCCTs). Compared to maintenance diets, renal diets in
of several urinary tract disorders, including urolithiasis. There-
both studies were restricted in protein, phosphorous, and sodium
fore, along with specific dietary considerations listed below,
and were supplemented with PUFAs.d2 In a canine double-
increasing dietary water intake is recommended for the treat-
blinded RCCT, dogs with stage II-III CRI were fed either a renal
ment and prevention of urolithiasis.? Increased water intake is
 or a maintenance diet. Dogs fed a renal diet had fewer episodes
also beneficial for patients with CKD and FIC. Increasing the
of uremic crises and clinical signs, slower progression of CKD,
water intake will increase urine volume and therefore will
higher quality of life perceived by owners, and reduced risk of
decrease the relative saturation of urinary calculogenic sub-
death compared to dogs fed a maintenance diet. The median
stances. Additionally, increased water intake will facilitate
survival time for dogs fed the renal diet was 594 days compared
shorter transit time of calculogenic crystallids in the urinary
 to 188 days for dogs fed the maintenance diet.
tract and will increase the frequency of voiding. USG can be
 In a feline double-blinded RCCT, cats with stage II-III CRI
measured periodically to determine if the desired increase in
were fed either a renal diet or a maintenance diet. The cats fed
water intake has been achieved. A USG <1.020 in dogs and
the renal diet had a reduced risk of uremic crises and death
<1.025 in cats is preferable.
compared to the cats fed the maintenance diet.? In a nonrand-
 Dietary water intake can be increased by feeding canned food,
omized feline study, cats fed a renal diet had a median survival
by adding water to dry food, by using pet drinking fountains,
time of 633 days compared to 264 days for cats that consumed
and by offering flavored water. Bouillon cubes with onion
their regular diet. Cats fed the renal diet also had reduced urea,
powder must be avoided for flavoring water as the onion powder
phosphorus, and PTH levels compared to the cats fed their
can cause Heinz body anemia in cats. Adding sodium chloride
regular diet. A retrospective study revealed that cats fed a renal
to the diet is another potential strategy to increase water intake,
diet had a median survival time of 16 months compared to 7
   n o e s i sn 
months for cats fed a conventional maintenance diet.'7
impaired renal tubular absorption of calcium and subsequent
Chapter 10  Urinary and Renal Diseases
339
Table 10.9.2
 Selected commercial diets for the treatment and
Table 10.9.3
Selected commercial diets for the treatment and
prevention of canine uroliths 
prevention of feline uroliths
Canine
Dissolution
Prevention
 Feline 
Dissolution
Prevention
urolith diets
urolith diets
Struvite
Hill's Prescription
Hill's Prescription
Struvite
Hill's Prescription
 Hill's Prescription Diet
 Diet Canine s/d
Diet Canine c/da
Diet Feline s/d 
 Feline c/d Multicare
Royal Canin 
Royal Canin 
 lams Veterinary Formula
Veterinary Diet
Veterinary Diet
Urinary-S-low pH/S
Urinary So
 Canine Urinary S0
Purina Veterinary
 Purina Veterinary Diets
 Royal Canin 
Diet UR st/ox
UR st/ox
Veterinary Diet
Royal Canin
 Royal Canin Veterinary
Canine Preventative
Veterinary Diet
 Diet Feline Preventative 
Calcium
NA
 Hill's Prescription 
 Feline Dissolution 
oxalate
 Diet Canine u/d 
 Royal Canin Veterinary
Royal Canin
 Diet Urinary SO
Veterinary Diet
Calcium
NA
Hill's Prescription Diet 
Urinary So
oxalate
 Feline c/d Multicare
Urate
 Hills Prescription 
 Hill's Prescription 
lams Veterinary Formula
Diet u/d
Diet u/d
Urinary-O-Moderate pH/0
Royal Canin 
 Royal Canin
 Purina Veterinary Diets
Veterinary Diet
Veterinary Diet
UR st/ox
Urinary Uc Low
Urinary UC Low
Purine
 Purine
Royal Canin Veterinary
 Diet Feline Urinary SO
 Canine struvite uroliths are usualy infection induced; dietary modification
for prevention is usually not required.
NA, not applicable.
hypercalciuria. High dietary sodium levels increase water intake
tioned of the potential passage of uroliths into the urethra once
and urine volume, leading to decreased USG and decreased
they are small enough. This can lead to urinary obstruction and
calcium oxalate saturation of the urine in healthy dogs and
 is of particular concern for males due to their relatively smaller
cats.2223 However, the effects of a high sodium diet have not been
 urethral diameter when compared with females.
studied on patients at risk for the development of uroliths. At
Struvite dissolution diets should be restricted in protein and
this time, supplemental dietary sodium chloride to stimulate
calculogenic crystalloids (e.g., urea, phosphorous, magnesium).
water intake in dogs and cats prone to urolithiasis should be used
Additionally, these diets produce a more acidic urine environ-
 cautiously. High sodium diets should not be used in patients
ment that is less favorable for struvite crystal formation. A diet
with renal insufficiency or cardiac disease due to the potential
used to prevent struvite urolith formation should maintain a
for exacerbation of hypertension with these conditions.
urine pH of <6.8. Water intake should be promoted. If struvite
 uroliths are treated with a dissolution diet, patients should be
Struvite uroliths
evaluated with abdominal radiographs and a urinalysis every 4
weeks. Once the urolith has dissolved, dietary therapy should be
 Struvite uroliths are composed of magnesium ammonium phos-
continued for another month to ensure dissolution of uroliths
phate hexahydrate. They are one of the most common types of
 too small (<3 mm) to be detected radiographically. Struvite uro-
Aensn si sin ans so u op pue sie u sn
liths associated with UTIs take an average of 3 months to dis-
accompanied by a urease-producing
bacterial infection that
 solve in dogs, while sterile struvite uroliths dissolve in an average
 causes an alkaline urine environment. Staphylococus spp. and
of 30 days in cats.24.25
Dissolution of struvite uroliths is not always successful. The
with UTI-induced struvite urolithiasis in dogs. Feline struvite
reasons for this include mixed composition of the urolith (e.g..
uroliths are usually not infection-induced. The etiology of stru-
struvite and calcium oxalate layers), poor owner compliance,
vite urolithiasis is likely multifactorial and includes gender,
 and inappropriate control of an associated UTI in canine patients.
breed, and dietary factors.
 A urinalysis and urine culture can be helpful in determining if
Dissolution diets can be effective in the treatment of struvite
a UTI is present. Additionally, the urinalysis should reveal a
uroliths, combined with treatment for a UTI where appropriate.
urine pH of <6.8 with appropriate dietary compliance. Ifa mixed
 Prior to attempting a dissolution diet, owners should be cau-
urolith composition is suspected after unsuccessful attempts at
340
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
medical dissolution, mechanical urolith removal (surgery, lithot-
 Oxalate and increases calcium excretion in the urine.21.36.37 Most
ripsy) should be performed, followed by urolith analysis.
pet foods are low in oxalic acid, and dietary oxalate precursors
 Cats appear to have a low rate of struvite recurrence.?6 Preven-
such as green leafy vegetables should be avoided. There are no
tion of struvite uroliths should include increasing water intake.
 studies to support severe dietary restriction of calcium in these
 Prescription diets may be required for additional prevention if
 patients. Moderate levels of calcium are desirable as calcium
recurrence is a concern. Urine pH should be maintained below
binds oxalate in the intestines and inhibits its absorption."5 Phos-
6.8, but excessive acidification of the urine (<6.29) may increase
 phorous should not be restricted excessively because this will
the risk of calcium oxalate urolithiasis.?7 Prescription diets
activate vitamin D and increase the absorption of calcium from
helped decrease the risk of recurrence of feline struvite urethral
the GI tract. Excess dietary phosphorous may complex with
plugs in one study.2α Additionally, diets low in fat and high in
calcium to form insoluble calcium phosphate salts.
fiber, calcium, phosphorous, magnesium, and chloride are asso-
Potassium citrate is a component of some diets designed to
ciated with an increased risk of struvite urolithiasis in cats.21
reduce the risk of calcium oxalate urolithiasis. Citric acid inhib-
There are no specific dietary recommendations for the preven-
its formation of calcium oxalate complexes in the urine. Addi-
tion of infection-associated struvite urolithiasis; medical strate-
tionally, citrate helps alkalinize the urine. Potassium may
gies to prevent UTIs should be sufficient. In the uncommon
decrease calcium excretion in the urine. Magnesium is thought
case of sterile struvite urolithiasis in dogs, dietary therapy may
to be an inhibitor of calcium oxalate urolith formation. However,
be used as a preventative measure. Similar measures that are
Excess magnesium may be a risk factor for calcium oxalate
recommended for the prevention of feline struvite recurrence
can be considered for these dogs. Caution should be exercised
diets to prevent calcium oxalate urolithiasis should have a mod-
 as some canine struvite diets are very low in protein and may
erate magnesium content.
not be suitable to feed on a long-term basis.
Some diets designed to prevent calcium oxalate urolithiasis
are supplemented with sodium chloride. The potential benefit of
Calcium oxalate uroliths
additional dietary sodium chloride is increased thirst, leading to
increased urinary volume and subsequent decreased concentra-
Calcuim oxalate uroliths are one of the most common types of
tion of calcium and oxalate in the urine. However, further studies
uroliths in dogs and cats.? Similar to struvite urolithiasis, the
examining high sodium diets in patients predisposed to calcium
etiology of calcium oxalate urolithiasis is multifactorial. Factors
oxalate urolithiasis are needed. Therefore, caution should be
in the development of calcium oxalate uroliths include sex,
used when adding sodium to diets.
 breed, hereditary factors, environment, and diet.29-31
Interestingly, struvite uroliths were the most common feline
Urate uroliths
uroliths until the mid-1990s when the predominance shifted to
Urate uroliths are composed of ammonium urate, uric acid, and
related to the development of acidifying diets used to decrease
uric acid salts. Urate uroliths are the third most common type
the risk of struvite urolithiasis.? With the increased awareness
of urolith in dogs and in cats, although the overall prevalence of
 of acidifying diets being linked to the development of calcium
urate uroliths is low. Dalmatians are predisposed to developing
oxalate uroliths, diets are being formulated to produce a less
urate uroliths due to a defect in urate transport. Other breeds
acidic urine (e.g. pH of 6.3-6.7).3 Feline upper urinary tract
such as the English bulldog also appear to be affected, although
uroliths (e.g., ureteroliths) are almost exclusively composed of
the genetic defect has not been identifed in this breed. Addition-
calcium oxalate, but struvite uroliths increase in proportion in
ally, dogs with hepatic dysfunction such as portovascular anom-
the lower urinary tract.3032 Similar to cats, calcium oxalate uro-
alies are at risk for developing urate urolithiasis. The underlying
liths are becoming the most common urolith type in dogs.29.33
etiology of feline urate urolithiasis is unknown, but some cases
This increase in calcium oxalate urolithiasis is likely multifacto-
 are associated with portovascular abnormalities.30
rial but may be related to diets that are acidifying and/or contain
Some urate uroliths are amendable to dietary dissolution.
 a high level of minerals. 33
Some commercial diets designed specifically for the treatment
Calcium oxalate uroliths cannot be medically dissolved.
and prevention of canine urate uroliths are available. Diets
 Instead, these uroliths should be removed via voiding urohydro-
designed for medical dissolution and prevention of urate uro-
 aq uo uo A ramo ans no uisd
liths promote alkaline urine. These diets have an ultralow protein
important factor in the prevention of calcium oxalate urolithi-
content, and the dietary protein is composed of low purine
asis. Another important factor to consider when reducing the
protein sources (e.g., milk and egg-based proteins). Patients
risk of calcium oxalate urolithiasis is the management of meta-
treated with a urate dissolution diet should have a urine pH of
bolic conditions that result in hypercalcemia.
7.0. Acidification of urine may promote precipitation of uric
 Diets for preventing calcium oxalate uroliths should be non-
acid. Urine alkalizing agents such as potassium citrate can be
paus e pay sies pe sio iaaisio u ua pue auie
added to the diet to promote alkaline urine. Due to the restricted.
diet have a lower risk of calcium oxalate urolithiasis.3435 Calcium
protein level of these diets, they are not suitable for growing,
oxalate uroliths can form in variable urine pHs, but acidic urine
     s   
decreases the concentration of urinary inhibitors of calcium
beneficial in the treatment and prevention of urate urolithiasis.
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
341
While there are no studies showing the effcacy of a urate dis-
Section 2
solution diet in patients with hepatic dysfunction, these diets are
likely effective for this purpose. Although Dalmatians have
 Lunn KF. Managing the patient with polyuria and polydipsia. In:
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV, eds. JD Bonagura, DC
defective urate transport, not all Dalmatians are affected by urate
Twedt, pp. 844-850. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2009.
 uroliths. Therefore, prescription diets for the treatment and pre-
vention of urate uroliths should only be used for affected Dal-
Section 3
matians. The low dietary taurine and/or carnitine content of
1.
Polzin DJ. Chronic kidney disease. In: Textbook of Veterinary
   s   s  
Hternal Medicine, Vol. 2, 7th edition, eds. SJ Etinger, EC Feldman,
myopathy, especially in English bulldogs. Therefore, it may be
p. 1990. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
more suitable to feed a low protein diet such as those formulated
2.
 Brown S. Evaluation of chronic renal disease: a staged approach.
for CKD rather than an ultralow protein diet in this breed.38
Compendium Contimuing Education for Veterinarians 1999;21:
There are no commercially available diets specifically for the
752-763.
treatment and prevention of feline urate uroliths. Medical dis-
3.
 Kellum JA, Levin NW, Bouman C, et al. Developing a consensus
solution protocols for feline urate uroliths have not been reported,
classification system for acute renal failure. Current Opinion in
but low protein diets combined with medical treatment (allopu-
Critical Care 2002;8:509-514.
rinol) may lead to dissolution of urate uroliths in cats.° Low
Langston C. Acute uremia. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, Vol. 2, 7th edition, eds. SJ Etinger, EC Feldman, pp.
 protein diets such as those designed for CKD patients are likely
suitable for the prevention in affected cats.
1970-1972. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
5.
Rentko VT, Clark N, Ross LR, et al. Canine leptospirosis: a retro-
spective study of 17 cases. JournalofVeterinary Internal Medicine
1992;6:235-244.
Feline idiopathic cystitis
6.
 Birnbaum N, Barr SC, Center SC, et al. Naturally acquired lept-
ospirosis in 36 dogs: serological and clinicopathological features.
FIC, also known as feline lower urinary tract disease, is a disor-
Journal of Small Animal Practice 1998;39:231-236.
der of young to middle-aged cats that results in clinical signs of
 Dambach DM, Smith CA, Lewis RM,et al. Morphologic, immuno-
pollakiuria, dysuria, and stranguria. The etiology of this syn-
histochemical, and ultrastructural characterization of a distinctive
drome is not fully understood, making treatment of the condi-
renal lesion in dogs putatively associated with Borrelia burgdorferi
tion difficult. Increasing water intake may be beneficial for these
infection: 49 cases (1987-1992). Veterinary Pathology1997;34:85-96.
cats. This can be achieved through the use of canned foods along
8.
Hutton TA, Goldstein RE, Njaa BL, et al. Search for Borrelia burg-
with the other strategies listed above. The transition from dry to
jouanof sdau a, paiasns um shop yo shaup u muafo
of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2008;22(4):860-865.
canned food should be performed gradually to increase the like-
lihood of the cat accepting the new diet and to reduce stress
9.
 Bartges JW, Blanco L. Bacterial urinary tract infection in cats.
Standards of Care: Emergency and Critical Care Medicine 2001;3:
 associated with the change. By increasing water intake, the USG
1-5.
is decreased, diluting potentially noxious substances present in
10.
 Ling GV, Norris CR, Franti CE, et al. Interrelations of organism
the urine. Reducing environmental stress and increasing water
prevalence, specimen collction method, and host age, sex, and
intake were two of the multimodal environmental modification
breed among 8354 canine urinary tract infections (1969-1995).
strategies that decreased the recurrence of FIC in one study.* A
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2001;15:341-347.
 prospective diet trial showed that cats fed with canned food had
11.
Barsanti JA. Genitourinary infections. In: Infectious Diseases of the
an 11% recurrence rate of FIC compared to a 39% recurrence
Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, ed. CE Greene, p. 937. St. Louis, MO:
rate for cats fed dry food.* For cats with a history of urinary
Mosby; 2006.
calculi, specifc diet therapy to reduce calculogenic materials in
12.
Bartges IW. Urinary tract infections. In: Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, Vol. 2, 6th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Nelson,
the urine and alteration of urinary pH may be indicated. Recom-
p. 1806. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2005.
mendations for dietary treatment of and prevention of urinary
13.
Yuri K, Nakata K, Katae H, et al. Distribution of uropathogenic
calculi are outlined in Table 10.9.3.
virulence factors armong Escherichia coli strains isolated from
dogs and cats. The Journai of Veterinary Medical Science1998;60(3):
287-290.
Bibliography
14.
Bartges IW. Diagnosis of urinary tract infections. Veterinary
Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 2004;34(4):
Section 1
923-933.
15.
Osborne CA, Lulich JP, Polzin DJ, et al. Medical dissolution and
1.
 Evans HE, Cristensen GC. Ihe urogenital system. In: Millers
 prevention of canine struvite urolithiasis. Twenty years of experi-
Anatormy of the Dog, 3rd edition, ed. HE Evans, Pp. 494-558.
ence. Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice
Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders, 1993.
1999;29:73-111.
2.
Verlander IW. Renal physiology. In: Textbook of Veterinary
16.
 Bartges JW, Osborne CA, Polzin DJ. Recurrent sterile struvite
Anatommy, 2nd edition, ed. JG Cunningham,pp.511-554.St. Louis,
urocystolithiasis in three related cocker spaniels. Journal of the
MO: W.B. Saunders; 1997.
American Animal Hospital Association 1992;28:459-469.
3.
 Koeppen BM, Stanton BA. Renal Physiology, 3rd edition. St. Louis,
17.
Osborne CA, Lulich JP, Kruger JM, et al. Canine uroliths, feline
MO: Mosby; 2001.
uroliths, and feline urethral plugs from 1981 to 2007: perspectives
342
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
from the Minnesota Urolith Center. Veterinary Clinics of North
36.1
 Hayes HM, Jr.. Breed associations of canine ectopic ureter: a study
America. Small Animal Practice 2009;39:183-197.
of 217 female cases. Journal of Small Animal Practice 1984;25:
18.  Ling GV. Urinary stone disease. In: Lower Urinary Tract Diseases
501-504.
of Dogs and Cats, ed. GV Ling, Pp. 144-177.St. Louis, MO: Mosby;
37.
 Holt PE, Ihrusfield MV, Moore AH. Breed predisposition to ure-
1995.
teral ectopia in bitches in the UK. The Veterinary Record 2000;
19. Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Ihumchai R, et al. Epidemiology of canine
146:561.
calcium oxalate uroliths. Identifying risk factors. Veterinary Clinics
38.
Holt PE, Gibbs C. Congenital urinary incontinence in cats: a
of North America. Small Animal Practice 1999;29:113-122.
review of 19 cases. The Veterinary Record 1992;130(20):437-442.
20.
 Ling GV, Franti CE, Ruby AL, et al. Urolithiasis in dogs. II: breed
39.
Cannizzo KL, McLoughlin MA, Mattoon JS, et al. Evaluation of
prevalence, and interrelations of breed, sex, age, and mineral
Jo sisougeip ioy Audenaun Aroianoxa pue Adossoisao enqamsuenl
composition. American Journal of Veterinary Research 1998;59:
ectopic ureters in female dogs: 25 cases (1992-2000). Journal of
630-642.
the American Veterinary Medical Association 2003;223:475-481.
21.
 Menon M, Resnick MI. Urinary lithiasis: etiology, diagnosis, and
40.
 Sami VF, McLoughlin MA, Mattoon JS, et al. Digital fluoroscopic
 medical management. In: Campbel's Urology, eds. AB Retik, ED
Vaughan, Ir., Pp. 3229-3305. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2002.
computed tomography, and cystoscopy in 24 dogs with suspected
22.
Bartges IW, Osborne CA, Lulich JIP, et al. Canine urate urolithiasis.
ureteral ectopia. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2004;218:
Etiopathogenesis, diagnosis, and management. Veterinary Clinics
271-281.
of North America. Small Animal Practice 1999;29:161-191.
41.
 Arnold S, Arnold P, Hubler M, et al. Incontinentia urinae beider
23.
 Bartges JW, Osborne CA, Lulich JP, et al. Prevalence of cystine
kastrierten Hindin: Haufigkeit und Rassedisposition. Schweizer
 and urate uroliths in bulldogs and urate uroliths in dalmations.
Archiv fur Tierheilkunde 1989;131:259-263.
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 1994;204:
42.B
Holt PE, Ihrusfield MV. Association in bitches between breed,
1914-1918.
size, neutering and docking, and acquired urinary incontinence
24. Bannasch D, Safra N, Young A, et al. Mutations in the SLC2A9
due to incormpetence of the urethral sphincter mechanism. The
 gene cause hyperuricosuria and hyperuricemia in the dog. PLoS
Veterinary Record 1993;133(8):177-180.
Genetics 2008;4(11):e1000246. Epub November 7, 2008.
43.
Center SA, Smith CA, Wilkinson E, et al. Clinicopathologic, renal
Bannasch DL, Ling GV, Bea J, et al. Inheritance of urinary calculi
immunofluorescent, and light microscopic features of glomeru-
in the Dalmatian. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2004;18:
lonephritis in the dog: 41 cases. Journal of the American Veterinary
483-487.
Medical Association 1987;190(1):81-90.
26.
Kruger JM, Osborne CA. Etiopathogenesis of uric acid and
44.1
 Richter KP, Ling GV. Clinical response and urethral pressure
ammonium urate uroliths in non-Dalmatian dogs. Veterinary
profile changes after phenylpropanolamine in dogs with primary
Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 1986;16:87-126.
sphincter incompetence. Journal of the American Veterinary
27.
Osborne CA, Lulich JP, Bartges IW, et al. Drug-induced urolithi-
Medical Association 1985;187:605-611.
asis. Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice
45.
 Scott L, Leddy M, Bernay F, et al. Evaluation of phenylpropa-
1999;29:251-266.
nolarmine in the treatment of urethral sphincter mechanism
28.
 Johnston SD, Kamolpatana K, Root-Kustritz MV, et al. Prostatic
incompetence in the bitch. Journal of Small Aimal Practice 2002;
disorders in the dog. Animal Repraduction Science 2000;60-61:
43:493-496.
405-415.
46.
Nendick PA, Clark W T. Medical therapy of urinary incontinence
29.
Forrester DS, Roudebush P. Evidence-based management of feline
in ovariectomised bitches: a comparison of the effectiveness of
lower urinary tract disease. Veterinary Clinics of North America.
diethylstilboestrol and pseudoephedrine. Australian Veterinary
Small AnimalPractice 2007;37:533-558.
Journal 1987;64:117-118.
30.
47.
Amold S, Hubler M, Lott-Stolz G, et al. Treatment of urinary
syndrome. Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal
incontinence in bitches by endoscopic injection of glutaraldehyde
Practice 1984;14:455-469.
cross-linked collagen. Journal of Srall Animal Practice 1996;37:
31.
 Kruger JM, Osborne CA. The role of viruses in feline lower urinary
163-168.
tract disease. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 1990;4:
48.
Grauer GF, DiBartola SP. Glomerular disease. In: Textbook of
71-78.
Veterinary Internal Medicine, Vol. 2, 5th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger,
32.
Kruger JM, Osborne CA, Goyal SM, et al. Clinical evaluation of
EC Nelson, p. 1669. St. Louis, MO: W.B. Saunders; 2000.
cats with lower urinary tract disease. Journal of the American
49.
Veterinary Medical Association 1991;199:211-216.
in dogs with renal amyloidosis: 59 cases (1976-1986). Journal of
33.
Cannon AB, Ruby AL, Westropp JL, et al. Evaluation of trends in
the American Veterinary Medical Association 1989;195:358-364.
urolith composition in cats: 5230 cases (1985-2004). Journal of the
50.1
 Mason NJ, Day MJ. Renal amyloidosis in related English fox-
American Veterinary Medical Association 2007;231:570-576.
hounds. Journal of Small Animal Practice 1996;37:255-260.
34.
 Kruger IM, Conway TS, Kaneene JB, et al. Randomized controlled
51.
Chew DJ, DiBartola SP, Boyce JT, et al. Renal amyloidosis in
trial of the efficacy of short-term amitriptyline administration for
related Abyssinian cats. Journal ofthe American Veterinary Medical
treatment of acute, nonobstructive idiopathic lower urinary tract
Association 1982;181:139-142.
disease in cats. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
52.
 DiBartola SP, Tarr MJ, Webb DM, et al. Familial renal amyloidosis
Association 2003;222:749-758.
in Chinese shar-pei dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary
35.(
 Osborne CA, Kruger IM, Lulich IP, et al. Prednisolone therapy of
Medical Association 1990;197:483-487.
idiopathic feline lower urinary tract disease: a double-blind study.
53.
 Mutsaers AJ, Widmer WR, Knapp DW. Canine transitional cell
Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice
carcinoma. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2003;17(2):
1996;26:563-569.
136-144.
Chapter 10 Urinary and Renal Diseases
343
54. Norris AM, Laing EJ, Valli VE, et al. Canine bladder and urethral
5. Cowgill LD, Kallet AJ. Systemic hypertension. In: Current
tumors: a retrospective study of 115 cases (1980-1985). Journal of
Veterinary Iherapy IX, ed. RW Kirk, pp. 360-364. Toronto: W.B.
Veterinary Internal Medicine 1992;6(3):145-153.
Saunders; 1986.
55.
Raghavan M, Knapp DW, Dawson MH, et al. Topical flea and tick
6.
 Reine NJ, Langston CE. Urinalysis interpretation: how to squeeze
 pesticides and the risk of transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary
out the maximum information from a small sample. Clinical
bladder in Scottish terriers.Journal of the American Veterinary
Techniques in Small Animal Practice 2005;20:2-10.
Medical Association 2004;225(3):389-394.
7.
 Brobst D. Urinalysis and associated laboratory procedures. Veter-
56.
 Chun R, Garrett LD. Urogenital and mammary gland neoplasia.
inary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 1989;19:
In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Vol. 2, 7th edition,
929-949.
eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman, p. 2208. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
 Swenson CL, Boisvert AM, Kruger JM, Gibbons-Burgener SN.
Elsevier; 2010.
Evaluation of modified Wright-staining of urine sediment as a
57.
 Bell FW, Klausner JS, Hayden DW, et al. Clinical and pathologic
method for accurate detection of bacteriuria in dogs. Journal of the
 features of prostatic adenocarcinoma in sexually intact and cas-
American Veterinary Medical Association 2004;224:1282-1289.
trated dogs: 31 cases (1970-1987). Journal of the American Veter-
9.
Osborne CA, Sevens JB (eds.). Biochemical analysis of urine: indi-
inary Medical Association 1991;199(11):1623-1630.
cations, methods, interpretation. In: Urinalysis: A Clinical Guide
58.
 Sorenmo KU,GoldschmidtM, Shofer F,et al. Immunohistochemical
fo Compassionate Patient Care, pp. 45-150. Shawnee Mission, KS:
 characterization of canine prostatic carcinoma and correlation
Veterinary Learning Systems; 1999.
with castration status and castration time. Veterinary and Compar-
10.
 DiBartola SP. Clinical approach and laboratory evaluation of renal
ative Oncology 2003;1(1):48-56.
disease. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine: Disease of the
59.
 Cornell KK, Bostwick DG, Cooley DM, et al. Clinical and patho-
Dog and the Cat, 7th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman, pp.
logic aspects of spontaneous canine prostate carcinoma: a retro-
1955-1969. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2010.
spective analysis of 76 cases. The Prostate 2000;45(2):173-183.
11.
 Stockham SL, Scott MA. Urinary system. In: Fundarentals
60.
 Henry CJ, Turnquist SE, Smith A, et al. Primary renal tumours in
of Veterinary Clinical Pathology, eds. SL Stockham, MA Scott,
cats: 19 cases (1992-1998). Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery
pp. 277-336. Ames, IA: Iowa State Press; 2002.
1999;1(3):165-170.
12.
Waldrop JE. Urinary electrolytes, solutes, and osmolality. Veteri-
 Bryan IN, Henry CJ, Turnquist SE, et al. Primary renal neoplasia
nary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 2008;38:
of dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2006;5:
503-512.
1155-1160.
13.
 DiBartola SP. Renal disease: clinical approach and laboratory
62.
 Moe L, Lium B. Hereditary multifocal renal cystadenocarcinomas
evaluation. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine: Disease
and nodular dermatofibrosis in 51 German shepherd dogs. Journal
of the Dog and the Cat, 6th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman,
gf Small Animal Practice 1997;38(11):498-505.
Pp. 1716-1730. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2010.
63.
 Ward MP. Seasonality of canine leptospirosis in the United States
14.
Crow SE, Allen DP, Murphy CJ, Culbertson R. Concurrent
and Canada and its association with rainfall. Preventive Veterinary
renal adenocarcinoma and polycythemia in a dog. Journal of the
Medicine 2002;56:203-213.
American Animal Hospital Association 1995;31:29-33.
64.
 Holt PE. Surgical management of congenital urethral sphincter
15.
Gorse MJ. Polycythemia associated with renal fbrosarcoma in a
mechanism incompetence in eight female cats and a bitch.
dog.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
Veterinary Surgery 1993;22(2):98-104.
1988;192:793-794.
65.
Barth A, Reichler IM, Hubler M, et al. Evaluation of long-term
16.
 Peterson ME, Zanjani ED. Inappropriate erythropoietin pro-
effects if endoscopic injection of collagen into the urethral sub-
duction from a renal carcinoma in a dog with polycythemia.
 mucosa for treatment of urethral sphincter incompetence in
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 1981;179:
female dogs: 40 cases (1993-2000). Journal of the American
995-996.
Veterinary Medical Association 2005;226:73-76.
 Snead EC. A case of bilateral renal lymphosarcoma with second-
ary polycythaemia and paraneoplastic syndromes of hypoglycae-
  ins rs rg  n s  
Comparative Oncology 2005;3(3):139-144.
Section 4
18.
 Nelson RW, Hager D, Zanjani ED. Renal lymphosarcoma with
1.
 Kobayashi DL, Peterson ME, Graves TK, Lesser M, Nichols CE.
inappropriate erythropoietin production in a dog. Journal of the
Hypertension in cats with chronic renal failure or hyperthy-
American Veterinary Medical Association 1983;182:1396-1397.
roidism. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 1990;4:58-62.
19.
 Bryan IN, Henry CJ, Turnquist SE, Tyler JW, Liptak JM, Rizzo SA,
2.
 Green HW. Feline systemic hypertension: diagnosis and treat-
Sfligoi G, Steinberg SJ, Smith AN, Jackson T. Primary renal neo-
ment. Proceedings of the NAVC conference, January 19 to 23,
plasia of dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2006;20(5):
2008, Orlando, pp. 213-215.
1155-1160.
3.
Cortadellas O, Del Palacio MJ, Bayon A, Albert A, Talavera J.
20.
Madewell BR, Wilson DW, Hornof WJ, Gregory CR. Leukemoid
 blood response and bone infarcts in a dog with renal tubular
clinical consequences.Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine
adenocarcinoma. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
2006;20:941-947.
Association 1990;197(12):1623-1625.
4. Jacob F, Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, Neaton JD, Lekcharoensuk C,
21.
Jepson RE, Brodbelt D, Vallance C, Syme HM, Elliot J. Evaluation
Allen TA, Kirk CA, Swanson LL. Association between initial
of predictors of the development of azotemia in cats. Journal of
systolic blood pressure and risk of developing a uremic crisis or
Veterinary Internal Medicine 2009;23:806-813.
of dying in dogs with chronic renal failure. Journal ofthe Armerican
22.
Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, Ross S. Chronic kidney disease. In:
Veterinary Medical Association 2003;222:322-329.
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine: Disease of the Dog and
344
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
the Cat, 6th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman, pp. 1756-1785.
39.1
Hamaide AJ, Martinez SA, Hauptman J, Walker RD. Prospective
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2005.
comparison of four sampling methods (cystocentesis, bladder
23.
Battaglia L, Petterino C, Zappulli V, Castagnaro M. Hypoglycemia
mucosal swab, bladder mucosal biopsy, and urolith culture) to
 as a paraneoplastic syndrome associated with renal adenocarci-
identify urinary tract infections in dogs with urolithiasis. Journal
noma in a dog. Veterinary Research Communications 2005;29(8):
of the American Animal Hospital Association 1998;34:423-430.
671-675.
24. Grauer GF Measurement, interpretation, and implications of pro-
Section 5
teinuria and albuminuria. Veterinary Clinics of North America.
Small Animal Practice 2007;37:283-295.
1.
 Borjesson DL. Renal cytology. Veterinary Clinics of North America.
25.
 Elliott J, Syme HM. Proteinuria in chronic kidney disease in cats—
Small Animal Practice 2003;33:119-134.
prognostic marker or therapeutic target? Journal of Veterinary
2.
Cannizzo KL, McLoughlin MA, Chew DJ, DiBartola SP.
Internal Medicine 2006;20:1052-1053.
Uroendoscopy. Evaluation of the lower urinary tract. Veterinary
26.
 Syme HM. Proteinuria in cats. Prognostic marker or mediator?
Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 2001;31:
Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery 2009;11:211-218.
789-807.
 Lyon SD, Sanderson MW, Vaden SL, Lappin MR, Jensen WA,
3.
 Rawlings CA. Diagnostic rigid endoscopy: otoscopy, rhinoscopy.
Grauer GE Comparison of urine dipstick,sulfosalicylic acid, urine
and cystoscopy. Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal
protein-to-creatinine ratio, and species-specific ELISA methods
Practice 2009;39:849-868.
for detection of albumin in urine samples of cats and dogs.
4.
fo s rauaa sieo pe sop ui Adosiedet d ia
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 2010;236:
North America. Small Animal Practice 2001;31:707-727.
874-879.
5.
Grauer GF, Twedt DC, Mero KN. Evaluation of laparoscopy for
28.
.Beatrice L, Nizi F, Callegari D, Paltrinieri S, Zini E, D'Ippolito P,
obtaining renal biopsy specimens from dogs and cats. Journal of
Zatelli A. Comparison of urine protein-to-creatinine ratio in
the American Veterinary Medical Association 1983;183:677-679.
urine samples collected by cystocentesis versus free catch in dogs.
Vaden SL, Levine JE, Lees GE, Groman RP, Grauer GF, Forrester
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 2010;236:
SD. Renal biopsy: a retrospective study of methods and complica-
1221-1224.
tions in 283 dogs and 65 cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal
Jacob F, Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, Neaton JD, Kirk CA, Allen TA,
Medicine 2005;19:794-801.
Swanson LL. Evaluation of the association between initial pro-
7.
Vaden SL. Renal biopsy of dogs and cats. Clinical Techniques in
teinuria and morbidity rate or death in dogs with naturally occur-
Small Animal Practice 2005;20:11-22.
ring chronic renal failure. Journal of the American Veterinary
Nash AS, Boyd JS, Minto AW, Wright NG. Renal biopsy in the
Medical Association 2005;226:393-400.
normal cat: exarmination of the effects of repeated needle biopsy.
30. Brown S, Atkins C, Bagley R, Carr A, Cowgill L, Davidson M,
Research in Veterinary Science 1986;40:112-117.
Egner B, Elliott J, Henik R, Labato M, Littman M, Polzin D, Ross
9.1
 Nash AS, Boyd JS, Minto AW, Wright NG. Renal biopsy in the
L, Snyder P, Stepien R. Guidelines for the identification, evalua-
normal cat: an examination of the effects of a single needle biopsy.
tion, and management of systemic hypertension in dogs and cats.
Research in Veterinary Science 1983;34:347-356.
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2007;21:542-558.
10.
Nyland TG, Wallack ST, Wisner ER. Needle-tract implantation
31.
Acierno MJ, Labato MA. Hypertension in renal disease: diagnosis 
following us-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of transitional
and treatment. Clinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice
cell carcinoma of the bladder, urethra, and prostate. Veterinary
2005;20:23-30.
Radiology e Ultrasound 2002;43:50-53.
32.
Henik RA. Systemic hypertension and its management. Veter-
11.1
 Lamb CR, Trower ND, Gregory SP. Ultrasound-guided catheter
inary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 1997;27:
biopsy of the lower urinary tract: technique and results in 12 dogs.
1355-1372.
Journal of Small Animal Practice 1996;37:413-416.
33.
 Henik RA. Diagnosis and treatment of feline systemic hyperten-
12.
 Bussadori C, Bigliardi E, DAgnolo G, Borgarelli M, Santilli RA.
sion. Compendium 1997;19:163-178.
The percutaneous drainage of prostatic abscesses in the dog. La
Finco DR. Association of systemic hypertension with renal injury
Radiologia Medica 1999;98:391-394.
in dogs with induced renal failure. Journal of Veterinary Internal
13.
Kawakami E, Washizu M, Hirano T, Sakuma M, Takano M,
Medicine 2004;18:289-294.
Hori T, Tsutsui T. Treatment of prostatic abscesses by aspiration
35.
 Ling GV, Norris CR, Franti CE, Eisele PH, Johnson DL, Ruby AL,
of the purulent matter and injection of tea tree oil into the cavities
Jang SS. Interrelations of organism prevalence, specimen collec-
in dogs. The Journal of Veterinary Medical Science 2006;68:
tion method, and host age, sex, and breed among 8354 canine
1215-1217.
urinary tract infections (1969-1995). Journal of Veterinary Internal
14.
 Boland LE, Hardie RJ, Gregory SP, Lamb CR. Ultrasound-guided
Medicine 2001;15:341-347.
snd rg iuan ard al s a said
 36. Bartges JW. Diagnosis of urinary tract infections. Veterinary Clinics 
abscesses and cysts in dogs. Journal of the American Animal
of North America.Small Animal Practice 2004;34:923-933.
Hospital Association 2003;39:151-159.
37.
Torres SM, Diaz SF, Nogueira SA, Jessen C, Polzin DJ, Gilbert SM,
15.
Anderson WI, Dunham BM, King JM, Scott DW. Presumptive
Horne KL. Frequency of urinary tract infection armong dogs with
subcutaneous surgical transplantation of a urinary bladder tran-
pruritic disorders receiving long-term glucocorticoid treatment.
sitional cell carcinoma in a dog. The Cornell Veterinarian 1989;79:
Journal ofthe American Veterinary Medical Association 2005;227(2):
263-266.
239-243.
Volpe A, Kachura JR, Geddie WR, Evans AJ, Gharajeh A, Saravanan
38.Lulich JP, Osborne CA. Urine culture as atest for cure: why, when,
A, Jewett MA. Techniques, safety and accuracy of sampling of
and how? Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal
renal tumors by fine needle aspiration and core biopsy. The Journal
Practice 2004;34:1027-1041.
of Urology 2007;178:379-386.
Chapter 10  Urinary and Renal Diseases
345
17.
Rawlings CA, Mahaffey MB, Barsanti JA, Canalis C. Use of
11.
 Henik RA, Stepien RL, Wenholz LJ, Dolson MK. Effcacy of aten-
laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy for removal of urinary calculi in
olol as a single antihypertensive agent inhyperthyroid cats. Journal
dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
of Feline Medicine and Surgery 2008;10(6):577-582.
2003;222(6):759-761. 737
12.
Ross LA. Hypertension and chronic renal failure. Seminars in
18. Hager DA, Nyland T, Fisher P. Ultrasound-guided biopsy of the
Veterinary Medicine and Surgery (Small Animal) 1992;7:221.
canine liver, kidney and prostate. Veterinary Radiology é
13.
 King IN, Gunn-Moore DA, Tasker S, et al. Tolerability and efficacy
Ultrasound 1985;26:82-88.
of benazepril in cats with chronic kidney disease. Journal of
Veterinary Internal Medicine 2006;20(5):1054-1064.
Section 6
14.
 King JN, Strehlaw G, Wernsing J, Brown SA Efect of renal insuf-
ficiency on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
1.
 Feeney DA, Johnston GR. Chapter 42: the kidneys and ureters. In:
benazepril in cats. Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology and
Textbook of Veterinary Diagnostic Radiology, 4th edition, ed. DE
Therapeutics 2002;25(5):371-378.
Thrall, pp. 556-570. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 2002.
15.
 Lefebvre HP, Brown SA, Chetboul V, et al. Angiotensin-converting
2.
 Park RD, Wrigley RH. Chapter 43: the urinary bladder. In:
enzyme inhibitors in veterinary medicine. Current Pharmaceutical
Textbook of Veterinary Diagnostic Radiology, 4th edition, ed. DE
Design 2007;13(13):1347-1361.
Thrall, pp. 571-587. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 2002.
16.
Henik RA, Snyder PS, Volk LM Treatment of systemic hyperten-
3.
 Pechman J. Chapter 44: the urethra. In: Textbook of Veterinary
sion in cats with amlodipine besylate. Journal of the American
Diagnostic Radiology, 4th edition, ed. DE Ihrall, pp. 588-592.
Animal Hospital Association 1997;33(3):226-234.
Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 2002.
 17. Atkins CE, Rausch WP, Gardner SY, et al. Ihe effect of amlodipine
4.
Samii VF, McLoughlin MA, Mattoon JS, et al. Digital fluoroscopic
and the combination of amlodipine and enalapril on the renin-
Excretory urography, digital fluoroscopic urethrography, helical
angiotensin-aldosterone system in the dog. Journal of Veterinary
computed tomography, and cystoscopy in 24 dogs with suspected
Pharmacology and Therapeutics 2007;30(5):394-400.
ureteral ectopia. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2004;18:
18.
 Kyles AE, Gregory CR, Wooldrige ID, et al. Management of hyper-
271-281.
tension controls postoperative neurologic disorders after renal
5.
Diseases of the Urinary Tract, pp. 15-17. Trenton, NJ: Veterinary
19.
 Bond BR. Nitroglycerin. In: Small Anirmal Critical Care Medicine,
Learning Systems; 2003.
eds. DC Silverstein, K Hopper, p. 179. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
Elsevier; 2009.
Section 7
 Pressler B, Bartges IW. Urinary tract infections. In: Textbook of
 Booth DM. Drugs affecting the kidneys and urination. In:
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SE Ettinger, EC
Small Animal Clinical Pharmacology Therapeutics, ed. DM Booth,
Feldman, pp. 2036-2047. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
Pp. 515-527. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 2001.
21.
Francey T. Prostatic diseases. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal
 Polzin Dl. Chronic kidney disease. In: Textbook of Veterinary
Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SE Ettinger, EC Feldman, pp. 2055-
2.
Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SE Ettinger, EC Feldman,
2056. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
p. 1972. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
22.
 Labato MA, Acierno MJ. Micturition disorders and urinary incon-
Lane IF. Treatment of urinary disorders. In: Srmall Animal
tinence. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition,
Clinical Pharmacology Therapeutics, ed. DM Booth, pp. 528-552.
eds. SE Etinger, EC Feldman, Pp. 160-164. St. Louis, MO:
Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 2001.
Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
4.
Willard MD. Treatment of hyperkalemia. In: Current Veterinary
23.
Therapy IX, Small Animal Practice,ed. RW Kirk, p. 94. Philadelphia,
treatment recommendations. Proceedings of the Advanced Renal
PA: W.B. Saunders; 1996.
Therapies Symposium, March 3, 2006.
5.
 Devey II. Crystalloid and colloid fluid therapy. In: Textbook of
24.
Chew DJ, Dibartola SP, Crisp MS. Peritoneal dialysis. In: Fluid
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SE Ettinger, EC
Therapy in Small Animal Practice, ed. SP Dibartola, p. 554.
Feldman, p. 494. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1992a.
6.
Chew DJ, Dibartola SP, Nagode LA, Starkey RJ. Phosphorus
25.
 Polzin Dl. Classification of acute and chronic kidney disease.
restriction in the treatment of chronic renal failure. In: Current
 Proceedings of the Advanced Renal Therapies Symposium, New
Veterinary Therapy XI, Small Animal Practice, eds. RW Kirk, JD
York, March 2006.
Bonagura, p. 853. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1992.
26.
 Stokes JE. Diagnostic approach to acute azotemia. In: Kirk's
1.
 Polzin DJ, Osborne CA. Diseases of the urinary tract. In: Handbook
Current Veterinary Therapy, 14th edition, eds. JD Bonagura, DC
of Small Aninal Therapeutics, ed. LE Davis, p. 933. New York:
Twedt, p. 856. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2009.
Churchill-Livingstone; 1985.
27.
Langston C. Acute uremia. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal
8
Plumb DC. Plumbs Veterinary Drug Handbook, 6th edition, Ames
Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SE Ettinger, EC Feldman, p. 1972.
IA: Blackwell; 2008.
St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
 Quimby JM, Gustafson DL, Samber BJ, et al. The pharmacokinet-
28.
 Karriker M. Drug dosing in renal failure and the dialysis patient.
ics of mirtazapine in healthy cats. Abstract in the American
In: Proceedings of the Acdvanced Renal Therapies Symposium,pp.
College of Veterinary Medicine (ACVIM) 2009 forum, abstract
8-12. New York; 2006.
282.Montreal, Canada; 2009.
29.
 IRIS. 2009 Staging ofCKD.http://wwwiris-kidney.com/education/
10.
 Quimby JM, Gustafson DL, Samber BJ, Lunn KF. Ihe pharma-
en/education06.shtml (accessed September 28, 2010).
cokinetics of mirtazapine in cats with chronic kidney disease.
30.
Cowgill LD, Kallet AJ. Systemic hypertension. In: Current 
Abstract in the American College of Veterinary Medicine
Veterinary Therapy IX, Small Animal Practice, ed. RW Kirk, p. 360.
(ACVIM) 2010 forum, abstract 315. Anaheim, CA, USA, 2010.
Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1986.
346
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Section 8
(2000-2002). Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2008;22(5):
1111-1117.
1. Bulger RE, Nagle RB, Dobyan DC. Acute tubular necrosis in the
11.1
Finco DR, Brown SA, Crowell WA, Groves CA, Duncan JR,
rat kidney folowing sustained hypotension: physiologic and mor-
Barsanti JA. Efects of phosphorus/calcium-restricted and
phologic observations. Laboratory Investigation 1977;Oct;37(4):
phosphorus/calcium-replete 32% protein diets in dogs with
411-422.
chronic renal failure. American Journal of Veterinary Research
 Davies G, Kingswood C, Street M. Pharmacokinetics of opioids 
1992;53(1):157-163.
in renal dysfunction. Clinical Pharmacokinetics 1996;Dec;31(6):
12.F
Barber PJ, Rawlings JM, Markwell PJ, Elliott J. Efect of dietary
410-422.
phosphate restriction on renal secondary hyperparathyroidism in
 Harris RJ. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition and renal physiology. The
the cat. Journal of Small Animal Practice 1999;40(2):62-70.
American Journal of Cardiology 2002;89(6):10D-17D.
13.(
Greco DS, Lees GE, Dzendzel GS, Komkov A, Carter AB. Effect
4.
Hikasa Y, Okuyama K, Kakuta T, et al. Anesthetic potency and
of dietary sodium intake on glomerular filtration rate in partially
cardiopulmonary effects of sevoflurane in goats: comparison with
nephrectomized dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research
isoflurane and halothane. Canadian Journal of Veterinary Research
1994;55(1):152-159.
1998;62(4):299-306.
14.
Greco DS, Lees GE, Dzendzel G, Carter AB. Effects of dietary
5.
Muir WW, Weise AJ, March PA. Efects of morphine, lidocaine,
sodium intake on blood pressure measurements in partially
 ketamine, and morphine-lidocaine-ketamine drug combination
nephrectomized dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research
m asa sio un  r  
1994;55(1):160-165.
isoflurane. American Journal of Veterinary Research 2003;64(9):
15.
Kirk CA, Jewell DE, Lowry SR. Effects of sodium chloride on
1155-1160.
selected parameters in cats. Veterinary Iherapeutics 2006;7(4):
 Sun H, Frassetto L, Benet LZ. Effects of renal failure on drug
333-346.
transport and metabolism. Pharmacology e Therapeutics 2006;
16.
Buranakarl C, Mathur S, Brown SA. Efects of dietary sodium
109(1-2):1-11.
chloride intake on renal function and blood pressure in cats with
normal and reduced renal function. American Journal of Veterinary
Research 2004;65(5):620-627.
17.
Plantinga EA, Everts H, Kastelein AM, Beynen AC. Retrospective
Section 9
study of the survival of cats with acquired chronic renal insuffi-
1. Jacob F, Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, et al. Clinical evaluation of
ciency offered different commercial diets. The Veterinary Record
dietary modification for treatment of spontaneous chronic renal
2005;157(7):185-187.
failure in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
18.
Brown SA, Brown CA, Crowell WA, et al. Beneficial effects of
Association 2002;220(8):1163-1170.
Ae paeesunad e-ea Aieia jo uesuue sui
2.1
Ross SJ, Osborne CA, Kirk CA, Lowry SR, Koehler LA, Polzin DJ.
acids in dogs with renal insufficiency. The Journal of Laboratory
Clinical evaluation of dietary modification for treatment of spon-
and Clinical Medicine 1998;131(5):447-455.
taneous chronic kidney disease in cats. Journal of the Arerican
19.
Elliott J, Syme HM, Reubens E, Markwell PJ. Assessment of acid-
Veterinary Medical Association 2006;229(6):949-957.
base status of cats with naturally occurring chronic renal failure.
3.1
 Elliott J, Rawlings JM, Markwell PJ, Barber PJ. Survival of cats with
Journal of Srmall Animal Practice 2003;44(2):65-70.
naturally occurring chronic renal failure: effect of dietary manage-
20.
Elliott DA, Riel DL, Rogers QR. Complications and outcomes
ment. Journal of Small Animal Practice 2000;41(6):235-242.
associated with use of gastrostomy tubes for nutritional manage-
4.
 Elliott DA. Gastrostomy tube feeding in kidney disease. In: Kirks
ment of dogs with renal failure: 56 cases (1994-1999). Journal
Current Veterinary Therapy XIV, eds. JD Bonagura, DC Twedt,
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 2000;217(9):
Pp. 906-910. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2009.
1337-1342.
Adams LG, Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, O'Brien TD, Hostetter TH.
21.
Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JP, et al. Association
 Influence of dietary protein/calorie intake on renal morphology
and function incats with 5/6 nephrectomy. Laboratory Investigation
ammonium phosphate urolithiasis in cats. Journal of the American
1994;70(3):347-357.
Veterinary Medical Association 2001;219(9):1228-1237.
6.1
 Brown SA, Finco DR, Crowell WA, Navar LG. Dietary protein
22.S
Stevenson AE, Hynds WK, Markwell PJ. Ihe relative effects of
intake and the glomerular adaptations to partial nephrectomy in
supplemental dietary calcium and oxalate on urine composition
dogs. The Journal of Nutrition 1991;121(11 Suppl):S125-S127.
and calcium oxalate relative supersaturation in healthy adult dogs.
7.1
Leibetseder JL, Neufeld KW. Efects of medium protein diets in
Research in Veterinary Science 2003;75(1):33-41.
dogs with chronic renal failure. The Journal of Nutrition 1991;
 Hawthorne AJ, Markwell PJ. Dietary sodium promotes increased
121(11 Suppl):S145-S149.
water intake and urine volume in cats. The Journal of Nutrition
8.1
Brown SA, Crowell WA, Barsanti JA, White JV, Finco DR.
2004;134(8 Suppl):2128S-2129S.
Beneficial effects of dietary mineral restriction in dogs with
24.
Osborne CA, Lulich JP, Forrester D, Albasan H. Paradigm changes
marked reduction of functional renal mass. Journal ofthe American
in the role of nutrition for the management of canine and feline
Society of Nephrology 1991;1(10):1169-1179.
urolithiasis. Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal
9.1
King JN, Tasker S, Gunn-Moore DA, Strehlau G. BENRIC
Practice 2009;39(1):127-141.
(benazepril in renal insufficiency in cats) study group. Prognostic
25.
 Houston DM, Rinkardt NE, Hilton J. Evaluation of the efficacy of
factors in cats with chronic kidney disease. Journal of Veterinary
a commercial diet in the dissolution of feline struvite bladder
Internal Medicine 2007;21(5):906-916.
uroliths. Veterinary Therapeutics 2004;5(3):187-201
10.
Boyd LM, Langston C, Ihompson K, Zivin K, Imanishi M.
26.
Albasan H, Osborne CA, Lulich JP, et al. Rate and frequency of 
Survival in cats with naturally occurring chronic kidney disease
recurrence of uroliths after an initial ammonium urate, calcium
Chapter 10  Urinary and Renal Diseases
347
oxalate, or struvite urolith in cats. Journal of the American
34.
Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JP, et al. Associations
Veterinary Medical Association 2009;235(12):1450-1455.
between dietary factors in canned food and formation of calcium
27.
 Markwell PJ, Buffington CT, Smith BH. Ihe effect of diet on lower
oxalate uroliths in dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research
urinary tract diseases in cats. Ihe Journal of Nutrition 1998;128(12
2002;63(2):163-169.
Suppl):2753S-2757S.
35.
Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Ihumchai R, et al. Epidemiology of
28.
Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JP. Evaluation of trends in
canine calcium oxalate uroliths. Identifying risk factors. Veterinary
frequency of urethrostomy for treatment of urethral obstruction
Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice 1999;29(1):
in cats. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
113-122. xi.
2002;221(4):502-505.
36.
 Hess B, Nakagawa Y, Parks JH, Coe FL. Molecular abnormality of
29.
 Osborne CA, Lulich JP, Kruger JM, Urich LK, Koehler LA.
Tamm-Horsfall glycoprotein in calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis.
Analysis of 451,891 canine uroliths, feline uroliths, and feline ure-
American Journal of Physiology. Renal Physiology 1991;260(4):
thral plugs from 1981 to 2007: perspectives from the Minnesota
F569-F578.
urolith center. Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal
37.
Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JP, et al. Associations
Practice 2009;39(1):183-197.
between dry dietary factors and canine calcium oxalate uroliths.
30.
 Cannon AB, Westropp JL, Ruby AL, Kass PH. Evaluation of trends
American Journal of Veterinary Research 2002;63(3):330-337.
in urolith composition in cats: 5230 cases (1985-2004). Journal
38.
McCue J, Langston C, Palma D, Gisselman K. Urate urolithiasis.
gf the American Veterinary Medical Association 2007;231(4):
Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing
570-576.
Veterinarian 2009;31(10):468-475.
31.
Houston DM, Moore AE, Favrin MG, Hoff B. Feline urethral plugs 
39.
 Bartges J, Kirk C. Nutrition and urolithiasis. Proceedings from the
and bladder uroliths: a review of 5484 submissions 1998-2003.
25th Annual American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine
The Canadian Veterinary Journal 2003;44(12):974-977.
Forum, Seattle WA, 2007.
32.
Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Wooden BG, et al. Clinical, clinicopatho-
40.
 Buffington CA, Westropp JL, Chew DJ, Bolus RR. Clinical evalu-
logic, radiographic, and ultrasonographic abnormalities in cats
ation of multimodal environmental modification (MEMO) in the
with ureteral calculi: 163 cases (1984-2002). Journal of the
management of cats with idiopathic cystitis. Journal of Feline
American Veterinary Medical Association 2005;226(6):932-936.
Medicine and Surgery 2006;8(4):261-268.
33.
Low WW, Uhl IM, Kass PH, Ruby AL, Westropp IL. Evaluation
Markwell PJ, Buffington CA, Chew DJ, et al. Clinical evaluation
of trends in urolith composition and characteristics of dogs with
 of commercially available urinary acidification diets in the man-
urolithiasis: 25,499 cases (1985-2006). Journal of the American
agement of idiopathic cystitis in cats. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association 2010;236(2):193-200.
Veterinary Medical Association 1999;214(3):361-365.
Chapter
Infectious Diseases
Editors: Jennifer Garcia and Meri Hall
 Section 1 Infectious Bacterial Diseases 349
Section 2 Fungal Diseases 366
Bartonella - Tracy Darling 349
Infectious fungal disease - Meri Hafl 366
Lyme borreliosis - Marcella D. Ridgway 350
Blastomycosis - Marcella D. Ridgway 370 
Canine brucellosis - Debra Sauberli 352
Section 3 Protozoal Diseases 374
Ehrlichiosis - Marcella D. Ridgway 353
Protozoal diseases - Meri Halfl374
Helicobacter-associated disease - Amy Somrak and
Hepatozoonosis - Amy Kubier and Marcella D. Ridgway 379
Marcella D. Ridgway 355
Section 4 Infectious Viral Diseases 381
Leptospirosis - Marcella D. Ridgway 357
Canine and feline herpesvirus - Tracy Darling 381
Methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus-
Influenza - Mer Hall383
Maureen McMichael 360
Papillomas - Meri Halfl 384
Mycobacterial disease - Meri Hafl 361
Section 5 Infectious Disease Testing - Meri Half 385
 Mycoplasmal diseases - William Whitehouse and
Marcella D. Ridgway 363
 Plague - Amy Kubier and Marcella D. Ridgway 365
SECTION 1 INFECTIOUS
host for Bartonella henselae and Bartonella quintana, but they
may likely host other bartonella species as well.2 Although dogs
BACTERIAL DISEASES
can be infected with Bartonella, their role as a reservoir host is
unknown at this time.
Bartonella
The Bartonella bacterium is most commonly known to be
   a     
 pe q a- i  ds
such as ticks and biting lice. Serology testing has shown that a
known to infect many mammals, including dogs, cats, and
large number of clinically normal cats are positive for exposure
humans. Bartonella is a zoonotic organism responsible for cat 
to a Bartonella spp.
scratch disease (CSD) and other disorders in humans.
Clinical signs
Pathogenesis and transmission
Bartonella has been associated with several disease processes
Six of the Bartonella spp. that are known to infect humans have
including endocarditis, uveitis, stomatitis, lymphadenopathy,
been isolated from cats and dogs.' Cats are the main reservoir
 and neurological and urinary disorders in cats. The high
Smat Anima nternat Medicine forVeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses, First Edition.Edited by Linda Meril
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
349
350
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
       
the reported cases of Lyme disease occur in the Northeastern
associated illness difficult. There are a small number of docu-
 and Eastern states and the West Coast.
mented cases of clinical manifestations of Bartonella spp. in
dogs. Cases of infectious endocarditis, meningoencephalitis,
Pathogenesis and transmission
 granulomatous hepatitis, and cutaneous vasculitis have been
attributed to Bartonella infection.
B. burgdorferi is transmitted by Ixodes ticks that acquire the
  s      n
rodents). Transmission requires at least 48h of tick attachment,
Diagnostic testing
during which the organism multiplies in the gut of the tick,
There are several testing modalities available for the detection of
migrates into the hemolymph, and travels to the salivary glands
Bartonella in dogs and in cats including blood culture, and
to be transmitted in the tick saliva to a new host while the tick
 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing. Proving bartonellosis
feeds. Organisms then migrate from the site of tick attachment
 as cause for clinical illness in cats is difficult due to the large
to infect other tissues, particularly connective tissue and syn-
ovium (thin layer of tissue that lines the joint space), to establish
 In contrast, detection of antibodies against Bartonella in dogs
a persistent infection. The host's immune response to the organ-
may provide strong evidence of active infection due to the low
sis pe a go  n aisi aq oi se s
festation may best be supported by detection of the organism via
Clinical signs
histology at the site of infection.
Most dogs are asymptomatic. The most often noted well-
characterized clinical manifestation of canine borreliosis is poly-
Pharmacology and treatment
arthritis. Clinical signs include fever, anorexia, lethargy.
lymphadenomegaly, stif gait, shifting leg lameness, and joint 
There are many antibiotics that are effective against Bartonella
swelling. Lameness is usually first manifested in the limb closest
spp. in vitro, but studies showed elimination of bacteremia in
 - p a jo  aso u po q sd as
to the site of tick attachment (oligoarthropathy). Lyme disease
 has also been associated with a progressive renal disease in dogs
mendations have been extrapolated from human literature.
 Commonly used antibiotics include doxycycline, azithromycin,
and in humans. In dogs with presumed Lyme nephropathy, the
clinical signs are those of renal insufciency (vomiting, anorexia,
enrofloxacin, rifampin, and amoxicillin/clavulanate. Resistance
-p iq sd su u ua jo aq A suaxp 
thy (peripheral edema, ascites). Labrador and golden retrievers
cycline is considered an appropriate first choice in feline patients
eiononn edodu aua on pasodsnd aq on readde
with clinical bartonellosis.2 Resistant cases may respond to com-
disease (neuroborreliosis) is well documented in humans; in
bination therapy. Longer-term therapy is often recommended
(4-6 weeks). Treatment is only recommended in patients with
dogs, seizures and behavior changes have been attributed to Bor-
relia infection, but the association is poorly documented. Like-
confrmed or highly suspect cases of Bartonella-associated
wise, cardiac arrhythmias have been noted in dogs with evidence
disease and should be considered in patients with immunocom-
of exposure to Borrelia, but causality is unclear. Dogs exposed to
promised owners.
Borrelia do not develop the characteristic cutaneous “bull's-eye'
lesion (erythema chronicum migrans [ECM]) at the site of the
Prevention
tick bite seen in humans.
 Bartonella is transmited to pets through an arthropod vector.
 Prevention is primarily achieved through vigorous fea control,
Diagnostic testing
although many cats have already been exposed at the time of
 Borreliosis should be considered as a differential for any dog in
adoption. This organism has zoonotic potential, especially to
a Lyme endemic region with shifting leg lameness or progressive
immunocompromised people. Pet owners and veterinary per-
nonresponsive renal disease. Animals diagnosed with tick-borne
sonnel should be advised to avoid bites, scratches, and contact
disease have probably been exposed to multiple tick-borne
with flea excrement. Wounds should be immediately washed
agents, so the possibility of coinfection with other organisms
with soap and water.
should always be considered.
Laboratory findings
Lyme borreliosis
In animals with polyarthritis, the complete blood count (CBC),
 Borreliosis is a tick-borne bacterial disease caused by the spiro-
serum chemistry profle, and urinalysis are expected to be
chete Borrelia burgdorferi. The disease is also known as Lyme
normal; therefore, if thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, anemia,
disease, named for Lyme, Connecticut, where the disease was
hyperglobulinemia, hypoalbuminemia, or elevated liver enzymes
frst described. Borreliosis is primarily a disease of humans and
are noted, another cause should be sought because these changes
dogs, although cats can be affected. In the United States, most of
are not consistent with a diagnosis of borreliosis. In dogs with
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
351
presumptive Lyme nephropathy, elevated serum creatinine,
 ceftriaxone, erythromycin, and azithromycin are also effective.
blood urea nitrogen (BUN), phosphorus, and cholesterol,
 Ceftriaxone and azithromycin are used to treat humans with
hypoalbuminemia, proteinuria, glucosuria, hematuria, and renal
refractory disease. Clinical improvement of acute arthritis is
casts (cylinduria) are found.
 often evident within 24-48h of initiating antibiotic therapy
(potentially longer if the patient is treated later in the infection).
Imaging
 It is uncertain if treatment completely clears the organism from
There are no imaging fndings specific for borreliosis, but
treated animals and relapse can occur after antibiotics are dis-
 imaging studies are useful for ruling out other diseases causing
continued. Some treated dogs remain Borrelia positive by PCR
similar clinical signs. In patients with polyarthritis, radiographs
or culture of tick attachment sites but do not have recurrence of
clinical signs. Patients with Lyme nephropathy should be treated
may show joint effusion and help characterize the arthritis as
 nonerosive (consistent with Lyme polyarthritis) versus erosive.
 intensively for renal failure in addition to antibiotic therapy. The
   a     si
In patients with nephropathy, abdominal ultrasound may help
asymptomatic dogs that are seropositive for Borrelia, current
to rule in/rule out other causes of renal failure.
recommendations are not to treat with antibiotics but to monitor
Other diagnostic tests
them two to four times per year for proteinuria.
Specific diagnostic tests for borreliosis detect Borrelia antigen
Prevention
(PCR) or detect Borrelia-specific antibody (indirect fluorescent
antibody [IFA], enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA],
Borrelia bacterins and subunit (OspA antigen) vaccines are com-
Western blot). Demonstration of the organism provides defini-
mercially available for dogs but their use is much debated.
tive diagnosis of infection (culture, cytology, or histopathology
 Studies of vaccine effectiveness have indicated some protection
against clinical illness in seronegative dogs. There are significant
formed on fluid or tissue samples: Samples of synovium or skin
concerns about use of a vaccine to stimulate an immune response
from the region of the tick bite are more likely to contain organ-
to Borrelia bacterial antigens when much of the clinical illness
isms, so are preferred samples for analysis. Serology is often used
 s     sn  
to make a clinical diagnosis of borreliosis, but no serologic tech-
response against the organism in joints or immune-complex
 disease in the kidneys; that is, vaccination may make the patient
 a p aad g a ise pa ao 
 worse. Ifa vaccine is used, it has been recommended that puppies
 organism, which is expressed only when the organism is trans-
          
mitted to the dog via a tick bite, are able to distinguish natural
second dose 2-4 weeks later). Immunity with vaccination is
exposure versus vaccination. This includes the point-of-care
 short-lived and yearly revaccination would be required. It is
SNAP4DX? test used by many small animal practices as a screen-
unclear if bacterins or subunit vaccines are the better choice.
ing test for tick-borne disease agents and heartworm. Arthro-
Discussion on vaccination can also be found in Chapter 12.
 centesis and joint fluid analysis and culture should be performed
Control of tick exposure by avoiding tick-infested areas and
in patients with polyarthritis. Joint fluid typically shows increased
 routine use of tick-control products to treat individual animals
cell counts, predominantly neutrophils. Cultures provide defini-
s  s i ae ssd  on p
tive diagnosis if positive but require several weeks to complete 
 control. If attached ticks are found on the animal, prompt
and may be negative in the face of active infection because of
 removal may minimize transmission of Borrelia organisms from
low organism numbers. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from patients
the tick (which requires 48-72h of tick attachment). Ticks
suspected to have neuroborreliosis may be normal or may show
should be removed carefully to ensure removal of the head and
mild mononuclear pleocytosis and mild increases in protein.
 mouthparts and to avoid crushing the tick to prevent exposure
Differential Borrelia antibody concentration between CSF and
to hemolymph. Most pet supply companies market special
serum may provide better evidence of neuroborreliosis. A pre-
instruments designed to safely remove attached ticks.
d   q  si o si a
Nutritional considerations
antibody, has clinical signs consistent with Lyme borreliosis,
other differentials have been ruled out, and a rapid response to
Patients with renal dysfunction should be fed appropriate renal
appropriate antibiotic treatment is observed.
diet formulations that are restricted in protein and sodium
content.
Pharmacology and treatment
Anesthetic and analgesia considerations
Borreliosis is treated with antimicrobials. Doxycycline (10 mg/
kg PO q 24 h for a minimum of 4 weeks) is used most commonly
Anesthetized patients with borreliosis should be monitored for
because of its effectiveness, relative safety, and reasonable cost.
cardiac arrhythmias, though the association with cardiac abnor-
Doxycycline also has the added benefit of being effective for
malities is weak Lameness usually responds rapidly to antibiotic
coinfection with some other tick-borne agents. Amoxicillin,
treatment, but additional analgesic medication can be beneficial.
352
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are preferred to corti-
     d  
 costeroids. The use of anti-inflammatory/analgesic medications
This is often misdiagnosed as conception failure.
can complicate the interpretation of clinical response to
In male dogs, epididymitis, scrotal edema, and orchitis occur
antibiotics.
as the hallmark signs. Morphological abnormalities, agglutina-
tion, and reduced viability of spermatozoa may be noted. Pro-
longed infections often lead to unilateral or bilateral atrophy of
Canine brucellosis
the testes. Males often become infertile.
Brucellosis is a signifcant cause of reproductive loss and infertil-
ity in animals as well a potential zoonotic disease of humans.
Diagnostic testing
The causative agent is an intracellular, gram-negative coccobacil-
lus or rod-shaped bacteria from the family Brucellaceae. Various
Bacterial isolation of B. canis will give a definitive diagnosis of the
species exist, each primarily infecting and being maintained by
disease. Early in the course of the disease (before the body has
a limited number of reservoir hosts. For the canid species, Bru-
had time to react), this is the preferred method. The ideal media
for testing is blood agar, although the bacteria will grow on most
cella canis is of main concern, although Brucella abortus, Brucella
melitensis, and Brucella suis have been isolated from dogs.
 common aerobic media. Bacterial growth is quite slow, leading to
overgrowth by contaminant bacteria and false-negative results.
Serologic evaluation will provide a presumptive diagnosis of
Pathogenesis and transmission
B. canis. Serologic tests vary in sensitivity and specificity, leading
The route of infection is mainly by ingestion and via contact with
to false negatives and positives, depending on the stage of the
the genital, oronasal, and conjunctival mucosa. Transmission
disease and the test conducted.′ The use of a combination of tests
through broken skin may also occur. Postabortion fetuses, fluids,
or repetitive testing will assist with drawing a definitive conclu-
placentas, and vaginal discharge from infected females either
sion (Table 11.1.1).
during heat, breeding, or postwhelp are common infective mate-
Currently, the common protocol for serologic testing is to
rials, all containing very high numbers of the brucella bacteria.
use a rapid slide agglutination test (RSAT) with or without
Postabortion shedding can occur for 4-6 weeks. Once infection
2-mercaptoethanol (2-ME) for initial screening. This test is
occurs, bacteremia usually ensues within 3 weeks. The intracel-
rapid, is commercially available (D-Tec CB, Synbiotics, San
lular bacteria eventually localize within the reproductive
 Diego, CA), can be performed on site, and is sensitive. Results
(steroid-dependent) tissues such as the prostate and epididymis
give a high percentage of false positives even with the addition
 of the male and the uterus of the female. Asymptomatic carriers,
of the 2-ME, but false negatives are rare. Hence, one can screen
especially of the male species, often propagate the disease. The
out negative animals and do further testing on positive animals.
male prostate and epididymides serve as excellent reservoirs
 The confrmatory test for the RSAT test is the agar gel immun-
from which the bacteria can spread. Signifcant shedding can
 odiffusion (AGID) using cell wall antigen or cytoplasmic antigen
occur in the semen of dogs for up to 2 months after infection
from B. canis. The use of cytoplasmic antigen appears the most
with intermittent shedding of smaller numbers occurring for
specific. Laboratories currently qualifed to conduct the AGID
years after. Other excretions such as urine, feces, saliva, milk,
testing include Cornell University, the University of Florida, and
and oral and nasal secretions can contain bacteria. A common
the Tifton Veterinary Diagnostic and Investigational Laboratory
route of transmission from dog to dog is venereal, hence the
in Georgia.
need to do serologic testing of both the male and female prior
ps ssod husn s a iax hu e u
to mating.
be eliminated either by neutering and removal or euthanasia.
Euthanasia is recommended due to the zoonotic potential of the
Clinical signs
significance to young people and immunosuppressed individu-
 Clinical signs ofthe disease are variable and it is unusual for dogs
als. All animals should test negative prior to entering a breeding
 to appear seriously ill. Many infections are asymptomatic.
kennel or prior to mating to prevent the spread of the disease.
Reproductive failure in a male or female dog should prompt
testing for B. canis. Lymphadenitis is typical and can be regional,
Pharmacology and treatment
based on the infection site, or generalized. Clinical signs such as
lethargy, inappetance, weight loss, and poor performance may
Brucella's intracellular nature makes treatment challenging, if
be noted. Occasionally, diskospondylitis, uveitis, endophthalmi-
not impossible. The bacteria remains sequestered within immune
tis, pyogranulomatous dermatitis, endocarditis, and meningo-
cells with episodic bacteremia. Combinations of antibiotics over
encephalitis have been reported. By far, the most common sign
 prolonged periods have proved most successful with relapse
in healthy appearing females is abortion and stillbirths occurring
common after treatment. Combinations found successful are
between 45 and 60 days of gestation. Some pups delivered alive,
tetracyclines (tetracycline HCl, chlortetracycline, doxycycline,
fade and die in a short period due to infection with the bacteria.
 minocycline) and dihydrostreptomycin. Gentamicin has been
A copious brown to gray green mucoid discharge for 1-6 weeks
used in place of dihydrostreptomycin. Recent evidence has
classically follows an abortion. Early embryonic death at 2-3
shown that enrofloxacin is an alternative option, potentially a
 Chapter 11 Infectious Diseases
353
Table 11.1.1Serologic tests for Brucella canis in the dog
Serologic test
Antigen
Time frame for positive results
Comments
2-ME-RCAT
Cell wall
8-12 weeks after infection to 3 months
Very sensitive; false-positive results are
after the animal is abacteremic
common; few (1%) false-negative results
are reported; easy and fast
2-ME-TAT
 Cell wall
10-12 weeks after infection to 3 months
Semiquantitative; false positive results are
 after the animal is abacteremic
possible
AGID test
Cell wall
12 weeks after infection to 4 months after
Test procedure is complex; more specific
the animal is abacteremic
than 2-ME-RCAT
AGID test
 Cytoplasmic
12 weeks after infection to 36 months after
 Most specific serologic test but not
the animal is abacteremic
sensitive, detects chronic cases when other
tests give negative results
ELISA
Cell wall
Unknown (expect time to be similar to that
Very specific, less sensitive than TAT,
observed with the TAT)
limited availability
ELISA
Cytoplasmic
Unknown (expect time to be similar to that
Very sensitive and specific, detects chronic
cbserved with AGID-cytoplasmic)
infection, limited availability
RCAT, card slide agglutination test; 2-ME, 2-mercaptoethanol; TAT, tube agglutination test; AGID, agar gel immunodiffusion; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay.
Source: Adapted from Johnston SD, Root-Kustritz Mv, Olson PN. Canine and Feline Theriogenoiogy. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 2001.
 d e s iq ad  r s a
the body, where they may subsequently be associated with a
 to one of the above-listed drugs.79
multitude of clinical signs related to which tissues are affected.
Clinical illness occurs in three phases: acute, subclinical, and
Prevention
chronic. In the acute phase, dogs are often febrile and anorectic.
Nasal discharge, lymphadenomegaly, and evidence of vasculitis
Currently, there is no vaccine available; testing dogs and bitches
(petechiation, edema) may be present. Thrombocytopenia, mild
prior to mating remains the best preventative. Since it is a
anemia, and leukopenia are often present. The acute phase lasts
zoonotic disease, people should wear standard personnel protec-
for 2-4 weeks in untreated dogs, after which clinical signs resolve
tive equipment, especially when handling aborted materials and
as dogs enter the subclinical phase, which may last for months
infected or suspected infected canines to help prevent human
to years. In this phase, dogs are still infected but are clinically
infection.
normal, although mild thrombocytopenia usually persists.
Immunocompetent dogs may clear the infection in this phase;
Ehrlichiosis
    s    s 
 chronic phase, which can be associated with severe disease, espe-
Ehrlichiosis is a bacterial disease caused by obligate intracellular
cially in young dogs and in German shepherds.
  p   i
and granulocytes in vertebrate hosts. Ehrlichiosis primarily
Clinical signs
affects dogs; cats are affected rarely. The causative organisms of
canine monocytic ehrlichiosis (CME), the major ehrlichial
 In acute CME, clinical signs may be nonspecifc signs of inflam-
disease of dogs, include Ehrlichia canis, Ehrlichia chafeensis,
 matory disease (fever, anorexia, lethargy, lymphadenomegaly).
Ehrlichia ruminantium, and Neorickettsia ristici, of which E.
More severely affected dogs may develop petechiation/
canis is the most common and the most pathogenic. Canine
ecchymosis, neurological abnormalities, muscle pain, peripheral
granulocytic ehrlichiosis (CGE) is associated with Ehrlichia
edema, or dyspnea. Clinical signs may be severe and can include
ewingii. Ehrlichia are transmitted by ticks. E. canis can also be
weight loss and debilitation, anterior uveitis, overt bleeding, neu-
transmited via blood transfusion and is one of the agents that
rological abnormalities, polyuria/polydipsia due to renal insuf-
should be considered in screening potential blood donors.
ficiency, and secondary infections as a result of bone marrow
suppression. Fever is common in both the acute and chronic
Pathogenesis and transmission
 phases. CGE is generally manifested as polyarthritis.
Ticks acquire the infection by feeding on a bacteremic vertebrate
Diagnostic testing
host and transmit the infection during subsequent feeding.
 During a 1- to 3-week incubation period, the inoculated organ-
Ehrlichiosis should be considered as a differential for any
isms multiply in mononuclear cells and disseminate throughout
dog with thrombocytopenia, uveitis, vasculitis, polyarthritis,
354
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
unexplained fever, or hemorhagic disease. Because animals
 increase the likelihood of demonstrating morulae. Culture of the
with tick-borne disease have potentially been exposed to multi-
 organism is not used clinically because of low sensitivity and
ple tick-borne agents, the possibility of coinfection with other
 relatively high cost. Clinical diagnosis is generally based upon
organisms should always be considered when a tick-borne
serology (detection of antibody to Ehrlichia spp. by IFA at a
disease like ehrlichiosis is diagnosed.
commercial laboratory or point-of-care SNAP4DX test) or PCR
(detection of Ehrlichia-specifc DNA). A presumptive diagnosis
Laboratory findings
of ehrlichiosis may be made if compatible clinical signs are
p epou si oas asod q op aos e u sd
Thrombocytopenia and mild anemia are the most consistent
itive test. Dogs may be seropositive because of cross-reaction
CBC abnormalities in animals with monocytic ehrlichiosis and
are present in over 80% of affected dogs. Thrombocytopenia
among some other tick-borne agents or because of exposure or
 often precedes the onset of clinical illness and persists through
subclinical infection with Ehrlichia. Dogs with ehrlichiosis can
the subclinical phase of the disease. The white blood cell (WBC)
be seronegative so a negative serology does not rule out the
disease. PCR detects organism-specific DNA in blood, CSE, joint
count is variable and may show leukopenia or leukocytosis.
fluid, aqueous fluid, and tissues and therefore documents infec-
Lymphocytosis may be seen. Some patients have pancytopenia.
Serum biochemical abnormalities may include hyperglobuline-
 tion, not just exposure. PCR becomes negative quickly with anti-
      
biotic treatment, so samples for PCR should be collected before
treatment is initiated. Many commercial laboratories offer tick-
aminotransferase [ALT], alkaline phosphatase [ALP]). Elevated
 BUN and creatinine may be present in patients with interstitial
borne disease panels, which include tests for multiple tick-borne
agents; most include testing for E. canis.
inflammation of the kidney associated with chronic ehrlichiosis.
 A urinalysis may show proteinuria and/or hematuria. Hyper-
globulinemic patients further evaluated by protein electrophore-
Pharmacology and treatment
sis usually have a polyclonal gammopathy, but a monoclonal
Ehrlichiosis is treated with antimicrobials. Doxycycline (10 mg/
for monoclonal gammopathy; in this regard, the disease can
kg PO q 24h for 4 weeks) is used most commonly because of its
mimic plasma cell tumors/multiple myeloma. Patients undergo-
effectiveness, relative safety, and reasonable cost." Chloram-
ing bone marrow aspiration for further evaluation of cytopenias
phenicol (20 mg/kg PO q 8h for 4 weeks) is also effective and
may be used instead of tetracyclines to avoid yellowing of erupt-
may show plasmacytosis, which again must be distinguished
ing teeth in young dogs but is generally not used because of the
from multiple myeloma as a cause. CSF from patients with neu-
 risk of serious side effects in humans exposed to the drug and
rological manifestations of ehrlichiosis may show increased
because potential side effects in animals (thrombocytopenia,
 protein concentration and mononuclear pleocytosis.
anemia, pancytopenia) parallel the abnormalities already present
Imaging
in ehrlichiosis patients. Enrofloxacin is not effective in eradicat-
ing Ehrlichia. In resistant infections, imidocarb (5 mg/kg IM,
 Imaging studies are frequenly done in animals with ehrlichiosis
repeat administration in 15 days) may be effective. Clinical
before a diagnosis is made as part of the overall assessment and
improvement is rapid following initiation of treatment. Fever is
diagnostic evaluation of patients with thrombocytopenia, fever,
expected to resolve, and platelet counts begin to rise within
musculoskeletal pain, or respiratory signs. However, there are no
24-48h concurrent with general improvement in the attitude
    s n
and activity of the patient. Platelet counts usually normalize in
megaly and/or splenomegaly may be present due to lymphoid
the first 2 weeks of treatment. If patients fail to show improve-
 and plasma cell hyperplasia in response to infection or splenic
ment in the frst few days, the accuracy of the diagnosis should
 sequestration of red blood cells and platelets. Interstitial to alve-
be reevaluated. It is uncertain if treatment completely eliminates
olar lung patterns may be evident on thoracic radiographs as a
the organism as treated animals may remain seropositive, but
result of vasculitis or hemorrhage. In animals with joint involve-
treated animals can be considered clear of infection if clinico-
 ment, radiographs may show evidence of joint effusion and soff
 pathologic abnormalities (thrombocytopenia, hyperglobuline-
tissue swelling. Although nonspecifc for ehrlichiosis, imaging
mia, anemia, leukopenia) have resolved.
studies are useful for ruling out other diseases causing similar
 In addition to antimicrobial therapy, some patients will
clinical signs.
require supportive care with intravenous fuid therapy and
potentially blood transfusions for anemia. Glucocorticoids at
Other diagnostic tests
immunosuppressive doses (prednisone or prednisolone 1-2 mg/
 Definitive diagnosis is made by demonstrating the presence of
dae ua asuodsan uo supuadap shep ti-2 o uzi b Od a
the organism in an animal with compatible clinical signs. Intra-
to taper) may be necessary to treat severe thrombocytopenia
cellular Ehrlichia morulae may be observed on peripheral blood
where secondary immune-mediated destruction is believed to
 smears or buffy coat smears, but morulae are generally present
contribute to the platelet loss. Infection with Ehrlichia does not
 in low numbers during the initial phase of infection, so cytology
confer permanent immunity and dogs can be reinfected after
is not sensitive for identifying infection. Collection of samples
successful treatment. Reinfection is likely in dogs maintained in
from a peripheral capillary bed such as an ear margin can
endemic areas.
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
355
Prevention
zoonotic transmission of H. heilmannii and H.felis to a small
number of humans with gastritis.17
No vaccines are available for protection against ehrlichiosis. Pre-
 Although it has been speculated that H.pylori could have
vention centers on control of tick exposure by avoiding tick-
zoonotic potential, no correlation between pet ownership and
infested areas and by the routine use of tick-control products to
human H. pylori infection has been shown.16
treat individual animals and to treat premises. If attached ticks
1q 'shop pue sies ul yaiq AiaA si sOTH jo asualeaaid au
are found on the animal, prompt removal may minimize trans-
 infection appears to be asymptomatic in most. Up to 100% of
clinically healthy pet cats and dogs are infected with a GHLO
fully to ensure removal of the head and mouthparts and to avoid
 and gastric biopsies in 57-76% of cats and in 61-95% of dogs
crushing to prevent exposure to hemolymph. A number of
with chronic vomiting revealed GHLOs.1l13 (see Figure 11.1.1).
devices designed for the safe removal of atached ticks are avail-
 Living conditions may be important to transmission since shelter
 e si s s s d  
 Or colony animals show higher prevalence than pets,' and Heli-
dlisease in some states ofthe United States, but reporting require-
 cobacter spp. may be cultured from the feces of children in
ments vary; reporting regulations for a given practice area
underdeveloped countries.4 This is consistent with a proposed
should be verified to ensure compliance.
fecal-oral route of transmission. Oral-oral transmission is also
hypothesized, although the exact route of transmission is unclear.
Nutritional considerations
Patients with renal dysfunction should be fed appropriate renal
Pathogenesis and transmission
diet formulations that are restricted in protein and sodium
H. pylori causes chronic superficial gastritis in humans by the
content until organ function normalizes.
disruption of the gastric mucosal barrier, secretion of cytotoxins,
increased gastrin production, and the production of inflamma-
Anesthetic and analgesia considerations
tory cytokines. However, GHLOs are not thought to interfere
Renal dysfunction, vasculitis, anemia, and clotting abnormalities
with gastric acid production in animals.13 The urease produced
put ehrlichiosis patients at increased risk of anesthetic and surgi-
 by Helicobacter species breaks down urea into ammonia, which
cal complications.
is directly toxic to epithelial cells, and bicarbonate ions, provid-
ing a buffer that allows the bacteria to survive the low pH
Helicobacter-associated disease
 gastric environment."6 In cats and dogs, inflammation and glan-
dular degeneration does not always accompany Helicobacter
Helicobacter species are gram-negative, urease-positive, micro-
infection, and studies have found no correlation between the
aerophilic, spiral-shaped, flagellated, motile bacteria related to
number of organisms found and the degree of inflammation.
Campylobacter and Arcanobacter.1i2 Most are 4 to 8μum long
q a s i e  u  o I p
found in the gastric mucous layer, closely adhered to the gastric
epithelial or parietal cells, or invading gastric mucosa.4 Helico-
bacter felis, Helicobacter bizzozeronii, Helicobacter salomonis,
Flexispira rappini, and Helicobacter heilmanni have been recov-
ered from the stomachs of dogs, and H. felis, Helicobacter pam-
etensis, Helicobacter pylori, and H. heilmannii have been found
in the stomachs of cats. Additionally, nongastric species of Heli
cobacterhave been isolated from the intestines and livers of small
animals.1
Over 30 organisms characteristic of Helicobacter, not all path.
ogenic, are known, and each varies in its preferred animal host
and in the type and degree of disease that it causes. Collectively,
these organisms are known as gastric Helicobacter-like organ-
isms (GHLOs)." H. pylori has been acknowledged for its role in
chronic gastritis, gastroduodenal ulcers, and neoplasia in
humans.5.16 However, it is a mistake to apply directly what is
Gastric spiral bacteria have been documented in monkeys, foxes,
and pigs, and have been associated with gastritis in cats, dogs,
ferrets, and cheetahs.'4 The clinical significance of Helicobacter
Figure 11.1.1  Spiral GHLO organisms in the gastric mucosa of a
spp. in cats and dogs is still controversial, and there is no evi-
clinically healthy cat (red arrows). Hematoxylin and eosin stain, x100
dence that Helicobacterinfection in cats and dogs leads to gastric
 magnification. Courtesy of Dr. A. Gal, University of llinois at
Urbana-Champaign.
356
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Demonstrating a clear relationship between GHLO colonization
 to detect antibodies against H.pylori, which is rarely found in
and gastric inflammation in cats and dogs has been diffcult.
animal patients. 13
Coinfection with multiple GHLO species also makes assigning
Stool antigen ELISA tests to detect active infection are also
species pathogenicity difficult. 1
available, but their accuracy may be compromised by gastroin-
testinal (GI) bleeding.16
Clinical signs
The PCR of GHLO DNA from a biopsy sample, gastric juice,
or dental plaque provides a diagnosis and identification of the
Most humans and animals infected with GHLOs are asympto-
p aos on rs si po s sads r
matic. Clinical signs most commonly reported in dogs and in
rapid urease testing when colonization density is low, but PCR
cats are chronic vomiting and diarrhea, although inappetence,
 availability may be limited.11
weight loss, fever, and polyphagia may also be seen.4 Belching.
Urea breath and blood tests indirectly measure the ammonia
lip smacking, repeated swallowing, and regurgitation have been
produced by the action of the enzyme urease, which is expressed
reported as well.3
a carbon isotope is ingested by the patient, and the carbon
Diagnostic testing
dioxide containing the labeled carbon is released and can be
measured either in the patient's blood or in exhaled air. The urea
Testing for GHLO organisms in cats and dogs may be invasive
breath test is the preferred method to assess for eradication of
(requiring gastric or duodenal biopsy samples) or noninvasive.
the bacteria since it detects active infection by Helicobacter spp.
The only way to confirm the presence of Helicobacter in veteri-
However, false-negative results are possible if colonization levels
nary patients is through direct observation using invasive
d ud m pe uaq s ud a j no mo a
methods. A common approach in human medicine is to use an
inhibitors or histamine receptor antagonists, which decrease the
invasive technique for initial diagnosis and a noninvasive tech.
urease activity of Helicobacter spp,.13.16
 nique to document eradication.416 The techniques described
differ in how sensitive to and specific for Helicobacter infection
imaging
they are'6 (see Table 11.1.2).
Abdominal imaging studies (radiographs, ultrasound) are fre-
Laboratory findings
quently performed in assessing patients with a clinical problem
 of vomiting and are useful to rule out other causes of these clini-
There are no abnormalities on routine CBC, serum chemistry,
cal signs, but helicobacteriosis does not generally result in
urinalysis, or fecal evaluation that are characteristic of helico-
 imaging abnormalities.
bacteriosis; results are often normal or may show evidence of
dehydration or other consequences of vomiting (electrolyte dis-
Biopsy technigues
turbance, acid-base abnormality).
 Circulating antibodies against Helicobacter spp. may be detected
Gastric biopsy via endoscopy or laparotomy remains the stand-
using ELISA test kits. IgG test kits designed for humans may not
ard technique for the diagnosis of helicobacteriosis in small
identify animals infected with a GHLO since they are designed
Table 11.1.2
 Methods used to diagnose Helicobacter infections
Method
Sensitivity
Specificity
Invasiveness
Notes
Bacterial culture
Up to 90%
100%
 Biopsy required
Sensitivity varies with laboratory
expertise
Rapid urease test
88-100%
88-100%
Biopsy required
Commercial assays available
Histology
%06<
100%
 Biopsy required
PCR
High 
High 
May use biopsy specimen, gastric
 Sensitivity varies with the primers
juice, or dental plaque
pasn
Urea breath test 
%96<
%96<
 Noninvasive
May be done on blood or breath 
Stool antigen test 
%76<
%76<
Noninvasive
Antibody ELISA
60-100%
60-100%
Noninvasive
Commercial assays available
Modified from Flatland B. Helicobacter infection in humans and animals. The Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian
2002;24:688-696.
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
357
with special silver, Giemsa, or toluidine blue stains allows the
Pharmacology and treatments
observation of Helicobacter spp. and the evaluation ofthe degree
 of inflammation or lymphoid follicle hyperplasia in gastric
Asymptomatic humans with H. pylori infection are generally not
fissue. Distribution of the organism in the stomach may be
treated and, likewise, it is recommended that treatment for
patchy, so biopsy samples must be obtained from the gastric
GHLO infection in pets be restricted to those with obvious clini-
antrum, corpus, and cardia. Additionally, the distribution of
cal signs and histological evidence of infection only when no
 other cause for gastritis can be found.13.16
GHLO in cats appears to be predominantly in the antrum of the
stomach, while in dogs the distribution seems to be in the fundus
Helicobacter can be difficult to eradicate in dogs and cats, and
and body.13 Cytology by Diff-Quik? or Gram stain of a touch
reinfection or recrudescence after treatment is possible. Although
prep or brush cytology specimen offers a simple, rapid diagnos-
numerous protocols have been described, combination therapies
fic test for GHLO, but it does not allow the extent of inflamma-
consisting of an antisecretory drug such as an H2 antagonist or
tion to be assessed.
 a proton pump inhibitor and two different classes of antibiotic
 Bacterial culture of organisms retrieved by biopsy is dificult,
for 2-4 weeks seem to be effective and minimize drug side effects
requiring special culturing media and conditions,17 but it is the
and the potential for antibiotic resistance. Commonly recom-
only way to determine sensitivity to specific antibiotics, and it is
mended antibiotic combinations include metronidazole with
considered the gold standard of the invasive diagnostic tests.6
amoxicillin, tetracycline or clarithromycin, or amoxicillin with
clarithromycin'7-1 (see Table 11.1.3). The optimal duration of
 Electron microscopy may be used to identify certain Helico-
bacter spp. based on their morphology, but caution must be used
treatment is unclear and treatment may not eradicate the bacte-
since organisms may lose their typical in vivo morphologies
ria. Eradication should be confirmed 4-8 weeks after the end of
when cultured.1
treatment.14.16
Commercially available rapid urease tests detect the breakdown
 of urea into ammonia by the urease produced by Helicobacter spp.
Nutritional considerations
e go si  (ee     e 
infection may be obtained in about an hour, false-positive readings
na mos ud an  u are n su
may result from other urease-producing bacteria in the sample or
nutritional support to maintain caloric intake. Small-volume
from contamination with blood from an ulcer. False-negative
feedings of fat- and protein-restricted diets may be better toler-
readings may result when bacterial numbers are low.16
ated until secondary gastric discomfort and dysmotility are
resolved.
A
B
Leptospirosis
Leptospirosis is a bacterial disease of humans and wild and
domestic animals caused by Leptospira interrogans and Leptospira
kirschneri. Leptospira are aerobic gram-negative spirochetes.
There are over 200 subtypes (serovars) of Leptospira that are
 pathogenic; these serovars are associated with host animals that
act as reservoirs of infection. There are at least eight serovars
(L.interrogans: Autumnalis, Bataviae, Bratislava, Canicola,
Hardjo, Icterohaemorrhagiae, Pomona; L. kirschneri: Grippoty-
 phosa) infectious to dogs and cats. Individual serovars have par-
       
infections but remain carriers, shedding the organism and main-
taining it in the environment (Autumnalis—mouse; Bataviae-
dog, mouse, rat; Bratislava—rat, pig, horse; Canicola—dog:
Grippotyphosa—opossum, raccoon, skunk; Hardjo—cow;
Icterohaemorrhagiae—rat; Pomona—cow, opossum, pig, skunk).
Pathogenesis and transmission
Figure 11.1.2 A commercially available rapid urease test (A) prior to
Animals may become infected by direct transmission of the spi-
exposure to urease-producing bacteria and (B) after. The urease
rochete (direct contact with infected urine or blood, ingestion
produced by the Helicobacter organisms hydrolyzes urea to ammonia,
aising the pH and changing the color of the phenol red in the
of infected tissues, bite wound, and venereal or placental trans-
medium from yellow to pink.
fer). More commonly, animals become infected by indirect
358
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 11.1.3
 Sample protocols for treatment of Helicobacter infections
Protocols
Drug
Drug type
Dose
Route
Frequency
Notes
Protocol 1
Amoxicillin
Antibacterial
20 mg/kg
PO
q12h
Metronidazole
Antibacterial
10-20mg/kg
PO
q12h
62.5mg total in cats
 Famotidine
Antisecretory
0.5 mg/kg
PO
q12h
Bismuth
 Coating agent
6mg/kg
PO
q12h
subcitrate
Protocol 2
Tetracycline
Antibacterial
22 mg/kg
PO
q8h
Metronidazole
Antibacterial
10-20mg/kg
PO
q12h
62.5 mg total in cats
Ranitidine
 Antisecretory
1-2mg/kg
PO, IV
q12h
3.5 mg/kg in cats, P0
Bismuth 
Coating agent
0.5-1.0 mg/kg
PO
q 12h
Use with caution in cats.
su bsalicylate
Protocol 3
 Clarithromycin
Antibacterial
7.5-10.0mg/kg
PO
q12h
Omeprazole
 Proton pump inhibitor
0.5-1.0mg/kg
PO
q24h
Modified from Happonen I, Linden J, Westermarck E. Effect of triple therapy on eradication of canine gastric helicobacters and gastric disease. Journal of Small 
Animal Practice 2000;41:1-6; Fox JG. Enteric bacterial infections. In: Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, ed. CE Greene, pp. 343-351. St.
Louis, MO: w.B. Saunders; 2006; Lieb MS, Duncan RB. Gastric Helicobacter spp. and chronic vomiting in dogs. In: Kirk's Current veterinary Therapy Xiv, 14th
edition, eds. JD Bonagura, DC Twedt, pp. 492-497. St. Louis, M0: w.B. Saunders; 2009.
transmission (exposure to water, soil, food, or fomites contami-
nated environments (forestry workers, participants in water
 nated by infected urine). Leptospires enter the body by penetrat-
sports, fishery or rice feld workers), and exposure to wild rodent
ing mucous membranes or through abraded or water-softened
populations (residents of unsanitary urban areas).
skin, enter the bloodstream, and multiply and spread rapidly;
this leptospiremic phase lasts 7-10 days during which the organ-
Clinical signs
ism can spread widely to tissues throughout the body. The
kidney, liver, spleen, central nervous system (CNS), eyes, and
Most infections are subclinical. Typical clinical disease is usually
genital tract are common sites impacted by disseminated infec-
a subacute illness in adult dogs (4-7 years of age) and is more
 tion. The resulting clinical signs depend on which tissues are
common in hounds, working dogs, and herding breeds, perhaps
 affected and the severity of the tissue damage. Leptospires pen-
because of greater exposure related to outdoor activities or
etrate and proliferate in renal tubular cells where they can cause
 contact with reservoir host animals. Younger dogs are more sus-
acute injury and acute or chronic renal failure. Leptospira persist
ceptible to severe(
 disease and leptospirosis can sometimes
in the renal tubules of animals surviving the infection despite
present as a septicemic condition in more susceptible young
neutralizing antibody production and clearing of the lepto-
animals. Cats can become infected but do not become ill and do
spiremia by the host. These chronically infected carrier animals
not become renal carriers. Clinical signs depend on which
may then shed the bacteria for months to years postinfection.
tissues are affected, and the clinical picture is variable. In acute
 After shedding into the environment, the organisms can survive
diseases, nonspecific signs are those of systemic illness (fever,
for weeks to months in contaminated water and moist soils. Risk
anorexia, lethargy vomiting, dehydration, and generalized
factors for leptospirosis include outdoor activities, exposure to
muscle pain) and are consistent with many infectious or inflam-
 wildlife or livestock (maintenance hosts), and exposure to moist
matory diseases. Therefore, leptospirosis may not be suspected
environments or standing water Flooding is associated with
in these patients unless more specific signs of renal or hepatic
      n s s
injury develop, or if uveitis develops concurrently with enlarge-
Jo raqu e aq u on andasss ae sn asna
ment and pain of the kidneys and/or the liver, oliguria/anuria or
different serovars and become infected by direct or indirect
polyuria/polydipsia, vomiting, and icterus. The classical presen-
transmission from animal reservoirs. Most human infections
tation of leptospirosis is that of acute inflammatory renal or
are asymptomatic or associated with a mild, fu-like illness, but
hepatic disease. Acute lung injury, uveitis, meningitis, and
 severe disease, including renal failure, liver dysfunction, menin-
abortion/infertility have been reported less frequently. Severe
 gitis, respiratory failure, bleeding diatheses, and death can occur.
vasculitis, coagulopathy, or disseminated intravascular coagula-
Risk factors for human leptospirosis include contact with
 tion (DIC) occurs in some cases. Physical examination fndings
domestic animals (veterinary personnel, farm workers, and
may include fever, dehydration, injected mucous membranes,
slaughterhouse personnel), exposure to potentially contami-
icterus, petechial and ecchymotic hemorrhages, conjunctivitis,
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
359
uveitis, abdominal pain (liver or kidney swelling), muscle pain,
Fluorescent antibody (FA) techniques are not commonly used
or increased lung sounds.
but can identify organisms in fluid or tissue samples and thereby
improve the sensitivity of histopathology which otherwise
Diagnostic testing
 shows nonspecifc changes not limited to leptospirosis.
Because of the zoonotic potential of this infection, all samples
 Leptospirosis should be considered as a differential for any dog
from patients with suspected or confirmed leptospirosis should
with acute or chronic renal disease, uveitis, vasculitis, unex-
be clearly labeled as such to alert laboratory personnel and
plained fever, or hemorrhagic disease.
others who may handle the samples.
Laboratory findings
A CBC will usually show an inflammatory leukogram, often with
Pharmacology and treatment
a left shif, and mild thrombocytopenia is present in about one-
 Leptospirosis is treated with antimicrobials to eliminate the
third of the cases. A serum biochemical profle will show azo-
 infecting leptospire bacteria. General treatment of dehydration
temia and hyperphosphatemia in patients with renal involvement 
and electrolyte imbalance and treatment of associated renal
and elevated ALT, ALP, and bilirubin in patients with hepatic
 failure, hepatic failure, or DIC may also be necessary. Penicillins
infection. Hypoalbuminemia may be seen in association with
(penicillin sodium 20,000 IU/kg IV q4h) or aminopenicillins
severe hepatic injury or vasculitis. Electrolyte abnormalities
(ampicillin 22 mg/kg IV or PO q8h or amoxicillin 22 mg/kg PO
q8 h) are used during the initial phase of treatment to clear the
bolic acidosis may be seen. A urinalysis may show glucosuria,
leptospiremia. In patients with suspected leptospirosis, immedi-
proteinuria, granular casts, and isosthenuria due to renal injury
ate initiation of penicillin or aminopenicillin administration is
advisable while confrmatory test results are pending. Doxycy-
Imaging
cline (5 mg/kg PO q12h for 2 weeks) is used subsequently to
eliminate bacteria from tissues and to prevent renal shedding.
Thoracic radiographs may be abnormal in patients with respira-
About 75-85% of treated patients survive but may have persist-
tory involvement or vasculitis: Unstructured interstitial, nodular,
ent renal or liver dysfunction. CBC and serum chemistry values
n sad aq a sd  roae ad 
should be monitored to assess progression or response to therapy
imaging may show enlargement of the liver, spleen, and/or
and to evaluate for residual liver or renal dysfunction.
kidneys; abdominal ultrasonography may reveal accumulation
 of fluid around the kidneys and a renal “medullary rim sign"
 (hyperechoic ring) in cases of renal infection.
Prevention
Other diagnostic tests
Vaccination with available Leptospira bacterins or subunit vac-
cines, which help prevent clinical disease and prevent establish-
ment of the carrier state in exposed animals, is recommended
Leptospira-specifc antibody (the microscopic agglutination test
 for animals at risk The duration of immunity provided by these
[MAT]) and tests to demonstrate the presence of the organism
products varies from 6 to 13 months, and vaccines differ in
(PCR, dark-feld microscopy, bacterial culture, IFA, and histopa-
which serovars are included. Vaccine-induced immunity is
thology). The MAT has been widely used as a diagnostic tool for
 serovar specifc. Whole-cell bacterin vaccines have been associ-
leptospirosis but may be positive due to recent vaccination
 ated with frequent adverse reactions, which can be minimized
(within 3 months) rather than infection and may give a false-
     s   
negative result in early phases of infection. Also, with the MAT,
dramine (2 mg/kg IM) and glucocorticoids (dexamethasone
there is significant cross-reaction among serovars, which pre-
 0.2 mg/kg IM). More information may be found in Chapter 12.
dludes accurate identification of the infecting serovar by this
Because leptospirosis can be transmitted from infected
technique. A MAT titer of greater than 1:800 in an unvaccinated
 animals to humans and other animals, protective measures
animal (>l:3200 in a vaccinated animal) or a fourfold increase
should be taken when handling leptospirosis patients, their
of the titer in a convalescent sample (2-4 weeks from the first
 bedding, or laboratory samples to prevent exposure of people
titer) is considered diagnostic of leptospirosis in animals with
and other animals to the disease. Leptospirosis patients or sus-
 compatible clinical signs.
pects should be isolated from other patients and, if moved,
 Dark-feld microscopy and bacterial culture (leptospires are
should be transported by gurney or carrier, which can be easily
difficult to grow in culture) are rarely used because of low sen-
disinfected. The organism is susceptible to bleach and other
sitivity and frequent false-negative results.
disinfectants as well as detergents. Urine containment to prevent
 PCR assays are sensitive and specific for identifying the pres-
 exposure of personnel and other animals may be achieved by
ence of the organism. PCR may be run on serum or urine, but
 confining the patient to a cage that is easily cleaned and that has
urine is the preferred sample. PCR may be positive early in infec-
complete dividing walls that prevent leakage/run-off of urine to
fion before an increase in specific antibody can be detected by
adjacent surfaces. Patients that cannot be managed by complete
MAT but does not distinguish which serovars are present.
cage confinement may be transported to a designated area away
360
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
from access by other animals (designated run or walk area) with
 u jo y   ie aq o re s
urine being captured (disinfectable bowl or disposable con-
 MRSA compared with the general public. Livestock veterinari-
-od si l ue oa/pq Aedodde ue Aq (u
 ans are at an even higher risk of being carriers.40
tant to consider that urine on paws or on the hair coat may cause
 Virulence varies as many of the strains possess superantigenic
contamination of surfaces in contact with patients being walked
 toxins or virulence factors, making them even more dangerous.
 or otherwise repositioned in the hospital environment. Hoses
MRSA infections have been isolated from cats, dogs, horses, and
should not be used to clean cages of infected animals because
several other animal species. Infections are potential zoonoses
they generate aerosols that can spread the bacteria to people and
and owners must be made aware of this (in writing recom-
other animals and distribute the organisms to various surfaces
mended) and given appropriate precautions.
within the facility. Goggles, masks, and gloves are useful in pre-
venting exposure via mucous membranes (eyes, nose, and
Clinical signs
mouth) and skin contact. Owners should be advised of the
zoonotic potential of Leptospira. Leptospirosis is a reportable
MRSA can cause lesions on the skin and soft tissues, osteomy-
dlisease in many states ofthe United States, but reporting require-
elitis, endocarditis, sepsis, pneumonia, or necrotizing fascitis.
        
 The most common lesions associated with MRSA in pet dogs
should be verified to ensure compliance.
and cats are wound infections and pyoderma. Other reports
included otitis and urinary tract infections.
Nutritional considerations
 Patients with renal or hepatic dysfunction should receive appro-
Diagnostic testing
 priate diet formulations that are restricted in protein and sodium
Appropriate samples should be collected as soon as infection is
content until organ function normalizes. In patients with renal
suspected in an animal. If a skin lesion is identified, swabs should
  s  so   r 
be made and submitted for culture and susceptibility testing.
tions may be permanent.
Other options for testing include urine culture, blood culture,
and airway secretions. It is essential to contact the laboratory
Anesthetic and analgesia considerations
used by the clinic before submitting samples to assure the correct
testing is available.
Organ dysfunction (kidney, liver, and lung), vasculitis, and clot-
ting abnormalities put leptospirosis patients at increased risk of
anesthetic and surgical complications. Additionaly, infected
Pharmacology and treatment
patients are a source of disease exposure to personnel handling
Topical therapy is the treatment of choice when a skin wound is
them, and surgeons would be at particular risk of potential direct
present. There are several topical treatments that are effective.
exposure to infected tissues.
Mupirocin is a topical antibiotic that is commonly used for the
treatment of MRSA. Honey has been reported to be effective
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
against several strains of antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections
aureus
wound will help minimize spread.
There has been an increased incidence of reports of both human
Systemic antimicrobial drugs are recommended for infections
and veterinary-related cases of MRSA in the last several years.
that are not limited to the skin alone. These can be used in con-
The moniker, MRSA, is often used to describe several different
junction with topical treatment if skin lesions are involved as
types of bacterial infections that are resistant to multiple antibi-
well. Systemic antibiotics should be chosen based on culture and
otics. Other names, such as oxicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
susceptibility results. In general, MRSA infections are resistant
αureus (ORSA), may be more appropriate in specific instances,
in vivo (regardless of what the culture and susceptability shows)
but the bulk of the literature is devoted to MRSA.42
 to B-lactam antimicrobials, and rapid resistance seems to develop
to fluoroquinolones. Therefore, these two classes of antibiotics
Anatomy and pathology
should be avoided if possible. Vancomycin should be reserved
only for human use to minimize the risk of developing a
 All of the numerous species of staphylococci are gram-positive
vancomycin-resistant strain.
facultative anaerobes that colonize the skin, mucous membranes,
and urinary or GI tract in healthy people. In people, up to 60%
Prevention
are colonized with S.aureus, but only 1.5% are colonized with
MRSA in the nasal passages. In people, there are two location-
Hand washing is essential after handling any animal and can be
associated infection models, hospital or health care associated
very helpful in halting the spread of disease. A thorough cleaning
(MRSA-HA) or community associated (MRSA-CA). A newly
of all areas of contact with the infected animal should be done
emerging threat, livestock associated (MRSA-LA), appears to be
as soon as the area is clear. Barrier clothing (gloves, gowns, and
associated with pig farming.4 Veterinarians and veterinary tech-
booties) should be used when handling the animal in the clinic.
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
361
Ideally, a designated exam room will be assigned for potential
infectious diseases and very limited contact with health-care
 pected samples to a laboratory, microbiology laboratory person-
personnel would occur. This room, along with all affected areas,
 nel should be alerted as cultures may present a potential danger
   s      
 for laboratory personnel if the plates are mishandled. Molecular
survive in the environment for weeks. Most topical disinfectants
diagnostic techniques such as PCR may give a more definitive
will be effective against MRSA.
diagnosis.
 Infections are usually spread via direct contact and fomites.
Granulomas are the primary lesions caused by Mycobacterium
Dogs and cats should not be allowed to sleep in the same bed as
 spp. The bacteria survive and replicate within host cells. Myco-
an infected human and vice versa. Most small animal cases are
bacteria are resistant to pH changes, heat, and routine disinfec-
tion. The minimum criteria for pasteurization and heat
ferred from pig to human.
disinfection were developed to kill mycobacteria. They are sus-
        
ceptible to 5% phenol, direct sunlight, and 5% sodium hypochlo.
can vary from a highly sophisticated multitier surveillance
rite (household bleach) after a contact time of 15 min at room
system to a simple surface swab C&S done monthly. MRSA
temperature.?1
organisms are increasingly emerging as infections of great
concern in both veterinary and human medicine, and infection
Difficult to grow mycobacteria
control measures will assist in limiting the morbidity and mor-
tality in veterinary medicine.
 A sa ds u m on 
techniques to culture.
Client education
Mycobacterium Lepraemurium
It is imperative that clients be informed about the transmission
and prevention of MRSA. Frequent hand washing along with
Mycobacterium lepraemurium is a mycobacteria that is thought
washing of pet beds/blankets in hot soapy water cannot be over-
 to be the cause of feline leprosy. It was frst documented during
emphasized. Client communication regarding prevention of
the 1960s in Australia and in New Zealand. It has since been
MRSA must be documented in the medical record. Ideally, a
documented in England, Canada, France, the Netherlands and
client information sheet will be either created or downloaded
the United States. Bites from infected rats are thought to be the
and given to each client. Once the client has received this infor-
 source of infection for cats; however, infection of cutaneous
wounds via contaminated soil is also thought to be a cause.?2
mation, it should be documented in the medical record.
Research has revealed that there are several organisms that cause
a leprosy syndrome. It appears to be more common in certain
Role of the veterinary technician
geographic regions such as temperate coastal locations, port
The veterinary technician is essential in the consistent imple-
cities, and inland tropical areas.
mentation of established hospital policies, particularly regarding
Typically, young (under 5 years of age) male cats are infected.
infectious disease. Technicians can encourage others to follow
 The syndrome begins as focal granulomas that are raised, fleshy.
painless lesions. They develop rapidly and may ulcerate and
easy-to-follow, simplifed, laminated guidelines to hang on cages
 rupture. Regional lymph nodes may become involved. Normally
will go a long way toward encouraging compliance.
the lesions are found on the limbs and head of infected cats.
Some cats develop the lesions on the tongue and nose. It is
 common for the lesions to occur in only one region of the body,
Mycobacterial disease
but in some cases, the lesions are found in multiple locations.
 The organisms can be seen on cytology and range from 2 to 4μm
Mycobacterial diseases are caused by bacteria from the order
 Actinomycetales family Mycobacteriaceae. The pathogenic myco-
and do not stain with hematoxylin. M. lepraemurium infections
bacteria are found in the genus Mycobacterium. This genus
can be confrmed by PCR.21
includes numerous species of saprophytic microorganisms
Mycobacterium Leprae, Mycobacterium
found in water and soil, along with the pathogenic Mycobacte-
Maimoense, and Mycobacterium Haemophilum
rium spp. and other pathogenic bacteria. The Mycobacterium
spp. are morphologically similar, non-spore-forming, nonmo-
Infections of older cats (older than 9 years) are thought to be
file, aerobic bacteria that are 0.6-1.0 x 1.0-10.0 μm in size.?
caused by M. leprae, M. maimoense, and M.haemophilum. Some
They are classifed by their growth in culture, whether they
 infected cats are presented with localized lesions that become
 produce granulomatous disease with or without dissemination
and if they produce tubercles.2 Mycobacteria can be diagnosed
 ning. Renal disease is commonly seen. Most infected cats are
by needle aspirates, crush preparations of biopsy material, and
1 from semirural or rural areas. The causative agent may be a
histology. The organisms are slender rods located within macro-
 saprophyte that can be found in soil or stagnant water. Cats may
phages that stain negatively with Diff-Quick or Giemsa stains.
 become affected after trauma or bites from arthropods. The com-
Cultures should also be submitted to determine if the lesions are 
 promised immune status of older cats may play a part in their
362
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 inability to fend off infection. Infection is susceptible to antimy.
Many cases resolve within 1-3 months with no treatment.
cobacterial therapy.23
Surgical removal or the use of antimicrobials known to have an
effect against other mycobacterial diseases may be beneficial.
Mycobacterium Visibilis
Treatment should continue until lesions have reduced in size
 In western Canada and the northwestern United States (Oregon
(4-8 weeks), but ideally until the lesions are gone.
and Idaho), a multisystemic granulomatous mycobacteriosis has
been reported. It is caused by M. visibilis.?' Rather than localized,
Slow-growing mycobacteria
cutaneous lesions, it is characterized by diffuse generalized
Slow-growing Mycobacterium spp. can take more than 7 days to
disease that is disseminated to multiple organs. The bacteria are
months for growth to appear on culture. These include Mycobac-
capable of intracellular survival and the histological fndings are
terium tuberculosis and Mycobacterium avium complexes.
dependent upon the immune status of the host. In immunocom-
promised animals, lesions have minimum lymphoid cells and
M. Tuberculosis, Mycobacterium Microti, M. Avium,
plasma cells.
Mycobacterium Bovis
Pharmacology and treatment
M. tuberculosis is a highly pathogenic, slow-growing mycobacte-
rium that can survive in the environment for 1-2 weeks. It is the
 Due to the slow-growing nature of the organism, determination
primary agent for human tuberculosis.? The transmission of
 of drug susceptibility is not possible. Treatment options include
infection of M. tuberculosis to dogs and cats is from humans via
surgical removal of the lesions and empirical antimicrobial
respiratory secretions. Cats are more resistant to M. tuberculosis
therapy. The use of surgical removal alone may be beneficial
than are dogs.
if the numbers of lesions are low. Medical treatment with a
M. avium and M. bovis affect cattle. Dogs and cats are not the
combination of drugs may give the best results. Treatment
reservoir hosts for M.tuberculosis or M. bovis, but they are sus-
with clofazimine, rifampin, or clarithromycin for at least 2
ceptible to infections caused by both.
 months after the lesions disappear is the recommended drug
M. microti has been identified in cats who hunt; it is also called
protocol.21
vole bacillus. It is significant in that cats do not get the infection
Care should be taken when working with infected animals.
from people.
Strict isolation protocols should be adhered to due to the
zoonotic potential. Gloves and masks should be worn when
M. Bovis
working with animals with active lesions.
The portal of entry for M. bovis is through the GI tract. Dogs and
cats acquire M. bovis infections from ingestion of contaminated
Canine leproid granuloma syndrome
milk or contaminated carcasses. M. bovis has been identified
Canine leproid granuloma syndrome is common in Australia
in White-tailed deer in Michigan and badgers in the United
and has been documented in dogs of New Zealand, Brazil, Zim-
Kingdom and in Ireland.2 The significance of wildlife for the
babwe, Florida, and California. Short-coated breeds are highly
spread of M.bovis to catle, cats, and dogs has not been estab-
affected. Boxer and boxer crosses account for nearly 50% of all
lished. Dogs usually excrete the organism from the respiratory
reported cases.?l The causal organism has not been identifed,
tract, and cats via feces. Outside of the host, the organism
but many of the affected dogs generally have lesions in regions
can survive from 4 days in the summer and up to 28 days in the
of the body where bites from vectors are seen. This includes the
winter. On farms where the infected cows have been removed,
head and particularly the dorsal pinna of the ears. The skin
subclinically infected dogs and cats may act as reservoirs for the
disease.
nodules are hard and painless and large lesions may ulcerate. The
M. Avium
lesions are subcutaneous and do not involve lymph nodes, inter-
nal organs, or nerves. The lesions can be irritating and may cause
M. avium organisms survive for at least 2 years in coastal plains,
disfigurement, especially when secondary infection is involved.
Diagnosis is made by the location of the lesions in an at-risk
and soil. M. avium has been identifed in deer and in rabbits.
breed. Needle aspirate smears stained with Diff-Quick reveal
Clinical signs
 and low numbers of neutrophils. Negative staining medium
In dogs and cats, tuberculosis is frequently a subclinical disease.
length bacilli can be seen extracellularly or within the macro-
If clinical signs occur, they will reflect the site of infection. If the
phages. The lesions consist of pyogranulomas composed of giant
site of infection is the respiratory system, then bronchopneumo-
cells, epithelioid macrophages, and scattered small lymphocytes,
 nia, lymphadenomegaly, weight loss, anorexia, fever, and aharsh,
plasma cells, and neutrophils. Cultures can serve to exclude
      
other mycobacteria as the causal organism. Care must be taken
enlargement, and ulcerated, chronically draining oropharyngeal
when obtaining samples as saprophytic mycobacteria can be
lesions may also be evident. If the disease is disseminated from
easily cultured from dirt present on the skin of dogs. PCR may
the respiratory system, then pleural or pericardial effusion with
be used to confrm diagnosis.
dyspnea and cyanosis may be seen. If the primary lesions are in
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
363
the GI tract, then weight loss, vomiting, diarrhea, and anemia 
 perineum. Common injuries such as vehicular trauma and fight
may be seen. Abdominal effusion and enlarged mesenteric
wounds that are exposed to dirt or contaminated water can give
lymph nodes are common. GI dissemination results in general-
rise to infection by the fast-growing Mycobacterium spp. Early
ized lymphadenomegaly, fever, anorexia, and weight loss. Sudden
 infections can resemble abscesses from cat fights but do not have
death may also occur.
Cats with M. bovis infections have developed choroiditis and
 and gradually increase in size and may involve the entire ventral
 retinal detachments. In some cases, CNS signs and granuloma-
surface of the affected animal, and they may develop a nonheal-
tous uveitis has occurred. Dogs with M.avium infections have
 ing wound.?21 Cats typically have a disease that is localized to the
extensive granulomatous disease of the mesenteric lymph nodes,
 skin with the disease rarely developing systemic infections. They
liver, bowel, and spleen. Vomiting, diarrhea, fever, hematochezia,
 may become lethargic, inappetant, febrile, and have weight loss.
lethargy and weight loss have been observed but may be
 Infection in dogs should be suspected with chronic nonheal-
intermittent.
ing wounds that are unresponsive to antimicrobial therapy. The
lesions appear as firm to fluctuant subcutaneous swellings that
Diagnostic testing
ulcerate, drain, and spread with new lesions at the edge of older
lesions.21 These lesions are typicall nonpruritic or painful. Some
Laboratory findings are nonspecific and may include moderate
 animals may present with lameness, pain, or fever Both dogs
leukocytosis and a nonregenerative anemia. Hyperglobulinemia
 and cats with pyogranulomatous pneumonia present with fever,
and hypercalcemia are frequently reported with normal to
 inappetance, dyspnea, and cough.
reduced serum albumin levels. Organisms may be seen in leu-
kocytes on blood and bone marrow smears, buffy coat smears,
or in urine. In M.avium infections, dogs may have increased
Diagnostic testing
liver enzymes. Radiographs may reveal visible masses in various
Diagnosis is made by cytology and culture of the discharge or
organ systems. Metastatic lesions are seen as miliary densities.
tissue. When preparing the site for sample collection, the skin
Tissue aspirates or impression smears should be submitted for
should be carefully disinfected with 70% ethanol to prevent
cytology. Skin testing is diagnostic for tuberculosis in dogs, but
sample contamination with saprophytic mycobacteria. Fluid
this test is unreliable in cats.?2 Serologic testing is available when
 obtained by aspiration should be placed immediately into a com-
skin testing is inconclusive. The standard for diagnosis continues
mercially available mycobacteria culture bottle. For suspected
to be bacterial isolation; however, organisms may fail to grow in
cases of mycobacterial pneumonia, bronchoalveolar lavage spec-
culture and if they do, may take months to do so.21
imens, deep bronchial washings or ultrasound-guided transtho-
racic fine needle aspirates give the best results. Cytology samples
Pharmacology and treatment
should be stained with Diff-Quick stain and typically reveal pyo-
Treatment should be based on cytology or histology diagnosis.
granulomatous inflammation. Generally, visualizing the organ-
   e   s  ns o
isms is possible.21
occur. Enrofloxacin, doxycycline, and azithromycin have been
used for the treatment of the slow-growing mycobacterial
Pharmacology and treatment
disease.
 Care should be taken when working with infected animals.
The treatment for mycobacterial panniculitis is dependent on
Strict isolation protocols should be adhered to due to the
disease severity and on how quickly a diagnosis can be made.
zoonotic potential. Personal protective equipment should be
 Empirical therapy with oral antimicrobials should be initiated
worn when working with animals with active lesions.
until in vitro susceptibility data are available. In the United
 States, clarithromycin is the initial drug of choice since myco-
Fast-growing mycobacteria
bacterial organisms susceptible to this drug are commonly
found.? In many cases, treatment with antimicrobials is suff-
Rapid-growing mycobacteria typically will grow within 7 days
cient, but in severe cases, surgical resection is required. Antimi-
on cultures. They are free-living saprophytes that can be easily
crobial therapy should continue for a minimum of 3-12 months
isolated from dirt and water. They include Mycobacterium smeg-
 or 1-2 months past clinical resolution of affected tissues.?
matis and Mycobacterium thermoresistibile.
The fast-growing Mycobacterium spp. produce mycobacterial
panniculitis, pyogranulomatous pneumonia, and disseminated
Mycoplasmal diseases
systemic disease. Mycobacterial panniculitis is more common in
cats than in dogs. Typically, a penetrating injury allows entry by
Mycoplasmas are gram-negative, nonacid fast, aerobic, or facul-
the mycobacteria. The causative organism has been found in
tative anaerobic bacteria that lack cell walls. Mycoplasmal disease
temperate regions ofAustralia, Finland, Germany, Japan, Canada
and mycoplasmosis are terms pertaining to infections with
and the United States.21
microorganisms in the genus Mycoplasma. Mycoplasmal patho-
Infections in cats typically start in the inguinal region and may
spread to the subcutaneous tissues of the abdominal wall and
(hemoplasmas) and nonhemotropic mycoplasmas.
364
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 Pathogenesis and transmission
most pathogenic of the feline hemoplasmas and may be identi-
fied as coccoid, rod-shaped, or circular organisms in an epicel-
Hemotropic mycoplasmas were previously called Haemobar-
lular location on red blood cells: The organism can be
tonella and eperythrozoon until research in the late 1990s
demonstrated on blood smears approximately 50% of the time
during the acute phase of infection. Blood smears must be made
tropic mycoplasmas are epicellular parasites of erythrocytes and
and evaluated soon after collection of the sample because ethyl-
can trigger hemolytic anemia of varying severity in infected
enediaminetriacetic acid (EDTA) can cause the bacterium to
animals. Mycoplasma haemofelis, Candidatus (temporary taxo-
detach from the erythrocytes. Many Romanowsky-type stains
nomic term for a noncultivable bacterium), Mycoplasma haemo-
can be used, and samples should be taken before antibiotic
minutum, and Candidatus Mycoplasma turicensis are the three
therapy is initiated. The individual examining the blood smears
main hemotrophic mycoplasmal species of cats, while Myco-
needs to be able to differentiate these organisms from artifact
plasma haemocanis, and Candidatus Mycoplasma haematopar-
(stain precipitation), basophilic stippling, Howell-Jolly bodies,
vum are the main species affecting dogs. Infection in cats is
and other erythrocyte parasites. The anemia associated with
thought to be transmitted by fleas and by the administration of
hemotropic mycoplasmosis is regenerative unless there is con-
contaminated blood products. Transmission from an infected
current infection with FeLV2 Spherocytosis and erythrophago-
queen to her offspring via an unknown nonarthropod vector
     o  
route also occurs. Hemotropic mycoplasmosis is more frequent
mycoplasmosis should be tested for retrovirus infection: About
in cats that are male, live outdoors, are unvaccinated, or have
half of cats with M. haemofelis-associated disease are FeLV posi-
concurrent infections with feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and/or
tive, and immunosuppression associated with retroviral infec-
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV).?5 A role for cat bites as a
tion may predispose to Mycoplasma infection and to more severe
mode of transmission has been sugested. Transmission in dogs
clinical disease.
occurs via the brown dog tick (Rhipicephalus sanguineus), intra-
 PCR can be a useful diagnostic tool in the evaluation of blood
venous or oral administration of infected blood, and possibly in
samples or of samples from other body systems. Although this
utero. Most infections are asymptomatic. Clinical disease is
diagnostic tool is more sensitive than blood smears, false nega-
usually restricted to dogs that are immunosuppressed, splenec-
tives may occur in asymptomatic carriers or cats treated with
tomized, or have splenic disease.?26
Many nonhemotropic mycoplasmas are commensals on various
plasma PCR from other samples (such as from a bronchoalveolar
mucosal surfaces such as the respiratory tract, urogenital tract,
u ae ssd ss paida on s si (s
conjunctiva, and colon. These bacteria have also been isolated from
commensals of many mucosal surfaces (upper respiratory tract,
the musculoskeletal system, abscesses, and organ parenchyma, 
distal urogenital tract) and their role as a primary pathogen
probably secondary to spread from mucosal surfaces where the
versus an opportunistic invader or contaminated sample is not
 organisms are part ofthe normal flora. They may therefore cause or
entirely understood." Bacterial cultures for identification of
contribute to systemic disease in animals that are severely ill due to
nonhemotropic mycoplasma can be performed in specialty labo-
 other disorders, such as immunosuppression.27
ratories, but special transport and growth media (Amies or
modifed Stuart transport medium, Hayfick medium) and
Clinical signs
growth conditions are required.27
Clinical signs of hemotropic mycoplasmosis vary with the degree of
Imaging
anemia, and some animals may be asymptomatic. Coinfection with
Candidatus Mycoplasma haemominutum may increase the severity
Splenomegaly may be evident on abdominal radiographs in
 ofanemia. Lethargy, anorexia, and weight loss are often the primary
cats with hemotropic mycoplasmosis. Dogs with clinical signs
due to hemoplasmas may have no spleen due to a prior
splenectomy.31
branes, and weakness may be observed. A heart murmur and
splenomegaly may also be noted upon physical examination. Jaun-
dice is an inconsistent finding. Fever may be present in the acute
Pharmacology and treatment
 phase, but patients may also be normothermic or hypothermic.?8
Susceptibility testing is often unavailable, but mycoplasmas are
Respiratory, joint, genitourinary and GI disease, and cat
typically susceptible to tetracyclines, fluoroquinolones, mac-
 abscesses have been attributed to nonhemotropic mycoplasma
rolides, and chloramphenicol. Doxycycline is the treatment of
 infection. The clinical signs of nonhemotropic mycoplasmosis
choice and is administered at 10 mg/kg PO q24 h or 5 mg/kg PO
vary depending on what tissues or organs are affected.
q12 h for 3 weeks. Enrofloxacin may be an alternative choice and
can be given at 10 mg/kg PO q24h; however, doses of >5 mg/kg
Diagnostic testing
can cause retinal damage in cats. None of these antibiotics have
Laboratory
been shown to reliably clear the infection,"2 so persistence of a
chronic carrier state is likely.
Hemotropic mycoplasmas cause anemia, which can be deter-
 In patients with hemotropic mycoplasmosis, removal of para-
mined from a packed cell volume or CBC. M. haemofelis is the
 sitized red blood cells by the reticuloendothelial cells may occur.
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
365
 Prednisone given at 1-2 mg/kg PO q12h is thought to decrease
rodent fleas. Dogs and other canines are less susceptible to
the amount of erythrophagocytosis. Transfusions can be given
 plague than are wild and domestic cats.
when deemed necessary. Terminal patients may be hypoglyc-
emic and may require glucose supplementation.31
Clinical signs
In cats, there are three distinct clinical forms of the disease:
Nutritional considerations
bubonic, septicemic, and pneumonic plague. Fever is a consist
Patients with mycoplasmal infections may be anorectic due to
ent finding in all forms, although moribund cats may be hypo-
fever, nausea, or systemic illness, and some patients develop GI
thermic. Other signs include anorexia, weight loss, vomiting.
upset and anorexia related to administration of antibiotics used
diarrhea, ocular discharge, and oral ulceration; neurological
signs may also occur. The most common form is bubonic plague.
atable diets, syringe feeding, or placement of feeding tubes
This form develops from inoculation of Y. pestis via the bite of
should be provided as needed for inappetant patients.
 an infected flea or by ingestion of infected tissues (mucous mem-
brane contact). Bacteria are phagocytized by mononuclear cells
Anesthetic and analgesic considerations
at the site of exposure (flea bite) then replicate within these cells.
The infected cells travel to regional lymph nodes where bacteria
Mycoplasmosis is not expected to impact anesthesia beyond
continue to replicate and trigger inflammation causing the
  d ss  p  yo uin
lymph nodes to enlarge, forming a bubo (the term used to indi-
underlying disease conditions that may impact the choice of
cate a swollen lymph node in bubonic plague cases). In cats,
anesthetic agents. Hemotropic mycoplasmosis is not considered
buboes typically occur on the head and neck with marked sub-
to be a painful condition, but analgesic medications may
be
mandibular and cervical lymphadenomegaly. These lymph
indicated for patients with musculoskeletal (joint) disease or
nodes go on to necrose and form abscesses, which may open and
abscesses associated with nonhemotropic mycoplasmosis.
drain. If the bubonic form of plague is not treated, the infection
 may spread hematogenously or via the lymphatics to manifest as
 septicemic plague. Hematogenous spread of Y. pestis can develop
Plague
with or without the bubonic form and can result in dissemina-
 Plague is a bacterial disease caused by infection with the gram-
tion of infection to any organ or tissue in the body. In cats, the
lungs are most commonly affected. Clinical signs of septicemic
negative coccobacillus Yersinia pestis. Plague is a zoonotic disease
s u o ra i e m pos u s i
plague are those of septic shock (fever or hypothermia, tachy-
throughout history and is classifed as a category A bioterrorism
cardia, hypotension, and DIC) typically progressing to death
agent. Y.pestis is widely distributed worldwide except in Aus-
within 24-48h after the development of bacteremia. The pneu-
monic form of plague is the form that carries the highest mortal.
tralia and occurs in certain regions where its vectors (fleas),
animal reservoirs (rodents), and suitable environmental condi-
ity rate and the poorest prognosis. In cats, the pneumonic form,
if it occurs, is usually secondary to the hematogenous or lym-
tions (semiarid to arid) coexist. In the United States, Y.pestis is
phatic spread of Y.pestis. In animals with bubonic or septicemic
typically found in the western United States, in a region between
the Pacific Ocean and the Rocky Mountains, with sporadic out-
plague, however, primary pneumonic plague can occur via
breaks extending the region of occurrence temporarily into
droplet transmission (rarely occurs in cats).
Colorado, Oklahoma, Texas, and Kansas. In cats, the disease
occurs more frequently in the summer, although cases may
tions are asymptomatic. Some dogs develop mild disease with
 transient fever and anorexia, and rarely, lymphadenomegaly.
occur at other times of the year as well.
Diagnostic testing
Pathogenesis and transmission
Animals suspected of having plague are often treated presump-
Y. pestis is maintained in the environment by chronically infected
rodent reservoir hosts and the fleas that parasitize these rodents
(dog and cat fleas are inefficient vectors for plague). Fleas acquire
collect samples for diagnostic testing then to initiate therapy, as
the organism by ingesting blood from a bacteremic rodent host,
rapid treatment can decrease the mortality rate associated with
A n n e a a p aq   a  
this disease. Plague is often suspected and treatment initiated
based on geographic location (likelihood), clinical signs, and
survive and replicate in the gut of the flea. At a subsequent
feeding, it is then regurgitated by the flea into the bite wound to
some diagnostic evidence (such as cytology).
transmit the infection to a new animal host. Less commonly,
Laboratory
Y. pestis can be transmitted via contact with mucous membranes
or broken skin, or via inhalation of droplets of respiratory secre-
Cats with septicemic plague may show marked leukocytosis and
tions from animals with the respiratory (pneumonic) form of
thrombocytopenia. Elevated fibrinogen degradation products
plague. Cats and dogs become infected by ingesting infected
(FDPs), decreased fbrinogen levels, and prolonged clotting
   a    s  n
   i m s u sd sq  s
366
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
and hyperbilirubinemia may be seen in cats with hepatic involve-
crobial therapy for Y. pestis, affected animals and their environ-
o a  o psq si si a 
ment should be treated to eradicate feas, which may harbor
ism or demonstrating a specific serologic response to the
infection.
organism. Diagnosis can be attempted from cytology of tissues.
Cytology of blood smears or fine needle aspirate samples of
Prevention
affected lymph nodes (buboes) or affected tissues may show
 gram-negative bacteria, which may be present in large numbers
All caretakers should wear surgical masks, eyewear, and dispos-
in infected tissues.
able hospital gowns during the initial three days of antibiotic
FA testing on impression smears of exudates or aspirate
treatment. The pneumonic form is of particular danger to others
samples can be done to confirm the presence of the organism.
as inhalation of infected droplets may initiate pneumonic plague
Serologic testing can be done, but paired acute and convalescent
in veterinary staff or in others exposed to the patient. The infec-
titers 2-3 weeks apart are required. A fourfold rise in titers is
tious droplets can be generated via coughing, sneezing, or during
needed to make a diagnosis. Serology is often negative early in
lancing of the abscesses. If a patient has pneumonic plague, it is
the infection. High titers can persist for over 1 year in cats sur-
essential that everyone in the hospital is aware of the risk of
viving infection, but infection does not confer immunity to rein-
droplet or airborne spread. Humans should seek medical atten-
fection. The organism can also be identified by bacteriologic
tion immediately in the face of known exposure (bite, scratch,
culture of blood, exudate, or tissue samples collected before ini-
and contact with fluid) or acute onset of febrile illness. The
tiation of treatment. Because of the signifcant zoonotic potential
incubation period for bubonic plague in people is 2-6 days; the
of the organism, culture should only be performed by specialized
incubation for pneumonic plague is much shorter at 1-2 days.
laboratories. Caution should be exercised to avoid contact with
Most human fatalities are related to delayed antimicrobial
 auad pe  um sns pa no ana
therapy.
nostic samples.
Nutritional considerations
Imaging
The cat's nutritional status should be monitored closely. If pro-
Cats with pneumonic plague show pulmonary changes consist-
longed anorexia is present, a feeding program (consisting of
ent with interstitial pneumonia or area of necrosis and abscess
formation on thoracic radiographs.
pharmacological and/or feeding techniques) to manage the
inappetent patient should be initiated.
Biopsy techniques
 Fresh tissue from biopsy of lymph nodes or postmortem sam-
SECTION 2 FUNGAL DISEASES
pling of lung, liver, and spleen can be submitted for culture and
FA testing. Tissues should be kept moist with sterile nonbacte-
riostatic saline (i.e., a moistened sterile cotton ball or sterile
Infectious fungal disease
 gauze in a collection tube with the sample). Tissue can be frozen
Systemic fungal infections are infections that enter from a single
for transit times exceeding 24 h. Formalin or other preservatives
should not be used.
port of entry and are then disseminated throughout the body.
g pao (sno a uon pudp are suis reu 
typically are cough, exercise intolerance, dyspnea, weight loss,
Treatment and pharmacology
fever, and lymphadenopathy. The most common point of entry
Patients with suspected plague should be hospitalized in isola
is the respiratory system. If the GI system is the point of entry.
 tion facilities for the frst 3 days of antibiotic treatment, and all
then severe diarrhea and weight loss may be noted.
personnel should exercise extreme caution when handling
Accurate diagnosis involves demonstrating the presence of the
infected animals or diagnostic samples. At-home treatment is
organism in tissue by means of culture, histopathology, or
 inadvisable due to the risk of human exposure. Aminoglycosides
molecular techniques. When submitting suspected systemic
are the most effective antibiotics for Y. pestis. Enrofloxacin is an
fungal samples to a laboratory, microbiology laboratory person-
acceptable alternative for patients with renal disease. Tetracy-
nel should be alerted to the suspected causative agent. Serology
clines or chloramphenicol may be used to treat the bubonic form
may be used to support the diagnosis, but most assays determine
and for prophylaxis. Often, a combination of medications
the presence of antibody and may only indicate prior exposure
(aminoglycoside and doxycycline) is used. Penicillins are not
and not an active infection.
efficacious. Injectable antibiotics are preferred for the first 3 days
of treatment to avoid contact with oral secretions and to reduce
Histoplasmosis
be treated for a minimum of 21 days or until at least 3 days past
Histoplasmosis is a systemic fungal infection that originates in
the resolution of buboes and pneumonic changes. If the bubonic
the lungs, or potentially the GI tract, and disseminates to the
form is present, buboes/abscesses should be lanced and flushed
lymph system, bone marrow, eyes, liver, and other organs. The
with a chlorhexidine solution. In addition to instituting antimi-
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
367
cultured at 25°C, the colonies grow in 7-10 days.' In nature, it 
Diagnostic testing
is a soil saprophyte that can survive a wide range of tempera-
tures. Additional information on histoplasmosis can be found in
Cytology from affected tissues reveals pyogranulomatous inflam-
Chapter 8.
mation. Intracellular yeast cells 2-4μm in diameter with a
 Most cases in the United States occur with geographic distri-
basophilic center and light halo may be noted. In cats, cytology
bution following the Mississippi, Missouri and Ohio rivers in the
       
central states.
alveolar wash, or transtracheal wash may yield the organism. In
dogs, cytology from biopsies and/or aspirations from the liver,
lymph nodes, spleen, bone marrow, rectal scrapings, bronchoal-
Pathogenesis and transmission
veolar wash, or transtracheal wash will typically reveal organ-
s e jou n u so u si sissdoi
 isms. Buffy coat smears, pleural or peritoneal effusion cytology.
disease, as it is spread from the environment but not from animal
lytic bone lesion aspirates and impression smears or aspirates of
to animal. Infection usually occurs by a respiratory route after
 skin lesions may also yield organisms.
the animal inhales infective conidiophores. In dogs, ingestion of
CBC results commonly show a normocytic-normochromic
the conidia also occurs. The incubation period in dogs is 12-16
 nonregenerative anemia. Neutrophilia and monocytosis are
days, and lymphatic dissemination to the lungs, GI system, eyes,
often seen. In cats, some affected animals will demonstrate a
adrenal glands, bone marrow, spleen, and liver can occur. Cats
may be more susceptible to infection than dogs. In cats, the
 are occasionally seen in monocytes or neutorphils. In approxi-
incubation period is 12-16 days, and lymphatic dissemination
mately 50% of affected dogs and 33% of affected cats, thrombo-
 cytopenia will occur.
to the lungs, eyes, liver, and bone marrow can occur. Animals
 younger than 4 years of age are at an increased risk.
The most consistent blood chemistry abnormality reported is
hypoalbuminemia. In cases with hepatic involvement, increases
 in ALP, total bilirubin, serum ALT, and serum aspartate ami-
Clinical signs
notransferase (AST) may be seen. Hypercalcemia is more
Feline histoplasmosis occurs most frequently in cats under 4
 common in cats than in dogs.
years of age. There is no breed or sex predilection. The disease
 Samples submitted for culture include bone marrow aspirates,
 lymph nodes and nodal aspirates, lung, spleen, liver and/or skin
 nodules, and rectal scrapings from dogs. When submitting
to the multisystemic nature of the infection. Common clinical
 samples to a laboratory, microbiology laboratory personnel
signs range from weight loss, pale mucous membranes, anorexia,
should be alerted because a culture of H. capsulatum does present
depression, and fever. In about half of the animals affected, tach-
 ypnea, dyspnea, or abnormal lung sounds are noted, but cough-
a potential danger for laboratory personnel if the plates are
 ing is uncommon. In approximately a third of infected animals,
mishandled.
lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, or splenomegaly is present.
Serology is an ineffective method of diagnosis as false nega-
 Ocular involvement may result in abnormal retinal pigment,
tives early in the disease are common' and antibody titers are
 not useful as an assessment tool posttreatment. Antigen testing
retinal edema, anterior uveitis, optic neuritis, granulomatous
chorioretinitis, or panophthalmitis. Lameness may occur with
is now available.
 Radiographs of the thorax often reveal a linear or diffuse
fungal osteomyelitis. Multiple small nodules that ulcerate and
drain are less commonly noted than with cats infected with
interstitial pattern.
blastomycosis. The only common GI sign is anorexia. Oral and
lingual ulceration are typically not observed, although cats with
hepatic involvement occasionally are jaundiced. Subclinical
Pharmacology and treatment
infection is common.
 Canine histoplasmosis also is most commonly seen in dogs
 Pulmonary histiomycosis can be a self-limiting disease because
less than 4 years of age. Male dogs are affected more frequently
 it is inapparent and may be confned to the respiratory tract
than females, with Brittany spaniels and Weimaraners overrep-
without disseminating to other organs. Antifungal treatment
resented.' GI signs are more common than respiratory signs in
with amphotericin B, ketoconazole, or itraconazole is recom-
dogs. Early in the disease, large intestinal diarrhea with mucus
 mended due to the potential for chronic systemic dissemination.
and fresh blood is common. As the disease progresses, volumi-
 Patients with systemic findings indicative of disseminated histo-
nous small intestinal diarrhea associated with protein-losing
mycosis usually die without treatment.' Dogs with GI involve-
      
 ment should be fed a highly digestible diet. Nonspecifc therapy
Common clinical signs range from severe weight loss, ano-
for diarrhea should be instituted until clinical signs resolve.
rexia, depression, and fever. In less than half of the animals
Treatment with antifungals for 1-month postclinical signs is rec-
affected, abnormal lung sounds with or without tachypnea,
 ommended. Any animal receiving azole antifungals should be
dyspnea, or coughing are seen. In rare cases, pleural effusion
 monitored on a monthly schedule with a complete physical
may be noted. Occasionally, infected animals show lymphaden-
 examination, including ocular examination and blood work to
opathy, hepatomegaly, or splenomegaly.
evaluate liver function.
368
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Disseminated aspergillosis
Aspergillosis
Disseminated aspergillosis is most commonly diagnosed in
Aspergillosis can be seen as either a localized or a systemic
animals that are terminally ill from the disease. The dissemi-
fungal infection.
nated form involves multiple organ systems and the causative
agents are Aspergilus terreus, Aspergillus deflectus, and Aspergil-
Localized aspergillosis
lus flavipes. German shepherds that are between 2 and 8 years
The causative agent of the localized form is the fungus Aspergil.
to the disseminated form, and dysfunctional mucosal immunity
lus fumigates. It is more common in dogs than in cats. Localized
is involved.? Affected cats typically have concurrent immuno-
aspergillosis is typically seen as a sinonasal infection. It may
suppressive diseases and are less than 2 years of age.
occur as a primary infection or may be secondary to nasal
trauma, the presence of a foreign body, or neoplasia. Localized
Transmission and pathogenesis
aspergillosis occurs most frequently in young to middle-aged
pue pzsoe ae sds sads suo Ared u
 dogs, with German shepherds and rottweilers most commonly
then inhaled when animals dig in infected soil. It then may dis-
 affected. It can dlisseminate to other organs.
seminate throughout the body.
Pathogenesis and transmission
Clinical signs
Aspergillus spp. is considered normal flora in many animals.
The clinical signs are nonspecific and are dependent upon the
When present in the soil, the spores are introduced through
organ system(s) involved. The most common signs include weight
broken skin or on the surface of the nasal passages. The mold
loss, pyrexia, lethargy anorexia, bone pain, paraparesis, draining
 then develops into plaques within the nasal passages.
sinus tracts, and muscle wasting. Ocular signs of uveitis, endo-
phthalmitis, and chorioretinitis have been reported. Mycotic
Clinical signs
granulomas of the liver, spleen, intervertebral disks, pancreas,
Clinical signs of anorexia, sneezing, facial pain, and copious
kidneys, lymph nodes, prostate, brain, myocardium, uterus, and
mucoid to hemorrhagic nasal discharge and crusting have been
thyroid glands have also been seen.
reported. The colonization can result in the destruction and
Diagnostics
necrosis of the nasal turbinates and is often accompanied by
frontal sinus osteomyelitis. Life-threatening epistaxis can occur
 In addition to the diagnostics for localized aspergillus, serum
antibody testing is available, but false negatives may occur.
with erosion of the nasal vasculature. In severe cases, the cribri-
form plate, palatine bones, and orbit can become involved.
Pharmacology and treatment
 Erosion of the cribriform plate may result in fungal meningoen-
Turbinectomy and rhinotomy have been used, along with sys-
cephalitis and seizures.
temic and topical antifungal therapy, to surgically treat aspergil-
Diagnostic testing
losis. Ketoconazole, itraconazole, and fuconazole systemically
and clotrimazole topically have been used to medically treat. The
Diagnosis is made by direct observation of invasive fungal
prognosis for recovery is poor even with appropriate antifungal
plaques on the nasal mucosa. A culture positive for aspergillosis
therapy and supportive care.
from affected tissues supports the diagnosis. Biopsy of affected
tissue and a positive histopathologic evaluation is confrmatory.
Coccidioidomycosis
In older dogs with confirmed aspergillosis, a high suspicion of
neoplasia as the primary condition must be considered.
Coccidioidomycosis is a systemic fungal infection that originates
Radiography will demonstrate a loss of fine nasal turbinate
in the lungs and disseminates to the lymph system, skin, eyes,
detail and fluid density in nasal passages. Radiology or computed
bones, and other organs. It is commonly refered to as “valley
tomography (CT) is best performed prior to rhinoscopic evalu-
fever" or "valley rheumatism,"' and it is found in the southwest-
 ation to avoid artifacts from tissue manipulation and lavage.
ern United States, western Mexico, and Central and South
America. Young, male, medium to large breed, outdoor dogs are
Pharmacology and treatment
at an increased risk of infection.
Treatment options for sinonasal aspergillosis include surgical
The two causative agents are the fungus Coccidioides immitis
removal of the lesions and systemic and topical antifungals. Oral
and Coccidioides posadasi. In nature, it is a soil saprophyte but
ketoconazole, thiabendazole, fluconazole, and itraconazole and
the organism can rarely be cultured from the environment.
topical enilconazole (compounded) and clotrimazole have been
Pathogenesis and transmission
used with fair results. Improved results are seen with intranasal
application of enilconazole or clotrimazole. For this procedure,
Routes of infection are inhalation or cutaneous contamination.
the animal is anesthetized and the medication of choice is
Coccidioidomycosis can be spread by direct inoculation of body
instilled via catheterization into the nasal passages.?
fluids. In tissue, C. immitis transforms into a spherule, which
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
369
   sa n s s
Australia. Cats are more commonly infected with cryptococcosis
correct conditions, such as under bandages, the organism can 
 than are dogs.
revert to mycelia form.
Clinical signs
Pathogenesis and transmission
The severity of clinical disease is dependent on the immunocom-
Infections occur from the inhalation of the yeast from the envi-
 petence of the host. It can range from subclinical to multisystem
 ronment. Infected animals may become asymptomatic carriers.
dissemination.
Dissemination can occur by direct extension from the nasal
 Common clinical signs are nonspecifc and include severe
cavity through the cribriform plate to the CNS or to the soft
weight loss, anorexia, cough, fever, lethargy, cervical or head
fissue. Dissemination can go to any organ system, but the skin,
pain, and chronic lameness. Lymphatic dissemination can
CNS, and eyes are the most commonly affected.
 involve the CNS, eye, pericardium, myocardium, prostate gland,
liver, or spleen.
Clinical signs
Diagnostic testing
The severity of clinical disease is determined by the immune
Serologic testing in the early stages of the disease (2-5 weeks)
 response. An association with FeLV and FIV infections in cats
shows increased IgM levels. At 8-10 weeks, complement fixation
has been reported, as has chronic glucocorticoid use as a predis-
(CF) testing shows the presence of IgG antibodies. A specific and
 posing factor in dogs and in cats.
sensitive PCR has been developed and is the recommended test.
 In cats, the clinical signs are usually nasopharyngeal, cutane.
CBC results commonly show a mature neutrophilic leukocy-
 ous, ocular, upper respiratory, or CNS involvement. The lungs
tosis, mild anemia, or monocytosis. The most consistent blood
are not normally affected. Typically, sneezing, snuffling, and
 mucopurulent nasal discharge (either unilateral or bilateral) are
hyperglobulinemia.
Histopathology and serology are currently the best options
sion, anorexia, and weight loss. Soft tissue masses or lesions
for diagnosis of coccidiomycosis. Cytology may not yield the
within the nasal cavity are seen in 70% of cases with respiratory
infective organism. Cultures may pose a threat to laboratory
signs.' Skin lesions include papules or nodules that may ulcerate
personnel, who should be alerted to the suspected causative
and drain. Lymphadenopathy, lameness secondary to osteo-
organisms.
myelitis, and renal failure are common. Ocular involvement can
 Radiography may demonstrate pulmonary and/or skeletal
 include granulomatous chorioretinitis, retinal detachment, pan-
lesions. Coccidioidomycosis is a reportable disease in humans
ophthalmitis, optic neuritis, and blindness. In cases with inva-
and is a serious biohazard due to the highly infectious nature of
sion through the cribriform plate, the forebrain is most
Coccidioides sp.
commonly affected due to its close proximity. CNS signs include
depression, seizures, circling, blindness, ataxia, cranial nerve
Pharmacology and treatment
 defcits, paresis, head pressing, and behavior changes. Cats with
Treatment with antifungal medication (amphotericin B, ketoco-
 concurent FeLV or FIV infection may be more likely to develop
nazole, itraconazole, or fluconazole), alone or in combination,
neurological or ophthalmic signs.
  si  ado ss   s n
 Canine cryptococcosis is typically seen in dogs less than 4
 ommended and is thought to reduce the potential for dissemina-
 years of age. The clinical findings typically seen in dogs include
tion. Treatment is recommended to be continued for a minimum
CNS, upper respiratory system, ocular, or cutaneous lesions
of 4-6 months past clinical signs along with reduced or resolved
 Common, nonspecific clinical signs are depression and anorexia.
serologic findings.?
The brain is affected in the majority of dogs with CNS involve-
 ment, but the spinal cord may be affected as well. In dogs with
Cryptococcosis
 CNS involvement, clinical signs include mental depression, ves-
tibular syndrome, ataxia, cranial nerve defcits, seizures, paresis,
Cryptococcosis is a systemic fungal infection that originates in
 blindness, hypermetria, and cervical pain. Subcutaneous lesions
the nasal cavity, paranasal tissue, or lungs and then may dis-
with ulcerative tracts are often seen on the head, nail beds, and
seminate to the CNS, skin, or eyes. The most common causative
mucous membranes of the mouth and feet. Occasionally, lesions
agents are Cryptococcus neoformans and Cryptococcus gatti. The
within the ear canals are seen and direct extension into the CNS
subspecies that most commonly causes disease is Cryptococcus
may occur (Table 11.2.1).
neoformans var. neoformans, which is associated with pigeon
droppings. In infected tissue, the organism is a variable-sized
Diagnostic testing
or roost. The Cryptococcus organism in the desiccated state can
 In animals with cryptococcosis, CBC and blood chemistry
survive up to 2 years in the environment.
 results are usually normal. Occasionally, a mild nonregenerative
It is found worldwide, and the enzootic areas are in the south-
anemia with mature neutrophilia or neutrophilia with a left shift
eastern and southwestern United States and the east coast of 
may be noted.
370
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Due to the high incidence of CNS involvement, CSF taps
do not have a humoral response, so antibody titers are not useful
or culture and cytology should be considered. In approxi-
diagnostically.
mately 90% of dogs with CNS involvement, the organisms are
visualized.
Pharmacology and treatment
On thoracic radiographs, nodular infltrates, pleural effusion,
an interstitial pattern, and tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy
Treatment with amphotericin B used alone or in conjunction
are occasionally seen. Nasal radiographs may demonstrate bone
with itraconazole and fluconazole has proven to be effective in
 destruction in the nasal passages and frontal sinuses with soft
treating cryptococcal infections (see Tables 11.2.2 and 11.2.3).
tissue density.
Resolution of clinical signs is the most effective means of moni-
Nasal swabs, aspirates, subretinal or vitreal aspirates, exudates
toring a patient, but serial serologic testing can be of benefit. The
from cutaneous lesions, and CSF often reveal the organism.
prognosis for cats with non-CNS involvement is good. The prog-
Cytology is the easiest and quickest method of identifying cryp-
nosis for dogs with any form of the disease or cats with CNS
tococcal organisms.
involvement is guarded.
Serology for the detection of cryptococcal antigen is useful
noninvasive, and should be considered early in the diagnostic
Blastomycosis
process. CSF is the best sample to submit for serologic testing
for animals with neurological signs, whereas serum is preferred
 Blastomycosis is a systemic fungal disease caused by infection
 for upper respiratory or cutaneous signs alone. The preferred test
with the organism Blastomyces dermatitidis. The disease is most
is for the capsular antigen, not antibodies. Most infected animals
o inq spaaq suods o u aeiadsa sop u uoo
also affect cats. There are marked regional differences in the rate
of occurrence of blastomycosis: The disease is endemic in the
Table 11.2.1 System involvement in canine cryptococcosis
Ohio and Mississippi River valleys, the southern Great Lakes
region, and the mid-Atlantic states.
System involved
Percent of dogs affected (%)
Pathogenesis and transmission
Upper respiratory
50
 B. dermatitidis is a dimorphic fungus that exists in the environ
Integument
10-20
 Ocular involvement 
20-40
that are inhaled or, less commonly, inoculated by puncture to
CNS involvement
50-80
establish infection in the animal. At body temperature, the
fungus transforms into a yeast form, replicates at the site of
Source: Nelson RW, Couto CG (eds.). Small Animal internal Medicine, 4th 
introduction (usually the lungs), and then may disseminate to
edition. St. Louis, M0: Elsevier Mosby; 2009.
other tissues via lymphatics and the bloodstream. The lymph
Table 11.2.2
Antifungal drugs of choice for dogs
Drugs of choice for dogs
Dose
Comments
Amphotericin B—regular
0.25mg/kg IV as test dose, then 0.5 mg/kg
Can be used in combination with fluconazole,
V up to three times a week
flu cytosine, itraconazole, or ketoconazole.
0.05-0.8mg/kg SQ two to three times weekly
 BUN or creatinine should be monitored prior
to each treatment.
Amphotericin B—liposomal
0.5 mg/kg IV as test dose, then 1.0 mg/kg Iv
Can be used in combination with fluconazole,
or lipid complex
three to five times a week
flu cytosine, itraconazole, or ketoconazole.
BUN or creatinine should be monitored prior
to each treatment.
Fluconazole
5mg/kg P0 q 12-24 h
Flucytosine
 50 mg/kg P0 TID
Can be used in combination with
amphotericin B
Ketoconazole
10mg/kg P0 q12-24h
Azole antifungals have been shown to be
successful as monotherapy.
Itraconazole
5mg/kg P0 BID for 4 days, then 5-10mg/kg
traconazole is the treatment of choice.
PO q24h
Source: Plumb DC. Piumbs Veterinary Drug Handbook, 6th edition. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2008; Nelson Rw, Couto CG (eds.). Smaff Animal intemal
Medicine, 4th edition. St. Louis, M0: Elsevier Mosby; 2009.
 Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
371
Table 11.2.3 Antifungal drugs of choice for cats
Drugs of choice for cats
Dose
Comments
Amphotericin B—regular
0.25mg/kg IV every other day to three
Can be used in combination with fluconazole,
times a week
flu cytosine, itraconazole, or ketoconazole
0.05-0.8mg/kg SQ two to three times
BUN or creatinine should be monitored prior to each
weekly
treatment.
 Amphotericin B—liposomal 
0.5 mg/kg IV as test dose, then 1.0 mg/kg
Can be used in combination with fluconazole,
or lipid complex
V three to five times a week
flu cytosine, itraconazole, or ketoconazole
BUN or creatinine should be monitored prior to ea.ch
treatment.
Fluconazole
50mg P0 q12-24h
Azole antifungals have been shown to be successful
as monotherapy.
Flucytosine
50 mg/kg P0 TID
Can be used in combination with amphotericin B
Ketoconazole
10mg/kg P0 q12-24h
Itraconazole
50-1o0 mg/cat P0 once daily (may be
3 months or more
divided into twice-daily dosing)
Source: DC Plumb. Plumbs Veterinary Drug Handbook, 6th edition. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2008; Nelson RW, Couto CG. Small Animal internal Medicine,
4th edition. St. Louis, M0: Elsevier Mosby; 2009.
nodes, eyes, skin, and bone are common sites affected by dis-
 mucous membranes. Many dogs have oozing or crusted solitary
seminated infection. Blastomyces incites a severe suppurative to
skin lesions, which usually result from systemic dissemination
pyogranulomatous inflammatory response that contributes to
of fungus from a respiratory infection rather than from cutane-
the tissue injury and dysfunction in blastomycosis. The disease
ous inoculation. Fever is present in about 50% of clinical cases,
is not considered to be contagious between individuals, although
 and many dogs have generalized lymphadenomegaly. Other
-  a q u ad is ans a  
fndings, consistent with a diagnosis of disseminated blastomy-
dental inoculation with a contaminated needle in the process of
cosis, include ocular disease (uveitis, chorioretinitis, glaucoma,
sampling infected tissues.
vitreal hemorrhage) and lameness (fungal osteomyelitis, joint
 infection). Inflammatory lesions of the testes or prostate, neuro-
Clinical signs
logical abnormalities due to CNS involvement, and sneezing or
nasal discharge due to nasal infection are less commonly identi-
Unlike other systemic fungal diseases such as histoplasmosis,
fed. Kidney and urinary bladder infections are uncommon and
subclinical infection with Blastomyces appears to be uncommon.
 GI involvement is extremely rare. Generally, extrapulmonary
Although relatively few animals, in areas where the organism is
lesions, including skin lesions, should be considered to be mani-
endemic and exposure rates are high, acquire blastomycosis, the
festations of infection that has disseminated from a primary
     n s  se
 pulmonary infection (Table 11.2.4).
tain. In dogs, males are more commonly affected than females,
and sporting breeds and hounds are at an increased risk Other
risk factors for dogs include living in proximity to a body of
Diagnostic testing
water and living near an excavation site. Small breed dogs are
less commonly affected. Most cases occur in young adult dogs
Laboratory findings
of 2-4 years of age, although all ages and breeds can be affected.
There are no particular clinicopathologic abnormalities that are
Clinical signs of blastomycosis reflect which tissues are affected.
characteristic of blastomycosis. On a CBC, leukocytosis reflect-
Because most animals become infected via inhalation of infec-
 ing a significant inflammatory response to infection is usually
tive spores, respiratory signs are common. Increased respiratory
present. Mild thrombocytopenia occurs in some cases. Mild
rate and dyspnea may arise because infection and inflammation
of pulmonary parenchymal tissue impair oxygen diffusion to the
thy secondary to systemic inflammation or effects of hypoxemia
bloodstream, causing hypoxemia. In addition, peribronchial
on liver cells, and hypoalbuminemia may be seen. A minority of
lymph node enlargement may cause extramural compression of
the distal trachea and mainstem bronchi, which triggers cough-
inflammation seen with systemic fungal infections. Otherwise,
ing and may impair ventilation.
serum biochemical values and urinalysis are usually normal.
Physical examination often reveals increased respiratory rate
Pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas analysis will often show
and effort, harsh lung sounds, and, potentially, cyanosis of
hypoxemia of varying degrees depending on the severity of
372
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 11.2.4
 Frequency of clinical signs——canine blastomycosis
Clinical sign
Percent of dogs affected (%)
Pulmonary signs
65-85
Diffuse lymphadenopathy
40-60
Cutaneous signs
30-50
Ocular involvement
20-50
Febrile
40
Lameness
25
Reproductive system
5-10
involvement
Nervous system involvement
5
Figure 11.2.2  Lateral thoracic radiograph of a 2-year-old female
Source: Modifed from Taboda J, Grooters AM. Systemic mycoses. In:
German shorthaired pointer with fatal blastomycosis showing a
Textbook of Veterinary internal Medicine, 6th edition, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC
diffuse miliary lung pattern.
Feldman, pp. 671-690. St. Louis, M0: Elsevier Saunders; 2005.
RIGHT
Figure 11.2.3
3 Lateral thoracic radiograph of a 2.5-year-old male
basset hound with pulmonary blastomycosis showing severely
enlarged tracheobronchial lymph nodes displacing mainstem bronchi
and prominent bronchial pattern.
Figure 11.2.1  Lateral thoracic radiograph of a 4-year-old male
golden retriever with pulmonary blastomycosis. A diffuse nodular lung
pattern with nodules of varying size is present.
in all cases of suspected blastomycosis because some animals will
m seu si sa ou nq se  a
pulmonary involvement. Arterial blood gas analysis is the test of
bone involvement, bone lesions are usually solitary and occur in
choice for initial evaluation of respiratory function and for mon-
the limbs; radiographically the lesions are lytic with periosteal
itoring disease progression and response to treatment in pulmo-
 proliferation and swelling of adjacent soft tissues.
nary cases.
Other diagnostic tests
Imaging
Serology is not diagnostic but may provide supportive evidence
Thoracic radiographs are usually abnormal. Diffuse nodular
of exposure to the organism. Some patients with active blasto-
interstitial changes are considered a classical finding in blasto-
mycosis are seronegative.
mycosis (Figure 11.2.1), but other lung patterns, focal solitary
An enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for the detection of Blastomy-
lesions, and pleural efusion are sometimes seen (Figure 1l1.2.2).
ces antigen is available commercially (MiraVista Diagnostics-
Tracheobronchial lymph node enlargement is common and may
http:// www. miravistalabs.com) and is a useful test for infection in
be severe, causing compression of the carina and mainstem
animals in which the organism cannot be demonstrated cytologi-
bronchi (Figure 11.2.3). Thoracic radiographs should be obtained
cally. Urine is the preferred sample for Blastomyces EIA, but any
 Chapter 11 Infectious Diseases
373
fuid (serum, CSF, pleural fluid) can be tested. EDTA interferes
 onstrate because of low numbers of yeasts or overriding intensity
with the assay, and blood collected into an EDTA tube should not
 of the inflammatory response, but a finding of pyogranuloma-
 be used; heparin is an acceptable substitute anticoagulant.
tous inflammation should raise concern about blastomycosis or
another systemic fungal infection as a potential underlying
Biopsy techniques
 cause. Impression smears of cutaneous lesions and vitreal cente-
Samples of affected tissues should be obtained for cytological
sis of infected eyes are more likely to yield organisms than sam-
 evaluation. Fine needle aspiration of enlarged lymph nodes or
pling of other sites.
other affected peripheral tissues, lung aspiration, arthrocentesis,
impression smears of cutaneous lesions, smears of sputum,
Pharmacology and treatment
vitreal aspirates, and transtracheal wash or bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid can provide suitable samples for cytology. A defini-
Animals with clinical blastomycosis do not recover without
tive diagnosis of blastomycosis is made by demonstrating the
 treatment. Blastomycosis is generaly treated with long-term oral
organism in infected tissues. Blastomyces appears in tissue
administration of itraconazole (dog: 5mg/kg PO q24h; cat:
samples as a thick-walled broad-based budding yeast with asso-
 5mg/kg PO q12h) or fluconazole (dog and cat: 2.5-5.0 mg/kg
si i snd on ndns p
 PO q12-24h). Fluconazole is preferred for patients with ocular,
11.2.4 and 11.2.5). Sometimes, the organism is diffcult to dem-
 CNS, or genitourinary involvement because it crosses the physi-
ological barriers between the blood and brain, eye, and prostate
and is excreted in the urine. Treatment should be continued for
a minimum of 3 months or until resolution of any evidence of
active disease. Patients should be monitored for hepatotoxicity,
which may occur with the azole antifungal drugs. Respiratory
lesions on thoracic radiographs may persist indefinitely and may
 represent scarring of lung tissue rather than active infection; if
thoracic lesions remain unchanged over 3 consecutive months
while on treatment, disease may be considered inactive. Anti-
fungal treatment is expensive because of the relative cost of the
drugs and the long duration of administration, especially for
the larger breed dogs which are typically affected, in addition to
the treatment costs of patient monitoring (serial radiographs,
blood work, +/- arterial blood gas, fne needle aspirate cytol-
ogy). Fluconazole often works out to be less expensive than
itraconazole. Pharmacies differ significantly in their pricing for
these antifungal drugs, so checking multiple sources to get the
best pricing for the client is recommended. Additionally,.
Figure 11.2.4  Fine needle aspirate cytology showing three deep-
although generic formulations of itraconazole are available and
staining thick-walled yeast (tissue) forms of Blastomyces organisms in
are much less expensive than the proprietary Sporanox", some
a background of pyogranulomatous inflammation.
 generics have been found to have reduced bioavailability, which
may lead to treatment failure. Ketoconazole (dog: 5-15 mg/kg
PO q 12h) may be considered as a less expensive alternative to
 and is associated with more frequent and more severe GI side
    a r rr  s
gicidal drug with good efficacy against Blastomyces but is neph-
rotoxic and requires careful monitoring of renal function.
Amphotericin is generally administered via every-other-day
dosing as an intravenous infusion of 0.25-0.5 mg/kg q 48h to a
target cumulative dose of 8-10mg/kg if used as a single agent
(4-5 mg/kg if used in conjunction with oral azole antifungals).
 Drug-associated fever during administration is common. Lipid-
complexed formulations of amphotericin (Abelcet", AmBisome^,
Amphocil°) are available that are less nephrotoxic but are more
expensive and require higher doses (2-3 mg/kg q48 h to a cumu-
lative dose of 24-27 mg/kg). Treatment with amphotericin B or,
preferably, a lipid-complexed formulation of the drug is recom-
Figure 11.2.5  Fine needle aspirate cytology showing broad-based
mended for patients with severe disease or for those not respond-
budding yeast form of Blastomyces.
ing adequately to oral antifungal agents.
374
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 In addition to antifungal drugs, other treatments for respira-
 in size from 10 to 52μm but can grow up to 1mm. The protozo-
tory and ocular disease are often necessary. Patients with respira-
ans typically cause GI tract disease, polysystemic disease, or
tory dysfunction will often require continuous supplemental
both.
 Oxygen for 4-8 days until respiratory function improves. Bron-
chodilators may help in some cases. Additional treatment for
Amebiasis
uveitis (topical corticosteroids and miotics) or secondary glau-
coma (carbonic anhydrase inhibitors) may be indicated. Treat-
Entamoeba histolytica is a parasitic amoeba that predominately
ment is successful in about three-quarters of the cases. Patients
infects people and nonhuman primates. The occurance in the
that do not survive are usually those with severe respiratory
 United States has declined, but it is still problematic in tropical
involvement. Patients that survive the first week of treatment
areas in the world. The trophozoites inhabit the colon lumen and
 often survive and ultimately respond well to antifungal therapy,
rarely disseminate to other organs. Cysts passed in human feces
but recurrence is common, occurring in about one-ffh of
are infective and transmission is through fecal oral ingestion.
treated patients, generally within the first few months after stop-
Amebiasis is a disease that is transmissible to pets but is seldom
ping antifungal drug administration.
transmitted from pets to people. The trophozoites damage the
intestine by attaching to the cells where they secrete enzymes
Prevention
that disrupt the intracellular connections.
Usually, the infections are asymptomatic, but signs of severe
There are currently no vaccines available for immunization
ulcerative colitis may be seen. Extraintestinal amebiasis is
against blastomycosis, but development of an effective vaccine is
unknown in cats and rare in dogs. Clinical signs in humans refer
actively being researched.
to the affected tissue.
Nutritional considerations
Diagnosis
Animals with blastomycosis often have increased caloric require-
Diagnosis of amebiasis in dogs and cats requires identification
ments because of fever and increased work of breathing. However,
of trophozoites in the feces or tissues. It is not possible to detect
the trophozoites in fecal floatation; however, direct smears of
may find it difficult to interrupt their breathing efforts in order
fresh feces will reveal the slow-moving motility of the tropho-
to eat. Additionally, GI function and motility may be adversely
zoite. There is an ELISA-based antigen test that has been shown
affected by hypoxemia in some patients. Diets that are calorie
to be species specific for dogs. The best diagnostic test available
dense and highly palatable are ideal, and frequent feedings of
is tissue biopsy and histopathology.'
small volume may be better tolerated. Bulky diets or large meals
should be avoided because gastric distension with food may
Treatment and prevention
restrict breathing by pressing on the diaphragm.
If clinical signs are present, metronidazole and furazolidone can
be used to eliminate the organism. The only prevention is clean-
Anesthetic and analgesia considerations
liness and removal of fecal material from the environment.
Virtually all animals with blastomycosis have respiratory involve
ment, and though the severity of respiratory dysfunction varies
Babesiosis
from nonclinical to severe, the presence of respiratory disease
should be addressed in assessing patient risk for anesthesia. In
Babesia spp. are piroplasmia, intracellular parasites of erythro-
patients ultimately requiring surgical procedures such as enu-
s   s d e s   
cleation of an infected glaucomatous eye (frequent in patients
  x i e si h sa u 
with severe ocular involvement) or lung lobectomy (uncom-
size, whereas Babesia gibsoni has a pleomorphic shape and exists
mon), surgery should be postponed until the patient has begun
singly within erythrocytes. It is small in comparison to B. canis,
antifungal treatment and is stable with good respiratory
function.
ted through ticks, blood transfusions, and dog bites. Both have
distribution in the United States, Japan, Australia, Africa, Asia,
 r nos u p ose si sn'g aoi pu
SECTION 3 PROTOZOAL DISEASES
strains of B. canis spp. have been identifed. Babesia canis rossi is
highly pathogenic and is transmitted by Haemaphysalis leachi;
Babesia canis canis is moderately pathogenic and is transmitted
Protozoal diseases
by Dermacenter reticulates; and Babesia canis vogeli is the least
 Protozoans are single-cell organisms that are classified based on
 pathogenic and is transmitted by R. sanguineus (brown dog tick).
their mode of locomotion. The classifications are flagellates
There are also at least three B.gibsoni spp. strains that have been
(Giardia spp., Leishmaniaspp.), coccidian( Toxoplasma,Neospora
identified: California, Asia, and Theileria annae, which is a
spp.), amoeba, ciliates, microspora, and piroplasmia. They range
B.gibsoni-like organism). In the United States, B.canis vogeli is
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
375
ssd e s a si  p sis n s a
viously affected dogs, avoid immunosuppressive drugs and
that dog bites may be a route of transmission of B. gibsoni. There
 splenectomy. The best prevention is to control ticks.
are several Babesia spp. found in cats throughout the world: in
India, Babesia cati; in Africa, Europe and South Asia, Babesia
Giardia
felis; in South America and Africa, Babesia herpailuri, and in
Israel, Babesia canis presenti. None of these strains have been
Giardia spp. is one of the most common protozoal organisms
recognized in America.
infecting the GI tract of dogs and cats. The organisms are flagel-
 Transmission is through ticks, blood transfusions, and dog
lates that replicate in the GI tract of multiple warm-blooded
bites. The organism replicates intracellularly and results in intra-
animal species. The average size of the trophozoite is 15 x 10 μm,
vascular hemolytic anemia. Immune-mediated reactions to the
and the cysts are on average 10 x 8 μm in size. Transmission of
parasite or against self-antigens worsen the anemia. A positive
 no o s no  no  q si ds 
Coombs test is possible. The severity of the anemia depends on
form. Although both the trophozite and cysts are infectious,
the patient's immune status, species, and strain of Babesia spp.
typically gastric secretions kill the trophozoites. The fecal shed-
The incubation period is from days to weeks.
ding period is variable. Many cases are associated with over-
crowded and unsanitary conditions.
Clinical signs
The cyst form can survive for months outside of a host in wet,
cold conditions. Giardia has a direct life cycle, and once the cyst
Chronic and subclinical infections are possible. Clinical signs of
 is ingested, the trophozoites mature in the GI system. Pathogenic
acute infection can include anemia, fever, tachycardia, tachyp-
mechanisms of the trophozoites include disruption of normal
nea, hypoxia, depression, anorexia, and weakness. Some animals
flora, inhibition of normal enterocyte enzymatic function,
will have jaundice, petechiation, azotemia, and hepatospleno-
induction of motility disorders, and blunting of microvilli.
 megaly. In acute infections, DIC, metabolic acidosis, and renal.
Giardia spp. can cause disease in animals of any species or age.
disease have been seen.
 In animals with immunodeficiency, clinical disease is more
 In chronic disease, clinical signs include weight loss, anorexia,
common.
ascites, GI signs, CNS disease, edema, and clinical evidence of
 Clinical signs typically are vomiting, small bowel diarrhea, or
cardiopulmonary disease. In cases of chronic disease, glucocor-
inappetence. Fever is uncommon with Giardia spp. More infor-
ficoid use or splenectomy may activate the disease.
mation is available in Chapter 8.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis
 Hematology may reveal a regenerative anemia or thrombocyto-
Diagnosis is made by documentation of oocysts, cysts, or tro-
 penia. Blood chemistries commonly show hyperbilirubinemia,
phozoites. Zinc sulfate centrifugation is the floatation solution
azotemia, and metabolic acidosis. Common findings on urinaly-
of choice for Giardia spp., as sugar solution is hypertonic and
sis include bilirubinuria, hemoglobinuria, and renal casts.
will distort the cysts. Trophozoites may be noted on direct
Presumptive diagnosis is based on history, physical examina-
smears. To aid in visualizing the internal structure of protozoa,
tion, hematology, blood chemistry, urinalysis, and serology.
a stain such as Lugol's solution, acid methyl green, or methylene
Immunofluorescent assays for B. canis and B.gibsoni are availa-
blue can be used. Antigens of Giardia spp. can be detected using
ble. False negatives can result in peracute conditions or in immu-
 ELISA tests; however, it is possible to have a false negative
nosuppressed animals. Currently, there is no defnitive cutof for
because there are some Giardia spp. that are canine specific, and
positive results, but increasing titers over a 2- to 3-week period
the antigens used to create the ELISA test kits are not species
is consistent with recent or active infection. Many dogs will be
 specific. Giardia spp. live chronically in the intestinal tract and
seropositive but have a subclinical infection. PCR testing is avail-
may not be a significant finding for the cause of disease.
able, but it does not always correlate with clinical illness. Babesia
spp. organisms can be demonstrated in erythrocytes using
Treatment and prevention
Wright's stain or Giemsa stain. B.canis is typically found as
paired, piriform bodies measuring 2.4 X 5.0 μm. B.gibsoni is
Treatment of giardiasis includes metronidazole and fenbenda
found as single, annular bodies 1.0 × 3.2 μm.
zole. Commonly, animals are infected after swimming in lakes
and ponds. The best prevention is to avoid water that is infected.
Treatment and prevention
Trichomoniasis
  u s  e p a a ss  a u
Trichomonads are highly motile fagellates similar in size to
more effective against B. canis than B.gibsoni. Azithromycin,
se isixa auo pue pades read on aus are e ds p
atovaquone, clindamycin hydrochloride, doxycycline, or metro-
 trophozoites. They have an undulating membrane, which is
nidazole has been effective in reducing the parasite load and may
 a characteristic feature. Trichomonads divide by binary fission
lessen disease if imidocarb dipropionate is not available.? In pre-
 and are transmitted directly by fecal oral ingestion. It is not
376
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
uncommon to have a coinfection with Giardia spp. and Tritri-
 nephritis and polyarthritis. Generally, dogs develop visceral
chomonas foetus. Due to the similar appearance of Trichomona
leishmaniasis and may have subclinical disease for months or
and Giardia, misdiagnosis of trichomoniasis as infection with
years. Cats are usually subclincally infected. The cutaneous
Giardia is common.' Overcrowding appears to increase the risk
lesions that develop are characterized by hyperkeratosis, scaling.
for infection. Cats with T.foetus infection range in age from 3
thickening, mucocutaneous ulcers, and intradermal nodules on
months to 13 years. Infections are seen in both purebred cats
the muzzle, pinnae, and footpads.
and cats from shelter environments.
Common clinical signs include weight loss even with normal
       
to increased appetite, polyuria, polydipsia, muscle wasting.
semiformed to cow pie in consistency. When animals with tri-
depression, vomiting, diarrhea, cough, epistaxis, sneezing, and
chomoniasis are administered antimicrobial drugs, the diarrhea
melena. On physical examination, splenomegaly, lymphaden-
improves.
opathy, facial alopecia, fever, rhinitis, dermatitis, increased lung
sounds, jaundice, swollen painful joints, uveitis, and conjuncti-
Diagnosis
vitis are commonly seen. CBC results may reveal leukocytosis
with a left shift, lymphopenia, and thrombocytopenia. Blood
 Observation of trophozoites in feces is diagnostic of infection.
chemistry results typically reveal hyperglobulinemia, hypoalbu-
 In contrast to Giardia, T.foetus has a single nucleus with an
minemia, increased liver enzymes, and azotemia. Urinalysis
undulating cell membrane.  Trichomonads will not survive
typically reveals proteinuria. The hyperglobulinemia is usually
 refrigeration. Feces may be cultured for T.foetus, but a PCR test
polyclonal. Some dogs develop a neutrophilic polyarthritis and
is available, which is superior to fecal culture.
some dogs may develop bone lesions.
Treatment and prevention
Diagnosis
Treatment with ronidazole may be effective; however, neurologi-
Diagnosis is made by demonstration of amastigotes
cal side effects are a potential concern. Clinical signs may resolve
(2.5 × 5.0μm X 1.5-2.0μm) in lymph node aspirates, bone
spontaneously but may take months.2
marrow aspirates, and skin impression smears using Wright's or
dis a pi aq oe  so au s e
Leishmaniasis
 sdoq uo us jo uona ssixadou no so
PCR. Antibody testing can be used as IgG titers develop 14-28
Leishmania spp are flagellates that cause visceral, athritis, cuta
days after infection and decline 45-80 days posttreatment.
neous, and mucocutaneous disease in mammals. Rodents and
dogs are the primary reservoirs, with humans and cats as inci-
Treatment and prevention
 dental hosts. The prime vector of Leishmania spp. is the sandfly.
In 200o, Leishmania donovani was confrmed in dogs in a Fox
Dogs are unlikely to eliminate the infection spontaneously, and
hound kennel in New York Since that time, L. donovani or Leish-
 mania spp. infection has been confirmed in 30 other foxhound
reported that allopurinol, antimony, and liposomal amphoter-
kennels in 20 states and in Ontario, Canada. It appears that
icin B have some activity against Leishmania spp.,' but the prog-
Foxhounds are the predominant canid infected with Leishmania
nosis is variable and most cases are recurrent. A poor prognosis
u s    s   r  s
 is indicated if concurrent renal insufficiency is present.
been identifed but appears to be dog to dog.' Leishmania spp.
The only prevention is to avoid vectors, typically infected
has been transmitted by blood transfusion, shared needles, fight-
sandfies. In enzootic areas, house animals indoors during the
ing, congenital transmission, and breeding. In transmission by
night and control sandfies. All potential blood donors and
the sandfly, flagellated promastigotes develop in the sandfly and
breeders from enzootic areas should be serologically screened.
are injected when the sandfly feeds. Macrophages engulf the
Dogs act as a reservoir for the organism and are a primary
 promastigotes, which then loses the flagella and become amas-
zoonotic risk.
tigotes. The amastigotes multiply by binary fussion, rupture the
macrophage, and are spread throughout the body. The incuba-
Toxoplasmosis
 tion period for Leishmania spp. ranges from 1 month to 7 years.
 The formation of amastigotes (nonflagellates) causes cutaneous
Toxoplasma gondis a coccidian protozoa that is the most preva-
lesions to develop.
lent parasite that infects vertebrates.' The only host to complete
the coccidian life cycle is the cat, which passes environmentally
Clinical signs
 e so s  s    so
tion of feline feces. The average oocyst measures 10 × 12 μm.
Infection by the intracellular organism induces an extreme
Sporozoites develop in the oocysts after 1-5 days of exposure to
immune response. The proliferation of macrophages, histiocytes,
and lymphocytes in lymphoreticular organs is seen, and com-
zoites disseminate in the blood or lymphatic system during
monly the immune-complex formation results in glomerulo-
active infection and cause cell destruction via rapid intracellular
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
377
replication. Bradyzoites are the slowly dividing persistent tissue
 lesions and include ataxia, seizures, tremors, paresis, cranial
stage that form in the extraintestinal tisues of infected hosts as
 nerve deficits, and paralysis. Animals with myositis have weak-
 ness, stif gait, and muscle wasting. Rapid progression to tetra-
form readily in muscle, CNS, and visceral organs. Infection can 
 paresis and paralysis with lower motor neuron dysfunction can
occur after ingestion of any of the life stages, or it can occur
 occur. In some dogs, myocardial infection resulting in ventricu-
transplacentally. Most cats are not coprophagic and are usually
 lar arrhythmias may occur. In polysystemic disease, dyspnea,
infected by ingestion of the bradyzoite during carnivorous
 yomiting, and diarrhea may occur. In some dogs, retinitis, ante-
feeding. Oocysts are shed in the feces from 3-21 days. Sporu-
 rior uveitis, iridocyclitis, and optic neuritis may occur, but these
lated oocysts can survive for months to years and are resistant
 are less common than in the cat.
 to most disinfectants. Bradyzoites may persist in tissues for the
life of the host. Approximately 30-40% of cats and 20% of dogs
Diagnosis
are seropositive. Many dogs diagnosed prior to 1988 with toxo-
plasmosis were based on histological evaluation and were actu-
 In some animals, routine laboratory data may be abnormal. The
ally Neospora caninum.
 most common hematologic fndings are a nonregenerative
anemia, neutrophilic leukocytosis, lymphocytosis, monocytosis,
neutropenia, and eosinophila. Urinalysis may reveal proteniuria
Clinical signs
and bilirubinuria. Blood chemistry may show increases in serum
Clinical disease with the GI phase is rare. Only 10-20% of exper-
 proteins, bilirubin concentration, creatinine kinase, ALT, ALP,
imentally inoculated cats develop self-limiting small bowel
and lipase.
diarrhea after primary oral inoculation.'Detection of T. gondi
Pulmonary toxoplasmosis commonly causes diffuse intersti-
0ocysts in feces is rarely reported in naturally exposed cats with
 tial to alveolar patterns with pleural effusion.
diarrhea.
There may be protein present in the CSF with higher than
In dogs and cats, following primary infection, death may
 normal cell counts. Rarely are bradyzoites or tachyzoites detected
 in tissues, effusions, CSF, or bronchoalveolar lavage.
zoites causing cellular necrosis (T.gondi does not produce any
The presence of oocysts in the feces is not conclusive of toxo-
toxins). There are no percentages available on the number of
plasmosis, as Hammondia and Besnoitia infections have similar
animals that die due to this process. T.gondi spreads to other
oocysts.
organs by the bloodstream or the lymphatic system. This spread
The most accurate diagnosis of toxoplasmosis is DNA detec-
of disease leads to hepatic, pulmonary, CNS, and pancreatic
tion by PCR, but DNA can be detected in animals that do not
fissue involvement. The skeletal muscle, lungs, liver, brain, and
have an active infection.?
eyes are common sites of replication and chronic infection.
Transplacental or lactationally affected kittens develop the most
Treatment and prevention
severe signs of extraintestinal infection and usually die of pul-
monary or hepatic disease. Common clinical signs with dissemi-
Treatment of toxoplasmosis consists of supportive care and
nated toxoplasmosis include depression, anorexia, fever, then
appropriate antibiotic therapy. Fluid therapy and nutritional
hypothermia, peritoneal effusion, jaundice, and dyspnea.
 Chronic toxoplasmosis can occur in both dogs and cats. Clini-
upon the severity of the clinical signs. Antibiotics successfully
cal fndings in cats with toxoplasmosis include anterior or pos-
used for the treatment of clinical toxoplasmosis include clin-
terior uveitis, fever, muscle hyperesthesia, weight loss, anorexia,
damycin hydrochloride, trimethoprim-sulfonamide, and azi-
respiratory tract disease, vomiting, abdominal effusion, spleno-
 thromycin. In animals with uveitis, treatment with topical, oral,
megaly, ataxia, circling, twitching, tremors, seizures, blindness,
 or parenteral glucocorticoids is recommended to avoid second-
 icterus, lens luxation, diarrhea, and pancreatitis. Chronic toxo-
 ary glaucoma and lens luxation.
The most common route for humans to acquire toxoplasmosis
 s s    n  ss 
been documented in cats with FeLV, FIV, FIP, and renal trans-
 tally. Humans should avoid eating undercooked meats or ingest-
plantation. T. gondii may be a common infectious cause of uveitis
ing sporulated oocysts on vegetables. Cats generally only shed
 in cats, based on T. gondi-specifc aqueous humor antibody and
0ocysts for days to several weeks after primary inoculation, so
PCR studies. Transplacental or lactationally infected kittens
routine contact with individual cats is not a common cause of
 toxoplasmosis infection in humans. Repeat oocyst shedding is
plasmosis has been found to be the cause of fading kittens and
rare and cats usually do not allow feces to remain on their coat
stillbirths.
or skin long enough to have oocysts sporulate.
In dogs, infections are typically respiratory, Gl, or neuromus-
cular. The clinical signs are similar to feline toxoplasmosis with
Neosporosis
fever, vomiting, diarrhea, dyspnea, and jaundice noted. Toxo-
plasmosis occurs most frequently in immunosuppressed animals.
Neurological signs are dependent on location of the primary
in the past due to similar morphology. The tachyzoites can
378
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
measure from 5-7 μm X 1-5μm depending on the stage of divi-
Diagnosis
sion. The tissue cysts can measure up to 100 μm in diameter and
can be found in neural cells and occasionally in the muscle. The
There are no specific hematologic or biochemical fndings. Com-
sexual cycle is completed in the GI tract of dogs; oocysts are then
monly, increases in creatine kinase (CK) and AST are found.
passed in the feces, and the sporozoites develop within 24h of
In CSF, increased protein concentrations (20-50 mg/dL) and
passage. The shedding of oocysts may continue for months in
mild mixed inflammatory cell pleocytosis (10-50cells/dL) con-
 dogs. The two other life stages are tachyzoites (fast dividing
sisting of monocytes, lymphocytes, neutrophils, and, occasion-
ally, eosinophils can be found.
stage) and tissue cysts containing hundreds of bradyzoites (slow
Jo uos Aq si son un uoun jo nn su (au
Thoracic radiographs can reveal interstitial and alveolar
- q s  s    s
patterns.
mented after ingestion of infected bovine placental tissue and
Tachyzoites are rarely identified. Oocysts may be detected in
other intermediate hosts. Transplacental transmission is well
feces after flotation or by PCR. N. caninum is differentiated from
documented, and there is increased risk for pups whose dam
PCR.'
reports of clinical disease in naturally infected domestic cats;
Demonstration of the organism in CSF or tissues gives a defin-
itive diagnosis. Presumptive diagnosis can be made by clinical
however, N. caninum has been reported in nondomestic felids.
 Glucocorticoid administration my activate bradyzoites in tissue,
signs, positive serology, or the presence of antibodies in the CSF.
causing clinical disease.
Detection of serum antibodies to N. caninum by IFA or ELISA
confrms the diagnosis.
Clinical signs
Treatment and prevention
The primary clinical illness reported is neuromuscular. The most
Trimethoprim, macrolides, tetracyclines, and lincosamides have
common clinical presentation is puppies younger than 6 months
been used to treat canine neosporosis. If one pup from the litter
of age that are congenitally infected These puppies develop an
ascending paralysis with hyperextension of the hind limbs. In
has been diagnosed with neosporosis, all pups in the litter should
be placed on treatment. Once a dam has been known to harbor
many cases, muscle atrophy can occur. Multifocal CNS disease
the organism, successive litters and litters from their progeny
and polymyositis alone or in combination can be noted. Hyper-
may be affected. This must be taken into consideration when
esthesia, incontinence, dysphagia, and respiratory muscle paral-
ysis are the clinical signs of myositis. Clinical signs may be seen
planning the breeding of Neospora-infected females.
beginning at 3-9 weeks of age. Neonatal death is common. In
 dogs over 6 months of age, regional or generalized myositis and
Cytauxzoonosis
CNS manifestation are common.? The clinical signs include
behavior changes, head tilt, seizures, blindness, Horner's syn-
Cytauxzoon felis is a piroplasmia organism that can infect cats
 drome, and trigeminal neuropathy. Systemic signs of fever,
in southeastern, south central, and mid-Atlantic regions of the
dyspnea, cough, myocarditis, megaesophagus, and vomiting
United States. It is transmitted to cats through a tick bite. The
have been noted.
organisms are 1-2 μm in size and appear as round bodies or oval
In experimentally infected cats, the infection is more severe
"safety pin" forms. Bobcats are usually subclinically affected and
for prenatal and neonatal kittens. Subclinical disease has been
are likely the natural host of the organism. C.felis has been
found in adult cats, but the disease is more severe when the cats
 passed experimentally from infected bobcats to domestic cats by
were immunosuppressed with glucocorticoids. The predomi-
Dermacentor variabilis (American dog tick).
nant lesions are hepatitis, encephalomyelitis, and polymysitis.
The incubation period is from 5 to 20 days. Infected macro-
Antibodies to N. caninum have been reported in domestic cats,
phages line the lumen of veins; as merozoites are released from
but natural clinical infections have not been documented.4
infected macrophages, they infect erythrocytes. Obstruction
 The disease tends to be most severe in congenitally infected
of blood flow through tissues by mononuclear infltrates and
pups, but dogs up to 15 years of age have been infected. It is
hemolytic anemia creates the clinical signs. Clinical signs rapidly
uncertain in older animals if the clinical signs are from an acute,
 progress and usually, in less than a week's duration, leads to
 primary infection or from chronic infection. Clinical findings of
death.
myocarditis, dysphagia, ulcerative dermatitis, pneumonia, and
hepatitis can occur in some dogs. Tissue cysts that are intact are
Clinical signs
not usually associated with inflammation as are ruptured cysts.
The intracellular replication of N.caninum causes the disease
Clinical signs of fever (103°-107°F/39.4°-41.6°C), dyspnea,
CNS infection usually causes mononuclear cell infltrates. It is
depression, jaundice, anorexia, dark urine, lethargy, dehydra-
believed that there is an immune-mediated component to the
tion, and pale mucous membranes have been observed. In many
 pathogenesis of the disease. If not treated, it is fatal in most dogs.
cases, the patient's temperature will go from febrile to subnormal
The prognosis for animals with severe neurological involvement
is grave.
some animals. In terminally ill cats, hypothermia, coma and
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
379
recumbency are common clinical findings. Late in the disease,
 occurrence of H. americanum-associated disease may expand
 parasitized erythrocytes may be observed. After the temperature
accordingly.
peak, cats usually die within 2-3 days.'
Anatomy and physiology
 go outdoors in tick-infested areas that develops a high fever,
depression, anemia, or jaundice. Cats typically present with
H. americanum is primarily transmitted through ingestion of an
regenerative anemia and neutrophilic leukocytosis. The anemia
infected tick, A.maculatum. Dogs do not become infected with
is typically mild with regard to the amount of icterus. With some
 H. americanum after being bitten by a tick This ingestion can
animals, thrombocytopenia is occasionally found. It is uncom-
 occur during normal grooming or by the consumption of small
mon to fnd hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, bilirubinemia,
mammals that carry this tick or its various life stages. When the
or bilirubinuria.
tick is ingested, the infective organism is released in the intes-
fines to infect phagocytic cells and endothelial cells and then
Diagnosis
disseminate to other tissues, especially muscle (skeletal and
cardiac). Once it has reached the target organs (muscle), it forms
 Diagnosis is based on demonstration of the piroplasms on blood
s ,    s  do
smears stained with Wright's or Giemsa stain. The number of
cyst (Figure 11.3.1).
parasites will increase as the disease progresses. Thoracic radio-
 The cyst itself causes no clinical symptoms since it is protected
graphs may show a bronchointerstitial pulmonary patern.
from the host's immune system by its mucopolysaccharide
Infected macrophages may be detected in the bone marrow,
 layers. As the organism matures, new, immature stages (mero-
spleen, liver, or lymph node aspirates. PCR may be used, but
zoites) are released into the muscle. Inflammatory cells will
serologic testing is not available.
travel to the site of the rupture and often incite a marked pyo-
granulomatous inflammatory response.
Treatment and prevention
H. americanum life cycle
 Treatment consists of supportive care including fluid therapy
'dondip qeon paeun jn uisnsun poo pue
1.
Dog ingests the infected tick.
diminazene, parvaquone, buparvaquine, or thiacetarsemide
2.
Sporozoites are released into the GI tract and penetrate the
have been used with some success. If none of these drugs are
wall of the gut.
available, enrofloxacin, azithromycin, and atovaquone have been
3.
Sporozoites travel to skeletal and cardiac muscle via blood
used but have had little success.
or lymph vessels and affect monocytes as a cyst
 The best prevention is to control ticks in the area. Cats living
4.
Concentric layers of mucopolysaccharide material surround
in an enzootic area should be kept indoors during periods of tick
the cyst forming an onion skin appearance
activity.
5.
 Cysts either remain dormant or undergo merogany and form
meronts that contain large numbers of merozoites
Hepatozoonosis
Hepatozoonosis is an arthropod-borne protozoal infection.
Hepatozoon canis is the predominant agent in South America,
Asia, Africa, or Europe, and Hepatozoon americanum is the
predominant agent in the United States, specifically in the
Gulf Coast region. Ticks serve as both definitive host and prin-
 primarily by R. sanguineus, the brown dog tick, and may result
 in asymptomatic infections or clinical disease of variable sever-
ity. Clinical disease is most commonly seen in animals with
-u pue siddnd sunon se yns asuodsan suu pausuu
 munosuppressed dogs (by medications or concurrent disease).
H.americanum is more pathogenic than H.canis, generally
 causing severe clinical signs in most dogs that become infected,
and will be the focus of this discussion.
The definitive host and principal vector for H.americanum is
the Gulf Coast tick, Ambylomma maculatum, and the distribu-
tion of H. americarum parallls the distribution of A. macula-
tum. H.americanum has been identifed in Texas, Oklahoma,
Figure 11.3.1  Myocytes contain clear onion skin cysts (arrow), which
Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, and Florida. However,
contain zoites. Image courtesy of Dr. Kuldeep Singh, Clinical Assistant
the range of the vector tick is expanding northward, so the
Professor, Pathobiology, University of llinois.
380
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
6.1
Meronts rupture and release merozoites causing inflamma-
changes are not evident in all affected dogs, so the absence of
tion and attract phagocytes that ingest the merozoites.
bony lesions does not rule out hepatozoonosis. It is speculated
 Merozoites circle until ingested by another tick to continue
that the bony proliferative changes are due to the attachment of
7.1
the cycle as gamots in WBCs or travel to other tissues to
affected (and inflamed) skeletal muscle to the bone.
continue asexual reproduction.
Biopsy technique
8.
 The zygote matures into an oocyst within the tick gut until
it is ingested by another dog.
A diagnosis can be made via demonstrating any life stage of
H. americanum in muscle biopsy samples with or without pyo-
Clinical signs
granulomatous inflammation. The rate of false-negative results
with a muscle biopsy is much less than with analysis of a blood
H.americanum infection causes severe, debilitating, and fatal
smear due to the high number of organisms present in muscles
disease. Common clinical signs include an intermittent fever,
of infected dogs (Figures 11.3.2 and 11.3.3).
 generalized muscle atrophy, weakness, muscle stiffness, and
cachexia. Cachexia, which is secondary to the increased caloric
needs of chronic states of inflammation, may even be seen in
patients with a normal appetite. Hyperesthesia, ocular discharge,
and keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) may also be noted. The
U uou jo puon a se sum pue xem A aseas
muscle varies with the life cycle phases ofthe organism. Untreated
chronic infections can lead to glomerulonephritis, and amyloi-
dal deposits in organs may cause death within 12 months.
Diagnostic testing
Laboratory
Dogs infected with H.americanum can have a neutrophilia,
ranging from mild to severe. A normocytic, normochromic
 anemia is a common clinical pathologic finding as well. Serum
biochemical testing can yield hypoglycemia if the sample is not
2.0mm
processed correctly (resulting from postcollection glucose
metabolism occurring as a result of large numbers of circulating
WBCs). Elevated ALP, hypoalbuminemia, and azotemia can be
Figure 11.3.2 Focally, a myocyte contains an onion cyst (arrow):
also note a pyogranuloma (star). Image courtesy of Dr. Kuldeep Singh,
seen in patients with renal compromise as a result of amyloidosis
Clinical Assistant Professor, Pathobiology, University of llinois.
ondary glomerular disease caused by chronic inflammation and
immune-complex deposition or amyloidosis.
The diagnosis of H. americanum is typically made via organ-
a blood smear (in the neutrophils or monocytes), but it should
be noted that the identification of H. americanum is difficult due
to a low number of neutrophils or monocytes being affected
      (e  s )
diagnosis can be made on muscle biopsies and will reveal the
presence of onion skin cysts within the striated muscle. An
ELISA for serum antibodies exists, but it is not commercially
available. The most reliable diagnostic test is PCR performed on
whole blood in EDTA (Auburn University), which distinguishes
hepatozoonosis from other protozoal infections.
Imaging
Periosteal bony changes have been identifed in dogs with
Figure 11.3.3  Pyogranuloma containing numerous neutrophils and
H.americanum, and because of this, survey radiographs are
macrophages with intracytoplasmic parasites. Image courtesy of Dr.
often taken of long bones and the pelvis to evaluate for charac.
Kuldeep Singh, Clinical Assistant Professor, Pathobiology. University of
teristic periosteal proliferative changes. These radiographic
Illinois.
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
381
Treatments and pharmacology
transmission may occur and transplacental exposure results in
some of the most serious CVH infections. Neonates can also be
Some cysts willremain dormant and have been found on biopsy
infected with CHV through direct contact with the genital or
up to 10 years after infection. The cysts are difficult to destroy
 respiratory secretions of the dam or another infected dog.
and will rupture at unpredictable intervals, creating a disease
that is difficult, if not impossible, to eradicate.
Clinical signs
Treatment of hepatozoonosis usually leads to rapid resolution
 Most genitally infected adult dogs remain asymptomatic, but
of clinical signs but does not eradicate the H. americanum organ-
 some infections may result in mild clinical illness, such as vaginal
isms from the host. Hepatozoonosis is treated with a combina-
hyperemia or genital vesicular lesions. Adult respiratory infec-
tion of antimicrobial drugs, typically trimethoprim-sulfonamide,
 tions of CHV may cause mild upper respiratory or ocular symp-
clindamycin, and pyrimethamine, typically for 2 weeks. This
toms, but the extent of clinical illness in adult patients is still
combination controls acute disease, but, as the organism changes
 unknown. CHV has also been associated with infectious tra-
and matures, new organisms are released into the muscle and
cheobronchitis or the “kennel cough" syndrome.
many dogs experience a relapse of clinical signs. Addition of the
Transplacental infection may result in late-term abortion,
anticoccidial drug decoquinate (10-20 mg/kg orally BID for
 stillborn, or mummified puppies. Infected puppies that reach full
2 years) to the standard triple protocol reduces recurrence
 term usuall develop systemic infection in the first 9 days after
 of clinical disease and improves survival. In addition to the spe-
birth.' Puppies exposed at less than 2 weeks of age are more likely
cific treatment recommendations, dehydration support is often
  sn   s   
needed.
multiorgan hemorrhage and necrosis. The commonly affected
Prevention of hepatozoonosis should begin with adequate
m snnn ra pe s ads she  are so
vector control and client education.
is why it is commonly referred to as "fading puppy syndrome?"
 Clinical signs include poor weight gain, lethargy, dyspnea,
Analgesia considerations
abdominal pain, inappetance, oculonasal discharge, and persist-
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications can be given to
ent vocalization. These signs develop into mucous membrane
provide pain relief and to reduce fever. Glucocorticoids should
 petechiation and erythematous rash with subcutaneous edema
be avoided in these patients.
of the ventrum. Pups eventually develop neurological signs
leading to seizures and loss of consciousness before death. Death
most often occurs rapidly within 24-48 h of the onset of clinical
Nutritional considerations
 signs. Systemic disease from herpesvirus has a high mortality
 Dogs with H. americanum are often cachexic. These dogs should
 rate in puppies less than 3 weeks of age likely due to their imma-
have their food intake monitored and adjusted to ensure that it 
 ture immune system and impaired ability to thermoregulate.
is sufficient. For animals experiencing decreased appetite,
 Puppies that survive mild clinical symptoms often suffer renal
feeding a food that is calorically dense will allow for smaller
 damage and lifelong neurological symptoms, such as ataxia and
 meals while still maintaining adequate calories. Many puppy and
blindness. Due to the fact that the virus can remain latent in the
 nerve ganglia, surviving patients can be chronic carriers of the
body condition with the added bonus of being highly
virus and recrudescent illness can occur during times of stress
palatable.
or corticosteroid administration.
Clinical signs of recrudescent disease in otherwise healthy
 adult patients can include mild upper respiratory symptoms or
vesicular lesions of the genital mucosa.
SECTION 4 INFECTIOUS
Diagnostic testing
VIRAL DISEASES
    si su ns   g sio
Canine and feline herpesvirus
history, physical exam, and often by gross examination of the
 internal organs at necropsy. Litters of puppies that die rapidly
Canine herpesvirus (CHV) and feline herpesvirus (FHV) are
within 1-3 weeks of age and have characteristic hemorrhagic
enveloped, double-stranded DNA viruses that belong to the
and necrotic renal lesions should be highly suspect of CHV, but
family Herpesviridae.
histological analysis of affected organs can assist in supporting
the diagnosis. Serum chemistries and CBC may reveal throm-
bocytopenia or marked increases in ALT, but these abnormali-
Canine
ties are nonspecific.' Definitive diagnosis is made by the detection
of viral DNA in affected tissues. Multiple modalities are availa-
Pathogenesis and transmission
 ble, such as cell cultures, immunohistochemical techniques, and
CHV is transmitted through direct contact with the respiratory
PCR. Serologic testing only indicates exposure but does not
or genital secretions of an infected dog. In addition, in utero 
prove active infection.
382
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Pharmacology and treatment
system. Atypical acute infection can manifest with dermal ulcer
ations, oral ulceration, pneumonia, systemic disease, and acute
Treatment of infected neonates is supportive care and is often
 death. Chronic active infections can present with chronic sneez-
disappointing. Thermal support may be helpful because the
ing and rhinitis, and/or chronic ulcerative keratitis. There are
  sn   d sd 
several other disorders that have been seen in patients with FHV
describe the intraperitoneal administration of serum collected
such as corneal sequestration, neurological disorders, eosino-
from bitches that have recently lost a liftter to CHV. Antibodies
philic keratitis, and uveitis, but a causal association has not yet
in the sera may decrease mortality in affected litters. Antiviral
been proven. Recrudescent disease usually occurs during times
medications are available, but there is no information on their
of stress or glucocorticoid administration.? Some causes of
effectiveness in puppies with CHV. Patients suspected of having
reactivation can include moving to a new environment and
CHV should be strictly isolated from other patients using proper
parturition.
isolation practices and disinfection techniques to prevent the
spread of disease to other patients.
Diagnostic testing
Diagnosis of FHV is similar to CHV. A detailed history should
Prevention
be obtained in patients presenting with upper respiratory or
 Ocular symptoms. Owners should be asked about recent contact
 Prevention is usually aimed at protecting gravid females and
with other cats, past history of similar symptoms, or administra-
 neonates from exposure to CHV. Latent CHV infection is
tion of immunosuppressive medications because these can help
 common among the canine population, which makes it difficult
abedo 1o yr jo Arois V AH Jo sisoue e joddns 0
to know which animals could transmit the virus. Females never
oculonasal discharge, inappetance, lethargy, or dyspnea can
before exposed to CHV are at very high risk of infecting their
indicate more severe infection or concurrent infection and can
assist the veterinarian in choosing appropriate therapy. There are
niques are the best way to reduce the risk of exposure to these
several laboratory techniques for identifying patients infected
 patients. Fetuses are most susceptible to CHV infection during
the last 3 weeks of gestation and during the first 3 weeks after
with FHV. Virus isolation of infected tissues can be used to
confrm infection but is not often performed in the clinical
birth. During this time, gravid females and new litters should be
setting. PCR of conjunctival and pharyngeal swabs is becoming
strictly isolated from other dogs. Subsequent litters from an
more widely performed, but a positive result can indicate latent
infected bitch are unlikely to develop serious clinical illness.
infection and does not prove the cause of clinical symptoms.4
Anecdotally, keeping neonates warm until their ability to ther-
 moregulate is fully developed may assist in reducing the severity
Treatment
of infection if exposed but will not prevent or eliminate infec-
 There is no specifc treatment for FHV. Treatment of active FHV
tion. CHV is stable in the environment for 3h at 37°C and is
infection is usually aimed at treating or preventing secondary
readily killed by commercial disinfectants, so routine disinfec-
 infection. Concurrent infection with other respiratory patho-
tion of housing facilities and equipment will help to reduce envi-
gens such as mycoplasma, Staphylococcus spp., Bordetella bron-
ronmental and fomite causes for exposure. A vaccine is available
chiseptica, Escherichia coli, and others is not uncommon and
in Europe, but it is unlikely that a vaccine will be developed for
appropriate antimicrobial therapy should be aimed to control
use in the United States.
these pathogens when suspected. Fluid and nutritional support
is indicated when infection is severe enough to cause dehydra-
Feline
tion or inappetance. Poor appetite can be caused by the inability
Pathogenesis and transmission
of the cat to smell its food due to nasal crusting. Nasal crusts
should be gently moistened and removed carefully to prevent
FHV is an important cause of upper respiratory disease in cats.
ulceration of the planum and this may help to restore the patient's
Cats become infected with FHV through direct contact with the
appetite. Warming of the food and administration of appetite
oronasal or conjunctival secretions of an infected cat actively
stimulants can be used to encourage the patient to eat. Feeding
shedding the virus. Infection is common in shelters and in
tube placement for supplemental enteral nutrition may be
cattery environments. Transplacental infection has not been
needed in severe cases. Nebulization with saline can be used to
proven, but neonates are commonly infected by the queen at a
moisten dry airways. Nasal and periocular ulcerations should be
very early age, before vaccination. Most patients infected with
treated with topical ointments to eliminate or prevent local
FHV become lifelong latent carriers? and recrudescent illness is
dermal infections. Conjunctivitis and corneal ulceration should
common.
be treated with appropriate topical antibiotics to prevent second-
ary ocular infection. Severe or refractory corneal disease such as
Clinical signs
herpes keratitis can be treated with topical antiviral agents, but
Clinical signs of acute infection in kittens and adults include
they must be applied frequently (every 2-4h) and may cause
sneezing, conjunctivitis, and serous oculonasal discharge that
local irritation. The benefit of oral antiviral medication such as
usually last about 10-14 days. Signs are usually more severe in
famcyclovir is currently being investigated. Oral administration
 of the amino acid l-lysine is very safe and may reduce spontane-
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
383
 ous shedding of virus in latently infected cats. Strict isolation
Influenza A
and good disinfection practices should be employed when
housing patients with suspected FHV to prevent transmission to
There is only one species of the influenza virus A, but there are
 other patients.
many strains of influenza A. Wild aquatic birds are the natural
hosts for a great many of the influenza A viruses. They can be
Prevention
the most virulent of the influenza types. The H5N1 strain, also
known as avian flu, has been transmitted to domestic and wild
Avoiding exposure is the best way to prevent infection of cats
felids that were fed uncooked chickens with the virus. The H3N8
with FHV. Because exposure is common in shelter and catery
 strain was originally an equine influenza, which crossed species
environments, measures should be taken to avoid cat-to-cat
in the last decade to create canine influenza.
contact in these environments. Symptomatic cats should be
promptly isolated from other cats, and all cats should be housed
Influenza B
in single enclosures unless they originate from the same house-
hold. New cats should be quarantined for at least 2 weeks before
 s     j ss   s as
being housed near other cats. Pet owners should be educated
the host for the vast majority of the influenza B viruses. It has
 about the potential for FHV infection when adopting a new cat,
been shown that the ferret' and seal" can be susceptible to
and the same quarantine procedure should be exercised in the
influenza B viruses. This species mutates at a slower rate than
home environment if they have existing cats. Like CHV, FHV is
 influenza A and has only one influenza B serotype.12
stable in the environment for 3h at 37°C and is easily inactivated
by commercial disinfectants. Proper disinfection of cages, treat-
Influenza C
ment tables, and equipment should prevent infection of cats
from the environment. Kittens are often infected by the queen
Influenza virus C also has only one species, but unlike influenza
 at an early age. Early weaning (4 weeks of age) and isolation of
virus B, it does infect humans, dogs and pigs. Influenza C is
less common but can cause both severe illness and local
until vaccination can be instituted. Besides exposure prevention,
epidemics.13
vaccination is the mainstay of disease prevention. The American
Association of Feline Practitioners recommends vaccinating
Pathogenesis and transmission
kittens as early as 6 weeks of age, and at 3- to 4-week intervals
until 16 weeks of age.° Adult cats with unknown vaccination
Transmission of the virus is by direct contact, aerosolization, and
fomites, and the duration of transmission is 5-7 days postinfec-
weeks apart. The initial vaccination series in adults and kifttens
tion. In seasonal human flu outbreaks, the strains of influenza
should be followed with a booster 1 year later, and then every 3
          
years. An additional booster should be considered before expo-
capable of surviving cold weather. They can survive in the envi-
sure to a high risk situation such as a cattery or shelter. Vaccina-
ronment for 24-48h on hard, nonporous material, 15 min on
tion may protect against disease but not against infection and
 paper and 5min on the skin. In mucous, the virus has been
viral latency. Please see Chapter 12 for additional information.
shown to survive for 17 days.14
Clinical signs
Influenza
Clinical signs for all of the influenza viruses can appear 1-2 days
 Influenza viruses are caused by RNA viruses of the Orthomyxo-
postinfection and may include fever, cough, nasal discharge,
viridae family.? There are three genera that contain the influenza
lethargy, dehydration, pain, reddened eyes, and, occasionally,
viruses: influenza virus A, influenza virus B, and influenza virus
diarrhea.
C. The structure is similar for all influenza viruses, with envel-
oped virus particles that are either filamentous or spherical in
Diagnostic testing
shape, that range in size from 80 to 120 nm in diameter.* Viruses
can only replicate in living cells. They affect all species of birds
Hematology may reveal moderate lymphopenia, normal leuko.
and mammals but are usually host specific. Transmission of the 
 gram, and hemoconcentration. Thoracic radiographs may reveal
influenza virus interspecies is a concern due to the emergence
 a bilateral, caudodorsal alveolar pattern to the lungs.
of novel endemic influenza strains and reverse transmission.
The subtypes of the virus are labeled for the hemagglutinin
Pharmacology and treatment
(HA) and neuraminidase (NA) proteins of the virus. HA (H)
codes the hemagglutinin glycoprotein and NA (N) codes the
neuraminidase enzyme. There are 16 different H antigens and
tional support. Antiviral drugs such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or
nine different N antigens at this time.′ Each subtype has mutated
zanamivir (Relenza) may be beneficial to halt the spread of the
into a variety of strains that are pathogenic to either one or
disease. Many owners do not realize an animal has been affected
multiple species.
until secondary bacterial infections, such as pneumonia, occur
384
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Effective reduction of the transmission is through minimizing
 response causes the T-cell infltration. Increased mitotic activity
human/animal contact when owners are ill and includes fre-
in the cells produces the characteristic warts. Young dogs
quent hand washing and covering coughs and sneezes. Influenza
viruses can be inactivated by sunlight, disinfectants, and deter-
are affected more frequently than older animals.1α Cutaneous
inverted papillomas are cup-shaped lesions also caused by a
nium compounds or diluted bleach is indicated.
papillomavirus. They occur on the ventral abdomen and groin
of young dogs.
H1N1
Clinical signs
 In the spring of 2009, an influenza strain underwent an antigenic
The appearance of warts is the primary clinical sign. Typically.
shift and evolved to have genes from four influenza strains. The
 aq sad e aq o prp Aio sm us ir
the warts appear in the oral cavity or other epithelial sites. The
warts develop 4-8 weeks postinfection and typically regress
World Health Organization in July 2009. This strain emerged in
Mexico and the United States. It contained genes from North
within 4-8 weeks after appearance. The impact on function is
American swine influenza, North American avian influenza,
usually minimal unless the warts are located in places that result
human influenza viruses and swine influenza viruses found in
in dysphagia or respiratory obstruction.
Europe and in Asia. During the pandemic, there were several
confrmed cases of H1N1 in cats, dogs, and ferrets. All but one
Diagnostic testing
of the infected companion animals was in close contact with
Diagnosis is usually based on the appearance of the characteris-
humans, who were confrmed to have H1N1. The one case, in
tic warts. Immunohistochemical techniques, electron micros-
which there was no confirmation of human illness, was a cat who
copy, or PCR-based analysis can document the viral antigen.
was adopted within 24h of placement in a shelter. It is thought
to have come in contact with an asymptomatic carrier. A
Pharmacology and treatment
reverse zoonotic situation occurred.
Treatment is usually not warranted unless the lesions compro-
Diagnostic testing
mise eating or respirations, in which case removal of the warts
may be indicated. Currently, there is no preventative vaccine
Hematology may reveal a normal CBC. If secondary bacterial
available for dogs. Generall, dogs that have recovered from
 rq  m r e d si 
COPV are immune to reinfection.19
 Aq ap s INH jo sio p aq a
 signs, detailed history (including any ilness in the family), and
 PCR to confrm H1N1. PCR is available utilizing nasal swabs or
Feline papillomavirus
repiratory tissue samples. It is unclear at this time if this strain
Feline papillomavirus has been confrmed in the domestic cat,
of H1N1 will continue to cause disease or if it will mutate again.
bobcat, snow leopard, clouded leopard, Florida panther, and
As of June 2010, the Center for Disease Control stated that there
Asian lion. The lesions are typically located in the oral cavity
 is litle 2009 A/H1N1 currently circulating in the United States.
with the tongue being most commonly involved. The papilloma-
 The Department of Health and Human Services urges continued
virus has been shown to be involved with the development of
vigilance and preventative measures.'
feline tumors.? Introduced through lesions or abrasions of the
skin, hyperplasia develops and the lesions become evident in 4-6
weeks postinfection. Most reported cases have been in animals
Papillomas
6-13 years old.' Immunocompromised animals appear to be at
 Papillomas appear as whitish or gray pedunculated masses that
higher risk.
pu op a u uoo ae Au sem se on pa uo ane
Clinical signs
rare in cats. Caused by species-specifc viruses that are fairly
stable in the environment, the virus can survive for over 2
In cats, the oral papillomas are small, light-pink oval lesions
months at 4-8°C and for 6h at 37°C.8 The virus is a non-
localized on the ventral surface of the tongue. Cutaneous papil-
enveloped double-stranded DNA virus from the family Papil-
lomas are slightly raised plaques and do not have the appearance
lomaviridae. Papillomaviruses can be transmitted by direct and
of warts. They are located on the abdomen, neck, head, and
indirect contacts; the infection occurs in damaged skin.
dorsal thorax. Solitary cutaneous warts are typically not caused
by papillomavirus.
Canine oral papillomavirus
Diagnostic testing
Canine oral papillomavirus (COpV) is closely related to papil-
lomaviruses that affect other species, including humans. The
Diagnosis is achieved by full-thickness biopsy processed for
virus infects basal layer cells of the epithelium of the conjunctiva,
imunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, or histopathologic
oral cavity, skin, penis, and vulva. Cell-mediated immune
methods.
 Chapter 11 Infectious Diseases
385
Pharmacology and treatment
organism isolation, and serological testing have been used to
diagnose disease. Proper sample handling will help maximize
Treatment is usually not warranted, although removal of the
diagnostic yield.
lesions is curative. Currently, there is no preventative vaccine
 available and, as with canine papilomas, spontaneous regression
Sample collection
is expected.
When collecting samples for laboratory analysis, the collection
 method must adequately preserve the sample, preclude contami-
SECTION 5 INFECTIOUS DISEASE
nation, and be representative of the infection. Sample collection
TESTING
containers must be sterile. Appropriate sample collction devices
can include swabs or containers. Specific devices may be needed
depending on the type of sample submitted. For example, anaer-
 Interest in early detection of disease has increased based in part
obic bacterial cultures should be submitted in a special vial to
 On society's expectations of increased levels of medical care.
prevent sample exposure to oxygen. Culture vials with various
Laboratory tests have varying levels of specificity and sensitiv-
 growth media are available. Submission of the appropriate
ity. Analytic sensitivity is defined as the minimum detectable
sample using proper handlling precautions will help ensure most
amount that can be measured, whereas diagnostic sensitivity is
accurate diagnostic results. Some bacterial culture samples can
the proportion of positive results from known infected animals.
be refrigerated for a short period prior to submission. Samples
Analytic specificity is defined as whether a substance will cross-
for serology and PCR that are expected to arrive at the laboratory
react with another substance, and diagnostic specificity is the
within 24-36 h should be promptly refrigerated. If the samples
 proportion of negatives from known uninfected animals. A test
are expected to arrive long term (2-4 days), check with the refer-
with high specificity has few false-positive results and a test with
ence laboratory for handling instructions. In some instances, the
high sensitivity has few false-negatives.
samples should be frozen and shipped on wet ice (Table 11.5.1).
 Infectious agents, infectious antigens, or antibodies to the
agent can be detected in cells, tissues, feces, and body fluids.
Serology
There are several diagnostic methods currently available for
diagnosing infectious diseases. The testing methodology is
Serology is the measure of specific antibodies in serum or other
dependent upon the suspected infectious agent itself as well as
body fluids. Common methodologies for detecting antibodies
on the site of infection. Cytology, bacterial culture, histology.
include complement fixation, hemagglutination inhibition, serum
immunohistochemistry, nucleic acid-based testing such as PCR,
 neutralization, agglutination assays, agar gel immunodiffusion,
Table 11.5.1  Appropriate sample selection
Sample selection for diagnosis of disease
Organ system or clinical sign
Sample collection in vivo
 Samples collected at necropsy
 Central nervous system?
Serum, whole blood, feces, cerebrospinal fluid
 Brain sections
Gastrointestinal tract
 Serum, whole blood, feces, vomitus
Small intestine sections, mesenteric lymph 
nodes, intestinal contents 
Genitourinary tract
Serum, whole blood, urine, urogenital swabs,
Kidney, liver, spleen, fetal lung, and placental
vaginal mucus
tissue
Respiratory and ocular
 Serum; whole blood; transtracheal wash;
Bronchiolar lymph nodes and selected tissue
 conjunctival scrapings; nasal, ocular, and
pharyngeal swabs
Skin and mucous membranes
Serum, whole blood, scraping of lesions,
Regional lymph nodes and selected tissues
vesicle fluid
 Blood dyscrasias, hematologic
Serum, whole blood, bone marrow
Lymph nodes and selected tissues
abnormalities,
immun osu ppression
 Handle animals with neurological signs with caution due to the possibility of rabies.
Source: Modified from Greene CE. infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, p. 3. St. Louis, M0: Elsevier Saunders; 2006.
386
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
immunofluorescence assay, direct fluorescent antibody, enzyme
Culture and sensitivity
 Antibody detection depends on the immune systems response.
Samples for culture may require special collection and handling.
 Once exposed to foreign antigens, the immune system produces
 If possible, culture samples should be acquired prior to antimi-
serum antibodies. This is known as a humoral response.
crobial therapy. Except in systemic fungal or bacterial infections
 Complement fixation, hemagglutination inhibition, serum neu-
requiring blood culture, culture samples should be taken directly
tralization, and agglutination assays can be used as nonspecifc
from the site of infection. Cleaning the surface of skin lesions
will aid in removing potential contamination from the environ-
formed to detect IgM, IgG, IgA, and IgE. The frst antibody
ment or normal flora.
Collection of blood for bacterial cultures requires special
IgG and IgA are produced.
 preparation. Best practice techniques have not been established
 IFA, Western blot immunoassays, and ELISA technology are
 s  n s nq sd ara n
usually adapted to detect specifc IgM, IgG, or IgA. Comparison
be followed. When collecting blood for culture, the site must first
of IgM, IgG, and IgA titers can be supportive of recent or active
be clipped and aseptically prepared with 2% chlorhexidine solu-
infection.
tion followed by 70% alcohol. Sterile gloves should be worn.
 Serologic testing does have limitations. Some serologic tests
Blood should be collected using a syringe and needle; collection
of blood from intravenous catheters is not recommended. The
yaccination from those in response to infection. Examples are
top of the blood culture vial should be disinfected (e.g., 70%
feline coronavirus, FIV, calicivirus, and canine distemper. Addi-
alcohol) prior to transferring 1-9 mL of blood into the culture
tionally, detection of antibodies does not always correlate with
medium with a new needle. Adequate sample volume may help
 active clinical disease but may instead be present due to subclini-
increase diagnostic yield; however, patient size may preclude
cal disease or a carrier state.
collection of large volumes of blood. Collection of three or more
The timing of testing is important for disease detection.
 blood cultures from separate sites over 1-3h may increase diag-
T pd aq nu pos su p sind yo s
nostic yield. Samples may be incubated at 37°C prior to transport
 8-12 weeks of age due to the presence and possible interference
to the laboratory. Positive culture of the same organism from
of maternal antibodies. False negatives can occur in animals of
more than one culture vial is likely representative of a true
any age during the acute phase of disease, prior to a detectable
bacteremia.
antibody response being mounted. It is recommended to repeat
Voided urine samples often have bacterial contamination
the test in 2-3 weeks to assess seroconversion. A fourfold
from the lower urogenital tract and are not suitable for culture.
increase in the antibody titer is suggestive of active infection.
If a urinary catheter is in place already, urine culture samples
q s o d si l   o 
can be obtained from the catheter. Otherwise, urine samples for
samples at the same time and in the same laboratory.
culture are best obtained by percutaneous cystocentesis. Samples
-sd iads a oi d  oi dn  p aq Ae
ervation systems should be used for longer storage.
PCR
Tissue samples, such as a surgical biopsy, can be submited for
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing is used to detect genetic
culture. A storage container that prevents sample desiccation of
material of microbial organisms and can be performed on a
the sample should be used. Both swabs and tissue samples of the
variety of samples including fluid and tissues. During this
lesions should be submitted for culture. Any fluid (e.g., pus)
 process, a minute quantity of microbial DNA is amplifed until
 present with the lesion should also be submitted for culture.
it can be detected. PCR testing can be used to diagnose infec-
Tissue samples submitted for culture should not be fixed or
tions that have low microbial shedding, low antibody titers, or
preserved. Samples may be refrigerated for 8-12h if immediate
low antigen levels. When diagnosing an RNA virus, reverse tran-
culture is not performed.
scriptase (RT) is added to the PCR method. Reverse transcriptase
Culture samples can be tested for antimicrobial sensitivity or
 polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) can also be used to detect
susceptibility. Results can help guide antimicrobial choices. Two
the presence of RNA produced by a DNA virus. Because RNA
common methods of determining bacterial antimicrobial sensi-
degrades in living animals quickly compared to DNA, detection
tivity are agar diffusion and minimum inhibitory concentration
of either messenger or ribosomal RNA using RT-PCR may be
(MIC). The MIC shows the lowest concentration of an antimi-
more indicative than PCR for active infection.' False positives
 crobial that inhibits bacterial growth. In the agar diffusion
can occur with PCR testing due to contaminated samples or
method, disks impregnated with various antimicrobials are
reagents, nonspecifc primers, inactive nucleic acid, or immuni-
placed directly on an agar plate containing a pure culture of the
zation. False negatives can be obtained from inactivation of
bacterial specimen grown. If the bacteria are susceptible to a
nucleic acid, nucleases, desiccation, heating, or formalin fixa-
particular antimicrobial, growth around that disk will be inhib-
tion. Advantages of PCR include its high sensitivity and lack of
ited (Table 11.5.2).
false-positive results due to the presence of vaccination-induced
Each diagnostic laboratory has information available on how
or maternal antibodies.
samples should be collected and submitted. Care must be taken
 Chapter 11 Infectious Diseases
387
Table 11.5.2
 Sample collection and processing techniques
Sample collection and processing
Test
Sample
 Collection and processing
Culture bacterial and
Body fluids; tissue; fine needle aspirates;
Collect aseptically to prevent contamination. Use appropriate
fungal
nail clippings; feces; transtracheal wash;
swab and suitable transport medium 
conjunctival scrapings; nasal, ocular and
pharyngeal swabs
Cytology
Feces or body fluids
Collect fresh; do not fix or freeze. Make impressions on 
clean, dry microscope slide and air dry Fix in alcohol.
 Direct fluorescent 
Tissue
Fix in Michel's fixative for antibody testing by direct FA
antibody (FA)
Tissue impressions 
Make impressions on clean, dry microscope slide and air
dry Fix in acetone.
 Electron microscopy
Tissue
Collect aseptically to prevent contamination. Cut into
1 x 2mm sections. Fix in 2-4% glutaraldehyde (at 10x
volume) for 24h at 20*C
Enzyme linked
Whole blood, tissue biopsy, feces, swabs
Collect aseptically to prevent contamination. Store at <10*c
immunosorbent assay
to prevent inactivation. Do not freeze or fix.
(ELISA) for antigen
Histology
Tissue
Collect aseptically to prevent contamination. Cut into 5-mm
sections and fix in 10% buffered formalin (at 10x volume)
Immunohistochemistry
Tissue
Collect aseptically to prevent contamination. Cut into 5-mm
sections and fix in 10% buffered formalin (at 10x volume)
Nucleic acid-based
Whole blood, tissue biopsy, feces, swabs
Collect aseptically to prevent contamination. Store at <10 *C
testing
to prevent inactivation. Do not freeze or fix.
Organism isolation
Whole blood, tissue biopsy, feces, swabs
Collect aseptically to prevent contamination. Store at ≤10*C
to prevent inactivation. Do not freeze or fix.
Serology
Cerebrospinal fluid, serum, synovial fluid
Collect aseptically to prevent contamination. Handle gently
to prevent hemolysis. Centrifuge and pipette serum into
clean, sterile tube. Paired samples (10-14 days preferred)
Modifed from Greene CE. infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, p. 4. St. Louis, M0: Elsevier Saunders; 2006.
Table 11.5.3 Veterinary diagnostic laboratories
 to ensure that the sample is handled according to the diagnostic
laboratory specifications.
Antech Diagnostics
800-745-4725
Many regional locations
800-872-1001
http://www.antechdiagnostics.com
Diagnostic laboratories
Idexx Laboratories
800-444-4210
 There are several commercial diagnostic laboratories and accred-
Many regional locations 
888-433-9987
http://www.idexx.com
ited veterinary diagnostic laboratories that perform diagnostic
 testing. For a complete listing of state-accredited veterinary labo-
 Mira Vista Diagnostics
866-647-2847
ratories, please refer to the Appendix and Table 11.5.3.
Indianapolis, IN
http://www.miravistalabs.com
 American Association
 See http://www.aavld.org for a
of Veterinary
current listing of accredited 
Laboratory testing selection
Laboratory
laboratories by state
 Diagnosticians
As mentioned earlier, the testing methodology is dependent
upon the infectious agent, the site of infection, the sensitivity
Note: See the Appendix for a complete listing of accredited laboratories by
 and specificity of the test, and the needs of the patient and the
state.
client. See Table 11.5.4 for recommendations on testing options.
Table 11.5.4  Laboratory testing for infectious disease
Laboratory testing for infectious disease
Infectious agent
Type of organism 
Test methodology
Sample
Anaplasmosis
Rickettsial
Cytology
Blood smears, bone marrow smears
ELISA
Serum
 Fluorescent antibody
 Serum
PCR
Whole blood
Protein electrophoresis
 Serum
Aspergillosis
 Fungal
Agar gel immunodiffusion
 Serum
Complement fixation
 Serum
Culture
Tissue or exudates
ELISA
 Blood or serum 
Blastomycosis
 Fungal
Agar gel immunodiffusion
Serum
Culture
Tissue or fluid aspirates
Cytology
 Tissue or fluid aspirates
Complement fixation
Serum
ELISA
Serum, body fluids
Histology
Tissue biopsy
 Babesiosis
 Protozoal
Complement fixation
Serum
Cytology
Blood smear
 Flu orescent antibody
 Serum
PCR
Whole blood, ticks
Botulism
Bacterial
Toxin analysis
Blood, serum, feces, intestinal
contents
Brucellosis
Ba cterial
Agar gel immunodiffusion
 Serum
Culture
 Blood, tissue, feces, testicles,
placenta, semen, genital swab
 Fluorescent antibody
Serum
PCR
 Blood, tissue, feces, testicles,
placenta, semen, genital swab
 Slide agglutination test
 Serum
Tube agglutination test
 Serum
Campylobacter
Ba cterial
Culture
Gastric biopsy, feces
Histological 
 Intestine, colon, lymph node, lung,
 spleen 
PCR
Gastric biopsy, feces
Candidiasis
Fungal
Culture
Blood or tissue
Canine
Bacterial
Culture
 Blood 
bartonellosis
Fluorescent antibody
 Serum
PCR
Blood
Canine calicivirus
Viral
Viral inclusion
 Oropharyngeal swab, fecal swab,
trachea, lung, kidney, intestine 
388
Table 11.5.4
(Continued)
Laboratory testing for infectious disease
Infectious agent
Type of organism 
Test methodology
Sample
 Canine coronavirus
Viral
ELISA
Feces 
In vivo
 Electron microscopy
Feces
 Fluorescent antibody
Serum 
 Immunoprecipitation test
Serum 
PCR
Feces 
Viral inclusion
Feces 
 Viral neutralization
Serum
Canine coronavirus
Viral
ELISA
Intestine
Postmortem
 Fluorescent antibody
Intestine
Histology
Intestine
 Viral inclusion
Intestine
 Canine distemper
Viral
 Fluorescent antibody
Blood, buffy coat smear, conjunctival 
In vivo
scraping, CsF, transtracheal wash 
PCR
Serum, blood, urine, CSF
 Viral neutralization
Serum, CSF
 Canine distemper
Viral
 Fluorescent antibody
 Tissue, conjunctival smear
 Postmortem
Histology
Tissue
 Immunohistochemistry
Tissue
PCR
Tissue
 Viral inclusion
Tissue
 Viral neutralization
Tissue
Canine herpesvirus
Viral
 Fluorescent antibody
Nasal swab, vaginal swab
infection 
Immunoprecipitation test
 Serum
In vivo
 Viral inclusion
Serum 
 Viral neutralization
Nasal swab, vaginal swab
 Canine herpesvirus
Viral
 Fluorescent antibody
 Brain, lymph node, liver, adrenal,
Postmortem
 kidney, spleen, lung 
PCR
Puppy/fetus tissue
Viral inclusion
Lung, liver, kidney, CNS 
Canine influenza
Viral
ELISA
 Nasal swab, tissue
 Hemagglutination inhibition
Nasal swab, tissue
PCR
Nasal swab, tissue
Canine
Viral
 Electron microscopy
Tissue
 papillomavirus
Histology
Tissue
Canine
Viral
 Fluorescent antibody
Respiratory wash or tissue
parainfluenza
Hemagglutination inhibition
Serum or CSF
Viral inclusion
 Transtracheal wash, oropharyngeal
swab, CSF
 Viral inclusion
Serum
(Continued)
389
Table 11.5.4
(Continued)
Laboratory testing for infectious disease
Infectious agent
Type of organism 
Test methodology
 Sample
Canine parvovirus
Viral
ELISA
Serum, feces
 Electron microscopy
Feces, intestinal mucosa
Fluorescent antibody
 Feces, intestinal mucosa
Hemagglutin ation 
 Feces, intestinal mucosa 
Hemagglutination inhibition
Serum, feces
PCR
 Serum, feces
Canine rotavirus
Viral
ELISA
Feces
In vivo
 Fluorescent antibody
Feces
Latex agglutination
 Feces
Viral inclusion
Feces
Canine rotavirus
Viral
 Electron microscopy
Intestine
Postmortem 
Fluorescent antibody
Intestine
Chlamydial 
Ba cterial
 Complement fixation
 Serum
infection
Culture
 Nasal and ocular swabs
ELISA
Nasal and ocular swabs, serum
 Fluorescent antibody
Conjunctival or tissue smear, serum 
Immunohistochemistry
Tissue
PCR
Blood or tissue
Clostridium
Ba cterial
Culture
Feces or intestine
 perfringens
ELISA
 Feces or intestine
 Latex agglutination 
Feces or intestine
PCR
Feces or intestine
 Reverse passive latex
Feces or intestine
agglutination 
Coccidiosis
Protozoal
Oocyst flotation
Feces
Coccidioidomycosis
 Fungal 
Agar gel immunodiffusion 
 Serum
 Complement fixation
 Serum
Culture
Fuid aspirate, tissue
Cytology
Tissue
 Fluorescent antibody
 Serum
Cryptococcosis
 Fungal
Culture
Fuid aspirate or tissue
Cytology
 Fuid aspirate smear or tissue
ELISA
Serum or CSF
 Fluorescent antibody
 Tissue
Latex agglutination
 Serum, CSF
Cryptosporidiosis
Protozoal
ELISA
Feces
 Fluorescent antibody
Feces
 Oocyst floatation
Feces
PCR
Feces or intestine
390
Table 11.5.4
(Continued)
Laboratory testing for infectious disease
Infectious agent
Type of organism 
Test methodology
Sample
Cytauxzoon osis
Protozoal
Cytology
 Blood smear, bone marrow
Ehrlichiosis
Rickettsial
Cytology
Blood smears, bone marrow smears
ELISA
Serum
 Fluorescent antibody
Serum 
PCR
Whole blood
 Protein electrophoresis
Serum 
Feline bartonellosis
Ba cterial
Culture
Blood
 Fluorescent antibody
Serum
PCR
Blood
 Feline calicivirus
Viral
 Electron microscopy
 Oropharyngeal swab, intestinal and 
In vivo
fecal swab
 Fluorescent antibody
Serum, oropharyngeal swab, intestinal
and fecal swab
 Viral inclusion
Oropharyngeal swab, intestinal and 
fecal swab
 Viral neutralization
 Serum
Feline calicivirus 
Viral
PCR
Trachea, lung, kidney, intestine 
 Postmortem 
Viral inclusion
Trachea, lung, kidney, intestine 
 Feline foamy virus 
Viral
Titer
 Serum
(syncytium-forming)
Feline
Viral
ELISA
Serum, whole blood 
immunod eficiency
 Immunoblot
 Serum, whole blood
virus
 Indirect fluorescent
Serum, whole blood 
 antibody
PCR
Whole blood, bone marrow, lymphoid
tissue
Feline infectious
Viral
ELISA
Serum 
 peritonitis
 Fluorescent antibody
Serum
In vivo
Protein electrophoresis
Serum
 Feline infectious 
Viral
 Flu orescent antibody
Tissue
peritonitis
Histology
Tissue
Postmortem
Immunohistochemistry
Tissue, CsF, lymphoid tissue, effusion 
fluid
Feline leukemia
Viral
ELISA
 Serum or whole blood
virus
In vivo
 Fluorescent antibody
Blood smear, buffy coat or bone
marrow smear
PCR
Lymphoid tissue or bone marrow
 Rapid immunomigration
 Blood or serum
 Viral inclusion 
 Blood or serum
Feline leukemia
Viral
 Fluorescent antibody
Blood or tissue or bone marrow
virus
 Postmortem
PCR
Lymphoid tissue or bone marrow
(Continued)
391
Table 11.5.4
(Continued)
Laboratory testing for infectious disease
 Infectious agent
Type of organism 
Test methodology
 Sample
Feline Lyme
Bacterial
ELISA
Serum
borreliosis
Fluorescent antibody
 Serum
In vivo
Immunoblot
 Serum
PCR
Body fluid, blood, tissue
Feline Lyme
Ba cterial
Fluorescent antibody
Tissue
borreliosis
 Postmortem
 Immunohistochemistry
Tissue
Feline
Viral
ELISA
Feces, serum
 panleukopenia 
 Electron microscopy
Feces
In vivo
 Fluorescent antibody
 Serum
Hemagglutination inhibition
Serum
PCR
Feces
Viral inclusion
Feces
Viral neutralization
Serum
Feline
Viral
 Electron microscopy
Tissue
panleukopenia
Histology
Postmortem 
Tissue
Immunohistochemistry
 Tissue
PCR
Tissue
Viral inclusion
Tissue
Feline
Viral
 Fluorescent antibody
 Skin biopsy
 papillomavirus 
Histology
 Skin biopsy
 Immunohistochemistry
 Skin biopsy
Feline rotavirus
Viral
ELISA
Feces
In vivo
Fluorescent antibody
Feces
Latex agglutination
Feces
 Viral inclusion 
Feces
 Feline rotavirus
Viral
 Electron microscopy
Intestine
 Postmortem 
Fluorescent antibody
Intestine
Giardia
Protozoal
ELISA
Feces
 Fecal flotation
Feces
 Fecal smears 
Feces
Fluorescent antibody
Feces
Helicobacter
Ba cterial
Culture
Gastric biopsy, feces
Histological
Intestine, colon, lymph node, lung, spleen
PCR
Gastric biopsy, feces
Hemobartonella
Parasite
Cytology
Blood smear
 Fluorescent antibody
 Blood smear
PCR
Serum, whole blood 
Hepatozoonosis 
Protozoal
Cytology
 Blood smear
Histology
 Muscle biopsy, tissues 
392
Table 11.5.4
(Continued)
Laboratory testing for infectious disease
Infectious agent
Type of organism
Test methodology
Sample
Infectious canine
Viral
Complement fixation
Serum
hepatitis
 Fluorescent antibody
Serum
In vivo
 Hemagglutination inhibition 
Serum 
Histology
Tissue
 Immunohistochemistry
Liver tissue
PCR
 Blood, urine, liver
Viral inclusion
 Oropharyngeal swab, urine, feces
 Viral neutralization 
Serum
Infectious canine
Viral
Cytology
Liver tissue
hepatitis
 Postmortem 
 Fluorescent antibody
Spleen, liver, brain
Histology
Tissue
Immunohistochemistry
Liver tissue
Leishmaniasis
Protozoal
Cytology
 Lymph node aspirate
ELISA
Serum
 Fluorescent antibody
 Serum or dried blood spots 
PCR
Blood, tissue
Western blot
Serum
Leptospirosis
Bacterial
Culture
 Serum, urine
 Fluorescent antibody
Tissue or body fluids 
Histology
 Kidney placenta, urine, fetal fluid
 Immunohistochemistry
Tissue
Latex agglutination
Serum
 Microscopic agglutination 
Serum
PCR
 Kidney or urine 
Canine Lyme
Bacterial
ELISA
Serum 
 borreliosis
 Fluorescent antibody
Serum
In vivo
Immunoblot
Serum 
PCR
Serum
Canine Lyme
Bacterial
 Fluorescent antibody
Tissue
 borreliosis
 Immunohistochemistry
Tissue
 Postmortem 
Mycobacteriosis
Bacterial
Culture
Exudates or tissue
Histology
Tissue
Mycoplasmal
Parasite
Culture
 Nasal swab, transtracheal wash
 infection
PCR
 Serum or swab 
Neorickettsiosis
Rickettsial
Cytology
 Blood smears, bone marrow smears
ELISA
Serum
 Fluorescent antibody
Serum 
PCR
Whole blood
 Protein electrophoresis 
Serum 
(Continued)
393
Table 11.5.4
(Continued)
Laboratory testing for infectious disease
Infectious agent
Type of organism
Test method ology
Sample
Neosporosis
Protozoal
ELISA
 Serum
 Fluorescent antibody
 Tissue biopsy
 Indirect fluorescent 
 Serum
antibody
 Immunohistochemistry
Tissue
PCR
Tissue
Nocordiosis
Bacterial
Culture
Pleural, pericardial nor peritoneal fluid
Plague
Ba cterial
Culture
 Blood, swab, fluid, tissue
Fluorescent antibody
Blood, swab, fluid, tissue
Hemagglutination
Serum
PCR
 Body fluids or tissue
Pneumocystosis
 Fungal
Cytology
Lung aspirates, sputum 
Fluorescent antibody
Lung aspirates, sputum 
Rabies
Viral
Fluorescent antibody viral
Serum
In vivo
neutralization
vaccination titers
Rapid fluorescent focus
Serum
 inhibition test 
Viral inclusion 
CSF
Rabies
Viral
Fluorescent antibody
Brain
Postmortem
Histology
Brain 
 Immunohistochemistry
Brain
Rhin otracheitis
Viral
ELISA
Serum, whole blood
virus
 Electron microscopy
Serum, whole blood
In vivo
 Fluorescent antibody
 Serum, whole blood 
 Immunohistochemistry
Tissue
PCR
Tissue
 Viral inclusion 
Tissue, respiratory wash, feces,
 cropharyngeal swabs, conjunctival
smears, CsF, whole blood, body fluids
 Viral neutralization
Serum, whole blood 
Rhin otracheitis
Viral
PCR
Trachea, lung, kidney, intestine
virus
Viral inclusion
 Trachea, lung, kidney, intestine 
Postmortem
Rocky Mountain 
Rickettsial
 Fluorescent antibody
 Serum
spotted fever
Latex agglutin ation
 Serum
PCR
 Serum
Salm onellosis
Ba cterial
Culture
Feces, fecal swab, blood, intestinal 
ymph node
Immunohistochemistry
Intestine, colon, lung, lymph node,
 spleen 
PCR
Intestine, colon, lung, lymph node,
 spleen 
394
 Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
395
Table 11.5.4
(Continued)
Laboratory testing for infectious disease
Infectious agent
Type of organism
Test methodology
Sample
Sporotrichosis
Bacterial
Culture
Lymphatic exudate
Cytology
Lymphatic exud ate
Toxoplasmosis
Protozoal
Complement fixation
Serum
ELISA
Serum
 Fluorescent antibody
 Serum
 Hemagglutination
Serum 
Histology
 Tissue biopsy
Immunohistochemistry
Tissue biopsy
Indirect fluorescent
Serum 
antibody
Oocyst flotation
Feces
PCR
Tissue or body fluids
 Trichomoniasis
Protozoal
 Fecal flotation 
Feces
Fecal smears
Feces
PCR
Feces
Trypanosomiasis
Protozoal
Cytology
 Blood smear
 Fluorescent antibody
 Serum
Tularemia
Bacterial
Culture
Exudate or swab
Microagglutination
Serum
PCR
Swab or exudate
Source: Modified from Greene CE, et al. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, p. 4, St. Louis, M0: Elsevier Saunders; 2006.
The premise was that all patients are potentially infectious and are
Disease prevention and control
 treated as such until proven otherwise. These precautions were
in the small animal hospital
expanded and are now known as standard precautions. The prac-
tice of standard precautions should be used in the veterinary
An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.
setting to aid in the prevention of disease transmission.
 Benjamin Franklin
Client education precautions
It is always better to prevent the spread of disease than to treat
 Each time an animal is presented to the veterinary hospital, the
dlisease. One ofthe best ways to prevent any disease is to avoid expo-
vaccine status of the patient should be verified with the client
sure. Since it is impossible for anything to live in a vacuum or a
and the vaccine status should be documented in the medical
bubble, veterinaryersonnel shoud be aware of the mode of trans-
record. Clients should be educated regarding the benefts of core
 mission for individual diseases. Awareness of disease prevention
vaccines (unless vaccination is not recommended due to health
and of the modes of transmission allows us to provide education to
concerns) and on any vaccines recommended for the area or the
clients and staff. This in turn helps to prevent the spread of disease.
 patient's individual risk factors. In addition, client education
The modes of transmission for viruses, bacteria, and fungus include
regarding control of ectoparasites (e.g., feas and ticks) and
aerosolization, GI (fecal/oral), vectors, fomites, and direct contact.
endoparasites is indicated. All hospitalized patients should be
 checked for ectoparasites prior to admission to the hospital and,
Standard (universal) precautions
if these parasites are found, should be treated accordingly. A
parasite prevention program including semiannual fecal parasite
Human health-care workers in the 1980s adopted universal pre-
examinations and the use of preventative treatments appropriate
cautions to avoid contact with bodily fluids when treating patients.
 to the region should be discussed with the clients.
396
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Examination precautions
In addition to cleaning procedures, consideration should be
given to reduce the spread of infectious agents throughout the hos-
Front desk staff should be trained to recognize the presenting com-
pital. Hospitalized patients should not be moved from cage to cage
plaints for infectious diseases. Patients with clinical signs associated
unless absolutely required. Disposable shoe covers and footbaths
with the appropriate disinfection agent should be used to prevent
ing) should be immediately placed into isolation if possible, other-
staffrom carrying the microorganism throughout the hospital. All
wise, directly into a designated examination room upon arrival at the
laundry in the veterinary hospital should be washed in hot water
veterinary facility. This will decrease the potential for direct or indi-
with the addition of an appropriate chemical agent; alternatively,
rect pathogen transmission to healthy animals in the waiting room
sm oi nod pe a u paos aq ues Arp a
and will alert the staff to a possible infectious patient on the premises.
There are some organisms that can survive for months in the envi-
 A thorough patient history is a key component in identifying
Sanitization reduces the number of infective organisms to a level
other animals (especially those with similar clinical signs) may alert
where they are considered safe from a public health standpoint.? Dis-
veterinary staffto the presence of a potentially infectious disease.
infecting and sanitizing agents may be physical processes or chemical
Movement of a potentially infectious patient within the hospi-
substances. Heat, either dryorsteam, and light are examples of physi-
tal should be restricted. These potentially infectious patients
cal disinfection or sanitization processes. Chemical disinfection or
should not be removed from the isolation room or designated
examination room (unless the patient is in an emergency situa-
several cleaning agents commercially available within each category.
 tion) until it is determined the patient is noninfectious. It is
Some agents can be used for both sanitizing and disinfecting, depend-
important that there is a limited amount of contact with the staff
 ing on the concentration and/or contact time ( Table 11.5.5).
with these patients to stop the potential spread of these diseases to
s  d u i   Si  n
other patients. Any staff interacting with these patients should
or disinfecting surfaces. Not every agent is effective against every
limit their contact with other patients for the rest of their shift.
microorganism that causes disease. In addition, some agents must
Effective hand washing and the use of personal protective equip-
be used at specific concentrations and contact times to be effective
against certain microorganisms. Always check the product label
ing on the clinical signs, necessary protective clothing may include
for concentration, application method, and contact time. Cleaning
barrier gowns, gloves, masks, booties, and eye protection.
and disinfecting protocols should be reviewed on an annual basis
 For effective disinfection and removal of the infectious agent,
or if there is an outbreak of disease in the veterinary hospital.
each and every room, equipment, surface, or item with any
Table 11.5.6 provides examples of some common microorgan-
patient contact should be thoroughly disinfected before use and,
isms of importance to veterinary medicine.4-7
if possible, taken out of use for 12-24h.
Any laboratory samples submitted from these animals should be
Table 11.5.5(
Chemical agents by category
clearly marked to prevent potential contamination of other personnel
Chemical
Concentration
 Presence of organic
and patients. All outer containers should be sprayed with a disinfect-
agent
material
ant prior to being taken from the room to the laboratory area. Gloves
should be worn and hands should be washed after removing the
Alcohols
50-95% Ethanol,
Ineffective
gloves. Care must be taken to not touch door handles, equipment, or
isopropyl
other animals with soiled hands or gloves. All trash from a suspected
Aldehydes
Formaldehyde
Some effect
infectious patient should be double bagged, and the outer bag should
Glutaraldehyde
be sprayed with the appropriate disinfectant prior to disposal.
Halogens
1:30 (sodium
Ineffective
Hospital precautions
hypochlorite bleach)
When hospitalizing patients with transisible infectious diseases,
lodine
May be reduced
staff should be aware that aerosolization of pathogens, contami-
lod ophor (betadine)
 May be reduced
nation of surfaces, and fomites are potential means of disease
1-10% (1:9)
transmission. Aerosolized particles can travel up to 20 ftand micro-
Oxidizing
5-20% Hydrogen
Some effect
 organisms can survive in the environment for hours to months. For
agents 
peroxide
this reason, traffc flow around infectious patients should be
Peracetic acid
limited. Cleanliness is imperative to prevent the spread of disease.
Phenolics 
Pine-Sol (5% solution)
Effective
All floors, cages, food bowls, and bedding should be thoroughly
Quaternary
Roccal@
Not effective against
cleaned and disinfected daily. Individual cages should be disin-
ammonium
D-256@
nonenveloped
fected after each use. All walls, cages, and equipment should be
Benzalkonium chloride
viruses
thoroughly cleaned and disinfected at least weekly. Examination
Bigu anid es
Chlorhexidine (0.78%)
Ineffective
tables should be sanitized between patients. Any food bowls used
for infectious patients should be disinfected in the isolation area
Source: Greene CE (ed.). infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition,
and used only for that patient during their hospitalization.
St. Louis, M0: Saunders Elsevier; 2006.
Table 11.5.6
Common microorganisms in veterinary medicine and their modes of transmission, survivability, and recommended disinfectants
 Microorganism 
Mode of
Environmental
Time of
 Disinfecting agent
Contact
tansmission
temperature
survival
time to
disinfect
Feline rhinotracheitis
Aerosol 
4°℃/39.2°F
154 days
Heat 56*C/132.8*F
4-5 min 
virus
25*C/77*F
33 days
70% Alcohol
10 min
37*C/98.6*F
3h
 Sodium hypochloritef
10 min
 100% lodine
10 min
Phenol
10 min
0.5% Quat*
10 min 
Formaldehyde
10 min
Glutaraldehyde
10 min
0.78% Bigd
10 min
Canine herpesvirus
Direct contact
4"C/39.2*F
48 h
Heat-56 ° C/132.8 °F
4-5min
Fomites
37*C/98.6*F
48 h
 Canine distemper
Aerosol
-65*C/-85*F
7 years
Heat-60*C/140*F
30 min
virus
Body fluids
4°C/39.2*F
7-8
 Formaldehyde 
120 min
weeks
 Transplacental
25*C/77*F
3h
0.2% Quats
30 min 
Canine parvovirus
Fecal/oral
25*C/77*F
3 months
Heat-56*C/132.8*F
15 min 
Very stable in the
or more
 Sodium hypochlorite
15 min 
environment
 Feline panleukopenia
Fecal/oral
very stable in the
3 months
0.05% Phenol
Rapid 
virus
environment
or more
 Sodium hypochlorite
10 min
Formaldehyde
10 min
Glutaraldehyde
10 min
0.78% Big
10 min
Infectious canine 
Fecal/oral
4°C/39.2*F
2 months
Heat- 60*C/140*F
30 min 
hepatitis
25*C/77*F
14 days
Ultraviolet
120 min
37*C/98.6*F
6h
 Formaldehyde 
24h
 Sodium hypochlorite
10 min
 100% lodine
10 min
 Phenol 
10 min
 Feline calicivirus
Aerosol
7*C-20*C/
10 days
Heat—50*C/122*F
30 min 
44.6*F-68*F
 Phenol (at 50%)
10 min
Sodium hypochlorite 
10 min
 Formaldehyde 
10 min
 Glutaraldehyde
10 min
Canine and feline
Fecal/oral
24*C/75.2*F
 2 days
Heat-60*C/140*F
30 min 
rotavirus
37*C/98.6*F
19 h
70% Alcohol
25 min
 Formaldehyde
56 min
Chlamydia
Aerosol
0*C/32*F
24h
Heat—60*C/140*F
15 min
Ocular
25*C/77*F
7 days
0.5% Quats
10 min
discharge
(Continued)
397
Table 11.5.6
(Continued)
Microorganism
Mode of
Environmental
Time of 
 Disinfecting agent
Contact
transmission
temperature
 survival
time to
 disinfect
Mycoplasma
Aerosol
28*C/82.4*F
21 days
Heat—55*C/131"F
15 min 
1% Phenol
<5 min
Formaldehyde
<5 min
Gram + staphylococci
 Direct contact 
4°C/39.2*F
Several
Heat-60*C/140*F
30 min
Aerosol
months
1% Phenol
15 min 
Bru cella
Direct contact
25*C/77*F
3 months
Heat-60*C/140*F
15 min 
1% Phenol
15 min 
Salmonella
Fecal/oral
25*C/77*F
12-14
Heat—60*C/140*F
20 min 
weeks
Clostridium spores 
Very resistant in
Heat—120*C/248*F
10 min
the environment 
 5% Phenol
10-12h
Leptospira
 Direct contact
0-25*C/32-77*F
Heat—50*C/122*F
10 min
Urine
lodine
10 min 
Toxoplasma cysts
Fecal/oral
4*C/39.2*F
68 days
Heat-56 *C/132.8*F
10-15min
Freeze
Isospora
Fecal/oral
25*C/77*F
24h
Heat—50*C/122*F
4h
 Canine influenza
Aerosol
Surfaces
48 h
 Sodium hypochlorite
10 min
H3N8
 Fomites
 Clothing
24h
Quats
10 min 
Hands
12 h
 Canine infectious
Aerosol
28*C/82.4*F
21 days
Heat-55*C/131*F
15 min 
Tracheobronchitis
 Fomites
1% Phenol
<5 min
Formaldehyde
<5 min
0.78% Big
10 min
Influenza H1N1
Aerosol
Paper/cloth
8-12h
Sodium hypochlorite
10 min 
 Fomites 
Surfaces
24-48 h
Quats
10 min 
Wet areas
Up to
72h
Methicillin-resistant
 Direct contact 
4°C/39.2*F
Several
Heat—60*C/140*F
30 min
Staphylococcus
months
1% Phenol
15 min 
aureus
 Sodium hypochlorite
15 min
Quats
15 min 
Methicillin-resistant
Direct contact
4*C/39.2*F
Several
Heat-60*C/140"F
30 min
 Staphylococcus
months
intermedius
1% Phenol
15 min
Sodium hypochlorite
15 min
Quats
15 min 
* Heat—dry or steam.
 Sodium hypochlorite household bleach.
* Quats-quaternary ammoniums.
' Big—biguanides.
398
Chapter 11 Infectious Diseases
668
Immunocompromised patients
Table 11.5.7 Recommended standard precautions
Good nursing care is imperative for the prevention of nosoco-
Precaution
Action
 mial infections for all hospitalized patients. Postoperative
patients may have a lowered immune system and may be more
Individual
susceptible to bacterial infections. Care should be taken to
ensure that these animals are kept clean and dry. If a postopera-
Hand hygiene
Frequent hand washing or use of
alcohol based gels; use gloves
tive patient is unable to shift its weight, such as dogs with intra-
appropriately
vertebral disk disease, the patient's cage should be well padded
and the patient turned every few hours to prevent decubital
 Personal protective 
Gowns, lab coats, eye protection,
equipment
masks appropriately utilized 
ulcers (a potential source of infection).
Care must be taken when immunocompromised patients are
Personal health
Current personal immunizations; stay
hospitalized to reduce the risk of exposure to infectious diseases.
home when ill, seek prompt medical
If possible, dedicated examination rooms should be used for
attention
animals with immunocompromised status, such as patients
 receiving chemotherapy. Hospital staff should wear gowns and
Employer
  d    s
Safety committee
Provide ongoing training, monitor for
flora carried by personnel. Protocols for minimizing contact
compliance of policies
 o d d  rdo si sd 
Ill worker policy
Enforce ill worker policy, send ill
patients.
employees home
Food and beverage
Prevent ingestion, limit food and 
Protocols and training
beverages to appropriate areas
Each facility should create an isolation protocol and it should be
Animals
reviewed frequently to ensure that there are no "breaks" in the
system. New staff should be thoroughly trained on the isolation
Isolation procedures
Both in hospital and in isolation
protocols before working with any infectious patient. It is recom-
protocols in place
mended that the isolation protocol be posted outside and inside
Restraint
Proper restraint techniques and
of the isolation area to aid the staff in adhering to the procedures.
appropriate use of anesthesia/
 Dedicated equipment, the use of PPE such as disposable gowns
sedatives to prevent bites/scratches
and gloves, and the use of disposable supplies within the isola-
tion area is recommended. No other equipment should be stored
 Client education
within this area. If equipment cannot be dedicated for isolation,
it must be cleaned and disinfected prior to returning it to general
vaccination
Current on all core and recommended
use.
vaccines
 The individual technician bears the responsibility to prevent
Fea and tick control
Educate and recommend
disease transmission not only to the patients but also to their
Internal parasites
Check fecal samples q6 months,
coworkers. Judicious hand washing or the use of hand sanitizers,
recommend year-round preventatives
-doidde seaie paaoidde u Aquo saaeiaaaq pue pooy buunsuo
if appropriate
ate animal restraint techniques (to reduce bites and scratches),
and prompt attention to personal health will limit the transmis-
Facilities 
 sion of infectious disease.
Cean and disinfect 
 All patient contact items daily and as
needed
Conclusion
lsolation
Exam rooms, hospital and isolation
Good client education is imperative to prevent the spread of
decontamination
areas, barriers and procedures
disease and is every veterinary team member's responsibility.
Clients who have animals with infectious diseases should be
Modified from Ehnert K. Zoonotic disease problems. In: Textbook of
given direction on disinfection and how to prevent the spread of
Veteninary intemal Medicine, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman, Table 222-2.
Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
e s r u j siad a no siad iao ni on ss
zoonotic disease, it is very important that those clients are given
 information on how to reduce their own risk of acquiring the
 disease. Special attention to clients whose animals are undergo-
 ing chemotherapy or are immunocompromised is imperative. It
is heartbreaking when animals become ill due to preventable
circumstances (Table 11.5.7).
400
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
21. Infectious Diseases ofthe Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, eds. CE Greene,
Bibliography
pp. 439-436 St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2006.
22.
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. S
Section 1
Ettinger, E Feldman. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2010.
1. Breitschwerdt EB. Canine bartonellosis. Clinicians Brief2010;epub
23.
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 6th edition, eds. S
July 2010:13-17.
Ettinger, E Feldman. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2000.
Brunt J, Kordick DL, Kudrak S, et al. American Association of
24.
 Neimark H, Johansson KE, Rikihisa Y, et al. Proposal to transfer
Feline Practitioners 2006 Panel report on diagnosis, treatment,
some members of the genera Haermobartonella and eperythro-
and prevention of Bartonella spp. infections. Journal of Feline
zoon to the genus Mycoplasma with descriptions of “Candi-
Medicine and Surgery 2006;Aug;8(4):213-226.
datusMycoplasmahaemofelis”
"CandidatusMycoplasma
3.
Guptill- Yoran L. Feline bartonellosis. In: Infectious Diseases of the
haemomuris,”and “Candidatus Mycoplasma wenyonii Inter
Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, ed. CE Greene,pp. 511-518. Philadelphia,
national Journal of Systematic and Evohutionary Biology 2001;51
PA: Saunders; 2006.
(Part 3):891-899.
4.1
 Breitschwerdt EB, Chomel BB. Canine bartonellosis. In: Infectious
25.
Sykes JE, Terry JC, Lindsay LL, et al. Prevalences of various hemo-
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, ed. CE Greene, pp.
518-524. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2006.
hemoplasmosis. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
 Hollett RB. Canine brucellosis: outbreaks and compliance. Theri-
Association 2008;232:372-379.
ogenology 2006;66:575-587.
Chalker VJ. Canine mycoplasmas. Research in Veterinary Science
6.
 Ledbetter EC, Landry MP, Stolkol T. Brucella canis endophthalmi-
2005;79:1-8
tis in 3 dogs: clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment. Veterinary
27.
Greene CE. Mycoplasmal, ureaplasmal, and L-form infections. In:
Ophthalnology 2009;12(3):183-191.
Infectious Diseases ofthe Dog and Cat,3rd edition, ed. CE Greene,
7.
Wanke MM. Canine brucellosis. Animal Reproduction Stience
pp. 260-265. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2006.
2004;82-83:195-207.
Small Animal Internal Medicine, 4th edition, eds. R Nelson, CG
8.
 Marley MS, Rynders PE. Iheriogenology question of the month.
Couto. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby; 2009.
JAVMA 2007;231(6):867-869.
29.
Saunders Manual of Small Animal Practice, eds. SJ Birchard, RG
9.
Wanke MM, Delpino MV, Baldi PC. Use of enrofloxacin in the
Sherding, et al. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1994.
treatment of canine brucellosis in a dog kennel (clinical trial).
30.
Chandler JC, Lappin MR. Mycoplasmal respiratory infections in
Theriogenology 2006;66(6-7):1573-1578.
small animals: 17 cases (1988-1999). Journal of the Ammerican
10.
 Neer TM, Breitschwerdt EB, Greene RT, Lappin MR. Consensus
Animal Hospital Association. 2002;38:111-119.
statement on ehrlichial disease of small animals from the infec-
31.
Harvey IW. Hemotrophic mycoplasmosis (hemobartonellosis). In:
tious disease study group of the ACVIM. Journal of Veterinary
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, ed. CE Greene,
Internal Medicine 2002;16:309-315.
pp. 252-260. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2006.
11.
Neiger R, Simpson KW. Helicobacter infection in dogs and cats:
 Sykes JE. Feline hemotropic mycoplasmas. Journal of Veterinary
facts and fiction. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2000;
Emergency and Critical Care 2010;20:62-69. 6. 6.
14:125-133.
33.
Fritz CL. Emerging tick-borne diseases. Veterinary Clinics of North
 Sinpson KW, Neiger R, DeNovo R, et al. The relationship of
America Small Animal Practice 2009;39(2):265-278.
Helicobacter spp. infection to gastric disease in dogs and cats.
34.
 Bowman D, Little SE, Lorentzen L, et al. Prevalence and geo-
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 2000;14:223-227.
graphic distribution of Dirofilaria immitis, Borrelia burgdorferi,
 Simpson J. Helicobacter infection in dogs and cats: to treat or not
Ehrlichia canis and Anaplasma phagocytophilum in dogs in the
13.
to treat? In Practice 2005;27:204-207.
 United States: results of a national clinic-based serologic survey.
14.
 Jenkins CC, Bassett JR. Helicobacter infection. The Compendium
Veterinary Parasitology 2009;160(1-2):138-148.
on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian 1997;19:
Littman MP, Goldstein RE, Labato MA, Lappin MR, Moore GE.
267-279.
ACVIM small animal consensus statement on Lyme disease in
15.
Warren JR, Marshall B. Unidentified curved bacilli on gastric epi-
dogs: diagnosis, treatment and prevention. Journal of Veterinary
thelium in active chronic gastritis. Lancet 1983;1:1273-1275.
Internal Medicine 2006;20(2):422-434.
16.
Flatland B. Helicobacter infection in humans and animals. The
36.
Whitney EAS, Ailes E, Myers LM, et al. Prevalence of and risk
Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veteri-
Sn u sieaaas uidsodat iuee sapoqe us iy soiey
narian 2002;24:688-696.
veterinarians. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
17.
Fox JG. Enteric bacterial infections. In: Infectious Diseases of the
Association 2009;234(7):938-944.
Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, ed. CE Greene, p. 343-351. St. Louis,
37.
Stokes JE, Kaneene JB, Schall WD, et al. Prevalence of serum
MO: W.B. Saunders; 2006.
antibodies against six Leptospira serovars in healthy dogs. Journal
18.
Happonen I, Linden J, Westermarck E. Effect of triple therapy on
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 2007;230(11):
eradication of canine gastric helicobacters and gastric disease.
1657-1664.
Journal of Small Amimal Practice 2000;41:1-6.
38.
Van De Maele I, Claus A, Haesebrouck F, Daminet S. Leptospirosis
19. Lieb MS, Duncan RB. Gastric Helicobacter spp. and chronic vom-
in dogs: a review with emphasis on clinical aspects. Veterinary
iting in dogs. In: Krk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV, 14th
Record 2008;163:409-413.
edition, eds. JD Bonagura, DC Twedt, pp. 492-497. St. Louis, MO:
39.
Guerra MA.
.Zoonosis update: leptospirosis. Journal of the
W.B. Saunders; 2009.
American Veterinary Medical Association 2009;234(4):472-478.
20.
Pathogenesis of Bacterial Infections in Animals, 4th edition, eds. CL
40.
 Smith TC, Pearson N. The emergence of Staphylococcus aureus
Gyles, JF Prescott, G Songer, CO Thoen. Ames, IA: Wiley-
ST398. Vector Borne and Zoonotic Diseases 2011;Apr 11(4):
Blackwell; 2010.
327-39. DOl: 10.1089/vbz.2010.0072.
Chapter 11  Infectious Diseases
401
41.
 Ippolito G, Leone S, Lauria F, et al. Methicillin-resistant Staphy-
8
Birchard SJ, Sherding RG. Saunders Manual of Srmall Animal
lococcus aureus: the superbug. International Journal of Infectious
Practice. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1994.
Diseases 2010;Oct;14Suppl4:S7-11. DOI: 101016/j.ijid.2010.05.003.
.
Bonagura JD. Krks Current Veterinary Therapy Xlll. Small Animal
42.
 Cohn L, Middleton JR. A veterinary perspective on methicillin-
Practice, pp. 310-313. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 2000.
resistant staphylococci. IVECC 2010;20(1):31-45.
43.
Plumbs Veterinary Drug Handbook, 6th edition, ed. DC Plumb.
Section 4
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2008.
44.
VanSteenhouse JL, Taboada J, Dorfman MI. 42. Haemobartonella
1.
Greene CE, Carmichael LE. Canine herpesvirus infection. In:
felis infection with atypical hematological abnormalities. Journal
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, ed. CE Greene,
of the American Animal Haspital Association. 1995;31(2):
Pp. 47-53. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2006.
165-169.
2.
Ledbetter EC, Kim SG, Dubovi EJ, Bicalho RC. Experimental
45.
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ
reactivation of latent canine herpesvirus-1 and induction of recur-
Ettinger, EC Feldman, Vols. 1&2, p. 1105. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
rent ocular disease in adult dogs. Veterinary Microbiology 2009;Jul
Elsevier; 2010.
2;138(1-2):98-105.
 Gaskell RM, Dawson S, Radford A. Feline respiratory disease. In:
Section 2
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, ed. CE Greene,
pp. 145-154. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2006.
1.
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, ed. CE Greene.
4.
European Advisory Board on Cat Diseases. ABCD Guidelines on
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2006.
Feline Herpesvirus, Panel Report; 2006.
2.
 Small Animal Internal Medicine, 4th edition, eds. R Nelson, CG
 5. Maggs DJ, Nasisse MP, Kass PH. Efcacy of oral supplementation
Couto. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby; 2009.
with L-lysine in cats latently infected with feline herpesvirus.
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 6th edition, eds.S
Ettinger, E Feldman. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2000.
American Journal of Veterinary Research 2003;Jan;64(1):37-42.
6.
 American Association of Feline Practitioners. The 2006 American
4.
Plumbs Veterinary Drug Handbook, 6th edition, ed. DC Plumb.
Association of Feline Practitioners Feline Vaccine Advisory Panel
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2008.
Report, 2006.
5.
Saunders Manual of Small Animal Practice, eds. SJ Birchard, RG
7.
Urban MA. Influenza: viral infections: Merck manual home
Sherding. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1994.
edition. http:// www.merck.com/mmhe/sec17/ch198/ch198d.html
6.
Small Animal Pediatrics, The First 12 Months of Life, eds. ME
(accessed July 27, 2010).
Peterson, MA Kutzler. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2011.
8.
 International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. Ihe universal
7.
Baumgartner DJ, Steber D, Galzier R, et al. Geographic informa-
virusdatabase, version4: influenza A.http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
tion system analysis of blastomycosis in norther Wisconsin:
ICTVdb/ICTVdB/00.046.0.01.htm (accessed July 27, 2010).
waterways and soils. Medical Mycology 2005;43(2):117-125.
9.
 Spnseller BA, Trujillo JD, Jergens A, et al. Apparent Reverse
8.
 Chen T, Legendre AM, Bass C, Odoi A. A case-control study of
Zoonotic transmission ofPandemic HiN1 Influenza Virus Infection
sporadic canine blastomycosis in Tennessee, USA. Medical
in Domestic Cats: Clinical Diagnoses and Disease, ACVIM Forum,
Mycology 2008;46(8):843-852.
 Crews LJ, Feeney DA, Jessen CR, Newman AB. Radiographic find-
June 9-12, 2010.
9.
10.
 Jakeman KJ, Tisdale M, Russell S, Leone A, Sweet C. Effcacy of
ings in dogs with pulmonary blastomycosis: 125 cases (1989-
2'-deoxy-2'-fluororibosides against influenza A and B viruses in
2006). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
ferrets. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 1994;38(8):1864-
2008;232(2):215-221.
1867. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7986023 (accessed
10.
Kerl ME. Update on canine and feline fungal diseases. Veterinary
July 27, 2010).
Clinics of North America Small Animal Practice 2003;33(4):721-747.
11.
 Osterhaus A, Rimmelzwaan G, Martina B, Bestebroer T, Fouchier
11.
 Spector D, Legendre AM, Wheat J, et al. Antigen and antibody
R. Influenza B virus in seals. Science 2000;288(5468):1051-1053.
testing for the diagnosis of blastomycosis in dogs. Journal of
http://dx.doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.288.5468.1051
Veterinary Internal Medicine 2008;22(4):839-843.
(accessed
July 27, 2010).
Section 3
12.
Nobusawa E, Sato K. Comparison of the mutation rates of human
influenza A and B viruses. Journal of Virology 2006;80(7):3675-
1.
Nelson R, Couto CG. Small Animal Internal Medicine, 4th edition,
3678.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1128%2FJVI.80.7.3675-3678.2006
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby; 2009.
(accessed July 27, 2010).
2.
Ettinger S, Feldman E. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
13.
 Taubenberger JK, Morens DM. The pathology of influenza virus
6th edition, St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2000.
infections. Anmual Review of Pathology 2008;3:499-522. http://
Peterson M, Kutzler MA. Small Animal Pediatrics, The First 12
www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?tool=pmcentrez&
Months of Life. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2010.
artid=2504709 (accessed July 27, 2010).
Greene CE. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition. St.
14.
Weber TP, Stilianakis NI. Inactivation of influenza A viruses in
Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2006.
the environment and modes of transmission: a critical review.
5.
Ettinger S, Feldman E. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
The Journal of Infection 2008;57(5):361-373. http://dx.doi.org/
7th edition, St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2010.
10.1016%2Fj.jinf.2008.08.013 (accessed July 27, 2010).
6.
Plumb DC. Plumbs Veterinary Drug Handbook, 6th edition, Ames,
15.
Suarez D, Spackman E, Senne D, Bulaga L, Welsch A, Froberg K.
IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2008.
The effect of various disinfectants on detection of avian influenza
7.
Vaden SL, Knoll JS, Smith FWK, Tilley L. Backwells Five-Minute
virus by real time RT-PCR. Avian Diseases 2003;47(3 Suppl):
Veterinary Consult: Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures
1091-1095. http://dx.doi.org/10.1637%2F0005-2086-47.s3.1091
Canine and Feline. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2009.
(accessed July 27, 2010).
402
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
16. Schrenzel MD, Tucker TA, Stalis IH, et al. Letter Pandemic (H1N1)
college/pr/documents/CanineinfluenzaFAQ.Veterinarians_000.pdf
2009 virus in 3 wildlife species, San Diego, California, USA.
(accessed July 29, 2010).
Emerging Infectious Disease Journal 201l;17(4).
5.
 Cleaning to reduce the risk of H1N1 flu virus—Guidelines for
17. CDC H1N1 flu, http://www.cdc.gov/h1 n1flu/ (accessed July27,2010).
cleaning, janitorial and maintenance staff http://www.enichols.
18.
Peterson ME, Kutzler MA. Small Animal Pediatrics, The First 12
com/downloads/cleaning_to_reduce_the_risk_of_h1n1_flu_
Months of Life. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2011.
virus.pdf (accessed July 29, 2010).
19.
Ettinger S, Feldman E. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
6.
Healthcare-associated infections (HAI). http://www.cdc.gov/
6th edition, St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2000.
ncidod/dhqp/ar_MRSA.html (accessed July 29, 2010).
20.
Greene CE. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition,
7.
Greene CE (ed.). Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2006.
Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1990.
8.
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 6th edition, eds. S
Ettinger, E Feldman. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2000.
Section 5
9.
Plumbs Veterinary Drug Handbook, ed. DC Plumb, 6th edition.
Greene CE. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition,
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2008.
p. 3. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2006.
Small Animal Internal Medicine, 4th edition, eds. R Nelson, CG
Vaden SL, Knoll JS, Smith FWK, Tilley L. Blackwells Five-rmimte
Couto. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby; 2009.
Veterinary Consult: Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures
11.
Saunders Manual of Small Animal Practice, eds. SJ Birchard, RG
Canine and Feline. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2009.
 Sherding. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1994.
3.1
 Dvorak G. Disinfection 101. http://www.cfsph.iastate.edu/BRM/
12.
Small Animal Pediatrics, The First 12 Months of Life, eds. ME
resources/Disinfectants/Disinfection101Feb2005.pdf
(accessed
Peterson, MA Kutzler. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2011.
January 14, 2009).
13.
Crawford C, Rada KA.
Canine
Influenza.
http://www
4.
Crawford C. 2009. Canine influenza: frequently asked questions
sheltermedicine.com/shelter-health-portal/information-sheets/
from veterinarians, Universityof Florida. http://www.vetmed.ufl.edu/
canine-influenza (accessed March 5, 2012).
Chapter
12
Vaccine, Vaccination,
and Immunology
Editors: Shauna Blois and Linda Merrill
Section 1 The Immune Response and Cancer Immunotherapy
Section 4 Vaccines and Vaccination 413
- Allyson Stewart 403
Vaccination strategies - Shauna Blois 413
Section 2 Laboratory Diagnostics in Immunology -
Canine vaccines - Shauna Blois 416
Linda Merrilfl 405
Feline vaccines - Linda Merrifl 422
Section 3 Immunosuppressive Medications
Colleen Ruderman 409
Vaccinations and adverse reactions - Melissa J. Supernor 427
SECTION 1 THE IMMUNE
so its response is the same regardless of the cellular trigger-
 inflammation. The complex set of reactions caused by inflam-
RESPONSE AND CANCER
mation increases blood fow, allowing for the accumulation
IMMUNOTHERAPY
 of phagocytic cels and enzymes triggered by the presence of
 invaders at the site.
Like the skin, the mucosal epithelia of the gastrointestinal and
The immune response in an individual represents a collective
 respiratory tracts serve as a barrier between the internal and
and coordinated response to the introduction of foreign sub-
external environment. Defense against microbes that enter
stances or cellular changes such as cancer. The immune response
is mediated by the cells and molecules of the immune system.'
through these routes is provided by the mucosal immune system,
which is one of the effector arms of the adaptive immune
The two primary components of the immune system are the
innate (nonspecific, typically rapid) and adaptive (highly specific
cally IgA, are present in the mucosal tissue. IgA's function is to
but slower developing) immune responses.?
bind to the microbe, making it too large to enter the host.' The
mucosal immune system plays a role with both innate and adap-
Innate and adaptive
tive functions.
Adaptive immunity represents the response of the body to a
immune response
 specific antigen. An antigen is a substance that is capable of
 Innate immunity is the immunity that one is born with—-physical
 activating the immune system and stimulating the formation
and chemical barriers such as intact skin, stomach acids, mucus,
of antibodies or cell-mediated immunity. Adaptive immunity
lysozyme in tears, body temperature, phagocytic cells (neu-
 is mediated by lymphocytes and stimulated by exposure to
trophils and macrophages), natural killer (NK) cells, and 
 molecules recognized as foreign or nonself Such antigens
cytokines. The innate immune system lacks any form of memory,
 include infectious agents, foreign material, and malignant or
Smat Anima nternat Medicine forVeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses, First Edition.Edited by Linda Meril
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
403
404
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
transformed cells. Nonself molecules differ from self-molecules
remove the immune tolerance so that nonself/cancerous anti-
(which are the body's own tolerated antigenic substances).' The
 gens can be recognized and subsequently attacked.
 separate arms of the immune system are linked by the ability of
the innate response to stimulate and influence the nature of the
Immunomodulation
 adaptive response.?
The frst attempts at modulating the immune system occurred
in the late 1800s, when a surgeon named William Coley noticed
Humoral and cell-mediated immunity
that patients that had cancer and developed secondary bacterial
infections often lived longer than those that did not get infected.
Humoral immunity and cell-mediated immunity are two types
He developed the first bacterial "vaccine,” referred to as “Coley's
of adaptive immune responses that function in different ways
toxins" using killed cultures of Serratia marcescens and Strepto-
against microbes and other agents such as cancerous cells.
coccus pyogenes. His goal was to induce sepsis and associated
Humoral immunity acts against extracellular foreign antigens,
pyrexia to cause tumor regression. This treatment led to many
complete and durable tumor remissions in patients with inoper-
(bone marrow-derived cells) which bind and direct the elimina-
able bone and soft tissue sarcomas; however, the development
tion of these antigens.' As it relates to oncology, one example of
of frequent side effects and the lack of support from other physi-
humoral immunity is the elimination of premalignant cells that
cians led to the technique falling out of favor.
express nonself antigens. Cell-mediated immunity is the primary
There is evidence for the immune system playing a major
adaptive immune response against intracellular pathogens as
part in the treatment of cancer. Specific examples include the
well as tumor antigens, mediated by T lymphocytes, which are
presence of tumor-specific cytotoxic T cells within tumor or
cells that have matured in the thymus.' T lymphocytes can either
draining lymph nodes, as well as the presence of monocytic,
be directly cytotoxic or can moderate cell destruction by a host
lymphocytic and plasmacytic infltrate in tumors. Reports of
of complicated mechanisms.
spontaneous remissions in patients who have cancer and do
There are fve types of tumor antigens recognized by T cells:
not have treatment, the increased incidence of some types of
(1) differentiation antigens (antigens associated with specific
stages in the development of a cell type, i.e., those normally
cancer remissions in patients treated with immunomodulators
 present in a fetal cell but not in an adult cell); (2) mutated forms
also lend support to the role of the immune system in cancer
 of normal proteins; (3) normal proteins produced in excessive
treatment.2
quantities; (4) cancer/testes antigens (tumor antigens with gene
It is possible to stimulate the immune system to kill tumor
expression restricted to male germ cells); and (5) tumors induced
cells using a number of methods. In review, active immunity is
by viruses that produce viral antigens (e.g., oncogenic virus such
immunity in which the individual plays an active role in the
 as feline leukemia).3
response; in passive immunity, the recipient receives immune
Cell-mediated immunity involving T cells and natural killer
cells or their products. Vaccination with tumor cells or antigens
a  s  s a  ae o ()
can enhance active immune responses, while passive immunity
immune response mediating the bodies' resistance to cancer. The
can be established by administering antitumor antibodies or
immune system is capable under certain circumstances, via both
activated T cells.
innate and adaptive responses, of recognizing and eliminating
 It is proposed that the ideal cancer immunotherapy agent
tumor cells. The NK cells of the innate response kill tumor cells
should have high specifcity (able to differentiate between cancer
by direct lytic mechanisms. NK cells can also be stimulated by
and normal cells), high sensitivity (potency to kill small or large
cytokines, which are cell-signaling proteins that mediate inflam-
numbers of malignant cells), and durability (able to prevent
matory and immune responses. In the adaptive response, lym-
tumor recurrence).? As with most other forms of cancer treat-
phocytes, specifically T cells, are continually surveying the body
o asd a u  m on se a 
for cancerous or abnormal cells and eliminating them—this is
minimal residual disease. Minimal residual disease refers to the
the concept of immunosurveillance. As it relates to cancer devel-
malignant cells that remain after surgical removal or other local
opment, the immune system ideally functions by recognizing
tumor treatment. These residual cells are not clinically evident
 and eliminating the transformed cells before they grow into
but can promote a relapse or recurrence of disease. Therefore,
tumors. Tumor cells are detected due to the expression of anti-
immunotherapy is likely most appropriate as an adjuvant treat-
gens that are identified as foreign.' However, as there are many
ment combined with local tumor control such as surgery and/or
cases of cancer in otherwise immunocompetent patients, the
radiation therapy.?
cancer cells develop complex ways to avoid being detected, either
by evading or overcoming host defenses.12
Cancer vaccines
 One of the major mechanisms of immunotherapy “works" by
using biologicall active proteins to alter the specific and non-
Adaptive immunity can alter an individual's immune system so
specific immune responses of the patient. In cancer immuno-
that it can remember a pathogen previously encountered, dif-
therapy, the body is stimulated with agents that can either make
ferentiate self from nonself, and respond more quickly to
them hypersensitive to the presence of abnormal/cancer cells or
repeated exposure to the pathogen. The goal in creating a cancer
Chapter 12 Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
405
vaccine is to cause an immune response that results in regres-
Interferon-o works by inhibiting the growth of tumor cells,
sion of the tumor and/or the metastases, or to protect against
 inducing apoptosis, activating NK cells and by a number of other
disease progression. Because of the slower speed of adaptive
 s d     
 s   n     n
 efficacy at the time of publication.
or more to appear while the immune response becomes fully
functional.?
Summary
In veterinary medicine, the canine melanoma vaccine Oncept "
by Merial is the most frequently discussed cancer vaccine and
mau se pudxa si ie pi xa ue si Adeo
was approved for use by the Food and Drug Administration
tools in molecular biology are developed and a better under-
(FDA) in 2007. The vaccine uses xenogeneic (different species,
 in this case human) deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) expressing
standing of ways to modulate the immune system are discoy.
ered.? The veterinary profession is in a unique position to
the human tyrosinase gene. This tyrosinase protein (encoded by
ae soui ies pue sop Auu se supsu ueunq jusuaduo
the DNA) is found on normal and cancerous melanocytes. The
protein produced from the human tyrosinase gene is different
comparable to human cancers in how they behave biologically.
 In addition, these tumors may in fact be caused by the same
enough from the canine tyrosinase protein that it will stimulate
 etiologic factors, as our pets share our environment, drink the
an immune response, but similar enough to canine melanoma
same water we do, breathe the same air we do, and in many cases,
cells that the immune system targets the cancerous cells that
 eat the same food as us. Another advantage to studying cancer
 contain the tyrosinase protein.6
in pets—specifically, the development and treatment of the
disease—stems from the fact that dogs and cats live a com-
Cytokine immunotherapy
pressed life span as compared to our own. We are then able to
witness treatment successes and failures within a shorter period
Cytokine  immunotherapy  refers to  the administration  of
of time. This may help get successful therapies, such as antican-
cytokines to stimulate antitumor immune responses. Cytokines
 cer vaccines, into human clinical trials faster than waiting the 20
 se rns sad no qa au a pnd ane
or 30 years it might otherwise take to monitor for side effects
macrophages, activated mast cells, dendritic cells, bone marrow
and effectiveness in human clinical trials. Although immuno-
stromal cells, and leukocytes. Interleukins and interferons are
 Ad Aia m i Kde ne-aas e aq rau a Aei
examples of cytokines used in cancer immunotherapy.?
supporting role alongside treatments such as surgery, radiation,
 Interleukins are proteins released from lymphocytes or mac-
 and chemotherapy.
rophages that can, among other more complex mechanisms,
 promote lymphocyte, monocyte, and macrophage proliferation,
activate NK cells, or mediate inflammation.'′ Interleukin-2 (IL-
2) is a cytokine that can induce a number of anticancer activities
SECTION 2 LABORATORY
in the innate and adaptive arms of the immune response such as
DIAGNOSTICS IN TMMUNOLOGY
activation of cytotoxic T cells and augmentation of NK cel func-
tion.' Side effects associated with IV administration of IL-2, such
as vascular leak syndrome, necessitated exploring other delivery
Serology
options. Inhalational therapy was explored as a method of maxi-
mizing drug exposure to the lungs while minimizing systemic
Antinuclear antibody test
toxicities. Liposomal formulations are used in this setting to
The antinuclear antibody (ANA) test detects antibodies (either
increase the retention time of active drug in the lungs. Inhala-
anti-IgG or anti-IgM) that react with nuclear components of
tional therapy with both free IL-2 and IL-2 liposomes has been
cells by the use of a fluorescence microscope (optical microscope
 investigated, with IL-2 liposomes showing greater activity in the
 using the phenomena of fluorescence and phosphorescence) or
 treatment of pulmonary metastases.7
an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
IL-12 is another cytokine being investigated in veterinary
 medicine. It has both immunostimulatory and antiangiogenic
Indications
ability of the tumor to form new blood vessels. IL-12 may be a
The ANA test is used as an adjunctive test to support a diagnosis
 useful adjuvant therapy in the treatment of localized tumors
of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The test is species spe-
such as subcutaneous hemangiosarcoma.
cific. The results are reported as a positive or negative titer. Posi-
Interferons are cytokines with antiviral, antiproliferative, and
tive titers are reported as a ratio, for example, 1:20. Positive tests
immunomodulatory effects. Recombinant feline interferon-@
 may also be reported with the pattern of nuclear staining
 ag  ssid  s  a ()
 observed (homogenous, peripheral, speckled, or nucleolar). A
been used in the treatment of a number of different cancers,
 positive titer (>l:80) with concurrent clinical disease and spe-
including feline fbrosarcoma, as well as in the treatment of
 cific laboratory findings is supportive but not definitive for the
retroviral infections (feline leukemia virus [FeLV]/feline immu-
 diagnosis of SLE, but SLE should not be diagnosed or excluded
nodeficiency virus [FIV]) associated with tumor development.?
 based upon this single test result.
406
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Limitations
immunophenotyping
False positives may be caused by inflammation, infection, or
Immunophenotyping detects cellular proteins in fresh or fixed
neoplastic disease. Previous corticosteroid therapy may cause a
tissue or in cellular suspensions. Commonly, this test uses anti-
false-negative test result.
bodies to detect the presence of cellular epitopes (the part of an
antigen that is recognized by the immune system), allowing for
Coombs test
the classification of cell types. Immunophenotyping can be used
to detect populations of leukocytes to aid in the diagnosis of
The direct Coombs test detects antibody and complement bound
 immunodeficiences. Additionally, immunophenotyping can aid
onto the surface of erythrocyte antigens.
in the detection of clonal expansion of malignant cell popula-
Indications
tions. Detection of specific cell markers (e.g. cluster of differen-
tiation [CD] antigens) can aid in the diagnosis of such
 The Coombs test is used in anemic animals suspected of immune-
malignancies as leukemias, lymphosarcomas, and histiocytic
 mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) that have a negative saline
sarcomas. Flow cytometry can be used for immunophenotyp-
agglutination test. The saline agglutination test is the frst choice
 ing, and tissue can be stained with labeled antibodies (immuno-
         
histochemistry). Panels of multiple antibodies may be used
results are reported as negative or positive; positive results also
when performing immunophenotyping, as this documents the
indicate the dilution at which the test became negative. The
presence and proportion of various cellular populations of
Coombs test is performed by incubating species-specifc anti-
interest.
bodies against IgG, IgM, and C3 (the third component of com-
 plement) with the patient's erythrocytes at both 37 and 4°℃. The
Rheumatoid factor
presence of hemolysis and agglutination at various antibody
Rheumatoid factor (RF) is a nonsensitive and nonspecific
dilutions indicates a positive result. The Coombs test is usually
antigen/antibody test of questionable value. A positive RF may
performed at several dilutions of antiglobulin sera (e.g, 1:2, 1:4,
be found in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, as well as some
1:8) to help decrease the possibility of a false-negative result due
cases of SLE.
to a prozone effect. The prozone effect occurs in the presence of
excessive antibody. Dilution allows for an appropriate ratio of
red cell antigen to antiglobulin, permitting agglutination.2
Immunologic testing modalities
Limitations
and techniques
Enzyme-finked immunosorbent assay
False positives can occur and can be the result of nonspecifc
coating of erythrocytes, in vitro complement binding, and previ-
Also referred to as an enzyme immunoassay (EIA), the ELISA is
ous blood transfusion. False negatives may occur and can be the
an immunoassay test used to detect a specific antigen or anti-
result of levels of antibody that are too low, prior use of corti-
body in a sample. Blood, urine, saliva, feces, or other samples
costeroids or laboratory processing issues. The reported sensitiv-
  o  o      
ity of the test is about 60%. An indirect Coombs test is available
antigen ELISA, a sample containing an unknown amount of
but is less sensitive than the direct Coombs, so it is rarely
antigen is applied to a surface (e.g., a membrane or sample well).
utilized.
 The surface contains an antibody to allow for the antigen within
the sample to bind to the surface. A specific antibody is then
Miscellaneous testing
applied and binds to the antigen in the sample. An enzyme is
linked to this antibody, either directly or via a secondary anti-
Lymphocyte proliferation/blastogenesis
body. The enzyme is typically a chromogenic substance that
undergoes a color change after the addition of a substrate. An
Lymphocyte proliferation/blastogenesis is a functional test of
ELISA to detect the presence of antibody in a sample uses a
lymphocyte responsiveness. There are multiple modalities used
for this test and they are specific to T cells and B cells. The testing
similar procedure.4 Originally performed at reference laborato-
 procedure starts with culture and stimulation of lymphocytes
ries, this modality is now commonly run in-house. A point-of-
with antigen or mitogen (protein to encourage cell division).
care example of ELISA testing is the Snap? FeLV/FIV/feline
 Flow cytometry, colorimetric assay, polymerase chain reaction
heartworm (FHW) test, which detects the presence of FeLV,
(PCR), or ELISA are utilized to measure response.
heartworm antigen, and FIV antibody.
Neutrophil bacterial killing assay
Immunofluorescent antibody assay
The neutrophil bacterial killing assay, also called the neutrophil
Also called an indirect fluorescent antibody assay, this immu-
function test, tests the ability of neutrophils to phagocytize bac-
noassay detects the presence of a specific antibody in a variety
teria and to generate an oxidative burst (the rapid release of
of biological samples such as blood, bone marrow, and tissue.
reactive oxygen species). Flow cytometry is used to enumerate
The immunofluorescent antibody assay (IFA) tests for a specific
the percentage of neutrophils with normal function.
antigen using a fluorescent dye-tagged viral antibody (direct) or
Chapter 12 Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
407
using a primary antibody that binds directly to the antigen and
a secondary fluorescent dye-tagged antibody that binds to the
Biopsy techniques
 primary antigen (indirect). An example of this testing modality
Fine needle cytology collection
is the FeLV IFA.
Needle aspirations, also known as needlle biopsies, utilize a
Radioimmunoassay (RIA)
 This is a nuclear medicine test for a specifc virus or antigen
analysis. The goal of needle aspiration is to reach a diagnosis
using a radioactive tagged element (e.g., iodine) combined with
without the need for surgical biopsy.
the antigen. The radioactive antigen is combined with a known
Indications
quantity of the specific antibody. The sample, containing an
 unknown quantity of antigen, is then added. The sample antigen
 Needle aspirations can aid in the diagnosis of lymphadenomeg-
competes with the radiolabeled antigen for antibody binding
aly, organomegaly, and masses.6
sites. The bound antigen is removed from the sample and a
Limitations
 gamma counter is used to measure the radioactivity of remain-
ing free antigen in the sample. This is then compared to known
The limitations of needle aspirations are that the technique
standards, allowing the amount of antigen in the original sample
cannot characterize tissue architecture, cannot distinguish
to be quantifed. An example of this modality is antiacetylcholine
between a lipoma and SQ fat, may result in a nondiagnostic
receptor antibody testing (myasthenia gravis).
sample as certain cells do not readily exfoliate, and may not be
able to distinguish between lymph node hyperplasia and
Polymerase chain reaction
lymphoma.
This modality tests for a specifc microorganism using two
Advantages and disadvantages
nucleic acid primers (short DNA fragments) that are compli-
The advantages of this technique are the relative ease of collec-
mentary to (react with) the target portion of the DNA (genome)
tion, minimal tissue trauma, usually no need for sedation, and
of the organism. A polymerase (enzyme) then amplifies (repro-
a fast turnaround time.
duces) by means of a chain reaction involving thermal cycling
The disadvantages include a low number of cels for analysis,
(alternating heating and cooling) of the DNA. By the addition
the possibility of seeding tumor cells along the needle track, and
of an additional step to this process (reverse transcriptase), RNA
the increased possibility of collecting a nonrepresentative sample.
is converted into DNA and therefore can be detected. The
number of tests available using this modality has dramatically
Potential complications
increased recently, but there is minimal laboratory standardiza-
tion of assays and the validation data for an individual test may
Complications are uncommon. Hemorrhage and sharp trauma
 not yet be available. For more information on PCR testing and
to surrounding tissues or organs are of concern if biopsying
the database of American Association of Veterinary Laboratory
thoracic or abdominal masses. Degranulation of mast cell tumor
Diagnosticians (AAVLD) accreditated and affiliated laboratories
and PCR tests available, please refer to the Web site http://
may be indicated if MCT is suspected.
pcr.sdstate.org. The specificity of PCR testing can be very high
Contraindications
but is dependent on the primers used. Care must be taken
during collection to help prevent false positives from contamina-
A coagulation disorder may be a contraindication. Note that
tion. The predictive value of a positive test (probability that a test
normal coagulation profle and buccal mucosal bleeding time
 positive animal is diseased) can be very low. This is due to a
 (BMBT) results do not eliminate the risk of hemorrhage.
variety of factors including the detection of DNA or RNA from
Patient preparation
both live and dead organisms, the detection of modified live virus 
(MLV) vaccine, or the presence of the organism in healthy
Coagulation tests should be considered prior to aspiration of
animals.
 internal organs, particularly the liver or spleen. For superfcial
aspirates, such as a dermal mass or a lymph node, the site may
Western blot
-dad as oedse o nod pauea ue padd aq pou ae n
 This test is also called immunoblotting and involves separating
ration consisting of clipping and a surgical prep of the area
 should be preformed prior to aspiration of the internal organs.
membranes, and then using specifc antibodies to detect the
Restraint
  a     d 
   d  s       
 Manual restraint usually is sufficient for superfcial aspirates.
of his work, which was called Southern blot (there are also tech-
 s    q  s   
niques called Northern blot and Eastern blot). An example of
 internal organs. Some clinicians choose to avoid opioids such as
this test is the FIV Western blot test, which is the confirmatory
hydromorphone prior to lung aspiration due to the increased
test for FIV.
 panting that this drug can cause.
408
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Patient monitoring
the aspiration process. The disadvantage of this method is
the increased incidence of cellular disruption. The advan-
For superficial masses, monitor for hemorrhage postprocedure;
tage is the possibility of an increased number of cells for
apply gauze and digital pressure if needed. Monitor the patient
analysis and little needle movement in sensitive areas or
 postaspiration of MCTs for possible release of histamine and the
when near critical structures.
resultant systemic reaction. Monitor patients postaspiration of
the thoracic cavity for signs of hemorrhage or pneumothorax,
Splenic cytology
(e.g., dyspnea, tachycardia, respiratory distress, cyanosis, or
Indications
abdomen for signs of hemorrhage (e.g., increasing heart or res-
Aspiration of the spleen is indicated when splenomegaly or
piratory rate, pale mucus membranes, decreasing blood pres-
 splenic nodules are present and as part of disease staging (e.g.
sure, or increasing effusion).
MCTs).
Techniques
Limitations
Needle aspiration may be blind or guided. In blind aspiration,
 The spleen is a large, vascular organ; therefore, samples may not
when possible, the nondominant hand stabilizes the tissue of
be representative of focal disease and may have hemodilution
interest, for example, a lymph node. If the tissue is too small to
artifact.
be stabilized with the fngers, then the nondominant hand and
The advantages and disadvantages are similar to those listed
fingers may simply rest on the skin surface, possibly providing
for needle aspirations.
some surface tension by holding the skin on either side.
Potential complications
Guided aspirations are real-time aspirates; usually ultrasound
guided in nature, although other imaging techniques (e.g., fluor-
Some degree of hemorrhage is almost always noted postsam-
 oscopy) may be utilized Guided aspirations allow the clinician
pling. Seeding of the abdomen with neoplastic cells is a
to visualize needle placement in the tissue to be sampled and to
possibility.
adjust the position in order to optimize collection location.
The size of the needle selected is determined by the size and
Contraindications
type of tissue to be evaluated and the clinician preference. Typi-
Splenic aspiration is contraindicated in patients with hemoabdo-
cally, a 25- or 22-ga. needle is utilized. Needle length is selected
men, if the splenic lesions are cystic in nature, and in patients
based on the location or depth of the tissue to be sampled.
with coagulation disorders.
 There are two basic techniques that may be utilized during a
needle aspiration. There can be minor variations on these pro-
Patient preparation
cedures, and often the selection of one method over another will
be dependent on the clinician's or the technician's preference.
Clipping and surgical preparation of the skin is indicated. Coop-
erative patients may not require sedation or anesthesia. If
 The two basic techniques for needle aspiration are outlined
sedation or anesthesia is used, the selection of drugs that do not
below:
cause splenic congestion is imperative. Avoid the use of
1.1
Fenestration is the repeated insertion of the needle into the
acepromazine.
desired tissue. Usually, fenestration is performed with the
Restraint
needle only, but if the tissue in question is in the thorax or
 aau a uo pnd aq a ss e ua e
 Manual restraint is usually sufficient for cooperative patients.
 prevent air from entering the cavity. During fenestration, the
Typically, patients are restrained in right lateral or ventral recum-
needle is held by the dominant hand and inserted into the
bency, but this is dependent on the location of the spleen,
tissue. Once into the tissue, a rapid up-and-down motion is
the location of any nodules, if present, and the clinician's
utilized and, if the tissue is large enough in size, the angle
preference.
of insertion may be altered slightly. The needle is kept under
the skin or surface of the organ and typically moved four to
Patient monitoring
eight times. The term “needle aspiration" is somewhat of a
 o si    d  
misnomer for this technique since no actual aspiration
Utilization of ultrasound to monitor the abdomen for any indi-
occurs. The disadvantage of this method is the possibility of
cation of hemorrhage is helpful. Hematocrits, pre- and postpro-
a low number of cells collcted. The advantage is the small
cedure, and as indicated by the results and the clinical signs of
amount of cellular disruption.
the patient, are indicated.
2.
True needle aspiration is the insertion of the needle into the
Techniques
 o assd au ude ua pue anss pans
syringe, often 2-4mL of negative pressure is applied two to
The ultrasound-guided fenestration collection method is the
three times. The size of the syringe is typically 6-12 mL. The
preferred method for splenic needle aspiration. A syringe should
use of a syringe “gun” helps to stabilize the syringe during
be attached during the collection process to prevent air from
Chapter 12 Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
409
entering the abdominal cavity. The syringe may or may not 
 amount of fluid is obtained from an aspirate, the sample may be
contain any air and is a matter of clinician preference. The spleen
placed in an EDTA collection tube. The sample can then be
is a highly vascular organ and hemodilution from excessive
centrifuged to concentrate the cellular material. Once centri-
fissue trauma, cystic lesions, or splenic engorgement will affect
 fuged, most of the supernatant can be discarded, and the pellet
sample quality.
remaining at the bottom of the tube can be resuspended in a
small amount of remaining fuid. Slides can then be prepared
Lymph node cytology collection
from this sample.
 All slides should be air-dried before enclosing in the slide
-u apou yu um p s use aou d
 holder. Avoid too rapid or too slow air-drying techniques. Never
 n s s  r d s  d si 
 submit slides for cytology in the same container as samples in
diseases such as neoplasia.
formalin.
As stated earlier, the cytology from a lymph node aspiration
may not be able to distinguish between hyperplasia and lym-
Bone marrow collection
phoma; in some cases, a lymph node biopsy may be needed.
The advantages, disadvantages, potential complications, con-
 See diagnostic techniques in the nursing chapter.
traindications, patient preparation, and restraint are similar to
those listed for fine needle aspirations.
SECTION 3 IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE
Techniques
MEDICATIONS
Either collection method (fenestration or aspiration) may be
utilized for lymph nodes, but the fenestration method is pre-
ferred. Lymph node cells readily exfoliate and are relatively
Immunosuppressive medications are used for the treatment of
fragile, so care must be used to minimize trauma during the
following graft or transplant surgery.
collection process.
Slide preparation techniques
Corticosteroids
To expel the contents in the needle, detach the syringe, aspirate
Corticosteroids are the standard and most commonly used med-
some air into the syringe, and reattach to the needle. Expel the
ication for the treatment of immune-mediated diseases. They
contents of the needle onto one end of the slide. Typically, no
carry a wide range of adverse effects and contraindications.
visible material is noted in the needle hub, but visible material
Doses range from lower physiological and anti-inflammatory
can be observed on the slide after expulsion.
The pull technique is preferred for preparing cytology slides.
  su   s   
 Place a second slide onto the sample, overlapping either parallel
ing T cells and suppressing complement activity. They also
or perpendicular to the sample. Usually, no additional pressure
decrease the migration of neutrophils, macrophages, and mono-
is needed to flatten and expand the sample. The slides are gently.
 cytes, thus decreasing phagocytosis and antigen processing.
horizontally pulled apart to make two slides. The bottom slide is
Corticosteroids can have a wide range of effects, both positive
usually superior in preparation to the top slide.
 o   ss o   su p
Alternate techniques may be used based on sample character-
 include an increase in blood pressure by causing vasoconstric-
istics (solid, liquid) and include the push (similar to blood
tion, as well as by increasing blood volume. There is an increased
smears and suitable for fluids), starfish (for spreading very thick
risk of acquired infections due to their suppressive effects on the
material), squash (see below), slant (often used for bone marrow
immune system. The secretion of gastric acid, pepsin, and
samples), and concentrating techniques.
 trypsin is increased within the gastrointestinal tract. For this
 In addition to the pull technique, the squash preparation is
 reason, the administration of an H2-receptor antagonist (e.g..
the most commonly used technique for thicker material. The
famotidine or cimetidine) to potentially decrease possible gastric
material is expressed onto the end of the first slide. A second
slide is placed on top, either perpendicular or parallel to the frst
redistributed from the limbs to the trunk, which contributes to
side. When the weight of the second slide is not enough
 the potbellied appearance and muscle wasting that can be seen
to spread out the material, slight pressure may be applied to
with the long-term use of corticosteroids. Gluconeogenesis and
the slides to spread out the material. Excessive pressure must
lipogenesis is increased and plasma levels of triglycerides and
be avoided so as not to disrupt the integrity of the cells. A
cholesterol are elevated, which can lead to markedly lipemic
pull technique is used to smear the material for cytological
serum, even in a fasted patient.
interpretation.
Corticosteroid therapy may cause increased activity of
If the material is a very thin fuid, prepare as if making a blood
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and, to a lesser extent, alanine
slide except toward the end of the smear; stop and lif the top
aminotransferase (ALT) and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase
slide to leave a concentrated line of fluid. Alternately, if a large 
(GGT). Corticosteroid administration may increase potassium
410
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
and calcium excretion and can also increase sodium and chlo-
Table 12.3.1
 Dnug interactions with corticosteroids
ride reabsorption. However, hypokalemia and hyperkalemia are
uncommon unless there is concurrent administration of medi-
Drug
Interactions
cations that compound electrolyte imbalances (e.g., diuretics).
Amphotericin B
Hypokalemia
In the central nervous system (CNS), corticosteroids may lower
the seizure threshold, stimulate appetite, and change the patient's
 Anticholinesterase
 Muscle weakness in myasthenia gravis
drugs
behavior (negatively or positively).
patients
The endocrine system is the most profoundly affected by corti-
Aspirin
Reduced salicylate blood levels
costeroids. At higher doses and with chronic use corticosteroids,
Cyclophosphamide
Inhibited hepatic metabolism of
suppress the release of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
cyclophosphamide
and, in turn, decrease the amount of endogenous cortisol released
Cyclosporine
Increased blood levels of
during times of stress. When long-term corticosteroids are dis-
corticosteroids and cyclosporine
continued suddenly, iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism can occur
as a result of diminished levels of endogenous corticosteroid pro-
Digoxin 
Increased risk for cardiac arrhythmia
duction. Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) production and function
as a result of hypokalemia
is decreased, resulting in diuresis and the polyuric, polydipsic
Furosemide/
Hypokalemia
effects that are often seen with corticosteroid administration. The
thiazides
 negative effects of the follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) will
Ephedrine
Increased metabolism of 
cause hair loss and poor hair regrowth. High doses of corticoster-
corticosteroids
 oids have been associated with reduced thyroid-stimulating
Insulin
Increased insulin requirements
hormone (TSH) levels as well as altered metabolism of T3 and
T4. Corticosteroids can cause insulin resistance by inhibiting
Ketoconazole
Decreased metabolism of
corticosteroids
insulin binding to the insulin receptors. Diabetic patients treated
with corticosteroids require close monitoring as well as increased
Mitotane
Decreased metabolism of
insulin dosing. Nondiabetic patients on long-term corticosteroid
corticosteroids
therapy should be monitored for the development of diabetes
NSAIDS
Increased risk of gastrointestinal
mellitus, which is rare but has been reported.
ulceration
The administration of corticosteroids is contraindicated in the
Phenobarbital/
Increased metabolism of
face of bacterial, viral, or fungal infections. Some of the most
phenytoin/rifampin 
corticosteroids
common adverse effects of corticosteroid administration are
Vaccines
Decreased immune response may
polyuria, polydypsia, polyphagia, and panting. With longer use
occur.
 of anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive doses, poor hair
coat, weight gain, and a potbellied appearance are common.
Source: Plumb D. Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook, 6th edition, pp. 88-90,
Other adverse effects may include vomiting, diarrhea, elevated
234-240, 248-249, 265-269, 427-429, 526-527, 639-640, 755-762.
liver enzyme activity, gastric ulceration, and worsening or acti-
Ames, IA: Blackwell.
vation of diabetes mellitus. Adverse effects in cats are typically
less pronounced.
When patients are treated with corticosteroids at either anti-
inflammatory or immunosuppressive doses, instructions should
be followed explicitly to prevent the relapse of immune-mediated
disease or iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism. Clients should also
sone are the most commonly administered oral corticosteroids.
be instructed to discontinue any non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
Prednisone and prednisolone have 1-4 times the anti-
medications prior to the start of corticosteroid administration,
inflammatory activity than hydrocortisone (cortisol), while dex-
as concurrent use has high potential to cause gastrointestinal
amethasone has 7-30 times the activity. Prednisone/prednisolone
ulceration and perforation (Table 12.3.1). While there is no clini-
 may have some mineralocorticoid activity, while dexamethasone
cal evidence, the typically washout period prior to starting
has none. Dexamethasone has the longest duration of activity
corticosteroids in a patient that has received non-steroidal anti-
(with greater than 48h), while prednisone and prednisolone
 inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) ranges from 5 to 10 days, depend-
have lesser activity (at about 12-36h). Patients with liver failure
 ing on clinician preference and on the patien's need for
and perhaps cats are unable to absorb or convert prednisone
corticosteroids.
to prednisolone (active form) effcienly, and therefore the use
of prednisolone is indicated. Immunosuppressive doses of
Prednisone/prednisolone/dexamethasone/
prednisone/prednisolone can range from 2 to 4 mg/kg/day orally.
 s  se s ai i ss
dexamethasone sodium phosphate
subcutaneous injection and is often used when oral medication
Either short- or intermediate-acting corticosteroids are typically
cannot be given. An immunosuppressive dose of dexamethasone
chosen for immunosuppression. Prednisone and dexametha-
is 0.25 mg/kg/day.
Chapter 12 Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
411
Opportunistic infections may occur due to immunosuppression
Immunosuppresives
induced by cyclosporine. With extremely high blood levels
Azathioprine (lmuran?)
Cyclosporine administration has been associated with the devel-
opment of neoplasia in humans and in dogs? (Table 12.3.2).
used to treat immune-mediated disease. This medication is for
The dosing of cyclosporine is varied depending on the form
use in dogs only, as severe bone marrow suppression can result
chosen. The Neoral/Atopica or modified forms have a higher
in feline patients. Azathioprine inhibits RNA and DNA synthesis
bioavailability in small animals and are recommended for use
and mitosis, and primarily affects cellular immunity. It is ab-
over Sandimmune. Cyclosporine should be administered on an
sorbed in the gastrointestinal tract, metabolized by the liver, and
empty stomach; liquid forms have limited palatability, so they
excreted by the kidneys. It is contraindicated in pregnant and
may need to be mixed with juices/broths for administration.
nursing dogs as it has teratogenic and mutagenic properties
Dosing for Neoral, Atopica, and modifed forms ofcyclosporine
and can be found in milk The principal adverse effects of this
for immunosuppression ranges from 5 to 10 mg/kg orally twice
medication may include bone marrow suppression (resulting
 in neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and/or anemia), gastrointes-
tinal upset, acute pancreatitis, and hepatoxicity. Increased toxic-
ity has been seen when given with angiotensin-converting
Table 12.3.2
Drug interactions with cyclosporine
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, aminosalicylates, trimethoprimsulfa,
 and cyclophosphamide.
Drugs causing
Drugs causing
Other interactions
The reported time to onset of azathioprine activity is variable
increased
decreased
with cyclosporine
and may range from 1 to 5 weeks. As a result, azathioprine is
cyclosporine
cyclosporine
 usually not used as a primary single-agent immunosuppressive
levels
levels
- n  s o oi ne  se nq 
 junction with prednisone) or when other immunosuppressives
Allopurinol/
Nafcillin 
Increased digoxin
cannot be continued. The use of azathioprine in conjunction
amiod arone
levels
with a corticosteroid can allow for a more rapid tapering of the
Ketoconazole/
Rifampin 
Increased
corticosteroid. Azathioprine is dosed at 2 mg/kg orally every 24h
fluconazole
methotrexate levels
with tapering doses for long-term use. An increased dose of
Bromocriptine
Phenobarbital
Increased
1-5 mg/kg has been used in conjunction with other medications
hyperkalemia when 
to prevent transplant rejection. Serial monitoring of complete
used with
 blood count (CBC) and serum biochemical panels are needed.
spironolactone
Patients should be monitored closely for evidence of liver toxic-
Calcium
Phenytoin
Decreased 
 f se is a mi snd o 
channel 
effectiveness of
vomiting, diarrhea, or inappetence).
blockers
vaccination
Cimetidine
 St. Johns
Increased
wort
nephrotoxicity with
Cyclosporine (Atopica?, Neoral?,
nephrotoxic drugs 
Sandimmune?, Cyclosporine-A?),
Cisapride
optimmune (topical), and tacrolimus
 Danazol
(Tacrolimus?, Protopic?)
Digoxin
Cyclosporine has been used in the prevention of allograft rejec-
Macrolide
antibiotics
eases in small animals. Cyclosporine primarily inhibits T-helper
Corticosteroids
cell activity but also has an effect of T-suppressor cells. Addition-
ally, cyclosporine appears to have broader anti-inflammatory
Losartan
and antipuritic properties, making it an effective treatment for
Metoclopramide
      s  
Omeprazole
excreted into the bile. It is contraindicated for use in dogs with
malignancies, in dogs and cats with renal or liver disease, and in
Sertraline
 pregnant or nursing patients as it can cause adverse fetal effects
Grapefruit juice?
 and can be found in the milk The adverse effects of cyclosporine
 are primarily gastrointestinal, which may include vomiting, ano-
 Grapefruit juice is a nonpharmaceutical that can also increase cyclosporine
rexia, and diarrhea, which typically occur within the first week
levels in small animals.
 of therapy. Uncommon adverse effects include gingival hyper-
 Source: Plumb D. Plumbs Veterinary Drug Handbook, 6th edition, pp. 88-90,
234-240, 248-249, 265-269, 427-429, 526-527, 639-640, 755-762.
plasia, hypertrichosis, excessive shedding, and papillomatosis.
Blackwell.
412
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
daily in dogs and from 1 to 4 mg/kg orally once to twice daily in
Table 12.3.3
3 Dnug interactions with cyclophosphamide
cats. Therapeutic drug monitoring may be used to guide dosing
Interactions
Interaction
Other drug
(see below). Topical cyclosporine ophthalmic ointment (Optim-
causing increased
causing decreased
interactions
mune?) is used as a treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca, an
myelosuppression
cyclophosphamide
immune-mediated disease of the lacrimal ducts.
 Because oral absorption of cyclosporine can vary among
metabolism
patients, measuring cyclosporine trough levels is recommended.
Allopurinol
Chloramphenicol 
Barbiturates-
 Therapeutic drug monitoring ensures the dose administered is
increased
metabolism of
reaching toxic levels. A trough level can be measured 72 h after
cyclophosphamide
starting treatment and is performed on blood obtained imme-
Thiazide diuretics
Phen othiazine
Cardiotoxic
diately before the next dose is due. Routine monitoring of drug
drugs—-increased
cardiotoxicity
 a  n   (   i) S
effective dose is achieved but is recommended if treatment eff-
Potassium iodide
cacy is poor or if adverse effects are suspected. Serial CBC and
Vitamin A
serum biochemical panels should also be performed at least
 every 3 months or in accordance to guidelines for the disease
Source: Plumb D. Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook, 6th edition, pp. 88-90,
being treated.
234-240, 248-249, 265-269, 427-429, 526-527, 639-640, 755-762.
 Tacrolimus is closely related to cyclosporine, and the two
Blackwell.
 drugs share a similar mechanism of action. Topical tacrolimus
has been successfully used in the treatment of atopic dermatitis,
Danazol
 perianal fistulae, and anal furunculosis.
Danazol is an androgen, anabolic steroid that is uncommonly
 pozeu seo pue shop u uoissaddnsouu ioy pas
Less commonly used
have a synergistic affect when used with corticosteroids and has
been used to reduce the amount of corticosteroids needed for
immunosuppressives
the treatment of immune-mediated diseases. The efficacy of
danazol as an adjunctive agent with glucocorticoids in cases of
Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan?)
IMHA and IMT is questionable. Danazol suppresses the immune
Cyclophosphamide is an immunosuppressive and antineoplastic
system by binding antibodies and reducing Fc receptor-mediated
medication used for the treatment of immune-mediated disor-
phagocytosis. It is primarily metabolized by the liver and
ders. It is an alkylating agent that interferes with DNA and RNA
absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract. The adverse effects of
synthesis. Cyclophosphamide has been used for the manage-
 danazol may include cardiac impairment, renal damage, weight 
ment of various immune-mediated disorders but is not recom-
gain, lethargy, edema, alopecia, and rarely, hepatotoxicity.
mended for the treatment of IMHA due to its reported lack of
Danazol is contraindicated in patients with cardiac, renal, or
efficacy. 13-5 Cyclophosphamide is metabolized by the liver and
hepatic disease, or during pregnancy due to fetal abnormalities
excreted in the urine. It is contraindicated in pregnant and
and fetal risk Pregnant people should avoid handling this medi-
nursing patients due to its possible teratogenic effects. Adverse
cation. Danazol may also decrease thyroxin levels and may cause
effects with this medication include myelosuppression, anorexia,
increased liver enzyme activity. Concurrent use of danazol and
vomiting, diarrhea, alopecia, and sterile, hemorrhagic cystitis (in
cyclosporine may increase blood levels of cyclosporine. Danazol
up to 30% of dogs treated long term with cyclophosphamide).4
administration may increase insulin requirements in diabetic
(Table 12.3.3).
patients. Canine patients start with a loading dosage of 10 mg/
The recommended dosage range for cyclophosphamide is
kg/day then decrease to a maintenance dose of 5mg/kg once to
quite variable and the dosing regimens vary depending on the
three times a day. Cats are dosed at 5 mg/kg given twice daily;
disease treated. An example dosage regimen for the treatment of
however, some dose recommendations have been found to be as
 immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT) is 50 mg/m² given
high as 10-15 mg/kg once daily. It is very important to monitor
once a day for 3-4 days then followed by tapering doses. For
these patients for any adverse effects, which include signs of
erosive arthritis/rheumatoid arthritis/polyarthritis, the dose is
hepatotoxicity (e.g., jaundice, melena, vomiting).
based on the weight of the patient. In patients weighing less than
10 kg, the dose is 2.5 mg/kg; for patients weighing 10-35kg, the
Novel immunosuppressive
dose is 2 mg/kg, and if the patient is greater than 35 kg, the dose
medications
is 1.5 mg/kg; all doses are given for 4 consecutive days per week.
 For polymyositis, 1 mg/kg given orally once daily for 4 days, then
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF)
2.5 mg/kg once daily for 4 days a week for 3 weeks, or 50 mg/m?
Mycophenolate is used in human medicine for the treatment of
given 4 days/week
immune-mediated diseases and as part of a multidrug treatment
Chapter 12 Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
413
regimen to prevent rejection in transplantation medicine. There
Patients treated with leflunomide should be monitored with
is limited experience with mycophenolate in veterinary patients;
 serial CBC and serum biochemical testing. Dosing recommen-
 potential applications include the treatment of IMHA, myasthe-
dations in canines is 4-6 mg/kg orally every 24h for immune-
nia gravis, pemphigus, glomerulonephropathy, and the preven-
mediated diseases and transplant protocols, and 2-4mg/kg
tion of transplant rejection. Mycophenolate suppresses the
        
 a p I no d h a sas s
histiocytosis. Dosing can be adjusted to reach target trough
 decreasing B cell formation of antibodies, and limiting leukocyte
levels of 10 mcg/mL for the treatment of immune-mediated dis-
deployment to sites of inflammation.
The use and handling of mycophenolate is contraindicated
tocols. Dosing guidelines for cats is 10 mg orally every 24h,
in nursing and pregnant people due to possible fetal malfor-
decreased to twice weekly when used with methotrexate for the
mations, so clear, thorough client communication is impor-
treatment of erosive arthritis.
tant with this medication. Mycophenolate may cause drug
interactions with acyclovir, antacids, aspirin, iron, and vaccines.
Human intravenous immunoglobulin
Adverse effects of mycophenolate are primarily gastroin-
testinal (vomiting, diarrhea), especially with the sodium
Human intravenous immunoglobulin (hIVIG) is used in small
enteric-coated tablets versus the capsules. The dosing ranges
animals for the short-term treatment of immune-mediated dis-
from 12 to 39 mg/kg/day and varies with the diseases being
eases, primarily IMHA and IMT; however, little research mate-
treated. Serial monitoring of the CBCs, renal and liver func-
rial is available. It contains IgG and small amounts of IgM, IgA,
tion, and electrolytes should be performed when using
CD4, CD8, and human leukocyte antigen molecules. IVIG
mycophenolate.
inhibits Fc-mediated phagocytosis of erythrocytes, interferes
with complement, suppresses antibody production, and binds to
 canine lymphocytes. Studies have reported no known adverse
Immunomodulating medications
effects, either during the infusion or within a 6-month period
after treatment.° A single infusion (0.5 g/kg) is usually adminis-
Leflunomide
 tered in conjunction with other immunosuppressive therapies.
 Lefunomide is used as a primary immunosuppressive medica-
Clinical trials of dogs with IMT have shown that IVIG treatment
tion or as adjunct therapy with other immunosuppressive medi-
significantly reduced platelet count recovery time and duration
cations and is a part of some transplant rejection protocols. It
 of hospitalization times.6
inhibits T-cell production and autoantibody secretion by B cells.
It is metabolized by the gastrointestinal mucosa and liver and is
Conclusion
excreted in urine. Lefunomide is contraindicated in pregnant
Client compliance is important to the successful use of any of
animals due to its teratogenic effects. The primary adverse effects
ofleflunomide are related to the gastrointestinal tract and include
these mediations, and extensive, complete client instruction,
both oral and written, is indicated. Inappropriate adjustment or
yomiting and decreased appetite. Uncommon and severe adverse
discontinuation of immunosuppressive medications can lead to
effects such as lymphopenia and anemia have also been observed
(Table 12.3.4).
overdose, increased incidence of adverse effects, relapse of
immune-mediated diseases, or transplant rejection. In addition
to dosing guidelines, clients should also be informed of their pets
 increased susceptibility to infection as well as decreased healing
Table 12.3.4  Drug interactions with leflunomide
time during the immunosuppressive period.
Drug
Interaction
 Charcoal (activated)
Increased elimination of
SECTION 4 VACCINES AND
leflunomide/decrease of drug
VACCINATION
con centration
Cholestyramine
Increased elimination of leflunomide
Vaccination strategies
Hepatotoxic agents
Increased risk liver toxicity
Methotrexate
Increased adverse effects of
Vaccination is an effective strategy to help prevent canine and
methotrexate/increased ALT
feline infectious diseases. Recently, vaccine recommendations
Phenytoin
Increased phenytoin levels
have become more refined for the individual dog or cat depend.
ing on individual lifestyle. Prior to vaccinating an animal, vet-
Rifampin
Increased leflunomide levels
 erinary staff must determine if it is appropriate to vaccinate an
 animal and, if so, what infectious agents the animal should be
Source: Plumb D. Plumb s Veterinary Drug Handbook, 6th edition, pp. 88-90,
234-240, 248-249, 265-269, 427-429, 526-527, 639-640, 755-762.
vaccinated against. The vaccine recommendations in this chapter
Blackwell.
are based on the guidelines published by the American Animal
414
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Hospital Association (AAHA) and the American Association of  tration does differ, on a molecular level, from noninjection site
Feline Practitioners (AAFP) in 2006.2 Veterinary technicians fibrosarcoma.
are encouraged to consult the most current vaccination guide-
The majority of vaccine-induced fibrosarcomas are sur-
lines published by these groups.
rounded by a fibrous capsule and infltrated by lymphocytes and
macrophages. Even though encapsulated, these sarcomas are
highly invasive and very aggressive. While fbrosarcoma is the
Vaccine technology
most common type of vaccine-induced sarcoma, other subcate-
There are several vaccine types available. The most common
gories have been reported. Aggressive surgery, radiation therapy.
vaccines are modified live and killed products.
chemotherapy, or a combination of these protocols is required for
the treatment ofthese tumors. Even with these treatment(s), local
Modified live virus vaccines
metastasis is common. The ability to obtain wide surgical margins
can be difficult when the tumor is located on the trunk of the
The MLV vaccines contain a pathogen that has been rendered
animal. Therefore, the current vaccine location recommenda-
noninfective. Attenuation of the pathogen causes minimal
tions are for administration on a limb, as distally as possible. It is
changes to the antigens. Because MLV vaccines contain a live but
recommended that certain vaccines always be administered in
od s non d are a si a d p
specific limbs (e.g., feline leukemia vaccine in the left hind, rabies
 gens to revert to virulence and/or to cause vaccine-induced
vaccine in the right hind). This may help identify the causative
illness. Additionally, MLV vaccines may become inactivated over
vaccine if a vaccine-associated sarcoma develops.
    s  s    
A multicenter study examining the association of vaccines
cate within the host, amplifying the antigenic mass that was
with sarcomas did not find a higher risk of sarcoma development
initially administered and producing a strong immune response
 in cats receiving adjuvanted vaccines. However, nonadjuvanted
after one dose. These vaccines do not require an adjuvant and
vaccines were not used frequently in this study. The exact causa-
can stimulate humoral, cell-mediated, and mucosal immunity.
tive agent or agents have yet to be proven, but adjuvants in rabies
Both injectable and topical forms of MLV vaccines may be
and leukemia vaccines have an apparent causal relationship.
available.*
While a direct causal relationship has not been specifically dem-
 onstrated between postvaccination inflammatory responses and
Killed vaccines
sarcoma development, the Feline Advisory Panel recommends
Killed vaccines are comprised of a pathogen or part of a patho-
that less inflammatory (ie., nonadjuvanted) vaccine products
 gen that has been completely inactivated. Because these products
are used when possible.?
are killed, the antigenic mass that is initially administered is
unable to replicate, and at least two doses are needed for maximal
Recombinant vaccines
immune system stimulation. Killed vaccines primarily induce
humoral immunity with little cellular or mucosal immunity.
Recombinant vaccines are a third type of vaccine product and
 These vaccines are stable in storage. Killed vaccines are usually
are becoming more common. Recombinant vaccines can be
formed using several different methods. Live vector vaccines are
 administered via injection and frequently require an adjuvant.
developed by identifying the protective antigens of a pathogenic
 organism. The genes encoding these antigens are then inserted
Vaccine-induced sarcoma in cats
into another nonpathogenic organism that serves as the vector.
There is some concern about a possible link between the inflam-
After vaccination, the nonpathogenic vector introduces these
matory responses induced by adjuvanted vaccines and the devel-
genes into the host. The antigenic proteins are expressed in the
host and induce an immune response. Because only protective
opment of vaccine-associated sarcomas in cats. Adjuvants are
  s    s
antigens from the pathogen are used, the pathogen cannot revert
back to a virulent state nor can it cause infection in immunosup-
response to vaccine antigens. Adjuvants can be metals (such as
aluminum), oil emulsions, microbial components (such as
pressed animals. Examples of live vector vaccines include a
lipopolysaccharide), or mammalian proteins (such as comple-
recombinant canine distemper virus (CDV) vaccine, which uses
 ment protein derivatives).4 Aluminum has been identifed as a
a canarypox vector.
foreign object in the macrophages of the vaccine-induced
Similar to live vector vaccines, subunit vaccines contain the
sarcoma. Following vaccine administration, a local inflamma-
portion of a pathogen that contains the protective antigens
rather than the entire pathogen. An example of a subunit vaccine
tory and granulomatous process may be noted. This reaction to
chronic inflammation is thought to be the precursor to tumor
is the Borrelia burgdorferi vaccine that contains the outer surface
development in cats affected by vaccine-associated sarcomas.
membrane protein OspA.
This process is estimated to take anywhere from 3 months to 3
Investigational vaccines
years. Neoplasia of mesenchymal origin, of which fibrosarcoma
is a subcategory, has been associated with sites of previous
Vaccine technology is constantly evolving, and some vaccine
vaccines. The fbrosarcoma associated with vaccine adminis-
types that are currently being investigated are gene deleted and
Chapter 12 Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
415
nucleic acid vaccines. Gene deleted vaccines can be either live or
 it is important to choose tests that are validated. Such tests have
either altered or deleted. DNA vaccines isolate the genetic mate- vaccine titers, they are not routinely recommended in place of
rial that codes for the protective antigens of an organism. The
vaccination.
 DNA is inserted into a bacterial plasmid where it replicates
 Rabies antibody titers may be required prior to importing an
within the bacteria. After replication, the DNA is purified from
 animal into a rabies-free region (e.g., Hawai or the United
the bacteria and directly inserted into the host.?
Kingdom). An adequate serum titer must be proven after rabies
vaccination as part of these import-export laws, and specific
details vary depending on the region involved.
Vaccine labels
Vaccine label directions contain information regarding route
Vaccine information in medical records
and dose volume, as well as recommended revaccination inter-
A patient's medical record should include information about any
vals. The dose and route of administration on the label should
vaccine administered.  Vaccination details recorded should
be followed closely as these reflect the testing performed to
include the date of vaccination, the name of the person admin-
evaluate the vaccine's safety and efficacy. The label also indicates
 istering the vaccine, vaccination site and route of administration,
recommended revaccination intervals, and these may differ
 and the vaccine name and manufacturer, lot number, and expira-
from the current published canine and feline vaccine guidelines.
tion date. Most vaccine vials have peel-off labels to affix to the
Rabies vaccines should be administered according to regional
medical record to facilitate this documentation. Additionally,
laws. In general, these laws state to vaccinate against rabies every
the benefits and risks of each vaccine should be discussed with
1 or 3 years. Veterinarians do have some discretion over the
the client, and a notation in the medical record of this discussion
extralabel use of nonrabies vaccines, provided this use meets the
and the client's informed consent for vaccine administration
current recommended standard of practice. For example, some
should be documented. Benefits of vaccination include control
vaccine manufacturers recommend annual revaccination of
of infectious disease at the level of the individual and the pet
dogs against distemper, parvovirus, and adenovirus-2. However,
 population. Additionally, vaccination also benefits public health
studies have shown a duration of immunity for these vaccines of
(e.g., rabies vaccination limits human exposure to this zoonotic
2 p se ue o s A ue uia re sk 2 oi 
disease). Potential drawbacks include that no vaccine is 100%
Similarly, immunity after vaccination of adult cats against feline
 protective and the potential risks that vaccination may induce
panleukopenia, herpesvirus-1, and calicivirus lasts 3-7 years or
(e.g., hypersensitivity reactions and vaccine-associated sarco-
more.?? After the initial series and 1-year booster are completed,
 mas). Given the potential benefits and risks, vaccination should
current guidelines suggest that revaccination intervals of every
be considered a medical decision based on the individual pet's
3 years is sufficient.'
 lifestyle and potential exposure to pathogens.
Considerations when developing
Serologic testing
vaccine protocols
Overvaccination is a concern for many pet owners and veteri-
nary professionals. Vaccine titer measurement is performed by
Vaccine protocols for individual animals are based on that indi-
some veterinary clinics and may be a useful complement to
vidual's risk factors and its exposure to infectious disease. Risk
vaccine protocols. However, vaccine titers have limitations, and
factors to consider include age, indoor only versus outdoor
 interpretation of titer results can be confusing.
 access, group housing or shelters, regional disease prevalence,
Serum titers can be used to demonstrate the duration of
  s  a n   o r 
immunity (measured by the presence of serum antibody) to a
more susceptible to infections. Outdoor cats have potential
 previous vaccination or infection. Vaccination induces both a
 exposure to various infections such as feline leukemia compared
humoral and a cell-mediated immune response. However, serum
to the solitary indoor cat. Group housing arrangements may
titer levels only measure the humoral response induced by a
increase the risk for upper respiratory infections such as
yaccine. Therefore, titers may be useful to measure protection
herpesvirus-1 and calicivirus for cats and Bordetella bronchisep-
against pathogens that replicate extracellularly (ie., pathogens
tica and parainfluenza virus for dogs. Some infections such as
that are eliminated from the body primarily via humoral immu-
 e  s  n    
d   d s  sr 
 ough knowledge of travel is important when making decisions
(CPV), distemper virus, and adenovirus; as well as feline pan-
about vaccinations.2
 It is preferable that only healthy animals are vaccinated. A
 does not ensure that an animal is protected, while a negative titer
does not equate lack of protection. If a veterinary clinic chooses
 determine a pet's health status. Vaccines should be delayed for
to add vaccine titer measurements to their health-care protocols,
 any pet with an acute illness until this condition has been
416
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
resolved or appropriately managed. Animals with chronic stable
Vaccine products and recommendations are continually
conditions such as diabetes mellitus can be safely vaccinated
evolving. Veterinary technicians can be instrumental in ensuring
 provided that the animal is receiving appropriate diagnostic and
that clinical vaccine practices remain up-to-date with the most
 therapeutic care. Patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy
current recommendations. By tailoring vaccine protocols based
(e.g., chemotherapy and high dose corticosteroids) may not
 on an individual pet's risk factors, veterinary health professionals
mount an effective immune response to a vaccine. Low to mod-
erate doses of corticosteroids given for a short period did not
encouraged to refer to the guidelines published by the AAHA
interfere with vaccine response in puppies in one study."l
(http://www.aahanet.org) and the AAFP (http://www.catvets.com)
However; it is recommended that vaccination should be delayed
 for the most up-to-date canine and feline vaccination recom-
until after immunosuppressive therapy concludes in these
mendations.'2 However, these guidelines are not meant to be
 patients, if possible.
 nd s e s ra  ss s s p
Vaccine-induced sarcoma is one reason to individualize
developing individual vaccine protocols.
vaccine recommendations in cats. Currently, the benefit of
immunization with a core vaccine outweighs the risk of develop-
Canine vaccines
ment of a vaccine-induced sarcoma.
 In many practices, canine core vaccines are administered as a
immune-mediated disease is mixed. While one study showed an
monovalent rabies product and a multivalent CDV, CPV, and
association between recent vaccination and IMHA, this study
canine adenovirus (CAV)-2 product. To help standardize vac-
did not prove a causal relationship.'? Additionally, no studies
cination sites, practices will often use the right hind limb for the
have definitively documented the risks of vaccination in patients
rabies vaccination ("R"abies in the "R"ight) with the multivalent
with a history of immune-mediated disease. Common opinion
CDV, CPV, and CAV-2 product usually in the left hind limb.
is that animals with previous immune-mediated diseases should
 Each vaccine product should be administered in a different loca-
have limited stimulation of the immune system, including vac-
tion, as distal on the limb as possible. Giving each vaccine
cination. The advantages and disadvantages of vaccination
 product in a different site will help identify which vaccine pro-
should be discussed with the owners of these patients on an
duces a local reaction (e.g., granuloma) if one occurs.
individual basis. Vaccines should be limited based on an indi-
vidual patients risk of exposure to infectious agents. However,
owners and veterinary clinics are advised to follow their area's
Core canine vaccines
rabies vaccination guidelines. Some areas will not allow a medical
Rabies
waiver and titer measurements in lieu of current rabies vaccina-
tion status. Veterinary professionals are encouraged to contact
Rabies is an enveloped RNA virus of the Rhabdoviridae family
their regional veterinary and public health resources for specific
affecting all warm-blooded animals including humans and is
information regarding rabies laws.
found almost worldwide. Some island and peninsular countries
is the major reservoir for the disease, although domesticated
Core versus noncore vaccines
animals can be another disease vector. Transmission is usually
(lifestyle vaccines)
through contact with infected saliva introduced by a bite wound.
Other routes of transmission include exposure of an open wound
 Designation of vaccines into core and noncore categories has
to infected saliva or neural tissue or ingestion of infected tissue.
helped to design individual vaccine protocols. Core vaccines
After ascending to the central nervous tissue, the rabies virus
are those that protect against diseases with high rates of mor-
replicates, then spreads to the salivary glands or other tissues.
bidity and mortality, diseases with a significant public health
The incubation period is highly variable. Animals typically begin
risk, diseases that are common, and/or diseases that are easily
to show clinical signs several days to weeks after infection,
 transmissible. Core vaccines are recommended for all dogs
q a s g o d sod oa  no
or cats.
reported. Rabies virus produces a rapidly progressive encepha-
Noncore vaccines, also referred to as lifestyle vaccines, protect
lopathy and death.13
against infections that produce mild or self-limiting disease, dis-
The animal may become infectious prior to displaying clinical
eases that are not easily transmissible, and/or diseases that have
signs. Outside of the host, the virus is relatively sensitive to
a low prevalence. Additionally, noncore vaccines may have
sunlight and to most disinfectants but may remain viable in a
limited effcacy or may interfere with screening tests for diseases.
carcass or tissues for several days. Rabies is a fatal disease that is
Noncore vaccines are best given only to those pets that have risk
capable of infecting all mammals (including humans), and
factors for exposure to a particular infection.
because of its zoonotic potential, treatment should not be
A third category of vaccines includes those that are not gener-
attempted. Canine, feline, and wildlife rabies vaccination pro-
ally recommended. This category includes vaccines with unknown
 grams are an important aspect of controlling this disease. Clini-
beneft, vaccines that target diseases with low prevalence, or
cal disease is divided into three stages, but not all animals will
vaccines against diseases that are considered low risk to pets.
exhibit all three distinct stages. Behavioral changes may be
Chapter 12 Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
417
 s a  s ()   n o
 nal, respiratory, and neurological signs. Clinical signs can be
days. On physical examination, fever, dilated pupils, and slow
 mild and nonspecifc in nature (e.g., fever and leukopenia),
corneal and palpebral reflex may be noted. Progression of clini-
making early diagnosis challenging. Upper respiratory signs of
cal disease can include signs related to forebrain lesions, such
 coughing and mucopurulent nasal and ocular discharges are
as unpredictable aggression, hyperresponsiveness to stimuli,
 noted commonly and may progress to dyspnea and pneumonia.
 muscle twitching and weakness, dysphagia, and ptyalism. This
 Diarrhea, dehydration, anorexia, and vomiting may occur if the
stage may be referred to as the “furious" stage and can last 1-7
 gastrointestinal system is infected. The eyes, skin, teeth enamel,
days. The paralytic or “dumb" phase of infection is usually
 or the neurological system may also be affected. This infection
apparent 2-4 days after the initial clinical signs. It is character-
can be highly fatal.
ized by progressive paresis, paralysis, and coma, eventually
 The diagnosis of distemper is often made presumptively on
resulting in respiratory arrest and death. Rabies is diagnosed on
the basis of a poor vaccine history and compatible clinical signs.
necropsy, following the procedures recommended or required
    sd q  o 
by the state or federal government. Rabies submission recom-
logic testing (IFA and immunohistochemistry) and serology are
mendations usually involve decapitation and refrigeration of the
available, but false-negative results are possible; PCR testing
head (never freeze the tissue). Using appropriate biosafety pro-
 cannot distinguish between vaccination and field strains of CDV.
 cedures, the head is transported to the state or federal veterinary
Treatment is supportive depending on the systems affected.
laboratory. Laboratories should be contacted prior to submis-
Secondary bacterial pneumonia infections are common and
sion of a rabies suspect.
 should be treated with the appropriate antimicrobial therapy and
Incidence of rabies in domestic animals and humans has
nebulization. Vomiting and diarrhea can be seen with systemic
decreased over the previous decades. In 2008, there were 294
cases of CDV and may require antiemetics, fuid therapy, and
cases of feline rabies and 75 cases of canine rabies reported in
electrolyte monitoring. Antiepileptic drugs may be necessary to
the United States. During that same year, 15 cases of rabies were
 control seizures. Some dogs that recover from canine distemper
reported in domestic animals in Canada and 31 cases of canine
 may develop neurological disease such as seizures, optic neuritis,
rabies were reported in Mexico.4 Approximately 3% of the
 or mycolonus later in life. Nursing care includes strict isolation
reported cases of canine and feline rabies in the United States
 procedures to prevent viral transmission, pain assessment, facial
from 1997 to 2001 had a previous history of rabies vaccination,
hygiene, nebulization and coupage, and nutritional support.
including 0.5% of dogs and cats in which rabies vaccination was
 Monitoring of the patient's temperature, hydration level, electro-
 s a      n
 lytes, lung sounds, and nutritional intake are indicated.
human rabies reported in the United States each year, with fewer
MLV or recombinant vaccines are recommended for the
 cases in Canada. Most human cases are atributable to bats.6.17
control of canine distemper. CDV is often found as part of a
 Rabies vaccination protocols may vary depending on regional
 multivalent vaccine including modifed live vaccines against
laws. The initial rabies vaccine is administered as early as 12
CPV and CAV-2 (+/-canine parainfluenza virus [CPiV]) and is
weeks of age depending on local regulations. A second rabies
vaccine is given 1 year following the initial vaccination. Subse-
enza (DHPP) (or DA,PP or DAP). Puppies are initially admin-
        
        s  s
the product used and the regional laws. Rabies vaccination prod-
and 16 weeks. The third vaccine in the initial series should be
ucts are typically killed virus products.
administered at 14-16 weeks of age. Dogs >16 weeks of age with
no previous vaccine history are initially administered two vac-
Canine distemper virus
cines, 3-4 weeks apart. Revaccination occurs 1 year after the
 Canine distemper is an enveloped RNA virus of the Paramyxo-
initial series. Although some vaccine manufacturers recom-
viridae family that can infect dogs, wolves, coyotes, fox, weasels,
mend subsequent revaccination for CDV annually, the duration
minks, skunks, badgers, ferrets, lions, leopards, tigers, and
 of immunity studies show protection for 4-9 years; current
seals.4 Young animals are most susceptible, but all ages can be
AAHA guidelines state that revaccination every 3 years is
infected The incubation period is typically 1-2 weeks but can
adequate. The recombinant canarypox-vectored CDV vaccine
be as long as 4-5 weeks. Viral shedding occurs by 7 days postin-
is combined with modifed live CAV-2, parainfluenza virus,
fection and can be transmitted for 60-90 days. Transmission is
and CPV. The recombinant CDV vaccine may be less affected
predominately by aerosolization of respiratory exudates, but the
 by the presence of maternal antibodies compared to MLV CDV
virus can be isolated in other body tissues and secretions includ-
vaccines.18
 ing urine. Transplacental transmission is possible. Although dis-
S    a   
 temper is found worldwide, it is well controlled in most of North
a e usns ai s n ssa pdd
America due to widespread vaccination. However, this infection
time of vaccination, infection prior to vaccination, or improper
still exists and is highly contagious. The virus is not durable at
room temperature and is inactivated by most disinfectants. It can
 attributable to the MLV vaccine itself. Signs of encephalitis may
persist for several weeks in cold moist environments.
develop within 3 weeks of vaccination using a modified live
 Manifestations of the disease are dependent on the virus
vaccine. Other systemic signs, such as gastrointestinal or respira-
strain and body system involved but can include gastrointesti-
tory signs, are not present.
418
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Canine parvovirus
mental or gastrointestinal contamination. More information can
be found in Chapter 8.
CPV is a small, nonenveloped DNA virus that is a member of
Modified live parvovirus vaccines should be used to prevent
the family Parvoviridae and can be found worldwide. Canine
 parvovirus as the killed products are susceptible to maternal
parvovirus subtype 2 (CPV-2) is the most common cause of
antibody interference in dogs up to 18 weeks of age. Vaccine
aq a s  s   
recommendations are similar to those outlined above in the
reported in domestic dogs, coyotes, foxes, and wolves. Experi-
 canine distemper section. Briefly, puppies are given three doses,
mental infections have been produced in ferrets, cats, and mink.
3-4 weeks apart, between 6 and 16 weeks of age. Dogs >16 weeks
 Puppies under 6 months old are most likely to have severe
of age with no vaccine history should be given two doses initially.
disease. Rottweilers, Dobermans, pit bulls, and mixes of these
 rea I Pi s P sidnd  lde a i-e
breeds may be especially vulnerable. This virus is resistant to
then at intervals of 3 years. Similar to distemper vaccines, many
most disinfectants and can survive in the environment for
parvovirus vaccine products are labeled for annual revaccina-
months to years. A 1:30 dilution of sodium hypochlorite (house-
tion, but duration of immunity studies show 4-9 years of protec-
hold bleach) with a minimum contact time of 10 min is required
tion after an MLV vaccine.7 CPV is typically found as part of a
for disinfection. For surfaces where it is diffcult to maintain the
multivalent vaccine and is often abbreviated as “p" in DHPP (or
contact time or are sensitive to sodium hypochlorite, steam
DA,PP, DAP). The effects of recent vaccination on testing for
 cleaning has been shown to be effective.58
parvovirus are controversial. Recent vaccination may cause a
Transmission of parvovirus is primarily through exposure to
false-positive result using fecal ELISA tests, although a recent
contaminated feces via the oronasal route. The incubation period
abstract reported that dogs vaccinated 3-7 days before testing
is 3-14 days. The virus replicates in the lymphoid tisue. Viral
 produced negative fecal ELISA test results.20
shedding can occur 3-4 days after exposure and can continue
Canine adenovirus
intermittently for up to 2 weeks. Clinical signs are usually noted
5-7 days after exposure to the virus; therefore, dogs can begin
CAVs are nonenveloped DNA viruses of the family Adenoviri-
shedding the virus prior to showing signs of illness. Clinical
dae. CAV-1 is found worldwide and is the causative agent of
 signs can vary from mild to severe and may include fever, leth-
infectious canine hepatitis (ICH) affecting dogs, wolves, coyotes,
 argy, anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea, leading to dehydration
bears, and foxes. CAV-1 is moderately resistant and can survive
 and possibly death in severe cases. Gram-negative sepsis, due to
for months under ideal conditions. Resistant to most household
bacterial translocation, or disseminated intravascular coagula-
 disinfectants, the use of a 1:30 bleach or quaternary ammonium
lo sdnd ui doaap uo snoa oso Aeu (i) u
solution with 10 min of contact time or steam cleaning will inac-
than 8 weeks of age. Young dogs appear to be most prone to
tivate the virus.
severe, life-threatening infection.*
Infection with CAV-1 is uncommon. It manifests as a multi-
Suspicion of parvoviral enteritis may be based on the presence
systemic disease that primarily affects the kidneys and liver. The
of foul smelling, hemorrhagic diarrhea. Laboratory diagnosis
incubation period is 4-9 days during which time the virus rep-
 can be achieved with in-house fecal ELISA CPV antigen tests.
licates in the tonsils and associated lymph nodes. Transmission
False positives have been noted postvaccination (see below), and
is through oronasal exposure to infected body secretions, prima-
false-negative tests may occur due to intermittent or low numbers
 rily feces and urine. Recovered animals can shed virus for up to
of viral shedding or timing of testing (either early or late in the
 6 months. Clinical signs include fever, tachypnea, tachycardia,
disease). Marked leukopenia observed on the CBC is highly
lethargy, and depression in the early stages of the disease fol-
indicative of parvovirus infection and will help to determine
 prognosis and therapeutic options. Without treatment, the prog-
enlargement. Hepatic failure from hepatocellular necrosis is
nosis for parvovirus infection is poor. Survival rates are high
 common. Coagulopathies secondary to liver failure may occur.
when supportive treatment is instituted quickly and aggressively.
Neurological signs related to hepatic encephalopathy or coagu-
 During treatment, full isolation procedures must be utilized.
lopathy may be noted and include seizures and disorientation.
Supportive care may include fluid therapy to address dehydra-
Diagnosis of CAV-1 infection is based on compatible clinical
tion and electrolyte imbalances, broad-spectrum antibiotics for
 signs and laboratory findings. Increased ALT and serum ALP
secondary bacterial infections due to compromised intestinal
 may be seen dependent upon the amount of hepatic necrosis.21
integrity, and antiemetics to prevent ongoing emesis. The addi-
Leukopenia, neutropenia, lymphopenia, and thrombocytopenia
tion of colloids, plasma and/or red blood cells may be warranted
 are usually present on a CBC. Confrmatory diagnosis is through
in severe cases. Nursing care includes strict isolation procedures
 detection of rising antibody titers.
 to prevent virus transmission and opportunistic bacterial infec-
Treatment is primarily supportive. Severely affected dogs
tions, and nutritional support (either enteral or parenteral).
should be maintained on intravenous fuid therapy. Treatment
 Close monitoring of the patienf's temperature, electrolytes, blood
of hepatic encephalopathy and/or hypoglycemia may be indi-
 glucose, protein levels, red blood cell count/hematocrit, and
cated based on the clinical picture. Care must be taken during
white blood cell counts are warranted. Care must be taken to
 yenipuncture or when placing the intravenous catheter as hypo-
ensure that intravenous catheters are protected from environ-
 coagulability secondary to liver failure may be present. Nursing
Chapter 12 
 Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
419
care includes strict isolation procedures to prevent transmission
recommend annual revaccination, challenge studies have shown
 of the virus, pain assessment, and nutritional support. Monitor-
that CAV-2 MLV vaccines induce protection against CAV-1 for
ing of the patient's temperature, hydration level, hematocrit,
at least 7 years.?2 CAV-2 is typically found as part of a multivalent
coagulation status, and nutritional intake are indicated. Severe
vaccine and is often abbreviated as “H" in DHPP or as “A2” in
CAV-1 infections can be fatal; dogs with less severe disease
DA,PP.
 often show improvement within 7 days of initiation of support-
ive care.
 Infection with CAV-2 causes mild, self-limiting respiratory
Noncore canine vaccines
signs. CAV-1 vaccines have been associated with adverse effects
Leptospirosis
including corneal edema ("blue eye") and uveitis. Therefore, it is
recommended to vaccinate dogs against adenovirus infections
Leptospires are helical bacteria of the family Leptospiraceae.
using a CAV-2 product, which is cross protective against CAV-1.
They are approximately 0.1 μm wide X6-20 μm long.23 Lept-
CAV-2 MLV parenteral vaccines induce a more effective immune
 ospira interrogans can cause renal and/or hepatic disease and are
response and are recommended over killed or MLV topical
 typically found in water. Most mammals are susceptible to lept-
products. Recommendations for vaccinating against CAV-1 are
ospirosis infection. Natural hosts do not show clinical disease
 similar to those outlined above in the section “Canine Distemper 
but instead shed the infection for months to years. Infection of
Virus" Briefly, puppies receive three doses initially, 3-4 weeks
 incidental hosts results in clinical disease. Clinical signs are
 apart between the ages of 6 and 16 weeks. Dogs >16 weeks with
 usually nonspecific and can include anorexia, vomiting, and
no vaccine history should receive two doses, 3-4 weeks apart.
severe weakness. Dogs are the reservoir host for L.interrogans
 Revaccination after the initial series should be performed 1 year
 serovars Canicola and Bataviae (and possibly serovar Bratislava),
later, then every 3 years. While some vaccine manufacturers may
but many serovars can infect dogs?3 (Table 12.4.1).
Table 12.4.1
Leptospira spp.serovars and hosts
Genomospecies
Serovar
Known primary
Incidental
Wild animal hosts
Serovar included
reservoir host
domestic hosts
in vaccine?
Leptospira
Autumnalis
Mouse
Cow, dog, human
Opossum, rat, raccoon
No
interrogans
L. interrogans
Bataviae
Dog, rat,
Cat, cow, human
Armadillo, hedgehog,
No
mouse
shrew, vole
L. interrogans
 Bratislava
Rat, pig, horse
Cow, dog, horse
Fox, hedgehog, mouse,
No
human 
opossum, raccoon,
skunk, vole, weasel
L. interrogans
Canicola
Dog
Cat, cow, horse,
Armadillo, hedgehog,
Yes-bivalent
human, pig
raccoon, rat, skunk,
and quadrivalent
vole
product
Leptospira
Grippotyphosa
Vole, opossum,
Cat, cow, dog.
Bobcat, fox, hedgehog.
Yes—quadrivalent 
kirschneri
skunk, raccoon
goat, human, pig.
mouse, muskrat, rat,
product only
rabbit, sheep
 shrew, squirrel, weasel
L. interrogans
Hardjo
Cow
Dog, horse,
No
human, pig.
sheep
L. interrogans
Icterohemorrh agica.
Rat
Cat, cow, dog.
Ape, civet, fox,
Yes-—bivalent
horse, human, pig
hedgehog, mouse,
and quadrivalent
 muskrat, opossum,
product
skunk, wood chuck
L.interrogans
Pomona
Skunk,
Cat, cow, dog.
Civet, fox, deer,
Yes—-quadrivalent 
opossum, pig.
gerbil, goat,
hedgehog, mouse, sea
product only
cOW
human, pig.
lion, vole, wolf,
rabbit, sheep
woodchuck
Source: Greene CE, Sykes JE, Brown CA, Hartmann K. Leptospirosis In: infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, ed. CE Greene, pp. 402-416.
St. Louis, M0: Saunders Elsevier; 2006; Rentko VT, Clark N, Ross LA, Schelling SH. Canine leptospirosis. A retrospective study of 17 cases. J Vet intern Med 
1992;6(4):235-244.
420
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
The bacteria are transmitted by direct contact with infected
infectious etiologies also known as infectious tracheobronchitis,
urine, placental transfer, bite wounds, or ingestion of infected
canine respiratory complex disease, or "kennel cough." Infection
 tissue. Indirect contact with contaminated water, soil, bedding.
with a single or multiple causative agents may occur. Causative
or food can also cause infection. The bacteria can live for several
agents associated with CIRDC include CAV-1, CAV-2, CPiV,
canine reovirus-1, 2, and 3, canine herpesvirus, canine influenza
mucous membranes of the eyes, nose, mouth, or scratched skin.
virus (CIV), CDV, Mycoplasma spp., and Streptococcus zooepi-
They replicate in the kidney, spleen, liver, eyes, genital tract, or
demicus. These infectious agents may also be opportunistic, sec-
the CNS.24
ondary pathogens to the primary infection.
 Dogs may be vaccinated against leptospirosis if they are at
high risk, depending on lifestyle, geographic location, and
 season. Male dogs of working and herding breeds were at greater
B. Bronchiseptica
risk for infection of leptospirosis than other dogs in one study.25
B.bronchiseptica is a small, motile, gram-negative, aerobic
Additionally, dogs in urban areas are at higher risk than dogs in
coccobacilli agent considered to be part of the infectious tra-
rural areas, presumably due to the urbanization of previously
cheobronchitis complex. It may infect the respiratory tract alone
rural areas and a greater opportunity for dogs to be exposed to
 or as a coinfection with other pathogens of CIRDC. B.bron-
wildlife reservoirs in some of these areas627 (see Chapter 11 for
chiseptica is highly contagious and is transmitted through aerosol
more details on this disease).
or direct contact. There is frequently a history of exposure to
 A bivalent leptospirosis killed bacterin vaccine was intro-
other dogs and is therefore often referred to as kennel cough.
duced in the 1970s and provided protection against the serovars
Dogs may continue to shed the bacteria for up to 14 weeks pos-
Canicola and Icterohemorrhagica. This led to a decrease in
tresolution of clinical signs. Environmental factors such as host
infection by these serovars and an overall decrease in the inci-
immune response, stress, contact rate, duration of exposure, and
 dence of leptospirosis. However, leptospirosis began to reemerge
crowding play a role in susceptibility to infection. Young, unvac-
in the 1990s, and infections with unusual serovars were demon-
cinated, and the immunocompromised individual are most sus-
 strated.5 A quadrivalent leptospirosis bacterin vaccine con-
ceptible. Bordetella can survive in the environment for weeks but
taining serovars Grippotyphosa, Canicola, Icterohemorrhagica,
is susceptible to inactivation by common disinfectants.
 and Pomona was introduced. Serovar prevalence varies geo-
 graphically, and the vaccine is not considered cross protec-
and include a dry, hacking cough that may persist for up to 3
tive against other serovars that can infect dogs. The most
weeks. The cough is occasionally productive. Other signs may
commonly reported serovars infecting dogs in North America
include fever, lethargy, ocular and/or nasal discharge, and inap-
in recent years include Grippotyphosa, Pomona, Autumnalis,
petence. Severe cases can progress to pneumonia.
and Bratislava. 19.25.28-30
 Mild cases of the disease are self-limiting and do not warrant
The leptospirosis killed bacterin vaccine is given in an initial.
antimicrobial therapy. In cases where secondary bacterial infec-
series of two vaccines, 2-4 weeks apart. This is repeated annually
tions or pulmonary parenchymal involvement are suspected,
if the dog is still considered to be at risk for exposure. Dogs
antimicrobial therapy should be used. Antitussives and bron-
should be >12 weeks of age prior to vaccination. The duration
 of immunity against serovars Canicola and Icterohemorrhagica
Antitussive therapy is not recommended in cases that are com-
has been shown to be approximately 1 year; similar duration of
plicated with bacterial pneumonia and/or when a productive
immunity is assumed for serovars Grippotyphosa and Pomona.
cough is present.2 Nebulization therapy with saline or antimi-
One challenge study identified Leptospira organisms in the blood
crobials have been shown to be of some benefit for animals with
27 and 56 weeks after vaccination with a bivalent bacterin
excessive accumulations of secretions or those with secondary
 product, showing some decline in sterile immunity over time.?1
bacterial infections. Nebulization with mucolytic agents has
Revaccination at intervals of every 6-9 months may be indicated
been shown to be irritating and induce bronchospasm and is
for dogs that are at exceptionally high risk of infection. Veteri-
therefore not recommended. Supportive care is directed at main-
narians and technicians should be aware of anecdotal reports of
 taining fluid and nutritional intake. The majority of cases are
a higher incidence of acute hypersensitivity reactions after this
mild and are treated on an outpatient basis. If hospitalization is
vaccine is administered, especially toy breeds and puppies.
Subunit vaccines have been developed to help reduce the anti-
utilized. Close monitoring of the patient's temperature, hydra-
genicity of the leptospirosis bacterin vaccine.? A recent study
fion status, lung sounds, and nutritional status is indicated. See
using a purified multivalent leptospirosis subunit bacterin
Chapter 6 for more information.
vaccine did not demonstrate a higher rate of vaccine reactions
B. bronchiseptica vaccines are available as mono- and multi
with this product compared with other vaccines.32
 s  sd (    
completely eliminate the risk of CIRDC because several infec-
Canine infectious respiratory disease complex
tious components of this complex are not included in the vaccine.
CIRDC is a disease complex found worldwide involving the oral
Vaccination should be considered for dogs exposed to other
cavity, nasal passages, sinuses, upper airway, and/or lower airway
dogs (e.g., kennels, dog shows, day care) or in group housing
of dogs. CIRDC is a clinical disease syndrome with multiple
environments (e.g., shelters).
Chapter 12 Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
421
Parenteral and intranasal B. bronchiseptica vaccines are avail-
anti-OspA antibodies kill B. burgdorferi in the tick's midgut, and
able. Parenteral products include a single-agent B. bronchiseptica
the tick fails to transmit the spirochetes to the dog. The initial
killed bacterin vaccine and a single-agent B.bronchiseptica
vaccine may be given to dogs as young as 9-12 weeks of age if
cell wall antigen extract. Additionally, a MLV parenteral CPiV
warranted, followed by a second vaccine 3-4 weeks later. Subse-
vaccine is available. A topical intranasal product combining
 quently, annual revaccination is recommended for at-risk dogs
B.bronchiseptica live avirulent bacteria and an MLV CPiV
and is usually administered prior to the onset of the region's tick
vaccine is also available. Combination B.bronchiseptica and
season.
CPiV vaccines are often administered due to the potential of
Canine influenza virus
many infectious agents contributing to this infectious complex.
The parenteral B. bronchiseptica vaccine requires that two vac-
Canine influenza is usually caused by influenza A virus and
       e  s
results in respiratory disease. In January 2004, an outbreak of a
within several days after the second dose, and the vaccine should
 respiratory virus was evident in racing greyhounds at a track in
be administered at least 1 week before anticipated exposure. The
 Florida with similar outbreaks occurring in other states later that
intranasal B. bronchiseptica and CPiV vaccine is initially admin-
year. PCR and gene sequencing determined the virus to be
istered as two doses, given 2-4 weeks apart. However, a single
closely related to equine influenza A (H3N8) virus. It was named
dose can induce protective immunity 72h after vaccination.33
A/canine/Florida/43/2004 (canine/FL/04). Research conducted
Some parenteral vaccines are labeled for puppies as young as 6-8
 at the University of Florida concluded that CIV was in the racing
weeks, while the intranasal vaccine may be administered in dogs
greyhound population as early as 1999.37 Since the initial out-
 as young as 3-4 weeks of age. However, administering a B. bron-
breaks of CIV, nongreyhound dogs have been reported to be
chiseptica vaccine is generally not indicated in such young dogs
affected in the United States and in the United Kingdom. CIV is
except for those in kennels with high rates of infection. Dogs
considered to be enzootic in New York, Pennsylvania, Florida,
considered to be at low to moderate risk of exposure should be
 and Colorado. The pathogenesis is still being investigated, but it
revaccinated every 12 months. Dogs at high risk of exposure
 is most likely similar to other influenza A viruses.
(e.g., frequently kenneled or at dog shows) should be revacci-
Canine infuenza is highly contagious and spread through
nated every 6 months.
respiratory secretions. Transmission may occur through dog-to-
Both the parenteral and intranasal vaccines likely result in
 dog contact or aerosolized droplets via sneezing and coughing.
decreased severity of coughing after exposure to B.bronchisep-
 The virus can survive in the environment for up to 48h, and as
tica. However, a recent study showed that an intranasal B. bron-
a result, fomites can also transmit the infection. The incubation
chiseptica vaccine resulted in less shedding and less severe cough
 period is 2-5 days, with peak viral shedding occurring during
after challenge with live B.bronchiseptica when compared to a
this time.37 Dogs begin to shed the virus prior to showing clinical
signs.
(3-10 days) mild coughing and/or sneezing after administration
 Approximately 20% of infected dogs are asymptomatic.
 in a small subset of dogs.
 Affected dogs exhibit a mild cough persisting over 10 days and
B. bronchiseptica is a potential zoonosis that may cause respi-
a low grade fever. Some dogs may have a dry hacking cough and
ratory signs in humans. Risk of transmission is considered low
are mistaken for cases of B. bronchiseptica. Secondary bacterial
but may be a concern for immunosuppressed humans.
with fever and cough is self-limiting, and dogs recover within 3
Borreliosis (Lyme disease)
weeks. A more severe but less common form of the infection is
 B. burgdorferi is a spirochete bacteria transmitted by Ixodes spp.
associated with tachypnea, dyspnea, fever (>104°F or 40°C),
ficks and is the causative agent of Lyme disease. Approximately
purulent nasal discharge, depression, anorexia, and moist cough.
95% of dogs exposed to B. burgdorferi do not show clinical signs
Thoracic radiographs may reveal lung lobe consolidation and
of disease. Clinically affected dogs may show signs of fever, ano-
pleural effusion. The severe form of canine influenza can result
rexia, acute or chronic renal failure, or lameness secondary to 
 in bronchopneumonia, hemorrhage within the respiratory tract,
 polyarthritis. Routine administration of this vaccine is contro-
 and acute death.36
versial due to the low percentage of exposed dogs that show
The CBC is usually normal. PCR of nasal swabs or respiratory
clinical signs, and also because the efficacy and duration of
 tissue is best performed at the peak of viral shedding, approxi-
 s g si s   p 
mately 2-3 days after infection, but this may occur prior to the
11 for more details on this disease.
 onset of clinical signs. Serological testing for virus-specific anti-
Vaccination against B.burgdorferi may be warranted if a dog
 bodies is available through the University of Florida College of
lives in an endemic area and if tick exposure is high. However,
Veterinary Medicine or Cornell Animal Health Diagnostic
the best prophylaxis for B. burgdorferi infection is likely tick
Center. The presence of antibody is indicative of viral exposure
    s  s  
 but not necessarily infection. Antibody levels may not be detected
killed bacterin product and a recombinant outer surface protein
 early in the course of disease. Therefore, it is recommended that
(Osp) A vaccine. Both vaccines induce antibody production
 paired serum samples are performed. A fourfold rise in titer
against OspA, generating anti-OspA antibodies which are
ingested when an infected tick bites an immunized dog. The
reports on the effect of the available vaccine on serological
422
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
testing.* If secondary bacterial infection is suspected, a transtra-
cheal wash or bronchoalveolar lavage for cytology and culture
MLV distemper vaccination, a recombinant CDV vaccine should
and sensitivity is recommended.
be used as an alternative. The canine measles vaccine should not
Treatment is primarily supportive care. Most cases of mild
be given to dogs >12 weeks of age.
 CIV are self-limiting and do not require any treatment. Nonpro-
ductive coughs may be treated with antitussives. Saline nebuliza-
Canine coronavirus
tion and coupage may be beneficial with dogs having lower
Canine coronavirus may produce subclinical infections or mild,
airway involvement.4 In dogs with productive cough, lower res-
piratory involvement, or systemic illness, antimicrobials should
virus infection in dogs is unknown, and vaccine efficacy is ques-
be utilized based on culture and sensitivity of the secondary
tionable. Therefore, vaccination against canine coronavirus is
bacterial infection. Supplemental oxygen, intravenous fluid
not recommended. See Chapter 8 for more information.
therapy, and nutritional support may be required in more severe
cases.4 Antiviral agents such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu?) are not
Rattiesnake vaccine
recommended as the dose, efficacy and safety of this medication
A vaccine designed to protect against envenomation by the
are unknown in dogs. In March 2006, the FDA published a final
Western diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox) and other
rule prohibiting the extra label use of adamantine, oseltamivir,
       s  
 sp ss n a   on d u  pn
does not offer complete protection from the effects of enve-
the treatment of influenza infections in humans.42
nomation but reportedly slows the onset and decreases the
 Prevention of CIV can be achieved by vaccination and by
severity of clinical signs. The efficacy of this vaccine is currently
limiting susceptible dogs' exposure. A killed canine infuenza
unknown.
H3N8 virus vaccine is available in the United States. Vaccination
reduces the severity of clinical signs and decreases shedding but
Canine adenovirus-1
 does not prevent infection. The initial vaccination requires two
doses 2-4 weeks apart, followed by annual revaccination. Vac-
CAV-1 causes infectious hepatitis. The CAV-1 vaccine is associ-
cination is indicated for healthy dogs >6 weeks of age at risk of
ated with adverse effects including uveitis and corneal edema.
Vaccination against CAV-2 is safer and provides cross protection
exposure to canine influenza, such as those in group housing.40
The risk of infection in household pets is very low and routine
against CAV-1.
vaccination is not recommended.
Porphyromonas dental vaccine
Canine influenza suspects must be isolated from other dogs. If
The Porphyromonas denticanis-gulae-salivosa bacterin vaccine is
ing disposable clothing should be used when handing these
designed to help reduce bone loss caused by pathogens com-
dogs. Proper isolation procedures are essential to avoid transmis-
monly associated with periodontal disease. Some veterinary
sion of this infection. The virus is killed by routine disinfectants,
dentists advocate using this vaccine as part of a complete dental
such as quaternary ammoniums or diluted bleach. Any surface
care plan to help decrease the risk of periodontal disease, espe-
cially in at-risk dogs. However, large clinical trials are needed
prior to recommending this vaccine for all dogs as its eficacy.
Canine vaccines not generally recommended
duration of immunity, potency, and risks have not yet been fully
evaluated.
Giardia lamblia
G.lamblia is a protozoal infection that can result in diarrhea. A
Feline vaccines
killed vaccine is available but is generally not recommended due
In practice today, the current standard of care for the feline core
to unknown benefit, low risk, and low prevalence. The Giardia
vaccine does decrease oocyst shedding, but evidence showing
vaccines is the administration of rabies as a univalent product
protection against infection or development of clinical signs is
and feline parvovirus (FPV), feline calicivirus (FCV), and feline
lacking. Additionally, diarrhea and other clinical signs caused by
   n  s () I  s
G.lamblia are usually controlled with routine medication.
standardize vaccination sites, the AAFP and the Academy of
Finally, most animals are at low risk of exposure to infection with
 Feline Medicine recommend the right hind limb for the rabies
G.lamblia.
vaccination ("R"abies in the “R"ight) with the multivalent
product administered intranasally or by injection in the right
forelimb. The noncore feline leukemia product should be admin-
Canine measies
istered in the left hind leg ("Leukemia in the “Left). Each vaccine
The canine measles vaccine has been used in puppies with a
product should be administered in a different location, as distal
maternal antibody level that is not protective but interferes with
on the limb as possible. Giving each vaccine product in a differ-
MLV distemper vaccination. The vaccine can cause acquired
ent site will help identify which vaccine produces a local reaction
immune responses and is not recommended. If maternal anti-
if one occurs.
Chapter 12 Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
423
Core vaccines
fever, abdominal pain, anorexia, and dehydration. FPV in the
queen can result in abortion or, if the in utero kittens survive, in
Feline rabies
As noted with canine rabies, feline rabies immunization is an
bone marrow lead to the name panleukopenia. The mortality
important aspect of public health. In fact, during 2000-2008,
rate in the unvaccinated is very high and without treatment is
more cats than dogs were reported rabid in the United States.
estimated at >95%. The clinical diagnosis is often presumptive
 The majority of these cases were associated with the epizootic of
 based on the history, presenting symptoms, and vaccine status.
rabies among raccoons in the eastern United States. The large
 Laboratory diagnosis is diffcult but possible by virus culture of
number of rabid cats compared with other domestic animals
 FPV in the feces of infected cats. Although not approved for this
 use, fecal ELISA tests for CPV antigen appear to detect FPV and
might be attributed to a lower vaccination rate among cats
because of less stringent cat vaccination laws; fewer confinement
 can be used as a more rapid method for detecting FPV in feces.47
 or leash laws for cats; and the nocturnal activity patterns of cats,
 Recently, a fecal PCR test has been developed. The prognosis is
guarded, but with aggressive symptomatic treatment, recovery is
placing them at greater risk for exposure to infected raccoons,
skunks, foxes, and bats.4 Rabies infection in feral cat colonies
 possible. During treatment, full isolation procedures must be
utilized. Supportive care usually consists of fluid therapy to
remains a concern. Cats are naturally, highly resistant to rabies
virus infection.4
 address dehydration and electrolyte imbalances, broad-spectrum
Vaccination with a killed rabies vaccine is highly preventative,
 antibiotics for secondary bacterial infections due to compro-
although rabies in vaccinated animals can occur.'5 The vaccine
 mised intestinal integrity, and antiemetics to prevent ongoing
 emesis. The addition of colloids, plasma, and/or red blood cells
is available as canarypox recombinant, nonadjuvanted vaccine
or as an inactivated 1- or 3-year adjuvanted vaccine. Initial vac-
may be warranted in severe cases. Nursing care includes strict
 isolation procedures to prevent cross contamination, scrupulous
cination for kittens is a single dose at 8-12 weeks of age. Revac-
cination intervals are subject to local laws and regulations and
 patient hygiene to decrease the chance of opportunistic bacterial
the manufacturer's vaccine recommendations. All cats, includ-
infections, and vigorous nutritional support (either enteral or
ing indoor only cats, should continue to receive rabies vaccina-
 parenteral). Close monitoring of the patient's temperature, elec-
trolytes, blood glucose, protein levels, red blood cell count/
tion throughout their lives. This recommendation is based on
the zoonotic potential of the disease, chance of escape and/
hematocrit, and white blood cell counts are warranted. See
or interaction with wildlife, and the reported incidences of
Chapter 8 for more information.
bats entering houses or apartments. Discussion continues on
a  q d  p s n 
the pros and cons of the use of the nonadjuvanted annual
tive in reducing clinical signs. Vaccines available for use are
vaccine versus the adjuvanted triannual vaccine. The location
either MLV or inactivated, adjuvanted or nonadjuvanted, and
recommendation for vaccine administration is the distal right
injectable or intranasal forms. The MLV is preferred due to the
hind leg.
reduced antigen quantities and to the fact that it is available in
a nonadjuvanted form. Inactivated (killed) vaccine is warranted
 for use in pregnant queens, in kittens <4 weeks of age, and in
Feline parvovirus (panieukopenia)
immunocompromised felines. The intranasal form of the
FPV is a resilient nonenveloped DNA virus found worldwide
vaccine avoids the risks of vaccine-induced sarcoma and pro-
that, among domestic cats, most commonly affects the young
vides a more rapid onset of local mucosal immunity. Current
unvaccinated cat. FPV is very similar morphologically and anti-
 recommendations for kittens are for three vaccines, starting at
genicaly to CPV4 The transmission of the disease is primarily
 6-8 weeks of age given every 3-4 weeks. The last vaccine should
through oronasal exposure to the infected host's secretions and
 be administered after 16 weeks of age. Kittens older than 16
excretions or via external parasites such as fleas, although fomites
 weeks and unvaccinated adults should initially receive two
such as bowls, bedding, litter pans, and veterinary personnel can
 doses of FPV, 3-4 weeks apart, with at least one dose in
also play a role. The incubation period is reported as 2-14 days.
the injectable form. All cats should receive a booster vaccine 1
The virus is actively shed during the acute phase of the disease
year after the initial series. The adult booster vaccine schedule
and can persist in the feces for up to 6 weeks postinfection.4 A
for FPV is still being debated. Most vaccine manufacturers rec-
carrier state is not observed in cats that have recovered from
ommend annual vaccination. The current veterinary recom-
 a s tie si pod n  d
 mendation is for triannual vaccination, although some argue
days. FPV is a very stable virus that can persist in the environ-
protection is lifelong. In addition, some practitioners will rec-
ment for over 1 year. Inactivation of the virus can be achieved
 ommend the triannual vaccine schedule only after an adequate
with bleach (sodium hypochlorite) in a 1:32 dilution or with
- u p s  i u aq s  s
glutaraldehyde; a 10-min contact time is recommended for both
bination with feline herpesvirus, and FCV and may just be
to be effective. The manifestations of the disease are systemic and
 abbreviated as “P" in FVRCP. FPV is now an uncommon disease
 n s       
due to the widespread use of the vaccine. Nevertheless, veteri-
 intestinal crypts, the bone marrow, and the lymphoid tissue. The
 nary personnel should be alert for this disease in feral or
most common clinical signs are vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy,
unvaccinated cats or in cats from overcrowded conditions. The
424
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
location recommendation for vaccine administration is the
The clinical diagnosis of upper respiratory infection often suf-
distal right front leg.
fices, without differentiation between the numerous causative
  go ap  issd si si  se
Feline upper respiratory disease complex
viral culture, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR), or immunohistochemical stains of samples obtained
involving the mouth, nasal passages, sinuses, and/or upper
from conjunctival scrapings, nasal discharge, or oral/respiratory
airway of cats found most often in those kept in close confine-
collection. During treatment, full isolation procedures must be
ment. Simultaneous infection with multiple causative agents
utilized. Supportive care usually consists of fluid therapy, broad-
 often occurs. The predominant causative agents are thought to
spectrum antibiotics for secondary bacterial infections, and
be feline herpesvirus and FCV. Other causes include Chlamydo-
nutritional support. Nursing care includes strict isolation proce-
philia felis, feline reovirus, B.bronchiseptica, Pasteurella spp, and
dures to prevent cross contamination, pain assessment, facial
mycoplasmas. These infectious agents may also be opportunistic,
hygiene, and nutritional support. Monitoring of the patient's
 secondary pathogens to the viral infection.
temperature, hydration level, lung sounds, and nutritional intake
are indicated. FCV has also been found in cats with lymphocytic-
 plasmacytic gingivitis, although its exact role has not been
Feline calicivirus
determined.
FCV is a nonenveloped RNA virus found worldwide that most
FCV vaccination is not completely preventative but is effective
commonly affects the young cat and those in multicat environ-
in reducing clinical signs. Vaccines available for use are either
 ments. FCV is one of two important viral causes of respiratory
MLV or inactivated, adjuvanted or nonadjuvanted, and injecta-
infection in cats that account for >50% of the cases. There are
ble or intranasal forms. The vaccination schedule for FCV is the
multiple subtypes of one serotype of FCV. The subtypes of FCV
same as for FPV. FCV is often abbreviated as "C" in FVRCP.
have varying levels of antigenic cross-reactivity, but they are
closely related and are thought to induce some degree of cross
Feline herpesvirus
 protection.4 In addition, studies have demonstrated that there
has been an antigenic shift in clinically relevant subtypes isolated
FHV-1 is a double-strand, enveloped DNA virus found world
from naturally infected cats.4 The transmission of the disease is
wide that most commonly affects cats in multicat environments.
through ingestion or inhalation of the infected host's secretions
 It is also known by its common name of rhinopneumonitis and
or excretions or through contact with contaminated fomites. The
    s      
incubation period is usually 2-6 days but can range from 1 to
cats. The transmission of FHV-1 is primarily through direct
14 days. The duration of illness is typically 1-2 weeks. Recovered
contact with infected animals or their secretions/excretions. It is
cats can be lifelong carriers of the disease in which the virus is
rarely contracted through aerosolization. The incubation period
shed continually from the oral cavity. FCV is a relatively stable
for FHV-1 is 2-17 days. The duration of illness is a bit longer
virus that can persist in the environment for up to 4 weeks.
than FCV at 2-4 weeks. Recovered cats can become intermifttent
Inactivation of the virus can be achieved with bleach (sodium
carriers; they often typically shed the virus in response to stress
hypochlorite) in a 1:32 dilution. The manifestations of the disease
or corticosteroid administration. FHV-1 can remain in the envi-
are generally upper respiratory in nature, although a rheumatic
ronment for 1 month, but it is not a hardy virus and is susceptible
form of the illness exists. The virus most commonly replicates in
to most hospital disinfectants. Feline herpesvirus manifests as an
    sss  sss  
upper respiratory disease, but it can have systemic effects includ-
epithelial tissues of the nose, mouth, and eyes. The most common
 ing pneumonia, ocular disease, and dermatitis. The virus repli-
clinical signs are sneezing, rhinitis, fever, conjunctivitis, and sali-
cates in slightly below normal core temperatures,2 so therefore
vation. Lesions on the tongue, hard palate, and nose are often
the eyes, mouth, and upper respiratory tract are the most
observed; these lesions usually present as superficial vesicles.
common locations. The clinical signs are varying degrees of con-
Histologically, cats infected with FCV may show evidence of
junctivitis with discharge, sneezing, salivation, fever, anorexia,
 pneumonitis. Coinfection with FHV-1 and other feline upper
and rhinitis. In severely affected cats, herpetic keratitis, with or
 respiratory diseases is common and can increase the severity of
without a secondary bacterial infection, can lead to corneal
the symptoms. Infection with FCV alone is experimentally
ulceration and even corneal sequestration in some individuals.
reported as mild and self-limiting, usually resolving in 10-14
These cats may become the chronic carriers that intermittingly
days.4 Kittens presenting with the rheumatic form typically
have reoccurrence of keratitis and/or conjunctivitis. Another
present with fever, joint pain and swelling, and muscle soreness.
possible chronic condition is sinus and nasal cavity congestion
The mortality rate for the respiratory form is relatively low.
due to the destruction of the nasal turbinates leading to second-
Recently, more virulent strains" have developed and with that,
ary bacterial infection. Reactivation of the virus is often found
the emergence of virulent systemic feline calicivirus (Vs-FCV).
after a stressor situation. At that time, the carrier may exhibit a
The mortality rate of the virulent strain is reported as up to 67%51
mild reoccurrence of upper respiratory signs. The clinical diag-
s      ss e   si 
 nosis of upper respiratory infection often suffices, without dif-
include limb and facial edema, icterus, blood in the feces, and
ferentiation between the numerous causative agents, although
nasal hemorrhage.
herpetic keratitis is pathognomonic. Laboratory diagnosis utiliz-
Chapter 12 Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
425
ing virus isolation of conjunctival, nasal, or pharyngeal swabs/
 mount an immune response, which clears the infection. As the
scrapings or PCR testing is an option.
 infection progresses to secondary viremia, bone marrow involve-
 During treatment, full isolation procedures must be utilized.
ment leads to the production of infected, circulating leukocytes
Supportive care usually consists of symptomatic treatment with
and platelets. If the cat is viremic for greater than 16 weeks, or
fluid therapy, broad-spectrum antibiotics for secondary bacterial
if there is bone marrow involvement, the virus will most likely
infections, ophthalmic antibiotics and antivirals (avoidance of
become part of the host's DNA. The exact presentation for cats
ophthalmic corticosteroids is  imperative), and nutritional
with secondary or persistent viremia varies based on subgroup
support. In addition, supplementation with oral L-lysine may be
and the host's immune system. They include lymphoma, nonre-
beneficial in acute and chronic infections. Nursing care includes
 generative anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. The
strict isolation procedures to prevent cross contamination, pain
timeline for this phase is reported as months to years. Clinical
 assessment, facial hygiene (with particular care and cleaning of
diagnosis is through laboratory testing by PCR, IFA, or the
the nose and eyes), and nutritional support. Humidifcation and
ELISA method on whole blood, serum, plasma, tears, or saliva.
an increased ambient temperature may be beneficial. Monitoring
It is recommended that the retroviral status be known on all cats.
of the patient's temperature, hydration level, lung sounds, and
The preferred screening test, and the most commonly used test,
 nutritional intake are indicated.
 is the ELISA, and it is the most accurate when run on plasma or
 FHV-1 vaccination is not completely preventative but is effec-
 serum samples. There is a reported increase of ELISA false-
tive in reducing clinical signs. Vaccines available for use are
 negative results when the test is run on tears or saliva. A positive
either MLV or inactivated, adjuvanted or nonadjuvanted, and
 ELISA test indicates circulating virus. However, a percentage of
injectable or intranasal forms. The vaccination schedule for
 cats infected with FeLV are able to clear the virus, and therefore
FHV-1 is the same as for FPV. FHV-1 is often abbreviated as
some cats may revert to negative. It is unclear at this time if this
"FVR" in FVRCP.
is a true conversion to negative status or if this is an inability to
 demonstrate the virus. Recent studies using PCR techniques
Noncore vaccines
tomatic ELISA-positive cats should be tested using the IFA
modality and/or retested in 1-3 months. IFA is the confrmatory
Feline leukemia virus
test modality and represents antigen in the cytoplasm of infected
FeLV is a retrovirus found in domestic cats worldwide. The virus
blood cells. The IFA test is run on either whole blood or bone
marrow smears at a reference laboratory. PCR testing is not yet
 n s n sisq a st d m po  s
standardized and currently is unvalidated. It is possible for cats
ties. There are three known subgroups of the virus (A, B, and C).
with retroviruses to live normal lives for many years. Their even-
 Recently, a fourth subtype has been identifed, FeLV-T. While
tual cause of death may or may not be caused by their retroviral
the subgroups vary in their clinical pathogenesis, laboratory
 status. The median survival after diagnosis was 2.4 years.54 All
determination is not readily available and therefore is not of a
healthy, positive cats should be on a biannual examination
practicable significance. FeLV is shed in the saliva, urine, feces,
schedule and, minimally, annual laboratory evaluations (CBC,
and other secretions, passing horizontally among cats with close
chemistries, urinalysis, and fecal parasite testing). Core vaccina-
communal contact and vertically from queens to kittens either
tion using inactivated vaccines is preferred. Close monitoring of
tn utero or through the mother's milk The virus is relatively
the cat's weight, body condition score (BCS) and oral health is
fragile outside of the host, so transmission is generally through
 indicated. During treatment, routine nosocomial precautions are
the oronasal route or bite wounds. Indirect transmission is not
 indicated. Cats should be housed individually, but isolation is
a known risk Inactivation of the virus can be achieved with
 not indicated and is in fact contraindicated since this may expose
routine disinfectants and detergents. Older studies suggested
the immunocompromised individual to other animals with
that exposure to FeLV and the resultant anti-FeLV antibodies
 infectious agents. Treatment with antiviral chemotherapy, most
accumulated with age but that susceptibility to infection simul-
commonly interferon, and immune modulatory therapy are
taneously decreased." Even though recent studies have demon-
 used, but the effectiveness of these treatments is variable. Sup-
strated natural infection in adult cats,3 kittens remain the most
portive care consists of treating secondary infections, bone
susceptible to infection. Other reasons for susceptibility are
marrow disorders, neoplasia, or other manifestations of the
multifold and include the fragility of the virus and the relatively
disease. Nursing care includes attending to the patient's cleanli-
large viral load needed to cause infection. This combination of
ness and nutritional intake. Close monitoring of the patient's
reasons leads to an increase in infection for cats chronically
 temperature, weight, blood counts, lymph nodes, and neurologi-
exposed to infected cats actively shedding the virus. The initial
cal status are indicated.
or primary stage of infection is usually transient, although it may
The efficacy of FeLV vaccines to challenge studies is still
be pronounced in its presentation. The clinical signs include
under debate; therefore, the protection provided from these vac-
fever, diarrhea, and lymphadenopathy; lethargy and leukopenia
cines is uncertain. Vaccines available for use are inactivated,
may also be noted. The virus propagates in the lymphoid organs.
adjuvanted and nonadjuvanted whole virus, viral subunits, or
The timeline for pathogenesis is unknown but is reported as
weeks to months. Most cats in the early stage of infection can
all cats be tested for FeLV prior to immunization. Only those
426
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
adult cats at risk for or for potential exposure to FeLV are rec-
tive agent. In most cats, Bordetella spp. cause mild and self-
ommended to be vaccinated. It is highly recommended that all
limiting respiratory tract disease of approximately 10 days
 kittens receive vaccination, regardless of exposure factors, in
duration. Bronchopneumonia, often acute and fatal, can develop
order to provide some protection when at their most vulnerable.
and is more prevalent in kittens. B. bronchiseptica (Bb) infection
The location recommendation for vaccine administration is the
is unusual in cats, found mostly in catteries and in shelter situ-
distal left hind leg.
ations. Bb infection presents, as with other upper respiratory
diseases, as fever, sneezing, nasal discharge, submandibular lym-
Chiamydia
phadenopathy, and rales. The characteristic cough noted in dogs
is not as prevalent in cats. The mode of transmission is by direct
C.felis is an intracellular bacterium occurring worldwide that
 affects cats, birds, and humans. This bacterium can play a role
contact with infected individuals (dog or cat) or through aero-
 sap s none ai s od uonou su uoo
 in feline upper respiratory disease complex. The transmission of
asymptomatic carrier state is common with reemergence of
the disease is primarily through contact with contaminated
symptoms often associated with times of stress. Bb is easily killed
fomites, host secretions and excretions, or through aerosoliza-
with most disinfectants. If a definitive diagnosis is indicated/
tion. The incubation period is 5-10 days. All age groups of cats
 pursued, it is through culture of oropharyngeal and nasal swabs,
are susceptible, but it is predominantly seen in young cats from 
or sputum samples. During treatment, full isolation procedures
2 to 9 months of age. Young kittens (7-10 day old) are also vul-
must be utilized. The first line of treatment is with antibiotics-
nerable to neonatal conjunctivitis with symptoms persisting for
tetracycline derivatives, quinolones, or amoxicillin/clavulonic
some time. Once contracted, cats can be carriers for as long as
being the antibiotics of choice. Supportive care usually consists
18 months postinfection. Episodes of shedding bacteria are often
of fluid therapy to address dehydration, facial hygiene, and nutri-
preceded by stressful events. The bacterium can be disinfected
tional support if indicated. Nursing care includes strict isolation
with household detergents. The primary clinical sign of this
procedures to prevent cross contamination, scrupulous patient/
highly contagious disease is acute, severe conjunctivitis charac-
facial hygiene, and nutritional support, if indicated. Close moni-
 terized by blepharospasm, conjunctival hyperemia, chemosis,
toring of the patient's temperature, hydration status, lung sounds,
 and ocular discharge. Other less common conditions include
and nutritional status is indicated.
abortion, polyarthritis, and feline pneumonitis (FPn). FPn is
The vaccine is only recommended for cats with a likely, spe.
characterized by sneezing and coughing. Although mortality is
cific risk of infection. The vaccine is available as a nonadjuvanted
not great, infected kittens and older cats may become severely
MLV topical vaccine for intranasal administration. Parenteral
debilitated. Because of its extreme infectivity, feline chlamydiosis
administration will cause a severe local reaction and possible
constitutes a major problem in pet hospitals, clinics, and catter-
death. A single dose can be administered in cats as young as
ies. Laboratory diagnosis is through positive culture of excre-
8 weeks of age, followed by annual booster vaccination if
tions or secretions. During treatment, full isolation procedures
indicated.
must be utilized. Supportive care usually consists of fluid therapy
to address dehydration and oral and/or ocular antibiotics.
Feline immunodeficiency virus
contamination, facial hygiene particularly cleansing of ocular
discharges, and nutritional support, if indicated. Close monitor-
FIV is a T-lymphotropic lentivirus that causes an acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). It is found in domestic
ing of the patient's temperature, lung sounds, hydration status
cats worldwide. FIV shares many characteristics with the human
and nutritional intake is indicated.
immunodeficiency virus, but it is a distinct virus that is not
There is a reported high rate of adverse vaccine reaction and
transmissible between cats and humans. Five known subtypes
a low rate of disease complications. These two factors plus a
exist (A-E). FIV is shed in the saliva, and transmission is via bite
vaccine that does not prevent, only lessens the course of the
 disease, warrants the noncore status of this vaccine. Additionally.
wounds. Passing of the virus horizontally among cats with close,
the use of the vaccine does not prevent shedding of the organ-
friendly communal contact is uncommon. The virus is relatively
fragile outside of the host and indirect transmission is not a
ism. The vaccine may be used as part of a control regime for cats
known risk Inactivation of the virus can be achieved with
in multiple cat environments where confrmed clinical disease is
routine disinfectants or detergents. The symptoms of the initial
 present. The vaccine is available as a nonadjuvanted MLV and as
 stage or acute phase of infection are fever, malaise, and diarrhea.
 an inactivated, adjuvanted injectable product. The initial dose
The virus propagates in different cells of the immune system
 can be administered as early as 9 weeks of age, with a booster
and/or in the CNS; the exact location of replication may be
vaccine administered 3-4 weeks later. Boosters, if indicated, are
indicative ofthe eventual manifestation ofthe disease. A decrease
 annual.
in the lymphocyte count with inversion of the T-lymphocyte
ratio is noted during viral propagation. Cell-mediated immunity
Bordetella
is more profoundly affected than humoral immunity.5 FIV pro-
Bordetella spp. are small, motile, gram-negative, aerobic cocco-
duces a persistent, lifelong infection (carrier state). The disease
bacilli that can be found in conjunction with other pathogens in
the feline upper respiratory disease complex or as the sole causa-
phase) with a gradual decline in immune function (terminal
Chapter 12 Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
427
phase). It is possible for cats with FIV to live normal lives for 
 prevent infection, a minimum duration of immunity based on
many years. Their eventual cause of death may or may not be 
 challenge has not been reported. The vaccine is available as an
 caused by their viral status. Eventual opportunistic infections,
adjuvanted, inactivated injectable vaccine licensed for use in
myelosuppression, stomatitis, neoplasia, ocular inflammation,
dogs. It may be administered as early as 8 weeks of age, with a
anemia, leucopenia, or neurological disease may be noted. The
booster vaccine in 2-4 weeks. Boosters, if indicated, are annual
 median survival after diagnosis is 4.9 years. Clinical diagnosis is
according to the manufacturer.
through laboratory testing for antibodies performed using the
 ELISA method. Confrmatory testing by a second antibody test
Feline infectious peritonitis
 or Western blot is suggested PCR testing is not yet standardized
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is a positive-stranded RNA
and currently is unvalidated. It is recommended that the retro-
feline coronavirus. The virus is a transmissible gastroenteritis
viral status be known on all cats. Vaccination against FIV pro-
through the fecal-oral route. FIP eventually results in a fatal
duces anti-FIV antibodies that cannot be distinguished from
 Arthus-type immune-mediated vasculitis.
 natural infection for at least 1 year. In addition, previously vac-
 At this time, proof is lacking that vaccination providles clini-
cinated queens will pass these antibodies via passive transfer
 cally relevant protection. In addition, only cats known to be
onto their kittens in their colostrum. All healthy, positive cats
 feline coronavirus antibody negative at the time of vaccination
should be on a biannual examination schedule and, minimally,
 are likely to develop some level of protection. Vaccination of
 annual laboratory evaluations (CBC, chemistries, urinalysis, and
 coronavirus antibody-positive cats or exposure to cats with FIP
fecal parasite testing). Core vaccination using inactivated vac-
is not recommended. The vaccine is a nonadjuvanted, MLV,
cines is preferred. Close monitoring of the cat's weight, BCS, and
 topical product. Initial vaccine is as early as 16 weeks of age, with
 oral health is indicated. During treatment, routine nosocomial
a booster vaccine in 3-4 weeks. Annual booster vaccine is
 precautions are indicated. Cats should be housed individually,
recommended by the manufacturer.
but isolation is not indicated and is in fact contraindicated since
this may expose the immunocompromised individual to infec-
Vaccinations and adverse reactions
tious agents. Treatment with antiviral chemotherapy, most com-
monly interferon, and immune modulatory therapy are used, but
As with any and all medications or drugs, the administration of
the effectiveness of these treatments is variable. Supportive care
vaccinations can result in adverse effects. Possible adverse effects
consists of treating opportunistic infections, stomatitis, anemia,
 include pain at the site of injection, fever, inappetence, and leth-
 or other manifestations of the disease. Nursing care includes
 argy. There are many diferent reactions that can occur after
attending to the patient's cleanliness and, especially in cases of
 exposure to a vaccination. They can range from minor (sensitiv-
stomatitis, to their nutritional intake. Close monitoring of the
ity and/or a small mass at the injection site) to more generalized
patients temperature, weight, blood counts, eyesight, and neuro-
reactions (urticaria, fever, lethargy) to the most severe with ana-
logical status is indicated.
 phylactic shock (vomiting, salivation, dyspnea, and incoordina-
This vaccine has been shown to provide protection against
tion) and death. In one study, mild to severe adverse effects
subtype A and subtype D strains of FIV, but its protective value
within 3 days of vaccination were reported in 0.38% of dogs. The
against all of the strains is unknown. Because cats vaccinated
highest risk of adverse reactions was observed when multiple
with FIV will exhibit a positive FIV test, some form of perma-
vaccine products were administered on the same visit, especially
nent identification is recommended. This vaccine is available as
in young adult small dogs (<10kg)." Most reactions were
an adjuvanted, killed product. The initial vaccination schedule
 reported within 1 day of vaccination. Multivalent vaccine prod-
is a series of three vaccines as early as 8 weeks of age with sub-
 ucts did not pose a higher risk than monovalent products in this
sequent doses every 2-3 weeks. Annual boosters are recom-
study. In another study, 0.52% of cats had adverse effects of
 mended only if warranted.
varying severity within 30 days of vaccination. Similar to dogs,
the highest risk was associated with cats receiving multiple
vaccine products per visit, and most reactions occurred within
Feline vaccines not generally recommended
3 days of vaccination.56
Giardia
Physiology of anaphylaxis
Giardia spp. are protozoal agents found worldwide that can
infect any mammal, including humans, dogs, and cats. The most
 After the initial exposure to an antigen or hapten, IgE binds to
common source for human infection is drinking contaminated
 mast cells (sensitization). When the sensitized animal is exposed
water, not from contact with infected pets. Infection in children,
to the allergen for the second time, the IgE antibodies on the
puppies, and kittens is often subclinical and does not necessarily
mast cells react, causing the cells to release their chemical media-
 tors (degranulation). The chemical mediators involved in this
ronment and can persist for years in the cystic form.
 process include histamine, proteases, chemotactic factors, leu-
Insufficient studies are available to support the role of this
kotrienes, prostaglandin D, and cytokines (tumor necrosis factor
s nd  h s  d  
and interleukins). These chemical mediators cause the clinical
but it does not prevent infection. Since the vaccine does not
signs associated with anaphylaxis.
428
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
-is ( I a e se pss i sie
Previous vaccination reaction history
tivity reaction that typically occurs within minutes to 1h of
If the patient has a history of vaccine reaction, precautions
should be taken with any future vaccination. If at all possible,
(biphasic) response may reoccur hours to days later.
further vaccinations should be avoided. Depending on local
Anaphylactoid reactions or psuedoanaphylaxis are due to the
direct degranulation of mast cells in the absence of IgE. These
regulations, rabies titers may be acceptable in lieu of vaccination.
 If further vaccinations are required, the following guidelines are
reactions present and are treated similarly as anaphylaxis but are
not true allergic reactions. An anaphylactoid reaction does not
recommended.
require prior sensitization and can be observed after the admin-
Different Vaccination Manufacture. Selection of a vaccine
istration of some drugs (e.g, certain radiocontrast agents).
from a different manufacturer may decrease the possibility
of a repeated vaccine reaction. If possible, avoid the same
Localized anaphylaxis
vaccine as used previously.
Localized anaphylaxis (also known as cutaneous anaphylaxis) is
2.
Administer by an Alternate Route. Avoid IM administration
limited to the site of the antigen exposure, usually resulting in
of a vaccine; administer by intranasal or subcutaneous route.
such clinical signs as urticaria or wheals (hives), pruritis, and
3.
Switch to an MLV Product. Avoid adjuvanted inactivated
erythema If the site of exposure is the respiratory tract (inhaled),
products.
localized anaphylaxis can result in rhinitis or asthma. If the site
Premedication. Premedication with an antihistamine, such
of exposure is the gastrointestinal tract (swallowed), localized
anaphylaxis can result in allergic gastroenteritis.
as diphenhydramine (Benadryl°), and a corticosteroid, such
as prednisolone sodium succinate, can be given 30 min prior
The treatment  for localized anaphylaxis is antihistamine
administration. Severe reactions may require corticosteroids,
to vaccine administration.
epinephrine, and/or oxygen therapy.
5.
Observation. Vaccinate early in the day; hospitalization of
the patient for observation may be needed. The length of
Systemic anaphylaxis (hypersensitivity reactions)
observation is dependent somewhat on the history, but
typically 4-8 h is indicated.
Systemic anaphylaxis is an acute, life-threatening, whole body.
6.
Only Administer One Vaccine at a Time. Only single-agent
hypersensitivity response to an antigen (e.g., drugs, hormones,
 products should be administered at each visit. A 2-week
vaccines, iodinated contrast media, and venom) in a sensitized
 animal.37 Anaphylaxis is also called anaphylactic shock, anaphy-
waiting period between all vaccines is advised.
lactoid reaction, severe allergic reaction, or hypersensitivity
reaction.
Postvaccinal masses
The clinical signs may include urticaria, pruritis, facial edema,
A biopsy should be obtained from any vaccinate-associated mass
periocular swelling, angioedema (generalized permeability of
as per the following guidelines from the American Veterinary
the peripheral vasculature), hypotension, collapse, dyspnea
Medical Association:
(from bronchospasm), nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. This can
 o A   s As i 
a.i
 if the mass is present for >3 months,
angioedema and cardiovascular collapse and death, possibly
b. if the mass is ≥2 cm in diameter, or
within 30 min of exposure to an antigen.
c.i
if the mass increases in size after 1 month.
Immediate emergency care is needed during anaphylaxis. The
administration of epinephrine is the frst response with antihis-
Inadequate immune response to vaccination aka
 tamines and corticosteroids often used as adjuncts to therapy.
vaccine failure
 Patients with anaphylaxis require close monitoring and may
 require resuscitation measures such as supplemental oxygen,
If a vaccinated animal develops the disease for which it had been
 airway management, and intravenous fluids.
vaccinated against, there are a number of factors to investigate.
Possible causes include host factors, vaccine factors, and human
Vaccine anaphylaxis
error (Table 12.4.2).
Anaphylaxis is among the most severe reactions that can be seen
Client education after vaccination
 after vaccinating an animal. Since anaphylaxis can occur after 
exposure to any foreign antigen and it is not limited to vaccine
Regardless of previous vaccination history, all clients should be
exposure, diagnosing the offending antigen is problematic in
educated about the possibility of adverse effects including the
some cases. Also, if more than one vaccine is administered at a
clinical signs of anaphylaxis, length of time to observe their pet
time, it is difficult to identify which vaccine, and which compo-
postvaccine administration, and the possibility of postvaccinal
nent within the vaccine may be responsible for the reaction. The
mass formation. This education should include information on
 introduction of microbial agents, adjuvant, inactivators, pre-
the site(s) of administration and recommendations on when to
servatives, or other proteins in a vaccine product may cause an
contact the veterinary team. In addition, the vaccination sched-
allergic reaction.
ule for their pet should be reiterated.
 Chapter 12 Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
429
Table 12.4.2  Factors causing inadequate immune response to vaccination
Host factors
Human error
vaccine factors
 Primary immunodefi ciences
Improper mixing of products
 Rendered noninfectious/inactivated
during handling
 Maternal antibody interference
Exposed at the time of vaccination
Improper storage
Insufficient time between vaccination and
Concurrent use of antimicrobials or
vaccines not protecting 100% of
disease exposure
immunosuppressive drugs
population (biological variation)
Age —very young and very old
Simultaneous use of vaccine and antisera
 Disinfectant used on needles and
syringes
Pregnancy
Too frequent administration (<2-week
 Different or wrong strain
intervals)
Stress, concurrent illness
Delay between vaccines in initial series 
Excessive attenu ation
 Pyrexia, hypothermia.
Wrong route of administration
Incubating disease at the time of
 Omission of booster vaccination 
vaccination
Immunosu ppressive drugs-cytotoxic,
 Concurrent surgery or anesthesia
glucocorticoids
Hormonal flu ctuations 
Excessive time between reconstitution and
ad ministration
General debilitation, malnutrition
Not administering entire dose
Overwhelming exposure
Disinfectant of skin (uncertain)
Concurrent surgery or anesthesia
(uncertain)
Source: Greene C. infectious Disease of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edition. St. Louis, MO: w.B. Saunders, 1999.
While reporting suspected vaccine reactions is voluntary, vet-
Hampel V, Schwarz B, Kempf C, et al. Adjuvant immunotherapy
erinarians and technicians are encouraged to do so. Suspected
of feline fibrosarcoma with recombinant feline interferon-00. J Vet
vaccine reactions should be reported to the manufacturer and
Intern Med 2007;21:1340-1341.
the government regulating agency (e.g., United States Depart-
Biller B. Cancer immunotherapy for the veterinary patient. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim 2007;37(1137):1141-1142.
 Bergman P, McKnight J, Novosad A, et al. Long term survival of 
nary staff can help maintain the safety and efficacy of vaccine
dogs with advanced malignant melanoma after DNA vaccination
products.
with xenogeneic human tyrosinase: a phase I trial. Clin Cancer Res
Vaccination adverse effects and anaphylactic reactions may
2003;9:1284-1285.
occur, but they are uncommon. Client fears of a reaction
7.
Khanna C, Hasz D, Klausner J, et al. Aerosol delivery of inter-
should not outweigh the benefits from disease protection,
leukin 2 liposomes is nontoxic and biologically effective: canine
both for the pet and the owner. The benefits of vaccinations
studies. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:721, 727.
do outweigh the vaccination risks.
 Khanna C, Anderson P, Hasz D, et al. Interleukin-2 liposome
inhalation therapy is safe and effective for dogs with spontaneous
pulmonary metastases. Cancer 1997;79(7):1410, 1415.
9.
de Mari K, Maynard L, Sanquer A, et al. Therapeutic effects 
Bibliography
of recombinant feline interferon-00 on feline leukemia virus
(FeLV)-infected and FeLV/feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)-
Section 1
coinfected symptomatic cats. J Vet Intern Med 2004;18:477.
1.
Abbas A, Lichtman A, Pillai S. Infectious Cellular and Molec-
Section 2
uar Irmmunology, 6th edition, pp. 4-7, 63, 346, 397, 410-415,
489, 500-502, 507-508. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier;
1.http://ahdc.vet.cornell.edu/sects/clinpath/test/immun/ana.cfm.
2010.
2.
Wardrop KJ. Ihe Coombs test in veterinary medicine: past,
2.
Bergman PJ. Cancer immunotherapy. Vet Clin North Am Small
present, future. Vet Clin Pathol 2005;34(4):325-334.
Anim. 2010;40:507-508, 511-512.
3.
Warman SM, Murray JK, Ridyard A, et al. Pattern of Coombs' test
3.
Tizard 1. Veterinary Immunology an Introduction, 8th edition,
reactivity has diagnostic significance in dogs with immune-
Pp. 4-5, 394-395. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2009.
mediated haemolytic anaemia. J Small Amirm Pract 2008;49:525-530.
430
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
4.Lappin MR. ELISA Tests: Methods and Interpretation. CVT XIII,
8.
 Lappin MR, Andrews J, Simpson D, Jensen WA. Use of serologic
Pp. 8-11. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 2003.
5.
Lappin MR. Laboratory diagnosis of infectious disease. In: Text-
and feline parvovirus infection in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
book of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition. St. Louis, MO:
2002;220(1):38-42.
Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
9.8
 Scott FW, Geissinger CM. Long-term immunity in cats vaccinated
Garrett L. Fine-Needle Aspiration, NAVC Clinician's Brief, June
with an inactivated trivalent vaccine. Arm J Vet Res 1999;60(5):
2010, pp. 61-66.
652-658.
7.8
 Siedlecki CT. Lymph node aspiration and biopsy In: Textbook of
10.
 Moore GE, Glickman LT. A perspective on vaccine guidelines and
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
titer tests for dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;224(2):200-203.
Elsevier; 2010.
11.
Nara PL, Krakowka S, Powers TE. Effects of prednisolone on the
8.0
Couto CG. Cytology. In: Snall Animal Internal Medicine, 4th
development of immune responses to canine distemper virus in
edition, eds. RW Nelson, CG Couto p. 1143. St. Louis, MO: Mosby
beagle pups. Arm J Vet Res 1979;40(12):1742-1747.
Elsevier; 2009.
12.
 Duval D, Giger U. Vaccine-associated immune-mediated hemo-
lytic anemia in the dog. J Vet Intern Med 1996;10(5):290-295.
Section 3
13.
Warrell MJ, Warrell DA. Rabies and other lyssavirus diseases.
Lancet 2004;363(9413):959-969.
Ettinger SJ Feldman EC. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine
14.
Blanton JD, Robertson K, Palmer D, Rupprecht CE. Rabies sur-
(Diseases of the Dog and Cat), 5th edition, Vol. 2, pp. 1793-1798,
veillance in the United States during 2008. J Arm Vet Med Assoc
1819-1823. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2000.
2009;235(6):676-689.
2.
Blackwood L, German AJ, Stell AJ, O'Neill T. Multicentric lym-
15.1
Murray KO, Holmes KC, Hanlon CA. Rabies in vaccinated dogs
 phoma in a dog after cyclosporine therapy. J Small Anim Pract
and cats in the United States, 1997-2001. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2004;45(5):259-262.
 Al-Ghazlat S. Immunosuppressive therapy for canine immune
2009;235(6):691-695.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Human
mediated hemolytic anemia. Compendium 2009;31(1).
Plumb D. Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook, 6th edition, pp.
rabies—Kentucky/Indiana, 2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
4.
2010;59(13):393-396.
88-90, 234-240, 248-249, 265-269, 427-429, 526-527, 639-640,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Human
755-762. Stockholm, WI: Blackwell; 2010.
rabies—Alberta, Canada, 2007. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
5.  Mason N, Duval D, Shofer FS, Giger U. Cyclophosphamide exerts
2008;57(8):197-200.
no beneficial effect over prednisone alone in the initial treatment
18.
 Pardo MC, Bauman JE, Mackowiak M. Protection of dogs against
of acute immune-mediated hemolytic anemia in dogs: a rand-
-an  xn e  n aq a a
omized controlled clinical trial. J Vet Intern Med 2003;17(2):
binant expressing canine distemper virus fusion and hemaggluti-
206-212.
nin glycoproteins. Arm J Vet Res 1997;58(8):833-836.
6.1
 Bianco D. A prospective, randomized, double-blinded, placebo-
19.
Goldstein RE, Lin RC, Langston CE, Scrivani PV, Erb HN, Barr
controlled study of human. J Vet Intern Med 2009;23:1071-1078.
 SC. Influence of infecting serogroup on clinical features of lept-
7.
Sharpe C. Standards of Care, Vol. 10, No. 10, Nov 2008, Immune
ospirosis in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2006;20(3):489-494.
Mediated Hemolytic Anemia on Lifelearn. http://www.vetlearn.
com/ArticleDetails/tabid/106/ArticleID/3903/Default.aspx
Schultz RD, Larson LJ, Lorentzen LP. Effects of modified live
canine parvovirus vaccine on the snap ELISA antigen assay. J Vet
8.1
 Misseghers BS, Binnington AG, Mathews KA. Clinical observa-
Emerg Crit Care 2008;18(4):410.
tions of the treatment of canine perianal fistulas with topical tac-
 Greene CE. Infectious canine hepatitis and canine acidophil cell
rolimus in 10 dogs. Can Vet J 2000;41(8):623-627.
hepatitis. In: Infetious Diseasesofthe Dogand Cat,3rd edition, d.
CE Greene, pp. 41-47, 58. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2006.
Section 4
 Schultz RD. Duration of immunity for canine and feline vaccines:
1. Paul MA, Carmichael LE, Childers H, et al. 2006 AAHA canine
a review. Vet Microbiol 2006;117(1):75-79.
vaccine guidelines. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2006;42(2):80-89.
23.
Adller B, de la Pena Moctezuma A. Leptospira. In: Pathogenesis
2.1
Richards JR, Elston TH, Ford RB, et al. Ihe 2006 American
of Bacterial Infections in Animals, 4th edition, ed. CL Gyles, et al.,
Association of Feline Practitioners feline vaccine advisory panel
pp. 527-541. Ames, LA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010.
report. J Ar Vet Med Assoc 2006;229(9):1405-1441.
24.
Greene CE, Sykes JE, Brown CA, Hartmann K. Leptospirosis. In:
Greene CE, Schultz RD. Immunoprophylaxis. In: Infectious
Infectious Diseases ofthe Dog and Cat,3rd edition,ed. CE Greene,
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition, ed. CE Greene, pp.
pp. 402-416. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2006.
1069-1119. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2006.
25.
Ward MP, Glickman LT, Guptill LE. Prevalence of and risk factors
4.
Spickler AR, Roth JA. Adjuvants in veterinary vaccines: modes of
for leptospirosis among dogs in the United States and Canada: 677
action and adverse effects. J Vet Intern Med 2003;17(3):273-281.
cases (1970-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002;220(1):53-58.
5.
Morrison WB, Starr RM. Report of the vaccine-associated feline
26.
Alton GD, Berke O, Reid-Smith R, Ojkic D, Prescott JF. Increase
sarcoma task force. JAVMA 2001;218 No. 5:697-702.
's y sh pue sisosda auus jo auaeadias u
6.
Kass PH, Spangler WL, Hendrick MJ, et al. Multicenter case-
Ontario 1998-2006. Can J Vet Res 2009;73(3):167-175.
control study of risk factors associated with development of
27.
Ward MP, Guptill LF, Wu CC. Evaluation of environmental risk
vaccine-associated sarcomas in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;
factors for leptospirosis in dogs: 36 cases (1997-2002). J Am Vet
223(9):1283-1292.
Med Assoc 2004;225(1):72-77.
7.8
 Schultz RD, Ihiel B, Mukhtar E, Sharp P, Larson LJ. Age and long-
28.
Adin CA, Cowgill LD. Treatment and outcome of dogs with lept-
term protective immunity in dogs and cats. JCormp Pathol 2010;142
ospirosis: 36 cases (1990-1998). JArm Vet Med Assoc 2000;216(3):
Suppl 1:S102-S108.
371-375.
Chapter 12
Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunology
431
29.
Prescott JE, McEwen B, Taylor J, Woods JP, Abrams-Ogg A,
44.
 Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
Wilcock B. Resurgence of leptospirosis in dogs in Ontario: recent
5th edition, Vol. 1, pp. 449-450. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2000.
fndings. Can Vet J 2002;43(12):955-961.
45.
Truyen U, Gruenberg A, Chang SF, et al. Evolution of the feline-
30.
 Ribotta M, Fortin M, Higgins R, Beaudin S. Canine leptospirosis:
subgroup of parvovirus and control of canine host range in vivo.
Serology. Can Vet J 2000;41(6):494-495.
I Virol 1995;69:4702.
31.
 Kaasen HL, Molkenboer MJ, Vrijenhoek MP, Kaashoek MJ.
46.
 Kahn CM. Merck Veterinary Manual, 9th edition. Whitehouse
 Duration of immunity in dogs vaccinated against leptospirosis
Station, NJ: Merck & co; 2008. Online, last accessed 2/2011.
with a bivalent inactivated vaccine. Vet Microbiol 2003;95(1-2):
47.
121-132.
6th edition, 653, 2004.
32.
Moore GE, Guptill LF, Ward MP, et al. Adverse events diagnosed
48.
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC. TEextbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
within three days of vaccine administration in dogs. J Amm Vet Med
7th edition, p. 946; 2010.
Assoc 2005;227(7):1102-1108.
49. Lauritzen A, Jarrett O, Sabara M. Serological analysis of feline
33.
Gore T, Headley M, Laris R, et al. Intranasal kennel cough vaccine
calicivirus isolates from the United States and United Kingdom.
protecting dogs from experimental Bordetella bronchiseptica
Vet Microbiol 1997;56:55.
challenge within 72 hours. Vet Rec 2005;156(15):482-483.
50.
 Radford A, Coyne K, Dawson S, Porter C, Gaskell R. Feline cali-
34.
Davis R, Jayappa H, Abdelmagid OY, Armstrong R, Sweeney D,
civirus. Vet Res 2007;38(2):319-335. DOI: 10.1051/vetres:2006056.
Lehr C. Conparison of the mucosal immune response in dogs
PMID 17296159.
vaccinated with either an intranasal avirulent live culture or a
Foley JE. Calicivirus: spectrum of disease. In: Consultations in
subcutaneous antigen extract vaccine of Bordetella bronchiseptica.
Feline Internal Medicine, Vol. 5.ed. JR August, pp. 3-10. St. Louis,
Vet Iher 2007;8(1):32-40.
MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2005.
35.
Littman MP, Goldstein RE, Labato MA, Lappin MR, Moore GE.
52.
 Lehmann R, Franchini M, Aubert A, et al. Vaccination of cats
ACVIM small animal consensus statement on lyme disease in
experimentally infected with feline immunodeficiency virus,
dogs: Diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. J Vet Intern Med
using a recombinant feline leukemia virus vaccine. J Ar Vet Med
2006;20(2):422-434.
Assoc 1991;199:1446-1452.
36.
Yoon K-J, Cooper VL, Schwartz KJ, et al. Influenza virus infection
53.
Torres AN, Mathiason CK, Hoover EA. Re-examination of feline
in racing greyhounds. Emerg Infect Dis 2005;11(12):1974-1976.
leukemia virus: host relationships using real-time PCR. Virology
37.
Hilling K, Hanel R. Canine Influenza. Cormpendiurm: Cont Educ
2005;332:272-283.
Vet2010;6:E1-E9.http://www.vetlearn.com/compendium/canine-
54.
 Levy JK, Lorentzen L, Shields J, Lewis H. 2006. Long term outcome
influenza-ce (accessed July 28, 2010).
of cats with natural FeLV and FIV infection. 8th International
38.
 Crawford C, Rada KA, UC Davis Koret Shelter Medicine Pro-
Feline Retrovirus Research Symposium, Washington, DC.
 gram. Information: canine influenza. http://www.sheltermedicine.
55.
 Levy JK, Ritchey IW, Rottman JB, et al. Elevated interleukin-10-
com/shelter-health-portal/information-sheets/canine-influenza
to-interleukin-12 ratio in feline immunodeficiency virus-infected
(accessed July 28, 2010).
cats predicts loss of type 1 immunity to Toxoplasma gondi. J Infect
39.
Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine Animal Health
Dis 1998;178:503-511.
Diagnostic Center. Appropriate samples for detecting presence of
56.
Moore GE, DeSantis-Kerr AC, Guptill LF, Glickman NW, Lewis
canine influenza virus. http://www.diaglab.vet.cornell.edu/issues/
HB, Glickman LT. Adverse events after vaccine administration in
civ.asp (accessed July 28, 2010).
cats: 2560 cases (2002-2005). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007;231(1):
40.
Intervet/Schering-Plough Animal Health.
1.Canine influenza
94-100.
vaccine, H3N8. http://www.intervetusa.com/products/nobivac-
57.
Waddell LS. Systemic anaphylaxis. In: Textbook of Veterinary
canine-flu-h3n8/productdetails_130_121109.aspx (accessed July
Internal Medicine, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman, Pp. 531-534.
28, 2010).
St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2010.
41.
Crawford PC, Sellon RK. Chapter 216: Canine viral diseases. In:
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 4th edition, ed. CE Greene,
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, eds. SJ Ettinger, EC
Pp. 75 St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2012.
Feldman, Pp. 958-970. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2010.
59.
 Rentko VT, Clark N, Ross LA, Schelling SH. Canine leptospirosis.
42.
 US Federal Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR 530.41. http://
A retrospective study of 17 cases. J Vet Intern Med 1992;6(4):
www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?
235-244.
fr=530.41 (accessed July 28, 2010).
43.
CDC-Human Rabies Prevention—United States. 2008 Recommen-
dations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices.
Prepared by Manning SE, Rupprecht CE, Fishbein D, et al.
Chapter
13
Pain and Its Management
Author: Barry Kipperman
 Managing pain in our animal patients is one of the most impor-
management protocols. In this paradigm, veterinary technicians
tant and challenging charges of all veterinary personnel. This 
 or nurses are expected to administer analgesics to patients and to
responsibility is explicitly stated in the veterinarian's oath ("the
 follow the orders of the veterinarian. Although this system pro-
relief of animal suffering")' and in the veterinary technician's
vides a simple and straightforward hierarchy, a paradigm shift
code of ethics (*shall prevent and relieve the suffering of animals
 that empowers the veterinary technician to a far greater degree of
with competence and compassion").? It is hard to imagine there
was a time just 50 years ago when infants and children were
 Let us examine the reasoning for this shift using the common
assumed not to require pain management. In fact, when this
 example of an animal being admitted to the hospital for a surgical
sse jo s e sa z u u sm nn
biopsy. Who admits the animal, observes its behaviors prior to
to trauma patients was a rare and extraordinary event, the
 anesthesia, scores the patient's pre-op pain status and anticipated
emphasis being placed on managing shock instead.
pain levels, spends time assisting and managing this patient after
Our profession was slow to embrace pain management in
 its surgery, and speaks to the animal's caretaker after surgery? At
animals due to a lack of experience with analgesics, fear of the
most hospitals, the answer to most, if not all, of these questions is
side effects of opioids, concerns regarding the management of
the veterinary technician. It has been stated that pain is the fifth
 controlled substances, and the perceived rapid recovery of our
"vital sign." Certainly, no one would question the ability of the
patients from surgery in the absence of analgesics. The fact that
 veterinary technician to measure and record the four recognized
dogs and cats could recover uneventfully from routine surgery
 vital signs of temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, and capil-
lulled veterinary personnel into the presumption that there is no
 lary refill time. The recognition and monitoring of pain, the fifth
need to manage pain. This can be referred to as the "he didn't die
 vital sign, should become as standard as the other four signs.
did he?" phenomenon, in which the veterinary staff equates the
A partnership between the veterinarian and the veterinary
animal's survival with a successful outcome. Although we'd all
 technician provides the patient with the best opportunity for
agree that survival is a desired outcome for our patients, survival
adequate pain management. In this team approach, the veteri-
 does not necessarily presume a humane or expedient path.
 narian proposes a suitable analgesic protocol, and the veterinary
 technician administers the protocol and provides frequent and
valued feedback to the veterinarian regarding whether the pro-
Veterinary technician as pain
d s sa d se d   si n
ship requires a keen sense of trust and communication that may
management team leader
take time to develop.
At many hospitals, it is assumed that the staff veterinarians are
The veterinary technician who is knowledgeable regarding the
 causes of pain and the available options to control it, and who is
Smat Anima nternat Medicine forVeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses, First Edition.Edited by Linda Meril
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
433
434
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
p pnd on gq sd r u e o 
 in turn causes depolarization and development of action poten-
relieve pain, can be a tremendous asset both to the veterinarian
fials. Nociceptors are unique in that repeated activation can
and to his/her patients.
result in either an enhanced response (sensitization) or a less-
ened response (habituation) to subsequent stimuli. There are
What is pain?
few interventions curently available that target the nociceptor,
though active research to fnd receptor antagonists is ongoing
 Pain is an unpleasant sensation involving the peripheral and
(Figure 13.1).
central nervous systems (CNS) that can range from mild to
debilitating. Pain is usually caused by stimuli that can arise exter-
Afferent nerve fibers
nally (bone marrow needle) or internally (inflamed pancreas).
Signals generated by the activation of nociceptors are transmit-
 Pain is an adaptive response that allows us to modify behaviors
ted to the CNS by afferent fibers or axons.? Local anesthetics such
or motions in order to preserve function. At its most mundane,
as lidocaine and bupivicaine block the Nat channels and inhibit
this can mean limiting use of an affected limb due to soreness
transmission of the painful signal to the CNS. Unfortunately,
after a bone marrow aspiration. In the case of abdominal pain,
these drugs are nonselective and block painful as well as "normal"
altering posture or simply resting may allow the animal patient
sensation. This lack of selectivity is well-known by anyone who's
to better cope with recovery from an inflamed pancreas.
had a local administered at the dentist, or who's seen the Seinfeld
episode where Kramer is assumed to be intellectually challenged
Pathophysiology of pain
due to his impaired speech after a visit to the dentist. The veteri-
nary technician must take precautions to prevent the animal
The technician who understands how pain is perceived and elic-
patient from harm when he/she is still desensitized from local
 ited can better comprehend pain and is more apt to apply the
anesthesia. For example, the animal receiving prolonged external
concept of multimodality analgesia to control it.
heat applied to a numb limb would be at risk for thermal injury.
Nociception
Dorsai horn neurons
Nociception is the physiological process that results in the con-
Afferent nerve fibers synapse with dorsal horn neurons in the
scious perception of pain.*
 gray matter of the spinal cord. The signal here is mediated by
excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters, particularly gluta-
Peripheral nociceptors
mate. Analgesic drugs that act at the dorsal horn include opioids,
In skin, muscle and viscera, noxious stimuli are translated into
alpha-2 agonists, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
electrical impulses by specialized nerve endings called nocicep
(NSAIDs). Dense populations of opioid receptors exist in this
tors.4 This involves the opening of sodium (Nat) channels, which
region.
Cortex
Third-order neuron
 Projection to higher
Cerebellum
brain structures
Thalamus
(e.g., somatosensory
Spinal cord 
Brainstem
cortex)
Second-order neuron
Spinal tract
Figure 13.1  A simplifed representation of
 nociceptive processing as a three-neuron chain.
A noxious stimulus activates a primary afferent
fiber that transmits the stimulus to the dorsal
Spinalcord
hom of the spinal cord. Here, a second neuron
 ascends in a spinal tract to the level of the
First-order neuron
thalamus. Finally, a tertiary neuron transmits the
 Primary afferent
 modified stimulus to higher brain centers for
fiber
perception.
 Source: Lamont LA, Tranquilli WJ, Grimm K. Physiology
of pain. In: Management of Pain, in the series Veterinary
Cinics of North America, Smal Animal Practice,Vol. 30,
Periphery
No. 4, ed. KA Mathews, p. 705. Philadelphia, PA: W/.B.
Saunders; 2000, with permission.
Chapter 13 Pain and Its Management
435
Inhibit perception
Modulation of spinal pathways
·Anesthetics
Inhibit central sensitization
·Opioids
· Local anesthetics
·α2-agonists
· Opioids or αz-agonists
·Benzodiazepines
*Phenothiazines
·NSAIDs
· NMDA antagonists (ketamine)
• Tricyclic antidepressants
·Anticonvulsants
Inhibit transmission
Inhibit impulse conduction
• Local anesthetics
o2-agonists
 Inhibit tr ansd uction 
Figure 13.2 Sites of action of the major classes of analgesics.
 Inhibit peripheral sensitization of nociceptors
Source: Lamont LA, Tranquilli WJ, Grimm K. Physiology of pain. In:
*NSAIDs
Management of Pain,in the series Veterinary Clinics of North America, Small
sp!o!do *
Animal Practice, Vol. 30, No. 4, ed. KA Mathews, p. 722. Philadelphia, PA:
 Local anesthetics
W.B. Saunders; 2000, with permission.
· Corticosteroids
Brain
Acute pain
The actual perception of a painful stimulus is believed to be
This is often a result of sudden onset of trauma (e.g., surgery.
mediated by neurons that synapse in the thalamus and cerebral
accidents) or inflammation (pancreatitis). The response to acute
pain, such as rest, facilitates repair and healing.
o  sse r p audn ss
the behavioral manifestations of pain by modifying conscious-
Chronic pain
 ness, but these are not primary analgesic agents.
Chronic pain is arbitrarily defined as pain of greater than 3
Descending pathways
months duration. The most common causes include cancer,
These pathways can modulate sensory input and are located in
osteoarthritis, and postamputation phantom pain. Unlike acute
the cerebral cortex and thalamus, the periaqueductal gray matter
 pain, this form of pain is maladaptive (serves no useful purpose),
of the midbrain, the rostral brain stem, and the dorsal horn of
 can have a significant negative influence on patient quality of life,
-n u a nis is a d sd ,o ps a
can be very difficult to discern as signs are often attributed to
lating these descending pathways (Figure 13.2).
old age, and can be very difficult to treat. The old paradigm of
"I know he seems painful, but the rest will do him good" is no
longer an accepted reason to allow a patient to suffer the debili-
Systemic responses to pain
tating consequences of chronic pain. Pain scoring systems have
It is well-known that pain can induce systemic changes that can
difficulty in assessing this type of pain.
signifcantly influence patient outcomes and response to therapy.
 Pain-induced reflex responses result in increased sympathetic
Visceral pain
tone, vasoconstriction, increased systemic vascular resistance,
increased cardiac output, increased myocardial work, 
and
Pain that arises from internal organs can sometimes remain
increased secretion of stress hormones.7 Stimulation of brain-
 untreated by the veterinary team as the perceived life-threatening
 stem centers causes increased respiratory rate. Recognizing and
 aspects of these conditions withdraw attention from the concur-
 rent pain. Distension of hollow organs, such as occurs with feline
 any pain management protocol.
urethral obstruction and resultant bladder distension, gastroin-
testinal (GI) distension from ileus, obstruction or GDV syn-
Types of pain
drome, and inflammation such as pancreatitis, cause some of the
most severe signs of pain in our patients
 Painful stimuli can be categorized in many ways including physi-
ological versus pathological, inflammatory or neuropathic, vis-
Neuropathic pain
ceral, and acute or chronic. As these phrases will be found in any
discussion of pain management as well as on the clinical floor,
This type of pain results from insult to the nervous system.
further clarification is warranted.
Human patients report burning sensations, allodynia, in which
436
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
seemingly ordinary sensations cause pain, and exaggerated
Interference in Ambulatory Status. Seldorm will adequate analge-
 responsiveness to stimuli. Common examples include the dachs-
sia result in loss of the ability to walk In addition, it may be
hund with a herniated intervertebral disk and patients with
beneficial for the patient not to ambulate within the immedi-
amputated limbs (phantom pain).
ate postoperative period.
Interference in Mental Alertness. Stupor and obtundation are
Causes 
 only noted in patients overdosed with medication. If using a
pain
constant rate infusion (CRI) administration, the potential
 For purposes of this discussion, causes of pain will be catego-
effects of drug on mentation can be abolished by discontinu-
rized by whether the etiology is spontaneous or iatrogenic, and
 ing administration for 20-30 min and then reassessing.
s  s  d     
 or presumed based on anthropomorphic factors, that is, “If
Cats Cannot or Will Not Tolerate the Drugs. Although cats are
more sensitive to drug-related side effects, it is very rare that
it hurts us, it probably hurts them just as much" (Tables 13.1
they will not tolerate a drug. With proper drug selection and
and 13.2).
dosing, most cats can and should be treated for pain.
Patient Does Not Appear to Exhibit Pain. Our ability to assess
General approach to pain control
and treat pain should not be limited to general observation of
patient demeanour. Many of our patients suffer in silence and
Although our profession has made significant strides in acknowl-
edging the role of pain in animals and the benefts of its manage-
ment, all too often, animals in pain still do not receive any
be in pain under the same conditions?
analgesics or receive therapy inappropriate relative to their
degree of pain. Also, pain management in cats seems to be
General rules of thumb
 lagging compared to pain management in dogs. Common exam-
 ples include lack of provision of analgesics to animals that sustain
in managing pain
head trauma and cats given only a single dose of butorphanol
Treat Early = Preemptive Anaigesia. Pain is far easier to
after a declaw procedure.
 Reasons veterinary personnel proclaim for withholding anal-
 prevent than to manage once signs manifest. Patients should
gesics include the following.
Therapy should be given prior to the painful procedure if at
Fear of Sedation. Therapeutic doses of opioids seldom result in
all possible. The classic example of this approach occurs
 profound sedation and weakness.
when the pain is planned and iatrogenic in nature, being a
result of surgery or other invasive procedure.
Table 13.1
 Common causes of pain
Spontaneous
Table 13.2
 Common causes of pain
Mild
Moderate
Severe
latrogenic
Lacerations
Osteoarthritis
Neuropathic,
cervical disk,
Mild
Moderate
Severe
meningitis
Castration
Onychectomy/
Th oracotomy
Cystitis
Degenerative joint 
Aortic
declaw
disease
thromboembolism,
limb infarction
Amputation
 Perianal surgery
(OVH)
Wounds
Torsion—gastric
 Peritonitis,
dilatation-volvulus
pancreatitis, sepsis 
Biopsies
Laparotomy
Extensive soft
(GDV), spleen
tissue surgery-
sarcoma, mast 
Urethral
Large wounds
obstru ction
cell tumor (MCT)
(degloving, burns)
Laparoscopy
Radiation therapy
 Ear ablation
Cancer
Polytrauma,
fractures
Bone marrow
Chest tube
Trauma—head,
 Bone cancer
IV and urinary
thorax
catheters
 Source: Modified from Mathews K. Pain assessment and general approach
Source: Modifed from Mathews K. Pain assessment and general approach
to pain management. Management of Pain. Veteninary Clinics of North
to pain management. In management of pain. Veterinary Cinics of North 
America 2000;30(4):735-736.
Amenica 2000;30(4):735-736.
Chapter 13  Pain and Its Management
437
 2. Treat Often. Do not deny an uncomfortable patient analge-
resolves from 6 p.m.-8 a.m., giving the postoperative patient
sic therapy because the next dose is not yet due.
a subcutaneous injection of narcotic at 6 p.m. and telling the
3. Be Empathic. Would you be asking for pain relief if you
client he/she is managed for the night has no basis in physi-
were the patient?
ology or fact. The duration of action of most opioids given
parenterally is 2-8h. This statement is simply our way of
4.  Consider a Multimodal Approach. Many of our patients
rationalizing what is convenient for the veterinarian and
have pain mediated through differing physiological path-
ways. Itshould therefore seem apparent that a “onesize-f
client, who naturally would like their pet to come home. If
one is in doubt as to whether the patient's pain is apt to recur
all" approach, in which all patients receive a standard dose
during the 14h your hospital may be closed or have no one
of analgesic, will seldom provide the most effective pain
on site, then referral to an overnight facility should be
management. Combinations of drugs that influence these
advised so that appropriate monitoring and pain manage-
varied paths are often more successful than single agents.
ment can be continued.
5.
Adjust and Modify Medications until Pain Appears to be
8.
Is the Procedure Starting at a Time and with Adequate Staff-
ing to Maximize Chances of a Positive, Pain-Free Outcome?
monitored regularly and progress is communicated to the
 The later in the day you begin a painful procedure, the more
afttending veterinarian.
compelling it becomes to inform the animal's caretaker that
Questions to consider
some occasions, our best-laid plans are interrupted by emer-
gencies, and suddenly, a procedure planned to begin at noon
1. How Painful Is the Condition or Surgery? The more painful
is now being considered at 5 p.m. In this circumstance, the
the anticipated procedure, the more compelling a multimo-
animal advocate will inform the client that unexpected
dal, intravenous CRI and prolonged analgesic program (24
emergencies arose, and it is no longer in Muffy's best interest
hour) become.
 ep au u aie si aipd aaoa ue uiq o
  psn ue h pe ad ms sb
2.  Is the Patient Especially Anxious? If so, sedative/anxiolytic
medications should be considered prior to anesthetic
minimizes postprocedural complications at closing time or
asking the client to transport an unconscious animal to the
recovery.
 overnight emergency center for observation and unantici-
3.Is This Patient a Suitable Candidate for Multimodal Analge-
pated cost. One option is to offer to board the patient over-
 sics? For example, a patient with renal insuficiency may not
night at no charge and to apologize for the inconvenience.
be deemed a suitable candidate to receive NSAIDs.
4. What Route of Administration Is Most Suitable? For most
How to be an analgesic advocate
patients in acute pain, intravenous administration of opioids
is the preferred route. For severe pain, a CRI of analgesics
for your patient
 provides the ability to best titrate doses to achieve relief, and
avoids the pitfalls of intermittent boluses in which the
Since our animal patients cannot ring for the nurse to increase
 patient rests for a few hours after a dose, and then seems
their rate of narcotic CRI, the veterinary technician is in the
restless and uncomfortable while waiting for the next sched-
most suitable position to detect when his/her patient is uncom-
fortable and to request a modification or initiation of analgesic
uled dose. For chronic pain, oral administration is the most
reasonable.
auu, se juaed iaus ynode pous ssu uen o Adeia
with a sense of ownership and accountability. Your task for that
5.Will the Timing of Administration Provide an Analgesic
day is to do your best to care for the needs of that animal. Once
Effect? Keep in mind that it may take at least 30-60 min to
this mindset is undertaken, it becomes clear that there is no
obtain adequate blood levels of analgesics, even after intra-
 greater need than managing pain and discomfort.
 venous administration. Beginning analgesic therapy at the
 Despite the best of intentions, the attending veterinarian occa-
time of surgical induction may not provide your patient with
 sionally will not provide orders for analgesics in a painful patient.
maximal benefits.
In these situations, a gentle reminder from the technician is all
6. What Dose Should Be Utilized? As a general rule, we can
that should be necessary, and a “thanks for reminding me about
often manage with lower doses of individual drugs when
that" the ideal response from the doctor. In practice, accom-
using a multimodal approach, in the very debilitated and in
plishing this successfully requires more than good intentions; a
 geriatric patients. Conversely, high end doses may be advised
willingness to speak up on your patient's behalf and checking
in a young, anxious patient or when only a single analgesic
egos at the door is required. An all too common refrain among
is used.
technicians is that the veterinarian with the ability to prescribe
7. Does Pain End at Closing Time? One of the major limita-
 analgesics ignores the request of the technician. In my experi-
tions our patients face in managing pain adequately is our
ence, the manner that the technician uses to apprise the veteri-
narian can make the difference between relative ignorance of
of hospitals close. Until it is proved that pain somehow
 your request versus immediate evaluation and action.
438
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 Let us look at the following example: Max, a canine recovering
Signs of pain can be divided into behavioral and physiologi-
from a biopsy, has already received narcotics, but you conclude
 cal. Those of you who can recall the sound of a dog vocalizing
pain persists based on noting the patient will not lie down, is
after extubation know that “the squeaky dog gets the grease";
panting excessively, and has a persistent tachycardia that was not
that is, vocal patients tend to receive far greater aftention from
present prior to the procedure. The blood pressure is normal, the
nurses and doctors than patients suffering in silence. Clearly.
packed cell volume is static, and the dog has an empty bladder.
rational consideration while you read this at home leads to the
Technician 1: “Dr. Kipperman, Max seems painful. We need to
conclusion that all vocalizations are not an expression of pain,
and silence is not necessarily an expression of comfort. Yet in
do something"
the bustle of the treatment room, we tend to feel a need to “put
Technician 2: "Dr. Kipperman, I think Max needs more fentanyl.
out the fre” and often sedate the vocal patient, sometimes
Can we increase his dose?
without consideration as to whether this is providing analgesia
 Technician 3; “Dr. Kipperman, Max seems much more restless
or addressing the root of the problem. Your patients will be
than before surgery, and he won't lie down. Hes been out for 
far better served by a deliberate, rational response to these
a walk but is panting a lot, and his heart rate is 180/minute
circumstances than by a “get the hammer out and stop this"
despite a normal blood pressure. Would you please evaluate
mentality.
him to see if you agree that we should consider modifying his
 So how can we distinguish whether crying and vocalizing are
medications?
expressions of pain? I consider the following guidelines:
When I am interrupted by technician 1, I have received no evi-
Anesthetic-induced dysphoria usually resolves within a few
 dence that he/she has performed a thorough evaluation of Max.
minutes after recovery (admittedly, this may feel like a few
 I am apt to then ask the technician to assess vital signs and to
hours). Give these patients a little time before you run for the
 get back to me, and Max's discomfort is prolonged in the mean-
drugs.
time. Technician 2 has offered a solution for Max but has not
 If the degree of patient vocalization is the same as before the
clarified why he requires a dose adjustment. In other words, what
 procedure, it is seldom necessary to treat with additional
signs are prompting the suggestion? I am far more apt to get to
analgesics. Anxiolytics may be appropriate.
Max's cage because technician 3 has communicated concern and
the results of her evaluation. In addition, she has respected the
 If the vocalization abates when the nurse gently speaks to or
teamwork philosophy of managing Max's care. I might conclude
 picks up the animal, this may be attention-getting behavior
that Max is either anxious or painful, and my response may be,
 or a painful dog that was temporarily distracted. Further
"We can increase the fentanyl dose or we can add on an anxio-
evaluation is warranted.
lytic; was Max nervous or agitated before the procedure?
 If the vocalization abates after basic nursing needs are
 In a busy hospital environment, most attending veterinarians
 addressed such as voiding, clean bedding and warmth, then
may be involved with other procedures or appointments when
no additional treatment is considered.
you report your concerns. Technicians can and should exert
In some instances, it is still impossible to discern whether your
significant influence on the analgesic protocol regarding the
 types, timing, route, and dose of analgesics administered to their
patient is vocalizing due to persistent pain, dysphoria, or anxiety.
patients. When you fail to motivate the veterinarian to assess
In these instances, consider an opioid trial; if the behavior
resolves, one may conclude a response to the narcotic or time.
your patient, you fail your patient as well.
If the behavior persists, consider a sedative, anxiolytic, narcotic
 antagonist, or benign neglect.
Clinical signs and means of detection
 In cases where the cause of pain is iatrogenic, it is extremely
helpful to assess the demeanor and vitals of your patient
before the procedure. Is the patient anxious and vocal in its
most of my patients are premedicated with analgesics prior to
cage, or fearful and hiding? What is the heart rate and res-
invasive procedures? First, a solid preemptive strategy is cer-
 piratory pattern? Ideally, the veterinary technician utilizes all
tainly sound and will be emphasized repeatedly here, but the
the evidence available when assessing a patient for pain. This
best-laid plans certainly do not abate spontaneous causes of
requires a keen knowledge of the patient and of causes of changes
pain. Second, as there is no one-size-fits-all approach that
in physiological parameters. A continuous electrocardiogram
(ECG) monitor is an underutilized, noninvasive means of assess-
is in pain allows the veterinary team to modify the protocol,
ing heart rate without disturbing the patient. In many small
thereby suiting the therapy to the individual patient.
patients or those that sustained thoracic trauma or surgery,
As already discussed, it is in the animal's best interest for the
frequent manipulations to auscult heart rates may be detri-
veterinary technician to be the frst responder in determining
mental. No single symptom is clearly diagnostic of pain in
his/her patient's pain level as the technician typicall spends
 all patients, and each patient's treatment regimen should be
more time cage side than any other member of the health-care
individualized.
team. By the time the veterinarian notices the patient is painful,
For example, a patient whose heart rate coming out of an
you are probably playing catch-up.
invasive procedure is greater than baseline may initially be
Chapter 13 Pain and Its Management
439
Table 13.3   CQinical signs of pain
Analgesics
Physiological
Behavioral
The number of analgesics available for use in animals is greater
Increase in heart rate
Abnormal posture —hunched
than ever before, providing the veterinary health-care team with
from baseline (exclude
stance, unable to get
a wide array of choices. As with anesthetics, this can seem over-
anemia and hypotension)
comfortable or lie down,
whelming at frst glance. It is useful to develop experience with
unwilling to stand/walk, pacing
at least one drug in each category listed below, and, ideally, more
Panting/tachypnea
Abnormal gait—stiff
than one opioid to manage mild to severe signs of pain.
Mydriasis
Abnormal movements
shaking, thrashing
Opioids
Hypertension
Vocalizations (exclude
 Narcotic medications are the most potent and effective analge-
dysphoria, anxiety)
sics and are used with increasing frequency in managing
Aggressive
 pain. In most cases, these are utilized to manage acute pain in-
Bu!P!H
hospital until the patient can be sent home on oral analgesics.
The most common side effects of opioids include sedation/
dysphoria/excitement, panting/tachypnea, bradycardia, nausea,
Source: Modified from Mathews K. Pain assessment and general approach
to pain management. In management of pain. veterinary Cinics of North
America 2000;30(4):732-733.
 overdosed and sedated with doses based on body weight.
usually treat giant dogs as 80-100 lb dogs and increase doses if
necessary.
attributed to pain once hypotension has been excluded by meas-
Opioid myths
uring blood pressure. If the procedure induced extensive bleed-
ing and anemia has developed, the tachycardia may be due to
Myth #1—All narcotics cause CNS side effects in cats.
acute anemia, and further administration of opioids may actu-
The most common side effect of overnarcotization in cats is
ally be detrimental. If your feline patient was hiding under a
severe mydriasis and dysphoria. Buprenorphine and butor-
towel before the procedure, then post-op hiding may not be an
phanol very rarely cause these signs, while morphine and
indicator of pain. Alternatively, if the cat was vocal and seeking
fentanyl will induce these clinical signs periodically.
attention pre-op then hides and stares at the back of the cage,
Myth #2—Narcotic administration cannot be given until hemody
this change in behavior should be considered as a possible mani-
namic stability has been achieved.
festation of pain (Table 13.3).
Although slowing of the heart rate from opioids could confound
 In essence, recognition of multiple clinical signs of pain
interpretation of patient heart rate, profound bradycardia
should elicit therapeutic trials to attempt to improve/resolve said
from routine doses of opioids is rare. Patients who have sus-
clinical signs. A tentative diagnosis of pain can only be accrued
tained head and vehicular trauma are in pain and require
via a high level of suspicion, action, and serial monitoring of
rapid relief.
clinical signs by the veterinary technician.
Myth #3—Interpreting patient recovery after receiving narcotics
Pain scoring systems
will be more diffcult.
With intermittent bolus administration, sedation can occur and
In an aftempt to standardize documentation of pain and
may take hours to resolve. With continuous-rate-infusion
responses to therapy, varied pain scales have been reported in
administration of fentanyl, any sedation would be resolved
human and veterinary medicine." The most commonly used
20 min after the CRI is discontinued.
types are visual analogue scales (VASs), which utilize both the
Myth #4—Morphine and hydromorphone cannot be used
observer's subjective assessments of patient behaviors combined
in cats.
with physiological parameters. The rationale for these systems is
 Morphine and hydromorphone have been reported to cause
similar to those more commonly in use such as anesthetic moni-
toring forms; they provide a documented numerical scale by
Although these drugs are used to manage pain in cats, I avoid
which patient level of pain and success or failure of any interven-
these on the premise that alternate options are available devoid
tions can be monitored (Figures 13.3-13.5, Box 13.1).
 In the clinical setting, these systems have not been fully
of these potentially serious side effects.
embraced, possibly because these are better suited for managing
Myth #5—The last narcotic administration before closing time will
last until morning.
acute pain and because the diverse causes and responses of
patients make a standardized approach dificult to fit for all
There is no rational explanation for assuming that an injection
patients.
of narcotic at discharge will provide adequate pain relief for
440
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Box 13.1
 Instructions for using the CsU acute pain scale.
 The CSU acute pain scale is intended primarily as a teaching
 The scale includes psychological and behavioral signs of 
3.
tool and to guide observations of clinical patients. The scale
pain as well as palpation responses. Further, the scale uses
has not been validated and should not be used as a definitive
body tension as an evaluation tool, a parameter not
pain score. Use of the scale employs both an observational
addressed in other scales.
Tenau un qud sl jo uonaa uo-spueu e pue poad
 There is a provision for nonassessment in the resting
the assessment begins with quiet observation of the patient in
patient. To the authors' knowledge, this is the only scale
 its cage at a relatively unobtrusive distance. Afterward, the
that emphasizes the importance of delaying assessment in
patient as a whole (wound as well as the entire body) is
a sleeping patient while prompting the observer to recog-
 approached to assess reaction to gentle palpation, indicators of
nize patients that may be inappropriately obtunded by
muscle tension and heat, response to interaction, and so on.
medication or by a more serious health concern.
The scale utilizes a generic 0-4 scale with quarter marks
5.
 Advantages of this scale include ease of use with minimal
as its base along with a color scale as a visual cue for pro-
interpretation required. Specifc descriptors for individual
gression along the five-point scale.
behaviors are provided, which decreases interobserver
 Realistic artist's renderings of animals at various levels of
variability. Additionally, a scale is provided for both the
pain add further visual cues. Additional drawings provide
dog and the cat.
space for recording pain, warmth, and muscle tension; this
6.
 A disadvantage of this scale is a lack of validation by clini-
allows documentation of specific areas of concern in the
cal studies comparing it to other scales. Further, its use is
medical record. A further advantage of these drawings is
largely limited to and is intended for use in acute pain.
that the observer is encouraged to assess the overall pain
 of the patient in addition to focusing on the primary
Source: Hellyer PW, Uhrig SR, Robinson NG, Colorado State Univer-
lesion.
sity, Veterinary Medical Center; 2006, with permission.
the 14-h interval between 6 p.m. and the following morning.
tration.'s Duration of effect at doses (see Table 13.5) is esti-
If your patient's discomfort is likely to persist after 6 p.m.,
mated at 6-8h in dogs and cats. The duration of effect at
 overnight analgesic care should be advocated.
doses of 0.02-0.12 mg/kg in dogs has been reported to be
16-20 h.15
Opioid medications
3.
Fentanyl. This narcotic is a very potent mu-agonist, with a
 Butorphanol. This drug is a partial agonist-antagonist.
very short duration of effect (15-20 min). Parenteral use of
Butorphanol is used commonly but is falling out of favor as
this drug is commonly utilized at veterinary teaching hos-
an analgesic due to its short duration of effect and its lack
pitals and referral practices, and is slowly gaining acceptance
of efficacy in managing moderate-severe pain. Sedation is
 in general practice. Due to its short half-life, CRI adminis-
common at doses greater than 4mg per patient. Its main
tration is necessary. Fentanyl is used to manage moderate-
utility is in combination with anxiolytics such as dexme-
severe pain in dogs and cats. Dysphoria is uncommon in
 detomidine, or acepromazine as a sedative, or to minimize
cats. Fentanyl is the most popular drug for CRI administra-
anxiety in patients with severe dyspnea. It is also used as an
tion in veterinary medicine.
antitussive for at-home use.
Once staff have developed familiarity with CRIs, it has
been my experience that management of severe pain is more
2.
Buprenorphine. This drug is one of the most widely used
effective as steady blood concentrations of narcotic is pro-
analgesics due to its minimal side-effect profle, prolonged
duration of effect (6-8h) relative to other opioids, and its
vided, which can be titrated based on patient needs and
effectiveness in both dogs and cats. Systemic uptake after
monitoring, as opposed to intermittent dosing, in which
 oral dosing (transmucosal) in cats is almost 100%, allowing
 patient comfort is often reported to wane hours after drug
administration. At our facility, the drug is provided via a
for at-home use; sedation is the most common side effect in
 separate syringe pump from the IV fluids. Fluid volumes are
this setting.' Recent literature has confrmed systemic
absorption of the drug transmucosally in dogs as wel.4 A
negligible. Internet Web sites (http://www.vasg.org) are
readily available that provide spreadsheets for rapid and easy
dose of 0.12 mg/kg in dogs given transmucosally induced a
calculations (Table 13.4).
longer and more consistent duration of analgesia than did
0.02 mg/kg given IV or orally.'5 This drug is most useful in
 Hydromorphone. This is a potent analgesic, used commonly
4.
managing mild-moderate pain in dogs and mild-severe
 pain in cats. Peak effect occurs approximately 60 min after
common side effects in dogs. Ultrasonographers prefer alter-
IV administration and 15 min after transmucosal adminis-
nate opioids as tachypnea can compromise the diagnostic
Date
Time
Univcrsity
Colorado State University
Veterinary Medical Center
Canine Acute Pain Scale
 Rescore when awake
 Animal is sleeping, but can be aroused - Not evaluated for pain 
 Animal can't be aroused, check vital signs, assess therapy
Pain Score
Example
Psychological & Behavioral
Response to Palpation
Body Tension
 Comfortable when resting
Happy, content
 Nontender to palpation of
 Not bothering wound or surgery site
wound or surgery site, or to
Minimal
 interested in or curious about surroundings 
 palpation elsewhere 
 Reacts to palpation of wound.
 Content to slig htly unsettled or restless 
surgery site, or other body part
 Distracted easily by surroundings
by looking aroune, flinching, or
Mild
whimpering
 Looks uncomfortable when resting
 May whimper or cry and may lick or rub
 wound or surgery site when unattended
 Droopy ears, worried facial expression 
 Flinches, whimpers cries, or 
Mild to Moderate
 (arched eye brows, darting eyes)
guards/pulls away
Rea55e55
 Reluctant to respond when beckoned
analgesic plan
 Not eager to interact with people or surroundings
but willook around to see what is going on 
 Unsettled, crying, groaning, biting or
 May be subtle (shifting eyes or
 chewing wound when unattended 
increased respiratory rate) if dog
 Guards or protects wound or surgery site by
is too painful to move or is stoic
Moderate
 altering weight distribution (i.e., limping.
 May be dramatic, such as a
Rea55e55
3
shifting body position!
sharp cry growl, bite or bite
analgesic plan
 May be unwilling to move all or part of body 
threat, and/or pulling away
 Constantly groaning or screaming when 
Moderate to
 Cries at non-painful palpation 
Severe
 unattended
 May bite or chew at wound, but unlikely to.
 (may be experiencing allodynia.
May be nididto
wind-up, or fearful that pain
move
could be made worse)
 Potentially unresponsive to surroundings
 Difficult to distract from pain 
 May react aggressively to palpation
Rea55e55
O Tender to palpatior
X Warm
Tense
RIGHT
Comments
@ 2006/PW Hellyer, SR Uhrig, NG Robinson
Supported by an Unrestricted Educational Grant from Pfizer Animal Health 
Figure 13.3 Canine acute pain scale. Image courtesy of Colorado State.
441
Date
tate
Time
Cnivcrsity
Colorado State University
Veterinary Medical Center
Feline Acute Pain Scale
Rescore when awa ke
 Animal is sleeping, but can be aroused - Not evaluated for pain 
 Animal can't be aroused, check vital signs, assess therapy
Pain Score
Example
Psychological & Behavioral
Response to Palpation
Body Tension
0
 Content and quiet when unattended 
 Not bothered by palpation of
Comfortable when resting
wound or surgery site, or to 
Minimal
 Interested in or curious about surroundings
 palpation elsewhere 
 Signs are often subtle and not easily detected in 
the hospital setting; more likely to be detected by
the owner(s) at home
woedied oilean pou Aeu do Aen   wo lemepuim ag Aeu awou ie subis isalie3 
surroundings or change in normal routine
of wound or surgery site
Mild
 In the hospital, may be content or slightly unsettl ed
 Less interested in surroundings but will look 
around to see what is going on
Decreased responsiveness, seeks solitude
 Quiet, loss of brightness in eyes
 Lays curled up or sits tucked up (all four feet
 Responds agg resively or tries to
under body, shoulders hunched, head held 
 escape if painful area is palpated 
slightly lower than shoulders, tail curled tightly
 Mild to Moderate
or approached
yad uana Aeu uojuane sateualol  pasop Asou io Aljleed saia yrim fapog punone
Rea5se55
dn pang lo yonoi seadde ieos jieh 
up when petted as long as painful
analgesic plan
May intensively groom an area that is painful or
area is avoided 
irritating
 Decreased appetite, not interested in food
 Growls or hisses at non-painful
 Constantly yowling, growling, or hissing when
palpation (may be experiencing
allodynia, wind-up, or fearful that
Moderate
 unattended
pain could be made worsey
ued'sbgue
if left alone
 adamantly pulls away to avoid
any contact
Moderate to
 Prostrate
Severe
 Potentially unresponsive to or unaware of
 May not respond to palpation
May be rigid to
 surroundings, difficult to distract from pain 
 May be rigid to avoid painful
avoid painful
  Receptive to care (even mean or wild cats
movement
 movement 
will be more tolerant of contacty
Reassess
analgesic plan
O Tender to palpatior
× Warm
Tense
Comments
@ 2006/PW Hellyer, 5R Uhrig, NG Robinson
 Supported by an Unrestricted Educational Grant from Pfizer Animal Health
Figure 13.4 Feline acute pain scale. Image courtesy of Colorado State.
442
SHORT FORM OFTHE GLASGOW COMPOSITE PAIN SCALE
Dog's name
Hospital Number
Date
(aneudoudde se aralap) oNsa Alabuns
Procedure or Condition
In the sections berow pfease circle the appropriate score in each fist and sum these to give the totat score.
A. Look at dog in Kennel
Is the dog?
(i)
(ii)
Ignoring any wound or painful area
Quiet
Looking at wound or painful area
Crying or whimpering
1
Licking wound or painful area
Groaning
2
2
5creaming
Rubbing wound or painful area
E
Chewing wound or painful area
4
In the case of spinal, pelvic or multiple limb fractures, or where assistance
is required to aid locomotion do not carry out section B and proceed to C
Please tick if this is the case then proceed to C.
B. Put lead on dog and lead out of the kennel.
.C. If it has a wound or painful area
including abdomen, apply gentle pressure 2
inches round the site.
When the dog rises/walks is it?
(i)
Does it?
 Normal
(iv)
Do nothing
Lame
5lovw or reluctant
Look round
Stiff
Flinch
3
Growl or guard area
It refuses to move
4
E
deus
4
Cry
5
D. Overall
Is the dog?
Is the dog?
(v)
(vi)
 Happy and content or happy and bouncy 
D
Comfortable
Quiet
Unsettled
Indifferent or non-responsive to surroundings
2
Restless
2
 Nervous or anxious or fearful
3
Hunched or tense
3
 Depressed or non-responsive to stimulation
4
Rigid
4
Total Score (i+ii+ili+iv+v+vi) =
@ 2008 University of Glasgow. Permission granted to reproduce for perse
hd educational use only. Commercial copying, hiring, lending is prehibited
Note: The short-form Composite Measure Pain Score (CMPs-SF) can be applied quickly and reliably in a clinical setting and has been designed as a clinical decision-
oaen yea uu igou bupnui saoaten ieoaeyag xis uuhm suodo otdusap oe sanui ll uied anse ui shop iog padoaaap sem yym root bueu
the descriptors are ranked numerically according to their associated pain severity, and the person carrying out the assessment chooses the descriptor within each 
Category that best fits the dog's behavior/condition. It is important to carry out the assessment procedure as described on the questionnaire,following the protocol
dosely. The pain score is the sum of the rank scores. The maximum score for the six categories is 24, or 20 if mobility is impossible to asses. The total CMPs-SF score
has been shown to be a useful indicator of analgesic requirement, and the recommended analgesic intervention level is 6/24 or 5/20.
443
444
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
value of studies. Hyperthermia in cats has already been
Alpha-2 agonists
noted above.
 This group of sedative-analgesics is most frequently used in
5.
 Morphine. This is an inexpensive, effective, and commonly
clinical practice as a readily reversible sedative for procedures in
 a   p s a s s r i
young dogs and cats as a preanesthetic. At the time of this
the advent of alternate drugs. Morphine is used frequently
writing, available drugs include xylazine and dexmedetomidine.
via the epidural route.
These are utilized as adjunct analgesics, usually in conjunction
6.
Morphine-Lidocaine-Ketamine (MLK) CRI. A few years ago,
with opioids, and are presently approved for use in dogs only.
a report documenting the use of an MLK cocktail garnered
These drugs are seldom used as a sole analgesic. Dexmedetomi-
interest."6 Adding 12mg morphine, 150 mg lidocaine, and
dine is most commonly used as a perioperative CRI in dogs
30 mg ketamine in 500 m L fluids dripped at 10 mL/kg/h pro-
deemed to benefit from mild to moderate sedation. The combi-
vides morphine at 4μg/kg/min, lidocaine at 50 μg/kg/min,
nation of opioid and dexmedetomidine CRI can be especially
and ketamine at 10 μg/kg/min. Although benefits similar to
useful in exuberant and anxious dogs recovering from ortho-
those from narcotic CRIs are noted, at our hospital, this
pedic and upper airway surgery. An IV bolus followed by a CRI
protocol has been replaced by fentanyl based on ease of use 
is particularly effective. As side effects can include hypotension
and simplicity (Table 13.5).
 and bradycardia, the drug is contraindicated in patients who are
not hemodynamically stable or in geriatric patients that may be
  s     
 advised. Reports discuss epidural administration, though this
usage is not yet common in clinical practice'" (Table 13.6).
Table 13.4  Advantages of CRls for analgesia
Allows for rapid titration of drug dosages to achieve adequate
NSAIDs
analgesia or sed ation
 All non-steroidal anti-inflammatories are cyclooxygenase (COX)
Less costly to client due to reduced number of injections
 enzyme inhibitors, resulting in reduced synthesis of prostaglan-
Reduces patient stress due to fewer injections
dins and their subsequent inflammatory mediators. Although
 Allows for rapid discontinuation if dysphoria or excess sedation
much marketing literature has been devoted to selective advan-
occurs
tages dependent on which COX enzyme is inhibited, clinical
Improved pain control for patient due to steady blood levels of
This group of drugs has been used to manage chronic pain for
analgesic
 decades, and parenteral formulations of carprofen and meloxi-
Table 13.5 Opioid dosages
Drug
Indication
Dose
Route
Duration
Buprenorphine
Dog—mild to moderate pain
0.005-0.02mg/kg or
IV, IM
6-8h or
0.02-0.12 mg/kg
TM
16-20h
Cat—all types pain
0.005-0.02mg/kg
Iv, Im, or TM
6-8h or 16-20h
Butorphanol
Dog and cat—mild pain
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
Iv, IM or sc
2-4h
Sedative
0.2-0.25mg/kg
As above
2-6h
Fentanyl
Dog—moderate to severe pain
2mcg/kg loading dose,
IV
Dose and CRI
then 2-5 mcg/kg/h as CRl
dependent
 Cat—moderate to severe pain
 2-5mcg/kg loading dose,
As above
Dose and CRI
then 2-5 mcg/kg/h as CRI
dependent
Hydromorphone
Dog—moderate to severe pain
0.05-0.2mg/kg
IV, IM
3-6h
 Cat—-moderate to severe pain
0.02-0.05 mg/kg
As above
3-6h
Morphine
Dog—moderate to severe pain
0.2-1.0 mg/kg
Iv, IM, or sc 
3-4h
Cat—moderate to severe pain
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
As above
3-4h
Oxymorphone
Dogs-moderate to severe pain
0.05-0.2 mg/kg
Iv, IM, or sC
4h
Cats-moderate to severe pain
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
Iv, IM, or Sc
4h
Chapter 13 Pain and Its Management
445
Table 13.6
Alpha-2 agonist dosages
Drug
Indication
Dose
Route
Duration
 Dexmedetomidine
Canine—sedative-analgesic
1-3μg/kg loading dose,
Dose and CRl dependent
then 1-3 μg/kg/h as CRI
Table 13.7 NSAID dosages
Drug
Indication
Dose
Route
Duration (h)
Carprofen
4 mg/kg x 1 dose, then 2.2 mg/kg
SC, P0
12
Deracoxib
3-4 mg/kg
PO
24
Etodolac
10-15 mg/kg
PO
24
Meloxicam
Dog
0.2 mg/kg x 1 dose, then 0.1 mg/kg
Iv, SC, P0
24
Cat?
0.03 mg/kg as a single dose
Tepoxalin
20mg/kg x 1 dose, then 10 mg/kg
PO
24
Firocoxib
5 mg/kg
PO
24
Piroxicam
0.3 mg/kg
PO
24
Note: All doses for dog only except meloxicam.
 Use of oral meloxicam in cats is not approved as no safe dose has been confirmed. The use of additional meloxicam or other NsAiDs is
contraindicated. Do not use in cats with renal dysfunction.
 Repeated use in cats has been associated with acute renal failure and death.
cam in the last decade have prompted their utility in acute pain
Local anesthetics and epidural anesthetics
settings as well.
Side effects include GI signs from gastroduodenal ulcers and,
The safest and most underutilized class of drugs are those that
rarely, GI perforation caused by local irritation and prostaglan-
are administered locally at the site of pain rather than systemi-
din inhibition.'1" Renal ischemia and decline in renal function
cally. They can be considered the “poor man's opioids?" Although
have seldom been documented in the literature, but clinical
narcotics garner the most attention, local anesthetics should
always be considered in a multimodality analgesic plan. These
 have a large safety profle, with systemic side effects of seizures
and/or hemodynamic compromise or decline under anesthesia
are at higher risk for decline in renal function. Hepatotoxicity is
and tremors seldom seen. The most commonly used local anes-
a rare idiosyncratic side effect in dogs. Approved NSAIDs in
thetics include lidocaine and bupivacaine. Lidocaine has an
 dogs include carprofen, etodolac, meloxicam, deracoxib, fro-
 a more delayed onset (20 min) and longer duration of action
coxib, and tepoxalin.
 Because of their well-documented sensitivity due to pro-
(4-8h). These can be used via the following techniques:
 longed half-lives of aspirin and acetaminophen, cats were typi-
1.
Topical Application. Lidocaine is available as a spray and as
cally excluded from consideration for treatment with NSAIDs
 a gel. It can be used for catheter placement in the skin and
 s a e sads s  e se  n
nose and to aid in endotracheal intubation in cats. Cats are
Recent warnings from the manufacturer advise this to be used
more sensitive to systemic side effects.
in cats as a single dose only, and not to use this in cats with any
2.
Local Infitration. Used for soft tissue surgery, lacerations,
preexisting renal compromise or in patients that may develop
biopsies, bone marrow aspiration, laparoscopy, and rib frac-
hypotension.
NSAIDs have a lower margin of safety than opioids in the
tures. Varied forms of wound catheters can be utilized; these
acute setting due to their potential for serious side effects. Rela-
are surgically adhered in the region of the surgery site, and
 tive contraindications for NSAID use include patients with pre-
the drug is infused into the wound via the catheter.
existing renal disease, geriatric patients, and those in which
3.
Epidural. Administration oflocal anesthetics and/or opioids
hemodynamic instability or marked dehydration is anticipated.
 at the L7-S1 space are used to benefit patients undergoing
It may be prudent to wait 12-24h after trauma before using this
painful procedures including perianal, tail, pelvic, and hind
 group of drugs as analgesics (Table 13.7).
limb surgery. Urine retention is the most common side effect.
446
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 13.8 Local anesthetics
Drug
Indication
Dose
 Forms
Duration
Lidocaine 2%
4-5 mg/kg
Topical and
60-90min
injectable
Bupivacaine
1-2 mg/kg
Injectable
4-8h
Intracavitary
Cats and
0.2 mL/kg of 0.5% bupivacaine + 0.01meq/kg
bupivacaine
small dogs
NaHcos?—dilute with saline to 3mL
Large dogs
Same-dilute to total volume of 6-12mL
* Often diluted with NaHCO, to reduce patient discomfort.
4.
 Intracavitary. Instilation of bupivacaine with saline can
available for management of chronic pain conditions. Reasona-
provide local pain relief in patients with peritonitis, pancrea-
ble indications include management of phantom limb pain,
titis, in patients with chest tubes, and in those recovering 
pelvic trauma, and intervertebral disk disease. The drug is avail-
from thoracotomy.
able as 100, 300, 400, 600, and 800 mg strengths. The tablet is
5.1
Local Nerve Blocks. Patients with rib fractures and those
bitter tasting, which can make home compliance problematic if
undergoing dental/orofacial and limb procedures all benefit
owners are unable to administer easily by hiding it in food or
from regional anesthesia (Table 13.8).
pill pockets. Starting doses in dogs are 10 mg/kg TID and the
dose range is 5-25 mg/kg BID-TID. Doses in cats are 5 mg/kg
BID. Sedation is a common side effect. This drug is usually used
Tramadol
in conjunction with an NSAID and/or tramadol. Acute discon-
Tramadol is a synthetic codeine analogue with mild mu-agonist
tinuation is discouraged to avoid rebound pain. A recent study
properties.2? Its use has increased in the past few years as a result of
found no benefits in the acute setting when used in addition to
not being a controlled substance, its wide safety profle, and limited
standard protocols in dogs undergoing amputation.21
options for at-home analgesic choices. The most common side
effects are sedation and, rarely, dysphoria in cats. Doses are
Amantadine
3-10 mg/kg BID-TID in dogs and 1-5 mg/kg SID-BID in cats. It is
This is an oral N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist, with
likely a weak analgesic by itself and is best used for at-home man.
agement of acute or chronic pain in conjunction with other drugs.
actions similar to ketamine. It is available as 100 mg capsules or
Au apnou suoun dns tunn se pun sian
degenerative joint disease (DJD) and chronic cancer pain. Studies
Lidocaine and fentanyl patches
 of efficacy are few The starting dose is 3 mg/kg SID in dogs.
Lidocaine dermal patches are used in humans with neuropathic
s    q si   
Pamidronate
 These should be considered as adjunctive pain management in
patients with cutaneous pain (burn and thermal injuries)
This is a bisphosphonate drug that inhibits bone resorption and
Fentanyl transdermal patches are available in varying strengths
osteoclast activity. Clinical indications include management of
bone cancer (osteosarcoma [OSA], multiple myeloma, bony
(25, 50, 75, 100 mcg) and have been used extensively in small
animal patients. Side effects are minimal. These have fallen out
 metastases) and hypercalcemia of malignancy.
of favor in the past few years due to their 12- to 24-h onset of
action (must be placed the night before procedure) and reports
Nursing care as analgesic
of marked variability in blood levels between patients. If using
these, it is better not to assume your patient is “covered" because
Some of the safest and most cost-effective methods of providing
the patch has been applied. These should be used as an adjunct
relief from pain, stress, and discomfort in animal patients are
with more conventional methods of analgesia as mentioned
empathic and thoughtful nursing care. Examples include but are
above.
not limited to the following.
Gabapentin
Ensuring ability to void
 This is an anticonvulsant medication used in humans with
It is not uncommon for large dogs to receive 500 mL to 2L of
chronic neuropathic pain. Its analgesic use has increased in
recent years, likely due to the limited number of effective options
to stand, they may manifest signs of anxiety or vocalizing. If
Chapter 13 Pain and Its Management
447
these clinical signs are misperceived as pain and opioids are
Send some patients home
administered, this will only worsen the patient's problem by
predisposing to urine retention. All dogs at our hospital receive
We have all seen the Labrador recovering from an anterior cruci-
a preanesthetic walk Consider urinary catheterization and
 ate ligament (ACL) repair or a laryngeal tieback, who requires
drainage (intermittent or indwelling) coming out of the operat-
sedation every 2-3 h due to incessant barking and panting. There
 are some patients who will never rest in a hospital; once stable,
ing room if your patient is expected to be nonambulatory all
these patients are simply better off at home. Do not allow any
evening (pelvic fracture repair). Try walking the patient as a trial
before providing additional analgesics if this seems reasonable.
Give cats litter pans as soon as recovery justifies.
to get in the way of being a patient advocate. Typically, after
discharge, these clients will tell me on the phone, “You know
Consolidate cage visits
doctor, he slept for about 24 h after coming home. Is that normal?
While my ears may still be ringing from that particular dog's
It is not uncommon for a critical patient to receive orders for
barking, I assure her that the rest will do him (and me) well.
multiple injections and serial monitoring of temperatures, Sp02,
 blood pressures, and so on. The inexperienced nurse may comply
Clinical examples
with treatment orders as written, entailing hourly visits to disturb
the patient. The astute nurse will recognize that the patient is apt
Bone marrow aspiration
to receive little rest unless the doctor's orders are consolidated
This is considered to be a procedure inducing an acute, moderate
degree of pain lasting a short duration. Many of these patients
aftention but can go a long way in relieving patient stress.
are systemically ill and debilitated and thus are at moderate-high
Minimize needlesticks and probes
risk for NSAID-related side effects.
Protocol:
If it is anticipated your patient is to require multiple sets of labs,
consider placing a central venous catheter in the saphenous or
 Buprenorphine IV 30-60 min prior to the procedure
jugular vein under anesthesia to facilitate samplings and to mini-
Local periosteal infltration with lidocaine
mize frequent venipunctures. Consider continuous temperature
Cold packs at site if tolerated
rectal probes to avoid serial thermometer insertions.
 Tramadol as needed at home
External stabilization
Laparoscopy
Apply bandages/splints expeditiously in patients with distal limb
fractures. These measures can be as important as any systemic
This is a procedure deemed to induce a mild degree of transient,
 e  s e  e   e s
local discomfort at the trocar site/s and possibly from the
induced abdominal insuflation. Patients may be young and
healthy (laparoscopic ovariohysterectomy) or older and debili-
Soft and clean bedding
tated (ascites with carcinomatosis, feline infectious peritonitis
If your canine patient is intentionally sedated as a part of his/her
[FIP]).
analgesic protocol, involuntary urinations should be anticipated
Protocol:
and checked for frequently.
Buprenorphine IV 30-60 min before anesthetic induction
Peace and quiet
 Local bupivacaine at trocar sites at the end of the procedure
It never ceases to amaze me how noisy our treatment rooms are. (I
NSAID, buprenorphine, or tramadol for at-home use
(ECG) monitors, beeping infusion pumps, dogs crying, phones
Pancreatitis
ringing, and loud veterinary staff, many of our patients are prob-
Local peritonitis in dogs and cats with this disease can cause
ably wondering when they can get home. Patients on opioids are
 severe and profound pain, often refractory to routine analgesic
typically noise sensitive and may be startled easily. Although I
 protocols. Some of these patients are debilitated and in poor
used to be able to fall asleep on the subways in New York en route
condition, suffering from systemic signs as well as local perito-
to my internship, now that I am older and wiser, peace and quiet
nitis, with resultant gastric distension/atony and recumbency
suits me better. I suspect our patients feel the same.
These patients can be some of the most challenging to manage
as their pain can be severe and persistent.
Hot/cold packs
Protocol:
 Reducing swelling and inflammation can be a useful adjunct in
preventing swelling induced by trauma and surgery. We use a
Fentanyl bolus and CRI IV at 3-5 μg/kg/h
GameReady" unit for this purpose.
Alpha-2 agonists prn
448
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Orogastric suction prn to relieve significant gastric distension
Woolf CJ, Ma Q. Nociceptors-noxious stimuli detectors. Neuron
Instill bupivicaine into the abdomen if significant ascites
2007;55:353-364.
present q 4-6 h (see Table 13.8 for protocol)
5.
Pascoe P Local and regional anaesthesia and analgesia. Semin Vet
Med Surg (Small Anim) 1997;12:94-105.
 Indwelling urine collection system to monitor urine output
6.
Jessell TM, Kelly DD. Pain and analgesia. In: Principles of Neural
and to relieve bladder distension
Science, 3rd edition, eds. ER Kandel, JH Schwartz, TM Jessell,
pp. 385-399. New York: Elsevier Science; 1991.
7.
Thurmon JC, Tranquilli WJ, Benson GJ (eds.). Perioperative pain
Head and/or thoracic trauma
and distress. In: Lumb and Jones Veterinary Anesthesia, 3rd edition,
Small dogs and cats that sustain head trauma can be diagnosed
Pp. 40-60. Baltimore, MD: Lea &Febiger; 1996.
8.
Wright EM, Jr., Woodson JF. Clinical assessment of pain in labora-
with any/all of the following problems: reduced/dull mentation,
oral/dental fractures, and ocular trauma/proptosed globes. In
eds. BE Rollin, ML Kesel, pp. 205-216. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
addition, rib fractures and pulmonary contusions may be con-
Press; 1990.
frmed as well. These patients are in severe and ongoing pain and
9.
 Merskey HM. Classification of chronic pain syndromes abstract1.
are often denied proper analgesic therapy out of concern of
Pain Suppl 1986;3:S217.
 causing or worsening patient obtundation or inability to ambu-
10.
 Shaffran N. Pain management: the veterinary technicians perspec-
late. Veterinary personnel with experience with opioids are
tive. In update on management of pain. Vet Clin N Am 2008;38(6):
 aware that these side effects are very rare at proper dosages.
1415-1427.
Clark WG, Cumby HR. Hyperthermic responses to central
Protocol:
and peripheral injections of morphine sulphate in the cat. Br J
Stabilize hemodynamics via serial blood pressure monitoring
Pharmacol 1978;63(1):65-71.
and IV fluids.
12.
Posner LP, Gleed RD, Erb HN, et al. Post-anesthetic hyperthermia
in cats. Vet Anaesth Anaig 2007;34(1):40-47.
  r    e  
13.
Robertson SA, Taylor PM, Sear IW. Systemic uptake of buprenor-
radiographs
phine by cats after oral mucosal administration. Vet Rec 2003;
External stabilization of any fractured limbs
152(22):675-678.
14.
 Abbo LA, Ko JC, Maxwell LK, et al. Pharmacokinetics of buprenor-
Local bupivicaine at the site of rib and oral/orbit fractures q
phine following intravenous and oral transmucosal administra-
4-6 h
tion in dogs. Vet Ther 2008;9:83-93.
No NSAIDs for 12-24h minimum
15.
 Ko JC, Freeman LJ, Barletta M, et al. Efficacy of transmucosal and
Ocular topical anesthetic (proparacaine) prn for ocular trauma
intravenous administration of buprenorphine before surgery for
postoperative analgesia in dogs undergoing ovariohysterectomy.
JAVMA 2011;238:318-327.
Conclusion
16.
Muir WW, Wiese AJ, March PA. Effects of morphine, lidocaine,
ketamine  and morphine-lidocaine-ketamine  combination on
Managing pain in our patients is one of the most fundamental
minimum alveolar concentration in dogs anesthetized with isoflu-
callings of our profession. The veterinary technician should be
rane. Arm / Vet Res 2003;64:1155-1160.
the designated leader of the hospital pain management team.
Branson KR, Ko JC, Tranquilli WJ, et al. Duration of analgesia
induced by epidurally administered morphine and medetomidine
tocols, anticipate and recognize pain and discomfort, communi-
in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1993;16:369-372.
cate the relative success or failure of the plan to the veterinarian
18.
Papich MG. An update on nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
in small animals. Vet Clin N Am 2008;38(6):1246-1250.
effectively, and is aware of options for modifcation including
19.
 Whittle BJ. Mechanisms underlying intestinal injury induced
 pharmacological and anxiety-relieving nursing care is a tremen-
by anti-inflammatory COX inhibitors. Eur J Phararmcol 2004;
dous asset to his/her patients. You are the pain advocate for your
500(1-3):427-443.
animal patients who cannot speak for themselves.
20.
Gutstein HB, Akil H. Opioid analgesics. In: Goodman and Gilrman's
The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 10th edition, eds. JIG
Harman, LE Limbird, A Goodman Gilman, p. 569. New York:
Bibliography
McGraw-Hill; 2001.
Wagner AE, Mich PM, Uhrig SR, Hellyer PW. Clinical evaluation
1.
AVMA-Veterinary Oath. Executive Board AVMA; 2010.
of perioperative administration of gabapentin as an adjunct for
2.
 NAVTA-Veterinary Technician Code of Ethics. NAVTA Ethics
postoperative administration analgesia in dogs undergoing ampu-
Committee; 2007.
tation of a forelimb. JAVMA 2010;236(7):751-756.
3.
Lamont LA. Physiology of pain. In management of pain. Vet Clin
N Am 2000;30(4):704-710.
Chapter
14 Nursing
Editors: Marnin Forman and Linda Merril!l
Section 1 Occupational Health and Safety - Tanya Crocker 449
Urinary catheters - Marcia Carothers 480
Section 2 Pharmacological Implications in Internal Medicine -
Bone marrow collection - Colleen Ruderman 484
Meri Half 453
Section 5 Endoscopy - Marnin Forman 487
Section 3 Nutritional Support - Ann Wortinger 463
Section 6 Selected Nursing Considerations of Internal Medicine
Section 4 Diagnostic Procedures 474
Patients 495
Cystocentesis - Diane Green 474
Thermoregulation - Linda Merrill 495
Abdominocentesis - Diane Green 475
Hypothermia - Linda Merrill 498
Thoracocentesis - Diane Green 478
The sepsis syndrome - Kimm Wuestenberg 499
SECTION 1 OCCUPATIONAL
associations, government health and safety divisions (e.g..
Occupational Safety and Health Administration [OSHA] in the
HEALTH AND SAFETY
 United States), the Centers for Disease Control, workers' health
 and safety organizations, and the World Health Organization
Making the work place safe
(WHO).
Occupational health and safety in veterinary hospitals is a topic
Health and safety committees
not always routinely considered but one that is of utmost impor-
tance. Veterinary facilities and other facilities involved in animal
Depending on the size ofthe facility, you may be required by law
care not only have the physical and chemical hazards, but
to form a health and safety committee. In Canada, the Workers
workers also need to consider zoonotic hazards. It is not only
Compensation Act requires employers to establish a committee
the responsibility of the owners of the practice but also of the
 in any workplace that regularly employs 20 or more workers';
-sod se un se panpau si sprezeu o ainsodxa asua on gs
this includes part-time as well as full-time staff. This may vary
sible and to abide by governmental regulations. This section is
between countries and even local areas. The best way to find out
intended to give an overview of common hazards and how to
 is through your government's health and safety branch. The main
prevent them. Further information should be found through
focus of the committee is to identify and resolve health and
such sources as your local veterinary and veterinary technician
 safety problems in the workplace (Table 14.1.1).
Smaf Animal Internar Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Edited by Linda Merrill
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
449
450
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 14.1.1  Role of the joint health and safety committee
One of the more common methods employed to circumvent
 a needlestick injury is to avoid recapping needles and to use a
To promote safe work practices
sharps container. Other methods to handle sharps are one-
To assist in creating a safe and healthy workplace
handed recapping, needleless adaptors, or using self-recapping
needles. Client education on these safety techniques is also indi-
To recommend actions that will improve the effectiveness of
the occupational health and safety program
cated whenever providing owners with recommendations for
therapies requiring needles. Avoid injuries from other sharps by
To promote compliance with Workers' Compensation Board
regulations
safely opening ampules, by removing scapel blades with the
appropriate instrument, and by the safe handing of al sharp
instrumentation.
Adapted from the Workers' Compensation Board of BC, Joint Health and
Safety Committee workbook, February 2000.
There are many pieces of equipment in the veterinary hospital
that pose a health or safety risk Steam autoclaves are hot to the
touch, and when opened, the steam can burn the skin or, if
inhaled, the respiratory track Gas autoclaves contain a toxic gas
One of the main tasks for the committee is to provide infor-
that cannot be seen and is odorless. Proper ventilation proce-
mation on hazards in the workplace and to develop and periodi-
dures must be strictly followed Cage dryers and external heat
cally review the written safety protocols.
support devices can be hot to the touch. Care should be exercised
        s n
Hazards in the workplace
occur on lift table joints. Overhead obstructions such as open
cage doors, dental X-ray arms, and X-ray collimators need to be
Hazards can be split up into three general categories: physical,
observed and avoided. Electrical equipment can pose a shock
chemical, and biological. It is important for staff to be aware of
hazard and should be plugged into a grounded circuit. Surgical 
how to identify these hazards, how to reduce or prevent expo-
and therapy lasers can pose a threat to our eyesight and eye
sure, and how to respond in the event of an accident.
protection should be worn whenever it is in use. This goes for
both the staff and the patients. Hearing protection is an often
 o       
Physical hazards
some of the machines we use a potential source of noise but the
Examples of physical hazards include slips and falls, animal-
 animals we work with can also raise quite the commotion.
induced injuries (bites and scratches), needlestick injuries,
Ergonomics is essential not only to your longevity as a worker
 machinery and equipment, ergonomic hazards, and ionizing
but also in performing activities in your daily life. Veterinary
radiation. Many of these hazards are preventable. Brightly
technicians will lift thousands of patients in their career. No
colored kennel labels are examples of easy and useful tools to
matter what size, it is up to you to ensure that correct lifting
bring staff attention to possible hazards as well as reminders for
(bend at the knees, not the waist!) as well as restraint techniques
preventative action (e.g., aggressive, chemotherapy patient,
are utilized each and every time. Several ergonomic guidelines
sedated patient, infectious patient).
for specific industries are published by OSHA (http://www.osha.
First aid signs are important in identifying where the first aid
gov/SLTC/ergonomics/guidelines.html).
Work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs) are a group
chemical injury to the eye or anesthetic gas or chemotherapy
of painful disorders affecting muscles, tendons, and nerves. Carpal
drug spills can all reduce the amount of time a situation takes to
tunnel syndrome, tendonitis, and thoracic outlet syndrome are all
 get under control and therefore possibly reducing injuries.
examples of WMSDs. Frequent and repetitive activities or awkward
Wearing nonslip shoes and installing proper floor mats in wet
posture when performing activities can lead to any of these disor-
areas of the hospital can cut down on the number of slips and
ders, which may cause pain either during work or at rest.?
falls. Posting a “Caution Wet Floor" or “Caution Slippery Floor”
Radiation exposure is one of the easier hazards to protect
sign, whenever you wipe up a spill or when cleaning floors, is
against. Human and lab animal studies have shown that regular
another technique to reduce slips and falls in the hospital. Always
exposure to radiation can cause cancer and can mutate healthy
 keep stairways clear of materials and do not use these as storage
 genes, therefore exposing not only yourself but any future off-
space, even if only on a temporary basis. General good house-
spring. Stil, a surprising number of veterinary staff continue to
keeping of all travel areas will also decrease obstructions and will
lay the lead glove over their hand (exposing themselves to scatter
thereby decrease accidents.
radiation) instead of wearing it. Wearing, as well as properly
There are entire books and courses are dedicated to informa-
maintaining, the lead gowns, gloves, and thyroid protectors are
tion on safe animal restraint techniques and animal behavior,
extremely important. This involves regularly imaging the protec-
and an in-depth discussion is beyond the scope of this text.
tive equipment (every 6-12 months) to look for signs of tears or
Avoiding bite wounds and animal scratches is the responsibility
breakages in the lead. It is also important that the gowns them-
 of everyone on the veterinary health-care team, and open lines
selves are stored correctly and are not folded to prevent the lead
from being damaged. Routine use of personal dosimeters and
process.
regular monitoring of exposure through government health
Chapter 14  Nursing
451
services is usually required. Health Canada's National Dosimetry
 contact dermatitis, present in the form of rash, hives, redness,
Services keeps lifelong measurements of health workers’ expo-
      i   
- pe uno uaus 'ssou i unui sds  i jo qa ansdxa ue ss sui vo ui oi as
Rems per calendar quarter to a person's whole body, with differ- matic attacks. Respiratory signs may occur when gloves are
 ent dose limits placed on the arms, hands, and skin. Positioning 
 donned or removed as the powder inside, to which the proteins
techniques in radiology, including the use of positioning devices
have become attached, becomes airborne and is inhaled.7
such as sandbags and ropes, as well as the use of chemical
 The main way to protect against latex sensitivity is to use
restraint, all aid in protecting the health of the clinic staf. Much
 nonlatex gloves. Nitrile gloves are made of synthetic latex and
of the general safety information may be found on human radi-
 do not contain the proteins responsible for latex sensitivity. If
ology organization Web sites and also includes information for
you must wear latex gloves on a regular basis, try to wear pow-
staff involved in procedures using MRI, computed tomography
derless gloves and refrain from using creams or lotions on your
(CT), and fluoroscopy.
hands.
Should you find out you are allergic to latex, it is imperative
Chemical hazards
you let your employer, as well as any health-care providers, know
to reduce your chances of exposure.
Chemical hazards include, but are not limited to, exposure to
anesthetic gases, disinfectants, insecticides, and allergies to latex.
Biological hazards
In many countries, an employer is required to maintain up-to-
date information on products in the form of a material safety
Biohazardous material
data sheet (MSDS). These are available online or from the
 Biohazards are infectious agents or hazardous biological materi-
manufacturer.
als that present a risk or potential risk to the health of humans,
Anesthetic gases
animals, or the environment. The risk can be direct, through
infection, or indirect, through damage to the environment. Bio-
Occupational exposure to waste anesthetic gases has been linked
hazardous materials include certain types of recombinant DNA;
to reproductive problems in women, and numerous animal
 organisms and viruses infectious to humans, animals, or plants
studies have shown embryo lethal and teratogenic effects.'
(e.g., parasites, viruses, bacteria, fungi, prions, rickettsia); and
Regular maintenance of anesthetic machines, hoses, and scaven-
biologically active agents (i.e., toxins, allergens, venoms) that
 ger system, as well as system leak checks is an easy way to help
may cause disease in other living organisms or cause significant
reduce exposure.
impact to the environment or community.
Disinfectants
Nosocomial infections and zoonosis
As with any product, take note of warning labels and MSDS
Nosocomial infections pertain to or originate in a hospital. * This
forms and use the product according to the manufacturer's
is said of an infection not present or incubating prior to admit-
 instructions. This includes knowing what personal protective
tance to the hospital, but generally occurring 72h after admit
equipment should be worn, what to do if you come into contact
with the product, how to clean up any spills, and if the product
ting. The term usually refers to patient disease, but hospital
personnel may also acquire nosocomial infections (e.g..
is flammable, explosive, poisonous, or reactive.
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus [MRSAJ).
 Zoonosis is a disease of animals transmissible to humans'0
Latex allergies
(e.g., rabies).
Latex, as found in nature, is the milky substance that comes from
Zoonotic and nosocomial infections are an inherent risk in
a flowering plant. Natural latex rubber is made from the latex of
veterinary facilities. They are not avoidable; however, their risk
the rubber tree (Hevea brasiliensis) and is in some veterinary
can be greatly reduced by a few simple steps:
products such as latex gloves and catheters. Latex allergies are a
Wash Your Hands! Washing hands in between patients,
1.
sensitivity reaction to certain proteins found in natural rubber.
before eating or smoking, and after washroom use greatly
reduces the chances of contacting an infection.
risk for developing sensitivities to these proteins. It is unknown
2.
 Change Patient Bedding Daily. This also includes disinfect-
how much exposure to these products will result in a latex
ing the kennel itself, including the roof of the kennel.
sensitivity.
3.
 Proper Management and Housing of Infected Animals. Rec-
Latex allergies were first recognized in the 1970s, and between
1988 and 1996, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) had
 ognizing the clinical signs of infections is an important step
over 1000 exposures and 15 deaths reported.* For more extensive
in preventing infection from getting worse.
information on latex allergies, please refer to your own govern-
 If you think you may have been exposed to a zoonotic disease,
ment Web sites regarding health and safety. Sensitivity reactions
 it is important to seek the advice of a medical professional as
can range from mild skin reactions (type IV reactions) to ana-
 on  aq A  ss ss  issod s o
phylaxis (type I reactions). Skin reactions, also known as allergic
exposure to your country of residence's Centers for Disease
452
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Control; this may also be discussed at the time of your medical
tion from eating/drinking or smoking via hand-to-mouth
examination. Any hospital staff that are immunocompromised
contact.
should speak to their personal medical doctor about any con-
2.The Safety Concerns and Proper Methods of Cleaning Up after
cerns and safety precautions. They may be advised to refrain
Patients (Including Vomitus, Urine, and Stools) and Spills. All
from handling certain patients or to wear personal protective
patients receiving chemotherapy should be marked appro-
equipment when handling patients with certain infections. This
priately so that all hospital personnel are aware of the safety
hazard. A written protocol for the proper disposal methods
on immunosuppressive medications, or whom have had their
for used chemotherapy vials, expired drugs, and all chemo-
spleens removed.
therapy equipment used should be followed (e.g., state and
 There have been entire books written on the topic of zoonotic
federal laws). The use of a separate, properly labeled chemo-
diseases, so this section is written more so to provide the reader
therapy waste disposal container is mandatory.
with information on a few of the more common infections they
Use of ProperPreparation and AdministrationEquipment for
may see in the hospital setting, as well as a list of other infections
Chemotherapy. This includes the use of fume hoods, vented
veterinary staff should be aware of.
needles, and a closed administration system (e.g., PhaSeal*
Please refer to Chapter 11 for information on leptospirosis,
system). The use of the proper type of equipment greatly
 MRSA, and other zoonotic diseases.
reduces the chances of exposure.
 Hospital staff members who are trying to conceive, are pregnant,
Saimonella and Ciostridium difficile, infectious
breastfeeding, or are immunosuppressed should refrain from
diarrheal disorders
administering chemotherapy.
Due to the popularity of raw food diets for dogs and cats, the
 A written protocol for the safe handling of patients receiving
risk of veterinary staff coming into contact with Salmonella is
chemotherapy should be outlined for each drug used in the
increased. Studies have shown an increase in the incidence of
hospital. Chemotherapy patients should be clearly identifed. A
Salmonella in the feces of pets fed with raw food diets versus
different colored name tag/ID band and/or cage label will visually
 nu sq o pda os sis i's r
help hospital staff identify these patients and indicate the need
 prevalent in reptile species. Clinical signs include fever and
to use extra precautions when handling. Another label indicating
diarrhea in dogs and in cats. In humans, Salmonella can cause
the drug given and the length and method of excretion is also
acute gastroenteritis, with symptoms such as vomiting, diarrhea,
recommended. Staff should be knowledgeable in the methods of
 and abdominal pain.2
how to clean up after a chemotherapy patient should they elimi-
C. diffcile is one of the most common infections detected in
nate in their kennel or elsewhere in the hospital, how to clean
human health-care facilities. It is a bacterium that causes infec-
iq  r o am rdd a pue s ii
tion of the colon producing watery diarrhea, nausea, and vomit-
Storage and handling of
surgical patients, and patients on long-term antibiotic therapy.
chemotherapy drugs
As with any nosocomial infection, diligence with regular hand
In the written chemotherapy protocol, a section should outline
washing, not eating in treatment areas of the hospital, and com-
municating to staff the possibility of an infected patient help
the policies and procedures to safely handle chemotherapeutics
from the time they arrive at the hospital (including inventory
 keep exposure to a minimum.13
personnel), while stored at the hospital, and during and after use.
The protocol should include the following steps:
1.
 Store chemotherapy drugs in a separate, secure, well-marked
Chemotherapy safety
area.
2.
 Keep chemotherapy drugs away from areas of food or drink
Chemotherapy is becoming more of a routine treatment in vet-
preparation and storage. Do not allow food or drink in areas
erinary hospitals; however, many hospitals do not have the funds
utilized for chemotherapy.
 or the space to house the biological safety cabinets many human
hospitals and larger veterinary facilities use to mix and prepare
3. Each open bottle should be separately stored in a ziplock bag
chemo drugs. There are numerous health risks associated with
 and kept within the original container.
4.  Reconstituted drugs need to be dated with the strength and
 nel should be aware of the following procedures for handlling and
expiry date marked on the bottle. Read and be familiar with
disposing of chemotherapeutic drugs:
drug inserts and the manufacturer's instructions with regard
to storage and drug viability after reconstitution.
1.
Potential Exposure to Self and the Environment. Exposure is
5. All personnel opening or unpacking boxes containing
most often through inhalation of aerosolized particles,
 chemotherapy drugs should wear personnel protective
direct absorption through skin contact, indirect contact
equipment and the drugs should be labeled with chemo-
therapy or biohazard labels.
Chapter 14  Nursing
453
Recommended safety equipment
own safety and the safety of his or her coworkers. Regular train-
ing, revision of safety procedures, plain old hand washing and
 Nitrile gloves—latex gloves do not provide adequate protec-
 common sense will help keep your workplace productive and
tion when handling chemotherapy drugs
healthy.
 N 99 or N 100 particulate face mask—surgical masks do not
 provide protection against aerosolized particles
Health and safety web sites
 Impermeable gown
The United States Department of Labor, http://www.osha.gov
 Safety goggles
WorkSafe BC, http://www. worksafebc.com
Nurse's cap
American Latex Allergy Association Inc.,
http://www.latexallergyresources.org
Chemotherapy spills
Occupational Health and Safety for Healthcare in BC,
http://www.ohsah.bc.ca
 In the written protocol, a section should detail management
 Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety,
of spills ("spill" includes drugs or fluids, e.g., urine and vomit)
http://www.ccohs.ca
to assure the safe handling of chemotherapy drugs or contami-
The Centers for Disease Control has many handouts under
nated eliminations. The safety procedures should include the
 National Institute for Occupational Health and Safety (NIOSH),
following:
http://www.cdc.gov/niosh
1. Immediately clear the area; postwarning signs on all
United Kingdom—Institution of Occupational Safety and
entrances to the area.
Health, http://www.iosh.co.uk
Alert staff; designate a few people to be involved in the
Australia—Safe WorkAustralia,http://www.safeworkaustralia.
2.
actual cleanup, those not involved should remain outside the
gov.au
area until the cleanup is completed.
Europe—European Agency for Safety and Health at Work
a es ae e m pos psiad dn
http://osha.europa.eu/en
(e.g., gown, gloves, mask, and goggles).
4.Use a spill kit (see Table 14.1.2).
SECTION 2 PHARMACOLOGICAL
5.
 Gently cover and absorb liquid spills with absorbent mate-
IMPLICATIONS IN INTERNAL
rial; pick up solids (powder) with moistened absorbent
MEDICINE
material.
6.
 Use a scoop to pick up any sharp or broken objects. Clean
the spillarea three times using ordinary detergent and water.
Drug calculations, compatibilities,
7. All disposable spill items should be placed in biohazard.
dosing, and administration
 Nondisposable items should be washed in soap and water
For the hospitalized patient, the most common routes of medica-
by staff wearing gloves and a gown.
tion administration are the oral, topical, and the injectable
routes. When administering medications via the oral and inject-
Conclusion
able routes, the timing of the drug administration is dependent
upon the uptake of the drug into the system.
Everyone from the veterinarians to the part-time kennel staff
who help out every other weekend is responsible for his or her
Constant rate infusion
There are many injectable medications that are ultrashort in
Table 14.1.2  Chemotherapy spill kit
duration of action. In these situations, frequent administration
 still may not maintain effective serum concentrations and may
Safety clothing—gowns, masks, goggles, gloves
lead to inaccurate dosages.
 Constant rate infusion (CRI) is a method of injectable medi-
Absorbent material (e.g., paper towel, gauze, kitty litter)
cation administration where a precisely calculated amount of a
Small scoop, spatula, or forceps to collect sharp objects
drug is administered at a constant rate. By administering drugs
Two large plastic waste disposal bags, 4mil or thicker
at a constant rate, the efficacy of the drug and the total daily dose
Puncture- and leak-resistant waste container for sharp or
may be reduced. A loading dose (LD) is administered before
breakable objects and liquids
beginning a CRI for some medications that are ultrashort in
Warning sign
duration, such as fentanyl citrate. Most CRI doses are recorded
as micrograms per kilogram body weight per minute. As with
*Chemotherapy Safety and Administration? Tanya Crocker, RVT, VTS (SAIM),
any medication, calculation of the drug dose must be done accu-
CWvS lecture series.
rately. The use of a syringe pump provides the most accurate
454
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
dosing since the drug is not diluted prior to use. If a syringe
To ensure accurate dosing, the amount of the drug to be added
pump is not available, accurate dosing can be achieved by com-
should be removed from the base fluid.
bining the drug with a dilutant fluid (commonly 0.9% NaCl).
 Example: A 20-kg dog requires a metoclopramide CRI at a
 If a syringe pump is not utilized, then the following calcula-
dose of 1 mg/kg/day. The fluid administration rate is 40 mL/h.
tions are required:
1.A 1-L bag of 0.9% NaCl will last 25h:
Determine the length of time a fluid bag will last at the current
 rate of infusion by dividing the volume of fluid in the bag by the
1000 mL x h/
rate:
/ 40 mL = 25 h.
/fluid administration rate
2. Number of days the 1-L bag of fluids will last 1.04 days:
= length of infusion in hours.
1 day/
25 h of infusion X
For some medications, the dose is by the minute; to obtain the
length of the infusion in minutes, multiply the number of hours
 3. Metoclopramide required per 24h = 20 mg:
the fluid bag will last by 60 to determine the number of minutes
 in each bag:
x1 mg/
/day
4. Metoclopramide required for 1 L of fluids = 20.8mg:
/h
= length of infusion in minutes.
20 mg X1.04 days = 20.8 mg/
For other medications, the dose is by day (24h); to obtain the
/day
length of the infusion in days, divide the number of hours the
 5.  Mililiters of metoclopramide required for 1L =
fuid bag will last by 24h to determine the number of days in
each bag:
20.8 mg xmL/
= 4.16 mL
day/
Length of infusion in hours X
724h.
See Table 14.2.1.
= length of infusion in days.
Drug compatibilities
Then multiply the weight of the animal in kilogram by the dose:
Care must be taken to check drug compatibilities when admin-
wt in kg x mg
= dose in mg.
istering multiple medications to a patient. Drug interactions can
/kg
potentiate the effects, counteract the expected outcomes, or
Now you will need to fgure the total amount of the drug to add
create toxic effects. Potential drug interactions in commonly
to the fluid bag. The dosage may be in milligram, microgram, or
used medications have been reported with cimetidine, sucral-
international unit; the dosage units are the frst number in the
fate, ketoconazole, fluoroquinolones, metoclopramide, cisapride,
equation. All dosages will be by weight (kilograms). The final
furosemide, omeprazole, phenobarbital, and clomipramine.
number in the dosage equation is the time and will be measured
These interactions may occur during intravenous administra-
in minutes, hours, or by day.
fion, in the gastrointestinal (GI) system after oral dosing, at the
 For example, if the drug dose is in milligram per kilogram per
target site, or during elimination in the hepatic and renal systems
hour, multiply the dose in miligram by the number of hours
With some medications, the timing of the administration must
each liter bag will last. This is the total number of milligrams to
be separated to ensure effective uptake. Always use a current
 place in the bag:
formulary to confrm the safe use of multiple medications.
Dose in mg Xlength of infusion = mg/
Drug dosage adjustments in patients
If the drug dose is in microgram per kilogram per minute, mul-
with heart, renal, and hepatic
tiply the dose in microgram by the number of minutes each liter
insuffciency or failure
- on p on on Aq roq s  i  
grams (since most medications have concentrations of miligram
Care must be taken to consult a drug formulary when adminis
per milliliter). This is the total number of micrograms to place
tering any drug to a patient. Information regarding any known
in the bag.
contraindications and adverse effects will be listed. Special atten-
tion must be given to animals with heart and renal or hepatic
Dose in μg X length of infusion in minutes
insufficiency or failure prior to administering any medications.
mg/
Animals in heart failure have a decrease in cardiac output and
= Dose in mg.
/1000μg
may have preferential shunting of blood to the brain or heart
Table 14.2.1
Table of drugs commonly used in CRls
Drug name and concentration 
Indications
 Constant rate infusion
Recommended dilutant (D)
Comments
dose
and incompatibilities (l)
Atracurium besylate
Induction of respiratory muscle
LD: 0.2-0.5mg/kg 
D: 5% dextrose, 0.9% NaCl
Start infusion 5 min after loading 
10 mg/mL
paralysis during mechanical
 CRl: 3-9mcg/kg/min (dog)
I: Should not be mixed with
dose; must monitor respiratory and
ventilation
0.37 mcg/kg/min (cat)
 other drugs
cardiovascular function
Butorphanol 10mg/mL
Analgesia ± sedation
LD: 0.2mg/kg
D: Any fluid
CRI: 0.1mg/kg/h
I: Diazepam, pentobarbital
Calcium gluconate 100 mg/mL
Hypocalcemia, hyperkalemic
CRI: 10 mg/kg/h
D: Any fluid
ECG should be monitored. CRl should
dysrhythmias, hypermagnesemia
I: Dobutamine, sodium
 be discontinued if bradycardia
bicarbonate, potassium 
develops
phosphate
Cimetidine 300mg/2 mL
Treatment of gastric ulceration,
LD: 2.5mg/kg
D: Any fluid
Too rapid of an infusion or use of a
metabolic alkalosis
CRI: 0.5mg/kg/h
I: Pentobarbital, atropine 
central vein may cause hypotension
and arrhythmias
Cisplatin 1 mg/mL
Antineoplastic agent
CRl: 60-70mg/m2 over
D: 0.9% NaCl
Should not be used in cats; saline 
2-6h
I: Metoclopramide
 diuresis should be provided to avoid
 nephrotoxicity
Diazepam 5 mg/mL
Anticonvulsant, sedative and 
LD: 5-10mg
D: 5% dextrose, 0.9% NaCl
Adsorbs to plastic IV tubing resulting
skeletal muscle relaxant effects 
CRI: 0.1-0.5mg/kg/h;
I: Many drugs, cloudiness in
 in unreliable dosing: does not adsorb
 increase to effect
admixture indicates
 into plastic syringes; should be
 precipitation and reduced
 protected from light. New CRl should
potency
be started every 4h 
Diltiazem 5mg/mL
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
LD: 0.2-0.4mg/kg
D: Any Iv fluid 
 Loading dose is not always needed
and supraventricular
 CRI: 0.2-0.5mg/kg/h or 
I: None listed at this time
ta chycardias
 5-20mcg/kg/min to effect
Dobutamine 12.5mg/mL
Useful in cardiogenic or septic 
2-20mcg/kg/min (dog)
D: 5% Dextrose or 0.9% NaCl
 Pink discoloration occurs with slight 
shock to treat decreased cardiac
1-15mcg/kg/min (cat)
I: Alkaline solutions, sodium 
 oxidation, but no loss of potency if
contra.ctibility
 bicarbonate; mixing with other
used within 24h; may cause focal
drugs should be avoided
facial seizures in cats
Dopamine 40mg/mL
Low dose: improves renal blood
 2-5 mcg/kg/min
D: 5% dextrose or 0.9% NaCl
Do not use if solution has a pink or
flow, may play a role in
 5-10mcg/kg/min
I: Sodium bicarbonate or
violet color; stable in fluids for
treatment of oliguric renal
7-20mcg/kg/min
alkalinizing solutions 
24-48h. Extravasation may cause
failure
necrosis; should be treated locally
 Moderate dose: positive inotrope
with 5-10 mg phentolamine in
High dose: increases blood 
10-15mL saline 
pressure
Epinephrine 1:1000 (1 mg/mL)
Used in cardiac arrest,
0.1-1.5 mcg/kg/min to
D: 5% dextrose, 0.9% NaCl
 Solution should be protected from 
hypotension, severe asthma and
effect
I: Alkaline solutions, calcium
light
anaphylaxis
 containing solutions
(Continued)
Table 14.2.1 (Continued)
Drug name and concentration
Indications
Constant rate infusion
 Recommended dilutant (D)
Comments
dose
and incompatibilities (l)
Esmolol 10 mg/mL
Used in tachycardia or
LD: 500 mcg/kg over 1
D: 5% dextrose, 0.9% NaCl
Concurrent use of calcium channel
hypertension 
minute
I: Sodium bicarbonate
blockers should be avoided 
CRl: 25-200 mcg/kg/min
Ethanol 100% 1000 mg/mL
Treatment of ethylene glycol
LD: 0.6 g/kg
D: 0.9% NaCl to a 7% solution
7% solution is prepared by adding
toxicity
CRI: 100 mg/kg/h
I: None listed at this time
7 mL 100% ethanol to 93 mL NaCl
Fentanyl citrate 0.05 mg/mL
Analgesia and sedation; may be
Dog:
D: 5% dextrose
Alternative dose: 1-5mcg/kg/h
(50mcg/mL)
used to facilitate mechanical
LD: 10-20mcg/kg Iv
I: Mixing with other drugs
ventilation
CRI: 0.3-0.7 mcg/min
should be avoided 
Cat:
LD: 2mcg/kg
CRl: 0.1-0.3 mcg/kg/min
Furosemide 50 mg/mL
Promotes diuresis in oliguric
3-8 mcg/kg/min or
D: Any Iv fluid
 Should be protected from light
renal failure, treats pulmonary 
0.1-1mg/kg/h to effect 
I: Acidic solutions; precipitates
edema in congestive heart
when combined with many
failure (CHF), promotes calciuria
drugs
 in hypercalcemia
Heparin 1000 U/mL
Activates antithrombin Ill,
LD: 100-300U/kg
D: Any Iv fluid
Adjust dose based on activated
prevents thrombin and fibrin
CRI: 10-50U/kg/h (dog)
I: Any drugs that are unstable 
 partial thromboplastin time 
formation; used in DIC and 
5-10U/kg/h (cat)
in an acidic environment 
thromboembolic disease
Hetastarch 6g/100 mL
 Synthetic colloid, used for its 
1-2 mL/kg/h
 Do not use if brown in color or
 oncotic properties and as a
 precipitate is present.
volume expander
Hydrocortisone sodium
Treatment of Addisonian crisis 
0.625 mg/kg/h
D: Any Iv fluid, should be 
 Proper dilution volume should be 
phosphate 100-, 250-, or
 and of adrenal insufficiency 
diluted to 0.1-1.0 mg/mL I:
used to avoid precipitation; do not
500-mg vials
 induced after adrenalectomy
Mixing with other drugs
use if discolored.
Insulin (regular) 10ou/mL
Lowers blood glucose, used in 
1.1-2.2 U/kg/day
D: 0.9% NaCl
Binds to IV tubing: tubing should be
diabetic ketoacidotic patients
I: Sodium bicarbonate; mixing
flushed with insulin solution prior to
 and adjunctive treatment of 
with other drugs should be
IV infusion
hyperkalemia
avoided
lsoproterenol 0.2 mg/mL
 Causes positive inotropy and
0.02-0.1mcg/kg/min
D: 5% Dextrose or 0.9% NaCl;
 Causes peripheral vasodilation
chronotropy; also vasodilator and
dilute to 1 mg in 500 mL
bronchodilator; used in advanced
heart block
Ketamine 100mg/mL
May be used as an adjunct to
1-3 mcg/kg/min
D: 5% dextrose or 0.9% NaCl
Should be used with opioid or
 opioid therapy to ease severe
I: Diazepam, barbiturates
tran quilizers
pain
Lidocaine 20mg/mL (2%)
Ventricular antiarrhythmic
Dog:
D: 5% Dextrose; 0.9% NaCl
Adsorption to polyvinyl chloride bags;
LD: 2-4mg/kg
less preferred
stable in Iv fluids for 24h; cats are 
CRl: 50-100mcg/kg/min
I: Alkaline solutions, mixing
very sensitive (seizures)
Cat:
with cther drugs should be
LD: 0.25-0.75 mg/kg
avoided
CRl: 10-20 mcg/kg/min
Magnesium sulfate
Used as a source of magnesium
Up to 1mEq/kg/day
 D: 5% dextrose diluted to
Use with caution with impaired renal
(parenteral) 4.06 meq/mL 50%
in hypomagnesemia and
<20%
function, overdose causes 
(500 mg/mL)
refractory hypokalemia
I: Many drugs, including those
bradycardia, muscle weakness; treat
containing calcium, vitamin B
with calcium
complexes, sodium 
bicarbonate
Mannitol 25% (250 mg/mL)
Osmotic diuretic; has a role in
0.5-1g/kg/h for 2-6h
D: 5% dextrose to 8%-10%
Warm to remove/prevent
treatment of oliguric renal 
solution 
crystallization
failure, gaucoma, cerebral
I: Blood, strongly acidic or 
edema
alkaline solutions; mixing with 
other drugs should be avoided
Methylprednisolone sodium
 Treatment of head/spinal cord
LD: 30mg/kg followed by
D: 5% dextrose or 0.9% NaCl
 Precipitation may occur; reconstituted
succinate 40 mg/mL
trauma
15mg/kg at 2 and 4h
I: Normosol-R, Normosol-M,
 solution should be used within 48h
CRl: 2-5g/kg/h for 42h,
reducing dose gradually
Metoclopramide 5 mg/mL
Antiemetic, gastrointestinal
1-2mg/kg/day or
D: Any Iv fluid without 
 Should be protected from light
stimulant
0.7-1.4 mcg/min or dog:
calcium
0.01-0.02 mg/kg/h
I: Sodium bicarbonate; mixing
Cat: 0.01mg/kg/h
with other drugs should be 
avoided
Midazolam 5mg/mL
Anticonvulsant, sedative, similar
Dog:
D: 5% dextrose or 0.9% NaCl
 Does not adsorb to plastics
to diazepam
LD: 0.1mg/kg
I: Mixing with other drugs 
CRl: 0.35 mcg/kg/min
should be avoided
Morphine 15 mg/mL
Opiate agonist, used in
LD: 1-10 mg/kg
 D: 5% dextrose; should be
 Cats may exhibit CNS excitability;
treatment of acute pain
CRl: 0.01-0.1 mg/kg/h
diluted to 0.1-1 mg/ml
lower doses should be used in cats.
I: Mixing with other drugs 
should be avoided
 Norepinephrine 1 mg/mL
 Potent adrenergic vasopressor;
0.05-1.0mcg/kg/min to
D: 5% dextrose or 0.9% NaCl
 Extravasation should be treated with
used for short-term blood
effect
I: Mixing with other drugs 
 phentolamine; systolic pressure
pressure support 
should be avoided
should not be raised by >40 mmHg 
Nitroprusside 200 mcg/mL
 Venous and arterial vasodilator;
Dog:
D: 5% Dextrose; must use
Use with extreme caution; should not
used in acute, congestive heart 
0.5-10mcg/kg/min
with infusion pump only 
 be used in oliguric patients; must be
failure to treat fulminant 
Cat: 0.1-0.3 mcg/kg/min
I: Mixing with other drugs
 shielded from light; overdose results
pulmonary edema or systemic
Start low and increase
should be avoided
in cyanide toxicity
hypertension 
slowly; blood pressure (BP)
should be monitored.
(Continued)
Table 14.2.1
(Continued)
Drug name and concentration 
Indications
 Constant rate infusion
Recommended dilutant (D)
Comments
dose
and incompatibilities (l)
Oxytocin 20 U/mL
Used for enhancement of uterine
Dog: 5-10U over 30 min
D: 5% dextrose or 0.9% NaCl
Ensure normal glucose and calcium
 contractions at parturition
Cat: 2-5U over 30 min
I: Mixing with other drugs
levels prior to use; use when cervix is
should be avoided
open
 Pancuronium 1mg/mL 
 Neuromuscular blockade as an
LD: 0-0.04-0.1mg/kg
D: 5% dextrose or 0.9% NaCl
 Cardiovascular and respiratory
adjunct to anesthesia or
CRI: 0.06-0.1 mg/kg/h
By syringe pump
monitoring must be used
 mechanical ventilation
I: Drug insert should be
consulted 
 Pentobarbital 65mg/mL
Used as an anticonvulsant and
LD: 3-30mg/kg to effect
D: 5% dextrose or 0.9% NaCl
Respiratory activity should be
for chemical restraint during
 CRI: 0.2-1mg/kg/h
I: Mixing with other drugs
monitored; ventilatory support may
mechanical ventilation 
should be avoided
be required 
Phenylephrine 100mg/mL
Causes vasoconstriction via
1-3 mcg/kg/min
D: 5% dextrose or 0.9% NaCl
 Extravasation injuries must be treated
alpha-adrenergic effects; used to
I: Sodium bicarbonate
 with phentolamine locally
treat hypotension under
 anesthesia
Potassium chloride 2mEq/mL
Used to treat serum potassium 
In Iv fluids: 28-80mEq/L
D: Any Iv fluid
IV administration should not exceed
deficits
I: Diazepam
0.5 mEq/kg/h
Potassiumphosphate3mM/mL
Used in correction of
0.01-0.03mM/kg/h for
D: 0.9% NaCl
50-75% of potassium supplied using
phosphorous, 4.4mEq/mL
hypoph osphatemia
6 hr or 0.03-0.12 mM/
I: Dobutamine, lactated
KCl, the rest as KPo4; phosphorus
potassium
kg/h for diabetic
Ringer's solution
levels checked every 12 h in DKA 
ketoacidosis (DKA)
patients until >2.5mg/dL
patients
Procainamide 100 or 500mg/mL
Antiarrhythmic, used in 
Dog:
D: 0.9% NaCl
Light yellow (but not amber)
treatment of ventricular
LD 2-20 mg/kg over 5 min
I: Decomposes if mixed with
discoloration does not affect potency;
arrhythmias
 CRI: 20-50mcg/kg/min
dextrose
should not be used if dark yellow;
Cat:
stable in fluids for 24h 
LD: 1-2 mg/kg
CRl: 10-20 mcg/kg/min 
Propofol 10mg/mL
Short-acting hypnotic
0.05-0.2 mg/kg/min
D: 5% dextrose
Propofol supports bacterial growth; 
I: Should not be mixed with
 should be used with strict asepsis
other drugs
Sodium bicarbonate 1mEq/mL
Alkalinizing agent; used to treat
 50% of calculated dose
D: 5% dextrose or 0.9% NaCl
 Deficit calculation: 0.3x kg body
metabolic acidosis; adjunctive
(based on deficit) IV over
I: Mixing with other drugs
weight x base deficit 
therapy in hyperkalemic crisis
4-6 hours
should be avoided 
verapamil 2.5mg/mL
Calcium channel blocker; used
LD: 0.05-0.15mg/kg
D: 5% dextrose or 0.9% NaCl
 Loading dose not always used
for supraventricular
CRl: 2-10mcg/kg/min
I: Mixing with other drugs
tachyarrhythmias
should be avoided 
Vitamin B complex (injectable)
Provides B complex
 2-4 mL/L at maintenance
D: Any IV fluid
CompatiblewithIy fluidandTPN
 supplementation 
fluid rate
I: Sodium bicarbonate
solutions
Source: Silverstein DC, Hopper K. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2009; Ettinger S, Feldman E. Textbook of veterinary Intemal Medicine, 6th edition. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier
Saunders; 2000.
Chapter 14  Nursing
459
muscle. Some drugs will enhance cardiac toxicity and clinical
Table 14.2.2 Drugs frequently associated with liver disease
signs may be apparent. One example would be an increase in
Drug
cardiac arrhythmias. In animals with shunting of blood to the
Species
brain, central nervous system (CNS) toxicity can be manifested
Acetaminophen
Cat and dog
by seizures or nausea. With heart failure, the decreased blood
flow to the GI system can be manifested by GI edema resulting
Amoxicillin/ampicillin produ cts
Cat and dog
in erratic oral absorption.
Azathioprine
Dog
Hepatic insufficiency can decrease drug metabolism, espe-
cially in cases of severe disease (e.g., portosystemic shunts and
Azithromycin
Cat
hepatic lipidosis). Common examples of drugs that may have
Azole antifungals
Cat and dog
 decreased drug metabolism include metronidazole and diazepam.
Cephalosporins
Dog
 Many pharmacological compounds are metabolized by the liver
Cyclosporine
Cat and dog
and must be excreted through the biliary system. Care must be
taken when using compounds whose modes of action target the
Diazepam
Cat
 n   n    
Diethylstilbestrol
Dog
the acute effects of drugs that are highly protein bound, such as
Enrofloxacin
Dog
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and benzodi-
azepines. For animals with ascites, the protein-bound drugs
Glucocorticoids
Dog (less commonly cat)
should be dosed on the total body weight including the ascites.
Lomustine
Dogs
With water and lipid-soluble drugs, the ideal body weight should
Mebendazole
Dog
be used. The estimated weight of the ascites should be subtracted
from the weight of the animal prior to calculating the drug
Megestrol acetate
Dog
dose. Some animals with liver disease may have an increased
Methimazole
Dog
sensitivity to CNS depressants. The dose of opioids should be
 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
Cat and dog
reduced and the use of reversible agents is recommended. Avoid
the use of or use decreased doses of benzodiazepines and bar-
drugs
biturates. If animals have hepatic encephalopathy, stored whole
 Oxibend azole
Dog
and packed blood should be avoided due to the increased
 Ph en obarbital
Cat and dog
ammonia concentration in stored red blood cell (RBC) prod-
 Phenytoin
Dog
ucts? (Table 14.2.2).
 Primidone
Dog
There are some drugs that are frequently associated with, or
are suspected to cause, drug-associated liver disease, and their
Stanozolol
Cat
use should be carefully monitored or avoided in animals with
Sulfonamides
Dog
known hepatic insufficiency4 (Table 14.2.3).
 Increased knowledge of canine genetics has led to the discov-
Tetracycline antibiotics
Cat and dog
ery of the MDRl gene. This gene codes P-glycoprotein (P-gp)
Thacetarsemide
Cat and dog
and is known as the multidrug resistance 1 gene. P-gp transports
Trimethoprim-sulfa combinations
Dog
(or pumps) chemicals from inside the cell across membranes to
outside the cel. P-gp is normally found in many locations
 Ormetoprim-sulfadiazine
Dog
including intestinal epithelial cells, brain capillary endothelial
cells, biliary canalicular cells, and renal proximal tubular cells. If
Table ad apted from Kirk's Current vet Therapy XIV.
mutated, this gene results in a nonfunctional protein that alters
CNS penetration, enhances oral absorption, and alters urinary
and biliary excretion of some drugs. The failure to pump these
drugs out of the brain can result in abnormal neurological signs.
heterozygous animal (one normal and one mutated gene), or a
The Washington State University Veterinary Clinical Pharma-
homozygous animal (two mutated genes).
cology Laboratory (WSU-VCPL) has a test available to easily
Some drugs have been shown to be pumped out of the brain
check for the MDR1 mutation, by submission of either a cheek
 by P-gp but, at this time, appear to be safely tolerated by dogs
swab or EDTA blood. Certain breeds, primarily the herding
with the mutation; these drugs include cyclosporine, digoxin,
breeds, are affected by the MDR1 gene mutation, although mixed
jo o padnd q oi paoa snp sao sauaaxop pue
breeds can be affected. The affected dogs in order of frequency
Aq paenanoi Aias aq oi readde suq u da-d Aq uq a
of mutation include collie, long-haired whippet, Australian
dogs; these drugs include buprenorphine, fentanyl, and mor-
shepherd (standard and mini), McNab, Silken Windhound,
phine. However, the use of these drugs should be carefully moni-
English shepherd, Shetland sheepdog, German shepherd, Old
tored in dogs with the mutation. Table 14.2.4 lists drugs shown
English sheepdog, and Border collie. With testing, an individual
 to cause problems in dogs with the MDRl gene mutation and
dog can be identifed as a normal animal (no gene mutation), a
the recommended dose titrations.
460
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 14.2.3 Drugs known to be associated with liver disease
Table 14.2.4 Drugs with documented problems in dogs with MDR1
mutation 
Drug
Drug
Suggested dosing for dogs with the MDR1
Acarbose
Albendazole
mutation 
Allopurinol
Amitraz
Acepromazine
Reduce dose by 25% in heterozygous dogs.
Amlodipine
Butorphanol
Reduce dose by 30-50% for homozygous
dogs.
Clomipramine
Danazol
Butorphanol
 Reduce dose by 25% in heterozygous dogs.
Desoxycorticosterone
Diethylcarbamazine
Reduce dose by 30-50% for homozygous
Enalapril 
Ethanol
dogs.
Febantel/praziquantel
Doxorubicin
Reduce dose by 25-30% and monitor
Etod olac
carefully.
Fenbendazole
Griseofulvin
Emodepside
Not recommended for use
Iron
Isoniazid
(Profender?)
lvermectins
Lufenuron
 Erythromycin
Not recommended for use
Lisinopril
Mabofloxacin
Ivermectin
Safe at 6 μg/kg (heartworm preventative
Marcrolide antibiotics
Meclofenamic acid 
dose)
May cause toxicity in heterozygous dogs at
Metronidazole
Methotrexate
300-600μg/kg
Neurological toxicity in homozygous dogs at
Mexiletine
Mibolerone
300-600μg/kg
Mitotane
Ormetoprim
Loperamide
Avoid use
Rifampin
Tamoxifen
(lmodiumTM)
Trilostane
Milbemycin
Terbinafine
Safe at manufacturer's recommended dose
oxime
for heartworm prevention.
Trovafl oxacin
valproic acid
(lnterceptor?)
Doses at 10-20 x recommended doses
toxic for animals with the mutation
Moxidectin
Safe at manufacturer's recommended dose
for heartworm prevention.
Doses at 10-20 x recommended doses
toxic for animals with the mutation
 Other drugs are excreted via the renal system. Care must be
Selamectin
Safe at manufacturer's recommended dose
taken to ensure that over dosing of patients with impaired renal
(Revolution?)
for heartworm prevention.
filtration does not occur due to incomplete or slow elimination
Doses at 10-20 x recommended doses
of these drugs. In patients with renal disease, there may be a
toxic for animals with the mutation
decrease in the fltration of drugs eliminated primarily by the
Vinblastine
Reduce dose by 25-30% and monitor
kidneys or a decrease in tubular secretions. Tubular secretions
carefully.
 include potassium, ammonia, hydrogen ions and some drugs.
Vincristine
Reduce dose by 25-30% and monitor
Some drugs should be used with caution in animals with one
carefully.
 or more physiological diseases. A common loop diuretic, furo-
semide, needs to be used with caution in patients with impaired
Derived from: wsu CvM veterinary Clinical Pharmacology Lab, http://
hepatic function and renal insufficiency or failure. In cases of
www.vetmed.wsu .depts-vCPL/ drugs.aspx.
hepatic function, caution must be taken as furosemide may
 cause hepatic coma (due to the possibility of electrolyte imbal-
 ances). Its use should be discontinued in patients with progres-
sive renal disease especially if oliguria or increasing azotemia
content of inspired air, ventilation-perfusion mismatch, cardiac
 Occurs. The serum half-life is prolonged in patients with renal
shunting, hypoventilation, diffusion impairment, and intrapul-
failure. See information in the pharmacology section of Chapter
monary shunting. Systemic illnesses also cause inadequate tissue
10 for more information on specific drug dosages.
 Oxygen delivery. Examples include anemia, metabolic and respi-
ratory acidosis, or alkalosis.
 The patient's arterial oxygen content (CaO) and cardiac
Oxygen therapy
output (Q) affects the delivery of oxygen to the tissues. To cal-
 Supplementation with oxygen is very important in the manage-
culate arterial oxygen, utilize the following formula, where SaO2
ment of critical patients including systemic inflammatory
is the arterial oxygen saturation, reported from a pulse oximeter
response syndrome (SIRS), cardiopulmonary disease, sepsis, and
in percent. The PaO is the partial pressure of arterial oxygen,
Chapter 14 Nursing
461
reported from arterial blood gas as millimeters of mercury
If oxygen therapy will be required for over 24h, invasive
(mmHg).
methods of supplemental oxygen can be achieved by nasal or
 nasopharyngeal administration. Nasal catheters are simple to
mL O,
place, are tolerated well by most patients, and require minimal
CaO =
1.34
xSaO, Xhemoglobin
/g：
 equipment. To place nasal catheters, anesthetize the nasal passage
with topical 2% lidocaine or proparacaine. Use a 5- to 10-Fr red
+ PaO, mmHg ×0.003(mL O/dL/mmHg)
dL
rubber catheter, with the tip pointing toward the eye; measure
from the nose to the medial canthus of the eye. Mark the catheter
An example using this equation where the patient's SaO, = 93%,
with a permanent marker at the level of the nostril. Lubricate
the PaOz=90 mmHg, and the hemoglobin = 14g/dL is as
the tip of the catheter and insert gently into the ventral nostril
follows:
to the line marked on the catheter. Secure the tube with suture
or staples to the lateral maxilla or between the eyes. Flow rates
of 50-150mL/kg/min can provide 30-70% FiO2 dependent
1×93% ×14
upon the patient's size, respiration rate, and open mouth breath-
 ing. With nasopharyngeal placement, the tip of the catheter is
+90 mmHg ×0.003(mL O /dL/mmHg)
placed at the ramus of the mandible. Care must be taken not to
LP
force the catheter into the turbinates as epistaxis can occur. An
Elizabethan collar should be placed to prevent the patient from
CaO = 17.44 mL O2/
dislodging the catheter.
7dL
Hypercapnia is the primary stimulus for respiration. In
and
patients with chronic hypercapnia, such as chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), administration of supplemental
17.71 mL O /
oxygen can result in severe hypoventilation and respiratory
CaO2
/dL:
failure. Some patients may require mechanical ventilation such
as animals with myasthenia gravis, consolidated lung lobes, or
Normal CaO, is 17.5-18.0 mL O/dL.
when paralytic agents have been used. Pulmonary oxygen toxic-
 Most arterial oxygen is carried while bound to hemoglobin.
ity can occur with exposure to 100% oxygen. An FiO, of over
A very small fraction (0.003 × PaO2) is carried unbound in the
60% should not be administered for longer than 24-72h to avoid
plasma. By providing supplemental oxygen, it is possible to
pulmonary oxygen toxicity.*
increase the fractional concentration of the oxygen in the
q si od sd e um i oqe (o) s p
Drug calculations
70 mmHg or the SaO on room air is less than 93%, oxygen sup-
 plementation should be provided.
Some medications, such as chemotherapeutic agents, are often
 All methods of oxygen supplementation require humidifica-
calculated on the basis of body surface area (BSA) in meter
 tion if used for more than a few hours. Oxygen supplementation
aaa psn si va m sd e a u raa pes
may cause drying and dehydration of the nasal mucosa, impaired
it is less affected by abnormal fat mass and is a better indicator
mucociliary clearance, epithelial degeneration of the respiratory
of metabolic mass. Common equations used to calculate BSA are
tract, and increased risk of infection. Humidifcation is easily
saline or distilled water and then delivering to the patient by
10.1X(weight in grams)3
Canine:
noninvasive or invasive methods.
10,000
 Noninvasive methods include flow-by oxygen, administration 
via face mask, oxygen hood, or use of an oxygen cage. Flow-by
and
oxygen is the simplest technique used. An oxygen flow rate of
2-3 L/min held within 2 cm of a patient will provide an FiOz of
25-40%. Administration with a face mask at 8-12L/min can
10×( weight in grams)?3
Feline:
 provide an FiO of 50-60%. The drawback for long-term admin-
10,000
istration by flow-by and administration with a face mask is that
both require a staff member to ensure the oxygen is getting to
Another way to calculate the BSA is with this formula:
the patient. Administration with an oxygen hood can be achieved
with a rigid Elizabethan collar and clear plastic wrap. The plastic
(weight in kg)3
wrap is applied to the open end of the collar, with a small space
Canine and feline:
so the hood can vent. Once the hood has been loaded with
10
Oxygen, flow rates of 0.5-1.0L/min will deliver an FiO, of 30-
40%.3 Higher FiO2 concentrations are possible with an oxygen
The chart below is an effective way to convert from kilogram
cage. FiO, with an oxygen cage can be maintained up to 60%.
body weight to meter squared surface area (Table 14.2.5).
462
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 14.2.5
 Conversion from kilogram body weight to meter squared surface area
Body surface area conversion chart (body weight in kilograms to meters squared)
Weight to body surface area conversion chart—dogs
kg
m2
kg
m²
kg
m²
kg
m²
kg
m²
0.5
0.064
10.0
0.469
20.0
0.744
30.0
0.975
40.0
1.181
1.0
0.101
11.0
0.500
21.0
0.759
31.0
0.997
41.0
1.201
2.0
0.160
12.0
0.529
22.0
0.785
32.0
1.018
42.0
1.220
3.0
0.210
13.0
0.553
23.0
0.817
33.0
1.029
43.0
1.240
4.0
0.255
14.0
0.581
24.0
0.840
34.0
1.060
44.0
1.259
5.0
0.295
15.0
0.608
25.0
0.864
35.0
1.081
45.0
1.278
6.0
0.333
16.0
0.641
26.0
0.886
36.0
1.101
46.0
1.297
7.0
0.370
17.0
0.668
27.0
606'0
37.0
1.121
47.0
1.302
8.0
0.404
18.0
0.694
28.0
0.931
38.0
1.142
48.0
1.334
9.0
0.437
19.0
0.719
29.0
0.953
39.0
1.162
49.0
1.352
50.0
1.371
Weight to body surface area conversion chart—cats
kg
m2
kg
m2
kg
m²
kg
m²
kg
m²
0.1
0.022
1.4
0.125
3.6
0.235
5.8
0.323
8.0
0.400
0.2
0.034
1.6
0.137
3.8
0.244
6.0
0.330
8.2
0.407
0.3
0.045
1.8
0.148
4.0
0.252
6.2
0.337
8.4
0.413
0.4
0.054
2.0
0.159
4.2
0.260
6.4
0.345
8.6
0.420
0.5
0.063
2.2
0.169
4.4
0.269
6.6
0.352
8.8
0.426
0.6
0.071
2.4
0.179
4.6
0.277
6.8
0.360
9.0
0.433
0.7
0.079
2.6
0.189
4.8
0.285
7.0
0.366
9.2
0.439
0.8
0.086
2.8
0.199
5.0
0.292
7.2
0.373
9.4
0.445
0.9
0.093
3.0
0.208
5.2
0.300
7.4
0.380
9.6
0.452
1.0
0.100
3.2
0.217
5.4
0.307
7.6
0.387
86
0.458
1.2
0.113
3.4
0.226
5.6
0.315
7.8
10.0
0.464
Source: Derived from Formula found in Plumb DC. Plumos Veterinary Drug Handbook, 7th edition. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2011.
diarrhea). If the medication has been shown to cause harmful
Client education
effects to humans, this information must be relayed to the client.
It is recommended to have client education handouts available
Veterinary technicians play a large part in client education when
on any drug that is being prescribed and dispensed from the
discharging patients from the hospital. When instructing clients
clinic.
on how to administer oral medications, care must be taken to
During discharge, many clients are overwhelmed with infor-
ensure that the client is instructed on the time of the dosing with
mation. The use of a discharge form has been shown to increase
 regard to other medications, if the medication must be admin-
client compliance with continued home care. A simple form can
istered on an empty stomach or with food and storage of the
be created for use when discharging a patient that includes a
medications.
description of what was found, treatments that were given, care
 Care must also be taken to inform the client of any potential
at home instructions, and medication information. Information
 toxicities and monitoring of side effects (such as vomiting or
should include the name of the medication, when to start the
Chapter 14  Nursing
463
Table 14.2.6  Sample medication discharge form
Medications for “Dusty"
Drug
What it is for
How much to give
When to give
When to start
Comments
Su cralfate
Gastrointestinal
1 tablet in a
5 a.m., 5 p.m.
Tomorrow
Give on an empty stomach,
protectant
slurry
morning
1h before and 2 h after food
Misoprostol
Gastrointestinal
12 tablet
6 a.m., 6 p.m.
Tonight with
Give with food
protectant
a small meal
Women should wear gloves
when handling
medication, what time to administer the medication, and any
malnutrition can also result from diets that are inappropriate
special handling issues (Table 14.2.6). When administering med-
for the physiological status of the patient (ie., low protein diet
ications that can be given with food, it can be placed in a small
  s  i s d  
meatball of canned food, pill pocket, or treat. The use of gelatin
lactation).?
capsules can ease administration of medications that are bitter,
 Insufficient nutrient intake can cause impaired immunity,
such as tramadol. If possible, show the owner how to administer
decreased resistance to infection, inability to withstand shock,
the medication during discharge. If a client feels comfortable
surgery or the effects of drugs, decreased wound strength, mus-
administering the medications, client compliance will increase.
cular weakness, organ failure, and death.
 For some pets, the use of a commercial pet piller would be
beneficial.
Nutrition goals
The veterinary technician plays a very important role in the
administration of medications. In the hospital setting this
The minimum goals of nutritional support are to meet the
includes confrming that the proper patient is receiving the
patient's nutritional needs, and if possible, to prevent further
correct medication at the appropriate dosage at the prescribed
deterioration. This can be done by providing protein, carbohy-
time. It is imperative that the veterinary technician has a full
drate, fat, and other nutrients in a formula that can be utilized
 by the body with maximum efficiency, minimal adverse effects,
understanding of and the ability to relay information on; the
 indications for use, pharmacokinetics, contraindications, pre-
and minimum discomfort.3
cautions, safety issues, adverse effects, drug interactions, and
When the body uses exogenous (those provided outside of the
monitoring parameters of the medications they encounter in
body) rather than endogenous (those provided by the animals
 own body stores) nutrients, the breakdown of lean body mass is
practice.
slowed down and the patient's response to therapy is optimized.4
Ani n ssui on sssau un uopq ud ps
SECTION 3 NUTRITIONAL
depletes the body of functional protein stores, thereby affecting
wound healing, immune and cellular functions, and cardiac and
SUPPORT
respiratory functions.5
When subjected to starvation, body tissues, except for the
Nutritional support
 brain and bone, loses cell mass by varying degrees. Tumors and
wounds may act as additional burdens and can further increase
 Many hospitalized and critically ill dogs and cats are at risk of
the patient's caloric and nutritional requirements.? Malnutrition
or the ability to eat.
can impair immune function and wound healing, decrease organ
Decreased food intake can be caused by any number of factors
function, and affect the prognosis for recovery.
   sd  ad  
The magnitude of metabolic aberration is determined by the
ketoacidosis, inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatitis, or liver
severity of the illness or injury and the associated tissue damage.
 or renal failure) to fear, anxiety, and untreated pain.
Even with the initiation of adequate nutritional support, muscle
wasting and negative nitrogen balance can occur.
Who is at risk?
Guidelines for support
 Dogs and cats of any age or any physiological stage (i.e., life
stage) may become malnourished from inadequate nutrient
intake. Malnutrition is any disorder with inadequate or unbal-
loss or anticipated loss of more than 10% of the body weight;
anced nutrition that is associated with either nutritional defi-
 anorexia for longer than 3 days; trauma; surgery (even including
ciencies or excessive nutrient intake. Protein and energy
some elective surgeries); severe systemic infltrative disease; and
464
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
increased nutrient loss through diarrhea, vomiting, draining
and ascites. These may reflect low serum protein levels secondary
wounds, or burns associated with decreased serum albumin. In
to malnutrition, likely in combination with intestinal or renal
the case of elective surgeries, just because we “elect" to have the
protein loss. Poor hair coat and skin condition can also result
 surgery performed does not make it any less stressful. A nutri-
from inadequate food intake or micronutrient deficiencies.?
tional assessment should be done on any animal who presents
under these conditions and nutritional support provided when
Calculating energy requirements
deemed necessary.
Other issues that must be considered include GI tract func-
Caloric requirements are determined by body weight and activ-
 tion, whether the patient can tolerate enteral nutrition (feedings
ity level/lifestyle and can be estimated by using the resting energy
administrated via the intestinal tract) or parenteral nutrition
requirements (RER) for healthy adults at rest in environmentally
(food administered intravenously, i.e., total or partial parenteral
comfortable cages.? (See Table 14.3.5.) The RER has previously
nutrition), the physical or chemical restraint risks required for
been multiplied by illness factors based on the patient gender,
placing a feeding tube or central line catheter, venous accessibil-
neutered status, and/or underlying condition; however, illness
ity, whether the patient is at risk for pulmonary aspiration (e.g..
factors are now thought to lead to excessive calories and more
megaesophagus), availability of skilled nursing care and equip-
complications rather than improve clinical outcome and are
ment, and client cost.
therefore discouraged.° It is important to remember the caloric
requirement calculations provide only an estimate of a patient's
Nutritional assessment
needs and may be off by up to 25%. It is vitally important to
closely monitor these patients for persistent undernutrition or
The cornerstones of nutritional assessment are obtaining a
overnutrition. Water requirements equal those for energy
detailed patient history, conducting a complete physical exami-
(1 mL = 1kcal).′ Patients that eat more than the calculated RER
nation, recording body weight and body condition score (BCS),
amounts should not be discouraged from doing so while recov-
and evaluating blood chemistry profles.4 The testing included in
ering from surgery or trauma.
the blood chemistry profle depends on the patient's condition
(Table 14.3.1)
Routes of administration
 The BCS used for healthy animals often do not apply to sick
animals. When an animal is physiologically stressed, lean body
Enteral feeding via the GI tract is generally the safest, most cost-
mass is its preferred energy source; in contrast, healthy animals
effective, and most natural route for administering nutrients.
use stored body fat for energy. The result is increased catabolism
Enteral feeding also has the ability to maintain the intestinal
of body protein.'
 A patient may present with increased amounts of body fat but
intake is the preferred route for enteral nutrition; however,
may be at serious risk of malnutrition-associated complications
patients must be able to consume at least 85% of their calculated
caused by protein catabolism. Careful palpation of skeletal
RERs for this method of feeding to be effective.3? Technicians
muscles over bony prominences (e.g., the scapula, vertebrae,
often need to devise ways to encourage patients to accept oral
ischium, and occipital crest) can help identify any muscle wasting
feedings (Table 14.3.2).
consistent with increased protein catabolism.? Another indicator
 of poor nutritional status is pitting edema of the lower extremities
Table 14.3.2
 Hints for increasing oral intake of food
· Hand-feed or pet the patient during feeding.
Table 14.3.1  Nutritional questions
 Warm the food to slightly below body temperature; if
microwaving, be sure food is stirred well before feeding.
When was the last time your pet ate or drank? How much
Always warm food in microwave-approved containers.
was offered? How much was consumed?
Add warm water to dry food or make a slurry from canned
What type of food is usually fed (canned, dry, table food.
foods by adding warm water.
scraps)? How much and how often?
Use baby food meats as a top dressing; dogs may also like
What brand of food is usually fed? For how long?
cat food used as a top dressing.
Have there been any recent changes in your pet's eating or
 Try various shapes and types of bowls. Shallow dishes for
drinking habits? If so, what changes and over what period
cats and brachycephalic dog breeds; plastic may have a
of time?
strange smell to the animals.
Have there been any recent changes in body condition (e.g.
 Use foods that have a strong smell or odor.
muscle loss, swollen abdomen, hair loss, or poor grooming)?
 Raise food (and water) bowls in patients with neck pain.
Has your pet recently taken, or is it currently taking any
Add appetite stimulants to “jump start" the feeding process
medications? Were there any changes in your pet's
(usually ineffective over the long term).
condition while taking these medications? Is so, what?
Source: Torrance AG. Intensive care nutritional support. In: Manual of
Source: Abood SK. Nutritional assessment of the critical care patient. In:
Companion Animal Nutntion and Feeding, pp. 171-180. Ames, IA: lowa State
Punina Nutnition Fonum. St. Louis, Mo: Ralston Purina; 1997.
University Press; 1996.
Chapter 14  Nursing
465
If a patient is unwilling or unable to eat voluntarily, tube
Table 14.3.3  Practices that adversely affect nutritional status
is somewhat limited by diet selections. In most instances, only
Failing to record weight daily
a ynoi pa aq uo sa p paz Aai no p
Failing to observe, measure, and record amounts of food
tube due to the smaller internal diameter size, but this is some-
consumed
what dependent upon the tube selected. In addition, tubes may
Allowing diffusion of responsibility for patient care during
become clogged, but flushing with water can prevent this from
staff rotation
 occuring? Even with these limitations, tube feeding may be
Prolonged administration of dextrose and electrolyte
containing solution without providing additional nutritional
appropriate in some cases.
support
 Delaying nutritional support until a patient reaches an
Parenteral nutrition
advanced state
 Withholding food to conduct multiple diagnostic tests or
When enteral nutrition is not an option, as with severe GI disease
procedures
resulting in intractable vomiting, when enteral nutrition could
Failing to recognize and treat increased nutritional needs
exacerbate a disease (e.g., necrotic hemorrhagic pancreatitis), or
 Failing to appreciate the role of nutrition in prevention and
 the animal's airway cannot be protected and aspiration pneumo-
recovery from infection and placing unwarranted reliance on
 nia is a concern, parenteral nutrition is an option.?
drugs
Parenteral nutrition uses a modified solution with nutrients
 Allowing surgery to be performed without verifying whether
a  sd pm s a q pose aq  p
the patient is optimally nourished
 gastrointestinal tract (GIT) first. Parenteral solutions can be used
 Providing inadequate nutritional support after surgery
alone or as a supplement to enteral feedings when insuffcient 
 Failing to use laboratory tests to assess nutritional status
caloric intake is seen. Using parenteral nutrition as the only
means of calories (termed total parenteral nutrition [TPNl) is
Source: Saker KE, Remillard R. Critical care nutrition and enteral-assisted
recommended only for patients that cannot be fed enterally.
feeding. In: Small Animal Cinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD
 Drawbacks include higher administration expenses (including
Thatcher, RL Remillard, P Roudebush, BBJ Novotny, pp. 439-471. Marceline,
MO: Walsworth Publishing: 2010.
hospitalization fees) and difficulty in obtaining the sterile, prop-
erly prepared TPN solutions. Short-term (less than 24h) use of
TPN is usually not justified, and most animals will need support 
Table 14.3.4 Recommended levels of protein, fat, and carbohydrate
for greater than 5 days.?
in critical care diets
TPN has several disadvantages. A dedicated central venous
catheter is required, which requires close monitoring. Throm-
Species
Protein % ME
Fat % ME
Carbohydrate % ME
bophlebitis and sepsis are serious complications if strict aseptic
technique is not followed." Lack of nutrients in the intestinal.
Dogs
20-30
30-55
15-50
 lumen may lead to a breakdown of the bacterial barrier in the
Cats
25-35
40-55
15-25
GIT, further increasing the incidence of sepsis. Lastly, a transi-
tional period is necessary to wean the patient from parenteral to
Source: Tennant B. Feeding the sick animal. In: Manual of Companion
enteral feedings.
Animal Nutrtion and Feeding, pp. 171-180. Ames, IA: lowa State University
Total parenteral solutions have very high osmolality (often
Press; 1996.
 greater than 800-1200 mOsm), and therefore a central venous
catheter is required to prevent phlebitis. Partial parenteral solu-
fions have lower osmolality and a peripheral catheter can be
diet strategy should address the animal's requirement for water
used. Partial parenteral solutions are diluted to decrease the
 and correct any preexisting fluid and acid-base defcits. After
osmolality, but this also dilutes the caloric content. Since both
these needs have been satisfed, sufficient fat, carbohydrate and
e  so a ss ad  p 
 protein should be provided to meet the animal's energy require-
tration rates of concurrent intravenous fluids must be adjusted
 ments and to minimize the gluconeogenesis of amino acids'0
to prevent fluid overload. Separation of the fuid line at connec-
(Table 14.3.4).
tion points (even when out of the cage during walks) or line
Commercial pet foods are specifically designed to meet the
damage/breakage must be avoided to decrease the incidence of
dietary requirements of cats and dogs and contain ingredients
introducing bacteria to the solution' (Table 14.3.3).
(e.g., glutamine, taurine, carnitine) not usually found in liquid
enteral or parenteral human diets. The principal difference
Diets
between human and animal liquid diets is the extent that ingre-
 dients are subject to hydrolysis and the protein content. For
 Patients with stress starvation can be glucose intolerant, and if
example, most human enteral diets contain 14-17% protein,
s0, use glucose less effciently as an energy source. Therefore,
which is insufficient for both dogs and cats. In addition, arginine
protein and fat are important sources of energy. Before evaluat-
and methionine levels in human enteral diets tend to be too low,
ing the need for fat, protein, and carbohydrate, however, a good
especially for cats.10
466
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 Pediatric or growth pet diets are often recommended because
Table 14.3.5
 Example of enteral nutrition worksheet
they are highly digestible, have high fat and protein contents, and
are very palatable.? Meat-based baby foods contain 30-70%
Enteral nutrition worksheet
protein and 20-60% fat. However, because they are deficient in
Client_
Patient_
Case #
calcium, vitamin A, and thiamine, baby foods should not be used
as the sole dietary source? (Table 14.3.5).
Date
Body condition score_
/5
Actual body weight (kg)
Desired body weight
Rate of diet initiation
(kg).
Resting energy requirements (RER) (wt in kg) 30 + 70 =
Because nutritional support is not an emergency procedure, the
kcal/day
general guidelines are to start slowly. Food intake should be
Patient's RER =
kcal/day
 gradually increased over a 2- to 3-day period until the estimated
caloric intake is met." If the patient shows discomfort, vomits,
Product selected
which contains
is nauseous, or becomes distressed, the diet and the route and
(complete as appropriate)
rate of delivery need to be assessed.
kcal/ mL
In most cases, 50% of the RER, divided into multiple small
kcal/ can
meals, is offered on the first day. If this amount is well tolerated,
then 100% of the RER can be fed on the second day. If the feed-
kcal/ cup
ings are not well tolerated, the increases should be more gradual
Total volume to be administered/day based on kcal required/day
over the next 2-3 days. Smaller meals tend to be better tolerated
( complete as appropriate)
because they do not cause overdistension of the stomach (and
kcal/mL of selected diet =
mL/day
 the subsequent delayed gastric emptying) or aggravate nausea,
as can occur with larger meals.? For patients receiving assisted
kcal/can of selected diet :
cans/day
feedings (via nasoesophageal, esophageal, or gastrostomy tube),
kcal/cup of selected diet =
mL/day
by delivering the food as a CRI (using a syringe pump), more
Administration schedule (differs for hepatic lipidosis)
food can be fed than if bolus feedings were utilized. This can
significantly decrease the incidence of nausea because only small
1/3 of total requirement on day 1 =
 mL/day
 amounts of food are in the stomach at any given time.? This
2/3 of total requirement on day 2 =
mL/day
method is also much easier on the nursing staff than if frequent
Total requirement on Day 3 :
 mL/day
small bolus feedings are given every 2-4h.
When using CRI feedings, the animals must be monitored
Feeding instructions (complete as appropriate)
closely to ensure that the feeding tube does not become dis-
For liquid diets: Feed_
mL
times/day
placed, allowing food to enter the lungs.
For canned diets: Feed
cans
times/day
 Refeeding syndrome is an electrolyte disturbance that occurs
 in patients with depleted intracellular cations (e.g., potassium,
For dry food diets: Feed
cu ps
times/day
phosphorus, magnesium, and calcium) and can be seen with
Feeding schedule
malnutrition, starvation as with feline hepatic lipidosis, or pro-
Divide total daily volume into 4-6 feedings/day (depending
longed diuresis as seen with uncontrolled diabetes or renal
on duration of anorexia and patient tolerance)
failure. This syndrome can be avoided by monitoring patients
Day 1 =
feedings/day
closely, introducing feedings slowly, monitoring electrolytes fre.
quently (every 12-24h), and appropriately supplementing diets.3
Day 2 =
feedings/day
Day 3 =
feedings/day
Implementing feeding orders
Volume/feeding
Clear instructions listing the type and form (i.e., liquid, canned,
Day 1 =
mL/feeding
or dry) of food to be offered, how much to give, and how often
Day 2 :
mL/feeding
Day 3 :
mL/feeding
need to record the food that was offered, the technique used to
feed the patient, the amount eaten, and the food that was offered
(e.g., one-half can of slightly warmed Hills ID' dog food offered
by hand at 3:00 p.m., ate 100%). A flowchart can be used to
record this information. One method of charting appetites is
in the circle. The technician should also record whether the
to draw a circle on the treatment sheet and to fill in the amount
offered food, the amount offered or the technique differs from
of food the patient consumed (e.g., filling in one-quarter of
the instructions. Such record keeping provides veterinarians
the circle if the patient ate one-fourth of the amount offered).
with an accurate measurement of food intake and technicians
If the patient refused to eat, the technician should record an R
with feeding methods that have succeeded or failed on a per-
Chapter 14  Nursing
467
Michigan YeterinarySpecialists24-HourFlow Sheet
1aa103
daily)
Date
Patient'sName
Clie
hypoglyeemia
DVMContact:
Cat
Home
Cell
Pager
Cage
Date003-AH
Step
ownICU?
Yes
DNR
RE
RI
PM
AM
Patient Orders
Freg
Technician PerformingTreatments:
D
b4
Attitude
Bin
T
99
Zl03.5
P
eo
7160
R
760
Pale
PCV/TS
FluidTypeLRS+O
Fluid Rate (mlhr) Aml/
Fluid cumulative
5
BM/V
Zo
Food:Type:C
res
Amount:
4can
Water
Weigh
Q24h
Flush IV Catheter
Q4h
Beizurewateh-seemotOhlh
walkoykide
Glucose
PredsoneaomdfablabPO
SID
Figure 14.3.1  Sample nutritional administration flowchart.
Table 14.3.6
 Sample diet transition—therapeutic diet (current diet) to maintenance diet (new diet)
Day 1-4
Day 5-8
Day 9-12
Day 13
3/4 therapeutic diet
12 therapeutic diet
14 therapeutic diet 
100% maintenance diet
14 maintenance diet
12 maintenance diet
3/4 maintenance diet
Source: Author.
patient basis. This is especially helpful during shift changes
diet every 3-4 days. For days 1-4, feed three-fourths of the
(Figure 14.3.1).
therapeutic diet and one-fourth of the maintenance diet; days
5-8, feed one-half of the therapeutic diet and one-half of the
maintenance diet; days 9-12, feed one-fourth of the therapeutic
Diet transitions
diet and three-fourths of the maintenance diet; day 13, feed
Although diet transitions may occur while the patient is hospi-
100% maintenance diet (i.e., transition phase of 12-16 days). If
talized, typically, this is done at some point following discharge
a problem develops at any stage, the owners should be instructed
from the hospital. One risk of transitioning to goal diet while a
to return to the last diet combination that worked.
 patient is hospitalized is the development of food aversions.
Technicians should supply owners with well-written, concise
Food aversion is the negative association of a certain diet with
hospitalization and leads to the avoidance of the offered diet. The
diet being fed can accomplish. Unfortunately, therapeutic or
transition depends on the diet being fed, the condition of the
maintenance diets cannot “cure” inflammatory bowel disease,
patient, its response to therapy, and the owner's willingness. As
 chronic renal failure, or diabetes mellitus, though they are often
with diet initiation, it is best to proceed slowly. For example,
used to help control the clinical signs of these diseases or to slow
when shifting from a therapeutic, support diet (current diet in
 a s p n A  h ssd 
hospital) to a maintenance diet (new diet at home), each dietary
educated and have reasonable expectations on the diet being fed
change should represent an additional one-quarter of the current
(Table 14.3.6).
468
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Conclusion
status, thyroid gland and autonomic nervous system function,
body composition, body surface area (BSA), and nutritional
 Being aware of the nutritional aspects of patient care can improve
status.'? As an animal's lean body mass or BSA increase, RER
the long-term outcome of the patient's health as well as the
also increases.
client-patient-veterinary team relationship. Technicians can
ds pu pxa d i  rd e s
Energy expenditure
to our patients.
Voluntary muscular activity, or exercise, is the most variable area
of energy expenditure. Muscular activity uses -30% of the total
Energy balance: weight loss versus
directly affected by the duration and intensity of the activity,
weight gain
though the amount of energy used can also increase as weight
 Energy balance is when an animal's intake is suffcient to meet
increases.
 Meal-induced thermogenesis is the heat produced following
 its needs and when minimal changes occur in the energy stored
by the body12.13 Positive energy balance happens when caloric
the intake of a meal."2 The ingestion of nutrients causes heat
intake exceeds energy expenditure. In growing and pregnant
production through the actions of digestion and absorption. The
use of enzymes by the body allows these chemical reactions to
animals, excess energy is converted primarily to lean body tissue;
in adult animals, excess energy is stored primarily as fat with
 Occur at the relatively low temperatures found within the body.
 only some increase in lean tissue.12.13 A negative energy balance
To achieve the same results in an industrial process would
 occurs when caloric intake is insufficient to meet energy expen-
require much more extreme conditions of temperature, pH, or
ditures; with this scenario, weight loss and a decreases in both
  h  e  s s  a
of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins is consumed, thermogenesis
fat and lean body stores can be seen.
uses -10% of the ingested calories to digest, absorb, metabolize,
and store these nutrients.1? The final amount of calories used is
Daily energy requirements
ultimately dependent on the composition of the diet as well as
sadap sies pe sp  () bai arua p 
the nutritional status of the animal.
Adaptive thermogenesis is the change in the RER secondary
 on the amount of energy that the body expends on a daily basis.2
to environmental stresses. These stresses include changes in
B pno pe n  a e si aq 
ambient temperature (both heat and cold), alterations in food
a period of time. Even a smallimbalance, maintained over a long
intake, and emotional stress. 2 Thermogenesis allows the body to
period of time, can cause weight gain or weight loss dependent
 on the direction of the imbalance.
   '    ss   
The principal mechanism for control of energy balance is
can maintain its weight over short periods of time without a
thought to be via the regulation of intake, though some variation
corresponding increase or decrease in food intake. Adaptive
in output can be important." The energy requirement of the
thermogenesis has been documented in laboratory animals and
animal and the energy density of the food will determine the
in humans but has not been documented in companion animals
yet.12
is considered to be a negative feedback system, meaning that as
RER can be affected by body composition, age, caloric intake,
weight increases, intake will decrease, and when weight decreases,
and hormonal status.12 The RER naturally decreases as an animal
intake will increase. Palatability can disrupt this feedback system.
ages and lean body tissue is lost. Changes in the RER can occur
A highly palatable food can lead to exces intake over energy
secondarily to decreased food intake. When caloric intake is
expenditure, and a poorly palatable food can lead to an insuffi-
 decreased, hormones will cause an initial decrease in require-
cient intake to meet energy requirements.
ment to conserve body tissue.215 If caloric restriction continues,
Energy expenditure can be divided into three major areas: RER,
RER will be readjusted and will not be corrected until levels of
 yoluntary muscular activity, and meal-induced thermogenesis.12
lean body tissue return to normal.
 Persistent overeating can lead to an increase in energy expend-
Resting energy requirements
iture in part due to the increase in lean body mass with weight
 gain, but also due to increased meal-induced thermogenesis.12.15
RER, also called resting metabolic rate (RMR), accounts for the
Reproductive status affects energy requirements with neu-
largest portion of an animal's energy expenditure, -60-75% of
tered animals having significantly lower estimated RER than
the total daily intake.2 RER is the amount of energy used in a
intact animals. This is due to both a change in body composition
nonfasted animal while resting quietly in a thermoneutral
(less lean body tissue) and also a decrease in activity levels.12
 environment.2-14 This represents the energy required to main-
Intact animals tend to be more active both during breeding
tain homeostasis in all of the integrated systems of the body
 season and in territorial disputes, which are usually not as much
while at rest. '? Factors influencing RER include sex, reproductive
of a concern for a neutered animal.
Chapter 14  Nursing
469
Voluntary oral intake
an increase in energy loss through increased thermogenesis.
With smaller, more frequent meals, the body actually uses more
Voluntary food intake is regulated by both internal physiological
 energy to digest, absorb, and metabolize the food than when one
controls and external cues.' The animal also receives cues from
 or two larger meals are fed.12
the body in the form of physical signs. For example, the stomach
contracts when it is empty, stimulating eating, or the stomach
distends when full, inhibiting eating.'5 There are also numerous
Nutrient composition
neural and hormonal mechanisms that provide direct stimula-
The nutrient composition of the food can affect both the nutrient
tion or inhibition to eating. Glucagon and insulin would be
metabolism and the amount of food voluntarily eaten by the
examples of two of these hormones. Glucagon is a peptide pro-
animal.'2 Most animals will decrease their intake of a high fat
duced in the intestines that causes a decrease in food intake.
 Insulin, on the other hand, is produced by the pancreas and
diet to compensate for energy needs, though the greater caloric
 density of the diet with increased palatability can still cause
stimulates hunger and increased food intake.'2 The administra-
 tion of exogenous steroids can have the same effect as insulin on
increased energy intake in some animals. The body is also meta-
 bolically more eficient at converting dietary fat to body fat for
hunger and food intake.
External controls of food intake include stimuli such as diet
storage than it is at converting dietary carbohydrate or protein
 palatability, food composition and food texture, and the timing
to body fat. Because of this, if an animal is eating calories of a
and environment of meals.12 Feeding a highly palatable diet is
high fat diet in excess of its requirements, it will gain more
weight than if it were consuming the same number of calories
considered a primary environmental factor contributing to the
of a high protein or high carbohydrate diet.
overconsumption of food, which in turn leads to obesity. This
The addition of treats and table scraps to the diet can also
can be seen with high fat diets, calorically dense diets, and foods
that offer a variety of palatable favors.2 The animal eats more
override the satiety cues the body gives. These treats tend to be
 highly desirable and appealing, and even if full, the animals will
than is physiologically required because it tastes good, resulting
 not turn them down. This leads to an increase in energy intake
 in excess caloric intake and subsequent weight gain.
Both dogs and cats have definite taste and texture preferences.
and obesity because owners seldom will decrease the amount of
The majority of dogs prefer canned and semimoist foods over
"regular food" offered to the pet. Feeding a variety of new food
types can also cause the same affect.2
dry food, with beef being the preferred flavor and cooked meat
 preferred over raw.2 Dogs also have a strong preference for
sucrose, while cats have been shown to lack the taste receptors
in their tongues to even detect sugars.1216 Dogs and cats can
Estimated energy requirements
detect several specific amino acids that are only weakly bifter to
Many formulas have been used to calculate the estimated energy
people. These amino acids and peptides help to give foods their
 requirements for animals. Dogs present a unique challenge in
pas on puodsai osle sies pue sao sere Aioaes pue Aea
that their sizes have one of the widest ranges in the animal
 nucleotides and fatty acids that appear to increase the meaty
kingdom (from the 4-lb Chihuahua to the 200-lb Great Dane).
taste perception in foods. A nucleotide that accumulates in
Cats tend to have a smaller range of sizes, usually between 4 and
 decomposing meat is distasteful to cats but not to dogs. This may
201b. Some references use allometric formulas, some linear
help explain dogs' fascination with dead animals.17 Both animals
equations, and still some use BSA. All of these formulas are
prefer warm food to cold food, with increasing palatability seen
helpful, but all still are only estimates of actual caloric needs.
with increased fat levels in the diet. 12
Numerous charts have also been devised that allow quick access
The timing of meals as well as the environment that they are
to estimate energy needs (Table 14.3.7).
offered in can affect eating behavior.' Dogs and cats rapidly
 All of these formulas have been compared, and when calcu-
become conditioned to receiving their meals at a specific time
lated out, the results are within a reasonable distance of each
 of day; this can be seen with both behavioral and physical signs.
 other. Ultimately, all energy estimates will need to be adjusted
 Activity will generally increase at anticipated mealtimes, and
 based on the desired response from the animal (weight gain,
 gastric secretions and motility increase in anticipation of eating.
weight maintenance, or weight loss). Variability between indi-
The number of animals being fed can also increase the amount
vidual animals and environmental living conditions can result
 of food consumed with each meal in dogs; this is a phenomenon
 in a difference up or down of up to 25% of the calculated energy
called social facilitation.' This causes a moderate increase in
need.'2 In the end, all of these are estimates, and the actual
interest in food and an increased rate of eating. The degree that
 animal will have to be periodically evaluated to determine if the
this affects individual dogs can vary greatly. Social hierarchies
between dogs can also affect the amount of food eaten, with
requirements.
saop p go ssad a u sset ua siop an
Certain life stages can result in increased energy needs.
during mealtimes.12
 These would include growth, gestation, lactation, periods of
 The frequency of meals can affect both food intake and meta-
 strenuous physical work, and exposure to extreme environmen-
bolic efficiency. With increased meal frequency, there is actually
tal conditions.12
470
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 14.3.7 Formula(s) for calculating MER in adult maintenance in kilocalories per day, using body
weight (Bw) in kilograms
Canine
Feline
Inactive 99 x Bw067 (1)
Inactive 60 x Bw (2,4)
Active 132 x Bwc.6i (1)
Moderately active 70 x BW (4)
Very active 160 x Bw:.67 (1)
Highly active 80 x Bw (4)
Endurance/performance 300 × Bwe.67 (5)
Kitten 0-3 month 250 x BW (4)
<2kg (BER 70 x BW.75) x 1.3 - 2.0 (5)
Kitten 3-5 months 130 x Bw (4)
>2kg (BER [30 x BW] + 70) x 1.3 - 2.0 (5)
<2kg (BER 70 x BWo.75) x 1.3 - 2.0 (5)
1500 × BSA (3)
>2kg (BER [30 x BW] + 70) × 1.3 - 2.0 (6)
Source: Compiled from Case LP, Carey DP, Hirakawa DA, Daristotle L. Energy balance. In: Canine and Feline Nutntion,
toueduon jo jenuem :u yuaed blamiapun aul 's anubouoa oooz gsow :ow 'sino7 is 's8-g2 'dd uompa puz
Animal Nutrition and Feeding, eds. N Kelly, J wills, p. 103. Ames IA: lowa State Press; 1996; Gross KL, Jewell DE,
Yamka RM, et al. Macronutrients. In: Smalf Animai Chinical Nutntion, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Thatcher, RL
Remillard, et al., pp. 50-88. Marceline, M0: Walsworth Publishing; 2010; Simpson JW, Anderson RS, Markwell PJ.
Anorexia, enteral and parenteral feeding. In: Cinical Nutnition of the Dog and Cat, p. 107. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell;
1993.
Table 14.3.8
 Life stage energy requirements for dogs
Table 14.3.9 Life stage energy requirements for cats
Life stage—canine
Energy requirement
Life stage—feline
Energy requirement
Postweaning
2 × adult MER
Postweaned
250kcal/kg BW
40% adult weight
1.6 x adult MER
20 weeks
130kcal/kg BW
80% adult weight
1.2 × adult MER
Late gestation
1.25 x adult MER
Late gestation
1.25-1.5 X adult MER
Lactation
3-4 x adult MER
Lactation 
3 × adult MER
Source: Gross KL, Jewell DE, Yamka RM, et al. Macronutrients. In: Small
Prolonged physical work
2-4 × adult MER
Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Thatcher, RL
 Decreased environmental temperature
1.2-1.8 x adult MER
Remillard, et al., pp. 50-88. Marceline, M0: Walsworth Publishing; 2010.
Source: Gross KL, Jewell DE, Yamka RM, et al. Macronutrients. In: Small 
Animal Cinical Nutrtion, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Thatcher, RL
a matter of increasing energy intake. When dealing with physi-
Remillard, et al., pp. 50-88. Marceline, M0: Walsworth Publishing; 2010.
ological problems affecting nutrient absorption (e.g., inflamma-
tory bowel disease, lymphangiectasia, pancreatic exocrine
insufficiency, and diabetes mellitus), weight gain will usually not
Using these equations and the energy density of the food, the
occur without addressing the underlying disease. Fats are more
amount of food to be fed to the individual animal can be calcu-
calorically dense than are proteins or carbohydrates. Knowing
lated'2 (Tables 14.3.8 and 14.3.9).
this, increasing the amount of fat in a diet will increase the
'm omi jo s u pssaa sq uo si r
caloric density and will increase the number of calories con-
either two to three times the dry matter intake of the food,
sumed if the amount eaten remains the same. For animals that
Ap rad sa  a a Aq no s u pssadxia
are unable or unwilling to consume enough calories, the use of
estimates to also calculate water requirements.12 The best recom-
a feeding tube can help to ensure adequate nutrition is received
 mendation is to have plenty of clean, fresh water available at all
to help with recovery.12
times, regardless of the animal's physiological state, caloric
intake, or dry matter intake.
Weight loss
Conversely, weight loss is simply a matter of decreasing the calo-
Weight gain
ries consumed and increasing the calories used. This can be done
Assuming that there are no physiological reasons decreasing
by restricting the volume of food fed, by changing the nutrient
nutrient absorption or utilization, creating weight gain is simply
distribution to decrease the caloric density, and by increasing the
Chapter 14  Nursing
471
activity the animal receives every day. Usually, this is much easier
Metabolizable Energy (ME). The energy in a food available to
said than done.
the animal after losses from feces, urine, and combustible
 gases; this amount is subtracted from GE.
Muscle atrophy
Kilocalorie (kcal). The energy needed to raise the temperature
Muscle atrophy can be caused either by decreased use of the
of 1g of water from 14.5 to 15.5°C. 1kcal = 1000cal.
muscle or through increased catabolism. Atrophy is a secondary
 3500 Kcal. The amount of energy required to lose or gain 11b.14.15
affect, and the underlying problem must be addressed Physical
therapy and increased exercise can help with muscle disuse as
long as the underlying issue is also addressed (e.g., pain with
Refeeding syndrome
movement and neurological disorders). Muscle catabolism is
usually caused through a disease process that either increases the
A phenomenon has been noted in historical records in humans
body's protein requirements (e.g., some cancers) or through
describing epidemics of death when starving people gained
 decreased protein intake in the food, causing secondary protein
access to food. When allowed to engorge themselves, they
became severely ill and died. Those people that did not engorge
malnutrition. The underlying problem must first be treated in
 order to affect the secondary problem of muscle atrophy.418
themselves but consumed small amounts of food did not suffer
 the same fate."* In human medicine, this metabolic derangement
Conclusion
is still seen in patients with severe anorexia nervosa or diabetic
ketoacidosis, in chronic alcoholics, or in those individuals having
Without the presence of an underlying disease, weight gain and
gone on hunger strikes.19.20
weight loss is simply a matter of balance, energy in versus energy
 More importantly to us in veterinary medicine, this metabolic
out. The presence of highly palatable and calorically dense foods,
derangement can also be seen in our patients. Typically, these
as well as decreased activity level, has tipped the balance and
patients present with a prolonged history of anorexia or other
 predisposed many of our pets to obesity.
metabolic condition such as diabetic ketoacidosis or hepatic
 A disease process can signifcantly affect the nutrient availa-
lipidosis.19.21
bility and therefore the amount of energy accessible to an animal.
To successfully treat weight loss due to a disease process, the
disease process itself must first be addressed.
Physiology of starvation
When a body goes into a starvation situation, a complex set of
Common measurements of energy
changes or adaptations occur. By understanding these changes,
we are better able to understand what happens when we start to
"refeed?2 Initially, the metabolic rate slows down decreasing the
normal animal in a thermoneutral environment, awake but
 resting in a fasting state. This is also known as basal metabolic
 energy necessary to run the basic needs of the body; in addition,
rate (BMR) or basal energy expenditure (BEE).
a reduction in the functional reserve of most if not all the organ
RER. The energy requirement for a normal animal at rest in a
systems occurs. Significant reductions occur in cardiac output
thermoneutral environment, awake but not fasted. RER
 capacity. Renal concentrating capacity, GI villous atrophy, and a
accounts for the energy used for digestion, absorption, and
 metabolism of nutrients and for recovery from physical activ-
 slowing of GI motility also occurs. These reductions in func-
 tional reserves are not severe enough to cause failure of any one
ity. Also known as resting metabolic requirement (RMR) or
resting energy expenditure (REE).
 organ system during starvation.
Maintenance Energy Requirement (MER). The energy require-
ment for a moderately active adult animal in a thermoneutral
Physiology of refeeding
environment. MER accounts for energy used for obtaining.
digesting, and absorbing nutrients in an amount to maintain
 In humans, potential complications of refeeding include general-
body weight, as well as energy used for spontaneous activity.
ized muscle weakness, tetany, myocardial dysfunction, cardiac
This is also known as metabolic energy expenditure (MEE).
arrhythmias, seizures, excessive sodium and water retention,
 DER. The energy required for the average daily activity of any
hemolytic anemia, and death from cardiac and respiratory
 failure.2022 While complications from refeeding are seen rarely
animal, dependent on lifestyle and activity. DER includes
 in veterinary medicine, it is seen most often in those patients
energy necessary for work, gestation, lactation, and growth, as
well as energy needed to maintain normal body temperature.
When reintroducing food several areas need to be monitored
Gross Energy (GE). The total amount of heat produced by
 closely to prevent the “"refeeding syndrome?" During recovery,
burning a food in a bomb calorimeter.
excessively rapid refeeding (or hyperalimentation) can over-
Digestible Energy (DE). The energy in a food that is remaining
whelm the patient's already limited functional reserves.20
after accounting for fecal losses, this amount is subtracted
Refeeding causes a shift in the body from a catabolic state,
from GE.
where protein is the primary energy source, to an anabolic state,
472
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
where carbohydrates are the preferred energy source.2023 Admin-
Phosphorus
istration of enteral or parenteral nutrition stimulates the release
of insulin; this causes dramatic shifts in serum electrolytes from
Phosphorus in the form of phosphate is the most abundant
the extracellular space to the intracellular space, primarily phos-
intracellular anion.?’ Most intraceular phosphorus exists as
organic compounds, such as creatine phosphate, adenosine
Insulin also promotes intracellular uptake of glucose and phos-
e si  s d  ) so
 phorus for glycolysis.23 Insulin acts like a doorknob into the cell;
present in many compounds in the body such as phospholipids,
when the door is open, glucose can flow into the cell where it is
phosphoproteins, nucleic acids, enzymes, cofactors, and bio-
converted into energy through the formation of adenosine tri-
chemical intermediaries.2l Phosphorus is involved in cell mem-
phosphate (ATP). Since glucose is not the only substance that
passes in through this door, all of the intracelular electrolytes,
function, carbohydrate, fat and protein metabolism, oxygen
as well as some metabolites, can also enter the cell. When exog-
delivery from the RBC to the tissue, and the acid-base buffering
enous insulin is supplied (injections) or endogenous insulin is
system.? Phosphorus also aids in the transfer of energy to cells
produced (pancreatic release for glucose transport), shifts can
through the formation of ATP and is an essential component of
also occur in these other substances. Increased insulin presence
bones and teeth.25
(exogenous or endogenous) drives intracellular electrolytes
 Most extracellular phosphorus is in the form of inorganic
(phosphorus, potassium, magnesium) into the cells out of the
phosphorus; approximately 12-15% of this is protein bound, and
bloodstream regardllss of the amounts present in the blood-
 the remaining 85-88% exists unbound as either monohydrogen
stream. In the case of refeeding syndrome, this can cause a
sudden and dramatic decrease in the plasma levels of these
ions are measured when serum is analyzed for the presence of
electrolytes.
phosphorus.? Serum should be separated from cells within 1h
Prior to reintroducing food, the serum electrolyte levels are
of sample collection; leakage of cellular organic phosphate into
usually within normal ranges and may even be elevated20.223
the serum may increase the inorganic phosphate concentration.
 During catabolism, as body cell mass shrinks, the intracellular
Hemolysis can have the same effect.?21
ions (phosphorus, potassium, and magnesium) move in to the
As with any ion found predominately in the intracellular
extracellular space.? From there, they are excreted through
space, serum concentrations do not represent total body stores.?
the kidneys as they reach the renal threshold This loss through
Phosphorus normally shifts freely between the extracellular,
the kidneys will continue to happen even with continued
intracellular, and bony compartments.? Hypophosphatemia
depletion.0
does not imply that phosphorus depletion exists, just that it has
 During refeeding, these ions move back into the reexpanding
shifted out of the measurable extracellular space.
intracellular space, and the serum levels can fall dangerously low
Phosphorus moves into the cells with refeeding to support the
within 24-72h.20.23 Treatment of uncontrolled diabetes with
increased production of phosphorylated intermediary compo-
 insulin can lead to identical electrolyte shifts.20
nents of energy metabolism. Severe hypophosphatemia, hemo-
In addition to electrolyte abnormalities, another potential
lytic anemia, and death can occur within 12-72 h of refeeding.
problem is fluid overload. Because of the decrease in functional
 Because of the phosphorus requirements for the formation of
 reserve in the heart and kidneys, death from congestive heart
ATP, signs of hypophosphatemia are often related to decreased
failure is a possibility. If carbohydrates are reintroduced too
energy stores and may include muscle weakness, anorexia, dys-
quickly, the resulting fluid retention can overwhelm the patient's
 phagia, and respiratory failure caused by decreased diaphrag-
limited cardiac reserve causing heart failure.? Carbohydrate
matic contractility and decreased cardiac output. Decreased
intake stimulates the release of insulin; one of the actions of
oxygen delivery to cells, depleted cell energy stores, seizures, and
insulin in addition to regulating glucose is to reduce sodium and
coma may result.25
water excretion.2024 Dextrose containing intravenous fluids can
also cause the same problems without having food being given
reducing the energy generating ability of the left ventricle. This
due to the rise in serum insulin levels driving the dextrose into
is thought to be the result of depleted intracellular ATP stores
the cells.
human patients show cardiac arrhythmias even when underly-
ing heart disease was not present. After repletion of phosphorus,
Risk assessment
the severity of the arrhythmias improved.1921
Those patients most “at risk" for developing refeeding syndrome
The RBC is the only tissue in the body that produces
are the following:
 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG). 2,3-DPG is bound to hemo-
globin and helps to enhance dissociation of oxygen from the
Cats with hepatic lipidosis-the more severe, the more at risk
hemoglobin molecule. A deficiency of RBC 2,3-DPG impairs the
release of oxygen from the hemoglobin molecule, causing tissue
Diabetic ketoacidotics
hypoxia. A deficiency of phosphorus within the RBC affects not
Severe malnutrition/starvation
only its ability to function, but also the body tissues' ability to
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease)2)
Chapter 14  Nursing
473
layer that helps maintain the cell integrity. This double hit causes
This further depletes the body of potassium since 0.33 mEq of
RBC death and a secondary anemia.
 potassium is required for each gram of glycogen produced.22
Muscle contraction also requires ATP as an energy source; low
concentrations of intracellular phosphorus results in depletion
Magnesium
of these energy stores, causing muscular weakness and respira-
Magnesium is the second most abundant cation in the intracellular
tory failure.?1
ATP depletion is also the proposed mechanism by which
 space. Approximately 60% of the body's magnesium can be found
in the bones and teeth, 39% in the intracellular space, and less than
hypophosphatemia may cause hemolysis. ATP is needed to main-
1% in the extracellular space. As with phosphorus and potassium,
tain RBC membrane integrity, cell shape, and deformability. Gly-
serum magnesium levels do not accurately reflect actual body
colysis is the only means by which RBCs generate ATP. Decreased
concentrations of inorganic phosphate therefore limit ATP pro-
stores because of the relatively small amounts found in the serum.
Approximately 30% of the magnesium in the serum is protein
duction. ATP depletion may cause malfunction of the sodium--
bound; therefore, reduced albumin levels may falsely decrease the
potassium pump, which causes decreased cell deformability and
 serum reading even if actual levels are within normal limits.25
 osmotic lysis. This can lead to severe hemolytic anemia.23
 Magnesium promotes enzymatic reactions within cells during
 Phosphorus depletion can occur in the absence of hypophos-
carbohydrate metabolism and helps the body produce and use
phatemia in diabetic ketoacidosis. This is due to the effects of
 ATP. Signs of hypomagnesemia are similar to those seen with
 insulin on extracellular phosphorus and potassium and not nec-
hypokalemia, respiratory muscle paralysis, complete heart block,
essarily due to the effects of“refeeding." Supplementation should
 be done in animals that have low normal or moderate hypophos-
and coma. Hypomagnesemia also causes an inappropriately
high excretion of potassium through the urine, thus making
phatemia prior to starting insulin therapy. Monitoring of serum
worse any existing hypokalemia. This occurs because sodium-
phosphate is critical during the frst 12-24 h after starting insulin
 potassium ATPase, which is required for the reabsorption of
 and fluid therapy. 9.21
potassium, is magnesium dependent. This also prevents correc-
Cats have low levels of hepatic glucokinase, the enzyme that
tion of the hypokalemia even with high doses of potassium sup-
 plements until the hypomagnesemia is corrected.20.225
cats particularly susceptible to hyperglycemia when either
 Hypomagnesemia can also cause a secondary hypocalcemia,
feeding diets high in glucose or receiving fuids containing
glucose.23 This elevated serum glucose further stimulates the pro-
which remains resistant to supplementation until magnesium is
duction of insulin, which causes an increased shift of phosphorus
 parathyroid hormone (PTH) is unable to elicit calcium release
from the extracellular space into the intracellular space. Enteral
from the bone. Even though the body initially continues to
diets high in simple carbohydrates can have the same effect.?
 secrete increased levels of parathyroid hormone to stimulate
calcium release, the continued hypomagnesemia will eventually
Potassium
inhibit PTH secretion.o2s A patient with hypocalcemia due to
hypomagnesemia may have a high, normal, or low PTH level.
 Potassium is the primary intracellular cation, with at least 90%
Animals with hypocalcemia can show signs of restlessness,
of the total body stores located in the intracellular space. Since
 muscle fasciculations, tetany, and convulsions.
potassium, like phosphorus, is located primarily intracellularly,.
serum levels often do not accurately represent the extent or
Reintroduction of food
severity of potassium deficiency, especially in cases of chronic
disease. Potassium has a direct impact on cell, nerve, and muscle
Current recommendations assert that no animal should go
function by maintaining the cell's electrical neutrality and osmo-
longer than 5 days without food.26 As many of the animals that
lality, aiding in neuromuscular transmissions, assisting skeletal
 develop refeeding syndrome have already far exceeded this time
and cardiac muscle contractility, and affecting the acid-base
frame, reintroducing food quickly is essential. It is important to
balance.25
keep in mind that the 5-day time frame is total days without
Since potassium is an integral part of the sodium-potassium
food, not just hospital days.
 ns u s a  ss si n
decreased GI motility.? An ECG will show prolonged repolari-
tion, electrolyte, and acid-base status be addressed. We want to
zation (the period of time in which the Na*-K+ pump moves the
 provide the best chance of a favorable outcome to our patients,
potassium back into the cell and the sodium out), this causes a
 and ensuring that everything starts off in the correct balance is
prolonged PR, QRS, and QT intervals, a decreased ST segment, 
essential to this.
and a flattened inverted T wave. When the plasma deficiency is
When discussing nutritional support, the frst consideration
severe, sinus bradycardia and heart block with atrioventricular
 is how much food to feed. Using conservative energy estimates,
dissociation can be seen.25
as is now the current recommendation, the most accepted
 Insulin also pulls potassium along with phosphorus into the 
formulas would be RER=70 ×(body weight in kg).7 or
intracellular space with resumption of carbohydrate metabo-
RER = 70 + (30 × body weight in kg). This formula can be used
lism.2022 When potassium and glucose move into the cells with
for animals weighing between 2 and 30 kg.? For cats, some rec-
insulin, the Na*-K+ pump and glycogen synthesis is stimulated.
 ommend the alternate formula of RER = 40 × body weight in kg.
474
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 The ultimate goal would be to have the animal receiving 100%
 suggest cystocentesis should not be performed in the presence
of their RER either through a feeding tube or orally soon after
of transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder due to the
discharge from the hospital. Usually by this time, the animal is
increased risk of transfer of cancer cells along the cystocentesis
metabolically stable, tolerating the food well, off fluids and
needlle track2
feeling better. Further nursing care can continue at home.
The potential complications of cystocentesis include puncture
of the abdominal aorta, vena cava, or an intra-abdominal
Recommendations for avoiding the
organ (besides the urinary bladder); laceration of the bladder
wall, leaking of urine into the abdomen from the cystocentesis
refeeding syndrome
site, transient hematuria, or bacterial contamination of the
1.1
 Anticipate the problem whenever a patient is at risk and
sample by inadvertent puncture of the small intestines or the
refeed with formulations known to contain adequate levels
colon.3 Also, within 5-20 min postcentesis, transient clinical
of phosphorus, potassium, and magnesium.
signs, unique to cats, have been reported characterized by col-
lapse, respiratory distress, salivation, urination, and/or defeca-
2.1
 Use initial nutritional refeeding rates not to exceed the
tion. Although not proven, it is felt by some to be associated with
patient's RER (30 X weight in kilograms) + 70. Consider
vagal stimulation.4.5
refeeding a high fat, low carbohydrate diet to patients who
have not eaten in more than 5 days, if their condition would
not contraindicate such a diet.
Obtaining a diagnostic urine sample
3.1
 Do not add extra energy to the caloric requirements by
by cystocentesis
using an ilness energy requirement adjustment to the RER.
First, gently palpate the abdomen to assess the urinary bladder
4.
Monitor phosphorus, potassium, magnesium, and PCV/TS
size and location. Insertion of a needle into the abdomen in the
at least daily, more often if indicated. Monitoring should
region of the urinary bladder without bladder palpation is not
start within 12h of refeeding.
recommended as it increases the risk of complications. If the
5.
 Supplement electrolytes as needed, either intravenous (IV)
urinary bladder is not palpable or is too small to safely obtain a
or with the food.
sample, the patient may be housed with access to water. A second
o.
 Monitor closely for signs of fluid overload and congestive 
aftempt can be made in a few hours. In felines, do not allow
heart failure.20.22
access to a litter box during this time to avoid voiding of urine.
 Cystocentesis may be performed in standing, lateral, or dorsal
Conclusion
recumbency. The position chosen will depend on the operator's
preference and patient comfort; for example, a patient with
The take-home message here is to be aware, to monitor, and,
spinal or hip pain may resist being in dorsal recumbency.
when feeding, to “go slow, go low?" Start feedings at 25-30% of
 Proper needle gauge, length, and insertion angle, as well as
 RER with continuous rate infusion with a syringe pump works
good restraint, will decrease the chance of complications.
well for the first day. Some diarrhea is not unexpected in patients
Although cystocentesis is generally well tolerated, sedation
that have undergone prolonged starvation due to GI villous
should be considered in uncooperative patients where move-
atrophy.
ment during the procedure is a concern. To lessen the risk and
amount of urine leakage postcentesis, the smallest gauge needle
possible should be used. Some authors also suggest that reducing
SECTION 4 DIAGNOSTIC
the volume of urine in the urinary bladder will decrease the risk
of postcentesis urine leakage. The use of the shortest length of
PROCEDURES
needle needed to reach the urinary bladder lumen reduces the
risk of passing through the urinary bladder and the inadvertent
Cystocentesis
puncture of the caudal vena cave and aorta. Historically, clipping
hair and preparing the skin was not deemed necessary unless the
Cystocentesis is performed to obtain a urine sample that is free
patient was obviously dirty. In fact, a small study, conducted on
of bacterial contamination from the distal urinary tract for uri-
22 felines, revealed no bacterial contamination of samples when
nalysis and/or culture, and in select emergent cases, to decrease
the hair was not shaved or the skin disinfected. However, since
the volume of urine in patients with a urethral obstruction.
the standards of care in veterinary medicine continue to rise, the
When properly performed, cystocentesis is a safe procedure.
study was very small and only cats were included; it is now the
However, there are rare, serious, and even life-threatening
recommended practice to clip hair if needed and to disinfect
complications that are seen more often with inappropriate
the skin prior to insertion of the needle.
techniques.
Palpate and immobilize the urinary bladder with the non-
The relative contraindications of cystocentesis include unco-
dominate hand so that it is either cranial or caudal to the opera-
operative (unsedated) patients, ascities, coagulopathies, perito-
tor's thumb; the location will depend on the bladder size and the
nitis,' insufficient urine volume, and the presence of a bladder
 operator's preference. Typically, a sterile 5- or 6-mL syringe with
mass within the bladder lumen. In addition, some authors
a 22- to 25-ga. 1.5-in. needle attached is chosen and is held in
Chapter 14  Nursing
475
Hold the probe in the nondominate hand with the notch (cranial
marker) oriented toward the head of the patient in order to visu-
alize a sagittal image of the urinary bladder. Optimize the set-
tings on the machine (gain) to have a well-balanced image. The
 image of the urinary bladder should be adjusted (depth) to take
up the entire screen. Once the distance to the far wall is deter-
mined, the appropriate needle length can be selected. This will 
decrease the chance of inserting the needle through the urinary
bladder and into the colon or blood vessels. The needle is intro-
duced into the bladder in the same orientation (parallel) as the
ultrasound probe, along the notch on the front the probe, so that
the needle can be visualized on the screen. Once in the urinary
bladder, the syringe is then aspirated, observing the screen
during the process to ensure the tip of the needle remains in the
middle of the urinary bladder lumen during collection.
Figure 14.4.1  Hand position for cystocentesis.
the dominate hand, while the bladder is stabilized. The syringe
Therapeutic cystocentesis
should be held in a manner that will not require hand reposi-
This procedure may be performed in cases of urethral obstruc-
tioning once the needle is in the bladder and aspiration begins.
tion if the urinary bladder is overly distended and a urinary
Place the needle cranial or caudal to the thumb (dependant
catheter cannot be readily passed Therapeutic cystocentesis
on bladder location), through the skin in the ventral or ventro-
removes most of the urine from the urinary bladder, thereby
lateral abdomen, and into the urinary bladder. This approach
relieving the excessive pressure within the urinary bladder
reduces the risk of inadvertent puncture of the ureters and blood
lumen and temporarily addressing the obstructive effects on the
vessels that run dorsolaterally along the urinary bladder wall
urinary system (e.g., hydronephrosis and bladder wall necrosis)
(Figure 14.4.1).
and allowing time to relieve the urinary obstruction.
 Pull back on the syringe plunger and aspirate 3-5 mL of urine.
After releasing all negative pressure on the syringe, quickly
remove the needle and syringe from the urinary bladder and
Abdominocentesis
abdomen. Releasing vacuum on the syringe prior to removal
from the urinary bladder will help to prevent sample contamina-
Abdominocentesis is performed to confrm the presence of effu-
tion by aspiration of intra-abdominal contents such as fat and
 sion, to obtain a diagnostic sample, and for therapeutic pur-
intestinal bacteria.
poses. Therapeutic abdominocentesis will be discussed later in
To avoid laceration or injury of the urinary bladder or any
this section.
internal structures, negative suction on the syringe should be
Blind abdominocentesis is a quick and simple procedure that
immediately released and the needle removed quickly if there is
 may assist in the evaluation of a patient with abdominal disease
 any patient movement or blood obtained. Also, never blindly
or trauma. Limitations include inability to diagnose disease in
redirect the needle within the abdomen.
the retroperitoneal space? and the potential for false positives
A new needle and syringe should be used for each centesis
and negatives (e.g., a false positive for peritonitis or hemoabdo-
attempt to prevent contamination of the sample and to prevent
men can occur from inadvertent sampling caused by a needle
spreading any bacteria that may be on the needle from the previ-
 puncture of the intestine or spleen, respectively,' and small
volumes or compartmentalized fluid can resultin a false nega-
ous attempt.
tive). It has been shown that at least 5-6 mL/kg of fluid must be
 present for a successful blind needle centesis.
Ultrasound-guided cystocentesis
Complications from blind needle centesis include the devel-
If ultrasound is available, it can be utilized to visualize small
 opment of a hemoabdomen from laceration of a blood vessel or
bladders and difficult to palpate bladders as seen in obese
 organ (e.g., liver or spleen), peritonitis due to laceration of the
patients or in patients with tense abdomens. The procedure for
 intestine or other hollow viscus (internal organ), iatrogenic
an ultrasound-guided cystocentesis is the same as noted above
 introduction of infection, or spread of a compartmentalized
Except, instead of palpating the urinary bladder, the ultrasound
 infection such as an abscess.
machine is used to locate it. Avoid the use of ultrasound gel as
If blood is obtained during centesis, the needle should be
a conduction medium since it may be inadvertently introduced
immediately removed. The sample should be checked for clot-
into the abdomen during needle insertion; alcohol or water
 ting by injecting the sample into a blood tube without anticoagu-
should be used.
lants to rule out a traumatic centesis versus a hemoabdomen.
 Using the appropriate probe and settings on the ultrasound
Blood from a traumatic centesis will clot, whereas blood from
machine, the urinary bladder is visualized ultrasonographically.
within the peritoneal space (hemoabdomen) will defbrinate
476
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
quickly and will not clot unless there is overwhelming ongoing
hemorrhage.'2
Ultrasound is a useful tool that can be utilized to guide aspira-
tion of focal areas of fluid accumulation or compartments;
however, it is not required to obtain a diagnostic sample. Addi-
tional procedures that may be performed include blind single- or
four-quadrant centesis and diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL).
Contraindications for blind abdominocentesis include patients
with coagulopathies, suspected abscess, large masses, pyometra,
 or other enlarged hollow viscera.13
As air may be introduced into the abdomen during centesis.
abdominal radiographs should be obtained prior to centesis to
avoid confusion when interpreting the radiographs. Iatrogenic
free air in the abdomen may be misinterpreted as traumatic
injury to a hollow viscus.
 Laboratory samples collected should include EDTA tube for
Figure 14.4.2 Demonstration ofthe technique to add fenestrations
fluid analysis, slides prepared for cytology, culture media, and
to an intravenous catheter.
nonadditive red top tubes (RTTs) for possible chemistries.
Which tests performed will depend on the suspected disease
process. For example, if pancreatitis is suspected, an amylase 
risk of damage to internal structures; proper restraint is impera-
may be performed on the abdominal fluid from the RTT and the
tive for patient safety.
results compared with those of a peripheral blood sample. If the
abdominal fluid results are higher than the peripheral blood, it 
after donning sterile surgical gloves, slowly insert a 22- to 18-ga.
is a strong indicator for pancreatitis. 4
1.0- to 1.5-in. needle or a fenestrated over-the-needle IV catheter
into the abdomen, approximately 2 cm caudal and to the right
lateral of the umbilicus. This approach will help avoid the spleen
Techniques
 and also any falciform fat, which may interfere with sample
collection.
Blind abdominocentesis
 Once the needle is in the abdomen, it may be gently rotated.
When performing blind abdominocentesis, an over-the-needle
and the placement of a second needle approximately 2 cm caudal
IV catheter with or without additional fenestrations, or a 18- to
to the first may help to stimulate flow by altering intra-abdominal
22-ga. 1.0- to 1.5-in. hypodermic needle may be used. Addi-
pressure. Any needlle within the abdomen should never be
tional fenestrations in an IV catheter decrease the chance of
blindly redirected. If using an IV catheter, once the catheter, and
occlusion, thus increasing the potential for a positive yield. Care
additional fenestrations if applicable, are within the peritoneum,
 must be taken when preparing and using the catheter. If the
the catheter is fed off the stylet and the stylet is removed.
additional fenestrations are too large or close together, it will
Initially, a syringe should be left off to see if fluid flows by
weaken the catheter, increasing the potential for a piece to break
gravity alone. By allowing to free drip or to flow freely, you lessen
off within the abdominal cavity. To help maintain catheter integ-
the chance of occlusion by aspirating abdominal contents against
rity when aseptically adding additional fenestrations on the sides
the needlle or catheter. If this method is successful, collect
of a 14- to 18-ga. over-the-needle catheter, make sure they are
samples aseptically by allowing them to drip into previously
smooth, never more than one-third the circumference of the
mentioned specimen collection tubes. If fluid is not free flowing,
carefully attach a 3-mL syringe and apply gentle suction. If the
Patient preparation should include emptying distended
centesis is still negative at this point, remove the needle or cath-
urinary bladders through voiding, expression, or catheterization
eter and perform a four-quadrant centesis (Figure 14.4.3).
to avoid inadvertent cystocentesis and a false positive for an
Four-quadrant centesis
 ing, which will help avoid inadvertent splenic sampling. However,
The four-quadrant centesis technique is similar in technique to
if due to a large quantity of effusion this position compromises
single-needle centesis; however, rather than attempting to sample
 the patient's comfort or ability to breathe, then standing may be
one area, needles will be consecutively placed in all four quad-
the better option. Clip and aseptically prepare a large area of the
rants of the abdomen.
ventral abdomen, from the xyphoid to the pubis. Preparing a
Visualize the four quadrants by dividing the abdomen into
large area in advance decreases the preparation time if a four-
right and left cranial quadrants and into right and left caudal
quadrant centesis is necessary Local anesthesia is not required
Bui snn pue ee eunl au huss Aq suepenb
for needlle centesis; however, it may be required when using a
medial to the mammary chain (Figure 14.4.4).
large-bore IV catheter. It is important to sedate uncooperative
Aseptically place the needles in each quadrant, checking for a
productive centesis at each site. Continue to place the needles in
Chapter 14  Nursing
477
may be adequate. The location of catheter placement is the same
 as previously described.
If a large-bore catheter is to be used, aseptically instill lido-
caine approximately two centimeters cranial and to the right of
the umbilicus; include both the skin and body wall in the block.
After waiting the appropriate time, a small skin stab incision is
made usually with a number 1l scalpel blade. Introduce the 14-
 to 16-ga. over-the-needlle IV catheter through the stab incision
the stylet and attempt to obtain fluid from this site. Ifthe centesis
is not productive, instill 22 mL/kg of warmed sterile saline into
the abdomen by attaching an IV fluid bag and venoset or syringe
and extension set to the catheter and quickly infuse the saline.
Gently rock the patient to distribute the fuid within the
abdomen, taking care not to dislodge the catheter. Next, gently
Figure 14.4.3  Image demonstrating abdominal fluid free dripping
and slowly attempt to aspirate the fluid; place the sample in the
into a collection tube.
appropriate containers as previously mentioned. The specimen
will be diluted, and this must be taken into consideration when
results are interpreted. As much of the instilled fluid as possible
should be removed.
Therapeutic abdominocentesis
Excess effusion can cause the abdomen to become distended and
tense, causing patient discomfort, and of greater concern, pres-
sure on the diaphragm resulting in respiratory distress. There are
not limited to, liver disease, cardiac disease, and neoplasia.
Currently, there is no consensus in veterinary medicine for
the appropriate amount of fluid to be removed. Some recom-
mend caution and to only remove enough fluid to relieve the
respiratory distress and to increase patient comfort. However,
 others are concerned with the risks of frequent repeated centesis
and recommend removing as much fluid as possible. Concerns
with the removal of abdominal effusion include protein loss,
Figure 14.4.4 Needle position for a four-quadrant centesis.
volume depletion, stimulation of the formation of additional
fluid, and infection.16
For therapeutic fluid removal, clip and aseptically prepare a
each quadrant, leaving the previously placed needles in place to
wide area that is centered on, caudal to, and to the right of the
help stimulate flow. Continue until a positive result is obtained
umbilicus. The technique used to collect the effusion and the
or until centesis has been performed on all four quadrants.
 amount removed will be directed by clinician preference. Any of
Fenestrated catheters may also be used in lieu of a needle to help
the techniques discussed previously may be used, for example, a
increase the chance of a positive sampling. If a diagnostic sample
hypodermic needle, over-the-needle IV catheters, or a fenes-
 is not obtained, a diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL) may be
 trated catheter attached to IV extension tubing and a three-way
performed.
stop cock Ideally, three people are available to assist with the
procedure: one for restraint, one to insert and position the
Diagnostic peritoneal lavage
needle/catheter, and one to aspirate the fuid. The length and
 DPL is useful when small amounts of fuid are present as it can
dimension of the catheter or needle selected will depend on the
detect amounts as small as 1-5 mL/kg of fluid. 15
size of the patient and the volume of fluid to be removed. For
In addition to the contraindications already listed, DPL on
pasn aq ues u s'e Aq eati o dn iaiaes aoq-aaret e aidxa
patients with potential trauma to the diaphragm should be
to efficiently remove large quantities of effusion in large breed
excluded.
patients. Obese patients may require longer catheters, and felines
As described earlier, the patient should be properly restrained
and small canines may do well with a butterfly catheter or a
 in left lateral or dorsal recumbency and the abdomen surgically
 smaller-gauge IV catheter. Patients that have had chronic effu-
 prepared. Selection of catheter size will be dependent upon the 
sions may develop compartmentalized areas of fluid. If ultra-
size of the patient and thus the amount of fluid needed to be
 sound guidance is available, it may prove helpful in identifying
quickly infused. In smaller patients, an 18- to 20-ga. catheter
the best location for the most productive centesis.
478
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 The total volume of fluid removed should always be measured
always have the necessary equipment available for the possibility
and recorded in the patient record. The patient should be
d        
reweighed after centesis to obtain an accurate weight.
fatigue due to increased respiratory effort. Fatigue may escalate
into requiring general anesthesia and manual or mechanical
ventilation.
Thoracocentesis
When performing thoracocentesis, there are multiple options
for patient positioning, and this will be determined by the stabil-
Thoracocentesis can be performed as a diagnostic procedure to
ity of the patient and if effusion or pneumothorax is suspected.
 collect a pleural efusion sample or as an emergent procedure to
 In emergent procedures, the patient should be allowed to assume
remove large volumes of pleural effusion or air. Complications
a position of comfort as long as this allows appropriate access.
of thoracocentesis include iatrogenic pneumothorax, lung lac-
If attempting to obtain a diagnostic sample of effusion on a stable
eration, hemothorax, and the introduction of infection. Relative
patient, sternal recumbency is preferred. Lateral recumbency is
contraindications  include  coagulopathy,  thrombocytopenia,
acceptable for a suspected pneumothorax.
pulmonary bulla, as well as pleural space disorders not managed
The exact anatomical location of the entry of your needle for
by thoracocentesis (e.g. pleural masses without effusions or
thoracocentesis should be based on physical examination or, if
 pneumomediastinum without a pneumothorax). 17
available, radiographic findings. Another modality that can be
The pleural space is normally under negative pressure. It is
helpful in collecting effusion is ultrasound If only a small
occupied by a small volume of fluid that acts as a lubricant
amount of effusion is present, or it has become compartmental-
between the lungs, mediastinum, and diaphragm. In pleural
ized, ultrasound guidance can be invaluable.
space disorders, the normal flow of fuid, lymphatic drainage,
 Most dyspnic patients will tolerate thoracocentesis with
hydrostatic pressure, or colloid osmotic pressure can be altered,
minimal restraint. Anesthesia and sedatives are avoided, if pos-
resulting in a pleural effusion. Some causes of pleural effusions
sible, but can be necessary in an uncooperative patient who will
include blood from trauma or coagulopathy, chyle from cancers
not safely permit thoracocentesis. If sedation is necessary,
or idiopathic chylothorax, malignant effusion from cancers,
administration of a noncardiac or respiratory suppressive agent
modified transudate from heart failure, lung lobe torsion, or
is recommended. See the respiratory anesthesia recommenda-
 inflammatory process, or transudate from hypoalbuminemia.1s
tions in Chapter 6.
 Normally, the mediastinum in dogs and cats is thin and semi-
There are several techniques used for thoracocentesis. A but-
permeable to fuid. Some diseases can lead to inflammation,
terfly catheter, a hypodermic needle, and an IV over-the-needle
thickening, and a loss of this permeability, resulting in a unilat-
catheter with an extension set, three-way stop cock, and syringe
eral pleural effusion.19
attached are all commonly used. The stop cock should always be
Air in the pleural space, pneumothorax, can be due to trauma,
turned off to the patient while the needle or catheter is being
iatrogenic causes, or spontaneous. The causes of spontaneous
placed into the thoracic cavity. This will avoid an iatrogenic
pneumothorax include congenital abnormalities, ruptured lung
 pneumothorax that might occur if the stop cock is open to the
abscesses, bulla, or advanced pulmonary disease. These patients
air If adequate personnel are available, it is best to work as a
d asasp Tenad Jo As aue aa o uou ou Ans ae
team. One person works the stopcock and syringe, while the
to presentation.20
 operator handles the needle, and a third and/or fourth person
A detailed history, thorough physical examination, and tho-
 restrains the patient and provides flow by oxygen.
racic radiographs, when deemed safe to obtain, will help deter-
The technique used will be dependent on the patient, operator
mine the cause of dyspnea in patients with pleural space disease.
Aq ea-e oi -z  pidxa s le no p f pue asuad
Thoracic auscultation often will reveal muffled heart sounds and
catheter works well in nonobese felines and in small or thin
lung sounds ventrally with effusion, either unilaterally or bilater-
canines. A hypodermic needle attached to a fluid extension set
 ally, and dorsally with pneumothorax.
tubing can be used in larger patients. When determining the
If the patient is not stable enough for radiographic conforma-
length and gauge of the needlle or catheter to use, considerations
tion of a pneumothorax or pleural effusion, then thoracocentesis
include patient size, if effusion or air is to be removed, as well as
 should be performed prior to any additional diagnostics tests 
type (e.g., a large-gauge needlle is required for a pyothorax vs. a
and utilized as a diagnostic and lifesaving measure. If radio-
op paaiq sre e u (a'a) uoisna jo auo pue (xeoop
 graphs are deemed safe, a dorsoventral view can be less stressful;
a large bore, up to 14ga. 3.5in. through the needlle catheter, will
however, some patients may better tolerate a lateral view. Ideally.
allow a large amount of chylous effusion to be removed eff-
both radiographic views are recommended.
ciently; however, if air is being removed, an 18-ga. catheter may
In all dyspnic patients, especially felines, stress should be kept
abae oi ae aq su  u (oe aou an
 to a minimum. Oxygen supplementation should begin upon
 penetrate the thoracic cavity, and the smallest gauge should be
presentation and continue during the patient's evaluation and
 used in order to avoid an iatrogenic pneumothorax due to a large
 treatment. Oxygen should be delivered via a method that is best
needle tract.
tolerated by the patient (and therefore least stressful) and appro-
 One disadvantage of using a needle is the likely increased risk
 priate for the situation (e.g., flow-by or resting in an oxygen
of creating a lung lobe laceration. The risk will increase as the
cage). Due to the fragile nature of dyspnic patients, you should
air or fluid is removed, the lungs reexpand, and the lung margin
Chapter 14  Nursing
479
is closer to the needle tip. The use of IV catheters has the advan-
dure. If this also produces a negative centesis, and there is a high
tage of a blunt atraumatic tip once the stylet is removed. Addi-
 suspicion of effusion, then centesis should be performed on the
tional fenestrations may aseptically be added to the side of the 
 opposite side of the thorax, or if available, ultrasound guidance
catheter with a scalpel blade to assist in the removal of fluid
 should be used. The addition of an extension set on the three-
(Figure 14.4.2). Make sure the fenestrations are smooth, not
 way stop cock allows the syringe to be emptied into your collec-
 more than one-third of the circumference of the catheter, or
tion container with more ease and with less chance of splashing
spaced too closely to avoid structural weakening. The extra fen-
of the contents.
estrations lessen the chance of catheter occlusion if the effusion
 It is recommended with pleural effusions that centesis be per-
 is flocculent. Disadvantages include kinking of the catheter or of
formed on both sides of the thorax, even in the presence of a
a piece breaking off within the thorax Prefenestrated centesis
 positive tap on the first side.
catheters are also commercially available.
The technique for an IV catheter is similar; however, the
exceptions are if a large-bore catheter is used, a local block and
Procedure
stab incision over the insertion site may be needed. Additionally,
to avoid an iatrogenic pneumothorax due to the large needle
The patient should be clipped and a sterile surgical preparation
 tract, the overlying skin may be pulled 2 cm cranially prior to
performed prior to thoracocentesis. Initially, only one side of the
placement, thus allowing the skin to act as a seal once the needle
chest may be clipped; this is true in unilateral effusions but also
 is removed and the skin returns to its normal position. Once
true if performing a diagnostic thoracocentesis. The hair should
 the catheter and, if applicable, added fenestrations are within
be clipped on both sides if a large bilateral effusion is present.
the pleural space, the stylet is quickly removed, allowing the
The area to be prepped extends cranially from the 5th rib space
 attachment of the extension tubing, three-way stop cock, and
caudally to the 10th rib space on the ventral one-half to two-
syringe.
thirds of the chest, although a much smaller area may be clipped
 If at any time during thoracocentesis the operator feels as if
for diagnostic thoracocentesis. The exception for a complete clip
the lungs have come in contact with the needle or catheter, or
and surgical preparation is an emergent case, when it is accept-
frank blood is obtained, the needle or catheter should be with-
able to quickly clip a smaller area and wipe with an appropriate
 drawn immediately. Blood may be indicative of a traumatic tap
antiseptic.
or a hemothorax. To differentiate between the two, check to see
 The use of a local anesthetic is an operator preference. Argu-
if the bloody effusion clots. Free fluid defbrinates and will not
ments can be made for a local block (anesthesia to the area of
clot. If a hemothorax is diagnosed, only enough blood should be
centesis to improve comfort and cooperation) and against it (two
removed to relieve the respiratory distress as RBCs in the pleural
needlesticks as opposed to one). If it is to be performed, a short-
space will be reabsorbed over several days.21 Otherwise, when
duration local anesthetic (i.e., lidocaine with or without sodium
 removing effusion or air, the largest amount possible should be
bicarbonate) is typically used.
removed. The site from which it was obtained, the measured
After donning sterile gloves, the needle and the attached
total volume of fluid or air, the gross appearance of the fluid, and
tubing are asepticall inserted between the sixth, seventh, or
the postcentesis condition of the patient should be recorded in
eighth rib, avoiding the vessels and nerves that run caudal to
the patient's record. Additionally, if a large volume of fluid is
each rib. When air is suspected, the centesis should be directed
removed, the patients should be reweighed to obtain an accurate
toward the dorsal thorax; effusion will be ventral, near the level
and current body weight.
of the costochondral junction. Some feel it is easier to count
 Any patient that has thoracocentesis performed should be
spaces up from the last rib forward than it is to count down from
 monitored for several hours postcentesis for an iatrogenic pneu-
the first rib backward.
 mothorax due to a slow leaking puncture or laceration of the
 Once the pleura has been punctured and therefore the needle
lung.
tip is in the pleural space, the stop cock is opened to the patient
 When fluid is collected, appropriate amounts should be saved
and gentle aspiration on the syringe begins. This will assist in
in EDTA tubes for fluid analysis, sterile nonadditive RTTs for
 recognition of the appropriate needle depth as air or fluid is
biochemical testing, aerobic and anaerobic culture swabs, and
drawn into the needle or tubing. As the needle is advanced, the
tip of the bevel should be directed toward the chest wall to avoid
 If negative pressure cannot be achieved or if multiple centesis
the bevel lacerating or puncturing the lungs during advance-
-dsa u pe assad au u  pb ae
ment. The needle may be redirected with a negative centesis,
tory rate and effort, then placement of an indwelling chest tube
keeping the needle as parallel to the chest wall as possible. While
with a continuous suction device may need to be considered.
the needle is being moved, continued gentle negative suction
 Numerous products are manufactured for use during centesis.
on the syringe will reveal a productive area. It is important to
One such device that is intended for use in place of a three-way
avoid the tendency to apply excessive suction on the syringe
stop cock and extension tubing is the Smart-Y' centesis device.22
since this is likely associated with higher rates of lung trauma. If
 This device has tubing with two one-way valves and two locking
this fails, reposition the patient if tolerated; for example, roll the
 injection ports attached to create a closed system. This allows for
patient toward the side of the centesis or remove the needle and
the appropriate direction of air or fuid movement during a
move to a different location within the parameters of the proce-
procedure (Figure 14.4.5).
480
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
(Kendall Sovereign, Kendall), and Foley balloon-tipped cathe-
ters (latex, Kendall, or silicon, Smiths Medical PM, Waukesha,
WI) (see Figure 14.4.6). A stainless steel rigid "bitch" catheter
(Jorgensen Laboratories, Loveland, CO) may be used in female
dogs to collect a urine sample. The selection of a catheter is based
on the indication of catheterization, the size of the patient, and
the species. A soft and flexible catheter (i.e., polyvinyl, latex, or
catheterization. A Foley catheter is ideal when an indwelling
Ta 5yrl
catheter is needed. In dogs, the smallest-sized catheter that can
be used will result in less trauma and secondary hematuria.
Generally, sizes 3.5-10.0Fr are used in male dogs (1Fr unit
equals 0.33 mm). In female dogs, sizes 5-12 Fr are typically used.
 The semirigid polypropylene tomcat catheters are often used in
cats. Tomcat catheters are 3.5-Fr rigid polypropylene catheters
Figure 14.4.5 Example of a closed centesis device, the Smart-Y.
that have either an open end or a closed end with side holes. The
 open-end catheter is shorter than the closed-end catheter (11.4
and 14.0 cm, respectively) and may not be of adequate length to
empty the bladder in some cats. The open-end catheter, which
Urinary catheters
allows for directed flushing of fluids into the urethra, is often
utilized in urinary obstruction patients. However, the closed-
Urethral catheterization is a common procedure performed in
end catheter causes less trauma to the urethra. Some emergency
clinical practice and is often utilized for diagnostic as well as
veterinarians prefer the Slippery Sam? tomcat urethral catheter
therapeutic purposes. Urinary catheterization may be needed to
(Surgivet, Smiths Medical PM, Inc., Wailesja, WI). This poly-
-aee sun 'a ssond su n as sun e uo
tetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) rigid 3.5-Fr open-end urethral cath-
sis, urine culture, urine cytology) when cystocentesis is contrain-
eter has variable lengths (11-18 cm) and can be ordered with
dicated (ie., bladder tumor present). Catheterization of the
side holes.
urethra may be utilized as a diagnostic aid to identify urethral
obstruction or stricture. Documentation of the obstruction or
Catheterization techniques
stricture by instilling contrast media for contrast radiography is
facilitated with urinary catheterization. Also, catheterization
It is important to gather the needed equipment for catheteriza-
may be necessary to document urine retention or to monitor
tion prior to the procedure (see Table 14.4.1). The area around
urine output. Therapeutic catheterization with an indwelling
the urethral opening (prepuce and penis in the male, vulva in
urinary catheter is often necessary in postobstructive or postsur-
the female) should be genly scrubbed using a nonirritating sur-
gical cases and can be an essential part of nursing care for recum-
gical cleanser. The prepuce or vestibule can be flushed with a
bent patients. Installation of medications through a urinary
diluted antimicrobial solution, further disinfecting the area.
catheter may also be needed in some patients.
Clipping of the fur can assist in providing an aseptic area, but
care must be taken not to cause irritation of the skin in this
sensitive area.
Types of urinary catheter
Sterile technique is mandatory to minimize contamination to
The common catheter types used in veterinary patients include
the urinary tract. Technicians should thoroughly wash their
soft polyvinyl ("red rubber") catheters (Kendall Sovereign",
hands prior to the procedure and should wear sterile surgical
Kendall, Mansfield, MA), semirigid polypropylene catheters
 gloves. Placing sterile drapes around the area can allow easier
Figure 14.4.6(
Common types of urinary catheters. A—open end tomcat catheter, B——closed end tomcat catheter, C—latex Foley catheter,
D—silicone Foley catheter, E—polyvinyl “red rubber" catheter, F—polypropylene catheter.
Chapter 14  Nursing
481
Table 14.4.1  Equipment for urinary catheterization
offer the benefit of local anesthesia. A gentle and careful approach
is necessary to prevent trauma during the procedure. The use of
Male dog or cat
Female dog or cat
force may result in severe trauma, such as rupture of the urethra
Clippers
Clippers
or bladder.
Gauze sponges or cotton
Catheterization of the male dog
Gauze sponges or cotton balls
balls
 The dog is placed in lateral recumbency. Select an appropriate
Mild disinfectant
Mild disinfectant
catheter size and measure the length of the catheter needed to
pass the end of the catheter to the neck of the bladder. This step
Syringe for flushing
Syringe for flushing
is very important to prevent coiling or knotting of the catheter
 Sterile aqueous lubricant
Sterile aqueous lubricant
within the bladder (see Figure 14.4.7). Retract the prepuce to
 Sterile urinary catheter
Sterile urinary catheter
expose the tip of the penis. The prepuce should be retracted
Scissors to cut finger tab
 Scissors to cut finger tab
during the entire procedure to maintain sterile technique. The
end of the penis is cleaned with a mild disinfectant. Lubricate
Sterile surgical gloves
Sterile surgical gloves
the end of the catheter with sterile aqueous lubricant. The pack-
Drape or sterile wrap from
Vaginal or otoscope
aging of the catheter can be cut to establish a “fnger tab" to
gloves
speculum
facilitate passage of the catheter into the urethral orifce and
 Appropriate urinary catheter
Light source
maintain sterile technique (see Figure 14.4.8). Insert the catheter
 into the external urethral orifce and advance the catheter gently
Drugs for sedation or
Drape or sterile wrap from
to the premeasured length. Resistance may be encountered in
anesthesia
gloves
the perineal region or in the area of the ischial arch. If there is
Sterile syringe or container for
Appropriate urinary catheter
sample
Drugs for sed ation or
 in the perineal region or rectal palpation may assist the passage
an esthesia
of the catheter. When the catheter is advanced into the bladder
 (should be approximately to the premeasured length), urine
Sterile syringe or container
for sample
should begin to flow through the catheter. The urine sample may
 be collected in a sterile container or withdrawn gently via a
Ad ditional items for indwelling urinary catheter
syringe.
Catheterization of the female dog
Sutured in place
Foley
Tape (if no tabs)
Appropriately sized syringe
The patient is placed in sternal recumbency, some prefer the
for balloon
hind legs hanging off the end of the table. Excessive perivulvar
Sterile saline
hair is clipped and the area is cleaned and disinfected. A vaginal
Suture material
 or sterile otoscope speculum can be used to directly visualize the
Needle holder
Needle (for saline bottle
urethral orifice (see Figure 14.4.9). Lubricate the end of the
do not use on catheter)
Thumb forceps
 Suture scissors
 manipulation of the catheter without contaminating it against
the animal's fur. The largest diameter catheter that will comfort-
ably fit into the urethra should be chosen to prevent leakage of
urine around the catheter Diameter is less important when cath-
eter placement is only for sample collction, but a catheter that
is too small may be more difficult to pass and is more likely to
fold on itself within the urethra (which can become a serious
complication). The catheter should be long enough to reach the
bladder comfortably. The catheter length should be measured
against the animal's anatomy (while still in the sterile packaging)
from the urethral tip (or vulvalar opening) to the estimated loca.
tion of the urinary bladder. Many catheters have measurements
  s rad    diu r  
sterile urinary catheter should be used and a small amount of
Figure 14.4.7 The urinary catheter is coiled within the urinary
sterile lubricant should be applied to the catheter tip. Sterile
 bladder (see arrow) of a dog due to improper measurement of the
lidocaine gel can be used as an alternative if available and may
urinary catheter.
482
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 14.4.10  Endoscopic view of the urethral orifice of the dog.
"qei jabuy, ayt buisn yoiezuaiayies Aeuun g't'tl ainbg
technique in a male dog.
obtained. Alternatively, a lubricated index finger can be inserted
into the vaginal area and the urethral papilla can sometimes be
 palpated on the ventral floor. The catheter can be inserted ventral
to the inserted fnger, and fed into the urethral opening. The
 urine sample may be collected in a sterile container or with-
drawn gently via a syringe.
Catheterization of the male cat
Most cats will require some degree of sedation or general
anesthesia to facilitate gentle catheterization. Tomcat catheters
are most commonly used to unblock male cats; however, red
rubber or small Foley catheters are recommended for indwelling
urinary catheters. It is important to premeasure the indwelling
 red rubber catheter length to prevent catheter folding or becom-
ing knotted within the bladder. The cat is placed in lateral
recumbency and the tail is held out of the way or in dorsal
recumbency. The prepuce is disinfected and the penis is extruded
and pushed dorsally to straighten the normal curvature. The
catheter is lubricated and advanced into the urethral orifice until
urine is obtained.
Catheterization of the female cat
As in the male cat, most female cats will require sedation or
anesthesia. The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency. The small
cone ofthe otoscope can be used to visualize the urethral orifice.
The catheter tip is lubricated and passed into the urethral orifice
Figure 14.4.9 The vaginal speculum and otoscope are useful tools to
and advanced until urine is obtained. The feline urethra can be
catheterize a female dog.
catheterized using the blind technique by directing the lubri-
cated catheter slightly dorsal along the ventral floor of the vesti-
bule. The catheter is advanced until urine is produced.
catheter and insert the end into the urethral orifice (see Figure
14.4.10). Advance the catheter until urine is seen flowing from
Indwelling urinary catheters
the catheter.
 The blind catheterization technique may be performed when
Indications for the use of indwelling urinary catheters include
the urethral orifice is not easily visualized or in small patients.
 postobstruction diuresis, posturethral or bladder surgery, mech-
The catheter is inserted above the clitoral fossa and advanced in
anism to measure urine output, decompressing a neurogenic
a cranioventral direction along the ventral midline until urine is
bladder, or as a method to instill medication into the bladder.
Chapter 14 Nursing
483
When securing urethral catheters in place, thought should be
taken to ensure maximum comfort for the patient. Poorly
secured urinary catheters can cause discomfort and irritation to
the skin and ureteral membranes. Urinary catheters without a
balloon cuff must be sutured in place to prevent withdrawal
during patient movement. Some catheters have anchor holes for
suturing in place. If not, a piece of waterproof tape can be
attached around the catheter in a butterfly pattern near the
 prepuce or vulva, and the tape can be attached to the skin with
sutures. Placement of the tape too close to the penis or vulva
and overtightening of the sutures in the patient can create
dermal irritation and patient discomfort. Another method to
secure the urinary catheter is tying a Chinese finger trap knot
onto the soft catheters (i.e., red rubber or silicone urinary
catheters).
Catheter care is important to prevent secondary urinary tract
infections (UTIs). Flushing the vagina or prepuce with a mild
disinfectant (e.g., 0.05% chlorhexidine solution) five times prior
to placement is recommended. Catheter placement using sterile
technique is mandatory. Maintaining a close collection system
by attaching the urinary catheter to a sterile line and collection
bag is important to help prevent secondary infections. A closed
system uses an infection control urine drainage bag (Bard? Infec-
Figure 14.4.11  Example of a urine collection IV bag on a clean blue
tion Control Urine Drainage Bag, Bard Medical Division, Cov-
pad.
ington, GA) and allows drainage without disconnection of the
bag. In veterinary medicine, empty, recycled sterile IV fluid bags
Table 14.4.2
 Troubleshooting indwelling catheter and collection
are attached to IV administration lines (macrodrips without
system
 backcheck valves) and connected to the urethral catheter. Barrett
Problem
Solution
and Campbell performed aerobic cultures on stored used IV
bags and demonstrated no bacterial growth in 95 bags when
Urine not flowing into collection bag
stored for <17 days. To empty the urine from the bag, the bag is
disconnected and replaced with another empty IV bag. This
Line clamped off
Remove clamp
system is considered open due to potential contamination
between the bag and line. Technicians should wash hands and
Catheter or line kinked or
Tape lines to the side of
wear examination gloves when handling the urinary catheter,
stuck in cage door
the cage
line and urine collection bag. Minimum nursing care of the
Catheter is no longer in the
Replace the urinary
       
urethra
catheter
visual inspection of the insertion site (for irritation), collection
Collection line disconnected
Reconnect lines and tape
line (to ensure patency), and collection bag (to record volume
and changes in urine color). The connections (catheter to line,
Urine not flowing from urethral catheter
line to collection bag) should be wiped with a disinfectant such
as 0.05% chlorhexidine every 6-8h. Urine collection bags should
Clot or debris in the urinary
Aspirate and/or flush
be changed every 6h. Avoid having the catheter line and urine
catheter
catheter
collection bag touching the floor by placing the bag on a clean
Urinary catheter is kinked,
Radiograph bladder,
blue pad (Chux, NorthShore Care Supply, Northbrook, IL) or
coiled, or knotted in the bladder
reposition or replace
cardboard tray (see Figure 14.4.11). Table 14.4.2 provides tips for
Bladder is empty
urinary catheter
troubleshooting problems of indwelling catheters.
Bladder or urethral rupture
leading to uroabdomen 
Complications of urinary catheters
The major complications of urinary catheterization are trauma
 The normal flora of the distal urethra, prepuce, and vagina can
to the lower urinary tract and infection of the urinary tract.
be introduced into the bladder during catheterization. UTIs
Trauma can be avoided by using smooth, soft and flexible cath-
associated with indwelling urinary catheter have been reported
eters, and good technique. Hematuria, urethral spasms, or
in 10-59% of patients. Bubenik et al. found the odds of develop-
tearing of the urethral mucosa or bladder neck area can occur
ing a UTI increased by 27% for each day the catheter was in
with poor technique or excessive force.
place. Smarick et al. reported a low risk of UTI during the frst
484
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
3 days after catheter placement. A study by Sullivan et al. sug-
 to the sciatic nerve should the needlle slip off the periosteum;
 gested that the type of urinary collection system (open vs. closed)
however, this is a rarely reported complication.
was not associated with the development of UTIs. The use of
antibiotics to prevent infection in patients with indwelling cath-
Contraindications
eters is not recommended due to the potential development of
a resistant bacterial infection.
Sedation and local anesthesia to full anesthesia is required;
restraint may be needed.
Bone marrow collection
Patient preparation
Bone marrow biopsy or aspiration is a relatively quick and easy
If sedation or anesthesia is to be used, the patient should be fasted
biopsy technique. The diagnostic procedure provides a means to.
for 8- 12 h prior to the procedure. Most patients tolerate this proce-
 access the cells of the bone marrow and, if indicated, a biopsy of
dure with moderate sedation and local anesthesia. However, the
the bone itself. In some practices, this technique is infrequently
used; the clinician must be familiar with the techniques of bone
anesthesia may be indicated; this is especially true in cases where
marrow collection and handling of the sample in order to obtain
the patient is difficult to restrain due to its size or behavior. General
a quality sample. Conversely, with proper training and if the law
sedation with a benzodiazepine/opioid combination, propofol
allows, this is a skill a veterinary technician can perform on a
 CRI, general anesthesia with induction and inhalant (isoflurane/
routine basis. Bone marrow samples should be submitted con-
sevoflurane), or local anesthesia with manual restraint are all com-
 currently with a peripheral blood sample for comparison.
monly used protocols. The aspirate site is then shaved with approx-
imately 2- to 3-in. margins around the desired entrance of the
Indications
needle. Nonsterile localization of anatomy may be helpful in deter-
mining the area to be prepped. Once the area is shaved, a surgical
The indications for performing bone marrow sampling includes
scrub should be performed. Once the scrub is performed, aseptic
diagnosis of peripheral blood abnormalities of the RBC, white
 technique should be followed. Using a gloved hand, sterile location
blood cell (WBC), or platelet cell lines, staging of neoplastic
 of landmarks should be performed. If desired, a local anesthetic
conditions, or as a test to further diagnose the causes of hyper-
 may be used at this time by injecting 0.25-0.5 mL from the perios-
calcemia, hyperproteinemia, or fever of unknown origin. Bone
teum to the surrounding tissues. Either 2% lidocaine or 0.5% bupi-
biopsy is indicated to evaluate lytic bone lesions.
vacaine is used. Lidocaine has a 5- to 10-min onset of action and a
1- to 2-h duration, where bupivacaine has a 20-min onset of action
Limitations
but typically lasts for up to 4-6h. When using a local anesthetic
and restraint or minimal sedation, it is important to be aware of the
 It is contraindicated in cases where sedation, anesthesia, or
 onset ofaction and duration of action for local anesthetics. Starting
restraint is not possible, or in patients with a significant coagu-
the procedure late or prematurely can cause unnecessary pain/
d   d as q o  m 
distress to the animal and can greatly affect the ability to obtain a
with severe thrombocytopenia with minimal hemorrhage. Bone
quality sample. It is also important to note that local anesthetic will
marrow biopsy may miss limited or focal disease.
not provide any relief for the actual aspiration portion of the proce-
dure, which is the most painful. However, the use of local anes-
Advantages and disadvantages
thetic can often provide significant postprocedure analgesia.
Depending on the location selected, the animal may be in right or
If the clinician is comfortable with the procedure, bone marrow
left lateral recumbency or in sternal recumbency. For aspiration of
biopsy is relatively easy to perform, produces minimal trauma,
the femur or humerus, right/left lateral recumbency is chosen
and has a fast turnaround time.
(based on dominant hand). When the iliac crest is chosen, the
 The disadvantage is that specific equipment is required (must
 animal should be placed in sternal recumbency.
use a bone marrow needle), and depending on case load, may
d     d  
Patient monitoring
Anesthesia and sedation should be monitored as usual. Monitor
Potential complications
the skin site postbiopsy for hemorrhage. Monitor patients post-
Complications with bone marrow aspiration are rare and include
biopsy for signs of hemorrhage (e.g., increasing heart or respira-
a minimal chance for infection or hemorrhage, even in throm-
tory rate, pale mucus membranes, or decreasing blood pressure).
bocytopenic patients. When using the most cranial aspect of the
 Firm pressure may be applied to the biopsy site for 5min
humerus with the needle direction toward the elbow, there is a
postprocedure to facilitate clotting. Following either bone
slight chance of needle slippage into the joint capsule. If this
 marow aspiration or bone marrow core/biopsy, the patient
occurs, the needle should be repositioned. If joint fluid is aspi-
should be monitored for pain. Pain levels can vary between
 rated, a new needle should be chosen and redirected. When
patients and most may benefit from mild analgesia for 1-2 days
using the femur collection site, there is a slight chance for damage
postprocedure.
Chapter 14  Nursing
485
Techniques
solution for use. The other anticoagulant option is ACD solution
from a blood collection bag, which is also available by the vial.
The materials needed are as follows:
With either anticoagulant, 0.5-1.0 mL is sterilely drawn into the
1. Bone marrow needle of choice
 syringe used to aspirate the sample and is allowed to coat the
inside. The anticoagulant may then be flushed through the bone
2.
 Sterile gloves
marrow needle to coat the inside, and either discarded, placed
3. #11 scalpel
 in a plain Vacutainer*, or into a Petri dish/cup/syringe cap for
4.
 Sterile surgical drape (optional)
collection of individual spicules.
10- to 12-mL syringe
After sterile confrmation of landmarks, a #1l scalpel blade is
5.
used to make a small stab incision where the needle will be
 Suture/surgical glue (optional)
 entering the tissue. This will allow for little resistance and easy
7.Slides
seating of the needle on the periosteum. Use the nondominant
8.
 Anticoagulant (EDTA or acid citrate dextrose [ACD])—
hand to stabilize the limb. The bone marrow needle should be
optional
held with the dominant hand in a fashion similar to a pen, with
9. Plain PCV tubes (optional)
the cap of the needle being braced by the palm or butt of the
 hand. It is important to ensure that the stylet is secured in place
 Personal preference and the patient size and condition will
 and completely occluding the lumen. Insert the needle through
dictate the selection of the site for harvesting the bone marrow.
the stab incision and allow it to rest on the periosteum. Using
The most common sites for the collection of bone marrow
 rotating or clockwise-counterclockwise motion and gentle pres-
are the proximal humerus, the trochanteric fossa of the femur,
sure, seat the bone marrow needle into the periosteum. Excessive
and the iliac crest of the hip. The greater tubercle on the proxi-
pressure or movement can cause slippage. If this occurs, reposi-
 mal humerus is often chosen for its large, flat surface area and
tioning is required before further advancement of the needle
small amount of surrounding tissue. When using this area, the
should take place. Once the needle is seated well, continued
bone marrow needle is inserted perpendicular to the greater
 gentle pressure and twisting should occur for several millimeters
tubercle.
(varies depending on the size of the animal) until the needle has
Each location has its own advantages and disadvantages,
reached the marrow. When this occurs, the needle should be
including accessibility, overlying tissue thickness, and the size of
frmly planted into the bone and should move with the limb. A
the area for needle placement. The greater tubercle can be dif-
 gentle tap of the end of the needlle can also help determine if it
ficult to access in large dogs due to the general thickness of the
is well seated.
 periosteum; however, if the humerus is still the desired location,
Keeping a sterile field, the stylet is removed and a 10- to
       nn  n 
 12-mL syringe is quickly attached. Using 5-8 mL of negative
parallel to the length of the bone in the direction of the elbow.
 pressure in two to three quick bursts of aspiration, 0.5-1.0 mL
The trochanteric fossa of the proximal femur is often chosen for
of bone marrow should be collected. If a sample is not obtained
cats and small dogs. The needle is inserted into the trochanteric
at this time, the stylet can be replaced and the needle advanced
fossa parallel to the long axis of the femur. The iliac crest can be
further and then aspirated a second time. If a sample is not
difficult in large, muscular, or obese patients as there is often a
 obtained after further advancement of the needle, complete
large amount of tissue covering the area. The widest, most dorsal
 removal and repositioning should be considered. Once the
 portion of the wing is used and the needle is positioned perpen-
sample is aspirated, the syringe should be quickly removed and
dicular to the widest, most dorsal aspect. The sternum and rib
 slide preparation or bone marrow concentration should begin.
have also been used for bone marrow collection but is typically
Bone marrow will clot in less than 60 s and, once clotted, will be
not recommended due to the possibility of damage to vital struc-
unusable as a diagnostic sample. Once the sample is placed
 tures should needle slippage occur.
 either on slides or in the anticoagulant, the stylet should be
The type of bone marrow needle selected is also clinician and
replaced. At this time, microscopic evaluation should be per-
patient driven. The most frequently used are the Illinois sternal,
formed to confrm that a diagnostic sample has been obtained
the Jamshidi, and the Rosenthal. They come in a variety of
(prior to removal of the bone marrow needle or recovery of the
gauges (15-18) and in a variety of lengths starting at 1 in. Jam-
 patient). Once the sample has been verifed, the needle may be
shidi needles are typicall reserved for bone marrow core or
removed and direct pressure should be applied to the site. A
biopsy.
small suture or surgical glue may be used if desired.
There are several anticoagulant options available for bone
marrow aspiration including EDTA, ACD, or none. The choice
Bone marrow slide preparation
of anticoagulant is based on personal choice, availability, and
choice of slide preparation method. The most commonly used
Slide preparation and verifcation of a diagnostic sample are
anticoagulant is EDTA. This can be difficult to find alone as an
 imperative to bone marow aspiration. As stated before, slide
injectable; however, it can be compounded by capable pharma-
 preparation can be dictated by the choice of anticoagulant. If no
cies. If EDTA is desired and unable to be found, 0.5 mL of sterile 
 anticoagulant is used, brisk slide preparation at the time of aspi-
saline may be added to a 7-mL EDTA blood tube to produce a
ration should be performed as bone marrow will clot very
486
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
s rd   aq  o ,  
ness of the bone marrow smear in contrast to a peripheral blood
slides upright and allowing a drop of bone marrow to fall down
smear, increased staining time is recommended. Once the slide
the slide. Once several slides have received a sample, a “spreader"
has been stained and air-dried, it should be microscopically
slide may be used to smear the sample. Samples may also be
evaluated. Evaluation should begin on the lowest objective (10x);
placed on a slide laying on a flat surface prior to smearing. If an
this will help evaluate the quality of slide preparation as well as
 anticoagulant is used, the sample should go immediately into a
ensure that bone marrow collection occurred during the aspira-
 storage container, either a plain Vacutainer or Petri dish. It is
tion. Once slide quality is determined, a brief, high power exami-
important to keep an approximate 1:1 ratio of bone marrow to
nation (100x—oil immersion) can be performed to identify cells
anticoagulant to prevent clotting. Once the bone marrow is in
located within the bone marrow, ensuring a diagnostic sample.
the anticoagulant, slides should be prepared within 1 h.
Once these RBC/WBC precursors are identifed, adequate bone
 A common practice in preparing bone marrow samples for
marrow aspiration has occurred and the patient may be recov.
        
ered, and the remaining unstained slides may be submitted for
 this procedure, approximately 1 mL of anticoagulant is placed in
pathology.
a plain Petri dish. If a Petri dish is unavailable, a paper/Styrofoam
Most clinics do not have on-site pathologists, so shipment of
 cup or a 35- to 60-mL syringe case cap may be used as well. Once
unstained bone marrow slides is typical. It is always beneficial to
the bone marrow sample has been aspirated, it is immediately
reserve one to two unstained slides in the event that additional
 placed into the dish containing the anticoagulant and gently
testing (immunofluorescent assay [IFA]/polymerase chain reac-
swirled to mix. The dish is then tilted at a 45° angle allowing the
tion [PCR]) is required. Once the slides have been allowed to
sample to slide down, revealing the small spicules, which tend
air-dry, the samples should be packed in slide holders to prevent
to stick to the surface of the dish. The spicules can be identified
breakage. When shipping slides, it is important to ship them
as small, irregular grains and can be collected with a plain PCV
separate from formalin samples as the fumes can affect the stain-
tube. The spicules may then be tapped or blown out onto a slide
 ing performed by the pathologist and can lead to a nondiagnos-
for squash preparation. This method has several benefits in that
tic submission. In addition, a recent or concurrent complete
it allows the technician to make a large number of slides without
blood count (CBC) and fresh peripheral blood smear should be
the threat of coagulation, as well as provides a concentrated
provided to the pathologist, as well as a patient history, to assist
sample of bone marrow spicules to the pathologist.
in obtaining a diagnosis.
 Once the sample is on the slide, either via dripping, dotting.
or a PCV tube, a second slide should be placed over the sample
Bonebiopsy
a, e sn rs uisss no dnd s, e aa 0
over slide technique. This may be done by placing the top, or
Under some circumstances, a bone marrow aspiration will be
spreader, slide either parallel or perpendicular to the slide con-
unable to provide a diagnostic sample, due to either inadequate
taining the sample. If the spreader slide is placed perpendicular
collection technique or the patient's underlying disease state. In
to the sample slide, the sample is allowed to spread for a few
this circumstance, a bone marrow core may be obtained to
seconds, and then the spreader slide is gently pulled down the
provide better diagnostic information, although it is always rec-
length of the sample slide with an even, steady motion. If the
ommended to aftempt aspiration first as this is less invasive.
 spreader slide is placed parallel to the sample slide, a small
Because there will be no hemodilution of the sample, bone
 section of each slide should be left on either end for grip. Once
marrow core samples can often provide a clearer picture of the
the sample has spread for a few seconds, the slides are then
cellularity and functionality of a patient's bone marrow. The
steadily pulled down their lengths. With either method, it is
-dse m q o rs are unedad pe as ad
 important to place little to no downward pressure on the sample,
tion; however, an anticoagulant is not used. The procedure is
which can lead to sample damage and nondiagnostic slides.
most commonly performed with a Jamshidi bone marrow needle
When the samples are smeared out correctly, the bone marrow
oe isf au u  s pe t s on a
 spicules can be seen grossly as a fine, granular material. In
has a tapered end with a beveled cutting edge, which is used to
excise a section of bone marrow. Alternately, a Goldenberg
observed. Typically, a minimum of 4-5 unstained slides and a
 Snarecoil bone marrow needle will capture the sample, making
maximum of 10-15 unstained slides are submitted.
-dse m suq e j ress ads a o ue
tion has been performed, it is recommended to choose a differ-
ent site for core collection. In addition, due to the pain associated
Verification of diagnostic sample
with this procedure, general anesthesia is recommended.
Verification of a diagnostic bone marrow aspiration is important
o e pue paddad aeiains uaaq se eare paiaias ai au
to perform prior to the recovery of the animal from anesthesia
 anesthetic applied, if desired, a stab incision is made as previ-
or sedation. This step provides a second chance to obtain a diag-
 ously described for aspiration. The advancement of the needle is
nostic sample if needed, without additional stress or sedation/
the same as with the aspiration technique; however, once the
anesthesia to the animal. Once several slides have been prepared,
marrow is reached, the stylet is removed and the needle is
one should be chosen and stained. In hospital, “diff-quick" stains
rocked/rotated in approximately 1-in. circles to excise a small
are sufficient; however, it should be noted that due to the thick-
piece of bone marrow. The needle is then removed and a shep-
Chapter 14 Nursing
487
herd's hook tool provided with the Jamshidi needle is used ret-
rograde to expel the sample through the proximal end of the
Umbilical
needle. It is not recommended to force the sample back through
Handpiece
the tapered end as damage can occur. Once the sample is
removed from the needle, a small portion should be cut of using
Accessory channel
a scalpel. The largest portion should be placed in formalin for
opening
histopathology. The small section that was removed should be
used to make slide samples by either rolling the sample down a
slide or by making an impression smear. Making these extra
slides will allow for additional testing, such as IFA or PCR, which
Insertion
tube
cannot be performed once the sample is fixed in formalin.
To make a roll slide, the sample is gently rolled or pushed over
Distal tip
a slide with a 20- to 22-ga. needle, creating tracts of bone marrow
Bending section
cells. An impression, or imprint smear, may also be made by
Figure 14.5.1  Olympus flexible fiberoptic endoscope XP20.
holding the section of bone marrow core on the end of a needle,
Source: http:/www.endoscopy.com
 or with a small pair of forceps, and by repeatedly applying gentle
 pressure to the slide.
Once the core sample is obtained, direct pressure should be
applied to the area and the patient should be monitored for 
hemorrhage and pain.
SECTION 5 ENDOSCOPY
Endoscopy is a medical procedure that permits visualization of
the interior of an organ (e.g., stomach with gastroscopy) or
cavity (e.g., abdomen with laparoscopy) in a minimally invasive
manner and, in many cases, simultaneously can be used to
obtain a diagnostic sample (e.g., biopsy) or removal of a foreign
body. Endoscopy is performed by utilizing either a flexible or a
rigid endoscope, a light source, and a light-transmitting cable.
Although this is the minimal requirement to perform endos-
copy, many accessory items (e.g, biopsy instrument) are fre-
quently utilized when performing endoscopy In many facilities,
the veterinary technician is the main person responsible for the
care of this very costly investment. This section will discuss flex-
ible endoscopy and then rigid endoscopy.
Figure 14.5.2  Insertion tube with a 2.8-mm channel—end-on view.
Source: http:/www.endoscopy.com
Flexible endoscope
In order to understand how to handle, use, and clean a flexible
in chip miniaturization).' The diameter size of the endoscope is
scope, the parts of the endoscope, and a number of endoscope
the main limiting factor in the use of an endoscope.
safety precautions to prevent damage and costly repairs. The two
There are three main sections of the fiberscope: the insertion
basic types of flexible endoscopes are fiberoptic and videoendo-
tube, the handpiece, and the umbilical cord (see Figure 14.5.1).
 i pe si ras sosa  aos
The insertion tube is a complex and fragile section that contains
 optical glass fbers that are bundled together and surrounded by
the many fiberoptic bundles to transmit images and light, mul-
glass cladding. While with videoendoscopes, the image is trans-
tiple channels to permit suction, irrigation, and insufflation and
mitted electronically. The advantages of the fberoptic endoscope
an accessory channel to pass instruments, deflection cables
include a less costly endoscope (compared to the videoendo-
(either two or four, depending on the type of endoscope, two- or
scope), good image quality, and a wide range of endoscope
four- way) and several layers ofprotective materials.' The bending
diameters. Outer diameters range from as small as 2.3 mm to
 section of the insertion tube is the last several centimeters, which
larger than 9.8 mm The main advantage of the videoendoscope
 are controlled via the deflection cables. Within the insertion
is an excellent image quality; however, these endoscopes are
 tube, at the end of the fiberoptic bundles and the distal tip of the
more costly and currently have limitations to the available diam-
 endoscope, is the objective lenses (see Figure 14.5.2), which
eters (which likely will not be an issue over time due to advances
 serve to focus the image of the interior of the organ.
488
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 14.5.3
3 Damage to insertion tube of flexible endoscope.
Figure 14.5.5  Hole in bending section of flexible endoscope.
Source: http//www.endoscopy.com
 Source: http://www.endoscopy.com
Up/down deflection knob
Up/down deflection lock
Right/left
deflection knob
Suction value
Right/left
deflection lock
Air/water value
Figure 14.5.4
 Bite damage to insertion tube of flexible endoscope.
Source: http://www.endoscopy.com
Figure 14.5.6 Video gastroscope GIF160 body close-up.
Source: http://www.endoscopy.com
The depth of feld, which is determined with the ocular lenses
in the eyepiece (see below) and the objective lenses, is from 3 to
4.
 Be very careful when passing items in the accessory canal
100 mm in modern fberscopes.' Due to the complexity of this
and do not force equipment, especially if the insertion tube
section and the associated fragility of the parts, this section is
d  s  r  n  so is an
is being bent by the endoscopist (see Figure 14.5.5).
damage to the insertion tube include the following':
The handpiece (see Figure 14.5.6), designed to be held with the
left hand, allows the endoscopist to control the tip of the inser-
Avoid damage by preventing accidental striking of the inser-
tion tube, to keep a clear image by the use of the suction, air, and
tion tube on hard surfaces (see Figure 14.5.3).
water channels, and to visualize the interior of an organ and pass
2.
 Ensure the endoscopist does not create a sharp bend, tight
equipment in the accessory channel. It contains defection
coiling, or twisting of the insertion tube.
control knobs and locks, suction and air/water valves, the eye-
Always use a mouth speculum when passing the tube
piece and diopter adjustment ring, and an opening to the acces-
through the oral cavity to protect the tube from inadvertent
sory channel. The first valve on the handpiece (from the eyepiece)
bite damage (see Figure 14.5.4).
is the suction valve, which is activated by fully depressing the
Chapter 14  Nursing
489
Figure 14.5.8 Corroded bending section of a flexible endoscope.
Figure 14.5.7 Storz endoscope handpiece with open cover.
Source: http://www.endoscopy.com
Source: http:/www.endoscopy.com
valve. The second valve permits air insuflation by covering the
 pressure remains stable. This one step can allow early detection
hole in the valve with the fingertip, or water irrigation by fully
 of leaks and can prevent costly water intrusion damage to the
depressing the valve (see Figure 14.5.7). For endoscopes with
internal components of the fiberscope (see Figure 14.5.8), which
only a two-way deflection (e.g., bronchoscopy), the single up/
is not always covered in warranty repairs.
down knob is controlled with the thumb of the left hand. For
endoscopes with four-way deflection (e.g., gastroscopy), the
Videoendoscope
larger knob is for up/down deflection and is controlled by the
thumb of the left hand, and the smaller knob is for right/left
The main sections and functions of the videoendoscope are
 deflection and is controlled by the right hand. A right/left deflec-
similar to the fberscope with one primary difference, the way
tion lock is attached to the smaller knob to allow a four-way
the image is produced. Instead of fberoptic bundles transferring
deflection endoscope to work like a two-way endoscopy; it is
 an image, an electronic image is produced by a special device
important to set this to the unlock position when using the right/
(CCD chip) in the distal tip of the endoscope and is transmitted
left deflection to avoid damaging the deflection cable. The right
 along wires in the insertion tube to a processor. The processor
hand (or an endoscopist assistant) also controls the passage of
can convert this electronic image into standard video signal,
the insertion tube through the mouth, applying rotational torque
which can be viewed on a monitor, stored in an image storage
if needed, while avoiding excessive torque, and inserts equip-
system (e.g., computer or USB hard drive, CD, DVD, videocas-
ment into the accessory channel.!
 sette recorder), or transferred to a picture archiving and com-
The umbilical cord is a very important section for the care of
munication (PAC) system and printed.' An endoscopic video
the flexible endoscope. This section is the portion that connects 
camera can be attached to the eyepiece of a fiberscope to accom-
to the light source and has connectors for the air insuflation
 plish indirect videoendoscopy; however, the videoendoscope
 pump and water irrigation bottle (in four-way deflection endo-
 provides a higher quality image than the fiberscope.
scopes), suction pump, and a pressure compensation valve. As
with other sections of the endoscope, it is important to carefully
Instrumentation
handle the umbilical cord to avoid damage to the light carrying
fber bundles passing through it. The pressure compensation
The accessory channel of both the fberscope and videoendo-
valve prevents damage from external pressure changes (e.g..
scope is designed to accommodate a wide range of flexible
during ethylene oxide [EtO] sterilization or shipping by air).
instruments (see Figures 14.5.9-15). These instruments include
Also, the very important air leak tester attaches at this valve. The
biopsy and foreign body retrieval forceps, cytology brushes,
air leakage tester is critically important to detect internal leaks,
injection/aspiration needles, polypectomy snares, aspiration
and this should be used both before and after each use. After the
tubing, mucous traps, scissors for cutting, and unipolar or
 ad   pe i rsn  ie a-rai
-d e m sn no is s o rno
pensation valve, the pressure bulb is compressed until the endo-
ticular endoscope should be used whenever possible to avoid
scope's manufacturer's specifed desired pressure is reached, and
damaging the accessory channel. Other important techniques to
then the needle of the pressure gauge is watched to ensure the
 avoid damaging the accessory channel include the following:
490
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 14.5.9  Serrated needle biopsy forceps—-close-up.
Source: http://www.endoscopy.com
Figure 14.5.11 Rat tooth forceps—close-up.
 Source: http://www.endoscopy.com
Figure 14.5.10 Oval cup forceps—close-up.
Source: http://www.endoscopy.com
Only pass instruments with a diameter that does not exceed that
recommended by the manufacturer; never force the instrument
when resistance is met; follow the manufacturer's recommenda-
Figure 14.5.12  Forked jaw forceps—-close-up.
tions when passing instruments through a deflected tip; and do
Source: http://www.endoscopy.com
not remove foreign objects through the accessory channel;
 rather, with the foreign body firmly grasped pull the endoscope
from the patient.'
thoracoscopy. The ranges of outer diameter sizes are 1.9-10.0 mm
with 2.7, 4.0, 5.0, and 10.0 mm being the most common. Larger
Rigid endoscopes
scopes produce a brighter and larger image; however, smaller
 scopes are less invasive and fit into smaller openings.' Also, in 
In contrast to flexible endoscopes, rigid endoscopes do not have 
contrast to flexible endoscopes, rigid endoscopes are available
 deflection cables or knobs, and as their names suggest, have a
with a range of viewing angles. The viewing angle is located at
rigid tube, termed a telescope, which attaches to an eyepiece (see
the distal tip of the telescope and includes 0° (forward viewing,
Figure 14.5.16). Rigid endoscopes are used when performing
same as a flexible endoscope) and 25° or 30° (which permits the
endoscopist to view a larger area by rotating the endoscope).'
Chapter 14  Nursing
491
Figure 14.5.13  Tripod forceps—-close-up.
Source: http://www.endoscopy.com
Figure 14.5.15 Basket forceps—-close-up.
Source: http://www.endoscopy.com
70° viewing angle
2.7 mm telescope
Eyepiece
Light cable attachment /
30° viewing angle
Figure 14.5.14  Small oval snare forceps—-close-up.
2.7 mm telescope in urethrocystoscopy sheath
Source: http:/www.endoscopy.com
Figure 14.5.16 Rigid 2.7-mm telescope.
Source: http:/www.endoscopy.com
 Choosing the correct telescope size and viewing angle is an
osu p ad pue dn ss go pd p
is more often used to permit optimal visualization. A last
 Due to the smaller available opening, rhinoscopy is often per-
consideration when preparing for rigid endoscopy is if steriliza-
formed using a 2.7-mm telescope with either a 0°, 25°, or 30°
tion of the telescope will be required for the procedure. Some,
viewing angle. Urethrocystoscopy and vaginoscopy are per-
but not all telescopes, are autoclavable. EtO sterilization is
formed with either the 2.7-mm telescope (females weighing
often an option, if available. It is important to check with the
 5-451b) or the 4-mm telescope (females weighing greater than
 manufacturer of the telescope for recommended sterilization
151b), and often, a 25° or 30° viewing angle is utilized to maxi-
 procedures. When considering sterilization, the sterility of the
mize visualization. Urethrocystoscopy using a rigid endoscope
region being imaged is the deciding factor. Rhinoscopy does
 a   s s  s n   n
not require sterilization since the nasal cavity is not sterile.
performed by a percutaneous approach. Laparoscopy and tho-
 However, urethrocystoscopy, laparoscopy, and thoracoscopy do
racoscopy can be performed with a wide range of diameter sizes;
 require sterilization since these regions are sterile, in which
however, optimal image quality is obtained with the larger-scope
introducing an infection needs to be avoided, even in the situa-
diameters (5 and 10 mm). Laparoscopy can utilize the 0°, 25°, or
 tion when a pathogenic infectious process is already occurring
 30° viewing angles; however, with thoracoscopy, the 25° or 30°
(e.g., pyothorax).
492
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
The light source for the flexible and rigid endoscopes is criti-
patients and hospital-acquired infections. In veterinary medi-
cally important to provide illumination during endoscopy. Many
cine, most endoscopes are cleaned and disinfected by hand;
factors contribute to the brightness of the ilumination during
however, in human medicine, a combination of hand cleaning
endoscopy, including the type and power of the light source,
and then a machine to disinfect the endoscopes (automated
hours of use for certain light bulbs, the diameter of the endo-
endoscope reprocessor) can be utilized.? Different types of deter-
scope, length, condition, capacity of the illumination chain, and
gents are used when cleaning endoscopes, including anionic (i.e.,
the size of the cavity being imaged. In addition, two more easily
 soap) and enzymatic detergents. Enzymatic detergents are low
adjustable factors that contribute to brightness are cleanliness of
foaming detergents with enzymes capable of digesting organic
the lens at the distal tip of the endoscope and any other interface
material such as blood and mucous. Disinfection can be achieved
with a chemical germicide (termed high level disinfectant
the standard in videoendoscopy since it offers excellent color
[HLD]). EtO or steam autoclaving are used for sterilization.?
reproduction and the 150-300 W of power recommended for
High level disinfection destroys all vegetative microorganisms
veterinary endoscopy being videotaped. After 400-1000h, a
but not necessarily all bacterial spores.
ps ss i go sd rao edai  i d 
in veterinary medicine include metal halide lamps, replaced after
Flexible endoscopes
200-250h, and tungsten halogen lamps with a life span of
approximately 100 h.' When choosing a light source for an endo-
The following is a list of steps that apply to most flexible endo-
of the light source but also if the light source unit is compatible,
each endoscope. These steps should be followed after every
or an adapter is available, with the type of endoscope being
endoscopy procedure since every patient could potentially be a
used.' For all rigid and some flexible endoscopes, light is trans-
source of infection.?
mitted via separate detachable cables rather than built into the
 endoscope's umbilical cord. It is again important to choose a
Precleaning
compatible cable for the type of endoscope being used.
As stated earlier, one of the advantages of a videoendoscope
Precleaning an endoscope is started immediately after fnishing
(or a fberopic endoscope with an attached endoscopic video
the endoscopy procedure and prior to disconnecting the endo-
camera) is the ability to project an endoscopic image. The endo-
scope from the power source.
scopic video camera system needed to produce this image con-
You will need the following:
tains an endoscopic adapter, a camera head, a camera control
unit (processor), and a monitor. Each of these parts plays a role
a.
Personal protective equipment (gloves, eye/face protection,
 in the quality of the projected image. The endoscopic adapter
and impervious gown)
 connects the camera head to the endoscope eyepiece and permits
D.
Detergent solution (ideally enzymatic) and a container
focusing and, depending on its focal length, magnification. The
C.
Sponge or soft, lint-free cloth
type of camera is based on the number of CCD chips. Although
d.
 Manufacturer's air and water channel cleaning (see Figure
 single-CCD chip cameras produce a slightly lower resolution
14.5.17-14.5.19) adapters (if supplied, and not to be con-
and less accurate color reproduction image versus three-CCD
fused with an all-channel irrigator)
chip cameras, the difference is minor and the three-CCD chip
camera is more costly. The CCD chip converts an optical image
Protective video caps if using video endoscopes
to an electronic signal, which is transmitted via an attached
Precleaning Steps:
cable to the processor. The processor is able to convert the infor-
1.
 Immediately after removing the endoscope from the patient,
mation to a standard video signal, which can be distributed to a
mechanically remove organic material from the endoscope
 monitor or image storage system.' The standard video signals are
by wiping the insertion tube with a wet cloth or sponge
 sent to the monitor in one of three common formats: composite
soaked in the detergent solution.
(the lowest cost but least detailed), S-video (recommended for
single-chip cameras) and RGB (red-green-blue [recommended
2.
Also at the patient side, alternate suctioning detergent and
 a   q a    
air, several times, through the biopsy/suction channel.
image quality, the resolution of the monitor and any image
3.
Continuing to suction detergent until the solution is visibly
storage system (e.g., VCR or printer) should be as close as pos-
clean and finish by suctioning air.
sible or higher resolution than the camera.
4.
Flush the water channel(s) and blow out the air channel per
manufacturer's instructions.
Reprocessing
5.
Detach the endoscope from the light source and suction
pump.
A very important step in the care of any endoscope is cleaning.
high level disinfecting, and with certain endoscopes, sterilization
 For videoscopes, place protective video cap.
of the equipment. Collectively, this step is termed reprocessing.
7.
 Transport the endoscope to the reprocessing area/room
Reprocessing is critical to prevent cross contamination between
(Figures 14.5.17-14.5.19)
Chapter 14 Nursing
493
WARNING
AW CHANNEL CLEANING ADAPTER (MB-107)
This adapter is designed exclusively for
cleaning theAIR/WATERchannel.
®
Never use it for clinical examinations as
air iscontinuouslyfedwhen attached.
Itwillcauseuncontrollable insufflation
of patient's internal organ.
Figure 14.5.17  Olympus air water channel adapter.
Source: http://www.endoscopy.com
Figure 14.5.19 Pentax cleaning adapters.
 Source: http://www.endoscopy.com
Figure 14.5.18  Olympus cleaning kit.
Figure 14.5.20 Channel brush.
Source: http://www.endoscopy.com
Source: http:/www.endoscopy.com
Cleaning
 Manufacturer's all-channel irrigating cleaning adapters
You will need the following:
f.
 Channel cleaning brushes (see Figure 14.5.20)
a.
 Personal protective equipment (gloves, eye/face protection,
Cleaning Steps:
 and impervious gown)
1.
 Air leak testing must always be done before immersion of
b. Large sink or basin of detergent solution (ideally enzymatic)
 an endoscope to detect damage to the interior or exterior
C.
 Sponge or soft, lint-free cloth
 of the endoscope. Always follow manufacturer's recom-
dAir leak tester
mendations (see Figure 14.5.21):
494
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
9.  If, due to time constraints, a complete reprocessing is not
 possible, then it is OK to stop at this step and to allow the
aq us h un unos quaiaap e u yeos oi adossoua
thoroughly reprocessed. However, it is important to follow
the manufacturer's recommendation for maximum soaking
time.
10.
With clean or distilled water, depending on the manufac-
turer's recommendations, thoroughly rinse the endoscope
5022
and all removable parts to remove residual debris and
detergent.
11. Using forced air, purge water from all the channels.
Dry the exterior of the endoscope with a cloth.
High level disinfection
HLD is recognized as the standard process for the reprocessing
of human GI endoscopes. By comparison, in veterinary medi-
Figure 14.5.21  Huid damage causing rusted connectors.
cine, HLD of the endoscope is only required for use in a sterile,
Source: http://www.endoscopy.com
operative feld. Multiple high-level disinfectants are available
 s    on  si h 
with the endoscope you are performing disinfection. Glutaral-
 Remove all valves (suction, air/water) and biopsy port
dehyde (2%) (e.g., Cidex 7 or plus") and ortho-phthalaldehyde
 cover and any other recommended detachable parts.
(0.55%) (e.g, Cidex OPA") are compatible with Olympus,
b.
Attach the air leak tester; pressurize to the manufac-
 Pentax, and Fujinon endoscopes.? Peracetic acid (0.2%) (e.g..
turer's recommend level and submerge in water.
Steris 20") is only compatible with Pentax and Fujinon endo-
With only the pressurized insertion tube submerged, flex
scopes. Hydrogen peroxide (7.5%) (e.g., Sporox") and 0.08%
the distal tip in all directions and observe for bubbles. If
peracetic acid/1% hydrogen peroxide are not compatible with
none are noted, submerge the entire endoscope and
Olympus, Pentax, or Fujinon endoscopes.?
observe all parts of the endoscope (i.e., universal cord,
You will need the following:
distal tip) for any bubbles. Ifa leak is detected, refer to the
manufacturer's instructions for the next step.
a.
 Personal protective equipment (gloves, eye/face protection,
and impervious gown)
2.Fill a sink or basin with detergent solution. Ideally for each
cleaning, use a freshly made, low foaming detergent so the
D.
High-level disinfectant (prepared and tested using a
 device can be clearly visualized during the cleaning process
product-specific test strip, according to manufacturer
 and avoid cross contamination between cleanings.
recommendations)
3. Immerse the endoscope and, whenever practical, leave
Manufacturer's all-channel irrigator adapter(s)
immersed under the solution to prevent splashing and
d.Basin large enough to accommodate the endoscope without
aerosolization of contaminated solution.
undue coiling and with tight-fitting lid
4.  Use a nonabrasive and lint-free cloth or sponge to wash all
 70% isopropyl alcohol
 debris from the exterior of the endoscope.
f.Soft, lint-free cloth
5.  Use a small, soft brush to clean all removable parts, includ-
HLD Steps
 ing inside and under all valves (suction, air/water), biopsy
port cover, and openings.
1.
 Completely immerse the endoscope and all removable
6. Pass the cleaning brush through the entire suction/biopsy
parts in a basin with disinfectant.
channel including the insertion tube, umbilicus, and body
2.
 Inject disinfectant into all channels of the endoscope until
 or handpiece. There are brushes specifc to the valve
a steady flow of disinfectant is observed exiting the oppo-
housing, biopsy port openings, and so on, and are depend-
site end. Ensure all channels are filled with the disinfectant
ent on manufacturer and model.
and no air pockets are present.
7.
 Attach the manufacturer's air, water, suction, and biopsy
 Soak the endoscope in a covered (to reduce exposure to
 channel cleaning adapters and flush the channels with the
chemical vapors) basin at the manufacturer-recommended
detergent solution to remove debris.
temperature and duration. For 2% glutaraldehyde prod-
8.
 If using an enzymatic detergent, soak the endoscope and
 i ss d  n os -o e s
 its internal channels for the enzymatic detergent's recom-
4.
After completing the soak, purge the channels with air
mended time period.
before removing the endoscope from the basin.
Chapter 14  Nursing
495
5.  Using clean or distilled water, depending on the disinfect-
SECTION 6 SELECTED NURSING
ant's and endoscope's manufacturer recommendations,
CONSIDERATIONS OF INTERNAL
thoroughly rinse all surfaces and removable parts and flush
all channels of the endoscope.
MEDICINE PATIENTS
6.Using air, purge all channels until dry.
7. Flush all channels with 70% isopropyl alcohol until the
Thermoregulation
alcohol can be seen exiting the opposite end of each channel.
Normal thermoregulatory process
8.  Again, using air, purge all channels until dry.
 9. Remove the manufacturer's all-channel cleaning adapters.
10.Dry the exterior of the endoscope with a soft cloth
temperature, hunger, thirst, fatigue, and circadian cycles. Ther-
 moreceptors, both peripheral (cutaneous) receptors and central
11.
Thoroughly rinse and dry all removable parts.
(deep) receptors, convey the external and internal temperature
to the brain. Based on the normal set point of the body, the
Storage
hypothalamus will instruct the body to increase or decrease the
1. During storage, do not attach removable parts to the
body temperature in response to this information, thereby
endoscope.
 achieving thermoregulation. In this process, heat generation is
Hang the endoscope vertically with the distal tip hanging.
balanced with heat loss.
2.
Each individual animal will have a set point that is considered
Do not store the endoscope in the carrying case.
"normal" for that animal in a healthy state. In addition, each
animal will also exhibit a daily temperature swing based on its
Patient and equipment preparation
circadian cycle. In general, body temperature is lowest at about
sunrise, increases slowly throughout the day, and peaks around
Since the vast majority of endoscopic procedures require an-
sunset. It then slowly returns to its morning low overnight. In
esthesia, patients should be fasted for a minimum of 12 h prior
dogs, it has been shown that tiny dogs have a normal body tem-
to procedure time. Longer fasting periods are required for
 1og (shop saret ui ue iaua Hez inoqe s ie aieiad
gastroscopy—-12-24h, proctoscopy—1-3 days, and colonoscopy
reason, establishing a normal temperature for a specific patient
—2-3 days to permit adequate visualization of the mucosal
when healthy can help to determine when or if the patient is
surface. In addition to fasting, enemas and intestinal lavage solu-
hyperthermic or hypothermic.
tions (e.g., GoLytely?) are essential for proctoscopy and colon-
When needed, the body can increase heat production through
oscopy, respectively.4
the effects of catecholamines and thyroxine and through the
Prior to placing a patient under anesthesia for an endoscopic
mechanical process of shivering. The body can also conserve
procedure, it is important to ensure all the equipment needed
heat by vasoconstriction, piloerection, postural changes, and
for a procedure is available, correctly set up, and functioning
heat-seeking behavior. Conversely, the body can dissipate heat
 properly. Table 14.5.1 reviews a number of problems encoun-
by panting, vasodilation, postural changes, cool-seeking behay-
tered during setup or a procedure with possible causes and
 ior, perspiration, and in cats also by grooming behaviors.
corrections.'
Once a patient is placed under anesthesia, the next step is
Fever or hyperthermia?
correctly positioning the patient on the table. The following will
discuss standard starting positions; however, some endoscopists
Fever is defined as a complex physiological response to disease
have alternative preferred positions.
 mediated by pyrogenic cytokines and characterized by a rise in
Gastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy is performed in left
 core temperature, generation of acute phase reactants, and activa-
lateral recumbency to facilitate examination of the pylorus and
tion ofimmunologic systems.² According to the Textbook of Inter-
ileocecal valve area. By contrast, ifa gastric feeding tube is being
nal Medicine the term fever is reserved for hyperthermic animals
placed, the patient is positioned in right lateral recumbency to
where the set point in the anterior hypothalamus has been “reset*
permit access to the gastric greater curvature. Esophagoscopy by
q  p     g  e 
 s     d  o 
Some endoscopists prefer sternal recumbency with esophageal
 an extremely high fever. Hyperthermia, in contrast, is defined as
foreign bodies to facilitate removal. Rhinoscopy, nasopharyn-
a therapeutically induced hyperpyrexia, but in actuality, it can
goscopy, and bronchoscopy are performed in sternal recum-
bency. Most endoscopists also perform vaginoscopy and
normal of that species without a change in the set point.
cystoscopy in sternal recumbency; however, right lateral recum-
bency is preferred by some.
Pathophysiology of fever
The author thanks Darlene Riel, RVT, VTS (SAIM), Univer-
sity of California, School of Veterinary Medicine, Davis, CA, for
 Step 1. Exogenous pyrogens (fever-inducing agents produced
excellent manuscript review and additions.
outside the body) are the external stimuli that set this reaction
Table 14.5.1Flexible endoscopy troubleshooting guide
 Problem 
 Possible causes
Correction
Unclear or blurry image
Dirty objective lens
Press water valve to use water to clean lens; gently
rub distal tip against mucosa.
 Dirty eyepiece, camera, or adaptor
Clean with alcohol-moistened cotton swab.
Lens not focused for endoscopist 
Focus image with diopter adjustment ring.
 Fluid damage inside distal end of eyepiece
 Return endoscope to manufacturer for repair.
(see Figure 14.5.21)
Water on objective lens
 Press air valve to use air to clear lens.
Image too dark or bright
 Dirty light cable or distal tip
Clean light cable or distal tip with alcohol-moistened
cotton swab.
Improper light source settings
Adjust brightness control knob.
Improperly installed or old lamp
 Properly install or replace lamp.
Broken (noncoherent) fiberoptic bundles 
 Replace/repair broken fiberoptic bundles
Absent/Decreased 
 Air or water channel (s) clogged
Soak distal tip in warm soapy water; pass water or
irrigation or Insufflation
enzymatic cleaner through channels.
Air/water valve dirty
Clean and lubricate, with silicone oil, valve.
Air pump not operating
Turn on switch on light source.
Incompletely closed/loose water cap
Replace and tighten cap.
Air/water channel damage/deformed 
Return endoscope to manufacturer for repair.
 O-ring absent or displaced
Replace work or damaged 0-ring.
Straw missing or displaced
Reattach straw to water bottle cap.
Unable to irrigate
Water bottle empty or over filled
Fill two-thirds full.
Unable to suction
Suction channel cbstructed
Clean suction channel in insertion tube and umbilical
 cord with cleaning brush.
Dirty suction valve
Clean and lubricate, with silicone oil, valve.
Absent, improperly attached, or leaky
 Ensure proper installation and function of valve.
accessory channel valve
 Suction pump problem
Ensure proper installation of pump tube, jar cap,
 valves, and suction settings.
Valve sticky
 Dirty air/water or suction valve
Clean and lubricate, with silicone oil, valve.
Inappropriate water or
 Worn or torn O-ring
Turn off air pump, remove air/water valve, and
air dispersed at distal tip
replace O-ring or entire valve, depending on 
 manufacturer.
Resistance with turning
 Deflection knob engaged
Turn lock to off position.
deflection knobs
Forceps doesn't pass in
 Bent or kinked forceps
Replace forceps.
channel smoothly 
 Broken jaws (often 1 "wing" of jaw has come
Repair or replace forceps.
 apart at its weld
Forceps will not open/
 Dirty forceps cups
Place under running warm water, lubricate forceps,
close
use enzymatic cleaner to help clean organic debris in
wire-wrapped forceps, consider ultrasonographic
 cleaner.
 Bent or kinked forceps
Replace forceps.
Camera will not attach
Improperly positioned autofocus pin on
Reposition camera; refer to manufacturer's
to fiberscope
fiberscope eyepiece
 instru ctions.
Source: Adapted from Barlow DE. Fiberoptic instrument technology In Smal Animal Endoscopy, ed. TR Tam. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 1990.
496
Chapter 14  Nursing
497
in motion. Pyrogens are numerous and include infectious
  d   r s 
agents such as bacteria or bacterial products like exotoxins
(hypocalcemia) and seizure.
and enterotoxins, fungi, virus, rickettsia, parasitic and proto-
zoal agents. Pyrogens can also be nonmicrobial agents such as
Pathological and pharmacological fevers
 bile acids, some pharmacologicalal agents, tissue inflamma-
tion, and antigen-antibody complexes. These exogenous pyro-
Fevers can also be pathological (resulting from disease) or phar-
gens stimulate the immune system to release endogenous
macological (resulting from pharmacological agents), although
pyrogens.
these types of fever are not frequently encountered. Brain lesions in
Step 2. Endogenous pyrogens (fever-inducing agents produced
the area ofthe anterior hypothalamus can interfere with the normal
operation of the thermoregulatory center resulting in an inappro-
inside the body) are proteins, specifically fever-producing
 priate response to thermoreceptors. Hypermetabolic disorders,
 such as hyperthyroidism and pheochromocytoma, can cause an
system in response to stimulation. This reaction of the body
 increase in heat production, an increase in heat conservation, or
is termed a “true fever" The part of the immune system that
 both effects. This results in a fever that is usually mild in nature.
is stimulated to release these cytokines is primarily macro-
phages, but lymphocytes (B and T cells) and other leukocytes
 Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is the result of a pharmacologi-
 cal or hypermetabolic myopathy. MH is an inherited disease
can be involved. Cytokines include some of the interleukins,
interferons, tumor necrosis factors, and macrophage inflam
effecting both dogs and cats with a breed predilection for some
lines of greyhounds and Labrador retrievers. The increased mus-
matory proteins.
q  o aai dde e a s si ae r
Step 3. Cytokines travel via the bloodstream to the anterior
the muscle cells. Stress, exercise, and anesthetics (especially
hypothalamus where they stimulate the anterior hypothala-
halothane) are the most common causative agents. The muscular
mus to release prostaglandin. The cytokines trigger the febrile
activity is most often characterized as muscular rigidity, muscular
response.
fasciculations, and muscular rigor, resulting in increased heat
Step 4. Prostaglandins raise the set point of the anterior hypotha-
production. The increased production leads to an increase in
lamus, which triggers heat conservation and heat production.
body temperature. This activity quickly depletes the ATP reserves
that, in turn, coupled with tachypnea, create an acidotic state. This
response may be quite pronounced and can quickly lead to a state
Causes of fever
of emergency. MH is also known as canine stress syndrome.
The inability to adequately dispel body heat will result in a fever.
High ambient temperatures, such as those produced in a car with
Fever of unknown origin
inadequate ventilation, can overload the body and lead to heat
Fever of unknown origin (FUO) in human medicine is defned
 ar s aaq sire p s d 
as an illness of more than 3 weeks' duration with a temperature
susceptible to heat stroke. This is when the term hyperthermia
higher than 101°F (38.4°C) on several occasions after 1 week of
is utilized because the set point has not been altered.
 hospitalization and evaluation. In veterinary medicine, FUO is
Another form of inadequate heat dissipation is hyperpyrexic
 also called fever of undetermined origin (FUD) since this term
syndrome. This is typically seen in dogs that are jogging with an
 is applied rather loosely to any patient with an unexplained fever.
owner or hunting dogs that are working in a hot and humid
 Often, the causative agent has simply not been identified rather
environment.3 These dogs will run or work beyond their normal.
limits, resulting in hyperthermia. The mechanism of this type of
than being an unknown.
hyperthermia is a combination of two problems. In hot and
humid environments, the body's ability to dissipate heat is less
Diagnostics
 than in the equivalent temperature in a dry environment. This
Since the list of potential causes for fever is long, so is the list of
leads to faster net heat gain in the body. In addition, in response
diagnostics. The minimum database includes a CBC, chemis-
to extreme exercise, the cardiovascular system may give prefer-
tries, and urinalysis. Depending on the signalment and risk
ential blood flow to the skeletal muscles without allowing for the
factors of the patient, additional laboratory diagnostic testing to
heat dissipation effects of vasodilation.
consider are bacterial culture (blood and/or urine), fecal parasi-
 Hyperpyrexic syndrome differs from exercise-induced hyper-
tology, infectious disease titers, coagulation testing, and radio-
thermia. Exercise-induced collapse (EIC) syndrome, also called
 graphs. Advanced imaging such as CT or MRI, ultrasonography,
exercise-induced hyperthermia, can occur with normal exercise
 and echocardiology and advanced diagnostics such as needle
but usually occurs during strenuous exercise. The clinical signs
 biopsy, joint taps, bone marrow evaluation, and cerebrospinal
are a very elevated temperature (>107.6°F or >41.5°C), stiff gait,
(CSF) analysis may also be indicated in some cases.
incoordination, rear leg collapse, and disorientation. Most dogs
recover quickly with no residual effects. Genetic testing is avail-
Care of the febrile or hyperthermic patient
able to identify the DNM1 gene that is associated with this syn-
drome. EIC is an autosomal recessive trait found most commonly
Nursing care for febrile patients includes frequent monitoring of
in Labrador retrievers, although other breeds can be affected.
the patient's temperature. The use of continuous temperature
498
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
monitors may increase patient comfort by decreasing the need
the skin (primarily) and the lungs (to a lesser extent). Heat loss
 to disturb the patient with frequent rectal temperatures. Sup-
through liquids and the evaporative effects of heat loss are noted
 portive care with fuid therapy to correct the accompanying
 in convection. Direct contact with cold surfaces (e.g, stainless
 dehydration is often prescribed Strict asepsis during catheter
steel tables) leads to heat loss through conduction.
 placement and maintenance is indicated since the patient may
already be septic. Medication protocols for febrile patients may be
Causes of hypothermia
empirical or therapeutic in nature. These protocols may include
antibiotics, corticosteroids, NSAIDs, phenothiazines, and anti-
Hypothermia is further defined dependent on the causative
 pyretics (e.g., dipyrone, acetylsalicylic acid). Close monitoring
reason, as accidental, pathological, or purposeful.
for a response to therapeutic treatment and/or response or side
Accidental hypothermia
effects from empirical treatment is advised. Febrile patients are
frequently anorexic, so their nutritional needs should be assessed
Accidental hypothermia is a decrease in core body temperature
and supported as indicated based on the RER and disease state
that is independent of the body's normal set point. This text, as
d   n    
it is not an emergency and critical care text, will not focus on
 generally exhibit malaise and may need additional care and
the environmental exposure causes of hypothermia. Accidental
comfort during the course of their hospital stay. Often, these
hypothermia is also the type of hypothermia that can be seen in
o a  ioia pe aq  z  pnai are s
patients during an anesthesitic event. Anesthetics may cause
cooler cages or run floors. Nursing attention to patient hygiene,
vasodilation and can impair the function of the hypothalamus.
opportunity to eliminate, and recumbent patient support of
These cooling effects coupled with exposure to cold tables, wet
 pressure-sensitive areas is essential.
surgical preps, loss of hair, and so on, compound the heat loss
 Temperatures above 106°F (41°C) are considered emergent
and can lead to hypothermia. The resulting decreased metabo-
temperatures that require intervention. Temperatures above
lism will prolong recovery from the anesthetic drugs and can
107°F (41.6°C) can cause permanent organ damage, dissemi-
become a vicious circle of prolonged recovery.
nated intravascular coagulopathy, or death. Total body cooling
Pathological hypothermia
procedures can include cool water baths or rinses, wetting down
and placing in front of a fan, administration of cool fluids, ice
 Pathological hypothermia is the result of a disease or a disease
packs, gastric lavage, enemas, and treatment for shock. Too rapid
process that decreases the metabolic rate or affects the ther-
or too slow of a cooling of the patient can have a deleterious
moregulatory center. These include hypoglycemia, sepsis, shock,
 effect on the survival of the emergent hyperthermic animal. An
and major trauma. Endocrine diseases that can have this effect
in-depth discussion of the emergency treatment of hyperthermia
include hypothyroidism, hypopituitarism, and hypoadrenocor-
is not included in this text.
ficism. These diseases usually produce a mild hypothermia.
Brain lesions in the hypothalamus can have a direct effect on the
Conclusion
set point of the body, causing either hypothermia or, as previ-
ously noted, hyperthermia. The treatment of pathological hypo-
Even though this is the most basic vital sign, its importance
thermia includes treatment of the underlying disease or disease
 should not be overlooked. Care of the febrile patient can be a
process in addition to the rewarming techniques described in
 short-term or a long-term proces dependent on the causative
this chapter.
agent and the patient response.
Purposeful hypothermia
Hypothermia
Purposeful hypothermia has been used in veterinary medicine
Hypothermia is defined as a body temperature below normal for
during selected cardiac procedures to slow the metabolic rate.
 the species. The accepted normal temperature for dogs and cats
 This decreases the oxygen consumption rate, which helps to
yaries by reference but is considered to be approximately 101.5°F
preserve brain function in cases of surgically induced hypoxia.
(38.6°C). Hypothermia is typically classifed as mild (96-99°F or
Purposeful hypothermia will not be discussed in this text,
although treatment protocols are the same as for accidental
34-37°C), moderate (88-93°F or 31-34°C), and severe (<88°F
 or <31°C). The actual ranges used for these defnitions may again
hypothermia.
vary based on the reference, but these values can serve as guide-
lines. In human medicine, profound hypothermia may also be
Pathophysiology of hypothermia
included as a separate classifcation. Smaller, older, and sick or
debilitated animals are more likely to become hypothermic as
As discussed earlier, the body can generate heat through the
temperature control mechanisms may be impaired.5
vasoconstriction, piloerection, postural changes, and heat-
seeking behavior. In cases of mild hypothermia, the body will
Mechanisms of heat loss
attempt to cope, exhibiting the above clinical responses. In addi-
The mechanisms by which the body can lose heat include radia
fion, sympathetic nervous system excitation may result in hyper-
tion, convection, and conduction. The body radiates heat through
tension, tachycardia, and tachypnea due to the increased oxygen
Chapter 14  Nursing
499
demands from shivering.? Some degree of hepatic dysfunction 
 e m hp um  d si s s
may be noted and the sympathetic excitation can cause the
 contricted patient.
release of glucose from the liver, resulting in hyperglycemia.
Hyperglycemia may also be noted due to the decreased con-
Active internal
sumption of glucose by the cells and the decreased excretion of
Active internal rewarming techniques consist of warmed IV, perito-
insulin.
neal, gastric, and/or colonic lavage fluids. In addition, if the patient
Once the core temperature is below 94°F, the ability to gener-
 or gases can significantly help in the rewarming process.
core temperatures continue to drop, decreases in respiratory
rate, heart rate, cardiac output, glomerular filtration rate, and
Conclusion
blood pressure will be noted. Further decrease will result in
loss of muscular control and a depression in consciousness.
 Extreme care should be taken when rewarming the severely
 Hypothermia-induced cold diuresis is a common sequelae that
hypothermic patient. The emphasis in human medicine is to
may necessitate fluid therapy. This will be accompanied by a
 rewarm the patient's core while minimizing activity. This is to
decrease in metabolic rate of most of the tissues of the body.
prevent the cool blood from the extremities from adversely
Acidosis and electrolyte imbalances may be noted. Tachycardia
affecting the core, particularly the heart, during the rewarming
and atrial fbrilation can occur. The end stages of hypothermia
process. An in-depth discussion of the emergency protocol for
are unconsciousness and respiratory and cardiac arrest. In
human medicine, paradoxical undressing may occur in that the
gency text.
patient removes clothing as the hypothermia worsens. Antidotal
evidence of hypothermic animals climbing out of warm blankets
The sepsis syndrome
and away from heat sources has been noted.
Sepsis is considered a malignant condition that occurs when
Diagnostics
 there is an exaggerated and uncontrolled immune response to
an infection that extends beyond the site of injury to normal
An extended range thermometer that has the ability to read very
tissue. The normal response to infection is a very intricate and
low temperatures is needed in order to obtain an accurate core
complicated process that maintains a controlled response to the
temperature. Monitoring of electrolytes, glucose levels, heart rate
 local affected area of injury. Sepsis occurs when regulation of the
and rhythm, and acid-base status are indicated in moderate and
local response ceases and the inflammatory reaction spreads
severe cases of hypothermia.
throughout the body. When the inflammation is no longer self-
sustaining, toxins and cytokines are released, resulting in a con-
Nursing care
 dition called systemic inflammatory response syndrome, or
"SIRS" As the SIRS process persists, another devastating chain
There are three rewarming techniques: passive external, active
 of events can lead to organ failure and the development of mul-
external, and active internal. These techniques should be used
 no, se u ose s usp uo 
according to the severity of the hypothermia. Frequent (e.g.
 s si  so e aq i sd ss sis
every 15-30 min) turning or repositioning of the patient should
 prevention, immediate clinical recognition, and implementing
occur to minimize the chance of thermal injury and to maximize 
 appropriate therapies influencing successful outcomes.
rewarming efforts.
Passive external
mately enters the bloodstream, creating a systemic infection.
Pathogens are primarily bacteria; however, viral and fungal
 Passive external rewarming techniques are aimed at preventing
infections can also cause sepsis. Although there are several con-
heat loss and allowing the body's natural heat conservation and
 ditions associated with the sepsis syndrome, essentially any con-
heat-generating abilities to function. This is typically accom-
 dition resulting in hypoperfusion and subsequent hypoxia can
plished by providing clean, dry, warm bedding and assuring that
lead to the sepsis syndrome. For the hospitalized patient, sources
1o pi on Ado ue d Aq Aida si rpq 
of infection include (but are not limited to) the GI system, the
 mechanically emptying the bladder.
excretory system, and the respiratory system. It is important to
Active external
note that the source of infection is not always identifiable. The
pathogen responsible for the inflammatory process is not the
Active external rewarming techniques provide the patient with
direct cause of SIRS but rather the individual response to the
an external heat source in addition to the patient's natural abili-
pathogen (Table 14.6.1).
fies. External heat sources such as circulating water blankets,
q aiu io no rnm jo p s e si i p
Pathophysiology
are some of the more typical external heat sources provided.
 Extreme care must be exercised whenever using an external heat
With normal tissue injury or infection, proinflammatory
source on a nonmobile patient in order to prevent thermal
and anti-inflammatory elements are released simultaneously to
500
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 14.6.1  Defnition of infectious terms
Terms
Definition
Example
Infection 
The presence or invasion of microorganisms to
Peritonitis, viremia
noninfected tissue resulting in an inflammatory response
Bacteremia
The presence of bacteria in the blood steam
Endocarditis, nosocomial
infections
Systemic inflammatory response
An immune response to a pathogen, which has resulted
Sepsis, septic shock, heat
syndrome (SIRS)
in systemic inflammatory state
exhaustion
Acute sepsis
A systemic response to a pathogen, which is associated
Oliguria, ischemic event,
with organ dysfunction or failure
hypoperfusion
Septic shock
Sepsis or infection induced hypoperfusion, which results
Bacteremia, SIRS
in organ dysfunction; refractory hypotension
Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome
Organ dysfunction involving two or more organs, which
Hypoperfusion, tissue ischemia
(MODS)
requires medical intervention to maintain function
balance tissue repair and healing. The endothelium is responsi-
tially, capillaries constrict, causing decreased perfusion to tissues;
ble for initiating the inflammatory process. The endothelium
however, as anaerobic metabolism progresses, blood flow into
regulates blood vessel tone and vascular permeability and, in
the capillaries is increased as outflow is restricted, causing a
response to injury, will allow local vasodilation and therefore
volume shift of blood accumulating in the venules. This local
increased microvascular permeability, which results in localized
"pooling" is responsible for the misdistribution of blood flow.
edema. The endothelium also regulates WBC activity and attracts
Fluid and protein leak into the surrounding tissues, which effec-
leukocytes to the local area of injury where phagocytosis can
tively concentrates the blood and increases viscosity on a micro-
ensue. When macrophages invade bacteria, cytokines and proin-
vascular level. Prolonged vasoconstriction results in loss of
flammatory mediators are activated and result in injury to the
blood flow to vital organs, which were previously protected by
endothelial cell and the underlying tissue. Apoptosis and the
arterial shunting. The end result is catastrophic as some tissues
formation of oxygen free radicals within the endothelial cell
are overperfused, while others suffer from ischemia. In the sepsis
result in a localized removal of damaged and infected tissue.
syndrome, hypovolemic shock, distributive shock, and cardio-
When cellular death occurs, creating gaps between cells, extrava-
genic shock are all responsible for the deterioration. To make
 sation of protein-rich fluid and celular material moves into
matters worse, the pulmonary vascular blood flow become dis-
 interstitial spaces contributing to edema. In sepsis, the localized
rupted, leading to pulmonary edema and may progress to acute
regulation becomes dysfunctional and the inflammatory process
respiratory distress syndrome
continues systemically as the endothelium covers a tremendous
The balance of coagulation systems is also regulated by the
surface area (Table 14.6.2, Figure 14.6.1).
endothelium. Once inflammatory cytokines have affected the
As the sepsis syndrome progresses, septic shock begins. Shock
epithelium, a substance called tissue factor leads to the produc-
is defined as a disturbance of function. In veterinary medicine,
tion of thrombin. Fibrin clots then develop in microvascular
shock is considered to be an imbalance between delivered oxygen
regions (capillary beds) and cannot be broken down naturally as
and consumed oxygen where the former is deficient. For a basic
interleukins and tissue necrosis factor (TNF) inhibit fibrinolysis.
review, the blood functions to deliver oxygen, nutrients, and hor-
Antithrombin is unable to bind or inhibit thrombin due to pros-
mones among other necessities to allthe body's tissues. The blood
taglandin production. As circulation continues with an increased
also carries away waste products from those tissues and aids in
cardiac effort, oxygen fails to be delivered to tissues due to the
the maintenance of the body's fluid balance. This delivery system
thrombi formation. Systemic vasodilation, poor perfusion, and
is dependent on cardiac output, which is determined by heart
subsequent oxygen demand and supply mismatch lead to tissue
rate and stroke volume consisting of cardiac preload. If cardiac
ischemia, resulting in organ dysfunction and failure (Figures
function and perfusion is impaired, neurohormonal responses
14.6.2 and 14.6.3).
ensue and inflammatory mediators contribute to a vicious cycle
as decompensation occurs (Tables 14.6.3 and 14.6.4).
Prevention, recognition, and management
During the initial stages of shock, cellular hypoxia causes an
of the septic patient
energy defcit as mitochrondia are no longer able to generate
ATP. Anaerobic metabolism ensues, causing the pH to fall,
There are many conditions that may lead to the sepsis syndrome;
leading to metabolic acidosis. An acute compensatory sympa-
therefore, prevention and anticipation of sepsis are essential. It
 o i s  se  ss ssi 
is imperative that veterinary nursing staff caring for patients not
Chapter 14 Nursing
501
Table 14.6.2 Pathophysiology of infection
Cytokines
Produced by tissue macrophages, monocytes, mast cells, platelets, and endothelial cells
Tissue necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin (IL-1) are released, which initiate several cascades, including the production of other
proinflammatory cytokines
 TNF and IL-1 are responsible for the release of norepinephrine, vasopressin, activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and
fever
IL-1 and TNF cause fibrinolysis impairment
IL-6C stimulates release of reactive protein C and procalcitonin
 Primary proinflammatory mediators
Bacterial endotoxin
TNF
Leukotrienes
Prostaglandins
Interleukin-1
Interleukin-6
Interleukin-8
Nitric oxide
 Interferon-gamma
Platelet-activating factor (PAF)
IL-6, IL-8, and interferon gamma
Activate the coagulation cascade, complement cascade
Release of nitric oxide, platelet-activating factor (PAF), prostaglandins, and leukotrienes
 Prostaglandins and leukotrienes contribute to endothelial damage
Tissue factor initiates the production of thrombin and coagulation
Disruption of naturally occurring anti-inflammatory mediators antithrombin and activated protein C
Proinflammatory polypeptides contribute to the release of additional cytokines and cause vasodilatation, increasing vascular
permeability
Anti-inflammatory mediators
Interleukin-4
Interleukin-6
Interleukin-10
Interleukin-12
Lipoxins
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-csF)
 Transforming growth factor (TGF)
Protein C
IL-1RA
PGE2
IL-4 and IL-10 decrease the production of TNF, IL-1, IL-6, and IL-8; antagonists to TNF and IL-1 receptors are produced
Protease inhibitors
Antioxidants
only understand the anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology
tion, respiratory function, and thermoregulation, and evaluated
 s  oe q  sd  gon
for signs of pain and level of consciousness. Additionally, antici-
 prepare for (and hopefully prevent) the next step of the disease
pation of GI bacterial translocation, kidney dysfunction, immu-
process. Proactive nursing care involves critical thinking skills,
 nosuppression, and coagulation abnormalities should influence
 preventing a patient from deteriorating, and ultimately improy-
monitoring parameters. Laboratory findings may reveal an
ing the health and well-being of the patient.
increase in lactate levels, abnormal coagulation parameters,
 Clinical recognition, beyond identifcation of at-risk patients,
acid-base status changes, hypoproteinemia, hypoglycemia, and
 includes astute monitoring of vital signs and possible sources of
abnormal CBC fndings. In recent years, biomarkers have
infection such as urinary catheters, IV catheters, and surgical
become available for procalcitonin, protein C, endotoxins, and
sites. The patient should be monitored for cardiovascular func-
TNF.
Table 14.6.3
 Stages of sepsis
Stages
Description
1. SIRS
 Fever + leukocytosis 
2. Sepsis
 SIRS + infection 
3. Acute sepsis
Sepsis + MODS
4. Septic shock
Acute sepsis + refractory hypotension
5. M0DS
 Final end pathway
Table 14.6.4
 Stages of MODS
Figure 14.6.1  Sepsis patient in the coagulation cascade: anemia.
thrombocytopenia, petechiae, ecchymosis (shown here), epistaxis, and
First stage
Hypoglycemia, oliguria, mild respiratory
 hematuria present.
alkalosis
Second stage
 Moderate liver dysfunction, tachypnea,
hypoxemia, hypocapnia
Third stage
Shock, azotemia, acid-base disorder,
coagulopathy
Fourth stage
Lactic acid osis, ischemia, oliguria/anuria
Insult of
bacteria, virus, fungus, endotoxin, parasite
 Inhibition of
Cytokine release:
Elastase
thrombomodulin
Tissue factors
Tnf, interleukins, oxygen radicals, proteases,
 prostoglandins, leukotrines, bradykinin,
 platelet-activating factors
Factors
Inhibition of
V and Vll
Decreased
activated 
Inflammatory response:
antithrombin
protein C
Fever, endothelial response,
nitric oxide release
Coagulopathy
Thrombotic
Microvascular
Supression of fibrinolysis
response
thrombosis
 Fibrin clot
Figure 14.6.2
Balance of the coagulation system.
502
Chapter 14 Nursing
503
 Nursing management of the septic patient includes supportive
 underlying disease and specific needs of the patient. In essence,
care, primarily with the goal of preventing progression of the
nutrition should be applied as an addition to medical therapeu-
disease state. Fluid balances should be assessed frequenly in
tics, helping to harmonize the dynamics of veterinary care. Ill or
debilitated patients, particularly those suffering from renal disease
 injured patients require higher calories to sustain an increase in
or hypotension. Urine production generally reflects overall tissue
metabolic rate or catabolism will ensue. When nutrition is inad-
perfusion. With each cardiac cycle, the kidneys receive 25% of
equate, the patient is at risk for a longer hospital stay, delayed
cardiac output. Normal urine output is 1-2 mL/kg/h; by quanti-
wound healing, immunosuppression, muscle weakness, low
tating urine output, a rough assessment of tissue perfusion can
serum albumin levels, and in cases where bacterial translocation
be obtained. Additionally, other excretory means such
as
 Occurs, sepsis, organ failure, and death.
dliarrhea, emesis, or even pleural fluid from a chest tube should
Although there are many useful machines and monitoring
be calculated in the fluid balancing. Critical patients at risk of
units readily available in most veterinary settings, the most
third-spacing fuid shifts should be weighed up to every 2-4h as
important one is the veterinary nursing staff. With that being
part of the fuid balancing procedure. Fluid balancing is impera-
said, utilizing the available instrumentation will help in better
tive in recognizing underhydration, overhydration and organ
 assessment and perhaps verifcation of clinical fndings. The
function (Figure 14.6.4).
most commonly used devices are blood pressure monitors, pulse
 Nutritional considerations of veterinary patients can largely
 oximetry machines, electrocardiographs, and capnographs.
influence healing and recovery. Patients should be assessed
These machines are useful in monitoring the ill or injured patient
individually and a nutritional plan instituted based on the
as hypotension, cardiac arrhythmias, hypoxemia due to V/Q
mismatch, and so on.
 Physical therapy enhances the natural healing process and
Infection
 improves surgery or injury recovery time. Physical therapy also
 increases blood flow, allows for better lymph drainage, prevents
Vasodilation
Inflammatory mediators 
Endothelial response
or reduces muscle atrophy, and reduces pain. In the recumbent
increasing oxygen in systemic circulation. In addition, physical
Edema
therapy is a noninvasive treatment, is generally low cost, and has
Hypotension
Microvascular thrombi
Vasoconstrictior
 psychological benefits for the patient. The main forethought in
performing physical therapy is having an accurate understand-
Circulus vitiosis
Ischemia
ing of the nature of the injury and the mechanism(s) involved
Tissue necrosis
in recovery. The use of physical therapy in the critical patient can
Organ dysfunction
help prevent secondary conditions from arising. Critical or
Organ failure
recumbent patients often suffer from secondary illnesses such as
Figure 14.6.3 Stages of the sepsis syndrome.
atelectasis, pneumonia, thrombosis, and muscle atrophy.
"uosnsqo Apoq ubiaioy-isod suoad sdas buuans juaed e jo Ahojono piny ieauoad t9'tl aunbi
504
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 Techniques that are useful to the patient include massage,
Table 14.6.5  Sepsis resuscitation
active and passive range of motion (PROM), thermal agents,
positioning, postural drainage, percussion, vibration, and low
Steps for
Example
level lasers. Physical therapy can be performed every 4-8h
resuscitation
depending on the patients' needs. Massage and ROM exercises
Control infection
Replace catheters (venous, urinary, etc.)
will help circulation, reducing the risk for thrombosis. ROM
source
Clean and debride wounds
exercises will help prevent or reduce muscle atrophy. Thermal
agents include the application of heat and/or ice. While heat
Laboratory
Blood culture: prior to antibiotics
dilates the capillaries and allows for better blood flow to the
interventions
ad ministration
region, ice will cause vasoconstriction, reducing swelling and
Maintain euglycemia
inflammation. Furthermore, both of these thermal agents con-
 tribute to pain management. Positional changes help prevent
Monitor serum lactate level
decubital ulcers, atelectasis, and peripheral edema. Postural
Identify and monitor blood dyscrasias
drainage, percussion, and vibration should be implemented in 
Hemodynamic
Fluid therapy: crystalloids and colloids
the patient due to the inability to productively cough. Activity
monitoring
Vasopressors, positive inotropes
stimulates coughing: therefore, the recumbent, obtunded, or
comatose patient may accumulate respiratory secretions and
Normalize cellular metabolism
may suffer from conditions such as pneumonia as a sequelae.
Ensure tissue perfusion
 Recognizing signs of pain and advocating pain management 
Anticipate DIC
is a paramount element of patient care. It is well recognized that
patients, both veterinary and human, suffer from longer hospital
Organ support
Implement mechanical ventilation
 stays, greater complications, and increased mortality when pain
Prevent pulmonary edema
 is not controlled. It is assumed that any condition that may cause
Prevent renal hypoperfusion
pain to humans would indeed cause pain to animals as well.
Sources for hospital-acquired infections include (but are not
Level of consciousness
limited to) venous access sites, urinary catheter sites, and surgi-
Miscellaneous
 Nutritional support
cal sites or wounds. Maintenance and handling of access sites is
Supplemental oxygen
 an essential part of veterinary patient nursing when it comes to
prevention of nosocomial infection. The single most effective
way to prevent a nosocomial infection is hand washing. Veteri-
nary personnel who do not wash hands between patients virtu-
improved survival in shock resuscitation. Although not readily
ally become fomites and transfer microorganisms from one
accessible in veterinary medicine, human studies have also
patient to another. When these microorganisms are transferred
shown that continual renal replacement therapy (CRRT), or
 to an ill or injured patient, the effects can be devastating due to
hemodialysis, is effective in critically ill patients with renal
the compromised immune system of the patient. Patients under-
failure and may in the future prove beneficial to the removal of
 going surgical procedure are at risk for developing nosocomial
cytokines seen in septic shock
infections; therefore, proper perioperative nursing is imperative
to help reduce the risks of infection. Patients with wounds or
Bibliography
bandages should be monitored to ensure perfusion, cleanliness,
and comfort (Table 14.6.5).
Section 1
Potential therapeutics for the future
1.
 Workers Compensation Board of BC. Joint Occupational Health
and Safety Committee workbook 2000, p. 5.
Currently, in both human and veterinary medicine, successful
2.
Washington State Department of Labor and Industries. [n.d.,
treatment of the sepsis syndrome continues to be a major focus.
online] Veterinary hazards. http:// www.lni.wa.gov/Safety/Topics/
 Protein C is an antithrombotic, anti-inflammatory, and prof-
AtoZ/Hazards Veterinary/default.asp (accessed January 21, 2011).
brinolytic agent that has been used for the treatment of sepsis in
3.
Canadian Centre for Health and Safety. [December 12, 2005,
 humans. A recombinant human activated protein C was ap-
online] Work-related musculoskeletal disorders.http://www.ccohs.
 proved by the FDA in 2001 for the treatment of sepsis and has
2011).
decreased mortality rates. Other experimental therapies cur-
4.
OSHA. 1974. Ionizing Radiation, Toxic and Hazardous Substances
rently in development include focus on the ability to block cy.
Part Number 1910, Subpart Z. Standard number 1910.1096.
tokines, TNF, nitric oxide, endotoxins, and the clotting cascade.
U.S Department of Labor, Occupational Health and Safety
 In human medicine, studies using drag-reducing polysaccha-
Division. [May 18, 2000, online]. Anesthetic gases: Guidelines
 rides, intracellular antioxidant solution, Ringer's ethyl pyruvate,
for workplace exposures; halogenated agents: section C, part 2.
and liposome-encapsulated nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/anestheticgases/index.html
solution are showing hemodynamic improvement as well as
(accessed January 27, 2011).
Chapter 14  Nursing
505
6.
 United States Department of Labor. [September 25, 2008, online].
.
 Saker KE, Remillard R. Critical care nutrition and enteral-assisted
Latex allergy. http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/latexallergy/index.html
feeding. In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS
(accessed March 6, 2011).
Hand, CD Ihatcher, RL Remillard, P Roudebush, BBJ Novotny,
7.
WorkSafe BC. [June 2005] Dealing with "Latex Allergies" at work.
Pp. 439-471. Marceline, MO: Walsworth Publishing; 2010.
http:// www.worksafebc.com/publications/health_and_safety/by_
B.
 Donaghue S. Nutritional support of hospitalized patients. Vet-
topic/assets/pdf/latex_allergies.pdf (accessed March 6, 2011).
erinary Clinicsof North America Small Animal Practice 1989;19(3):
8.
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. [1998, online]. Latex
475-493.
allergy a prevention guide. http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/98-
 Abood SK. Nutritional assessment of the critical care patient. In:
113/ (accessed March 6, 2011).
Purina Nutrition Forum, Pp. 16-19. St. Louis, MO: Ralston
9.
 Canada West Veterinary Specialists. Infection control and Isolation
Purina; 1997.
Protocols Manual, 2009.
5.
Wingfield WE. The essentials oflife in critically ill animals. In: Purina
10.
W.B Saunders. Dorland's Pocket Medical Dictionary, 24th edition,
 Nutrition Forum, pp. 2-15. St. Louis, MO: Ralston Purina; 1997.
Philadelphia, PA: W.B Saunders Co; 1957.
 Chan DL. 2005. In-hospital starvation: Inadequate nutritional
11.
Schlesinger DP, Joffee DJ. Raw food diets in companion animals,
support. In 1lth International Veterinary Emergency e Critical
a critical review. The Canadian Veterinary Journal 2011;52:
ss-sts d supaaoud unsoduis aun
50-54.
7.
Torrance AG. Intensive care nutritional support. In: Manual of
12.
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. [September 27
Companion Animal Nutrition and Feeding, ed. NC Kelly, IM Wills,
 2010, online]. Salmonella. http://www.cdc.gov/salmonella/general/
Pp. 171-180. Ames, LA: Iowa State University Press; 1996.
technical.html (accessed January 25, 2011).
8.
Hill RC. Critical care nutrition. In: The Waltharm Book of Clinical
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, F
Healthcare-
Nutrition of the Dog and Cat, eds. IM Wills, KW Simpson, pp.
Associated Infections. [January 25 2011, online]. Clostridium diff-
39-57. Tarrytown, NY: Pergamon Press; 1994.
9.
 Remillard RL, Saker KE. Parenteral-assisted feeding. In: Small
html (accessed January 31, 2011).
Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Ihatcher,
14.
 Henry CJ, Higginbotham ML, Royer NS. Cancer Managerment
 RL Remillard, P Roudebush, BBJ Novotny,pp.477-492. Marceline,
in Small Animal Practice, Pp. 107-113. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
MO: Walsworth Publishing; 2010.
Elsevier; 2010.
Tennant B. Feeding the sick animal. In: Manual of Companion
15.
Withrow/Vail. Small Animal Clinical Oncology, 4th edition,
Animal Nutrition and Feeding, eds. NC Kelly, IM Wills, pp. 171-
Pp. 167-169. St. Louis, MO: W.B. Saunders; 2007.
180. Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press; 1996.
16.
Withrow/MacEwan. Small Animal Clinical Oncology, 3rd edition,
11.
Davenport D, Remillard R, Jenkins C. Gastric motility and empty-
p. 95. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 2001.
ing disorders. In: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds.
 MS Hand, CD Thatcher, RLRemilard, PRoudebush, B Novotomy,
Section 2
p. 1044. Topeka, KS: Mark Morris Institute; 2011
12.
Case LP, Carey DP, Hirakawa DA, Daristotle L (eds.). Energy
1.
Trepanier LA. Top ten potential drug interactions, ACVIM
balance. In: Canine and Feline Nutrition, 2nd edition, pp. 75-88.
Forum, Anaheim, CA 2010.
St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2000.
2.
 Plumb DC. Plurmbs Veterinary Drug Handbook, 7th edition. Ames,
13.
Will JIM. Basic principles of nutrition and feeding. In: Manual of
IA: Blackwell Publishing; 2011.
Companion Animal Nutrition and Feeding, eds. N Kelly, I Wills,
3.
Silverstein D, Hopper K. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine.
pp. 19-21. Ames, IA: Iowa State Press; 1996.
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2009.
Gross KL, Jewell DE, Yamka RM, et al. Macronutrients. In: Small
4.
Bonagura JD, Twedt DC. Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV.
Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD Ihatcher,
St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2009.
RL Remillard, et al., Pp. 50-88. Marceline, MO: Walsworth
5.
 Mealey KL. MDR1 testing for prevention of chemotherapeutic
Publishing; 2010.
adverse effects, ACVIM Forum, Anaheim, CA 2010.
15.
Burger IH. A basic guide to nutrient requirements. In: The
6.
 Trpanier LA. Drug dose adjustments for disease. Proceedings 
Waltham Book ofCompanion animal Nutrition,eds. M Wils, KW
from the CVC, April 7-12, 2010, Baltimore, MD.
Simpson, pp. 6-10. Tarrytown, NY: Pergamon; 1993.
7.
 Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
16.
 Xia L, Weihua L, Hong W, et al. July 2005. Pseudogenization of a
6th edition. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2000.
sweet-receptor gene accounts for cats indifference toward sugar a
8.
Macintire DK, Drobatz KJ, Haskins SC, Saxon WD. Manual of
http://www.plosgenetics.org, 1(1):27-35.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care Medicine. Ames, IA:
17.
Crane SW, Cowell CS, Moser EA, et al. Commercial pet foods. In:
Blackwell Publishing; 2006.
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edition, eds. MS Hand, CD
9.
Nelson RW, Couto CG, Small Animal Internal Medicine, 4th
Thatcher, RI Remillard, P Roudebush, B Novotny, p. 161.
edition. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby; 2009.
 Marceline, MO: Walsworth Publishing; 2010.
10.
Mathews KA Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Manual, 2nd
18.
 Donoghue S. The underweight patient. In: Manual of Companion
edition. Guelph, Ontario: Lifelarn; 2006.
Anirmal Nutrition and Feeding, eds. N Kelly, I Wills, p. 103. Ames,
11.
Kirk RW. Krks Current Veterinary Therapy VI1. St. Louis, MO:
IA: Iowa State Press; 1996.
Saunders; 1980.
19.
Knochel JP. Phosphorus. In: Modern Nutrition in Health and
Disease, 9th edition, eds. ME Shils, JA Olson, S Moshe, AC Ross,
Section 3
 Pp. 157-166. Philadelphia, PA: Lipponcott, Williams & Wilkins;
Buffington CA, Hollaway C, Abood SK (eds.). Clinical dietetics.
1999.
In: Manual of Veterinary Dietetics, Pp. 54-60. St. Louis, MO:
20.
 Hamaoui E, Kodsi R. Complications of enteral feeding and their
Elsevier; 2004.
prevention. In: Clinical Nutrition, Enteral and Tube Feeding, 3rd
506
Small Animal Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
edition, eds. JL Rombeau, RHRolandelli,pp.566-568. Philadelphia,
 Connolly DJ. The Ascitic Dog: British Small Animal Congress; 2006.
PA: W.B. Saunders; 1997.
17.
Blok B. Thoracocentesis. In: Clinical procedures in Emergency
21.
Forrester SD, Moreland KJ. Hypophosphatemia. Journal of
Medicine. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2004.
Veterinary Internal Medicine 1989;1989(3):149-159.
18.
Doelken P, Sahn SA. Thoracocentesis Textbook of Critical Care.
22.
 Remillard RL, Armstrong PJ, Davenport DJ. Assisted feeding in
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2006.
hospitalized patients: enteral and parenteral nutrition. In: Srall
19.
Fossum TW. Surgery If the Lower Respiratory System: Pleural
Animal Clinical Nutrition, 4th edition, eds. T Hand, R Remillard,
Cavity and Diaphragm, Pp. 896-929. Philadelphia, PA: Mosby;
p. 364. Marceline, MO: Walsworth Publishing; 2000.
2007.
23.
Justin RB, Hosenhaus AE. Hypophosphatemia associated with
20.
Battaglia A. Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care A Manual
enteral alimentation in cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine
for the Veterinary Technician. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2001.
1995;9:228-233.
21.
Sauve' V. Pleural space disease. In: Small Anirmal Critical Care
24.
 Driscoll DF, Adolph A, Bistrian BR. Lipid emulsions in parenteral
Medicine, pp. 125-130. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2009.
nutrition. In: Clinical Nutrition, Parenteral Nutrition, 3rd edition,
22.
L.C.U. Medical Inc. S
Smart-Y Centesis Device. http:// www.
eds. JL Rombeau, RH Rolandelli, p. 42. Philadelphia, PA: W.B.
icumedical.com
Saunders; 2001.
23.
Chew DI, Dibartola SP, Schenck PA. Carine and Feline Nephrology
25.
Wortinger A. Electrolytes, fluids and the acid-base balance. Vet-
and Urology, 2nd edition,pp.2-5.St.Louis,MO:Elsevier Saunders;
erinary Technician Magazine February 2001;22(2): 80-87; 2001.
2011.
 Chan DL. Controversies in clinical nutrition therapy. In IVECCS 
24.
Wingfeld WE. Veterinary Emergency Medicine Secrets, 2nd
2006 Proceedings, San Antonio, TX, pp. 499-502; 2006.
edition, pp. 449-455. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley & Belfus; 2001.
25.
Bassert JM, McCurnin DM. MeCurnins Clinical Textbook for
Veterinary Technicians, 4th edition, pp. 591-593. St. Louis, MO:
Section 4
Saunders Elsevier; 1998.
Cote E. Clinical Veterinary Advisor Dogs and Cats, pp. 1213-1214.
26.
 Barrett M, Campbell VL. Aerobic bacterial culture of used intra-
St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier; 2007.
venous fluid bags intended for use as urine collection reservoirs.
 Brown C. Diagnostic cystocentesis: technique and considerations.
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 2008;44:
Laboratory Animals 2006;35(4):21-23.
2-4.
3.
Buckley GJ, Aktay SA, Raozanski EA. Massive transfusion and
27.
 Barsanti JA, Shotts EB, Crowell WA, Finco DR, Brown J. Effect of
surgical management of iatrogenic aortic laceration associated
s ae u suau i Aiem o aass u Aea
with cystocentesis in a dog. Journal of the American Veterinary
with indwelling urethral catheters. Journal of Veterinary Internal
Medical Association 2009;235(3):288-291.
Medicine 1992;6:64-70.
4. Lulich J. How I Get a Decent Urine Sample, British Small Animal
 Barsanti JA, Blue J, Edmunds J. Urinary tract infection due to
Congress, 2007.
indwelling bladder catheters in dogs and cats. Journal of the
5.
Caney SMA. Collecting Urine Samples From Cats: British Small
American Veterinary Medical Association 1985;187:384-388.
animal Veterinary Congress, 2009.
29.
 Smarick SD, Haskins SC, Aldrich J, et al. Incidence of catheter-
6.
 Fry DR, Holloway SA. Comparison of normal urine samples col-
associated urinary tract infection among dogs in a small animal
lected by cystocentesis with or without prior skin disinfection.
intensive care unit. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Australian Veterinary Practice 2004;24:2-5.
Association 2004;224:1936-1940.
7. Macintire DK, Drobatz KJ, Haskins SC (eds.). Urologic emergen-
30.
Ogeer-Gyles J, Mathews K, Weese JS, et al. Evaluation of catheter-
cies. In: Manual of Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care
associated urinary tract infections and multi-drug-resistant
Medicine, lst edition, p. 226-231. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Escherichia coli isolates from the urine of dogs with indwelling
Williams & Wilkins; 2005.
urinary catheters. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
 Kruger IM, Osborne CA, Ulrich LK Cystocentesis, diagnostic and
Association 2006;229:1584-1590.
therapeutic considerations. Veterinary Clinics of North America:
31.1
 Bubenik LJ, Hosgood GL, Waldron DR, Snow LA. Frequency of
Small Animal Practice 1996;26(2):353-361.
urinary tract infection in catheterized dogs and comparison of
9.0
Crowe DT. Diagnostic abdominal paracentesis techniques: clinical
bacterial culture and susceptibility testing results for catheterized
evaluation in 129 dogs and cats. Journal of the American Animal
and noncatheterized dogs with urinary tract infections. Journal of
Hospital Association 1984;20:223-230.
the American Veterinary Medical Association 2007;231:893-899.
10.
Walters IM. Abdominal paracentesis and diagnostic peritoneal
32.
Bubenik J, Hosgood G, Hosgood G. Urinary tract infection in
lavage. Clinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice 2003;18(1):
dogs with thoracolumbar intervertebral disc herniation and
32-38.
urinary bladder dysfunction managed by manual expression, ind-
11.
Jandrey KE. Abdominocentesis. In: Small Animal Critical Care
welling catheterization or intermittent catheterization. Veterinary
Medicine, Chapter 155, Pp. 671-673. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
Surgery: VS: the Offcial Journal of the American College of
Elsevier; 2009.
Veterinary Surgeons 2008;37:791-800.
12.
Mazzaferro EM.
：Abominocentesis and DPL; International
33.
 Sullivan LA, Campbell VL, Onuma SC. Evaluation of open versus
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium; 2006.
closed urine collection systems and development of nosocomial
13.
 Smeak DD. Abdominocentesis; NAVC Clinicians Brief, September 
bacteria in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
2006.
Association 2010;237:187-190.
 Lee JA. Abdominal trauma: Evaluation and stabilization. Interna-
McSherry L.. Techniques for bone marrow aspiration and biopsy.
tional Veterinary and Critical Care Symposium; 2005.
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edition, eds. SJ
 Powell LL. The acute abdomen. Western Veterinary Conference;
Ettinger, EC Feldman, Pp. 383-385. St. Louis, MO: Saunders;
2008.
2010.
Chapter 14  Nursing
507
35.
Hendrix CM. Laboratory Procedure for Veterinary Technicians,
11.
 Proulx J. Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome. American
5th edition, pp. 60-70, 290-301. St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier;
Animal Hospital Association Scientific Program; 2003.
2007.
12.
 Schaer M. Clinical Pearls in Intensive and Critical Care I and II.
36.
Price A. Aspirating the answer: bone marrow aspirate basics,
Western Veterinary Conference; 2003.
ACVIM 2010 Proceedings; 2010.
13.
Otto C. Biomarkers of Sepsis International Veterinary Emergency
and Critical Care Symposium; 2006.
 Rozanski A. Cytokines: Who's who and should I care? International
Section 5
 isos a e pe Auaag Aeuaia
Chamness CJ. Endoscopic instrumentation. In: Srmall Anirmal
15.
'e ea see rs  a u n  s
Endoscopy, 2nd edition, ed. TR Tams, pp. 3-27. St. Louis, MO:
Veterinary Technician the Complete Journal for the Veterinary
Mosby; 1999.
Hospital Staff 1998;19(5):349-353.
 Committee SP. Standards of Infection Control in Reprocessing of
16.
Womack B. Providing nutritional support to critical care patients.
 Flexible Gastrointestinal Endoscopes. Society of Gastroenterology
Nurses and Associates, Inc. (SGNA); 2007.
Hospital Staff 2003;24(6):376-386.
Committee SP. Guideline for Use of High Level Disinfectants &
17.
Mott J. Ethical decision making: dealing with dilemmas and
Sterilants for Reprocessing Flexible Gastrointestinal Endoscopes.
improving patient care. Veterinary Technician the Complete Journal
Society of Gastroenterology Nurses and Associates, Inc. (SGNA);
for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 2004;25(2):126-131.
2007.
18.
Limon L. Nosocomial infections. The National Association of
4.
Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyer DJ.
Veterinary Technicians in America Journal 2006;(Winter):29.
Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology, 3rd edition.
19.
Wilson JH. Avoiding nosocomial infections. The National Associ-
Philadelphia PA: WB Saunders; 1996.
ation of Veterinary Technicians in America Journal 2007;(Summer):
64-68.
Section 6
20.
Pue mo am op im sad Araian u sisdas ' oo
where can we go? Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical
Refinetti R. Big dogs cooler than small dogs. Veterinary Forum
Care 2007;17(4):329-331.
2009;26(3):24.
21.
DeClue C. Acute respiratory distress syndrome in dogs and cats:
2.
Dirckx JH (ed.). Stedman's Concise Medical Dictionary for the
a review of clinical findings and pathophysiology. Journal of
Health Professions, 4th edition, Baltimore, MD: Lippincott,
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 2007;17(4):340-347.
Williams, Wilkins; 2001.
22.
Oto CM. Clinical trials in spontaneous disease in dogs: a new
3.
Miller J. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Ettinger &
paradigm for investigation of sepsis. Journal of Veterinary
Feldman, 7th edition, Vols. 1 and 2, p. 41. St. Louis, MO: W.B.
Emergency and Critical Care 2007;17(4):359-367.
Elsevier Saunders; 2010.
23.
 Nemzek JA, Agrodnia MA, Hauptman JG Breed specific pro-
4.
 Pachtinger G, King LG. Fever of unknown origin. Clinician's Brief
inflarmmatory cytokine production as a predisposing factor for
2010;8(3):29-31.
susceptibilityto sepsis inthe dog.Journal of Veterinary Emergency
5.
Taylor P. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Ettinger &
and Critical Care 2007;17(4):368-372.
Feldman, 7th edition, Vols. 1 and 2, p. 46. St. Louis, MO: W.B.
Fransson BA, Lagerstedt AS, Bergstrom A, et al. C-reactive
Elsevier Saunders; 2010.
ym shop u g-umaau pue 'e ioiey sisaiau nou uaoid
6.
Jack CM, Watson PM. Veterinary Technician's Daily Reference
pyometra and SIRS. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical
Guide, 2nd edition, p. 346. Ames, ILA: Blackwell; 2008.
Care 2007;17(4):373-381.
7.
 Laforcade AM. Mitochondrial Energetics in Sepsis. International
25.
 Wuestenberg K Clinical recognition and treatment of shock Inter-
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium; 2003.
national Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium; 2008.
 Laforcade AM. Postoperative Care of the Septic Patient. Interna-
26.
Hackett T. Fluid therapy. The National Association of Veterinary
tional Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium; 2003.
Technicians in America Journal 2008;(Summer)58-63.
9.
Silverstein D. Clinical Markers and Prevention of Sepsis. Inter-
Wortinger A. Ihe benefits of using nutrition in the management
national Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium;
of critical care cases. Veterinary Technician the Complete Journal
2003.
for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 2009;30(3):26-28.
10.
 Rivera A. MODS and SIRS. International Veterinary Emergency
28.
Wuestenberg K. Physical therapy interventions in the ICU.
and Critical Care Symposium; 2003.
American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine Forum; 2009.
Appendix
Accredited State Veterinary
Diagnostic Laboratories
Arizona
Arizona Veterinary Diagnostic Lab
Phone: 520-621-2356
2831 N. Freeway
Fax: 520-626-8696
Tucson, AZ 85705
http://cals.arizona.edu/vdl/
Arkansas
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Phone: 501-907-2430
Arkansas Livestock and Poultry Commission
Fax: 501-907-2410
Shipping Address:
http://alpc.arkansas.gov/Pages/default.aspx
 One Natural Resources Drive
Little Rock, AR 72205
Mailing Address:
PO Box 8505
Little Rock, AR 72215
California
CA Animal Health & Food Safety Lab System
Phone: 530-752-8709
University of California, Davis
Fax: 530-752-5680
Shipping Address:
http://cahfs.ucdavis.edu
West Health Science Drive
Davis, CA 95616
 Mailing Address:
PO Box 1770
Davis, CA 95617-1770
Colorado
Colorado State University
Phone: 970-297-1281
Veterinary Diagnostic Lab
Fax: 970-297-0320
Shipping Address:
http://www.dlab.colostate.edu
Fort Collins, CO 80523
 Mailing Address:
CSU DLab
Fort Collins, CO 80523
Smalf Animat Irnternar Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Edited by Linda Meril
@ 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
509
510
Appendix：
 Accredited State Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratories
Connecticut
Connecticut Veterinary Medical Diagnostic
Phone: 860-486-4000
Laboratory
Fax: 860-486-2794
Department of Pathobiology & Veterinary Science
http://www.patho.uconn.edu
University of Connecticut
Shipping Address:
61 N. Eagleville Road, Unit-3089
Storrs, CT 06269-3089
Mailing Address:
61 N. Eagleville Road, Unit-3089
Storrs, CT 06269-3089
Florida
 Kissimmee Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory
Phone: 321-697-1400
 Florida Dept. of Agriculture & Consumer Services
Fax: 321-697-1467
Shipping Address:
http://www.freshfromflorida.com/ai/index.shtml
 2700 N. John Young Parkway
Kissimmee, FL 34741
 Mailing Address:
PO Box 458006
Kissimmee, FL 34745
Georgia
Athens Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Phone: 706-542-5568
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Fax: 706-542-5977
University of Georgia
http://www.vet.uga.edu/dlab
Athens, GA 30602-7383
 Veterinary Diagnostic and Investigational Laboratory
Phone: 229-386-3340
University of Georgia
Fax: 229-386-7128
 Shipping Address:
http://www.vet.uga.edu/dlab
43 Brighton Road
Titon, GA 31793
 Mailing Address:
PO Box 1389
Tifton, GA 31793
Illinois
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Phone: 217-333-1620
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Fax: 217-244-2439
 Shipping Address:
http://www.cvm.uiuc.edu/vdl/
PO Box U
Urbana, IL 61802
Mailing Address:
2001 South Lincoln Ave. Rm 1224
Urbana, IL 61802
Indiana
 Animal Disease Diagnostic Lab
Phone: 765-494-7440
Purdue University
Fax: 765-494-9181
406 South University St.
http://www.addl.purdue.edu
West Lafayette, IN 47907
Iowa
ISU- College of Vet Med
Phone: 515-294-1950
Vet Diagnostic Lab
Fax: 515-294-3564
1600 S. 16th Street
http://www.vdpam.iastate.edu
Ames, IA 50011
Kansas
 Kansas State Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Phone: 785-532-5650
Kansas State University
Fax: 785-532-4481
1800 Denison Ave., Moiser Hall
http://www.vet.k-state.edu/depts/dmp/
Manhattan, KS 66506
Appendix  Accredited State Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratories
511
Kentucky
Murray State University
Phone: 270-886-3959
Breathitt Veterinary Center
Fax: 270-886-4295
Shipping Address:
http://breathitt. murraystate.edu/bvc
715 North Drive
Hopkinsville, KY 42240
Mailing Address:
PO Box 2000
Hopkinsville, KY 42241-2000
Livestock Disease Diagnostic Center
Phone: 859-253-0571
Shipping Address:
Fax: 859-255-1624
1490 Bull Lea Rd.
http://www.lddc.uky.edu/
Lexington, KY 40511
Mailing Address:
PO Box 14125
Lexington, KY 40512
Louisiana
LA Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory
Phone: 225-578-9777
Shipping Address:
Fax: 225-578-9784
1909 Skip Bertman Dr. Rm. 1519
http://laddl.1su.edu
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
Mailing Address:
PO Box 25070
Baton Rouge, LA 70894
Michigan
 Diagnostic Center for Population and Animal Health
Phone: 517-353-0635
Michigan State University
Fax: 517-353-5096
Shipping Address:
http://www.animalhealth.msu.edu
4125 Beaumont Road, Room 122
Lansing, MI 48910-8104
Mailing Address:
PO Box 30076
Lansing, MI 48909-7576
Minnesota
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Phone: 612-625-8787
University of Minnesota
Fax: 612-624-8707
1333 Gortner Avenue
http://www.vdl.umn.edu
St. Paul, MN 55108-1098
Mississippi
 Mississippi Veterinary Research and Diagnostic
Phone: 601-420-4700
Laboratory System
Fax: 601-420-4719
Mississippi State University
http://www.cvm.msstate.edu/diagnostic_labs/index.html
Shipping Address:
 3137 Highway 468 West
Pearl, MS 39208
Mailing Address:
PO. Box 97813
Pearl, MS 39288
Missouri
Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Lab
Phone: 573-882-6811
University of Missouri
Fax: 573-882-1411
 Shipping Address:
http://www.vmdl.missouri.edu
 1600 East Rollins Road
Columbia, MO 65211
Mailing Address:
PO Box 6023
Columbia, MO 65205
512
Appendix：
 Accredited State Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratories
Montana
Montana Department of Livestock
Phone: 406-994-4885
Montana Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Fax: 406-994-6344
 Shipping Address:
http://www.liv.mt.gov/default.mcpx
South 19th and Lincoln
Bozeman, MT 59718
Mailing Address:
PO Box 997
Bozeman, MT 59771
Nebraska
Veterinary Diagnostic Center
Phone: 402-472-1434
Fair Street, E. Campus Loop
Fax: 402-472-3094
 Shipping Address:
http://vbms.unl.edu/nvdls
PO Box 82646
Lincoln, NE 68501-2646
Mailing Address:
PO B0x 830907
Lincoln, NE 68583-0907
New York
Animal Health Diagnostic Center
Phone: 607-253-3900
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Fax: 607-253-3943
Cornell University
http://ahdc.vet.cornell. edu/
Shipping Address:
 Upper Tower Road
Ithaca, NY 14853
 Mailing Address:
PO Box 5786
Ithaca, NY 14852
North
North Carolina Department of Agriculture &
Phone: 919-733-3986
Carolina
Consumer Services
Fax: 919-733-0454
Rollins Laboratory
 Shipping Address:
2101 Blue Ridge Road
Raleigh, NC 27607
Mailing Address:
1031 Mail Service Center
Raleigh, NC 27699-1031
North Dakota
 Department of Veterinary Diagnostic Services
Phone: 701-231-8307
North Dakota State University
Fax: 701-231-7514
 Shipping Address:
http://www.vd.ndsu.edu/
1523 Centennial Blvd., Van Es Hall
Fargo, ND 58105
 Mailing Address:
PO Box 5406
Fargo, ND 58105
Ohio
 Animal Disease Diagnostic Lab
Phone: 614-728-6220
8995 E. Main Street, Building 6
Fax: 614-728-6310
Reynoldsburg, OH 43068
http://www.agri.ohio.gov/addl/
Oklahoma
 Oklahoma Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory
Phone: 405-744-6623
Oklahoma State University
Fax: 405-744-8612
 Shipping Address:
http://www.cvm.okstate.edu
Center for Veterinary Health Sciences
Farm and Ridge Road
Stillwater, OK 74078
 Mailing Address:
PO Box 7001
Stillwater, OK 74076-7001
Appendix  Accredited State Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratories
513
Oregon
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Phone: 541-737-3261
Oregon State University
Fax: 541-737-6817
Magruder Hall, Room 134
http://oregonstate.edu/vetmed/diagnostic
Shipping Address:
 30th and Washington Way
Corvallis, OR 97331
 Mailing Address:
PO Box 429
Corvallis, OR 97339-0429
Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture
Phone: 717-787-8808
Pennsylvania Veterinary Laboratory
Fax: 717-772-3895
2305 N. Cameron Street
http://www.padls.org
Harrisburg, PA 17110-9408
Pennsylvania State University
Phone: 814-863-0837
 PADLS—Penn State Animal Diagnostic Laboratory
Fax: 814-865-3907
Orchard Road
http://www.padlls.org
University Park, PA 16802-1110
 University of Pennsylvania
Phone: 610-444-5800
PADLS—New Bolton Center
Fax: 610-925-8106
382 West Street Road
http://www.padls.org
 Kennett Square, PA 19348
South
 Clemson Veterinary Diagnostic Center
Phone: 803-788-2260
Carolina
Shipping Address:
Fax: 803-699-8910
500 Clemson Road
http://www.clemson.edu/public/lph/lab/
Columbia, SC 29229
Mailing Address:
PO Box 102406
Columbia, SC 29224-2406
South Dakota 
Animal Disease Research and Diagnostic Laboratory
Phone: 605-688-5171
 South Dakota State University
Fax: 605-688-6003
Shipping Address:
http://www.sdstate.edu/vs/mission/index.cfm
 Animal Disease Research Building.
North Campus Drive
Brookings, SD 57007-1396
Mailing Address:
 Box 2175, North Campus Drive
Brookings, SD 57007-1396
Tennessee
CE Kord Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory
Phone: 615-837-5125
 Ellington Agricultural Center
Fax: 615-837-5250
Shipping Address:
http://www.tn.gov/agriculture/regulatory/kord.shtml
440 Hogan Rd., Porter Building
Nashville, TN 37220
 Mailing Address:
PO Box 40627
Nashville, TN 37204
Texas
Texas Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory
Phone: 979-845-3414
(TVMDL)
Fax: 979-845-1794
TVMDL-College Station
http://tvmdl.tamu.edu/
Shipping Address:
1 Sippel Road
College Station, Texas 77843
Mailing Address:
PO. Box 3040
College Station, Texas 77841-3040
514
Appendix：
Accredited State Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratories
TVMDL—Amarillo
Dr. Robert Sprowls
Shipping Address:
Phone: 806-353-7478
6610 Amarillo Blvd., West
Fax: 806-359-0636
Amarillo, Texas 79106
http://tvmdl.tamu.edu/
Mailing Address:
PO. Box 3200
Amarillo, Texas 79116-3200
TVMDL—Gonzales
Phone: 830-672-2834
 Shipping Address:
Fax: 830-672-2835
1812 Water Street
http://tvmdl.tamu.edu/
Gonzales, Texas 78629
 Mailing Address:
P O. Box 84
Gonzales, Texas 78629
TVMDL—Center
Phone: 936-598-4451
Shipping/Mailing Address:
Fax: 936-598-2741
635 Malone Drive
http://tvmdl.tamu.edu/
Center, Texas 79535
Utah
 Utah Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Phone: 435-797-1895
Shipping and Mailing Address:
Fax: 435-797-2805
950 East 1400 North
http://www.usu.edu/uvdl/
Logan, UT. 84341
Washington
Washington Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory
Phone: 509-335-9696
Washington State University
Fax: 509-335-7424
 Shipping Address:
http://www.vetmed.wsu.edu/depts_waddl
155N Bustad Hall
Pullman, WA 99164-7034
 Mailing Address:
PO Box 647034
Pullman, WA 99164-7034
Wisconsin
Wisconsin Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Phone: 608-262-5432
University of Wisconsin
Fax: 847-574-8085
445 Easterday Lane
http://www.wvdl. wisc.edu
Madison, WI 53706
Wyoming
Wyoming State Veterinary Laboratory
Phone: 307-742-6638
1174 Snowy Range Road
Fax: 307-721-2051
Laramie, WY 82070
http://wyovet.uwyo.edu/
Canada
Animal Health Laboratory
Phone: 519-824-4120 ext. 54502
University of Guelph
Fax: 519-821-8072
 Shipping Address:
http://www.guelphlabservices.com/AHL/
Door P2, Building 49, McIntosh Lane
Guelph, Ontario N1G 2W1
Mailing Address:
PO Box 3612
Guelph, Ontario N1H 6R8
CANADA
Animal Health Branch
Phone: 604-556-3003
1767 Angus Campbell Road
Fax: 604-556-3010
Abbotsford, BC V3G 2M3
http://www.agf.gov.bc.ca/ahc/
CANADA
Abbreviations
Abbr
Word/term
AIDS
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome
Iezt
Iodine-123
ALP
 Alkaline phosphatase
1311
Iodine-131
ALT
Alanine aminotransferase
99mTcO4-
 Technetium-99m as pertechnetate
AMP
Adenosine monophosphate
2-ME
 2-Mercaptoethanol
ANA
Antinuclear antibodies
C.
Alpha
ANP
Atrial natriuretic peptides
C-PI
 Alphaj-protease inhibitor
APC
Activated protein C
β
Beta
aPTT, APTT
 Activated partial thromboplastin time
0)
Omega
APUDoma
Amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation
AAFCO
American Association of Feed Control Officials
tumor
AAFP
Association of Feline Practitioners
ARDS
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
AAHA
 American Animal Hospital Association
ARF
Acute renal failure
AANAT
Serotonin N-acetyltransferase
AROM
Active range of motion
AAROM
 Active-assisted range of motion
AST
Aspartate aminotransferase
ABG
Arterial blood gas
AT
Antithrombin
ACD
Acid citrate dextrose
ATE
Arterial thromboembolism
ACE
Angiotensin-converting enzyme
ATP
Adenosine triphosphate
ACEi, ACEI
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor
AV
Atrioventricular valves
AChR
 Acetylcholine receptor
AVMA
American Veterinary Medical Association
ACL
 Anterior cruciate ligament
AVP
Arginine vasopressin
ACT
Activated clotting time
BAL
Bronchoalveolar lavage
ACTH
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone
BCS
Body condition score
ADH
Antidiuretic hormone
BER
 Basal energy requirement
ADHF
 Acutely decompensated heart failure
BFU-E
 Burst-forming unit-erythroid
AD-MSC
Adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cell
BGC
Blood glucose concentration
ADP
Adenosine diphosphate
BID
Bis in die (twice a day)
Antigen
BIPS
 Barium-impregnated polyethylene spheres
AGID
Agar gel immunodiffusion
BMBT
 Buccal mucosal bleeding time
Smalf Animat rnternar Medicine for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Edited by Linda Merill.
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons,Inc.
515
516
Abbreviations
BNP
Brain natriuretic peptide
CRTZ
Chemoreceptor trigger zone
BP
Blood pressure
CRYOPP
 Cryoprecipitate poor plasma
BPH
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
CSA
Chondrosarcoma
BSA
 Body surface area
CSD
Cat scratch disease
BUN
Blood urea nitrogen
CSF
Cerebral spinal fluid
C
Celsius
CT
Computed tomography
C3
Complement 3
CUPS
 Chronic ulcerative paradental stomatitis
Ca2+
Calcium
CVP
Central venous pressure
CACH
 Copper-associated chronic hepatitis
D5W
Dextrose 5% in water
CaO2
 Changes in arterial oxygen concentration
DABP
 Direct arterial blood pressure
CATE
Canine arterial thromboembolism
DCM
 Dilated cardiomyopathy
CAV2
Canine adenovirus 2
DDAVP
Deamino-8-d-arginine vasopressin
CBC
Complete blood count
DE
 Digestable energy
CCD
 Charge-coupled device
DEA
Dog erythrocyte antigen
CCK
Cholecystokinin
DER
 Daily energy requirements
CCK-2
Cholecystokinin 2
DES
Diethylstilbestrol
CD
 Cluster of differentiation/designation
DHA
Docosahexaenoic acid
CD
Compact disk
DI
 Diabetes insipidus
CDV
 Canine distemper virus
DIC
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation
CE
Client education
DJD
 Degenerative joint disease
CF
Complement fixation
DKA
Diabetic ketoacidosis
CFU-E
 Colony-forming unit-erythroid
dL
Deciliter
CGE
 Canine granulocytic ehrlichiosis
DM
 Diabetes mellitus
CGMS
Continuous glucose monitoring system
DM
Dry matter
CHF
Congestive heart failure
DMSO
Dimethyl sulfoxide
CHOP
Cyclophosphamide, hydroxydoxorubicin
DNA
 Deoxyribonucleic acid
(doxorubicin), Oncovin (vincristine),
DNM
Dynamin
prednisone
DPG
 Diphosphoglycerate
CHV
Canine herpesvirus
DPL
 Diagnostic peritoneal lavage
CIBDAI
Canine IBD Activity Index
DV
Dorsoventral
CIRDC
Canine infectious respiratory disease complex
DVD
 Digital versatile disk
CIV
Canine influenza virus
Dx
Diagnosis
CK
Creatine kinase
EB
 Eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy (formerly
CKCS
 Cavalier King Charles spaniel
known as PIE)
CKD
Chronic kidney disease
ECF
Extracellular fluid
CLAD
Canine leukocyte adhesion deficiency
ECG
Electrocardiogram
cm, cm?
Centimeter, cubic centimeter
ECM
Erythema chronicum migrans
CME
Canine monocytic ehrlichiosis
EDTA
 Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
CNP
C-type natriuretic peptide
EE
 Eosinophilic enteritis
CNP
 Circulating neutrophil pool 
EFA
Essential fatty acid
CNS
 Central nervous system
EGE
 Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
CO2
Carbon dioxide
EHBO
 Extrahepatic biliary obstruction
COPD
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
EHEC
 Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli
COPV
 Canine oral papillomavirus
ELA
Enzyme immunoassay
COX
Cyclooxygenase
EIC
 Exercise-induced collapse
CPiV
 Canine parainfluenza virus
ELISA
 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
CPK
 Creatine phosphokinase
EMG
Electromyogram
cPLI
 Canine pancreatic lipase
EPA
 Eicosapentaenoic acid
CPV
 Canine parvovirus
EPI
 Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
CRF
Chronic renal failure
EPO
Erythropoietin
CRH
 Corticotropin-releasing hormone
EpoR
Erythropoietin receptor
CRI
Continuous/Constant Rate Infusion
ERD
 Early renal damage
CRI
 Chronic renal insufficiency
EtO
 Ethylene oxide
CRRT
Continuous renal replacement therapy
E-tube
 Esophagostomy tube
CRT
Capillary refll time
Fahrenheit
Abbreviations
517
FA
Fluorescent antibody
GS
Gingivostomatitis
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization
GSPC
Gingivitis-stomatitis-pharyngitis complex
FAT
Functional adrenal tumor
GT
 Glanzmann's thrombastenia
FATE
Feline arterial thromboembolism
G-tube
Gastrostomy tube
Fc
 Fragment, crystallizable
Gy
Gray
FCV
Feline corona virus
h
Hour
FDA
 Food and Drug Administration
H+
Hydrogen
FDP
 Fibrin degradation products
H2
Histamine 2
FEGC
 Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex
HO
Water
FeLV
Feline leukemia virus
HA (H)
Hemagglutinin
FFP
Fresh frozen plasma
HAC
Hyperadrenocorticism
FHV
 Feline herpesvirus
Hb, Hgb
Hemoglobin
FIBDAI
Feline IBD Activity Index
HCM
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
FIC
 Feline idiopathic cystitis
HCO-
Bicarbonate
FiO2
Fractional concentration of oxygen
HCS
Hepatocutaneous syndrome
FIP
Feline infectious peritonitis
HCT
Hematocrit
FIV
Feline immunodeficiency virus
HDDST
 High dose dexamethasone suppression test
FLUTD
 Feline lower urinary tract disease
HE
 Hepatic encephalopathy
FNA
 Fine needle aspirate/aspiration
Hg
Mercury
FOS
Fructooligosaccharides
hIVIG
Human intravenous immunoglobulin
FP
Frozen plasma
HLD
High level disinfectant
FPn
 Feline pneumonitis
HMWK
 High molecular weight kininogen
FPV
 Feline panleukopenia virus
HPAA
 Hypothalmic-pituitary-adrenal axis
FPV
 Feline parvovirus
hpf
High power feld
FR
French
HSA
Hemangiosarcoma
FSA
Fibrosarcoma
HT
Hydroxytryptamine
FSH
Follicle-stimulating hormone
HUS
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
fT4 (ED)
 Free T4 by equilibrium dialysis
IBD
 Inflammatory bowel disease
FUD
Fever of undetermined origin
ICH
 Infectious canine hepatitis
FUO
 Fever of unknown origin
ICU
 Intensive care unit
FUS
 Feline urologic syndrome
IDDM
 Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
FWB
Fresh whole blood
IFA
 Immunofluorescent assay
Gram
IFN-α.
 Interferon alpha
ga.
Gauge
Ig
 Immunoglobulin
GAG
Glycosaminoglycans
IGF
 Insulin-like growth factor
gag
Group-specific antigens
IL
Interleukin
GALT
Gastrointestinal (gut)-associated lymphoid
IM
 Intramuscular
tissue
IMHA
 Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
GBM
Gallbladder mucocoele
IMPA
 Immune-mediated polyarthropathy
G-CSF
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
IMT
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
GDV
Gastric dilatation-volvulus
IPF
 Idiopathic pulmonary fbrosis
GE
Gross energy
IRIS
 International Renal Interest Society
GFR
Glomerular filtration rate
ISF
 Interstitial fluid
GGT
Gamma-glutamyl transferase
IU
 International units
GGT
Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase
IV
 Intravenous
GH
Growth hormone
IVD(D)
Intervertebral disk (disease)
HIHD
Growth hormone release-inhibiting
K+
Potassium
OTH5
Gastric Helicobacter-like organism
kcal
Kilocalorie
GI
Gastrointestinal
KC1
Potassium chloride
GIP
 Gastric inhibitory polypeptide
KCS
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
GIT
Gastrointestinal tract
kg
Kilogram
GM
Granulocyte-macrophage
kJ
Kilojoules
GMC
Giant migrating contractions
KKK
 Kininogen-Kallikrein-Kinin system
GnRH
 Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
K-time
Clot formation time
GP
Glycoprotein
L
Lumbar
518
Abbreviations
L
Liter
NAC
 N-acetylcysteine
LADA
 Latent autoimmune diabetes of adults
NaCl
Saline
lbs
 Pounds
NADPQI
 N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine
LD
Loading dose
NE
Nasoesophageal
LDDST
 Low dose dexamethasone suppression test
ng
Nanogram
LMWH
Low molecular weight heparin
NIDDM
 Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
LPC
Lymphocytic plasmacytic colitis
NK
Natural killer
LPE
Lymphocytic plasmacytic enteritis
NMDA
 N-methyl-D-aspartate
lpf
Low power feld
NME
 Necrolytic migratory erythema
LPGS
Lymphoplasmacytic gingivitis-stomatitis
nmol
Nanomole
LRS
Lactated Ringer's solution
NormR
Normosol-R
LS-CHF
Left-sided congestive heart failure
NPH
 Neutral protamine Hagedorn
LYST
 Lysosomal trafficking gene
nRBC
Nucleated red blood cells
m
Meter
NSAID
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
MA
 Maximum convergence
NT-proANP
 N-terminal prohormone of atrial natriuretic
MAP
 Mean arterial pressure
peptide
MAT
Microscopic agglutination test
NT-proBNP
N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic
MC
Mast cell
peptide
mcg,μg
Microgram
O2
Oxygen
MCHC
OA
Osteoarthritis
mcL, μL
Microliter
ORSA
Oxacillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
mcm, μm
Micron
OSA
Osteosarcoma
MCT
 Medium chain triglycerides
OSHA
 Occupational health and safety
MCV
Mean corpuscular volume
Osp
 Outer surface protein
MDR
Multidrug resistance
OSPT
One-Step prothrombin time
ME
 Metabolizable energy
PAC
Picture archiving and communication
MEE
 Metabolic energy expenditure
PaCO2
 Partial pressure of carbon dioxide
mEq
Milliequivalent
pANCA
 Perinuclear antineutrophilic cytoplasmic
MER
 Maintenance energy requirements
antibodies
mg
Milligram
PaO2
 Partial pressure of oxygen
MH
 Malignant hyperthermia
PCD
 Primary ciliary dyskinesia
MIC
Minimum inhibitory concentration
PCR
 Polymerase chain reaction
mL
Milliliter
PCV
Packed cell volume
MLK
Morphine-lidocaine-ketamine
PD
Polydipsia
MLV
 Modifed live virus
PDH
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
mm
Millimeter
PEEP
 Positive end-expiratory pressure
mmHg
Millimeter of mercury
PEG
 Percutaneous endoscopic (placed)
MMF
Mycophenolate mofetil
gastrostomy
MMM
Masticatory muscle myositis
PET
Positron emission tomography
mmol
millimole
P-gP
P-glycoprotein
MNP
 Marginal neutrophil pool
pH
 Potential hydrogen
MODS
 Multi (multiple) organ dysfunction syndrome
PH
 Pulmonary hypertension
mOsm
milliosmol
PIE
 Pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophils (now
MRI
 Magnetic resonance imaging
known as eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy)
mRNA
 messenger RNA
PIV
 Parainfluenza virus
MRSA
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
PIVKA
 Protein induced by vitamin K antagonism
MRSA-CA
Community-associated MRSA
PK
Pyruvate kinase
MRSA-HA
Hospital or Health-Care-Associated MRSA
PLE
 Protein-losing enteropathy
MRSA-LA
Livestock-associated MRSA
PLN
 Protein-losing nephropathy
MSDS
Material safety data sheet
PO
Per os (by mouth)
MCT
Mast cell tumor
PP
 Pancreatic polypeptide
MST
Median survival time
PPE
 Personal protection/protective equipment
n-3
Omega-3
PPI
 Proton pump inhibitors
NA
Noradrenaline
PPN
 Partial parenteral nutrition
NA (N)
Neuraminidase
PR
Pulmonic regurgitation
Na+
Sodium
PRA
 Plasma renin activity
Abbreviations
519
PRAA
 Persistent right aortic arch
SCF
Stem cell factor
pRBC
Packed red blood cell
SCFA
 Short-chain fatty acids
PRN
Pro re nata (as needed/as required)
IS
Small intestine
PROM
 Passive range of motion
SIBO
 Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
PRP
Platelet-rich plasma
αIS
Semel in die (once a day)
PSIg
SIRS
 Systemic inflammatory response syndrome
PSS
 Portosystemic shunt
SLE
Systemic lupus erythematosus
PT
Prothrombin time
SND
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis
PTE
Pulmonary (arterial) thromboembolism
SpO2
 Saturation of peripheral oxygen
PTFE
 Polytetrafluoroethylene
spp.
Species
PTH
Parathyroid hormone
SRIF
 Somatotropin release-inhibiting factor
PTT
Partial thromboplastin time
SST
Somatostatin
nd
Polyuria
SSTR
Somatastatin receptor
PUFA
 Polyunsaturated fatty acids
SWB
Stored whole blood
PVC
Polyvinylchloride
T3
Triiodothyronine
PZI
Protamine zinc insulin
T4
Thyroxine
b
Quaque (every)
TCC
 Transitional cell carcinoma
Q
Cardiac output
TCO2
Total carbon dioxide
RA
Rheumatoid arthritis
TEG
Thromboelastography
RAAS
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
TENS
 Transcutaneous electrical neuromuscular
RAST
 Radioallergosorbent testing
stimulation
RBC
Red blood cell
TF
Tissue factor
RCCT
Randomized controlled clinical trials
THM
 Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein
RCM
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
TID
Ter in die (three times a day)
RDVM
 Referring DVM
TIVA
 Total intravenous anesthesia
RER
 Resting energy requirement
TL
Thoracolumbar
RF, RhF
Rheumatoid factor
TLI
Trypsin-like immunoassay
rhG-CSF
 Recombinant granulocytic colony-stimulating
TNF (-α)
Tumor necrosis factor (-alpha)
factor
TNM
Tumor node metastasis
rHuEPO
 Recombinant human EPO
TPA, tPA
 Tissue plasminogen activator
RLA
Radioimmunoassay
TPH
 Tryptophan hydroxylase
RMSF
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
TPN
Total parenteral nutrition
RNA
Ribonucleic acid
TR
Tricuspid regurgitation
ROM
 Range of motion
TRH
 Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
RSA
Rhabdomyosarcoma
TS
Total solids
RSAT
 Rapid slide agglutination test
TSH
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
RS-CHF
 Right-sided congestive heart failure
TT
Thrombin time
RT
 Radiation therapy
TT4
Total T4
RT, RT-PCR
Reverse transcriptase
TTW
 Transtracheal wash
R-time
Reaction time
Tx
Treatment
RTT
 Red top tube
U
Units
RVOT
 Right ventricular outflow tract
UC:CR
 Urine cortisol:creatinine ratio
S
Sacral
UDCA
Ursodeoxycholate
SOAP
Subjective, objective, assessment plan 
UP:C
Urine protein-to-creatinine ratio
S1
First heart sound
uPA
 Urokinase plasminogen activator
S2
Second heart sound
USB
Universal serial bus
S3
Third heart sound
USG
 Urine specific gravity
S4
 Fourth heart sound
USMI
 Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence
SA
Sinoatrial
UTI
Urinary tract infection
SAA
Sulfasalicylic acid
UV
Ultraviolet
SAMe
S-adenosylmethionine
VAC
Vincristine adriamycin cyclophosphamide
SaO2
Saturation of oxygen
VAS
Visual analogue scale
SAP
 Serum alkaline phosphatase
VBTA
Veterinary bladder antigen test
SBP
 Systemic blood pressure
VCR
Video cassette recorder
SBS
 Short bowel syndrome
VD
Ventrodorsal
SC, SQ
Subcutaneous
VIP
Vasoactive intestinal peptide
520
Abbreviations
VIP
Vasoactive intestinal protein
WBC
White blood cell
VIPoma
Vasoactive intestinal peptide secreting tumor
WHO
World Health Organization
VPCs
Ventricular premature contractions
WMSD
Work-related musculoskeletal disorder
VSD
Ventricular septal defect
XSCID
X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency
VS-FCV
Virulent systemic feline calicivirus
ZF
Zona fasciculata
vWD
von Willebrand disease
ZG
Zona glomerulosa
yWF
yon Willebrand factor
ZR
 Zona reticularis
Index
Note: Page numbers in italics refer to figures; those in bold to tables.
Abdominal palpation, 7-8
hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's), 25-26
Aminoglycosides, 366
Abdominocentesis, 475-478, 476, 477
pheochromocytoma, 29-31
Aminopenicillin, 359
blind, 475-476
 Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH),
Amlodipine, 133, 133
Academy of Feline Medicine, 422
27-28, 58, 410
Amphotericin B, 211-212, 373
Acarbose, 32-33
Adverse reactions, vaccines, 427-429
Amprolium, 215
Acepromazine, 121
Aeromonas hydrophila,233
Amyloidosis, 301
Acetaminophen, 270
Afferent nerve fibers, 434
Analgesics
Acidemia, 213,235
Aflatoxin, 271
advocating for, 437-438
 Acquired secondary megaesophagus,
Albumin, 169, 229, 285
dosages, 444
204-205
Albuterol, 144
pain management, 440, 444-447
Acromegaly, 12
Alimentary lymphoma, 219
sites of action, 435
 Active range of motion (AROM) exercises,
Alkalemia, 213
Anaphylaxis, 427-428
85
Alpha 1-protease inhibitors, 200
 Anatomy and physiology. See also Nursing.
Active-assisted range of motion (AAROM)
Alpha-2 agonists, 444, 445
diagnostics
exercises, 85
Alpha-adrenergic antagonists, 239, 255
circulatory system, 161-162
Acute colitis, 235-236
Amantadine, 446
coagulation system, 163, 164, 165
Acute gastritis, 207-208, 208
Ambylomma maculatum (Gulf Coast tick),
gallbladder, 280-281
Acute hepatitis, 263-265
379
hemostatic system, 127-128, 128
Acute pain, 435, 440, 441, 442
Amebiasis, 374
hepatozoonosis, 379, 379, 380
Acute proctitis, 235-236
 American Animal Hospital Association
liver, 263, 266, 268, 268, 276, 278,
Acute renal failure (ARF), 292, 293-294,
(AAHA), 413-414, 416, 417
279
294, 329-330
American Association of Feed Control
lymphatic system, 162
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS),
Oficials (AAFCO), 121-122
methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA),
147, 150-151
American Association of Feline Practitioners
360
Acute sepsis, 500
(AAFP), 414, 416, 422
musculoskeletal system, 69-72, 70
Adaptive immunity, 403-404
American Association of Veterinary
neurological exam, 99-102, 100, 108
Addison's disease. See Hypoadrenocorticism
Laboratory Diagnosticians (AAVLD),
pain and, 434-435, 434, 435
Adenocarcinoma, 219-220, 236
407
respiratory system, 137, 138, 141, 142,
Adrenal gland, 25-31
American Diabetes Association, 31
146, 152
hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's), 26-29,
American Veterinary Medical Association
spleen, 162-163, 163
27, 28
(AVMA), 83, 428
urinary and renal system, 289-291, 290
Smalf Animat Intera Medicine for Veterinary Techiciansand Nurses,First Edition.Edited byLindaMerill
 2012 John Wiley & 5ons,Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & 5ons, Inc.
521
522
Index
Ancylostoma spp. (hookworms), 214
pulmonary artery thrombosis, 130
Bone marrow
Anemia
syncope,102
collection of, 484-487
erythropoietin, 49
thoracocentesis, 478
pain management, 447
gastrinoma, 51
Azathioprine, 173, 240,411
Bone repair, 70
overview of, 163-167, 165, 166
Bone types, 70-71, 70
Anesthesia and analgesia
B lymphocytes, 404
Borborygmus, 196
blastomycosis, 374
Babesiosis, 374-375
Bordetella spp. vaccine, 420-421, 426
canine diabetic ketoacidosis, 41
Bacteremia, 500
Borreliosis. See Lyme borreliosis
central nervous system trauma, 120-121
Bacterial arthritis, 73-74
Bowman's capsule, 290
diabetes insipidus, 14
Bacterial diseases
 Brachycephalic airway syndrome, 137-139,
gastrointestinal system, 255-256
Bartonella, 349-350
138, 139
hematologic disorders, 183, 188
canine brucellosis, 352-353, 353
Brain, 99
hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's), 29
diagnostics, 388-395
 Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), 54-57
hypoadrenocorticism (Addisons), 26
ehrlichiosis, 353-355
Brain stem, 99
leptospirosis, 360
Helicobacter-associated disease, 355-357,
Brainstem auditory evoked response/
liver disease, 266, 272, 273, 277, 284-286,
355,356, 357, 358
brainstem auditory evoked potentials
285
leptospirosis, 357-360
(BAER/BAEP), 117-118, 118
Lyme borreliosis, 351-352
Lyme borreliosis, 350-352
 Breed-related blood disorders, 188-189
mycoplasmosis, 365
methicillin-resistant S. aureus, 360-361
Brittany spaniels, C3 deficiency, 182
pain management, 445-446, 446
mycobacterial disease, 361-363
Bromide, 103, 119
 primary ciliary dyskinesia, 146
mycoplasmosis, 363-365
Bronchitis, chronic, 144-145
pulmonary disease, 156-157
plague, 365-366
Brucellosis, 352-353, 353
 pulmonary neoplasia, 151-152
 Bacterial meningoencephalitis, 105
Buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT),
pyothorax, 156, 335-336
“Bailey” chair, 114
407
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
 Barium-impregnated polyethylene spheres
Budesonide, 240
inhibitors, 331, 411
(BIPS), 200
Buprenorphine, 120, 440
Anorexia, 197
Bartonella, 349-350
Butorphanol, 120, 133, 440
Antacids, 238-239
 Basal energy requirement (BER), 471
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 291, 410
Basophil disorders, 180
C3 deficiency, 182
Antiemetics, 239
Benign prostatic diseases (BPH), 298
Cachexia, 197
Anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive
 Benzodiazepines, 284
Calcitriol, 47-48
drugs, 240-241
Beta-Lactam, 231
Calcium, 92, 328
Anti-inflammatory mediators, 501
Biliary cysts, 278-279
Calcium oxalate urolithiasis, 298, 323, 339,
Antinuclear antibody (ANA) test, 405-406
Bilirubin, 304
340
Antioxidants, 91, 121
Biohazards, 451-452
Campylobacteriosis, 231
Antithrombin (AT), 128-129
Biopsy
Cancellous bone, 70
Aquatic therapy, 86-87
blastomycosis, 373
Cancer vaccines, 404-405
Arterial thromboembolism (ATE). See also
bone marrow, 486-487
Canine acute pain scale, 440, 441
Thrombotic disorders
 gallbladder, 281
Canine adenovirus (CAVs), 418-419, 422
overview of, 129-130
helicobacteriosis, 356
Canine albumin, 169
prevention, 133-134, 133, 134
hepatozoonosis, 379, 380
Canine arterial thromboembolism (CATE),
therapy, 132-133
immunology, 407-409
129-130, 132-133
Arthritis
inflammatory bowel disease, 222
Canine brucellosis, 352-353, 353
inflammatory joint disease, 73-76
liver, 264, 265, 267, 269, 273, 274,
Canine chronic bronchitis, 144-145
noninflammatory joint disease, 76-77,
277
Canine coronaviral enteritis, 230
92
muscle, 73
Canine coronavirus, 422
Arthrocentesis, 72-73
nerve and muscle, 118-119
Canine granulocytic ehrlichiosis (CGE),
Arthropod-borne illness. See Vector-borne
plague, 366
353-355
illnesses
respiratory system, 143, 147-148
Canine herpesvirus (CHV), 381-383
Aspergillosis, 368
urinary and renal systems, 315-319
Canine hypothyroidism, 14-16, 15
Aspiration biopsy, 315-316
 Birman cats, neutrophil granulation 
Canine IBD activity indices (CIBDAI),
 Aspirin, 174
anomaly, 189
221
 Atrial natriuretic peptides (ANP), 54-57
 Bladder infection. See Urinary tract
Canine infectious respiratory disease
Auscultation
infections (UTIs)
complex (CIRDC), 420
acute respiratory distressed syndrome,
Blastomycosis, 370-374, 372, 373
Canine infectious tracheobronchitis,
150
Bood pressure, 311-312, 311
144
bowel, 198
Bood typing, 169-170
Canine influenza virus, 421-422
cardiac, 6, 6, 7
Body conditioning score (BCS), 92-93, 92,
Canine leproid granuloma syndrome,
gastrointestinal system, 194, 198
93, 94-95, 425
362
lower airway disease, 142
Body surface area (BSA), 461, 462
 Canine leukocyte adhesion deficiency
pulmonary, 4-5, 5
Bone growth, 69-70
(CLAD), 178
Index
523
Canine measles, 422
Chronic gastritis, 208-209
Constant rate infusion (CRI) insulin, 40-41
Canine monocytic ehrlichiosis (CME),
Chronic hepatitis, 265-266
Constipation, chronic, 237-238
353-355
Chronic kidney disease (CKD), 292-293,
Consultation appointment, goals of, 2-9
Canine oral papillomavirus (COPV), 384
292, 327, 329-330
Continuous glucose monitoring systems
Canine parvovirus (CPV), 228-229, 418
Chronic pain, 435
(CGMS),36
Canine respiratory disease complex, 144
Chronic renal insufficiency (CR1), 336-337,
Contrast radiology, 319-320, 320
Canine rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 75-76
337
Coombs test, 406
Canine thyroid tumors, 20-22, 21
Chronic ulcerative paradental stomatitis
Copper-associated chronic hepatitis
Canine vaccines, 416-422, 419. See also
(CUPS), 202-203
(CACH), 266-267
 Immunology and vaccination;
Chylothorax, 155-156
Core vaccines, 416-419, 423-425
Vaccination
Ciliary dyskinesia, 145-146
Cornell Animal Health Diagnostic Center,
Capillary refill time (CRT), 3
Cimetidine, 238
421
Carbohydrates
Circulatory system, 161-162, 163
Coronavirus, canine, 422
food intolerance and allergy, 252
Cisplatin, 80
Corticosteroids
liver disease, 283
Cleaning. See Disinfection
chronic bronchitis, 144
musculoskeletal system, 90-91, 90
Client education
diarrhea, acute and chronic, 226-227
 recommended levels, 465
canine diabetic ketoacidosis, 41
eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy, 149
Carcinoma
diarrhea, 227
gastritis, 208, 209
adenocarcinoma, 219-220, 236
hepatocutaneous syndrome, 274
immunosuppressive medications,
squamous cell, 203
hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's), 29
409-410, 410
thyroid, 22
hypoparathyroidism, 23
insulin resistance, 33
 transitional cell, 301
medications, 462-463, 463
intestinal diseases, 240-241
Cardiac auscultation, 6, 6, 7
methicillin-resistant S. aureus, 361
myasthenia gravis, 77
Cardiac murmurs, 6, 7
patient discharge, 462-463, 463
obstruction, esophageal, 206
Cardiac muscle, 72
thrombotic disorders, 134
pain management, 435
Casts, 306
thyroid carcinoma, 22
rheumatoid arthritis, 76
Catheterization, urinary, 480-484, 480,481,
toxic hepatopathy, 272
Cortisol : creatinine ratio, 27
482, 483
vaccination, 395, 399, 428
Cranial nerve syndrome, 107, 108
Caudal occipital malformation syndrome
veterinary technician role in, 39, 43-44
Cranial nerves, 99-101, 100
(COMS), 104
Clindamycin, 380
Cross matching, 170
 Cell-mediated immunity, 404
Clostridial diseases, 232
Cryoprecipitate, 169
Cellular casts, 306
Clostridium difcile,232,452
Cryotherapy, 83
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Clostridium perfringens, 232
Cryptococcosis, 369-370, 370, 371
449, 451-452
Coagulation, 127-128, 128, 163, 164, 165,
Cryptococcus spp., 106
Central nervous trauma, drugs for, 120
182-184, 502
Cryptosporidia, 215
Central vestibular disease, 108-109
Coccidioidomycosis, 368-369
Crystals, 306, 307
Cerebellomedullary cistern CSF collection,
Coccidiosis (Isospora spp.), 215
C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP), 54-57
114
Coley, William, 404
Culture, 199, 386
Cerebral neoplasia, 105, 105
Colitis, 235-236
Cushing's disease. See Hyperadrenocorticism
Cerebrospinal fluid collection and analysis,
Collapsing trachea, 143-144
Cyclic hemopoiesis, 178-179
114-116, 115, 116
Colorado State University pain scales, 440,
Cyclooxygenase (COX) enzyme inhibitors,
Cervical vertebral malformation (CVM),
441, 442
209, 444-445, 445
110-111
Communication
Cyclophosphamide, 174, 240, 412
Charting, 1-2
medications, 462-463
Cyclosporine, 173-174, 240, 411, 411
Chediak-Higashi syndrome, 176-178, 178
methicillin-resistant S. aureus, 361
Cystocentesis, 302-303, 313, 474-475, 475
Chemotherapy
nutrition and, 464, 466-467, 467
Cystoscopic biopsies, 317-318
endocrine diseases, 60, 61-62
 pain management, 433-434, 437-438
Cystoscopy, 323
glucagonoma, 47
of plan to client, 9
Cytauxzoonosis, 378-379
neoplasia, 80, 81, 88, 105
with referring veterinarian, 1
 Cytokine immunotherapy, 405
neutropenia caused by, 176, 177
thromboembolism and, 134
Cytokines, 501
thrombocytopenia, 185
vaccination, 395, 428-429, 429
tumors, canine, 22
Compact bones, 70
 Daily energy requirements (DER), 468,
vaccine-induced fbrosarcomas, 414
Complete blood count (CBC), 198, 307-309
471
workplace hazards, 450, 452-453, 453
Computed tomography (CT)
Danazol, 412
Chlamydia, 426
neurological examination, 116-117
Defecation, 195-196
Chlorambucil, 240-241
urinary and renal systems, 323-324, 324
 Degenerative myelopathy (DM), 113
Chloramphenicol, 354
Congenital megaesophagus, 204-205
 Dejenerative joint disease (DJD), 76-77
Cholangitis,feline, 276-278
Congenital vascular anomaly, 274-275
Dermacentor variabilis (American dog tick),
Chondroprotectants, 92
Constant rate infusion (CRI) administration,
378-379
Chondrosarcoma (CSA), 81, 88
436, 444, 453-454, 455-458. See also
Desflurane, 256
Chronic bronchitis, 144-145
Pain management
 Desoxycorticosterone pivilate (DOCP), 26
524
Index
Dexamethasone, 410
urinary and renal systems, 327
Eosinophils, 180
Diabetes insipidus (D1), 13-14, 13, 291
urinary diseases, 309
Epilepsy, 102-103
Diabetes mellitus (DM), canine, 37-39
Electromyography (EMG), 117
Ergonomic guidelines, 450
Diabetes mellitus (DM), feline, 31-37
Elimination diets, 252
Erythromycin, 231, 241
diagnostics, 32
Encephalitis, 105-107
Erythropoietin (EPO), 48-50, 291
etiology 31-32
Encephalopathies, 103-105, 104
 Esophageal disorders
physical examination, 32
Endocrine testing, 27
megaesophagus, 204-205, 205
prognosis, 37
Endocrinology, 11-62
nutrition, factors affecting, 206-207
treatment, 32-37,33,35,36
adrenal gland, 25-31
obstruction, 205-206
 Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), canine, 40-41
hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's),
Esophagostomy tube placement, 243-244,
Diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL), 477
26-29, 27, 28
244
Diagnostic plan, 9
hypoadrenocorticism (Addisons),
Etomidate, 255
Diagnostics. See specific diagnostic tests;
25-26
Evans syndrome, 172
 Nursing, diagnostics
pheochromocytoma, 29-31
 Exercise, energy sources, 90
Diarrhea
calcitriol, 47-48
Exercise-induced collapse (EIC) syndrome,
acute and chronic, 224-228, 224, 226,
erythropoietin,48-50
497
227
gastrin, 50
Exocrine pancreatic insufciency (EPl), 201
carcinoid tumors, 61
gastrinoma, 50-52
Expectoration, 195
infectious, 228-235
kinins, 52-53
Extrahepatic biliary obstruction (EHBO),
overview of, 195-196
melatonin,53-54
279-280
patient history, 196
natriuretic peptides, 54-57
Extrinsic coagulation, 127-128
Diazepam, 103, 119-120, 270, 285
neuroendocrine tumors, rare, 60-62
Diet. See Nutrition
pancreas, 31-47
 Fading puppy syndrome. See Canine
Digestible energy (DE), 471
diabetes mellitus, canine, 37-39
herpesvirus (CHV)
Dipylidium caninum, 214
diabetes mellitus, feline, 31-37, 33, 35,
Famotidine, 239
Direct arterial blood pressure (DABP)
36
Fats
measurement, 335
diabetic ketoacidosis, canine, 39-41
diarrhea,large bowel, 234
 Discospondylitis, 110
glucagonoma, 45-47, 45
food intolerance and allergy, 252
Disinfection
insulinomas, 41-45, 42, 43
gastric diseases, 212
bone marrow collection, 483
 parathyroid glands and endocrine disease,
inflammatory bowel disease, 222-223
endoscopy tools, 492-495
22-25
liver disease, 283
infectious disease safety, 395-396, 396,
hyperparathyroidism, 23-25
musculoskeletal system, 90
397-398,399
hypoparathyroidism, 22-23
recommended levels, 465
workplace hazards, 451
pituitary gland, 11-14
Fatty acids, 337
Disseminated aspergillosis, 368
diabetes insipidus, 13-14, 13
Fatty casts, 306
Distemper vaccine, 416
growth hormone disorders, 11-13, 12
Fecal cytology, 199
 Doberman pinschers, neutrophil defect of,
renin, 57-59, 58
Fecal flotation concentration, 199
178, 188
somatostatin, 59-60
Fecal sedimentation, 199
Donor selection, 169-170
thyroid, 14-22
Fecal smear, 198-199
 Dopamine receptor antagonists, 239
hypothyroidism, canine, 14-16, 15
Feeding tubes, 242-250, 242, 245, 246, 247,
 Dorsal horn neurons, 434
hypothyroidism, feline, 16-20, 16, 18
338
Doxycycline, 350, 354-355
tumors, canine, 20-22,21
Feline acute pain scale, 440, 441
Drug related arthritis, 76
Endoscopy
Feline arterial thromboembolism (FATE),
Dyschezia, 195-196
defned, 487
129-130, 132-133
Dysphagia, 194
flexible endoscope, 487-489, 487, 488, 496
Feline asthma, 145
Dysuria, 291
gastric motility disorders, 210
Feline bronchial disease, 145
overview of, 201, 487-495
Feline calicivirus (FCV), 424
Echocardiography, 132
reprocessing, 492-495
Feline cholangitis, 276-278
Ectopic ureters, 299-300, 300
rigid endoscope, 490-492, 491
Feline coronaviral enteritis, 231
Edema, pulmonary, 149
 Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex
Education. See Client education;
Energy density, 207, 212-213, 222-223
(FEGC), 201-202
Communication
Energy requirements, 464, 468-471, 470
Feline factor XII deficiency, 182
Ehrlichiosis, 105-106, 353-355
 Energy sources for exercise, 90
Feline gingivitis-stomatitis-pharyngitis
Electrocardiogram, 132, 438-439
Enrofloxacin, 366
complex, 202-203
Electrodiagnostics, 117-118, 118
Entamoeba histolytica,374
Feline herpesvirus (FHV), 381-383,
Electroencephalography (EEG),118
Enteral nutrition worksheet, 466
424-425
Electrolytes
Enteropathic polyarthritis, 76
 Feline hyperthyroidism, 16-20
diarrhea, large bowel, 234
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
clinical signs, 16, 16
gastric motility disorders, 212
(ELISA), 406
diagnostics, 16-18, 18
inflammatory bowel disease, 222
Eosinopenia, 180
prognosis, 20
refeeding syndrome, 472-473
Eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy (EB), 149
treatments, 18-20
Index
525
Feline IBD activity indices (FIBDAI), 221
Gabapentin, 446
diarrhea, acute and chronic, 224-228,
 Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), 231,
Gadolinium, 117
224, 226, 227
426-427
Gallbladder mucocoeles (GBM), 280-282,
diarrhea, infectious, 228-235
 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), 427
281
inflammatory bowel disease, 220-223,
Feline interstitial cystitis (FIC), 299, 341
Gastric disease
221
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV), 231, 425-426
acute gastritis,207-208, 208
leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas, 220
Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD),
chronic gastritis, 208-209
obstruction, 218
299, 341
infltrative gastric disease, 211
protein-loss enteropathy, 216-217
 Feline panleukopenia virus (FPV), 230
motility disorders, 210-211
short bowel syndrome, 217-218
 Feline parvovirus enteritis, 230
nutrition, factors affecting, 212-213
Gastromucosal protectants, 241
 Feline parvovirus FPV (panleukopenia),
pythiosis,211-212
Gastrostomy tube placement, 244-247
423-424
ulceration and erosions, 209-210
Giardiasis, 233-234, 375, 422, 427
 Feline rabies, 423
Gastric Helicobacter-like organisms
Gingivostomatitis (GS), 202-203
 Feline upper respiratory disease complex,
(GHLOs), 355-357, 355
Glanzmann's thrombasthenia (GT), 187
424
Gastric motility disorders, 210-211
Glasgow composite pain score, 443
Feline urological syndrome (FUS), 299,
Gastrin, 50
Glomerulonephritis, 301
341
Gastrinoma, 51-52
Glucagonoma, 45-47, 45
Feline vaccines, 422-427
Gastrointestinal system, 193-256. See also
Glucocorticoids
Fenestration, 408
Nutrition
ehrlichiosis, 354-355
Fentanyl, 120, 133, 133, 440,446
anesthesia and analgesia, 255-256
endocrinology, 27, 32, 33
Fever. See Ihermoregulation
clinical signs, 194-197, 195, 197
eosinopenia, 180
 Fever of unknown origin (FUO), 497
diagnostics, 197-201
hypoglycemia, 44
Fiber
esophageal diseases
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia,
constipation, 238
megaesophagus, 204-205, 205
173
diarrhea, acute and chronic, 227-228
nutrition, factors affecting, 206-207
leptospirosis, 359
diarrhea, large bowel, 234-235
obstruction, 205-206
liver disease, 277, 459
gastric motility disorders, 212
feeding tubes, 242-250, 242, 243, 244, 245,
thrombocytosis, 187
inflammatory bowel disease, 223
246, 247
tracheal collapse, 144
liver disease, 283-284
food intolerance and allergy, 251-254,
Glucosuria, 303
Fibrinolysis, 128, 163
251, 254
Gluten, 252
 Fibrocartilaginous embolization (FCE),
 gastric diseases
Goals
113
acute gastritis, 207-208,208
of consultation appointment, 2-9
Fibrosarcoma (FSA), 81, 203
chronic gastritis, 208-209
of hypoadrenocorticism therapy, 26
Fine needle aspiration (FNA), 315-316
 infltrative gastric disease, 211
of nutritional support, 463, 464
Flexible endoscope, 487-489, 487, 488,
motility disorders, 210-211
of radiation therapy, 88
492-495,496
nutrition, factors affecting, 212-213
 of treatment of diabetes mellitis, 44
Fuconazole, 373
pythiosis, 211-212
Granular cysts, 306
Fludrocortisone, 26
ulceration and erosions, 209-210
Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 410
large intestine diseases, 235-238
(GME), 106-107
Food. See Nutrition
 oral diseases
Gray collies, cyclic hemopoiesis, 178-179
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO),
feline eosinophilic granuloma complex,
Gross energy (GE), 471
253
201-202
Growth hormone (GH) disorders, 11-13
 Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 253,
feline gingivitis-stomatitis-pharyngitis
Gut-associated lymph tissue (GALT), 162,
405, 451
complex, 202-203
163
Food intolerance and allergy, 251-254, 251,
neoplasms, 203-204
254
parasites, 213-216
H1N1 strain, 384
Four-quadrant centesis, 476-477, 477
patient history, 193-194, 196
Hz-receptor antagonists, 238-239
Frank-Starling mechanism, 162
pharmacology, 238-242
Halitosis, 194
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP), 168-169
antacids,238-239
Handpiece, endoscopy, 488-489
 Frozen platelet concentrate, 169
antibiotics, 241
Hazards, workplace, 450-452
Fungal arthritis, 74
antiemetics, 239
 Health Canada's National Dosimetry
Fungal infections 
anti-inflammatory and
Services, 451
aspergillosis, 368
immunosuppressive drugs,
Helicobacter-associated disease, 355-357,
blastomycosis, 370-374, 372,373
240-241
355, 356, 357, 358
coccidioidomycosis, 368-369
digestive enzymes, 241
Hemangiosarcoma (HSA), 81, 88
cryptococcosis, 369-370, 370, 371
gastromucosal protectants, 241
Hematemesis, 195
diagnostics, 388-395
laxatives, 241-242
Hematology, 161-189
histoplasmosis, 366-367
physical examination, 194
anatomy and physiology, 161-163, 163,
Fungal meningoencephalitis, 106
 small intestine diseases
164, 165
(enun) suoau isen Aen [eu
adenocarcinoma, 219-220
breed-related disorders, 188-189
315
alimentary lymphoma, 219
coagulation diseases, 182-184
526
Index
Hematology (contd)
Hypoglycemia, 43
serology, 405-407
leukocyte disorders, 174-182, 175, 177,
Hypokalemia, 309
vaccination strategies, 413-416
178, 179
Hypomagnesemia, 473
 Immunomodulation, 404 
platelet disorders, 184-188, 185, 186
Hypoparathyroidism, 22-23
 Immunosuppression
red blood cell disorders, 163-174
Hyposomatotropism, 12, 12
IMHA, 173-174
anemia, 163-167
Hyposthenuria, 13-14, 13
medications, 409-413
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia,
Hypothermia, 498-499
Inappetence, 331
171-174, 172
Hypothyroidism, canine, 14-16, 15
Incontinence, 291, 334-335, 334
polycythemia, 167
Induction, anesthetic, 255-256
transfusion medicine, 167-171
Idiopathic facial paralysis, 109
Indwelling urinary catheters, 482-483
Hematuria, 291
Idiopathic megaesophagus, 204-205
Infection, defined, 500. See also Infectious
Hemophilia, 182
 Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), 150
diseases; Sepsis
Hemostasis, 127-128, 128, 163. See also
 Idiopathic trigeminal paralysis, 109
Infectious diarrhea, 228-235
Thrombotic disorders
Idiopathic vestibular syndrome, 107
Infectious diseases, 349-399, 388-395,
Hemothorax, 154-155
 Imaging. See also Endoscopy;
397-398.See also Sepsis
Heparin, 133, 133, 174
Ultrasonography
bacterial
Hepatic encephalopathy, 104-105
blastomycosis, 372
Bartonella, 349-350
Hepatic lipidosis, 268-270, 268, 269
computed tomography, 116-117, 323-324,
canine brucellosis, 352-353, 353
Hepatic neoplasia, 275, 276
324
ehrlichiosis, 353-355
Hepatic system. See Liver
ehrlichiosis, 354
Helicobacter-associated disease,
Hepatitis
gallbladder, 281
355-357, 355, 356, 357, 358
acute, 263-265
gastrointestinal system, 200-201, 205,
leptospirosis, 357-360
chronic, 265-266
210-211, 221
Lyme borreliosis, 350-352
copper-associated, 266-267
hepatozoonosis, 380
methicillin-resistant S. aureus, 360-361
infectious canine, 418, 422
leptospirosis, 359
mycobacterial disease, 361-363
Hepatocutaneous syndrome (HCS), 272-274,
liver, 264, 265, 267, 269, 274, 275-276,
mycoplasmosis, 363-365
273
277, 278, 280
plague, 365-366
Hepatozoonosis, 79-80, 379-381, 379, 380
 magnetic resonance imaging, 117
diagnostics, 385-387, 385, 387, 388-395
Herpesvirus, 381-383, 424-425
pleural disease, 153, 153
fungal
High level disinfection (HLD), 494
radiology, 116, 131, 319-321, 320
aspergillosis, 368
 Histarmine-receptor antagonists, 239
respiratory system, 143, 147
blastomycosis, 370-374, 372, 373
Histoplasmosis, 233, 366-367
urinary and renal systems, 319-324, 320,
coccidioidomycosis, 368-369
History. See Patient history
324, 324
cryptococcosis, 369-370, 370, 371
Hookworms, 214
Imidocarb dipropionate, 375
histoplasmosis, 366-367
Hospital precautions, 396, 396, 399, 399
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia 
prevention, 396, 396, 397-398,399, 399
 Human intravenous immunoglobulin
(IMHA), 171-174, 172, 406, 412
protozoal
(hIVIG), 413
Immune-mediated polyarthropathy (IMPA),
amebiasis, 374
Humoral immunity, 404
75
babesiosis, 374-375
Hyaline casts, 306
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT),
cytauxzoonosis, 378-379
Hydration assessment, 328. See also Water
169, 186, 412
giardiasis, 375
Hydrocephalus, 103-104, 104
Immunoblotting, 407
hepatozoonosis, 379-381, 379, 380
Hydromorphone, 120, 440
 Immunofluorescent antibody assay,
leishmaniasis, 376
Hydrotherapy, 86-87
406-407
neosporosis, 377-378
Hygiene. See Disinfection
 Immunoglobulin, 174
toxoplasmosis, 376-377
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease),
Immunoglobulin A deficiencies, 181
trichomoniasis, 375-376
26-29, 27, 28
Immunologic reactions, 171
viral
Hyperbilirubinemia, 279-280
Immunology and vaccination, 403-429.
H1N1 strain, 384
Hypercapnia, 461
See also Vaccination
herpesvirus, 381-383
Hypereosinophilic syndrome, 180
adverse reactions, 427-429, 429
influenza, 383-384
Hyperkalemia, 309, 329
biopsy techniques, 407-409
papillomas, 384-385
Hyperparathyroidism, 23-25, 329-330
cancer vaccines, 404-405
 Infltrative gastric disease, 211
Hyperphosphatemia, 309, 329-330
canine vaccines, 416-422, 419
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 209,
Hypertension
corticosteroids, 409-410, 410
220-223, 221
medications, 332
cytokine immunotherapy, 405
Inflammatory joint disease, 73-76
pulmonary, 130, 130
feline vaccines, 422-427
Influenza, 383-384, 389, 421-422
renal disease, 331-332, 331
humoral and cell-mediated immunity,
Innate immunity, 403-404
systemic, 311-312, 311
404
Insulin therapy
Hyperthyroidism, feline, 16-20, 16, 18
immunomodulation, 404
diabetes mellitus, canine, 39
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease),
immunosuppressive medications,
diabetes melltus, feline, 33-37, 33, 35,
25-26
411-413, 411, 412, 413
36
Hypoalbuminemia, 285
innate and adaptive immunity, 403-404
diabetic ketoacidosis, canine, 40-41
Index
527
Insulinomas
Leukocyte disorders, 174-182, 175, 177, 178,
 Material safety data sheet (MSDS), 451
client education, 44
179
 MDR1 gene mutation, 459, 460
clinical signs, 41-42, 42
Leukogram analysis, 174-175
Measles, 422
diagnostics, 42-43,43
Levetiracetam, 120
Mediastinal masses and disease, 141-142
etiology, 41
Lidocaine, 446, 446
Mediastinitis, 141
pathophysiology, 41, 42
Lifestyle vaccines, 416
Megacolon, 237
prognosis, 45
Lipiduria, 306
Megaesophagus, 204-205, 205
treatment, 44-45
Liver, 263-286
Melanoma, 203
Interferons, 405
acute hepatitis, 263-265
Melatonin, 53-54
 Interleukins, 405
anesthesia and analgesia, 284-286, 285
 Meningitis, 107
 Internal medicine nursing
biliary cysts, 278-279
 Meningoencephalitis
hypothermia, 498-499
chronic hepatitis, 265-266
bacterial, 105
sepsis, 499-505,500, 501, 502, 505
congenital vascular anomaly, 274-275
fungal, 106
thermoregulation, 495-498
copper-associated chronic hepatitis,
granulomatous, 106-107
 International Renal Interest Society (IRIS),
266-267
protozoal,106
292, 326-327
drug metabolismn, 459, 459, 460
viral, 106
Intestinal absorption tests, 201
extrahepatic biliary obstruction, 279-280
 Meningoencephalitis of unknown etiology
 Intestinal adenocarcinoma, 219-220
feline cholangitis, 276-278
(MUE), 107
 Intestinal leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas,
gallbladder mucocoeles, 280-282, 281
Meningomyelitis, 110
220
hepatic lipidosis, 268-270, 268, 269
Metabolic acidosis, 330-331
 Intraluminal obstruction, 205
hepatocutaneous syndrome, 272-274, 273
 Metabolizable energy (ME), 471
 Intramural obstruction, 206
liver neoplasia, 275-276, 275, 276
Methadone, 120
Intrinsic coagulation, 127, 128
nutrition,282-284, 284
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
Isoflurane, 256, 285
toxic hepatopathy, 270-272
(MRSA), 360-361
Isospora spp. (coccidiosis), 215
Liver neoplasia, 275-276, 275, 276
Methimazole, 18-19
Itraconazole, 211-212, 373
Loading dose (LD), 453
Metronidazole, 222, 226-227, 241
Ixodes ticks, 350-352, 421
Local anesthesia, 445-446, 446
Minerals. See also Nutrition; Vitamins
 Localized anaphylaxis, 428
calcium, 92, 398
Jack Russell terriers, immunodeficiency, 182,
Long bones, 70
gastrointestinal illness, 253
188-189
Low level light therapy (LLLT), 121, 122
liver disease, 284
Jejunostomy tube placement, 247
Low molecular weight heparin (LM WH),
magnesium, 473
Joints, 71
134
neurological patients, 121
Lower airway disease, 142-146, 145
phosphorus, 328, 337, 472-473
Kennel cough, 144
Lower motor neuron (LMN), 101-102, 109
potassium, 327-328,330, 337,473
Ketamine/diazepam, 255, 285
Lumbar puncture CSF collection, 114-115,
urine crystals, 306, 340
Ketoconazole, 373
115
zinc, 223, 267
 Keyhole renal biopsy, 317
Lung lobe torsion, 149-150
Modifed live virus (MLV) vaccine, 414
Kidney disease, chronic, 292-293, 292, 327,
Lyme borreliosis, 74, 350-352, 421
Molecular fingerprinting, 199
329-330
Lymph node aspiration, 409
Monocyte disorders, 180-181
Killed vaccines, 414
Lymphatic system, 162
Morphine, 444
Kilocalorie (kcal), 471
Lymphocyte disorders, 181-182
Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome
Kininogen-kallikrein-kinin (KKK) system,
Lymphocyte proliferation/blastogenesis, 406
(MODS), 500, 502
52-53
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis (LPC),236
Murmurs, 6, 7
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis (LPE),
Muscle biopsy, 73
Labels, vaccine, 415
219. See also Inflammatory bowel
Muscle conditioning score, 93
Lactulose, 104-105
disease (IBD)
Muscular system, 71-72. See also
Laparoscopy. See also Endoscopy
Lymphoplasmacytic gingivitis-stomatitis 
Musculoskeletal system
 biopsy techniques, 318
(LPGS),202-203
Musculoskeletal system, 69-95
pain management, 447
 Lysosomal storage diseases, 178, 179
anatomy and physiology, 69-72, 70
Large intestine (LI) diseases, 235-238
arthrocentesis, 72-73
Laryngeal paralysis, 139-140
Magnesium, 473
diseases, 73-81
Laryngitis, 140-141
Magnetic resonance imaging, neurological
hepatozoonosis, 79-80
Latex allergies, 451
examination,117
inflammatory joint disease, 73-76
Laxatives, 241-242
Maintenance energy requirement (MER),
masticatory muscle myositis, 78-79
Leflunomide, 413
471
myasthenia gravis, 77-78
 Leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas,
 Mannitol, 120
noninflammatory joint disease, 76-77,
intestinal, 220
Marrow, 70
92
Leishmaniasis, 376
Massage therapy, 86
polymyositis, 79
Leptospirosis, 357-360, 419-420,
Mast cell tumor (MCT), 407
muscle biopsy, 73
419
Masticatory muscle myositis (MMM), 78-79,
neoplasia, 80-81
Leukemia, 425-426
109
nutrition, 89-95, 90, 92, 93, 94-95
528
Index
Musculoskeletal system (contd)
encephalitis, 105-107
Nutrition. See also Gastrointestinal system
physical examination, 81-82
encephalopathies, 103-105, 104
calcitriol, 47-48
therapy, 82-89
hepatic encephalopathy, 104-105
calcium and phosphorus, 92, 328
 palliative radiation, 88-89, 89
meningitis, 107
congenital vascular anomaly, 275
veterinary rehabilitation, 82-88
myasthenia gravis, 77-78, 113-114,
constipation, 237-238
Myasthenia gravis, 77-78, 113-114, 114
114
copper-associated chronic hepatitis, 267
Mycobacterial disease, 361-363
seizures,102-103
diabetes mellitus, 32, 39
fast-growing Mycobacterium spp., 363
of the spine, 109-113
diabetic ketoacidosis, canine, 41
M. leprae, M. haemophilum, M.
glossary of terms, 122-124
diarrhea, 227-228, 227, 234-235
malmoense, 361-362
nursing considerations, 121-122
energy balance, 468-471, 470
M. lepraemurium, 361
 pharmacology, 119-121
esophageal diseases, 206-207
M.visibilis, 362
Neuropathic pain, 435-436
food intolerance and allrgy, 251-254,
slow-growing Mycobacterium spp..
Neutropenia, 176, 177
251, 254
362-363
Neutrophil disorders, 175-180, 175
gastric diseases, 212-213
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), 412-413
Neutrophil function disorders, 176-178, 178,
helicobacteriosis, 357
Mycoplasmosis, 363-365
188, 406
hepatitis, 266
 Myelography, neurological examination,
Neutrophilia, 176, 177
hepatocutaneous syndrome, 273
116
 Nine-point body conditioning score card,
hyperlipidemia, 282
 Myths
94-95
hyperparathyroidism, 25
opioids, 439
Nitrous oxide, 285
inflammatory bowel disease, 222-223
 pain management, 436
Nociception, 434
iodine restriction, 20
Noncore canine vaccines, 419-422
liver disease, 282-284, 284
Nasoesophageal (NE) tubes, 243
Nonimmunologic reactions, 171
musculoskeletal system, 89-95, 90, 92, 93,
Natriuretic peptides, 55-57
Nonregenerative anemia, 166-167, 166
94-95
application, 55-57
Non-steroidal antinflammatories (NSAIDs),
mycoplasmosis, 365
functions of, 55
444-445, 445
neurological patients, 121-122
pathophysiology, 55
Nosocomial infections, 451-452. See also
potassium, 327-328,330
Natural killer (NK) cells, 404
 Infectious diseases
refeeding syndrome, 471-474
 Necrotizing leukoencephalitis (NLE),
Nursing, 449-505. See also Anatomy and
respiratory disease, 157-158
107
physiology
support of, nursing, 463-468, 464, 465,
Necrotizing meningoencephalitis (NME),
diagnostics
467
107
abdominocentesis, 475-478, 476,
urinary and renal systems, 336-341,
Needle aspiration, 408
477
339
 Neoplasia and neoplasms. See
bone marrow collection, 484-487
zinc, 223,267
Chermotherapy; Tumors
cystocentesis, 474-475, 475
Neoplastic pulmonary disease, 151
thoracentesis, 478-479, 480
Obstruction
Neosporosis, 377-378
urinary catheterization, 480-484, 480,
 brachycephalic airway syndrome, 137
 Neostigmine, 78
481, 482, 483
esophageal, 205-206
Nephrotoxic drugs, 325
endoscopy, 487-495, 487, 488, 491, 493,
extrahepatic biliary, 279-280
Nerve conduction velocity (NCV), 117
496
pain and, 438
Nervous system, cranial nerves, 99-101, 100.
internal medicine
postrenal azotemia, 294, 309
 See also Neurological examination
hypothermia, 498-499
pulmonary thromboembolism, 130, 150
 Nestle Purina Body conditioning system,
sepsis, 499-505, 500, 501, 502, 505
small intestine, 218-219
94-95
thermoregulation, 495-498
tracheal collapse, 143
Neuroendocrine tumors, 60-62
nutrition, 467
Occult blood, 199-200
Neurokinin 1 (NK1) antagonists, 239
energy balance, 468-471, 470
Occupation Safety and Health
Neurological examination, 99-122
refeeding syndrome, 471-474
Administration (OSHA), 449, 450,
 anatomy and clinical signs, 99-102, 100,
support of, 463-468, 464, 465, 466
451
108
occupational health and safety, 449-453,
 Occupational health and safety, 449-453,
diagnostics, 114-119
450,453
450
biopsy, nerve and muscle, 118-119
Omega-3 fatty acids, 235, 337
CSF collection and analysis, 114-116,
pharmacology
Omeprazole, 239
115, 116
client education, 462-463, 463
Opioids, 284, 439, 440, 444, 444
electrodiagnostics, 117-118, 118
constant rate infusion, 444, 453-454,
Oral diseases
imaging, 116-117
455-458
feline eosinophilic granuloma complex,
diseases, 102-114
dosing adjustments, 454, 459-460, 459,
201-202
caudal occipital malformation
460
feline gingivitis-stomatitis-pharyngitis
syndrome, 104
drug calculations, 461, 462
complex, 202-203
cerebral neoplasia, 105, 105
drug compatibility, 454
neoplasms, 203-204
 cranial nerve syndrome, 107-108,
oxygen therapy, 460-461
physical examination, 3
108
Nutrients, 90-91, 469. See also Nutrition
Orthomyxoviridae family, 383-384
Index
529
Osteoarthritis (OA), 76-77, 92
Pelger-Huet anomaly, 176
head, 3-4
Osteosarcoma (OSA), 80-81, 88
Penicillin, 359
musculoskeletal system, 8, 81-82
Otitis media-interna, 107-108
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG)
neck to thorax, 4-7, 5, 6, 7
Otoscopic examination, physical
tubes, 244-245, 245, 247
observation, 3
examination, 4
Periesophageal obstruction, 206
pain, detection, 438-439, 439
Overvaccination, 415
Peripheral nociceptors, 434
 Physiology. See Anatomy and physiology
Oxicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
Peristomal cellulitis, 250
Pituitary gland, 11-14
(ORSA). See Methicillin-resistant
Persistent right aortic arch (PRAA), 206
diabetes insipidus, 13-14, 13
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
P-glycoprotein (P-gp), 459
growth hormone disorders, 11-13, 12
Oxygen therapy, 460-461
Pharmacology
 Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism,
acute renal failure and kidney disease,
26
Packed cell volume (PCV), 169
329-330
Plague, 365-366
Packed red blood cells (pRBCs), 168
amebiasis, 374
Plasma, 168-169
Pain management, 433-448
analgesics, 435, 440, 444-447, 444, 445
Platelet-rich plasma, 169
advocating for, 437-438
aspergillosis, 368
Platelets, disorders of, 184-188, 185, 186
analgesics, 439, 440, 444-447, 444, 445,
blastomycosis, 373-374
Plesiomonas shigelloides, 233
446
bone marrow collection, 485
Pleural disease, 152-157, 152, 153, 155
approach to, 436
canine brucellosis, 352-353
Pleural effusion, 154, 155
causes of, 436
chemotherapy, 452-453, 453
Pneumonia, 148-149
clinical examples, 447-448
client education, 462-463, 463
Pneumothorax, 155
clinical signs, 438-439, 439
coccidioidomycosis, 369
 Pollakiuria, 291
considerations, 437
constant rate infusion, 444, 453-454,
Polychromatophils, 166
guidelines for, 436-437
455-458
Polycythemia, 167
nursing care, 446-447
cryptococcosis, 370, 371
Polydipsia (PD), 13-14, 13, 291
overview, 433
drug calculations, 461, 462
Polyethylene glycol (PEG), 112, 113, 120
pain, defined, 434
ehrlichiosis, 354-355
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 386, 407
pathophysiology,434-435, 434, 435
Helicobacter-associated disease, 358
Polymyositis, 79
scoring systems, 439, 440, 441, 442, 443
helicobacteriosis, 357
Polyphagia, 196
types of pain, 435-436
hepatozoonosis, 380-381
Polyuria, 13-14, 13, 291
urinary and renal systems, 336
herpesvirus, 382
Porphyromonas denticanis-gulae-salivosa
veterinary technician role, 433-434
histoplasmosis, 367
bacterin vaccine, 422
 Palliative radiation therapy, 88-89, 89
immunosuppressive medications,
Posthepatic disease, 276-282
Pamidronate, 446
409-413, 410, 411, 412, 413
biliary cysts, 278-279
Pancreas, 31-47
influenza, 383-384
Extrahepatic biliary obstruction, 279-280
diabetes mellitus, canine, 37-39
liver disease, 459, 460
feline cholangitis, 276-278
diabetes mellitus, feline, 31-37, 33, 35, 36
Lyme borreliosis, 351
gallbladder mucocoeles, 280-282, 281
diabetic ketoacidosis, canine, 39-41
MDR1 gene mutation, 459, 460
 Postoperative rehabilitation therapy, 122
glucagonoma, 45-47,45
methicillin-resistant S. aureus, 360
Postrenal azotemia, 294, 309
insulinomas, 41-45, 42, 42, 43
mycobacterial disease, 362, 363
Postrenal proteinuria, 310
 Pancreatectomy, 44
mycoplasmosis, 364-365
Potassium, 327-328, 330, 337, 473
 Pancreatitis, pain management, 447-448
nephrotoxic medications, 325
Potassium chloride, 40, 328
Panleukopenia, 423-424
neurological therapy, 119-121
Prebiotics, 253-254, 254
Papillomas, 384-385
nursing care, 453-463
Precautions. See Disinfection; Infectious
 Paraparesis, 111
plague, 366
diseases; Prevention
Paraplegia, 111
urinary and renal systems, 324-335, 324,
Prednisolone, 410
Parasites, alimentary tract, 213-216
325, 326-327, 328, 329-330, 333
Prednisone, 26, 240, 410
 Parathyroid glands and endocrine disease,
Phenobarbital, 103, 119, 270
Prerenal azotemia, 293, 308
22-25
Phenothiazides, 284
Prerenal proteinuria, 309
hyperparathyroidism, 23-25
Phenoxybenzamine, 30-31
Prevention
hypoparathyroidism, 22-23
 Phenylpropanolamine, 300
Bartonella, 350
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 293
Pheochromocytoma, 29-31
brucellosis, 353
 Parenteral nutrition, 465
Phosphorus, 328, 337, 472-473
ehrlichiosis, 355
Parvovirus vaccine, 418
Physical examination, 1-9. See also
herpesvirus, 382, 383
 Passive range of motion (PROM) exercises,
Neurological examination
of infectious diseases, 396, 396, 399, 399
84-85
abdomen, 7-8
leptospirosis, 359-360
 Patient history
charting, 1-2
Lyme borreliosis, 351
acquisition, 2-3
consultation goals, 2-9
methicillin-resistant S. aureus, 360-361
gastrointestinal system, 193-194, 196
diabetes mellitus, feline, 32
plague, 366
infectious diseases, 396
ears, 4
sepsis, 500-501
nutritional assessment, 464
eyes, 4
thromboembolism, 133
vaccination reaction, 428, 429
 gastrointestinal system, 194
thrombosis, 174
530
Index
Prevention (contd)
Pyruvate kinase (PK), 166
Resting energy requirements (RER), 468, 471
toxoplasmosis, 377
Pythiosis, 211-212
Rewarming techniques, 499
urinary and renal diseases, 339
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RSA), 81
Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), 145-146
Quadriparesis, 109
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), canine, 75-76
Primary hemostasis, 127
Quadriplegia, 109
Rheumatoid factor (RF), 406
Probiotics
Qualitative urine culture, 313
Rickettsial infection, 74-75, 105-106
defined, 253
Quick-Dip, 115
Rigid endoscopes, 490-492, 491
diarrhea, acute and chronic, 228
Roberfroid, Marcel, 253
gastrointestinal illness, 222, 228, 254, 254
Rabies vaccine, 416-417, 423
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 105-106
Proctitis, acute, 235-236
Radiation exposure, 450-451
Rodenticide intoxication, 183
Proinflammatory mediators, 501
Radiation therapy, 22, 88-89, 89
Ronidazole, 216, 376
Propofol, 255
Radiography, 200
Roundworms (Toxocara spp.), 213-214
Prostatic diseases, 298-299
Radioimmunoassay (RIA), 407
Prostatitis, 298-299
Radioiodine therapy, 19, 22
Safety, workplace, 449-453, 450
Protein
Radiology
Salmonellosis, 232, 452
diarrhea, acute and chronic, 227
neurological examination, 116
Sanitation. See Disinfection
diarrhea, large bowel, 234
thrombotic disorders, 131
Sarcoma, vaccine-induced, 414-415
esophageal diseases, 207
urinary and renal systems, 319-321, 320
Schiff-Sherrington posture, 102
food intolerance and allergy, 252
Range of motion (ROM) exercises, 84-86
Secondary anemia, 166-167
 gastric diseases, 212
Ranitidine, 238
Secondary hemostasis, 127-128
inflammatory bowel disease, 223
Rattlesnake vaccine, 422
Sedimentation chamber, 116
liver disease, 283
 Recombinant vaccines, 414
Seizures, 102-103
musculoskeletal system, 91
Rectal polyps, 236-237
Selenium, 91, 121
recommended levels, 465
Red blood cell disorders, 163-174
Senile vestibular syndrome, 107
urinary and renal systems, 304, 336-337
Refeeding syndrome, 471-474
Sepsis, 499-505, 500, 501, 502, 505
Protein hydrolysates, 252
Referring veterinarians (RDVM), 1
Septic shock, 500
Protein-losing enteropathy (PTE), 216-217
Regenerative anemia, 164-166, 165
Serology, 385-386, 405-407
Protein-losing nephropathy (PLNs), 301
Regurgitation, 195
Serotonin receptor antagonists, 239
Proteinuria, 309-311
Renal azotemia, 293, 308
Serum biochemistry chemistry, 307-309
Protocols, vaccine, 415-416
Renal core needle biopsies, 317
"Setting sun sign,” 104, 104
Proton pump inhibitors, 239
 Renal diseases. See Urinary and renal
Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID),
 Protozoal arthritis, 74
diseases
181-182
Protozoal diseases
Renal failure, 292, 293-294, 294, 329-330
Sevoflurane, 256, 285
amebiasis, 374
Renal function, medications and, 326-327
 Shar-peis, immunodefciency of, 189
arthritis, 74
Renal proteinuria, 310-311
Short bones, 70-71
babesiosis, 374-375
Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism, 293
Short bowel syndrome, 217-218
cytauxzoonosis, 378-379
Renin, 57-59, 58
Skeletal muscle, 71
diagnostics, 388-395
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
Skeletal system, 69-71, 70. See also
giardiasis, 375
(RAAS), 57-59, 58
Musculoskeletal system
hepatozoonosis, 379-381, 379, 380
Repetitive nerve stimulation, 117
Slide preparation, 409
leishmaniasis, 376
Resources
Small intestine diseases
neosporosis, 377-378
accredited veterinary laboratories by state,
adenocarcinoma, 219-220
toxoplasmosis, 376-377
509-514
 alimentary lymphoma, 219
trichomoniasis, 375-376
albuterol mask directions, 144
diarrhea, acute and chronic, 224-228, 224,
 Protozoal meningoencephalitis, 106
canine influenza virus, 421
226, 227
Ptyalism, 194
ergonomic guidelines, 450
diarrhea, infectious, 228-235
 Pulmonary arterial thromboembolism
MDR1 gene mutation testing, 459, 460
inflammatory bowel disease, 220-223, 221
(PTE), 130, 130
muscle biopsy, 119
leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas, 220
Pulmonary auscultation, 4-5, 5
pain scales, 440, 441-443
obstruction, 218
Pulmonary contusions, 149
PCR tests, 407
 protein-loss enteropathy, 216-217
Pulmonary edema, 149
veterinary diagnostic laboratories, 387
short bowel syndrome, 217-218
Pulmonary infltrates with eosinophils (PIE),
Respiratory distress syndrome, acute, 147,
Smears, 319
149
150-151
Smoke inhalation, 151
 Pulmonary neoplasia, 151
Respiratory system, 137-158
Smooth muscle, 72
Pulmonary parenchymal disease, 146-152
lower airway disease, 142-146, 145
SOAP charting system, 1-2
 Pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE), 150
mediastinal disease, 141-142
Sodium, 337
Pyelonephritis, 295, 296
nutrition, 157-158
Somatostatin (SST), 59-60
Pyrantel, 213
pleural disease, 152-157, 152, 153, 155
Southern, Sir, 407
Pyrexia. See Ihermoregulation
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 146-152,
Spinal cord, 101-102
Pyridostigmine bromide, 78
147, 151
Spinal diseases, 109-113
Pyrimethamine, 380
upper airway disease, 137-141, 138, 139
Spleen, anatomy, 162-163
Index
531
605-80  ss
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), 133, 150
Urinalysis, 198, 302-306, 307
Spongy bones, 70
Toltrazuril, 215
Urinary and renal diseases, 289-341
Squamous cell carcinoma, 203
 Torsion, lung lobe, 149-150
acute renal failure, 292, 293-294, 294,
Staphylococcus aureus, 360-361
Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA), 335
329-330
Starvation, 471
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN), 465
anatomy and physiology, 289-291, 290
Status epilepticus, 103
Toxic hepatopathy, 270-272
anesthesia and analgesia, 335-336
Storage diseases, 103
Toxocara spp. (roundworms), 213-214
biopsy techniques, 315-319
Stranguria, 291
Toxoplasmosis, 376-377
clinical signs, 291-292
 Stricture formation, 206
Tracheal collapse, 143-144
diagnostics, 302-315
Strongyloidiasis, 214-215
Tracheobronchial malacia, 143-144
blood pressure, 311-312, 311
Struvite urolithiasis, 297-298, 297, 339-340
Tramadol, 120, 446
complete blood count, 306-307
Sucralfate, 241
Transfusion medicine, 167-171
proteinuria, 309-311
Sulfadimethoxine, 215
Transfusion reactions, 171
serum biochemistry chemistry, 307-309
Sulfasalazine, 241
Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), 301
urinalysis, 302-306, 307
Sulfonylureas,33
Transitions, dietary, 467-468, 467
urine culture, 313-315
 Surgical biopsy, 318
Transtracheal wash (TTW), 143
ectopic ureters, 299-300, 300
 Systemic arterial thromboembolism, 
Traumatic urinary catheterization, 318-319
imaging, 319-324, 320, 321, 322, 324, 324
129-130, 129
Treatment. See specific diseases by name;
kidney disease, 292-293, 292, 327,
 Systemic inflammatory response syndrome
Pharmacology
329-330
(SIRS), 499, 500
Trichomoniasis, 215-216, 375-376
lower urinary tract diseases, 298-299
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 76,
Trichuris vulpis (whipworms), 213
nutrition, 336-341,339
405-406
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, 215
pharmacology, 324-335
Trimethoprim-sulfonamide, 380
antimicrobials, 332-334, 333
Tlymphocytes, 404
 True needle aspiration, 408
hydration assessment, 328
Taenia spp., 214
Trust, 1, 2
nephrotoxic medications, 325
Tamm-Horsfall mucoproteins (THMs), 306
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI), 201
renal function and, 326-327
Tapeworms, 214
Tumor antigens, 404
prostatic diseases, 298-299
Teeth, examination, 3-4
Tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) system, 203
protein-losing nephropathy, 301
Tegaserod, 237
Tumors
pyelonephritis, 295, 296
 Telencephalon, 99
cerebral neoplasia, 105, 105
urethral sphincter mechanism
Tetracycline, 226-227, 241
gastrinoma, 50-52
incompetence, 300-301
Therapeutic abdominocentesis, 477-478
insulinomas, 41-45
urinary neoplasia, 301-302
Thermoregulation, 495-498
liver, 275-276
urinary tract infections, 294-295, 295, 332
Thermotherapy, 84
musculoskeletal system, 80-81
urolithiasis, 295-298, 296, 297
Thoracentesis, 478-479, 480
neuroendocrine (rare), 60-62
Urinary catheterization, 480-484, 480, 481,
Thoracolumbar intervertebral disk dise ase,
oral cavity, 203-204
482,483
111-113
palliative radiation, 88-89, 89
Urinary control, 121-122
Thrombin, 128-129
pheochromocytoma, 29-31
Urinary incontinence, 291, 334-335, 334
Thrombocytopenia, 184-187, 185, 186, 354
of small intestines, 218
Urinary neoplasia, 301-302
Thrombocytosis, 187, 187
thyroid, 20-22, 21
Urinary tract infections (UTIs), 294-295,
Thromboelastography (TEG), 131, 132
urinary and renal systems, 301-302
295, 332, 483-484
Thrombotic disorders, 127-134
vaccination,404-405
Urine crystals, 306, 307
coagulation inhibitors, 128-129
Tylosin, 226-227, 241
Urine culture, 313-315
diagnosis, 130-132, 132
Urine sediment examination, 305, 307
physiology, 127-128, 128
Ulcers, 209-210
Urine specifc gravity (USG), 303, 308
prevention, 133-134, 134
Utrasonography, 200-201, 210-211,
Urolithiasis, 295-298, 296, 297, 338-341
 pulmonary arterial thromboembolism,
321-323, 321, 322
Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), 218, 277
130,130
Ultrasound-guided needle biopsy, 317
 systemic arterial thromboembolism,
Umbilical cord, endoscopy, 489
Vaccination, 403-429
129-130, 129
Uncinaria spp. (hookworms), 214
adverse reactions, 427-429, 429
therapy, 132-133, 133
Unilateral trigeminal paralysis, 109
cancer vaccines, 404-405
Thyroid disorders, 14-22
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
canine parvovirus, 229-230
hyperthyroidism, feline, 16-20, 16, 18
253, 405, 451
canine vaccines, 416-422, 419
hypothyroidism, canine, 14-16, 15
University of Florida College of Veterinary
dlient education, 395, 399
tumors, canine, 20-22, 21
Medicine, 421
feline vaccines, 422-427
Thyroid scintigraphy, 18
Upper airway disease, 137-141, 138, 139
leptospirosis, 360
Thyroid tumors, canine, 20-22, 21
Upper motor neuron (UMN), 101-102, 109
Lyme borreliosis, 351
Thyroidectomy, 19
Urate urolithiasis, 298, 339, 340-341
protocols, 415-416
 Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 410
Uremia, 183-184
strategies of, 413-416
Tick-related joint disease, 74-75. See also
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence
Vaccine failure, 428-429, 429
Vector-borne illnesses
(USMI), 299-301
Vaccine-induced sarcoma, 414-415
532
Index
Vaginoscopy, 323
diarrhea, large bowel, 235
Weight
Valley fever (coccidioidomycosis), 368-369
E, and musculoskeletal system, 91
body conditioning score, 92, 93, 94-95
Vector-borne illnesses
inflammatory bowel disease, 223
 gain of, and energy balance, 470
babesiosis, 374-375
K, and coagulation, 134, 183
loss of, and energy balance, 470-471, 470
Bartonella, 349-350
K, and malabsorption, 280
loss of, etiology, 197
canine leproid granuloma syndrome, 362
liver disease, 284
 refeeding syndrome, 471
cytauxzoonosis, 378-379
neurological patients, 121
Weimaraners, immunodeficiency, 179, 189
ehrlichiosis, 105-106, 353-355
Vomniting, 194-195
Western blot, 407
hepatozoonosis, 379-381
von Willebrand disease (vWD), 187-188
Western diamondback rattlesnake vaccine,
leishmaniasis, 376
422
Lyme borreliosis, 350-352, 421
Warfarin, 134
Whipworms ( Trichuris vulpis), 213
mycoplasmosis, 363-365
Washington State University Veterinary
Whole blood, 168
plague, 365-366
 Clinical Pharmacology Laboratory
Wobbler disease, 110-111
Rickettsial infection, 74-75, 105-106
(WSU-VCPL), 459
Workers Compensation Act, Canada, 449
Veterinary bladder tumor antigen (VBTA)
Water
Workplace safety, 449-453, 450
test, 305
constipation, 237-238
Work-related musculoskeletal disorders
Veterinary rehabilitation therapy, 82-88
diarrhea, large bowel, 234
(WMSDs), 450
Videoendoscope, 489
exercise, 90
World Health Organization (WHO), 253, 449
Viral arthritis, 74
gastric motility disorders, 212
Viral diseases
inflammatory bowel disease, 222
 X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency
diagnostics, 388-395
urinary and renal systems, 338-339
(XSCID), 181-182
H1N1 strain, 384
Waxy casts, 306
Xylitol, 271
herpesvirus, 381-383
Web sites
influenza, 383-384
Blastommyces antigen testing, 372
Yersinia enterocolitica, 232-233
papillomas, 384-385
bronchodilators, 144
Yersinia pestis, 365-366
Viral meningoencephalitis, 106
genetic testing, storage diseases, 103
Visceral pain, 435
health and safety, 453
Zinc therapy, 223, 267
Vitamins. See also Minerals; Nutrition
PCR testing, 407
Zonisamide, 120
C, and musculoskeletal system, 91
vaccination guidelines, 416
Zoonosis, 451-452. See also Infectious
 D, and endocrinology, 47-48
veterinary diagnostic laboratories, 387
diseases