ANN L.JOHNSON AND DANNE DUNNING
Atlasof
ORTHOPEDICSURGICAL
PROCEDURESOFTHE
DOGANDCAT
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
ELSEVIER
SAUNDERS
11830 Westline Industrial Drive
St. Louis, Missouri 63146
ATLAS OF ORTHOPEDIC SURGICAL
ISBN 0-7216-9381-4
PROCEDURES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Copyright @ 2005, Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
 any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage
and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Health Sciences Rights Department in
Philadelphia, PA, USA: phone: (+1) 215 238 7869, fax: (+1) 215 238 2239, e-mail:
healthpermissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request on-line via the Elsevier
Permissions."
NOTICE
   n  a o  da     
therapy may become necessary or appropriate. Readers are advised to check the most current
product information provided by the manufacturer of each drug to be administered to verify the
recommended dose, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the 
responsibility of the treating veterinarian, relying on experience and knowledge of the patient, to
 determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient. Neither the publisher nor 
the authors assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising frorm
this publication.
International Standard Book Number 0-7216-9381-4
Publishing Director: Linda Duncan
Senior Editor: Liz Fathman
Developmental Editor: John Dedeke
Pubtishing Services Manager: Melissa Lastarria
Senior Project Manager: Joy Moore
Design Manager: Bill Drone
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
www.elsevier.con | www.bookaid.org | www.sabre.org
Printed in the United States of America
ELSEVIER
BOOK AID
International
Sabre Foundation
Last digitis the print number:987654321
This book is dedicated to my family,
mentors, colleagues, residents, and students,
all of whom have provided input in my
development as a surgeon and consequently in
the development of this book.
Ann Johnson
I thank Ann Johnsonfor her generosity and
friendship. This book is dedicated to my
amazing children, George Henry and Sydney,
who generate an abundance of love, happiness,
and true joy in my life.
Dianne Dunning
Our goal in writing this atlas of orthopedic surgical procedures
tial for those who do not have the opportunity to master each
was to create a uniquely portable, easy-to-use reference
techmique by performing the procedures on a daily basis.
resource for surgeons in the operating room—an atlas that
The techniques selected and described are based on our
dermonstrates a wide range of procedures commonly performed
years of experience in training surgical residents, interms, and
in veterinary surgery. We thank Laura Duprey for helping us
students and in offering continuing education to practicing vet-
reach this goal by providing superb illustrations of the proce
erinarians. Also included are tips that we have found helpful as
dures.
we have performed these procedures in our own practice.
In our surgical practice at the University of Ilinois, we
It was a joy to compile this atlas; we hope that it is as illumi-
strongly encourage our residents and students to use textbooks
nating to read as it was instructive to write.
in the surgery suite to guide them in each surgical technique
  a  o   o 
AnnJohnson
of surgical techniques and procedures, this guidance is essen-
DianneDunning
vili
2
Part one · surgical procedures for Joint diseases
ShOULder
Osteochondrosis of the Shoulder
Chapter 1
via Caudolateral or Caudal Approach
INDICATIONS
of the deltoideus and the long and lateral heads of the triceps
muscle (Plate 1B). Blumtly dissect umder the deltoideus muscle
shoulder caused by osteochondrosis that is not responsive to
to visualize the axillary nerve and caudal circumflex hurmeral
conservative management.
artery and vein. Use Gelpi retractors to craniodorsally retract
the teres minor muscle located deep to the spinous head of the
ObJeCtiVeS
deltoideus muscle. Elevate and gently retract the axillary nerve
● To improve limb fumction by removal of the entire osteo
off of the joint capsule. Incise the joint capsule parallel to the
chondrosis flap, curettage of the adjacent diseased cartilage,
rim of the glenoid cavity, and replace the Gelpi retractors within
and forage to provide blood supply to the exposed subchon-
the joint space to facilitate visualization. Intermally rotate and
dral bone
adduct the hurmerus to maximize exposure to the caudal aspect
of the femoral head (Plate 1D).
ANATOMIC CONSIderATIONS
Curettage: Remove the cartilage fap with thumb or
The shoulder joint is easily located by palpating the acromial
 Halstead forceps. Probe the remaining cartilage surrounding
process of the scapula and the greater tubercle of the hurmerus.
the defect with a curette, and remove any abnormal cartilage
The acromial head of the deltoideus is bordered cranially by
not adherent to the subchondral bone (Plate 1E).
the omobrachial vein and caudally by the axillobrachial vein.
Forage: Using a small Kirschmer wire or small Steinmanm
Muscular branches of the axillary nerve and caudal circurmflex
pin, penetrate the sclerotic subchondral bone in multiple sites
vessels are located deep in the caudal aspect of the acromial
umtil it bleeds (Plate 1F). Explore the caudal cul-de-sac of the
head of the deltoideus muscle, superficial to the ticeps muscle.
EQUIPMENT
● Standard surgical pack, two mediurm or large Gelpi retractors
CAUTIONS
(depending on the size of the dog), blunt Hohmann retractor,
Osteochondrosis is often bilateral (42% to 65%)*; both shoulders
should be evaluated, even if the anirmal exhibits a unilateral lame
wires or small Steinmann pin for forage
 ness. Accurate hemostasis should be used when approaching the
PrePARATION ANd POSITIONING
Prepare the leg circumferentially from dorsal midline to the
POStOPeRAtIVE EVAlUATION
carpus. Use a hanging leg preparation with the dog in lateral
No specific postoperative evaluation is required.
recurmbency to allow for maximal manipulation of the shoulder
joint during surgery.
PoStOperatiVe Care
Exercise should be restricted for 3 to 4 weeks to allow soft
PROCEDURE
Craniolateral Approach:1 Incise the skin and subcuta-
activity should be reintroduced slowly.
neous tissues in a curvilinear fashion from mid-scapula to mid-
humerus. Incise the deep fascia between the acromial and
Expected outcome
spinous portions of the deltoideus muscle (Plate lA). Further
Outcome is good to excellent in most cases.4 Note that degen-
delineate this separation by blunt dissection with Mayo scissors,
erative joint disease may develop despite the surgical removal
allowing for cranial retraction of the acromial head and caudal
 of an osteochondrosis flap.
retraction of the spinous portion of the deltoideus muscle. The
muscle branch of the axillary nerve is visualized at this point
References
and preserved. Place the Gelpi retractors at 90 degrees to each
1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the caudolateral region of
other to facilitate visualization. Incise the joint capsule parallel
the shoulder joint. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the Bones
to the rim of the glenoid cavity and replace the Gelpi retractors
's a 'edaed pa y 're pue soa an go sr p
within the joint space to facilitate visualization. Intermally rotate
2004.
and adduct the humerus to maximize exposure to the caudal
 2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the caudal region of the
aspect of the femoral head. Place a blunt Hohmann retractor
shoulder joint. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the Bones and
Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
caudomedial to the femoral head to exteriorize the femoral
3.Whitehair J, Rudd R: Osteochondritis dissecans of the humeral head
head and further facilitate lesion visualization (Plate 1C)
in dogs. Compend Cont Ed 12:195-203, 1990.
Caudal Approach:? Incise the skin and subcutaneous
4. Rudd R, Whitehair J, Marogolis J: Results of management of osteo
tissues in a curvilinear fashion from mid-scapula to mid-
chondritis dissecans of the humeral head in dogs: 44 cases
humerus. Incise between the caudal border of the spinous head
(1982-1987). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:173-178, 1990.
Chapter 1
OSteOChONdrOSIS OF the ShOUlder
3
Ｐlate
Caudolateral
approach
Deltoideus muscle:
 Scapular part
Acromial part
Triceps brachii muscle:
 Long head
Lateral head
Caudal
approach
C
Teres minor
Glenoid
muscle
(retracted
craniodorsally)
Deltoideus muscle:
Scapular part
Acromial part
Joint
capsule
Deltoideus muscle
4
Part one · surGical procedures for Joint diseases
ShOULdEr
pinatus Contracture
CHApter 2
INDICATIONS
spinous tendon should be visible as it inserts on the greater
Candidates are animals with infraspinatus contracture that is
tubercle of the proximal hurmerus. Affected tendons will appear
not responsive to rest and management with nonsteroidal anti-
grossly thickened and fibrotic and will become visibly taut and
   s so s  
inhibit the range of motion of the shoulder when it is placed in
abnormality of extermal rotation of the shoulder, elbow abduc
extension or flexion. Isolate the tendon by sharp and blunt dis-
tion, and outward rotation of the pes.
section with a scalpel blade and periosteal elevator. Transect
the tendon and any associated fibrotic bands until the shoulder
ObJeCtIVeS
moves freely. Resect a portion of the tendon (approxirmately
● To restore normal shoulder joint range of motion and fore
1 cm) to prevent recurence and submit for histopathology
limb fumction by releasing the fibrotic infraspinatus muscle
(Plate 2B). Closure is routine.
AnatOMIC CONSIderAtIONS
CAUTIONS
The infraspinatus muscle is one of the cuff muscles of the
There are no specific cautions.
shoulder joint,' lying just caudal to the scapular spine. Its
tendon lies beneath the acromial head of the deltoideus muscle
POStOPeratIVe EValuaTION
and crosses the joint craniolaterally, inserting on the lateral
Once released, the shoulder should resume full range of motion.
aspect of the greater tubercle of the humerus. The teres minor
A portion of the affected tendon should be biopsied and sub
tendon inserts just distally to the infraspinatus along the lateral
mitted for histopathology for disease verification.
aspect of the greater tubercle of the humerus.
POStOPeratIVE CAre
EQuipMeNt
 Excessive activity should be restricted for 10 to 14 days to pre
● Standard surgical pack, two mediurm or large Gelpi retractors
vent seroma formation.
(depending on the size of the dog), periosteal elevator, and
formalin jar for histopathology
Expected outcome
Outcome is usually excellent, with a full return to function
preparatIon And pOSItioninG
expected.3
Prepare the leg circumferentially from dorsal midline to the
carpus. Use a hanging leg preparation, with the dog in lateral
recurmbency to allow for maximal manipulation of the shoulder
joint during surgery.
References
 1. Vasseur P, Moore D, Brown S: Stability of the canine shoulder joint:
PROCEDURE2
An in vitro analysis. Am J Vet Res 43:352-355, 1982.
 2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the craniolateral region of
 Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue in a curvilinear fashion
the shoulder joint by tenotomy of the infraspinatus muscle. In An
from the mid-scapular spine to the proximal portion of the
Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and
humerus. Incise the deep fascia along the cranial border of the
Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
acromial head of the deltoideus muscle. Elevate and caudally
 3. Bennet R: Contracture of the infraspinatus muscle in dogs: A review
retract the muscle with Gelpi retractors (Plate 2A). The infra-
 of 12 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:481487, 1986.
CHAPTER 2
INfraSpInatuS CONtraCture
5
PlAte 2
Supraspinatus
muscle
Deltoideus muscle:
acromial part
Infraspinatus
muscle
Teres minor muscle
Triceps brachi muscle:
lateral head
B
Infraspinatus
muscle
6
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
SHOULDER
Stabilization of Medial
Chapter 3
Shoulder Luxation
INDICATIONS
anchor system, a screw and washer combination may be used.
This procedure is indicated in animals with medial shoulder
Additional instrurmentation needed for this technique includes a
luxation and instability. Open reduction and stabilization is indi-
high-speed drill, bone screw and washer, drill bit, tap, depth
cated if a traumaic luxation is umstable enough after closed
gauge, and screwdriver.
reduction that reluxation occurs, or if the luxation is chronic.
Surgery is warranted in animals with congenital luxation or
PREPARATIONAND POSITIONING
     s
Prepare the leg circumferentially, from the dorsal midline to the
carpus. Use a hanging leg preparation with the dog in dorsal
ObJeCtIVES
recumbency to allow for maximal manipulation of the shoulder
● To restore normal stability, congrrency, mobility, and function
 joint during surgery.
to the shoulder joint without altering regional anatomy
PROCEDURE
AnatomIC CoNSIderatIONS
Approach:2 Use an approach to the craniomedial shoulder
Anatomic landmarks for the scapulohumeral joint are the
joint to expose the luxated joint. If possible, reduce the luxation
acromion process of the scapular spine, the greater tubercle,
before the approach to reestablish normal anatomic relation-
and the acromial head of the deltoid muscle. Anatomic land-
ships. Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue from the medial
marks for positioning the skin incision include the acrormion of
aspect of the acrormion over the greater tubercle to the medial
the scapula, the greater tubercle of the humerus, and the pec-
aspect of the midhumeral diaphysis. Ligate the ormobrachial
toral muscles. The suprascapular nerve is present over the
vein if it interferes with the intended approach. Incise the fas-
cranial lateral surface of the scapula. The caudal circumflex
cial border of the brachiocephalicus muscle and retract the
muscle medially. Incise the insertions of the superficial and
eral aspect of the shoulder, and these should be avoided.
deep pectoral muscles from the hurmerus and retract them
medially. Retract the supraspinatus muscle laterally. Transect
EQuIPMENT
the tendon of the coracobrachialis muscle near its origin to
● Standard surgical pack, two medium or large Gelpi retractors
expose the subscapularis muscular tendon. Incise and elevate
(depending on the size of the dog), periosteal elevator, two
the subscapularis muscle tendon at its origin, exposing 0.5 to
smal Hohmann retractors, wire dhiver, intrarmedullary pins or
1.0 cm of the distal scapula. Place one small Hohmanm retractor
Kirschmer wires, mallet, 20-pound nylon* or the appropriate
oue pue aosnu sneudsens a ueauapun pue jeen
size nonabsorbable suture material, and a suture anchor
caudally against the caudal scapula for good visualization of the
systemt
medial glenohurmeral joint (Plate 3A). Inspect the joint, and
 Altermatively, if a suture anchor system is not available or if
assess the condition of the humeral head and medial labrurm of
s a o on o  u s  
the glenoid.
Continued
*Mason Nylon Leader Line, Mason Tackle Company, Otisville, Michigan.
Bone Biter Suture Anchor System, Warsaw, Indiana.
CHAPTER 3
StABIlIZATION OF MEdIAl SHOUldEr luXaTION
PLATE 3
Subscapularis
muscle
Supraspinatus
muscle
Biceps brachii
muscle
Coracobrachialis
muscle
Deep pectoral 
muscle
 Superficial /
pectoral
 muscle
8
PART ONE · SURGICAL PROCEDURES FOR JOINT DISEASES
 Stabilization with the Suture Anchor System:1.3
CAUTIONS
Reduce the joint and identify the insertion and origins of the
Because the suprascapular nerve lies in close proxirmity to the
medial glenohumeral ligament in the distal scapula and prox-
fascial attachment between the deep pectoral and supraspinatus
imal hurmerus. Drill three holes, one each at the cranial and
muscles, care must be taken during the approach in order to
caudal components of the ligament origin on the distal scapula
avoid trauma.
and another at the ligament insertion on the proximal humerus
(Plate 3B). Insert suture anchors threaded with fish leader line
POStOPErATIVE EVALUATION
or nonabsorbable suture into each of these holes. There should
Joint stability and range of motion should be evaluated at 2 and
be two independent suture loops for the cranial and caudal
4 weeks to assess continued need for external coaptation.
cormponents of the medial glenohurmeral ligament. Tie the
sutures with the limb held at a normal standing angle (approxi-
POStOPErATIVe Care
mately 135 degrees of extension) such that the sutures are taut,
A Velpeau sling is indicated to protect the repair for 2 to
but not overly tight, avoiding plication of the joint capsule
4 weeks.
(Plate 3C). Imbricate the capsule and subscapularis tendon
with nonabsorbable mattress sutures. Place the scapulo-
Expected outcome
bility and mobility. Closure is routine.
series noted minimal gait abnormalities following surgery and
Stabilization   with 
a
Screw
and Washer
rehabilitation, even in the face of degenerative joint disease
Combination:1 Reduce the joint and identify the origins and
and joint malformation stermming from congenital shoulder
insertion of the medial glenohumeral ligament in the distal
luxati on.
scapula and proximal hurmerus. Drill, measure, and tap three
holes, one each at the cranial and caudal components of the lig-
References
ament origin on the distal scapula and another at the ligament
 1. Fitch R, Breshears L, Staatz A, et al: Clinical evaluation of prosthetic
insertion on the proximal humerus. Use a screw and washer
medial glenohumeral ligament repair in the dog (10 cases). Vet
combination to prevent subsidence into the soft metaphyseal
Comp Orthop Traumatol 14:222-228, 2001.
bone and slippage of the ligature. There should be two inde
 2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the craniomedial region of
pendent suture loops for the cranial and caudal components of
the shoulder joint. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the Bones
the medial glenohurmeral ligament. Tie the sutures with the limb
and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
2004.
held at a normal standing angle (approximately 135 degrees of
 3. Ringwood P, Kerwin S, Hosgood G, et al: Medial glenohumeral liga-
extension) such that the sutures are taut, but not overly tight,
ment reconstruction for ex-vivo medial glenohumeral luxation in the 
dog. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 14:196-200, 2001.
 capsule and subscapularis tendon with nonabsorbable mattress
sutures. Place the scapulohumeral joint through a range of
motion and evaluate joint stability and mobility. Closure is
routine.
Chapter 3
StaBIliZatION Of MEDIAl SHOUldEr luXaTION
6
PLATE 3
Suture anchor threaded
with two sutures
inserted in humerus 
Anchor locked beneath
cortices
10
Part one · surgical procedures for Joint diseases
SHOULDER
Stabilization of Lateral
CHapter 4
Shoulder Luxation
INDICATIONS
PROCEDURE
Lateral shoulder luxations are usually traumatic in origin and
Approach:12 Use an approach to the craniolateral region of
occur after glenohurmeral ligament and infraspinatus tendon
the shoulder joint to expose the luxated joint. It may be helpful
rupture. Open reduction and stabilization is indicated if the lux-
ation is umstable enough after closed reduction that reluxation
 joint before the approach is made. Incise the skin and subcuta-
Occurs, or if the luxation is chronic.
neous tissue in a curvilinear fashion from the mid-scapular
spine to the proximal portion of the humerus. Incise the deep
ObJeCTIVES
fascia along the cranial border of the acromial head of the del-
● To restore normal stability, congruency, mobility, and fumc
toideus muscle. Elevate and caudally retract the muscle with
tion to the shoulder joint without altering regional anatormy
Gelpi retractors. If the infraspinatus tendon is not tom, either
incise it 5 mm from its origin or perform an osteotormy of the
AnatomIC ConSIderatIOnS
acrormial process to facilitate reattachment. Incise the joint cap-
Anatomic landmarks for the scapulohumeral joint are the
sule, inspect the joint, and assess the condition of the humeral
acromion process of the scapular spine, the greater tubercle,
head and lateral labrum of the glenoid (Plate 4A). If the labrum
and the acromial head of the deltoideus muscle. Anatomic land-
is wom, the prognosis for successful stabilization of the
marks for positioning the skin incision include the acromion of
shoulder is poor and arthrodesis should be considered (see
the scapula, the greater tubercle of the hurmerus, and the acro-
Chapter 5). Reduce the joint and identify the origin and inser-
mial head of the deltoideus muscle.
tion of the lateral glenohumeral ligament. Primary apposition of
EQUIPMeNT
If greater stability is desired, reinforcerment of the repaired
● Standard surgical pack, two medium or large Gelpi retractors
ligarment with prosthetics may be necessary.
(depending on the size of the dog), periosteal elevator, wire
Stabilization with the Suture Anchor System:?
driver, intramedullary pins or Kirschmer wires, mallet, 20- to
Drill one hole in the distal scapula at the lateral glenohurmeral
60-pound nylon,* and a suture anchor system*
ligament origin and a second hole at the ligament insertion on
Altermatively a bone tunmel, screw, and washer combination
the proximal humerus. Insert suture anchors threaded with
may be used, if a suture anchor system is not available or if the
fishing leader line into each of these holes (Plate 4B). Tie the
animal is not large enough to accommodate the suture anchor
sutures with the limb held at a normal standing angle (approxi-
system. Additional instrumentation needed for this techmique
mately 135 degrees of extension) such that the sutures are taut,
includes a high-speed dril, bone screw and washer, drill bit, tap,
but not overly tight, avoiding plication of the joint capsule.
depth gauge, and screwdriver.
Imbricate the capsule with nonabsorbable mattress sutures.
 Reattach the infraspinatus tendon with a three-loop pulley or
PrePaRaTION ANd POSITIONING
locking loop suture patterm. Place the scapulohumeral joint
Prepare the leg circumferentially from the dorsal midline to the
through a range of motion and evaluate joint stability and
carpus. Use a hanging leg preparation, with the dog in lateral
mobility. Closure is routine.
recumbency, to allow for maximal manipulation of the shoulder
Continued
joint during surgery. The animal is positioned in lateral recum-
bency with the affected leg draped.
*Bone Biter Suture Anchor System, Warsaw, Indiana.
CHAPTER 4
StaBIliZAtION Of LAteral ShOUlder luxatION
11
PlAte 4
B
Joint capsule
 incised 
Supraspinatus
Infraspinatus
muscle
muscle
Deltoideus muscle:
Infraspinatus
 acromial part
muscle
Suture anchor threaded
with two sutures
inserted in humerus
Teres minor
muscle
Anchorlockedbeneath
cortices
12
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
Stabilization with a Bone Tunnel and Screw and
be evaluated at 2 and 4 weeks to assess continued need for
Washer Combination:4 Reduce the joint, and identify the
extermal coaptation.
origin and insertion of the lateral glenohurmeral ligament. Drill
an oblique bone tumnel through the distal scapula at the origin
POStOPErATIVe Care
 of ligarment (Plate 4C). Thread the fishing leader line through
The limb should be supported in a spica splint for 10 to 14 days.
the bone tummel. Drill, measure, and tap a bicortical screw hole
Passive range of motion exercises should be implemented after
in the ligament insertion on the proximal hurmerus. Use a screw
splint removal for the next 2 weeks, with concurrent exercise
and washer to prevent subsidence into the soft metaphyseal
restriction. Over the following 2 weeks, the animal should slowly
bone and ligature slippage. Tie the sutures in a figure-eight pat-
be returned to normal activity.
term, with the limb held at a normal standing angle (approxi-
mately 135 degrees of extension) such that the sutures are taut,
Expected outcome
but not overly tight, avoiding plication of the joint capsule
Outcome is usually fair to excellent, depending on the degree of
(Plate 4D). Imbricate the capsule with nonabsorbable mattress
trauma to the joint.
sutures. Reattach the infraspinatus tendon with a three-loop
a e t  d a oo o o 
References
scapulohumeral joint through a range of motion and evaluate
1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the craniolateral region of the
joint stability and mobility. Closure is routine.
shoulder joint. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the Bones and 
Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
CAUTIONS
2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the lateral aspect of the
There is a high potential for concunrent chest traurma with these
 humeral condyle and epicondyle. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches
injuries. Patients should be thoroughly evaluated (e.g., with
to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
electrocardiogram, thoracic radiographs, and blood work) and
Saunders, 2004.
3. Slocum B, Slocum TD: Suture stabilization for luxations of the
stabilized before initiating surgical repair.
shoulder. In Bojrab MI (ed): Current Techniques in Small Animal
Surgery, 4th ed. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1998.
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION
The joint should be radiographed to assess implant positioning
(ed): Current Techniques in Small Animal Surgery, 4th ed. Baltimore,
Williams & Wilkins, 1998.
Chapter 4
StaBIliZAtION Of LAteral ShOUlder luxatION
13
PLATE 4
Tendon of
infraspinatus
muscle
E
14
Part one · surGical procedures for Joint diseases
SHOULDER
Shoulder Arthrodesis
Chapter 5
INDICATIONS
scapular and the proxirmal humeral ostectomy surfaces, and
This procedure is used for animals with unreconstructable joint 
-ne ue asn (g ae sam ast ua ua x Aenn
fractures, chronic shoulder luxation, or severe osteoarthritis
minum termplate to determine the cranial contour of the junction
that is refractory to medical treatment.
of the spine and body of the scapula and the cranial aspect of the
proximal humerus. Use the bending pliers and the torque irons to
ObJectIVes
contour an appropriately sized bone plate (allowing at least three
● To fuse the bones of the scapulohurmeral joint in a functional
screws proximally and distally to the shoulder) to match the alu-
position
o ss d   ad a  'n 
the proximal and distal plate holes. Place a lag screw through the
AnatomiC coNSIderatIonS
plate and across the ostectomy surfaces (see Plate 5C). Fill the
The greater tubercle of the humerus and the acromion of the
remaining plate holes, directing the proximal screws into the thick
scapula are palpable landmarks. Osteotomy of the acromion
bone at the jumction of the spine and body of the scapula (Plate
allows reflection of a portion of the deltoideus muscle and visu-
5D). Remove the Kirschmer wires. Collect cancellous bone from
alization of the joint. Osteotomy of the greater tubercle also
the ostectomized hurmeral head with rongeurs and place it around
aids joint exposure and provides a flat surface for the plate. The
the ostectomy surfaces. Reattach the biceps brachii tendon
to the fascia of the supraspinatus muscle. Attach the greater
and under the acrormion. The axillary artery and nerve are
tubercle to the hurmerus lateral to the plate with a lag screw (see
located immediately caudal to the joint, but these are not usul-
Plate 5D). Wire the acromion.12 Close the wound routinely.
ally visualized with this approach.
CAUTIONS
EQUIPMENT
The suprascapular nerve and artery must be protected during
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi
the procedure, and care must be taken not to trap the nerve
 retractors, periosteal elevator, oscillating saw, self-centering
umder the plate. Medial and lateral angulation of the saw blade
plate-holding forceps, high-speed drill and wire driver,
should be avoided when performing the scapular and humeral
Kirschmer wires, wire cutter, orthopedic wire, wire twister,
articular ostectomies. Angular and rotational alignment of the
plating equipment, and rongeurs
limb should be checked carefully before the plate is secured.
PrePARATION ANd POSITIONING
POStOPeratIVe EVAluATION
Prepare the forelimb circumferentially from dorsal midline to
The axial aligrment of the limb and the angle of the arthrodesis
mid-radius. Position the animal in lateral recumbency with the
should be observed critically. Radiographs for limb alignment
affected limb up. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to
and irmplant placement should be evaluated.
allow maximal manipulation during surgery. A cancellous bone
 graft can be harvested frorm the ostectormized humeral head.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
A soft padded bandage should be placed around the forelimb
PROCEdURE
and over the scapula to control bleeding and swelling. The
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue over the
arthrodesis site should be protected with a spica splint for 6
cranial lateral aspect of the shoulder frorm the distal one third of
weeks or umtil early radiographic evidence of bone bridging is
the scapula to the proximal one third of the humerus.
observed. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals
Osteotomize the acromion and retract the deltoideus muscle
umtil bone healing occurs. The animal should be confined, with
distally and caudally. Osteotormize the greater tubercle and ele
activity limited to leash walks until bone healing is complete.
vate the supraspinatus muscle proximally. Incise the infra-
 Barring complications, the plate should not be removed
spinatus, teres minor, and biceps brachii tendons and the joint
capsule to expose the articular surfaces (Plate 5A).2
Expected outcome
Alignment: Predetermine the cranial caudal angle for the
The bone should heal in 12 to 18 weeks. Satisfactory function of
shoulder arthrodesis by observing the normal standing angle of
the treated limb can be expected as long as the elbow and
the shoulder in the individual patient. This angle is commonly
carpus are free of disease.
110 degrees (Plate 5B).12
Stabilization: Remove the articular surface of the scapula
References
with an oscillating saw directed perpendicular to the spine of the
 Johnson KA: Arthrodesis. In Olmstead ML (ed): Small Animal
scapula. Flex the shoulder to the predeterrmined angle and perform
Orthopedics. St. Louis, Mosby, 1995.
an ostectomy of the hurmeral head. The hurmeral ostectomy should
2. Piermattei DL, Flo GL: The shoulder joint. In Brinker, Piermattei,
parallel the ostectomy surface of scapula when the shoulder is
and Flo's Handbook of Small Animal Orthopedics and Fracture
flexed to the appropriate angle (see Plate 5B). Appose the distal
Repair, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997.
CHAPTER 5
ShOUldER ARThRODESIS
15
PlAte 5
Supraspinatus muscle
A
Tendon of biceps
brachii muscle cut
Spinous head of
deltoideus muscle
Joint capsule
incised
Osteotomy site
 Infraspinatus muscle
Teres minor muscle
Acromial head of
deltoideus muscle
16
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint diseases
ELBOW
Fragmented Medial Coronoid
Chapter 6
Process and Osteochondrosis of the Elbow
INDICATIONS
This eliminates excessive forces on the medial coronoid
process that are present when incongruities in radial and ulnar
lameness that exhibit minimal degenerative changes to the joint
length exist.34
on radiographs. Dogs with severe degenerative joint disease
Osteochondrosis Curettage: Remove the cartilage flap
and persistent larmeness that are not responsive to conservative
with thumb or Ochsner forceps. Probe the remaining cartilage
management and nonsteroidal anti-inflarmmatory drugs may
surroumding the defect with a curette, and remove any abnorrmal
also benefit frorm joint exploration, loose fragment excision,
cartilage not adherent to the subchondral bone (Plate 6C).
and osteophyte curettage.
Forage: Using a small Kirschmer wire or small Steinrmann
pin, penetrate the sclerotic subchondral bone in multiple sites
OBJECTIVES
umtil it bleeds. Lavage the joint copiously, and close the joint
· To improve function and limit pain stermming from
capsule and wound in a routine fashion.
 osteoarthritis and elbow incongruity
CAUTIONS
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS2
 a    an a n  s 
The elbow joint is exposed through a medial approach. The
present in the interrmuscular septurm between the flexor carpi
medial epicondyle and the pronator teres and flexor carpi radi-
radialis and deep digital flexor muscles. Strict hemostasis of
alis muscles are key anatomic landmarks for this approach. The
these intermuscular vessels is imperative for adequate visuali-
median nerve, brachial artery, and ulnar nerve are located just
zation within the joint.
proximal to the epicondyle. The median nerve and brachial
artery and vein course cranially to the medial epicondyle. The
POSTOPERATIVEEVALUATION
ulnar nerve courses caudally to the medial epicondyle, over the
anconeus muscle.
POStOPeratIVe CAre
EQuipMenT
The limb should be bandaged after surgery for 2 to 3 days to pre
● Standard surgical pack, a small Frazier suction tip (size 8 or
vent swelling and to provide soft-tissue support. Exercise should
10), two baby Gelpi retractors, bone curettes, osteotome and
be restricted for 4 weeks (e.g., kenmel confinement when not under
mallet, periosteal elevator, Lempert rongeur, pin chuck or
direct observation; walks outside on leash only to urinate/defecate;
 high-speed wire driver, Kirschner wires or small Steinmann
no rumming, jumping, or playing). Over the following 4 weeks, the
 pin for forage, and an Ochsner forceps
animal should slowly returm to normal activity.
PrePARATION ANd POSITIONING
Expected outcome1.5
Prepare the limb from shoulder to carpus. Position the dog in
The outcome is usually guarded to good. Multiple clinical
dorsal recumbency, with the affected limb suspended for
studies have found that surgical treatment does not halt the pro-
draping. Then release the limb to allow access to the medial sur-
gression of degenerative joint disease. Continued nonsteroidal
face of the elbow.
anti-inflammatory therapy may be required in some patients,
especially those with advanced degenerative joint disease.
PROCEDURE
epicondyle to the proximal radius. Incise the subcutaneous fat
References
and fascia along the sarme lines. Identify the separation between
1. Read R, Armstrong S, Black A, et al: Relationship between physical
the flexor carpi radialis and the superficial digital flexor tendon
signs of elbow dysplasia and radiographic score in growing rot-
by counting the muscle bellies from cranial to caudal, starting
tweilers. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209: 1427-1430, 1996.
with the pronator teres. Separate the muscles via blunt dissec-
 2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the medial aspect of the
tion, paying close attention to the muscular branch of the ulnar
humeral condyle and the medial coronoid process of the ulna by an
d nn asr pe ansd pof a asodxg aa pe Aa
intermuscular incision. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
to the muscle-splitting incision to expose the coronoid process.
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders, 2004.
Insert the baby Gelpi retractors into the joint to facilitate visu-
3. Wind AP: Elbow incongruity and developmental elbow diseases in
alization (Plate 6A).
the dog: Part I. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:711-724, 1986.
Joint Exploration: Identify the fragmented coronoid
4.
Wind AP, Packard ME: Elbow incongruity and developmental elbow
process and any osteochondrotic or kissing lesions on the
diseases in the dog: Part 11. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:725-731, 1986.
medial humeral condyle. Remove the coronoid fragment with
5. Huibregtse BA, Johnson AL, Muhlbauer MC, et al: The effect of treat.
rongeurs or osteotome and mallet so that the base of the medial
ment of fragmented coronoid process on the development of
coronoid process is level with that of the radial head (Plate 6B).
Osteoarthritis of the elbow. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:190-195, 1994.
Chapter 6
OSteOchOndrOSIs Of the elbOW
17
ＰlAte
6
Flexor carpi
 radialis muscle 
B
TL
CTUT
Joint capsule
incised
 Superficial digital 
flexor muscle
Medial coronoid
process of ulna
(fragmented)
Sharp adduction and internal
rotationofhumerus
18
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
ELBOW
Stabilization of Lateral
ChAPter 7
Elbow Luxation
INDICATIONS 1
recurmbency to allow for maximal manipulation of the shoulder
The indications for open reduction of luxated elbows include
joint during surgery. The animal is positioned in lateral recum-
Monteggia fractures; acute luxations that canmot be reduced by
bency with the affected leg draped.
closed manipulation because of instability, bony fragments, or
hematomas; failed closed reductions; and chronic luxations
PROCEDURE
with muscle contracture and capsule fibrosis.
Approach:23 Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue over
the lateral condyle, from the distal hurmerus to the proximal
OBJECTIVES
radius. Incise the deep brachial and antebrachial fascia to
● To reestablish normal joint orientation and stability while
expose the lateral head of the ticeps. Continue the incision
 preserving functional pain-free range of motion of the elbow
though the deep fascia on the cranial border of the ticeps and
joint
extend it distally over the extensor muscles of the ante
brachium. Retract the muscles to expose the lateral condyle.
Anatomic conNSideratIonS2
Incise the periosteal origin of the anconeal muscle to expose
More than 90% of traurmatic elbow luxations are lateral because
the caudolateral compartment of the elbow. If additional expo
of the large medial epicondylar ridge of the humerus and the
sure to the joint is necessary to visualize the radial head, a cran-
distal slope of the medial epicondyle. A limited lateral approach
iolateral compartment can be made. Incise the periosteal origin
to the elbow is used. Anatomic landmarks for open reduction
of the extensor carpi radialis, and extend this incision distally
  o  a    
along the intermuscular septum between the extensor carpi
processes, and the radial head. A deep branch of the radial
radialis and the common digital extensor muscle. Elevate the
nerve courses proximally to the cranial border of the extensor
extensor carpi radialis muscle frorm the bone and enter the joint
carpi radialis muscle. A superficial branch of the radial nerve is
(Plate 7A)
located between the lateral head of the triceps and the
 Reduction:4,5 Reduce the elbow by hooking the anconeal
brachialis muscle, and this must be protected in the proximal
process into the lateral condyle and restoring radiohurmeral
portion of the incision.
joint orientation (Plate 7B). First, flex the elbow about 100
degrees and inwardly rotate the antebrachium. Next, hook the
EQUIPMENT
anconeal process over the lateral condyle and slightly extend
● Standard surgical pack, two mediurm or large Gelpi retractors
the elbow. While placing lateral to medial pressure over the
(depending on the size of the dog), periosteal elevator, two
head of the radius, reduce the radial head umder the humeral
small Hohmann retractors, wire driver, intrarmedullary pins or
capitulurm. Abduct and inwardly rotate the antebrachiurm and
Kirschner wires, mallet, and a suture anchor system*
into the fully reduced position (Plate 7C). Try to protect the car-
If a suture anchor system is not available or if the animal is
tilage during reduction. If the muscle contraction and subse
quent overriding are severe, a blumt periosteal elevator can be
screw and washer combination may be used. Additional instru-
used to gently lever the radial head into position. If reduction is
mentation needed for this technique includes high-speed
not achieved, perform an olecranon osteotomy to eliminate the
drill, bone screw and washer, drill bit, tap, depth gauge, and
pull of the triceps muscle. After reduction, fush the joint and
screwdriver.
assess stability.
Continued
PrEPArATION ANd POSITIONInG
Prepare the leg circumferentially from dorsal midine to the
carpus. Use a hanging leg preparation with the dog in lateral
*Bone Biter Suture Anchor System, Warsaw, Indiana.
Chapter 7
StaBIliZAtION Of LAteral ElbOW LuXatION
19
Ｐlate 7
 Deep fascia
Anconeal muscle
Extensor
carpi
Lateral
radialis
condyle
muscle
exposed
Common digital
extensormuscle
Anconeal process
hooked over
lateral epicondyle
 Medial
pressure
on olecranon
20
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
Collateral Ligament Repair: Identify the torm lateral
splint removal for the next two weeks with concurrent exercise
restriction. Over the following 2 weeks, the animal should
ment should be attermpted. Appose the torn ends of the ligament
slowly return to normal activity.
Reattach avilsed ligaments with a bone screw and spiked
Expected outcome'
Teflon washer (Plate 7D). If needed, ligamentous repair may be
The usual outcome is fair to excellent. Most dogs have good
supplermented with suture anchors with either heavy (No. 1 or
limb fumction after surgical reduction. Smaller, less active dogs
No. 2) nonabsorbable suture or two screws and a figure-eight
wire (Plate 7E). Check the joint for stability and range of
tive joint disease and decreased range of joint motion.
lateral ligarment repair.
References
CAUTIONS
There is a high potential for concurrent chest trauma with these
1. Schaeffer IGF, Wolvekamp P, Meij BP, et al: Traumatic luxation of
the elbow in 31 dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 12:33-39, 1999.
injuries. Patients should be thoroughly evaluated (e.g., with
2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the lateral aspect of the
electrocar diogram, thoracic radiographs, and blood work) and
 humeral condyle and epicondyle. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches
stabilized before initiating surgical repair. As soon as the patient
to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
is stabilized, reduction, repair, or both should be attempted.
Saunders, 2004.
 3. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the lateral humeroulnar
POStOPERATIVE EVALUATION
 o s  g s   s  a go 
The joint should be radiographed to assess implant positioning
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders, 2004.
4. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the humeroulnar part of
be evaluated at 2 and 4 weeks to assess contimued need for
the elbow joint by osteotomy of the tuber olecrani. In An Atlas of
extermal coaptation.
 Surgical Approaches to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat,
4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
Postoperative care
5. Piermattei DL, Flo GL: Brinker, Piermattei, and Flo's Handbook of
The limb should be supported in a spica splint for 10 to 14 days.
Small Animal Orthopedics and Fracture Repair, 3rd ed. Philadelphia,
Passive range of motion exercises should be implemented after
WB Saunders, 1997.
CHAPTER7
StaBIlIZATION OF LATeRAl ElBOW LuXATION
21
PLATE 7
Avulsed
fragment
22
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint diseases
ELBOW
Treatment of Ununited Anconeal
ChaPter 8 
Process via Removal, Lag-Screw Fixation.
and Dynamic Proximal Ulnar Osteotomy
INDICATIONS1-4
vator, high-speed wire driver/drill/oscillating saw, aiming
Surgery is the treatment of choice for dogs older than 5 months
device, Kirschner wires or small Steinmamm pins, plating
with failure to form an osseous umion between the anconeal
equiprment, bone curettes, osteotome and mallet, Lempert
process and the ulna. Medical therapy alone has been associ-
rongeur, and two Hohmann retractors
ated with a rapid progression of severe degenerative joint dis-
ease (DJD) and lameness. Three surgical treatment options
PREPARATION AND POSITIONING
Prepare the limb from shoulder to carpus. Position the dog in
dymarmic proximal ulnar osteotomy (DPUO). Considerable con-
dorsal recumbency with the affected limb suspended for
draping. Then release the limb to allow access to the lateral and
recommended in dogs with minimal DJD and umunited
caudal surfaces of the elbow.
anconeal process (UAP) that is tightly adhered to the ulna. Lag-
screw fixation of the UAP, followed by concurrent DPUO, is rec-
PROCEDURE
ommended in dogs with minimal DJD and a loose anconeal
Caudolateral Approach:s Incise the skin and subcuta
process and an incongruent joint as foumd by evaluation of the
neous tissue over the lateral condyle, from the distal hurmerus
joint via arthrotomy or arthroscopy. Surgical excision is gener-
to the proximal radius. Incise the deep brachial and ante
ally reserved as a salvage procedure for dogs with severe DJD
brachial fascia to expose the lateral head of the triceps.
and UAP
Contimue the incision though the deep fascia on the cranial
border of the triceps and extend it distally over the extensor
OBJECTiVES1.2
muscles of the antebrachium. Retract the muscles to expose the
● To improve joint congruity, encourage fusion of the anconeal
lateral condyle. Incise the periosteal origin of the anconeal
muscle to expose the caudolateral compartment of the elbow
Surgical excision is considered a salvage procedure aimed at 
 and enter the joint through a capsular incision.
eliminating the irritation caused by the UAP
Caudal Approach to the Proximal Ulna:5 Incise the
skin and subcutaneous tissue along the shaft of the ulna from
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS5.6
the tuber olecrani to the proximal midshaft region. Incise the
Exposure of the anconeal process for either lag-screw fixation
- 'snaoe a pe sn  oxa a no usonad
or excision is made via a caudolateral approach. Anatormic land-
tinuing distally along the ulnaris lateralis muscle. Place the
marks for the elbow are the lateral hurmeral condyle, the ole
Hohrmann retractors between the radius and ulna just distal to
the medial and lateral coronoids to retract the tissues amd visul-
branch of the radial nerve courses proximally to the cranial
alize the ulna.
border of the extensor carpi radialis muscle. A superficial
Ununited Anconeal Process Excision:4 Flex the
branch of the radial nerve is located between the lateral head of
elbow joint fully to expose the anconeal process. Grasp the
the triceps and the brachialis muscle, and this must be pro-
floating process with pointed reduction or tissue forceps and
tected in the proximal portion of the incision. For a DPUO, a
remove (Plate 8A). If the process is adherent to the ulna, sever
caudal approach to the proximal ulnar diaphysis is used. The 
the fibrous attachrments with a periosteal elevator or osteotome
landmark for ulnar osteotomy is the caudal border of the prox-
and mallet.
imal ulna.
Continued
EQUIPMENT
● Standard surgical pack, a Frazier suction tip, two medium
Gelpi retractors, pointed reduction forceps, periosteal ele
Chapter 8
TreatmeNt Of UnunIted AnCOneal prOCess
23
Plate 8
Tricepsmuscleretracted
Anconeus
muscle
retracted
24
Part one · surGIcal procedures fOr JOInt dIseases
Ununited Anconeal Process Lag-Screw Stabiliza
restricted umtil healing of the UAP is confirmed by radiograph.
Sun eum a wm dn a ueuu pue sonpah z'e'zuo
Exercise should be restricted for 2 to 4 weeks in dogs with sur-
pointed reduction forceps (Plate 8B). Insert a Kirschner wire
gical excision of the UAP.
 into the proximal quadrant of the anconeal process, passing
perpendicular to the cleavage line and exiting 1 mm to 2 mm
EXpected outcome2.3.8
beyond the articular margin. Use this pin as a reference point to
Surgical excision of the UAP is associated with a variable prog-
guide lag-screw positioning; it will be removed once the
nosis, with 70% of the patients improving in the immediate post-
operative period. However, only 50% of the dogs were free of
caudal cortex of the ulna, parallel to the K-wire, and exiting at
lameness on long-term follow-up exarmination, and moderate to
the point of the anconeal process (Plate 8C). Altermatively, an
severe DJD can be expected because of the inherent instability
aiming device can be used to ensure accurate screw placerment
of the elbow following removal of the anconeal process and
(Plate 8D). Secure the anconeal process with either a 2.7-mm or
3.5-mm cortical screw placed in lag fashion or a partially
come is better in dogs with DPUO and/or lag-screw fixation.
threaded 4.0 cancellous screw. Insert an additional Kirschmer
The reported clinical outcome is good to excellent for these ani-
wire parallel to the screw to ensure rotational stability. Remove
mals, with fusion of the anconeal process and minimal to no
the first Kirschner wire that is penetrating the joint. Closure is
progression of DJD expected.
routine.
 Dynamic Proximal UInar Osteotomy:1-3.e Using an
oscillating saw or Gigli wire, cut the bone distal to proximal at
a 20- to 30-degree angle to the long axis of the ulna shaft. When
the osteotomy is complete, the ulna should separate 2 mm to
References
4 mm spontaneously. Stabilize the ulna with a srmall intra-
1. Turner BM, Abercromby RH, Innes J, et al: Dynamic proximal ulnar
medullary pin (Plate 8E). If not separated, lever the bone ends
osteotomy for the treatment of ununited anconeal process in 17
with a periosteal elevator to release the interosseus ligament.
dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1l:76-79, 1998.
Closure is routine.
 2. Meyer-Lindenberg A, Fehr M, Nolte I: Short- and long-term results
after surgical treatment of an ununited anconeal process in the dog.
CAUTIONS
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 4:101-110, 2001.
3. Krotscheck U, Hulse DA, Bahr A, et al: Ununited anconeal process:
Lag-screw fixation for UAP is techmically diffcult. Correct posi-
Lag-screw fixation with proximal ulnar osteotomy. Vet Comp Orthop
tioning of the lag screw is imperative. Incorrect drillings can
Traumatol 13:212-216, 2000.
result in failure because of penetration of the joint as a result of
4. Cross AR, Chambers JN: Ununited anconeal process of the canine
the small size of the anconeal process.
elbow. Compend Cont Ed 19:349-362, 1997.
5. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the proximal shaft and
POStOPeratIVe EValuATION
trochlear notch of the ulna. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to
The joint should be placed through a thorough range of motion
the Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
before closure. Postoperative radiographs are indicated to
Saunders, 2004.
6. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the lateral humeroulnar
verify complete UAP excision, joint congruency, and/or implant
part of the elbow joint. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
and osteotomy position. Radiographs should be repeated every
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
 4 to 6 weeks until the UAP is healed.
Saunders, 2004.
7. Fox SM, Burbidge HM, Bray JC, et al: Ununited anconeal process:
POStOPeraTIVe Care
Lag-screw fixation. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32(1):52-56, 1996.
All patients should be placed in a soft padded bandage for 2
 8. Sjostrom L: Ununited anconeal process in the dog. Vet Clin North
to 3 days to prevent seroma formation. Exercise should be
Am Small Anim Pract 28(1):75-86, 1998.
CHAPTER 8
TREATMENT OF UNUNITED ANCONEAl PROCESS
25
PLATE8
26
Part one · surGical procedures for Joint diseases
ElbOW
 Distal Ulnar Ostectomy
Chapter 9  
with Fat Graft
INDICATIONS1-3
CAUTIONS2.5
 Distal ulnar ostectomy is indicated as an early corrective sur-
The periosteum must be cormpletely removed with the ostec-
gery for premature closure of the distal ulnar physis, before the
tomized bone, because it will form a prermature bony union if left
appearance of severe angular lirmb deformities. This procedure
in situ. Hermostasis is imperative to ensure that large blood clots
is most effective in young dogs (median age, 5 months) with
do not fill the defect and promote conmective tissue replacement.
less than 25 degrees of carpal valgus or in older animals (medial
The fat graft should be harvested atraurmatically in one piece, and
age, 6.5 months) with less than 13 degrees of valgus.
should be of a size that is adequate to fll the ostectormy site. This
will minimize the armount of graft necrosis and shrinkage.
ObJeCtIVeS
● To prevent or correct angular limb deformity, limb short-
POStOPErATIVe EVALUATION
ening, abnormal load transrmission, and joint subluxation
Postoperative radiographs are indicated to verify ostectomy
position and the complete removal of periosteum. To monitor
AnatomIC CoNSIderatIONS
ostectomy healing, joint congruity, and angular limb deformity,
A caudal approach to the distal ulnar diaphysis is used.
radiographs should be repeated every 4 to 6 weeks until radial
Landmarks for the ostectomy are the caudolateral border of
bone growth is complete. Once bone growth is complete, cor-
the distal third ulna, the tendons of the lateral digital extensor,
rective osteotormies can be performed if necessary.
a p sa oxa  aap a 'set sn a
abductor pollicis longus muscle.
Postoperative care2
All patients should be placed in a soft padded bandage for 2 to
EQuIPMENT
3 days to prevent seroma formation. Exercise should be
· Standard surgical pack, a Frazier suction tip, one Gelpi
restricted for at least 6 to 8 weeks, until the full effect of the
retractor or two Senm retractors, two Hohrmanm retractors,
distal ulnar ostectomy is achieved. Excessive movement of the
ostectomy site inhibits graft vascularization and may result in
and Lempert rongeur
displacement and subsequent premature union of the ulna.
PrePARATION ANd POSITIONING
Expected outcome6
  on   o     
The outcome is usually good to excellent. Younger dogs with less
Position the dog in dorsal or lateral recumbency, with the
severe angular limb deformities have better fumctional results
affected limb suspended for draping. Then release the limb to
after distal ulnar ostectomy than do older dogs with severe angu-
allow access to the caudolateral aspect of the antebrachium.
lation and joint subluxation. The mean age at surgery of dogs with
Prepare the caudal abdominalinguinal region for fat graft
good to excellent results is 6.5 months, contrasted to the mean
harvest.
 age at surgery of 9.75 months in dogs with fair to poor results.
PrOCEdUre
References
Approach:4 Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue along
 1. Shields Henney LH, Gambardella PC: Premature closure of the ulnar
the shaft of the ulna, from the midshaft of the diaphysis to the
physis in the dog: A retrospective clinical study. J Am Anim Hosp
styloid process. Incise the antebrachial fascia between the
Ass0c 25:573-581, 1989.
ulnaris lateralis and the lateral digital extensor tendons,
2. Vandewater A, Olmstead ML, Stevenson S: Partial ulnar ostectomy
exposing the periosteal surface ofthe ulna. Use a periosteal ele
vator to elevate the surround musculature, and place the
the dog. Vet Surg 11:92-99, 1982.
Hohmanm retractors between the radius and ulna at the pro
 3. Shields Henney LH: Partial ulnar ostectomy for treatment of prema
posed osteotomy site.
ture closure of the proximal and distal radial physes in the dog. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 26:183-188, 1990.
Gigli wire, cut the bone perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of
 4. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the distal shaft and styloid
the ulna (Plate 9A). Remove a 1-cm to 2-cm section of the ulna,
process of the ulna. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the Bones
and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
and add a fat graft. Close the subcutaneous tissue and skin over
2004.
the ostectomy site (Plates 9B and 9C).
5. Craig E: Autogenous fat grafts to prevent recurrence following sur-
Fat Graft Harvest:25 Incise the skin and subcutaneous
gical correction of growth deformities of the radius and ulna in the
tissue in the cranial inguinal/caudal abdorminal region. Harvest
dog. Vet Surg 10:69-76, 1981.
 a fat graft of sufficient size to filthe defect, and place in the gap
6. Morgan Pw, Miller CW: Osteotomy for correction of premature growth
created by the ostectomy (Plate 9D). Closure is routine.
plate closure in 24 dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 7:129-165, 1994.
CHAPTER9
dIstal ulnar Ostectomy With Fat Graft
27
PlAte 9
Lateral digital
extensormuscle
Ulnaris lateralis
muscle
Fat graft
28
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
ELbOW
Elbow Arthrodesis
Chapter 10
INDICATIONS
ends. Perform an ostectomy of the proximal ulna to create a
This procedure is indicated in animals with unreconstructable
smooth surface for the plate (see Plate 10B). Temporarily fix the
joint fractures, chronic elbow luxation or subluxation, or severe
distal humeral condyle to the trochlear notch with a Kirschner
degenerative joint disease that is not responsive to medical
wire (Plate 10C). Use an aluminum template to determine the
treatment.
contour of the caudal surfaces of the distal hurmerus and prox-
imal ulna. Use the bending pliers and the torque irons to con-
OBJECTIVES
tour an appropriate-size bone plate (allowing at least four
● To fuse the bones of the humeroradial and humeroulnar
screws proximally and distally to the elbow) to match the alu-
joints in a fumctional position
mimurm termplate. Apply the plate by first placing screws through
the proximal and distal plate holes. Place a lag screw through
ANAtOMIC CONSIdeRaTIONS
the plate and across the lateral portion of the humeral condyle
The triceps muscle courses in a cranial proximal direction frorm its
into the radial head. Place a second lag screw through the
insertion on the olecranon, and crosses the humerus rather than
plate across the ulna and into the medial portion of the
rmning parallel to it. The radial nerve lies beneath the lateral head
humeral condyle (see Plate 10C). Fill the remaining plate holes.
of the triceps near the distal third of the hurmerus. The ulnar nerve
Screws placed through the ulna should penetrate the radius, if
courses over the medial aspect of the elbow, caudal to the medial
possible. Remove the temporary Kirschner wire. Reattach the
epicondyle, and an olecranon osteotomy aids joint exposure. A
osteotomized portion of the olecranon to the medial epicondyle
proximal ulnar ostectomy provides a flat surface for the plate.
with a lag screw (Plate 10D).12 Collect cancellous bone from
the proximal hurmerus and place it aroumd the ostectomy
EQUIPMENT
surfaces. Close the wound routinely.
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi
retractors, periosteal elevator, oscillating saw, bone curette
CAUTIONS
self-centering plate-holding forceps, high-speed drill, burrs and
The radial and ulnar nerves must be protected. All articular car-
tilage must be rermoved. Angular and rotati onal aligrment of the
limb must be checked carefully before the plate is secured.
PreParAtION ANd POSItIONING
Prepare the forelimb circumferentially frorm dorsal midline to
POStOPeratIVe eVAluatION
carpus. Position the animal in lateral recumbency, with the
The axial alignment of the limb and the angle of the arthrodesis
affected lirmb elevated. Drape the limb out from a hanging position
should be observed critically. Radiographs should be evaluated
to allow maximal manipulation during surgery. A cancellous bone
for lirmb alignment and implant placement.
 graft can be harvested from the ipsilateral proximal humerus.
POStOPerAtIVe CAre
PROCEDURE
A soft padded bandage should be placed to control bleeding and
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue on the
swelling. A lateral splint should be used for 6 weeks or until
caudal lateral aspect of the elbow frorm the distal one third of
the humerus to the proximal one third of the ulna. Elevate the
Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals umtil bone
anconeus muscle from the olecranon. Osteotomize the ole
healing occurs. The animal should be confined and activity
cranon process, and retract the triceps muscle proximally to
should be limited to leash walks until bone healing is complete.
expose the caudal surface of the distal hurmerus. Elevate the
The plate may be removed 6 to 9 months after bone healing if it
flexor carpi ulnaris and deep digital flexor muscles medially
causes soft tissue iritation.
and the ulnaris lateralis muscle laterally to expose the proximal
ulna. Reflect the origin of the fexor carpi ulnaris muscle to
Expected outcome
expose the trochlear notch. Incise the ulnaris lateralis, lateral
The bone usually heals in 12 to 18 weeks. Function of the treated
collateral ligament, and joint capsule to expose the articular
lirmb can be aw kward, and the anirmal may have trouble with stairs
surfaces (Plate 10A).
Or with rough terrain.' Amputation may offer better function.?
Alignment: Predetermine the cranial caudal angle for the
elbow arthrodesis by observing the normal standing angle of
References
the elbow in the individual patient (commonly 110 degrees)
1. Johnson KA: Arthrodesis. In Olmstead ML (ed): Small Animal
(Plate 10B).12
Orthopedics. St. Louis, Mosby, 1995.
Stabilization: Remove the articular cartilage of the
2. Piermattei DL, Flo GL: The elbow joint. In Brinker, Piermattei, and
humeral condyle, radial head, and trochlear notch with a bone
Flo's Handbook of Small Animal Orthopedics and Fracture Repair,
curette or high-speed burr, following the contours of the bone
3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997.
CHAPTEr 10
ElBOW ARthrOdeSIS
29
PLATe 10
 Osteotomy of
the olecranon
process
Anconeus
muscle
Joint capsule
incised
Flexor carpi
ulnaris muscle
Lateral collateral 
ligament
Ulnaris lateralis muscle 
Ulnar
ostectomy
30
Part one · surgical procedures for Joint diseases
CArPuS
Radial and Ulnar Styloid Fractures
Chapter 11
INDICATIONS
avulsions, two pins may be inserted into the far cortex of the
Candidates include dogs with avulsion fractures of one or both
radius (Plate 11C). Drill a transverse hole 1 to 2 cm proximal to
styloid processes.
the fracture site and pass a figure-eight wire through the hole
and aroumd the Kirschner wires. Tighten the wire, bend the pins
ObJECTIVES
over, and cut. Closure is routine.
●To restore normal joint orientation and stability to the ante
Lag-Screw Technique: For the radial styloid process,
 brachial carpal joint
drill a gliding hole (equal to the diameter of the threads on
the screw) in the styloid fragment. Place an insert drill sleeve
ANATOMIC CONSIdERATIONS1-4
into the gliding hole and drill a smaller hole (equal to the core
The antebrachial carpal joint is forrmed by the radius and the
diameter of the screw) across the radius. Measure, tap, and
styloid process of the ulna, articulating with the radial and ulnar
select and place the appropriate-length screw (Plate 11D).
carpal bones. This joint contributes to nearly 90% of the move
Compression of the fracture should occur. When stabilizing the
ment in the carpus and is important to carpal function. The
ulnar styloid process, treat the styloid process as the fragment
radial and ulnar styloid processes serve as the origin of the
by drilling the gliding hole through the ulna and the tapped hole
collateral ligaments and also extend down into the joint,
in the radius (Plate 11E). Closure is routine.
serving as a physical buttress against medial lateral instability.
Intermal fixation is required to restore stability to the ante
CAUTIONS1
brachial carpal joint.
It may not be possible to place two pins into the distal ulna in
small dogs; therefore, the ulnar styloid fracture may not be
EQUIPMENT
completely rotationally stable. Extermal coaptation is strongly
● Surgical pack, pointed reduction forceps, Kirschner wires or
recommended.
 o   so  o sd n 
speed wire driver; plating equipment is required for lag-screw
POSTOPERATIVE EVAlUATION
fixation
Radiographs should be evaluated for articular surface reduction
and implant placement. Radiographs should be repeated every
PrEPARATION ANd POSITIONING
6 to 8 weeks until the fracture has healed.
Prepare the limb circumferentially frorm the shoulder to the
digits. Position the animal in dorsal recumbency for greater
POStOPerAtiVe Care2.4
flexibility, with the affected limb suspended for draping. Then
A Mason Meta splint or fiberglass half-cast is necessary to
release the limb to allow access to the distal antebrachium.
protect the repair for the first 6 to 8 weeks. Exercise should be
resticted until the fracture heals. Implant removal is indicated
PROCEDURE
if the implants become loose or if they irritate the soft tissues
Approach: Expose the styloid processes by incising directly
after the fracture heals.
over the processes through the skin and subcutaneous tissue.
Continue the incision into the retinacular and antebrachial
Expected 0utcome3.4
fascia. Elevate the surroumding tissue as necessary to visualize
Outcome is fair to excellent in most cases. Carpal stability and
the fracture and collateral ligament (Plate llA [lateral view]).
aligmrment depend on adequate reduction and stability of the
styloid process. Mild to moderate degenerative joint disease
bone ends, and lever the bone back into position. Maintain
may be expected because of the articular nature of this fracture.
reduction with pointed reduction forceps.
Stabilization:1.2.4 Accormplish fixation of the styloid
References
process with the pin and tension band wire or lag-screw tech-
1. Bruce WJ: Radius and ulna. In Coughlan AR, Miller A (eds): BSAVA
nique. If the fragments are too small to permit pin insertion, the
Manual of Small Animal Fracture Repair and Management.
collateral ligament may be reattached to the bone with a screw
Cheltenham, British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 1998.
2. Egger EL: Fractures of the radius and ulna. In Vasseur P, Slatter D
 and spiked plastic washer.
(eds): Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, vol. 2, 2nd ed. Philadelphia,
Pin and Tension Band Wire Technique:14 Depending
WB Saunders, 1993.
on the avulsed fragment size, drive one or two wires into the
3. Miller AS: What is your diagnosis? (Radial carpal dislocation in a
styloid process, directing the wires obliquely across the
dog). J Small Anim Pract 34:11, 576, 582-583; 3 ref. 1993.
fracture into the far cortex of the radius or ulna. For ulnar
4.
Probst Cw: Stabilization of fractures of the radius and ulna. In
avulsions, insert a single K-wire into either the ulna or into the
Bojrab MJ (ed): Current Techniques in Small Animal Surgery, 4th ed.
far cortex of the distal radius (Plate 11B). For radial styloid
Baltimore, Williams & Willins, 1998.
CHAPTER 11
RadIal ANd UlNar StYlOId FraCtureS
31
Plate 11
Radius
Flexor
carpi ulnaris
UIna
32
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
CArPuS
Pancarpal Arthrodesis
Chapter 12
INDICATIONS
larger screws over the radius and smaller screws over the
metacarpal bones.?) Position the plate so that one screw will
brachial carpal joint; dogs with severe injury (e.g., fracture,
penetrate the radial carpal bone. Ensure adequate plate holes
luxation, or shearing injury) of the antebrachial carpal joint
for a minirmum of three screws in the radius and three screws in
the metacarpal bone. Mark the level of the distal metacarpal
or dogs with painful degenerative joint disease that is not
plate screw. Rermove the plate and center the dhrill on the
responsive to conservative measures.12
metacarpal bone. Secure the plate with three screws in the
metacarpal bone, and then reduce the plate to the radius with
ObJeCtIVeS
self-centering forceps. Check plate and joint alignment and
● To fuse the bones of the antebrachial, middle carpal, and car-
attach the plate to the radius, using the loaded drill guide in one
pometacarpal joints in a functional position
or two holes to compress the antebrachial carpal joint (see
Plate 12C). Fill the remaining plate holes (Plate 12D). One plate
AnAtOmIC CONSIderAtIOnS
screw should secure the radial carpal bone (Plate 12E).
The carpus consists of the radius, ulna, proximal (radial, ulnar,
and accessory) carpal bones, distal row (I, Il, and IV) carpal
CAUTIONS
bones, and the metacarpal bones, forming the antebrachio-
 All of the articular cartilage should be removed. Angular and
carpal, middle carpal, and carpometacarpal joints.
rotational aligrment of the limb should be checked carefully
before securing the plate to the radius. Tourmiquet use should
EQUIPMENT
be lirmited to 60 minmutes.
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Hohmann
retractors, periosteal elevator, self-centering plate-holding for-
POStOPeRAtIVE EVAluATION
ceps, bone curette, high-speed drill and burrs, plating equipment 
 The axial alignment of the limb and the angle of the arthrodesis
should be observed critically. Radiographs for limb alignment
PrePARATION ANd POSITIONING
and irmplant placement should be evaluated.
Prepare the forelimb circurmferentially from shoulder to digits.
Position the animal in lateral recumbency with the affected
POStOPeratIVE CAre
limb up. Drape the limb out frorm a hanging position to allow
A soft, padded bandage should be placed to control bleeding and
swelling. Casting should be delayed for 48 to 72 hours if a tourni-
proximal shoulder or ilial wing for cancellous bone graft
quet has been used. A bivalve cast should be used for 6 weeks or
harvest. Consider using a tourniquet to control bleeding.
umtil early radiographic evidence of bone bridging is observed.
Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals until bone
PROCEDURE
healing occurs. The animal should be confined, with activity
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue over the
limited to leash walks umtil bone healing is complete. Implants
dorsal surface of the joint from the distal third of the radius to
 are generally removed after 6 to 12 months to avoid soft tissue
the distal third of the metacarpal bones. Elevate and resect the
irritation.*
attachrment of the carpal extensor tendons from the metacarpal
bones. Elevate and retract the digital extensor tendons laterally
Expected outcome
to expose the distal radius, the carpus, and the proximal two
Bone healing is expected in 12 to 18 weeks, and good function
thirds of the third metatarsal bone. Incise the joint capsule
in the treated limb is anticipated. Fatigue fractures of the distal
to enter each joint space and expose the articular surfaces
(Plate 12A).
metacarpal bone with the plate may reduce this problem.4
Alignment: The cranial caudal angle for the pancarpal
Stabilization: Flex the carpus and remove the articular
References
cartilage from the antebrachial carpal joint surfaces, the middle
 1. McLaughlin RM: Arthrodesis. In Brinker WO, Olmstead ML, Sumner
Smith G, et al (eds): Manual of Internal Fixation in Small Animals.
bone curette or high-speed burr, following the contours of the
New York, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
2. Johnson KA: Arthrodesis. In Olmstead ML (ed): Small Animal
bone ends (Plate 12B). Harvest cancellous bone and place the
Orthopedics. St. Louis, Mosby, 1995.
graft within the prepared joints (Plate 12C). Place an appro-
3. Li A, Gibson N, Carmichael S, et al: Thirteen pancarpal arthrodeses
priate-size bone plate (limited by the size of the metacarpal
using 2.7/3.5 mm hybrid dynamic compression plates. Vet Comp
bone), precontoured to 10 to 12 degrees of carpal extension, on
Orthop Traumatol 12:102, 1999.
the dorsal surface of the distal radius and third metacarpal
4 Whitelock RG, Dyce J, Houlton JEF: Metacarpal fractures associated
bone. (Alternatively, use a hybrid plate that accommodates
with pancarpal arthrodesis in dogs. Vet Surg 28:25, 1999.
CHAPTEr 12
PANCarPal ARThrODESIS
33
PLATE 12
Abductor pollicis
B
longus muscle
Radial ~
Radius
carpal bone
Tendon of
Tendon of
common digital
extensor carpi
radialis muscle
extensor tendon
10°-12°
carpal extension 
34
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
CArPuS
Partial Carpal Arthrodesis
Chapter 13
with a Plate
INDICATIONS
Harvest cancellous bone and place the graft within the prepared
Candidates include dogs with hyperextension of the middle
joints (Plate 13C). Position a veterinary T plate distally on the
carpal and carpometacarpal joints.
dorsal surface of the radial carpal bone and third metacarpal
bone. It is imperative that the plate be distal to the articular car-
OBJECTIVES
tilage on the radial carpal bone to avoid interference with the
● To fuse the bones of the middle carpal and carpometacarpal
radius. Secure the plate to the radial carpal bone. Select screws
joints in a functional position
that are slightly shorter than the measured length to avoid inter-
ference with palmar soft tissues. Reduce the plate to the third
AnatomiC coNSIderatIonS
metacarpal bone (see Plate 13C). Starting with the most distal
The carpus consists of the radius, ulna, proximal (radial, ulnar
plate hole, fill the remaining plate holes, securing the plate to
and accessory) carpal bones, distal row (Il, Ill, and IV) carpal
the third metacarpal bone (Plate 13D).1
bones, and the metacarpal bones, forming the antebrachio-
carpal, middle carpal, intercarpal, and carpometacarpal joints.
CAUTIONS
All articular cartilage must be removed. The plate must not
EQuIPMENT
 interfere with the articular surface of the radial carpal bone or
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, small Hohmanm retractors,
a n a s q a m n a s
Gelpi retractors, periosteal elevator, plate-holding forceps,
should be limited to 60 minutes.
bone curette, high-speed drill and burrs, plating equipment
POStOPERATIVE EVALUATION
PrePARATION ANd POSITIONING
Radiographs should be evaluated for limb alignment and
Prepare the forelimb circumferentially from shoulder to digits.
implant placement.
Position the animal in lateral recurmbency with the affected
limb up. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow
POStOPerATIVe Care
maximal manipulation during surgery. Prepare the ipsilateral
A soft, padded bandage should be placed to control bleeding
proximal shoulder or ilial wing for cancellous bone graft
and swelling. Casting should be delayed for 48 to 72 hours if a
harvest. Consider using a tourniquet to control bleeding.
6 weeks or umtil early radiographic evidence of bone bridging is
PROCEDURE
observed. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue over the
umtil bone healing occurs. The animal should be confined, with
dorsal surface of the joint frorm the distal metaphysis of the
activity limited to leash walks until bone healing is complete.
radius to the distal third of the metacarpal bones. Elevate and
Implants may need to be removed after 6 to 12 months to avoid
retract the carpal extensor tendons medially and the digital
soft tissue irritation.
extensor tendons laterally to expose the distal radius, the
carpus, and the proximal two thirds of the third metatarsal
EXPECTED OUTCOME
bone. Incise the joint capsule to enter each middle and distal
Bone healing is expected in 12 to 18 weeks. A decrease in range
joint space and expose the articular surfaces (Plate 13A).
of motion in the antebrachial carpal joint is usually seen. Near-
Alignment: Align the dorsal surfaces of the radial carpal
normal fumction of the treated limb can be expected unless
bone and third metacarpal bone with the plate to produce the
umdiagnosed antebrachial carpal joint injuries are present.
correct alignment for the arthrodesis.
Stabilization: Flex the carpus and remove the articular
cartilage from the middle carpal, intercarpal, and car-
Reference
1. Johnson KA: Arthrodesis. In Olmstead ML (ed): Small Animal
burr, following the contours of the bone ends (Plate 13B).
Orthopedics. St. Louis, Mosby, 1995.
CHAPTER13
PartIal CarPal ArthrOdeSIS WIth A Plate
35
Plate 13
B
Radial ~
carpal bone
Radius
Tendon of
Tendon of
extensor carpi
common digital
radialis muscle
extensor tendon
36
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
CArPuS
Partial Carpal Arthrodesis
Chapter 14
with Intramedullary Pins
INDICATIONS
joints. Create burr slots in the dorsal surface of the distal third
 Candidates have hyperextension of the middle carpal and car-
of the third and fourth metacarpal bones. Drive small inter-
pometacarpal joints. .2
medullary pins or Kirschner wires through the slots proximally
into the base of the bones. Reduce the subluxation and align the
OBJECTIVES
carpus as described previously. Drive the pins into the radial
● To fuse the bones of the middle carpal and carpometacarpal
carpal bone (Plate 14C). Back the pins out a few millimeters,
 joints in a fumctional position
and then cut and bend the ends into hooks. Reseat the pins and
rotate the hooks flat against the bones (Plate 14D).12
AnatOmIC CONSIdeRAtIONS
The carpus consists of the radius, ulna, proximal (radial, ulnar,
CAUTIONS
and accessory) carpal bones, distal row (II, IIl, and IV) carpal
All articular cartilage must be removed. The slots will have to
bones, and the metacarpal bones, forming the antebrachio-
be long enough to allow the pins to bend as they are driven
carpal, middle carpal, intercarpal, and carpometacarpal joints.
proximally. The carpus must be fexed 90 degrees and pressiure
placed on the metacarpal bones to align the carpal bones with
EQUIPMENT
the metacarpal bones while the pins are placed. The pins should
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi
not penetrate the radial carpal bone articular surface.
retractors, periosteal elevator, bone curette, high-speed drill
Tourmiquet use should be limited to 60 minutes.
and burrs, intramedullary pins or Kirschner wires, Jacob pin
chuck, pin or wire cutters
POSTOPERATIVE EVAlUATION
Radiographs should be evaluated for limb alignment and
PrePARATION ANd POSITIONING
implant placement.
Prepare the forelimb circurmferentially from shoulder to digits.
Position the animal in lateral recurmbency with the affected
PoStOPeratIVe CAre
moe on uonisod suouy e wog ano qu a aei dn qu
A soft, padded bandage should be placed to control bleeding
maximal manipulation duing surgery. Prepare the ipsilateral
and swelling. Casting should be delayed for 48 to 72 hours if a
proximal shoulder or ilial wing for cancellous bone graft har-
tourmiquet has been used. A bivalve cast should be used for 6
vest. Consider using a tourmiquet to control bleeding
weeks or umtil early radiographic evidence of bone bridging is
observed. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals
PROCEDURE
umtil bone healing occurs. The animal should be confined, with
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue over the
activity limited to leash walks until bone healing is complete.
dorsal surface of the joint from the distal third of the radius to
Implants are generally removed after healing to avoid soft
the distal third of the metacarpal bones. Elevate and retract the
tissue irritation.
carpal extensor tendons medially and the digital extensor ten-
dons laterally to expose the distal radius, the carpus, and the
Expected outcome
proximal two thirds of the third metatarsal bone. Incise the
Bone healing is expected in 12 to 18 weeks. A decrease in range
joint capsule to enter each middle and distal joint space and
of motion in the antebrachial carpal joint is usually seen.
expose the articular surfaces (Plate 14A).
Lameness is eliminated or improved in two thirds of the dogs.?
Alignment: Flex the antebrachial carpal joint 90 degrees
and apply proximal and palmar pressure to the metacarpal
brachialcarpal injuries have been overlooked.
bones while placing the intramedullary pins to align the dorsal
suurfaces of the radial carpal bone and metacarpal bones cor-
rectly for the arthrodesis' (see Plate 14C).
References
Stabilization: Flex the carpus and remove the articular
1. Johnson KA: Arthrodesis. In Olmstead ML (ed): Small Animal
cartilage from the middle carpal, intercarpal, and car-
Orthopedics. St. Louis, Mosby, 1995.
pometacarpal joint surfaces with a bone curette or high-speed
 2. Willer RL, Johnson KA, Turner TM, et al: Partial carpal arthrodesis
burr, following the contours of the bone ends (Plate 14B).
for third-degree carpal sprains: A review of 45 carpi. Vet Surg
Harvest cancellous bone and place the graft within the prepared
92:334, 1990.
CHAPTER14
PaRtIal CarPal ARthRODeSIS WIth INtRamedUllary PinS
37
PLATE  14
B
Radial
carpal bone
Radius
Tendon of
Tendon of
common digital
extensor carpi
extensor tendon
radialis muscle
C
38
Part one · surGical procedures for Joint diseases
HIP
Extracapsular Stabilization
CHAPTer 15
of Hip Luxation (Suture Anchors or Screw
and Was
INDICATIONS'
Craniolateral Approach:1 Use a craniolateral approach
Open reduction and stabilization is indicated in animals with
to the coxofemoral joint. Incise the skin and subcutaneous
chronic luxations, failed closed reductions, excessive postre
tissue 5 cm proximal to the greater trochanter, curving distally
duction instability, intra-articular fractures, concurrent pelvic
fractures, or other fractures of the affected limb that prevent
distally from 5 cm over the proximal femur. Incise between the
closed reduction.
tensor fasciae latae muscle and deep border of the biceps
femoris muscle and superficial gluteal muscle. Retract the
ObJeCtIVeS
tensor fasciae latae cranially, the biceps caudally, and the
● To restore normal stability, congruency, mobility, and fumc
 middle gluteal muscle proximally. Incise the deep gluteal
tion to the coxofermoral joint
muscle close to its attachment on the trochanter for one third
to one half of its width. Incise the joint capsule (or enlarge the
ANaTomIC CoNSIdERATIONS2
traumatic tear) parallel to the long axis of the femoral neck,
Osseous anatomic landmarks for the coxofermoral joint are the
greater trochanter of the femur and the ischial tuberosity and
erally through the point of origin of the vastus lateralis muscle
ilial wing of the pelvis. The curvilinear incision should center on
on the cranial face of the proximal fermur. Reflect the vastus lat-
the cranial edge of the greater tubercle. Distally, it extends cra-
h  o d a oxa o s sna
nial and parallel to the proximal third of the shaft of the femur.
Dorsal Approach with Trochanteric Osteotomy:?
Muscular landmarks include the biceps femoris, the gluteals
Use a dorsal approach to the coxofermoral joint with an
and the vastus lateralis. Reduce the hip prior to starting the sur-
osteotomy of the greater trochanter. Incise the skin over the
 gical approach to establish normal tissue relationships.
cranial border of the greater trochanter, from 3 cm to 4 cm
proximal to the dorsal ridge of the greater trochanter and
EQUIPMENT
curved 3 cm to 4 cm, following the cranial border of the femur.
● Standard surgical pack, two mediurm or large Gelpi retractors 
Incise the superficial leaf of the fascia lata, and carry the inci-
(depending on the size of the dog), periosteal elevator, wire
sion proximally through the insertion of the tensor fasciae latae
driver, intramedullary pins or Kirschner wires, mallet, 20- to
muscle at the greater trochanter and along the cranial border of
60-poumd nylon* and a suture anchor systerm'
 s      gs 
Altermatively, a bone tunmel and screw and washer combina-
the superficial gluteal muscle at the third trochanter. Refect the
tion may be used if a suture anchor system is not available or
superficial gluteal muscle proximally and the biceps femoris
if the animal is not large enough to accommodate the suture
caudally to find and visualize the course of the sciatic nerve.
 anchor system. Additional instrurmentation needed for this tech-
Perform an osteotomy of the greater trochanter with an
nique includes a high-speed drill, bone screw and washer, drill
osteotome and mallet or with Gigli wire. Refect the gluteal
bit, tap, depth gauge, and screwdriver.
muscles and greater trochanter from the joint capsule with a
periosteal elevator, and incise both stuctures together at the
PreParaTIOn ANd POSItIOninG
trochanter fossa. Elevate the gemellus muscle from the cau-
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from dorsal midline to
dolateral surface of the acetabulurm with a periosteal elevator.
mid-tibia. Position the animal in lateral recumbency with the
Use a suture to retract the muscle proximally and caudally.
Incise the joint capsule (see Plate 15A).
allow maximal manipulation during surgery.
Explore the hip joint prior to stabilizing the joint to assess
PROCEDURE
integrity is intact, a number of hip-stabilizing techniques are
Approach: A trochanteric osteotomy is not always necessary
 available.
to reduce and stabilize the hip; however, chronic cases may
Continued
benefit from the additional exposure of an osteotomy.
*Mason Nylon Leader Line, Mason Tackle Company, Otisville, Michigan.
Bone Biter Suture Anchor System, Warsaw, Indiana.
CHAPTer 15
EXtraCapSUlar StaBIlIZaTION Of HIP LuXatION
39
Plate 15
Deep gluteal
muscle
Incision in
joint capsule
Middlegluteal
muscle retracted
proximally
Vastus lateralis
muscle
Tensor fasciae
Biceps femoris muscle
latae muscle
retracted caudally
retracted cranially
Osteotomy of the
 greater trochanter
Tensor fasciae
Superficial gluteal muscle
lataemuscle
(retracted proximally)
(retracted cranially)
 Gemelli muscles incised
 Sciatic nerve
Osteotomy of the
 greater trochanter
Vastus lateralis muscle
40
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
Stabilization: To achieve successful reduction and stabi-
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION
lization of the coxofemoral joint, the use of one or more of the
 The joint should be radiographed to assess implant positioning
following techniques may be necessary: Suture anchors, screws
 and joint congruency. Joint stability and range of motion should
and washers, and wire sutures may be employed for added
be evaluated at 2 to 3 days to assess hip position.
irmbricated.
POSTOPeraTIVE CAre
Stabilization with Capsular Repair and Imbrication:
An Ehmer bandage can be used to assist hip reduction in the
Luxate the femoral head to visually inspect the cartilage surface
early postoperative period. The bandage should be removed 4
for damage. Debride any remaining fibrous tissue, hematoma,
to 7 days after reduction. Cage confinerment may be adequate
and fracture fragments from the acetabular socket. Reduce the
for dogs with stable hips. Leash activity is required for an addi-
femoral head and imbricate the joint capsule with nonab-
tional 3 weeks, and the animal should gradually be returmed to
full activity over a 2-week period. Reexamination is advisable
ciate patterm (Plate 15B). Place the joint through a range of
3 days after removal of the Ehmer bandage and before resump
motion. If the joint is stable, joint capsule repair and imbrica-
tion of umsupervised activity.
tion alone can constitute the reconstructive procedure.
Stabilization with Screw and Washer:? Drill two
ExPected outcome4
holes into the craniodorsal aspect of the acetabular rim at the
 The success rate for maintaining reduction and regaining good
10-0'clock and 1-o'clock positions. Measure, tap, and select two
to excellent limb function with closed reduction is about 50%.
appropriate-length screws, adding 2 mm to the screw length to
The rate is lower in patients with poor conformation of the hip
joint secondary to hip dysplasia or previous trauma. Clinical
screw and washer in the trochanteric fossa, or drill a bone
studies indicate that the success for surgical intervention fol-
tumel through the femoral neck in the trochanteric fossa to
lowing failure of closed reduction does not differ from the suc-
accept the suture. Pass heavy, nonabsorbable suture or cerclage
cess rate for surgical reduction as a primary treatment.
wire between the acetabular screws and trochanteric fossa
Therefore, it is reasonable to attempt closed reduction in
(Plate 15C). Place the joint through a range of motion to ensure
patients with a hip luxation. Regarding maintenance of reduc-
stability and fumction.
tion with good to excellent limb fumction following open reduc-
Stabilization with the Suture Anchor System:
tion, the success rate is approximately 85% to 90%. The results
 Drill two holes into the cramiodorsal aspect of the acetabular
do not appear to favor any one reconstruction technique. Mild
rim at the 10-o'clock and 1-o'clock positions. Insert suture
to moderate degenerative joint disease may be expected in
anchors threaded with heavy, nonabsorbable suture into each
cases with questionable cartilage viability or obvious cartilage
trauma. If cartilage viability or reduction is questionable, sal-
the suture from the acetabular anchors into the trochanteric
vaging lirmb function with a femoral head and neck ostectomy
fossa (Plate 15D). Tie the sutures with the hip at a normal angle
   os    
of flexion and slight abduction and intermal rotation. Place the
prognosis with open reduction is good to excellent if the joint
joint through a range of motion to ensure stability and fumction.
integrity is intact.
Closure: Reattach the external rotator muscles as neces-
sary. If a trochanteric osteotomy has been performed, reattach
the trochanter in a caudodistal position on the femur to pro-
mote joint stability and femoral adduction and internal rotation
References
(Plate 15El). Stabilize the greater trochanter with two
1. Martini FM, Simonazzi B, Bue MD, et al: Extra-articular absorbable
Kirschner wires and a tension band (Plate 15E2). Suture the fas-
cial layers, subcutaneous tissue, and skin.
30(5):468 475, 2001.
2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the craniodorsal aspect of
CAUTIONS4
the hip joint through a craniolateral incision. In An Atlas of Surgical
The most common cause of coxofemoral luxation in the dog is
Approaches to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
motor vehicular traurma; concurrent injuries should therefore
3. Braden T, Johnson M: Technique and indications of a prosthetic cap-
be ruled out. Open reduction may need to be delayed until the
 sule for repair of recurrent and chronic coxofemoral luxations. Vet
animal has been adequately stabilized. A femoral head and neck
Comp Orthop Traumatol 1:26-29, 1988.
excision or total hip replacement should be considered if cox0
4. Bone DL, Walker M, Cantwell HD: Traumatic coxofemoral luxation
femoral integrity is questionable.
CHAPTER 15
EXtrACapSUlAr StaBIlIZaTION Of HIP LuXatION
41
PLATE 15
Bone anchor
Anchorlockedbeneath
cortices
E1
Reattachment
site
42
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
HIP
Intracapsular Stabilization of Hip
Chapter 16
Luxation with Modified Toggle Pin
INDICATIONS
Craniolateral Approach:1 Perform a craniolateral
Open reduction and stabilization is indicated in animals with
approach to the coxofemoral joint. Incise the skin and subcuta-
chronic luxations, failed closed reductions, excessive postre
meous tissue 5 cm proximal to the greater trochanter, curving
duction instability, intra-articular fractures, concurrent pelvic
distally adjacent to the cranial ridge of the trochanter and
fractures, or other fractures of the affected limb that prevent
extending distally from 5 cm over the proximal femur. Incise
closed reduction.
between the tensor fasciae latae muscle and deep border of the
biceps femoris muscle and superficial gluteal muscle. Retract
ObJeCtIVES
the tensor fasciae latae cranially, the biceps caudally, and the
● To restore normal stability, congruency, mobility, and fumc-
middle gluteal muscle proximally. Incise the deep gluteal
tion to the coxofemoral joint
muscle close to its attachment on the trochanter for one third
to one half of its width. Incise the joint capsule (or enlarge the
ANATOMIC CONSIderATIONS
traumatic tear) parallel to the long axis of the femoral neck near
Osseous anatomic landmarks for the coxofemoral joint are the
its proximal ridge. Continue the joint capsule incision laterally
greater trochanter of the fermur and ischial tuberosity and the ilial
through the point of origin of the vastus lateralis muscle on the
wing of the pelvis. The curvilinear incision should center on cra-
cranial face of the proximal femur. Reflect the vastus lateralis
nial edge of the greater tubercle. Distally it extends cranial and
distally to expose the hip joint (Plate 16A).
parallel to the proximal third of the shaft of the femur. Muscular
Dorsal Approach with Trochanteric Osteotomy:2
landmarks include the biceps femoris, the gluteals, and the vastus
Use a dorsal approach to the coxofemoral joint with an
lateralis. Soft tissue bruising and swelling often distort the nor-
osteotomy of the greater trochanter. Incise the skin over the
mal anatomy. To establish normal tissue relationships, the hip
cranial border of the greater trochanter, from 3 to 4 cm
should be reduced before the surgical approach is begun.
proximal to the dorsal ridge of the greater trochanter and
curved 3 to 4 cm, following the cranial border of the femur.
EQuipMent
Incise the superficial leaf of the fascia lata and carry the
● Standard surgical pack, two mediurm or large Gelpi retractors
incision proximally through the insertion of the tensor fasciae
latae muscle at the greater trochanter and along the cranial
speed drill, C-arm aiming device, toggle pin or rod and toggle 
border of the superficial gluteal muscle. Incise through the
rod insertion device.*
insertion of the superficial gluteal muscle at the third
trochanter. Reflect the superficial gluteal muscle proximally
PrEPARATION ANd POSITIONING
 and the biceps femoris caudally to fnd and visualize the course
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from dorsal midline to
of the sciatic nerve. Perforrm an osteotomy of the greater
mid-tibia. Position the animal in lateral recurmbency with the
trochanter with an osteotome and mallet or with Gigli wire (see
affected limb up. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to
Plate 16A). Reflect the gluteal muscles and greater trochanter
from the joint capsule with a periosteal elevator. Elevate the
gemellus muscle frorm the caudolateral surface of the acetab
PROCEDURE
ulum with a periosteal elevator. Use a suture to retract the
Approach: A trochanteric osteotomy is not always necessary
muscle proximally and caudally (see Plate 16A). Incise the joint
to reduce and stabilize the hip; however, chronic cases may
capsule, and explore the hip joint prior to stabilizing the joint to
benefit from the additional exposure of an osteotomy.
assess cartilage viability and sunrounding soft-tissue injury.
Continued
*Securos Coxofemoral Luxation Management System, Charlton, Massachusetts.
CHAPter 16
INtraCapSulAr StaBIliZatION OF HIP luXaTION
43
PlAte 16
Deep gluteal
muscle
Incision in
joint capsule 
Middle gluteal
muscle retracted
proximally
Vastus lateralis
muscle
Tensor fasciae
Bicepsfemorismuscle
latae muscle
retracted caudally
retracted cranially
Osteotomy of the、
greater trochanter
Tensor fasciae
Superficial gluteal muscle
latae muscle
(retracted proximally)
(retracted cranially)
Gemelli muscles incised
Sciaticnerve
Osteotomy of the
 greater trochanter
Vastus lateralis muscle
44
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
Toggle Pin Stabilization:? Luxate the femoral head to
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION
visually inspect the cartilage surface for damage. Debride any
The joint should be radiographed to assess implant positioning
remaining fibrous tissue, hermatoma, and fracture fragments
be evaluated at 2 to 3 days to assess continued need for assisted
origin of the roumd ligament with a 3.5-mm drill bit (Plate 16B).
weight bearing.
 Drill the femoral tunmel from the lateral subtrochanteric area to
the fovea capitis using a C-arm aiming device and a 2.5-mm drill
POStOPerATIVe Care
bit (Plate 16C). Thread four strands of 0 or 1 monofilament
A belly band sling should be used outside for the first 2 to 3 days
nonabsorbable suture material through the toggle pin or rod.
to prevent umcontrolled use of the limb. Exercise should be
Position the toggle device into the acetabular hole and lock it
restricted and the animal should be confined to a kenmel for
into position on the medial cortex of the acetabulurm (Plate
the first 4 to 6 weeks. Then normal activity can be slowly
16D). Thread the sutures through the femoral head and neck
reintroduced.
(Plate 16E). Reduce the femoral head and drill a second trans-
verse bone tmnel cranial to caudal in the subtrochanteric
EXPECTEd OUTCOme?
region of the femur, slightly proximal to the exit hole of the
Outcome is usually good to excellent. Mild to moderate degen-
suture (Plate 16Fl). Pull one pair of the sutures through the
erative joint disease and gait abnormalities may be expected in
second femoral tunmel and snugly tie them to the opposite
cases with questionable cartilage viability or obvious cartilage
sutures (Plate 16F2).
traurma. If cartilage viability or reduction is questionable, a
Capsular Repair and Imbrication: Imbricate the joint
femoral head and neck ostectomy or total hip replacement
capsule with nonabsorbable monofilament material using an
should be considered to salvage limb function.
 interrupted or cruciate patterm. Place the joint through a range
of moti on.
References
Closure: Reattach the external rotator muscles as neces-
1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the craniodorsal aspect of
sary. Reduce and stabilize the greater trochanter with two
the hip joint through a craniolateral incision. In An Atlas of Surgical
Kirchner wires and a tension band. Suture the fascial layers,
Approaches to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed.
subcutaneous tissue, and skin.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
 2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the craniodorsal and cau-
CAUTIONS4
dodorsal aspects of the hip joint by osteotomy of the greater
The sciatic nerve courses dorsomedial to the acetabulum; to
trochanter. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the Bones and
 Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
avoid damaging this nerve, caution must be exercised when
 3. Beckman HP: Use of a modified toggle pin for repair of coxofemoral
  o   n
luxation in dogs with multiple orthopedic injuries (1986- 1994). J Am
toggle pins, passage of suture back through one arm of the
Vet Med Assoc 208:81-84, 1996.
toggle pin in the 3-o'clock and 9-o'clock positions prevents rota-
 4. Flymn MF, Edmiston DN, Roe SC, et al: Biomechanical evaluation of
tion and eliminates uncertainty with regard to final orientation
a toggle pin technique for management of coxofemoral luxation. Vet
after insertion.
Surg 23(5):311-321, 1994.
Chapter 16
INtraCaPSulAr StabIliZatION Of HIP LuXatION
45
plate 16
Aiming device
F2
Suture passer
46
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint diseases
HIP
Femoral Head and Neck
Chapter 17
Ostectomy with Joint Capsule Interpolation
INDICATIONS
fermur is parallel to the operating table (Plate 17B). Visualize the
Candidates include dogs with recuurent or chronic coxofemoral
osteotomy line from the medial aspect of the great trochanter to
luxation, intra-articular coxofemoral fractures that are not
the most proximal aspect of the lesser or second trochanter (Plate
amenable to reduction and stabilization, degenerative joint dis-
17C). Direct the saw blade or osteotorme caudally to ensure com-
plete excision of the fermoral neck and head (Plate 17D). Perform
femoral head and neck.
the osteotomy and grasp the head and neck with pointed reduc
tion forceps. Remove the femoral head and neck by severing the
ObJeCTIVES'
remaining medial joint capsule attachments. Palpate the
● To relieve pain and salvage limb function in cases of
osteotomy for irregularities, and remove any sharp prominences
irreparable damage to the coxofermoral joint
with rongeurs or a bone file. Returm the leg to normal standing
position, and place it through a range of motion, putting medial
ANAtOmIC CONSIdErAtION
pressure on the greater trochanter. If there is excessive crepitus or
Osseous anatomic landmarks for the coxofemoral joint are the
bone-on-bone contact between the femur and acetabulurm, remove
greater trochanter of the femur and ischial tuberosity and the
more of the femoral neck with rongeur, file, or oscillating saw.
ilial wing of the pelvis. The curvilinear incision should center on
Flush the joint and suture the joint capsule over the acetabular
the cranial edge of the greater tubercle. Distally it extends cra-
fossa. The deep gluteal may also be sutured over the acetabulurm
nial and parallel to the proximal third of the shaft of the femur.
if joint capsule coverage is deermed insufficient. Closure is routine.
Muscular landmarks include the biceps femoris, the gluteals,
and the vastus lateralis. To establish normal tissue relationships,
CAUTIONS
the hip should be reduced before the surgical approach is begun.
Proper orientation of the osteotomy is essential to ensure com-
plete removal of the femoral head and neck. Soft tissue inter-
EQUIPMENT
polation will not compensate for a poor cut.
● Standard surgical pack, two medium or large Gelpi retractors
(depending on the size of the dog), periosteal elevator, oscillat-
POStOperatIVe EValuatION
ing saw, osteotome and mallet or Gigli wire, rongeur, bone file 
Postoperative radiographs are indicated to evaluate the
osteotomy. Limb function and range of motion should be evalu-
PreparaTIOn ANd pOSItIoninG
ated at suture removal and at 6 to 8 weeks.
mid-tibia. Position the animal in lateral recumbency with the
POStOPeratIVe Care
 affected limb up. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to
Exercise and physical therapy after surgery should be encour-
aged. Frequent leash walks and passive range-of-motion exer-
cise will improve limb function and use.
PrOCEdUre
Approach:2 Use a craniolateral approach to the coxofemoral
Expected outcome'
joint. Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue 5 cm proximal to
Results of this surgery vary among animals. Factors reported to
the greater trochanter, curving distally adjacent to the cranial
influence limb function include patient temperarment, concurrent
ridge of the trochanter and extending distally from 5 cm over
orthopedic disorders, body weight, chronicity of larmeness before
   a   g  
surgery, preexisting muscle atrophy, extent of surgically induced
muscle and deep border of the biceps femoris muscle and
trauma, completeness of excision, and postoperative activity and
superficial gluteal muscle. Retract the tensor fasciae latae cra-
nially, the biceps caudally, and the middle gluteal muscle proxi-
cated as critical. Dogs that weigh less than 17 kg are reported to
mally. Incise the deep gluteal muscle close to its attachment on
have good to excellent clinical results. Decreased efficacy has
the trochanter for one third to one half of its width. Incise the
been attributed to greater body mass and increased bony con-
joint capsule parallel to the long axis of the femoral neck near
tact between the fermur and acetabulum during weight bearing.
through the point of origin of the vastus lateralis muscle on the
References
cranial face of the proximal fermur. Reflect the vastus lateralis
 1. Lewis DD: Femoral head and neck excision and the controversy
distally to expose the head and neck of the femur (Plate 17A).
concerning adjunctive soft tissue interposition. Compend Contin
Femoral Head and Neck Excision: Subluxate the
Educ Pract Vet 14:1463-1473, 1992.
femoral head by placing lateral traction with pointed reduction
 2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the craniodorsal aspect of
forceps on the greater trochanter. Sever the round ligament, if it
the hip joint through a craniolateral incision. In An Atlas of Surgical
is intact, with Mayo scissors, and fully luxate the hip. Rotate the
Approaches to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed.
lirmb externally so that the patella is directed at the ceiling and the
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
CHApter 17
Femoral head And Neck ostectomy
47
PlAte 17
Middle gluteal muscle
 retracted proximally
 Deep gluteal muscle
Tensor fasciae latae
muscleretracted cranially
Vastus lateralis muscle
retracted distally
Incision in joint capsule
B
Biceps femoris muscle
retracted caudally
C
Maxi driver
blade directed caudally
Externally
rotated limb
 Patella is
 directed at ceiling
48
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
HIP
e Pelvic Osteotomy
Chapter 18
INDICATIONS'
PrEPAraTION ANd POSItIONING
Candidates include immature dogs with coxofemoral laxity and
Prepare the entire hindquarter circumferentially to allow access
subluxation with minimal radiographic signs of degenerative
to the pubis, tuber ischi, and ilium from dorsal and ventral
joint disease.
 midline to mid-tibia. Place a pursestring suture to prevent fecal
contarmination. Position the animal in dorsal recurmbency with
Objectives2
the affected limb up. Drape the limb out from a hanging position
● To improve joint stability and function by providing greater
to allow maximal manipulation during surgery.
dorsal coverage of the femoral head by rotating the dorsal
rim of the acetabulum laterally
PROCEDURE
Pubic Ostectomy:? With the dog in dorsal recumbency,
AnAtOMIC CONSIdeRatIONS
incise the skin and subcutaneous tissues over the pubis, cen-
Three separate surgical approaches and osteotomies of the
tering on the pectineal muscle as it inserts on the iliopectineal
pelvis are necessary to free the acetabular segment for axial
eminence. Elevate the gracilis and adductor muscles from the
rotation and improved dorsal femoral head coverage. The pubic
pubis, and severe the prepubic tendon and pectineus from its
osteotomy is performed first and includes removal of the
cranial aspect. Place two Hohmanm retractors ventral to the
pubic ramus. Osseus anatomic landmarks include the pelvic
proposed osteotomy sites to protect the umderlying soft tissues
symphysis, the iliopubic eminence, and the ventral aspect of the
and the obturator nerve (Plate 18A). Using an oscillating saw,
coxofemoral joint. Pertinent soft tissue landmarks include the
Gigli wire, or osteotome and mallet, perform the first osteotomy
origin of the pectineus muscle on the iliopectineal eminence,
medial to the iliopubic eminence, and the second osteotomy
the prepubic tendon, and the adductor and gracilis muscles.
near the medial limit of the obturator foramen. Remove and pre
Care should be taken to protect the obturator nerve as it
serve the segment of bone in a blood-soaked gauze as a corti-
courses through the cranial portion of the obturator forarmen.
Osseus anatomic landmarks for the ischial osteotomy include
muscle to the prepubic tendon to prevent inguinal herniation.
the tuber ischii laterally and the obturator foramen. Muscular
Closure is routine.
landmarks include the intermal obturator and the sermitendinous
Ischial Osteotomy:2 With the dog in lateral recumbency,
and semimembranosus muscles.
incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue sagittally over the
ischial shelf, midway between midline and the tuber ischii.
EQUIPMENT
Elevate the intermal obturator, semimermbranous, and semi-
● Standard surgical pack, two mediurm or large Gelpi retractors
tendinosus muscles off of the ischial shelf. Perform an
(depending on the size of the dog), periosteal elevator, oscil-
lating saw, osteotome and mallet, Gigli wire or reciprocating
aspect of the obturator foramen with a reciprocating saw or
saw, rongeur, two Hohmann retractors, Kern bone holding
Gigli wire (Plate 18B). The osteotomy is not stabilized. Closure
forceps, plating equipment, drill, and Canine Pelvic
is routine.
Osteotomy plate*
Continued
*Canine Pelvic Osteotomy Plate, Slocum Enterprises, Eugene, Oregon.
CHAPTER 18
Triple pelvic osteotomy
49
PLATe 18
Prepubic
tendon 
Section of
pubic ramus
to be
,Pectineus
removed
muscle
Adductor
muscle
Gracilis
muscle
B
Ischial
lschial
osteotomy site
osteotomy
50
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
Illial Osteotomy and Stabilization:?4 Incise the skin
second cranial screw and filling the ischial cerclage hole with a
and subcutaneous tissue from the center of the iliac crest to the
screw or cerclage.
 gluteal fascia between the tensor fascia latae and the middle
POSTOPErATIVE EVALUATION
 gluteal muscle frorm the ventral iliac spin to the cranial border
 Postoperative radiographs are indicated to evaluate osteotomy
of the biceps femoris muscle. Preserving the cranial gluteal
and implant position and acetabular coverage. Radiographs
artery, vein, and nerve, sharply elevate the origin of the middle
 soa o ao  an s ga d 
ilial shaft. Cauterize the iliolumbar vessels as necessary.
Continue elevating the soft tissues off of the ilial wing medially,
POStOPerATIVe Care
being careful not to injure the sciatic nerve. Palpate the caudal
The animal should be confined to a small area or kennel until
   o ood  s a jo a
the ilial union is evident. Activity should be limited to outside
retractors medial to the iliurm to protect the sciatic nerve (Plate
leash walks for urination and defecation. Care should be taken
18C). Perform the osteotomy of the ilial wing with an oscillating
to avoid stairs and slippery surfaces.
saw. Be sure the osteotomy is caudal to the sacroiliac joint and
perpendicular to a reference pin positioned parallel to the ven-
EXpected 0utcome5.6
tral third of the ilial wing to the tuber ischi (Plate 18D). Move
Outcome is usually good to excellent. Force plate analysis
the acetabular segment cranially and laterally with Kerm bone
holding forceps, and remove the sharp spike of the ilium of the
nonoperated hips. Ninety-two percent of the clinical signs asso-
caudal segment with an oscillating saw or rongeurs. Preserve
ciated with lameness and gait abnorrmalities resolve with min-
the bone segment as a corticocancellous graft for the ilial
imal progression of degenerative joint disease in dogs
osteotomy. Attach the Canine Pelvic Osteotomy Plate to the
umdergoing this procedure. In a separate clinical study, loco-
caudal segment 3 mm dorsal to the ventral margin with
3.5-mm cortical screws (Plate 18E). Drill, measure, and tap the
riority of the tiple pelvic osteotomy over medical treatment
plate holes in the following order: 1, 2, and 3. Rotate the acetab-
and excision arthroplasty.
 ular segment caudolaterally, and fix the plate to the cramial ilial
References
segment. Drill, measure, and tap the plate holes in the following
order: 4, 5, and 6. The small hemi cerclage hole in the caudal
1. Simmons S, Johnson AL, Schaeffer DJ: Risk factors for screw
half of the plate may be left open or filled with a 2.7-mm screw.
migration after triple pelvic osteotomy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
37(3):269-273, 2001.
The hip should now be stable and the Ortolani sign eliminated.
2. Graehler RA, Weigel JP, Pardo AD: The effects of plate type, angle of
 If not, the plate can be removed and replaced with another plate 
ilial osteotomy, and degree of axial rotation on the structural
of increased angle. Most coxofemoral joints in dogs are
anatomy of the pelvis. Vet Surg 23:13-20, 1994.
sufficiently stable with 20 to 30 degrees of rotation. Joints that
3. Slocum B, Slocum TD: Pelvic osteotomy. In Bojrab MJ (ed): Current
Techniques in Small Animal Surgery, 4th ed. Baltimore, Williams &
to warrant the triple pelvic osteotomy procedure. Lavage, place
Wilkins, 1998.
the corticocancellous graft along the osteotomy, and suture
 4. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the ilium through a lateral
the deep gluteal to the sartorius fascia. The rermainder of the
incision. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the Bones and Joints
closure is routine.
of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
5. Plante J, Dupuis J, Beauregard G, et al: Long-term results of conser-
CAUTIONS1
vative treatment, excision arthroplasty and triple pelvic osteotomy
Caution should be taken to protect the cranial gluteal, obtu-
 d o  a u s d go n a o
Radiographic and physical results. Vet Comp Ortho Traum
rator, and sciatic nerves. Premature screw loosening and migra-
10:101-110, 1997.
tion are commonly associated with the cranial portion of the
6. McLaughin RM, Miller CW, Taves CL, et al: Force plate analysis of
plate. Factors associated with decreased screw migration
 triple pelvic osteotomy for the treatment of canine hip dysplasia. Vet
include increasing the depth of sacral purchase in the first and
Surg 20:291-297, 1991.
CHAPTEr 18
Triple pelvic osteotomy
51
PLATe 18
Middle gluteal
C
muscle
D
Osteotomy
line
Cranial gluteal
llial
artery and vein
osteotomy
Deep
Reference line for
gluteal muscle
ilial osteotomy
Tensor
Shaft of
fasciae
ilium
latae muscle
E
Canine pelvic
 Rotated segment
osteotomy plate
of pelvis
52
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint diseases
STIFLE
Medial Patella Luxation Stabilized
Chapter 19
With Wedge Recession Trochleoplasty
Desmotomy, Tibial Tuberosity "
Transposition
and Retinacular Imbrication
INDICATIONS
recummbency at the end of the surgery table to allow for maximal
Candidates include clinically lame animals with Putmanm's
 manipulation and visualization of the stifle joint during surgery.
grade II and above patella luxations.
PROCEdURe2.3
ObJeCTIVES
Lateral Arthrotomy and Medial Desmotomy: Incise
● To improve limb fumction and prevent degenerative joint dis-
the skin and subcutaneous tissue in a curvilinear fashion on the
ease by anatomic realignment and stabilization of the patella
craniolateral aspect of the stifle (Plate 19A). The middle third of
within the trochlear groove
the incision should center on the patellar tendon. Reflect the
skin and subcutaneous tissue laterally with blunt dissection.
ANATOmIC CONSIDERATIONS1.2
Return the patella to its normal orientation within the trochlear
The patella is the largest sesamoid bone in the body; it is
groove, and incise the lateral retinaculum and joint capsule
located within the tendon of insertion of the quadriceps muscle 
from the cupola to the tibial plateau to release the patella and
expose the joint. If the cranial sartorius and vastus medialis
femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus medialis, and vastus inter-
   n    s
medius muscles, converges on the patella and continues as the 
these muscles at the proximal patella. Exarmine the cruciate
         s
ligaments and menisci to check for tears caused by stifle insta-
lateralis and medialis have additional attachrments to the patella
bility, and excise as necessary. Delay closure of the joint until
by medial and lateral parapatellar fibrocartilages, which aid in
 patella aligrment and stability are assessed.
stifle stability through contact with the ridges of the femoral
Wedge Recession Trochleoplasty: With the stifle in
trochlear. Originating from the fabella and merging with the 
flexion and the patella luxated, cut the abaxial and axial mar-
medial and lateral parapatellar fibrocartilages are the collagen 
gins of the wedge osteotomy using the fine-toothed saw (Plate
fibers of the medial and lateral retinacula. The patella articu-
19B1). Keep the margins of the cut wide enough to accommo-
lates within the trochlear groove, which is formed by the
 date the width of the patella. Rermove the wedge and deepen the
trochlear ridges of the medial and lateral condyle. The medial
recession in the trochlea by removing additional bone from
trochlear ridge is thicker than the lateral in normal dogs. Proper 
either side of the trochlear ridge with a file or an additional
anatomic alignment of the extensor mechanism is a straight line
osteotomy, sliced parallel to the original cut. Resect the basilar
of force; this is necessary for stability of the patella. The patella.
surface of the osteochondral wedge with rongeurs to allow the
fumctions in the extensor mechanism of the stifle to provide
cartilage to seat deeply into the new femoral groove patella
cranial and rotary stability to the joint and serves as a lever
(Plate 19B2). Additional trochlear depth can be achieved by
rotating the wedge 180 degrees. Replace the patella, and
extension of the stifle.
examine lirmb alignment and patellar stability. With the stifle
and tarsus flexed at 90 degrees, the patella, tibial tuberosity, and
EQUIPMENT
tarsus should follow the same linear orientation. After evalu-
● Standard surgical pack, small Hohmann retractor, fine-
ating lirmb alignment, flex and extend the stifle while intermally
toothed saw,* bone cutters or osteotome and mallet, Freer
and extermally rotating the pes. If the patella luxates or appears
periosteal elevator, Kirschmer wires, wire driver
malaligned, a desmotomy and tibial tubercle transposition are
indicated.
PrEPARATION AND POSITIONING
Continued
Prepare the leg circumferentially from dorsal midline to below
the tarsus. Use a hanging leg preparation with the dog in dorsal
*X-ACTO Inc., Long Island City, New York
CHAPTER 19
MedIal Patella LuXatION
53
PLATE 19
 Incision in lateral
retinaculum
Wedge resected
Biceps
B1
femoris
muscle
Additional wedge resected
on either side
B2
Osteochondral
wedgereplaced
Patella
Cranialis
tibialis
muscle
M
 Cranialis tibialis
muscle reflected
54
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
Tibial Tubercle Transposition: Incise the lateral retina-
transposition is imperative to a successful outcome of the sur-
gery. Retinacular imbrication and joint capsule closure should
tally to the tibial tubercle. Elevate the cranial tibial muscle from
be evaluated after each imbricating suture to ensure a balanced
the tibia to the level of the long digital extensor tendon. Perform
and stable closure.
a partial osteotomy of the tibial tubercle, preserving the distal
periosteal attachment of the tibial tubercle to serve as a biolog-
POStOPeratIVe EVALuatION
ical tension band using bone cutters or an osteotome and mallet
Radiographs should be evaluated for patellar aligmment and
(Plate 19Cl). Rongeur an osseus bed for the tibial tubercle to
implant placement. Radiographs should be repeated every 6 to
reside in, and with the stifle and tarsus flexed at 90 degrees,
8 weeks until the osteotomy site is healed.
lever the tibial tubercle laterally with a periosteal elevator so
that it is in alignment with the patella and tarsus. Stabilize the
POStOPErATIVe Care
tubercle with two divergent Kirschner wires directed caudally
The limb should be placed in a soft, padded bandage for 1 to
and slightly proximally, engaging but not extending beyond the
 2 days. Activity should be restricted to walks on a leash until the
caudal cortex of the tibia (Plate 19C2). Reevaluate patellar
osteotomy site is healed. Passive range-of-motion exercises
alignment and stability, and relocate the tuberosity if needed.
 may help maintain muscle mass and stifle range of motion.
Cut and bend the Kirschmer wires to prevent soft tissue irrita-
tion and facilitate removal if migration occurs.
Expected outcome?
Joint Capsule Closure and Retinacular Imbrication:
Outcome is usually good to excellent. The prognosis depends
 Excise excessive lateral joint capsule and perform a balanced
on the age of the patient at the time of surgery, the body weight
closure of the joint capsule and retinaculum. Check patellar sta-
and condition score, and the amount of degenerative joint dis-
bility after each imbricating suture. Imbricate the lateral joint
oid aseas puol aagenauaaq Aiasms on rotid puasaid aa
capsule and lateral patellar tendon. Recheck patellar stability.
 gresses despite surgical correction and is positively correlated
Close the lateral and medial retinaculurm with a vest-over-pants
with the animal's age at surgery.
       
each suture is placed, evaluate patellar stability. Closure of the
medial joint capsule may not be indicated in higher grades of
References
patellar luxation. Allow the medal arthrotomy to separate, and
1. Roush JK: Canine patellar luxation. Vet Clin North Amer 23:855-875,
do not suture the cut edges if medial luxation is severe. Close
1992.
the subcutaneous tissue and skin over the arthrotomy and
  so    i  ' ii 7
Pathogenesis and diagnosis. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
retinacular incisions.
24:234-239, 2002.
3. LEplattenier H, Montavon P: Patellar luxation in dogs and cats:
CAUTIONS4
Management and prevention. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
 The most common complication associated with surgical repair 
24:292-300, 2002.
of patella luxation is recurrence of the luxation. Correction of 
 4 Willauer CC, Vasseur PB: Clinical results of surgical correction of 
the malalignment of the extensor mechanism via tibial tubercle
 medial luxation of the patella in dogs. Vet Surg 16:31-36, 1987.
CHAPTER 19
MedIal Patella luXatlON
55
PLATE 19
Biceps
femoris
muscle
Modified Mayo mattress suture
 Cranialis tibialis
muscle reflected
56
Part one · surGical procedures for Joint diseases
STIFLE
Deranged Stifle Luxation
ChApter 20
Stabilized with Suture Anchors, Screws.
and Suture
Indications1-4
and baby Ochsner forceps for joint inspection and cruciate lig
Surgical stabilization and intermal fixation is indicated in ani-
ament debridement.
mals with gross instability of the stifle resulting from multiple
a u pam samnns ouuoo psou au mfu juai
PreParatIOn And POSITIOnING
luxated stifle are the cranial and caudal cruciate, and either
Prepare the leg circumferentially from dorsal midline to below
the lateral or medial collateral ligament. Reconstruction of the
the tarsus. Use a hanging leg preparation with the dog in dorsal
collateral and cranial cruciate ligaments and careful repair or
recurmbency at the end of the surgery table to allow for maximal
removal of damaged menisci and joint capsule is an effective
 manipulation and visualization of the stifle joint during surgery.
treatment method for medium and large dogs. Reconstruction
pons qu aaeadosod pue nau aeoni pno a go
PROCEDURE
is not foumd to be essential.
 Approach:s-7 Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue in a
curvilinear fashion on the craniolateral aspect of the stifle. The
ObJectiVes
middle third of the incision should center on the patelar
● To restore normal stability, congruency, mobility, and fumc-
tendon. Reflect the skin and subcutaneous tissue medially and
tion to the stifle joint
laterally with blumt dissection. Perform a medial arthrotomy,
and incise the joint capsule from the cupula to the tibial plateau
ANATOmIC CONSIdERAtIONS2.4
to expose the joint. Luxate the patella, and flex the limb.
The stifle joint is primarily stabilized by the cranial and caudal
Exarmine the cruciate ligaments and menisci to check for tears,
cruciate ligaments, the medial and lateral collateral ligaments,
and excise/debride as necessary. Lavage and close the joint. To
the joint capsule, and menisci. Additional stability may be
   rs  o  a aoa
provided by the patellar tendon, quadriceps, and popliteal
of the caudal belly of the sartorius and elevate its insertion
musculature.
caudally to the level of the ligament (Plate 20A). To expose the
lateral collateral ligament, incise the aponeurosis of the biceps
EQuiPMENT
femoris muscle just cranial to the muscle fibers and elevate the
● Standard surgical pack, two medium or large Gelpi retractors
biceps femoris and attached fascia lata caudally to the level of
(depending on the size of the dog), periosteal elevator, Jacob
the ligament. Before cranial cruciate repair is begun, stabilize
the collateral ligarment(s) to restore norrmal joint alignment and
fishing leader line,* suture anchor system, and crimp clarmp
congruity.
system
Collateral Ligament Repair: Inspect the ligament for
Altermatively, a bone tunmel and screw and washer combina-
tears or avulsions. Repair avulsed intact ligaments with a screw
tion may be used if a suture anchor systerm is not available or if
and spiked plastic washer? (Plate 20B1). As a general rule,
the animal is not large enough to accommodate the suture
repair mid-substance tears with a locking loop suture (Plate
anchor system. Additional instrumentation needed for this tech-
20B2). Then protect the repaired ligament with screws,
nique includes a high-speed drill, bone screw and washer, drill
washers, and heavy suture; wire placed in a figure-eight suture
pattern; or suture anchors (Plate 20B3).
Continued
*The 20-, 40-, 60-, 80-, 100-pound test is available through Mason Tackle Company,
Otisville, Michigan.
Inmovative Animal Products, Rochester, Minmesota.
Securos Veterinary Orthopedics, Charlton, Massachusetts.
Synthes, Mcnument, Colorado.
CHAPTer 20
DerANGed StIfle luXATION
57
PlAte 20
Caudal head of
sartorius
 muscle reflected
Ruptured medial
collateral ligament
 and joint capsule
B2
B3
 Suture anchor threaded
with two sutures
inserted in femur
 Anchor locked beneath
Locking loop
cortices
repair
58
PARt ONe · SuRGICal PrOCEdUReS fOR JOINT DISeASES
Cranial Cruciate Ligament Repair: To expose the
for definitive diagnosis.
femoris muscle just cranial to the muscle fibers, and blumtly ele-
vate the biceps femoris and attached fascia lata caudally to the
POStOPErATIVe EVALUATION
level of the ligament. Palpate the fabella and fibular head for
The range of motion should be evaluated, and the stifle should
proper anatormic orientation of the lateral fabellar suture. Pass
be checked for cranial drawer before the patient awakens. The
the appropriate-size monofilament fishing leader line through
 stifle should be radiographed to assess implant positioning and
the eye of a Martin uterine needle, and pass the needle aroumd
joint congruency.
the cranial half of the fabella from proximal to distal. As a gen-
eral rule, use l poumd of test per pound of body weight. Drill a
PoStOPeratIVe Care
s as g o qo e  a a ao
Exercise should be restricted to outside leash walks for uwina-
to pass the eye of the needle through the tibial crest from lateral
tion and defecation, and the animal should be confined to a
to medial. The hole should be proximal to the most prominent
kenmel for the first 4 to 6 weeks. Then the animal's activity
point of the tibial tuberosity, in order to estimate the insertion
should slowly be returmed to normal.
 of the cranial cruciate ligament. Pass the suture under the soft
tissues of the cranial tibia to avoid muscle entrapment and pre
EXPected outcome?
mature loosening of the lateral fabellar suture frorm tissue
Because of the traumatic nature of this disease, concormitant
necrosis. Pass the leader line from lateral to medial through the
injuries are common and must be addressed prior to surgery;
hole in the tibial crest and then under the patellar ligarment
however, they do not justify a worse prognosis in dogs with
stifle luxation. Delaying surgery to stabilize the patient is often
in half to remove the needle, obtaining two sutures to tie. Flex
necessary and also does not contribute to any difference in out-
the stifle to a normal standing angle, hold the tibia caudally and 
come. The long-term prognosis with stifle stabilization is fair to
rotated extermally to remove drawer motion, and tie each suture
good, despite decreases in range of motion and reductions of
individually. Using the Securos crimp clarmp system, slide one
 muscle mass of the affected limb. Mild to moderate degenera-
nd pue sduep duo eoeans a yano au e pe pua ainns
tive joint disease and gait abnormalities may be expected in
the ends so that the loop becomes taut (Plate 20C). Slide the
cases with questionable cartilage viability or obvious cartilage
additional crimp clamps on each end of the suture, positioning
trauma.
therm 2 mrm to 3 mrm from the center crimp clamp. Use the crimp
References
tool to firmly crimp the clarmp on the individual strands. Slide
the slotted tips of the tensioning device over the suture, and
1. Aron DN: Traumatic dislocation of the stifle joint: Treatment of 12
squeeze the arms of the tensioning device one click at a time,
dogs and one cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:333-340, 1988.
 2. Welches CD, Scavelli TD: Transarticular pinning to repair luxation of
palpating for drawer and range of motion (Plate 20D). Once the
the stifle joint in dogs and cats: A retrospective study of 10 cases. J
appropriate amount of tension is obtained, crimp the middle
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:207-214, 1990.
clamp holding the two sutures three times, once in the middle
 3. Hulse DA, Shires P: Multiple ligament injury of the stifle joint in the
and once on either end (Plates 20E1 and 20E2). Altermatively,
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:105-110, 1986.
use a sliding half hitch or a clarmped square kmot to stabilize
 4. Bruce WJ: Multiple ligamentous injuries of the canine stifle joint: A
the stifle. Check the stifle for range of motion and cranial
study of 12 cases. J Small Anim Pract 39:333-340, 1998.
drawer after each suture is tied. Imbricate the lateral fascia
5. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the stifle joint through a
covering of the biceps femoris with a vest-over-pants closure.
medial incision. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the Bones and
Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
CAuTIoNS?
 6. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the medial collateral liga-
Preoperative palpation should be performed and stress radio-
ment and caudomedial part of the stifle joint. In An Atlas of Surgical
Approaches to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed.
 graphs of the stifle joint should be taken under sedation or gen-
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
'samfr panadsns aun po puaussasse rado id og eisasae eia
7. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the lateral collateral liga-
Stifle joint stability should be assessed in all planes with the
ment and caudolateral part of the stifle joint. In An Atlas of Surgical
joint held in extension, normal standing angle, and 90 degrees
Approaches to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed.
flexion while maintaining the tibia in neutral position; however,
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
CHApter 20
DerANGed StIfle luXATION
59
PlAte 20
Lateral
fabella
Lateral
collateral
ligament
Drill hole 
 in tibial
crest
Tensioning
device
E
E2
Correct Crimp Pattern
Crimps too close
totheedge
Incorrect Crimp Pattern
60
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
STIFLE
Cranial Cruciate Repair
ChaPter 21
with a Lateral Fabellar Suture
INDICATIONS
p on og d pa ay   qo
Candidates include animals with stifle instability caused by par-
fishing leader line,* Martin uterine needles, and crimp clarmp
tial or complete cranial cruciate ligament injury as diagnosed
system
via palpati on or arthrotomy.
Additional instrumentation needed for this techmique
includes a baby Hohrmanm retractor, baby Ochsner forceps, and
ObJeCtIVes
     g  r  
● To improve limb function by stabilization of the stifle and
debridement.
     ro s   o
external suture strut to temporarily support the limb in neu-
PreParatION And POSItIOnInG
tral drawer position
Prepare the leg circumferentially from dorsal midline to below
the tarsus. Use a hanging leg preparation with the dog in dorsal
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS1
recumbency at the end of the surgery table to allow for maxi-
The cranial cruciate ligament is composed of two elements:
mal manipulation and visualization of the stifle joint during
(1) the craniomedial and (2) the caudal lateral band. It has three
surgery.
important functions in defining stifle motion and stability.
Together the bands work to limit joint hyperextension and
PROCEDURE
intermal rotation and cranial displacement of the tibial plateau.
 Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue in a curvi-
The smaller cramiomedial band remains taut (and thus restricts
linear fashion on the craniolateral aspect of the stifle. The
motion) in both extension and flexion of the stifle joint. The
middle third of the incision should center on the patellar
more substantial caudolateral band is taut in only extension.
tendon. Reflect the skin and subcutaneous tissue medially and
This seermingly minute piece of anatomic trivia is important in
laterally with blunt dissection.
understanding the clinical signs associated with partial and
Arthrotomy: Perform a medial arthrotomy, and incise the
complete cranial cruciate injury. If the craniomedial band is
a asodxa o naeid gen a oi edna a uo as puo
disrupted, which is more commonly seen in the dog, cranial
joint. Luxate the patella and flex the limb. Examine the cruciate
drawer will be only elicited in flexion, because the caudolateral
ligaments and menisci to check for tears, and excise/debride
band is lax with the stifle held in this position. If the caudo-
 asn 'aua aeni pam a apnaep o Xssanau se
lateral band is disrupted, there may be no drawer palpable,
no. 11 blade and incise the origins of the ligament within the
because the craniomedial band is still present and taut in both
intercondylar notch of the caudomedial portion of the lateral
flexion and extension. If both bands are torn, drawer will be
condyle (Plate 2lA). Take care not to injure the caudal cruciate
 palpable in both flexion and extension.
    a    
the intercondylar fossa of the fermur. This may be achieved
EQuipMenT
  a   a    s  
● Standard surgical pack, one medium or large Gelpi retrac-
   tos a ao o a  s
tor (depending on the size of the dog), periosteal elevator,
method.
Continued
*The 20-, 40, 60-, 80-, 100-pound test is available through Mason Tackle Company,
Dtisville, Michigan.
Inmovative Animal Products, Rochester, Minnesota.
CHAPTER21
CranIal CruCIate REPaIr With A lateral Fabellar Suture
61
PLATE21
 Cranial
cruciate
ligament 
Medial
meniscus
62
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
Lateral Fabellar Suture:2.3 To expose the lateral collat-
CAUTIONS2.4
eral ligarment, incise the aponeurosis of the biceps femoris
 Activity should be restricted to short walks on a leash to pre
muscle just cranial to the muscle fibers, and blumtly elevate the
vent premature breakdowm of the stifle stabilization. Risk of early
biceps femoris and attached fascia lata caudally to the level of
failure may be higher with poor fabella anchorage; therefore,
the ligament (Plate 21B). Palpate the fabella and fibular head for
particular attention should be paid to needle position relative to
proper anatormic orientation of the lateral fabellar suture. Pass
fabella anatomy. Meniscal darmage is reported in 45% of cranial
cruciate rupture, with the medial meniscus being most commonly
eye of a Martin uterine needle, and pass the needle aroumd
affected. Careful assessrment of both menisci is important because
the cranial half of the fabella from proximal to distal. As a gen-
damaged menisci should be partially debrided or excised.
eral rule, use 1 poumd of test per pound of body weight. Drill a
s as g o qo e  a a ao
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION4
to pass the eye of the needle through the tibial crest from lateral
The range of motion should be evaluated and the stifle for cra-
to medial. Make the hole proximal to the most prominent point
nial drawer should be checked before the patient awakens. It is
of the tibial tuberosity in order to estimate the insertion of the
not necessary to radiograph the stifle to assess implant posi-
cranial cruciate ligament. Pass the suture under the soft tissues
tioning and joint congruency in this repair.
of the cranial tibia to avoid muscle entrapment and premature
loosening of the lateral fabellar suture from tissue necrosis.
POStOPErATIVe Care
 Pass the leader line from lateral to medial through the hole in
The leg should be placed in a soft, padded bandage for 24 hours
to cover the wound and provide support. Exercise should be
ately proximal to the tibial tuberosity. Cut the leader line in half
restricted and the animal should be confined to a kenmel for
to remove the needle, obtaining two sutures to tie. Flex the
the first 4 to 6 weeks. Then normal activity should slowly be
stifle to a normal standing angle, hold the tibia caudally and
reintroduced.
rotated extermally to remove drawer motion, and tie each suture
individually. Using the Securos crimp clamp system, slide one
EXPECTED OUTCOME
 suture end at a time through the surgical crimp clamps and pull
Osteoarthritis is a common sequela to cranial cruciate rupture,
the ends so that the loop becomes taut. Slide the additional
particularly when meniscal damage is present. However, the
crimp clamps on each individual end of the suture, positioning
them 2 mm to 3 mm from the center crimp clamp (Plate 21C).
and confinement.
Use the crimp tool to firmly crimp the clamp on the individual
strands. Slide the slotted tips of the tensioning device over the
References
suture, and squeeze the arms of the tensioning device one click
1. Hart RC, Hulse DA, Slater MR: Contribution of periarticular tissue to
at a time, palpating for drawer and range of motion (Plate 21D).
 Stabilization of the canine stifle joint after cranial cruciate ligament
a du 'paenqo st uotsuan jo punoue aendoidde a auo
reconstruction. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 16:21-25, 2003.
middle clarmp holding the two sutures three times, once in the
2. Lampman TJ, Lund EM, Lipowitz AJ: Cranial cruciate disease:
Current status of diagnosis, surgery, and risk for disease. Vet Comp
sliding half hitch or a clamped square knot to stabilize the stifle.
Orthop Traumatol 16:122-126, 2003.
 3. Peycke LE, Kerwin SC, Hosgood G, Metcalf JB: Mechanical compar-
Check the stifle for range of motion and cranial drawer after
ison of six loop fixation methods with monofilament nylon leader
each suture is tied. Imbricate the lateral fascia covering of the 
line. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 15:210-214, 2002.
biceps femoris with a vest-over-pants closure (Plate 21E2) from
4. Stork CK, Gibson NR, Owen MR, et al: Radiographic features of a
the patella to the tibial crest to cover the sutures and help pre
lateral extracapsular wire suture in the canine cranial cruciate
vent seroma formation (Plate 21E3).
deficient stifle. J Small Anim Pract 42:487-490, 2001.
tSecuros Veterinary Orthopedics, Charlton, Massachusetts.
CHAPTER21
CraNIal CrUCIate rEPaIr WIth A lateRal Fabellar SuTuRe
63
PlAte 21
B
Lateral
fabella
Lateral
collateral
ligament
Secondary
crimp clamp
Drill hole
 in tibial
Primary
crest
crimp clamp
Secondary
crimp clamp
Tensioning
device
E1
E2
Modified Mayo mattress suture
E3
CorrectCrimpPattern
Crimps too close
totheedge
Incorrect Crimp Pattern
64
Part one · surGIcal procedures fOr JOInt dIseases
STIFLE
Cranial Cruciate Repair
ChAPter 22
with Intra-articular Repair
INDICATIONS
Additional instrumentation needed for this techmique
Candidates include animals with stifle instability caused by par-
includes baby Hohmann retractor, baby Ochsner forceps, and
tial or complete cranial cruciate ligament injury as diagnosed
a no. 11 blade for joint inspection and cruciate ligament
via palpation or arthrotomy.
debri dement.
OBJECTIVES
PREPARATION AND POSITIONING
 Prepare the leg circumferentially from dorsal midline to below
ease by stabilization of the stifle, and to prevent cranial dis-
the tarsus. Use a hanging leg preparation with the dog in dorsal
placerment of the tibial plateau by replacing the cranial crucial
recumbency at the end of the surgery table to allow for maximal
ligament with an autogenous intermal graft
 manipulation and visualization of the stifle joint during surgery.
ANATOmIC CONSIDERATIONS1
PROCEDURE
The cranial cruciate ligament is composed of two elements:
 Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue in a curvi-
(1) the craniomedial and (2) the caudal lateral band. It has three
linear fashion on the craniolateral aspect of the stifle. Center
important functions in defining stifle motion and stability.
the middle third of the incision on the patellar tendon. Reflect
Together the bands work to limit joint hyperextension and
the skin and subcutaneous tissue medially and laterally with
intermal rotation and cranial displacement of the tibial plateau.
blunt dissection.
The smaller cramiomedial band remains taut (and thus restricts
Arthrotomy and Notchplasty:2a Perform a lateral
motion) in both extension and flexion of the stifle joint. The
arthrotomy, and incise the joint capsule from the cupula to the
more substantial caudolateral band is taut in only extension.
This seermingly minute piece of anatomic trivia is important in
long digital extensor tendon (Plate 22A). Luxate the patella and
understanding the clinical signs associated with partial and
flex the limb. Examine the cruciate ligaments and menisci to
complete cranial cruciate injury. If the craniomedial band is
check for tears and excise/debride as necessary. To debride the
disrupted, which is more commonly seen in the dog with partial
  a i ou     
cranial cruciate injury, cranial drawer will be elicited only in
the origins of the ligament within the intercondylar notch of
flexion, because the caudolateral band is lax with the stifle held
the caudomedial portion of the lateral condyle. Take care not to
in this position. If the caudolateral band is disrupted, there may
injure the caudal cruciate ligaments where they cross each
be no palpable drawer at all, because the craniomedial band is
other near attachments in the intercondylar fossa of the femur.
still present and taut in both fexion and extension. If both
Perform a notchplasty with a bone rasp, curette, or rongeur,
bands are torm, drawer will be palpable in both fexion and
removing any osteophytes and widening the lateral wall of the
extension.
intercondylar notch to allow adequate space to pass the graft
and to protect the graft from impingerment of the craniolateral
EQUIPMENT
● Standard surgical pack, one medium or large Gelpi retractor
returm the patella to its original position.
(depending on the size of the dog), periosteal elevator, drill,
Continued
dill bit, screws, plastic washers, rongeurs, bone rasp, curette,
straight needle and/or cerclage wire
CHAPTER22
CranIal CruCIate repaIr WIth IntRa-ArtiCular repaIr
65
PLATE 22
B
Biceps
Notchplasty
femoris
muscle
Cranialcruciate
ligament debrided
Fascia
lata strip
Tibial
tunnel
Cranialistibialis
muscle reflected
66
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
Intracapsular Graft: 1.2.2 Harvest a 10-cm graft from the
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION5
craniolateral aspect of the distal fascia lata and lateral third of
The range of motion should be evaluated, and the stifle should
the patellar tendon, using the arthrotomy incision as the caudal
be checked for cranial drawer before the patient awakens. It is
border of the graft. Free the graft and its bony insertion onto the
not necessary to radiograph the stifle to assess implant posi-
tibial plateau with an osteotome while maintaining its distal fas-
tioning and joint congruency in this repair.
cial attachrments (see Plate 22A). Create a tibial tunmel with a
drill bit large enough to accept the graft from the cranial surface
POStOPeratIVe Care
of the tibia (see Plate 22B). Altermatively, use a guide wire fol-
The leg should be placed in a soft, padded bandage for 24 hours
lowed by a cannulated drill bit to ensure accuracy of the graft
to cover the wound and provide support. Exercise should be
placerment. The entry point location of the tunmel is just lateral
restricted and the animal should be confined to a kenmel for
and distal to the tibial tuberosity, exiting into the joint at the
the first 4 to 6 weeks. Then normal activity should be slowly
point of insertion of the cranial cruciate ligament (Plate 22C).
reintroduced.
Place one or two stay sutures in the end of the graft using large
diameter monofilament suture (0 or 1) or cerclage wire. Thread
Expected Outcome
the stay suture with a straight needle or loop of cerclage wire
Osteoarthritis is a cormmon sequela to cranial cruciate rupture,
through the bone tunnel in the tibia from distal to proximal.
particularly when meniscal damage is present; however, the
Place the graft through the intercondylar notch by passing
prognosis is good to excellent with proper postoperative care
  n do   g   a 
and confinement.
condyle or by creating a separate femoral tumnel extending
from the point of origin of the cranial cruciate to the caudolat-
eral aspect of the femoral condyle and passing the straight
  d   aa  o  
References
Secure the graft to the distal femur by suturing it to the femo
1. Hart RC, Hulse DA, Slater MR: Contribution of periarticular tissue to
  o ( on     
stabilization of the canine stifle joint after cranial cruciate ligament
 absorbable suture, or with a spiked screw and washer with the
reconstruciton. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 16:21-25, 2003.
stifle in standing flexion (Plate 22E). Check the stifle for range 
2. Fitch RB, Montgomery RD, Kincaid SA, et al: The effect of inter-
of motion and cranial drawer after the graft is secured.
condylar notchplasty on the normal canine stifle. Vet Surg
24:156-164, 1996.
CAUTIONS4.5
3. Moore KW, Read RA: Rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament in
Placing excessive tension on the graft should be avoided,
 dogs. Part I1. Diagnosis and management. Compend Contin Educ
Pract Vet 18(4):381-391, 1996.
because it will lead to premature failure of the repair. Normally,
4. Lampman TJ, Lund EM, Lipowitz AJ: Cranial cruciate disease:
2 mm to 3 mm of drawer motion should be detected on palpa-
 Current status of diagnosis, surgery, and risk for disease. Vet Comp
tion. Excessive drawer may then be removed by joint capsule
Orthop Traumatol 16:122-126, 2003.
and fascial imbrication; however, many surgeons at this point
5. Stork CK, Gibson NR, Owen MR, et al: Radiographic features of a lat.
often reenforce the intracapsular repair with a lateral fabellar
eral extracapsular wire suture in the canine cranial cruciate
suture (see Chapter 21 for details regarding this procedure).
deficient stifle. J Small Anim Pract 42:487-490, 2001.
CHApter 22
CranIal CruCIate repair With IntRa-ArtiCular repaIr
67
Plate 22
$
Site of 
Lateral
 Spiked
drill hole
fibula
washer
M
68
Part one · surGical procedures for Joint diseases
STIFLE
Meniscectomy
Chapter 23
INDICATIONS
(particularly to the caudal pole), and increases the likelihood of
Candidates include animals with meniscal damage caused by
degenerative joint disease and stifle dysfumction. The medial
stifle instability from chronic partial or complete cranial cru-
meniscus has been reported to be damaged in 47% to 80% of
ciate ligament injury or traumatic luxation.
cranial cruciate deficient stifles and aroumd 14% of previously
ed anou auanadxa Aensn aup ostuau wm so
repaired cranial cruciate deficient stifles.45
and display more lameness in association with stifle instability
than in association with a pure cruciate tear.
EQUIPMENT
● Standard surgical pack, one medium or large Gelpi retractor
OBJECTIVES
(depending on the size of the dog), baby Hohrmann retractor,
● To improve limb fumction and decrease pain associated with
baby Ochsner forceps, and a no. 11 or 15 blade for joint
inspection and cruciate ligament and meniscal debridement
because of stifle instability
or excision
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS1
PrePAratION And POSItIOnInG
Dogs and cats have a medial and a lateral menisci that reside
Prepare the leg circumferentially from dorsal midline to below
within the stife joint. The fumctions of the menisci are complex,
the tarsus. Use a hanging leg preparation with the dog in dorsal
but these structures are very important to normal stifle biome
recumbency at the end of the surgery table to allow for maxirmal
chanics. They are white, C-shaped, discoid, fibrocartilagenous
manipulation and visualization of the stifle joint during surgery.
structures that are wedge-shaped when viewed on cross sec-
tion. Each meniscus consists of a body and a cranial and caudal
PROCEDURE
pole. The medial meniscus is stabilized by cranial and caudal
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue in a curvi-
tibial ligaments, an intermeniscal ligament, and a strong attach-
linear fashion on the craniolateral aspect of the stifle. Center
ment to the medial collateral ligament. The lateral meniscus is
the middle third of the incision on the patellar tendon. Reflect
less firmly attached via cranial and caudal tibial ligaments, an
the skin and subcutaneous tissue medially and laterally with
intermeniscal ligament, and a caudal femoral ligament. The
blunt dissection.
menisci move slightly while the stifle joint moves through its
Arthrotomy: Perform a medial arthrotomy, and incise the
ranges of motion, but because of the presence of more synovial
attachrment, the caudal tibial ligament, and the lack of a femoral
joint. Luxate the patella and flex the limb. Examine the cruciate
attachment, the medial meniscus moves less than the lateral
ligaments and menisci to check for tears and excise/debride as
een e u Amfu o pasodsipand anou aq Aeu aoganaun pue
cruciate deficient stifle.? Once the cranial cruciate ligament is
blade and incise the origins of the ligarment within the inter-
disrupted, cranial displacement of the tibia acts to wedge the
condylar notch of the caudomedial portion of the lateral
posterior horm of the medial meniscus between the tibial plateau
condyle (Plate 23A). Take care not to injure the caudal cruciate
and the femoral condyle.? Repetitive entrapment between the
ligaments where they cross each other near attachrments in the
femoral condyle and tibial plateau results in meniscal injury
intercondylar fossa of the femur.
Continued
CHAPTer 23
MeniScectOMY
69
PLATE 23
Cranial
cruciate
ligament
Medial
meniscus
70
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
Meniscectomy: Using a baby Hohrmann retractor, lever
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
the tibial plateau forward by placing the tip of the instrrment
The leg should be placed in a soft, padded bandage for 24 hours
behind the tibial plateau while holding the stife at a normal
to cover the wound and provide support. Therapeutic exercise
standing angle (Plate 23B). Avoid excessive flexion of the joint,
and rehabilitation should be strongly considered for the first 4
because it will close the joint space and limit visualization of
to 6 weeks. Then normal activity should be slowly reintroduced.
the menisci. Inspect both the medial and lateral menisci for
tears or crushing injury (see Plate 23B). If only the caudal pole
EXpected 0utcome7.&
is affected, perform a partial meniscectomy. Grasp the damage
A guarded prognosis for full returm to fumction is the general
portion of the meniscus firmly with Ochsner forceps and place
rile when meniscal damage is present, because degenerative
cranial traction on the damaged pole. Incise the caudal menis-
joint disease is a cormmon sequela. Aggressive postoperative
cotibial ligament to release the caudal pole with a number 11 or
rehabilitation has been shown to improve the fumction in the
15 blade (Plate 23C1). Next release the synovium and collateral
case of dogs with meniscal damage.
attachments (if performing a medial meniscectomy) of the body
 until healthy fibrocartilage is reached and cut perpendicularly
across the body of the meniscus to remove the caudal pole
References
(Plate 23C2). If the entire meniscus is damaged, perform a com-
1. Flo GL: Meniscal injuries. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
plete meniscotomy. Incise the intermeniscal and cranial tibial
23(4):831-843, 1993.
attachments of the cranial pole (Plate 23Dl). Release the
2. Amoczky SP: Pathomechanics of cruciate and meniscal injuries. In
Bojrab MJ: Disease Mechanisms in Small Animal Surgery.
lateral traction on the cranial pole of the meniscus with an
Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1993.
Ochsner forceps. Finally, incise the caudal meniscotibial liga-
3. Aglietti P, Zaccherotti G, De Biase P, et al: A comparison between
ment to release the caudal pole and remove the meniscus
medial meniscus repair, partial meniscectomy, and normal meniscus
in anterior cruciate ligament reconstructed knees. Clin Orthop
(Plate 23D2)
(307):165-173, 1994.
Lavage and close the joint in one or two layers, making sure
4
Metelman LA, Schwarz PD, Salman M, Alvis MR: An evaluation of
to appose the synovial layer with either method. Stabilize the
three different cranial cruciate ligament surgical stabilization
 o s  xa   a o
procedures as they relate to postoperative meniscal injuries: A
 prevent further injury.
retrospective study of 665 stifles. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
8(2):118-123, 1995.
CAUTIONS
 5. Timmermann C, Meyer-Lindenberg A, Nolte I: Meniscus injuries in
Meniscectomy should not be performed umless there is
        
meniscal pathology present, because either partial or complete
Wochenschr 105(10):374-377, 1998.
6. Stork CK, Gibson NR, Owen MR, et al: Radiographic features of a
meniscectomy results in the progression of degenerative joint
disease.
lateral extracapsular wire suture in the canine cranial cruciate
deficient stifle. J Small Anim Pract 42:487-490, 2001.
7. Innes JF, Bacon D, Lynch C, et al: Long-term outcome of surgery for
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION6
dogs with cranial cruciate ligament deficiency. Vet Rec
The range of motion should be evaluated and the stifle should
147(12):325-328, 2000.
be checked for cranial drawer before the patient awakens. It is
8. Marsolais GS, Dvorak G, Conzemius MG: Effects of postoperative
not necessary to radiograph the stifle to assess implant posi-
rehabilitation on limb function after cranial cruciate ligament repair
tioning and joint congruency.
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 220(9):1325-1330, 2002.
Chapter 23
 Meniscectomy
71
PlAte 23
C1
C2
72
Part one · surGical procedures for Joint diseases
STIFLE
Stifle Arthrodesis
Chapter 24
INDICATIONS
of the selected joint angle (see Plate 24B). Resect the articular
Candidates include animals with unreconstructable joint frac-
 portion of the tibia parallel to wire 1 and perpendicular to the
tures, stifle luxation, or severe osteoarthritis. Other candidates
long axis of the tibia. Resect the articular surface of the femur
parallel to wire 3 and perpendicular to the long axis of the
conventional treatment. 12
femur (see Plate 24B). Appose the femoral and tibial ostectomy
surfaces and temporarily fix them with Kirschmer wires (Plate
ObJeCtIVeS
24C). Ensure that the guiding Kirschner wires are in the same
plane to preserve rotational alignment. Remove the guiding
position
Kirschner wires. Resect the trochlear ridges to improve plate
contact (see Plate 24B). Apply a plate of appropriate size and
Anatomic conSiderationS
contour, allowing at least four screws in the fermur and four
The landmarks for the incision are the distal femoral diaphysis,
screws in the tibia. Secure the plate by first placing screws
the patella, the tibial tuberosity, and the proximal tibial
through the most distal and most proximal plate holes (see
diaphysis. The tibial tuberosity is osteotomized to gain joint
Plate 24C). If possible, place one or two screws as lag screws
exposure and to provide a flat surface for the plate.
across the joint. Fill the remaining plate holes. Remove the sta-
bilizing Kirschner wires. Attach the tibial tuberosity to the
EQUIPMENT
medial surface of the tibia with a lag screw (Plate 24D).
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi
retractors, periosteal elevator, oscillating saw, self-centering
CAUTIONS
plate-holding forceps, high-speed drill, wire driver and burrs,
Avoid angling the saw blade medially or laterally when per-
Kirschner wires, wire cutters, plating equipment
forrming the tibial and femoral articular ostectormies. Check
 angular and rotational alignment of the limb carefully before
PreParatION ANd POSItIONING
 securing the plate.
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from dorsal midline to
the hock. Position the animal in dorsal recumbency. Drape the
POStOPeratIVe EVALUAtION
limb out from a hanging position to allow maximal manipulation
The axial alignment of the limb and the angle of the arthrodesis
during surgery. A cancellous bone graft is not needed because of
should be critically observed. Radiographs for limb alignment
the large cancellous bone contact surfaces at the arthrodesis site.
and implant placement should be evaluated.
PROCEDURE
POStOPeratIVE CAre
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue over the
A soft, padded bandage should be placed to control bleeding
craniolateral aspect of the stifle, extending from the mid-diaphysis
and swelling. A lateral splint should be used for 6 weeks or until
of the fermur to the mid-diaphysis of the tibia. Incise the lateral
early radiographic evidence of bone bridging is observed.
retinaculum, and retr act the quadhiceps muscle and patella medi-
 Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals umtil bone
ally to expose the distal femur. Elevate the cranial tibial muscle
healing occurs. The animal should be confined, with activity
to expose the proximal tibia. Osteotomize the tibial tuberosity to
limited to leash walks, until bone healing is complete. The plate
aid exposure of the joint and to prepare a surface for the plate.
may be removed 6 to 9 months after bone healing to avoid stress
Excise the menisci and cruciate ligaments. Preserve the col-
concentration at the distal plate end.
lateral ligaments to aid in maintaining aligrrment (Plate 24A).
Alignment: Predetermine the cranial caudal angle for the
Expected outcome
stifle arthrodesis by observing the normal standing angle of the
The bone usually heals in 12 to 18 weeks. For most pet animals,
stifle in the individual patient. Consider adding 10 degrees to
satisfactory fumction of the treated limb is seen; however,
the normal angle in large dogs and 5 degrees to the normal angle
circurmduction of the lirmb and toe kmuckling may occur at
p sn aq a g a o so p sop ts u
faster gaits. Results are best when the correct angle for fusion is
the procedure. Commonly, the angle is 135 to 140 degrees for
 achieved. Fracture may occur in the tibia at the end of the plate.
 dogs and 120 to 124 degrees for cats (Plate 24B).
Stabilization: To determine the ostectomy angles, place
References
three Kirschner wires as follows: Place the first Kirschmer wire
1. McLaughlin RM: Arthrodesis. In Brinker WO, Olmstead ML, Sumner-
perpendicular to the tibial diaphysis and in the midsaggital
Smith G, et al (eds): Manual of Intermal Fixation in Small Animals.
plane. Place the second wire perpendicular to the femoral dia-
New York, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
physis and in the midsaggital plane. Place a third wire into the
2. Johnson KA: Arthrodesis. In Olmstead ML (ed): Small Animal
femur distal to the second wire and at the complermentary angle
Orthopedics. St. Louis, Mosby, 1995.
Chapter 24
STIFLE ARTHRODESIS
73
PLATe 24
Patella
 Lateral collateral
ligament
 Long digital
extensor tendon
Osteotomy
site
 Cranial tibial muscle
retracted
74
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
TARSUS
Achilles Tendon Repair
Chapter 25
INDICATIONS
 In type 3 injuries, the AT is intact but inflamed. AT injuries may
Candidates include animals with partial or complete rupture of 
be acute or chronic in duration. Type 2 injuries are more
the Achilles or calcanean tendon.
common than full AT tears (i.e., type 1). Chronic injuries are
technically more difficult to repair because tendon contracture
ObJECTIVES
and fibrosis hamper identification and apposition.
● To restore normal weight bearing and limb function and
eliminate the plantigrade stance associated with the injury
EQUIPMENT
● Surgical pack, Gelpi retractors or Senn retractors, pointed
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS1-4
reduction forceps, Kirschner wires or small Steinmanm pins
The Achilles tendon (AT) is the largest tendon complex in the
o  aa as o    a 
dog. It consists of the combined tendinous insertion of five sep
wire, snub-nosed wire twisters, wire cutter, heavy-gauge
arate muscles: (l) the gastrocnemius, (2) the superficial digital
monofilament nonabsorbable suture for tendon repair,
flexor, and (3-5) the combined tendon of the biceps femoris,
extermal skeletal fixation set, equipment for casting and
the semitendinosus, and the gracilis. Tendon injuries may be
bandage material
classified into three general types. Type 1 involves a complete
disruption of the tendon apparatus. On physical examination,
PrEPARATION AND POSITIONING
the hock may be fully flexed, with no tension placed on the
Prepare the leg circumferentially frorm dorsal midline to the
Achilles mechanism. Dogs with this injury have a characteristic
phalanges. Use a hanging leg preparation, with the dog in dorsal
plantigrade stance, with the metatarsals and digits lying flat on
recumbency at the end of the surgery table to allow for maximal
       g   
 manipulation and visualization of the stifle joint during surgery.
classifications of this category are recognized: (l) type 2a is a
 wa adt  e si qz a (z) ani souaomosn
PROCEDURE
  si  n  p ns su o d p
Approach:5 With the tarsus extended, incise the skin 3 cm to
rupture, with an intact superficial digital flexor tendon. Dogs
4 cm proximal to the injury on the caudolateral aspect of the
that have a type 2c AT injury display a characteristic “crab-like"
common calcanean tendon to the level of the fourth tarsal bone
stance, with a hyperflexed tarsus with contracture of the toes.
(Plate 25A). Refect the skin and subcutaneous tissue to expose
The superficial digital flexor tendon is placed umder consider-
the deep fascia. Incise the deep fascia and lateral retinaculum
able tension with partial disruption of the AT, which pulls on its
along the lateral border of the superficial digital tendon,
insertions on the palmar surface of the proximal end of the
exposing the injured AT apparatus. Extend the incision proxi-
middle phalanges of digits II, Ⅲl, IV, and V, contracting the toes.
 mally as needed to expose the injured tendon.
Continued
CHAPTER 25
AChIlleS TeNdON RePaIr
75
PLATE 25
Tendon of 
flexor hallucis
longus muscle
Tendon of
 gastrocnemius
muscle
Calcaneus
 Tendon of superficial
flexor muscle
 Tendon of 
abductor digiti
quinti muscle
76
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
Acute Midsubstance Tendon Repair: Identify the
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION?
three separate tendons and attempt apposition. Using a
 Radiographs are not necessary umless a tension band or transar-
monofilarment nonabsorbable suture (0 to 1 for large dogs; 2-0 -
ticular fixator is placed. Ultrasound can be used to monitor
to 3-0 for cats and small dogs), suture each tendon separately
tendon healing. Full healing and reorganization of the AT is a
using a three-loop pulley patterm with the tarsus in extension
slow process that may go on for years.
(Plate 25B). Make the first two passes with the needle from
near to far, and orient the third and fourth passes 120 degrees
POSTOPERATIVE CARE?
External coaptation or transarticular fixation is necessary to
the final fifth and sixth passes 120 degrees, and place therm far
protect the repair for the first 6 to 8 weeks. Exercise should be
to near.
restricted until the tendon heals. Then the animal should slowly
Chronic Midsubstance Tendon Repair: Ideally, the
be returmed to normal activity.
fibrotic scar should be sharply resected until normal tendon is
identified. Most often, however, this is not possible because of
EXPECTeD OUTCOme?
tendon retraction and contracture. Resect as much scar tissue
The expectation for return to full athletic ability is guarded;
as possible to permit apposition of the tendon ends. Because
however, most animals will be able to fumction very well as
the individual tendons will probably be undistinguishable in the
pets. Tarsal arthrodesis may be employed if, despite repair, pain
fibrotic scar, the AT apparatus is repaired using a single locking-
and dysfumction persist.
loop patterm.
Avulsed Achilles Tendon Repair: Sharply debride the
References
AT using a scalpel blade or Mayo scissors. Using a Jacob chuck
 Or mini-driver, create a bone tunmel from lateral to medial of
1. Moreshead D, Leeds EB: Kirschner-Ehmer apparatus immobilization
following Achilles tendon repair in six dogs. Vet Surg 13(1):1l-14,
sufficient size to pass the suture through. Place the suture
1984.
through the bone tunmel using a straight needle or bent pin
 2. Meutstege FG: The classification of canine Achilles tendon lesions.
(Plate 25C). Secure the tendon to the calcaneus using a locking-
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 6:53-55, 1993.
loop suture pattem.
3. Kramer M, Gerwing M, Michele U, et al: Utrasonographic examina-
Fracture of the Calcaneal Bone: Fracture of the cal-
tion of injuries to the Achilles tendon in dogs and cats. J Small Anim
caneus is treated with a tension band wire (Plate 25D). See
Pract 42:531-535, 2001.
Chapter 81 for details.
4. Rivers BJ, Walters PA, Kramek B, Wallace L: Sonographic findings
in canine common calcaneal tendon injury. Vet Comp Orthop
CAUTIONS'.7
Traumatol 10:45-53, 1997.
Debridement of the AT should be performed in a stepwise
5. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the calcaneus. In An Atlas
fashion. Excessive resection will prevent apposition of the
of Surgical Approaches to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat,
4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
tendon ends and complicate recovery. Tarsal immobilization
6. Guerin S, Burbidge H, Firth E, Fox S: Achilles tenorrhaphy in five
dogs: A modified surgical technique and evaluation of a cranial half
catastrophic failure of the AT repair. Extermal coaptation (i.e.,
cast. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1l:205-21l, 1998.
lateral splints or bivalved casts) or transarticular fixation
 7. de Haan JJ, Goring RL, Renburg C, Bertrand S: Modified transartic-
should be placed with the tarsus in a slightly extended but
ular external skeletal fixation for support of Achilles tenorrhaphy in
weight-bearing position.
four dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 8:32-35, 1995.
CHAPTER 25
ACHIllES TENdON REPaIr
77
PLATe 25
B
C
D
Midsubstance
Avulsion
Fracture of calcaneal bone
Three-loop pulley repair
Locking-loop repair
Pin and tension band repair
78
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
TARSUS
ChAPter 26
ur
with Tarsal Luxation
INDICATIONS
-ou oadse jiaet a on Amfu tn to aou st sns
 Candidates include animals with shearing woumds to the tarsus 
ever, both have been reported in the literature.
sustained from motor vehicle trauma.
EQUIPMENT
OBJECTIVES
● Surgical pack, Gelpi retractors or Senm retractors, pointed
● To restore stability to the tarsal joint and salvage joint fumc-
reduction forceps, periosteal elevator, snub-nosed wire
tion while allowing soft tissue healing to occur
leader line for collateral ligament repair, high-speed drill,
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS1.2
bone screw and washer, drill bit, tap, depth gauge, screw-
The tarsus is composed of six separate anatomic joints: (1) the
dhriver, pin chuck and key, low-speed drill, extermal skeletal
talocrural or tarsocrural joint, (2) the talocalcaneal joint,
fixation set, equipment for casting and bandage material
(3) the talocalcaneocentral joint, (4) the calcaneoquartal
joint, (5) the centrodistal joint intertarsal joint, and (6) the
PreParaTION ANd POSITIONING
tarsometatarsal joint. Fumctionally, however, the joint can be
Prepare the leg circurmferentially from dorsal midline to the
separated into four compartments: (1) the talocrural, (2) the
phalanges. Use a hanging leg preparation with the dog in dorsal
proximal intertarsal joint (consisting of the calcaneoquartal and
recumbency at the end of the surgery table to allow for maxi-
the talcalcaneocentral joint), (3) the distal intertarsal joint (cen-
mal manipulation and visualization of the stifle joint during
trodistal joint), and (4) the tarsometatarsal joint. The majority
surgery.
of moverment of the tarsus is at the talocrural joint, between the
tibia and talus. Joint stability is provided by the medial and lat-
PROCEDURE
eral collateral ligaments, which are composed of long and short
 Approach:?2 Center a curvilinear incision over the talocrural
cormponents originating on the malleoli of the tibia and fibula,
joint along the medial aspect of limb, exposing the distal tibial
respectively. The long component of the medial collateral liga-
to the level of the tarsometatarsal joint. Retract the subcuta-
neous and crural fascia and expose the medial ridge of the talus
whereas the short component attaches to the talus. The long
by incising the joint capsule cranial to the collateral ligament. If
component of the lateral collateral inserts on the proximal
the shearing injury is extensive, removing much of the covering
aspect of the fifth metatarsal, and the short component attaches
soft tissues, much of this approach may be unmecessary
to the body of the calcaneus. Injury to the medial aspect of the
(Plate 26A).
Continued
Chapter 26
ShEaRInG INJURy WIth tarSal luXatION
79
ＰlAte 26
Tendon of 
cranial tibial 
muscle
80
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
Prosthetic Ligament Repair:? Dril, measure, and tap
POSTOPERATIVEEVALUATION4
a bicortical screw hole into the distal aspect of the tibia at the
The wound should be evaluated at least daily for the first 7 to
level of the medial malleolus, being careful to avoid the joint
10 days, umtil healthy gramulation tissue is present or as tissue
i isn p o rs  a e  
viability dictates. A nonadherent bandage can then be placed
over the wound and the dressing changed less frequently.
two additional screws and washers in similar fashion into the
body of the talus (aiming distally to avoid the trochlear sulcus)
soft tissues heal to evaluate limb alignment, apposition of the
and into the head of the talus, which is located midway between
fracture-luxation, and apparatus integrity.
the medial trochlear ridge and the intertarsal articular surface.
Depending on the size of the animal, utilize 20- to 60-poumd test
PostoPerAtiVe CAre2.4.5
of monofilament fishing leader line to place two independent
External coaptation or transarticular fixation is necessary in
suture loops for the long and short cormponents of the medial
order to protect the repair for the first 6 to 8 weeks. Exercise
collateral ligament. Tie the sutures independently: tie the short
should be restricted until the fixator is removed and the soft tis-
component with the tarsus held in fexion and the long compo
sues heal. Then the animal should slowly be returmed to normal
nent with the tarsus held in extension. The sutuires should be
activity.
taut, but not overly tight, to avoid compromising joint range of
motion (Plate 26B).
EXPeCted OutCome6
 Prosthetic ligament repair for a lateral shearing injury is very
There is a 75% chance of good to excellent function, despite
similar to the medial repair just described (Plate 26C). The
progressive degenerative joint disease and restricted range of
proximal screw and washer is placed in the distal fibula/tibia,
motion of the tarsal joint. Pantarsal arthrodesis may be
taking care to avoid the joint. The distal two screws and
ermployed if pain and dysfunction persist despite repair.
washers are positioned in the base of the coracoid process,
midway between the base of the coracoid process and the prox-
imal intertarsal joint (Plate 26D).
References
Transarticular External Skeletal Fixation:24 Place a
1. Benson JA, Boudrieu RA: Severe carpal and tarsal shearing injuries
type I or I transarticular extermal fixator with two pins through
 treated with immediate arthrodesis in seven dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
 a   ao s auo p od ao) an an
Ass0c 38:370-380, 2002.
neus, and one pin into the metatarsal bones 2 and 3. Position the
2. Harasen GLG: Tarsal shearing injury in the dog. Can Vet J 4l:
tarsus in a normal standing angle and immobilize it for 6 to
940-943, 2000.
 8 weeks, depending on the severity of soft tissue trauma.
 3. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the medial malleolus and
talocrural joint. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the Bones and
CAUTIONS
Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
Lavage and wound debridement of the tarsus should be per-
4. Kraus KH, Toombs JP, Ness MG: Transarticular case studies. In
External Fixation in Small Animal Practice. Blackwell Sciences,
formed once the patient is stabilized. Excessive debriderment
Oxford, England, 2003.
should be avoided early on, because—given the right conditions
 5. de Haan J, Goring RL, Renberg C, Bertrand S: Modifed transartic-
and wound care—the soft tissue coverage, which is a prermium,
ular external skeletal fixation for support of Achilles tenorrhaphy in
will survive despite extensive damage. The use of sterile wet-to-
four dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 8:32-35, 1995.
dry bandages until healthy granulation tissue is present is an
6. Diamond DW, Besso J, Boudrieu RA: Evaluation of joint stabilization
excellent way to improve wound quality without surgical
for treatment of shearing injuries of the tarsus in 20 dogs. J Am Anim.
debridement.
Hosp Assoc 35:147-153, 1999.
CHAPTER 26
ShEaRInG INJURy WIth tarSal luXatION
81
PLATE 26
82
Part one · surGIcal procedures fOr JOInt dIseases
TARSUS
Osteochondrosis of the Lateral
Chapter 27
Trochlear Ridge of the Talus
INDICATIONS
bone curettes, pin chuck or high-speed wire driver, Kirschner
Candidates include dogs with persistent lameness and pain of
wires or small Steinmanm pin for forage
the tarsus caused by osteochondrosis (OCD) that is not respon-
sive to conservative management.
PrEParATION ANd POSITIONING
Prepare the leg circurmferentially from dorsal midline to the
ObJectiVes
phalanges. Use a hanging leg preparation, with the dog in dorsal
● To improve limb function by removal of the entire OCD flap,
recumbency at the end of the surgery table to allow for maxirmal
 curettage of the adjacent diseased cartilage, and forage to
 manipulation and visualization of the tarsus during surgery.
e auoq tepuouqns pasodxa aun o Aiddns pooq apiaod
forage
PROCEDURE
 Dorsolateral Approach:2.4-s Flex and extend the tarsus to
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS1-5
The tarsus is the third most comrmon joint to be affected by
via palpation. Center a curvilinear 4-cm to 5-cm incision over
OCD, with a reported incidence of 9%. Forty-four percent of
the trochlear ridge from the distal tibia and fibula to the distal
the tarsal lesions are bilateral, although the typical presenting
intertarsal joint. Retract the skin and subcutaneous tissues with
complaint of a dog with tarsal OCD is a umilateral larmeness.
a Gelpi or Senn retractor to improve visualization of the ten-
Seventy-five percent of the OCD lesions of the tarsus occur on
dons of the long digital extensor muscle, the cranial tibial
the plantar half of the medial trochlear ridge of the talus, and
muscle, the extensor hallucis longus muscle, the dorsal branch
25% occur on the lateral ridge. Because of the diversity of the
of the lateral saphenous vein, and the superficial peroneal nerve
lesion location, the surgical approach used to expose the lesion
(Plate 27A). Retract these structures laterally. Retract the
is as important as the surgical debridement and curettage. Both
tendons of the peroneus longus, the lateral digital extensor,
medial and lateral approaches have been described. A com-
and the peroneus brevis in a plantar direction. Incise the deep
bined dorsomedial and plantaromedial approach exposes all
fascia and adherent joint capsule longitudinally along the mid-
but 4% of the medial trochlear ridge of the talus. Similarly, a
line of the palpable portion of the lateral trochlear ridge, pre
combined dorsolateral and plantarolateral approach exposes
serving the lateral collateral ligament of the tarsus. If necessary,
the entire lateral trochlear ridge, with the central 20% of the lat-
extend the joint capsular incision into the periosteum at the
eral ridge being accessible from either individual approach
jumction of the distal tibia and fibula to increase the exposure of
the trochlea (Plate 27B).
EQUIPMENT
Continued
(depending on the size of the dog), blunt Hohmarm retractor,
CHAPter 27
OSteOCHONDrOSIS OF the LATEral trOCHleAr RIdGE OF the tAluS
83
PlAte 27
Proximal extensor
retinaculum
B
Tendon of long
Tendon of
digital extensor musle
peroneus brevis muscle
 Tendon of lateral 
Tendon of cranial :
cligitalextensormuscle
tibial muscle
Digital extensor
Tendon of
 retinaculum
extensor hallucis
longus muscle
84
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
Plantarolateral Approach:2.4-6 Flex and extend the
6 weeks until the articular cartilage heals. Passive range-of-
[aet a go padse eid a Auapt Aiaene on sns
motion exercises should be performed two or three times daily
trochlear ridge of the talus via palpation. Center a curvilinear
for 5 to 10 minutes per session to maintain range of motion and
4-crm to 5-crm incision over the plantar aspect of the trochlear
to improve cartilage healing. After 4 to 6 weeks, the animal
ridge. Retract the skin and subcutaneous tissue with a Gelpi or
should slowly be returmed to normal activity.
Senn retractor to improve visualization of the tendons of the
peroneus brevis, the lateral digital extensor, and the peroneus
EXPECTED OUTCOME5.6.8
longus muscles (Plate 27C). Retract these structures dorsally.
Expected outcome is usually guarded to fair, depending on
Retract the plantar branch of the lateral saphenous vein, and a
mumerous factors (e.g., unilateral versus bilateral disease,
branch of the caudal cutaneous sural nerve, in a plantar direc-
lesion size, surgical approach, and presence of degenerative
 a   o    
capsule longitudinally along the center of the palpable portion
surgical removal of the flap, but it does not correlate with the
of the lateral trochlear ridge. If necessary, extend the joint cap-
degree of lameness. Nonetheless, owners should be advised
sular incision into the periosteurm at the junction of the distal
that nonsteroidal anti-inflarnmatory drugs may be indicated to
tibia and fibula to increase the exposure of the trochlear ridge
(Plate 27D).
degenerative joint disease.
Curettage:2-s Rermove the cartilage flap with thumb or
Halstead forceps. Probe the remaining cartilage surroumding
References
the defect with a curette, and remove any abnormal cartilage
1. Montgomery RD, Hathcock JJ, Milton JL, Fitch RB: Osteochondrosis
not adherent to the subchondral bone (see Plates 27B and 27D).
dissecans of the canine tarsal joint. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
Forage: Using a small Kirschner wire or small Steinmann
16(7):835-845, 1994.
pin, penetrate the sclerotic subchondral bone in multiple sites
2. Beale BS, Goring RL, Herrington J, et al: A prospective evaluation
until it bleeds.
of four surgical approaches to the talus of the dog used in the
treatment of osteochondritis dissecans. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
CAUTIONS?
27(2):221-229, 1991.
3. Beale BS, Goring RL: Exposure of the medial and lateral trochlear
Unlike the more common OCD of the medial trochlear ridge,
where the lesion is generally located in the proxirmal region of
ridges of the talus in the dog. Part I: Dorsomedial and plantarome
dial surgical approaches to the medial trochlear ridge. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 26(1): 13-18, 1990.
to arise from both proximal and dorsal aspects of the ridge, thus
4. Goring RL, Beale BS: Exposure of the medial and lateral trochlear
necessitating a more aggressive surgical exposure. In addition,
ridges of the talus in the dog. Part Il: Dorsolateral and plantaro
clinical reports of lateral trochlear ridge OCD lesions describe
 lateral surgical approaches to the lateral trochlear ridge. J Am Anim
large, “shelf-like" lesions that may result in significant malar-
Hosp Assoc 26(1): 19-24, 1990.
ticulation, joint instability, and degenerative joint disease.
Fitch R, Beale BS: Osteochondrosis of the canine tibiotarsal joint.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28(1):95-113, 1998.
POStOPeratIVe EValuatION
6. Smith M, Vasseur P, Morgan J: Clinical evaluation of dogs after
No specific postoperative evaluation is required. Note that joint
surgical and nonsurgical management of osteochondritis dissecans
of the talus. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187(1):31-35, 1985.
goniometry should be performed preoperatively to provide a
7. Wisner ER, Berry CR, Morgan JP, et al: Osteochondrosis of the
baseline assessrment of tarsal range of motion and fumction.
lateral trochlear ridge of the talus in seven Rottweiler dogs. Vet Surg
19(6):436 439, 1990.
POStOPeratIVe Care
8.Diamond Dw, Besso J, Boudrieu RA: Evaluation of joint stabilization
The limb should be bandaged for 2 to 3 days, depending on
for treatment of shearing injuries of the tarsus in 20 dogs. J Am Anim
the degree of swelling. Exercise should be restricted for 4 to
Hosp Ass0c 35:147-153, 1999.
Chapter 27
OSteOCHONDrOSIS OF the LATEral trOCHleAr RIdGE OF the tAluS
85
PLATE 27
Tendonofflexor
hallucis longus muscle
+
Tendon of
peroneusbrevismuscle
Calcaneus
Tendon of 
peroneus
longus muscle
Tendon of lateral
digitalextensormuscle
Tendon of abductor
digiti quinti muscle 
86
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
TARSUS
Osteochondrosis of the Medial
ChaPter 28
Trochlear Ridge of the Talus
INDICATIONS1
PrePARatION And POSItIONING
Candidates include dogs with persistent lameness and pain of
Prepare the leg circumferentially from dorsal midline to the
the tarsus caused by osteochondrosis (OCD) of the medial
phalanges. Use a hanging leg preparation with the dog in dorsal
trochlear ridge that is not responsive to conservative manage
recumbency at the end of the surgery table to allow for maximal
   o  o  o  
 manipulation and visualization of the tarsus during surgery.
trochlear ridge is the plantar aspect, which accoumts for more
than 80% of all medial trochlear lesions.
PrOCEDUre
Dorsomedial Approach:1-e Flex and extend the tarsus to
OBJECTIVES
accurately identify the dorsal aspect of the medial trochlear
● To improve limb function by removal of the entire OCD flap,
ridge via palpation. Center a curvilinear 4-crm to 5-crm incision
curettage of the adjacent diseased cartilage, and forage to
over the trochlear ridge, from the distal tibia and fibula to the
provide blood supply to the exposed subchondral bone
distal intertarsal joint. Retract the skin and subcutaneous tis-
sues with a Gelpi or Senm retractor (Plate 28A). Preserve the
ANAtomIC CoNSideratIoNS1-5
distal extensor retinaculurm, and laterally retract the tendon of
Surgical exposure of the tarsus can be achieved through a
the cranial tibial muscle, the saphenous nerve, the cranial tibial
variety of surgical approaches. The plantaromedial approach is
artery and vein, and the dorsal branches of the saphenous
artery and vein. Preserve the medial collateral ligarment, and
40% of the plantar aspect of the medial trochlear ridge, which is 
longitudinally incise the deep fascia and adherent joint capsule
the most common site of OCD in the tarsus.
necessary, extend the joint capsular incision into the perios-
EQuipMenT
teum at the junction of the distal tibia and fibula to increase the
● Standard surgical pack, two medium or large Gelpi retractors
exposure of the trochlea (Plate 28B).
(depending on the size of the dog), blunt Hohmann retractor,
Continued
  a      a
wires or small Steinmann pin for forage
CHAPter 28
OSteOChONdrOSIS Of the MedIal trOChlear rIdGe OF the taluS
87
PlAte 28
Proximal extensor
 retinaculum
B
Tendon of long
Tendon of
digital extensormuscle
peroneus brevis muscle
Tendon of lateral 
Tendon of cranial 
digital extensor muscle
tibial muscle
Digital extensor
Tendon of 
retinaculum
extensor hallucis 
longus muscle
88
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
 Plantaromedial Approach:1.35,6 Flex and extend the 
provide a baseline assessment of tarsal range of motion and
tarsus to accurately identify the plantar aspect of the medial
fumction.
trochlear ridge of the talus via palpation. Center a curvilinear
4-crm to 5-cm incision over the plantar aspect of the trochlear
POStOPerAtIVe Care
ridge. Retract the skin and subcutaneous tissue with a Gelpi or
The limb should be bandaged for 2 to 3 days, depending on the
Senn retractor to improve visualization of the tendons of the
degree of swelling. Exercise should be resticted for 4 to
medial head of the deep digital flexor muscle, the distal attach-
6 weeks, until the articular cartilage heals. Passive range-of-
ment of the caudal tibial muscle, the flexor hallucis longus
motion exercises should be performed two or three times daily
muscle, and the medial collateral ligament (Plate 28C). Retract
for 5 to 10 minutes per session to maintain range of motion and
the medial head of the deep digital flexor muscle and the caudal
to irmprove cartilage healing. After 4 to 6 weeks, the animal
tibial tendon dorsally; and laterally retract the flexor hallucis
should slowly be returmed to normal activity.
longus, the tibial nerve with its superficial branch, the plantar
branches of the medial saphenous vein and saphenous artery,
Expected 0utcome1.6.9
and superficial plantar metatarsal vein. Taking care to preserve
Expected outcome is guarded to fair. Most dogs seem to benefit
the medial collateral ligament, incise the joint capsule longitu-
from early surgical rermoval of the OCD flap. A decreased suc-
dinally along the center of the palpable portion of the medial
cess rate has been reported for dogs older than 12 months
because of the progression of degenerative joint disease.
into the periosteurm at the junction of the distal tibia and fibula
Debridement and curettage should be kept to a minimum to
to increase the exposure of the trochlear ridge (Plate 28D).
Curettage:1.a-s Remove the cartilage flap with thurmb or
Halstead forceps. Probe the remaining cartilage surroumding
References
the defect with a curette, and remove any abnormal cartilage
1. Fitch R, Beale BS: Osteochondrosis of the canine tibiotarsal joint.
not adherent to the subchondral bone (see Plates 28B and 28D).
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28(1):95-113, 1998.
Forage: Using a small Kirschner wire or small Steinmann
2. Montgomery RD, Hathcock JT, Milton JL, Fitch RB: Osteo-
pin, penetrate the sclerotic subchondral bone in multiple sites
 chondrosis dissecans of the canine tarsal joint. Compend Contin
until it bleeds.
Educ Pract Vet 16(7):835-845, 1994.
3. Beale BS, Goring RL, Herrington J, et al: A prospective evaluation of
CAUTIONS1.7.8
four surgical approaches to the talus of the dog used in the treat-
ment of osteochondritis dissecans. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27(2):
Excellent radiographic technique and positioning is necessary
221-229, 1991.
to diagnose OCD lesions within the tarsus. Standard antero-
4. Beale BS, Goring RL: Exposure of the medial and lateral trochlear
posterior and lateral views of the tarsus provide good visualiza-
ridges of the talus in the dog. Part I: Dorsomedial and plantarome-
tion of the plantar aspect of the medial trochlear ridge, but
 dial surgical approaches to the medial trochlear ridge. J Am Anim
additional views may be necessary to fully evaluate the joint.
Hosp Assoc 26(1): 13-18, 1990.
The dorsolateral-plantaromedial oblique projection provides
5. Goring RL, Beale BS: Exposure of the medial and lateral trochlear
good visualization of the medial trochlear ridge; the dorso-
ridges of the talus in the dog. Part II: Dorsolateral and plantarolat-
eral surgical approaches to the lateral trochlear ridge. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 26(1): 19-24, 1990.
trochlear ridge; and the fexed dorsoplantar projection profiles
6. Smith M, Vasseur P, Morgan J: Clinical evaluation of dogs after sur-
the central region of both trochlear ridges. Computed tomog-
gical and nonsurgical management of osteochondritis dissecans of
raphy and magnetic resonance imaging also provide additional
the talus. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187(1):31-35, 1985.
7. Wisner ER, Berry CR, Morgan JP, et al: Osteochondrosis of the lat-
widespread use. Owners should be advised that the nature of
eral trochlear ridge of the talus in seven rottweiler dogs. Vet Surg
the surgical procedure is exploratory and that a negative
19(6):436 439, 1990.
exploratory is possible and is necessary to rule out OCD.
&. Miyabayashi T, Biller DS, Manley PA, et al: Use of a flexed dorso-
 Arthroscopy has greatly improved tarsal joint access and visu-
plantar radiographic view of the talocrural joint to evaluate lame-
 alization, but it does not completely eliminate the necessity of
ness in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 199(5):598-600, 1991.
arthrotomy because of the difficulty of lesion location and
 9. Diamond Dw, Besso J, Boudrieu RA: Evaluation of joint stabilization
for treatment of shearing injuries of the tarsus in 20 dogs. J Am Anim
treatment.
Hosp Assoc 35:147-153, 1999.
POStOPeratIVe EValuaTION
goniometry should be performed preoperatively in order to
CHAPTER28
OsteoChOndroSIS Of the MedIal trochlear RIdGe Of the talus
89
PLATE  28
Tendon of long 
digital flexor muscle
(deep digital flexor,
 medial head)
Tendonofflexor
 Tendon of caudal
hallucis longus muscle
(deep digital flexor, 
tibial muscle
lateral head)
Medial collateral ligament:
Short part
-Long part
90
Part one · surGical procedures for Joint diseases
TARSUS
Pantarsal Arthrodesis
Chapter 29
INDICATIONS
Stabilization: Extend the hock and remove the articular
Candidates include animals with severe injury (e.g., fracture,
cartilage from the talocrural, intertarsal, and tarsometatarsal
luxation, or shearing injury) of the tibial cochlea and condyles
joint surfaces with a bone curette or high-speed burr, following
of the talus that precludes maintaining a long-term, pain-free
the contours of the bone ends (see Plate 29A). Harvest cancel-
articulation; animals with painful degenerative joint disease
 lous bone, and place the graft within the prepared joints (Plate
that is not responsive to conservative measures; and animals
29B). Place an appropriate-size bone plate, precontoured to
with irreparable Achilles tendon injury and sciatic nerve palsy
provide the selected joint angle, on the cranial surface of the
treated with tendon transfer.
tibia, the talus, the central tarsal bone, and the third metatarsal
bone (see Plates 29B and 29C). Position the acute bend in the
ObJeCtIVeS
plate over the neck of the talus. Ensure adequate plate holes for
● To fuse the bones of the tarsocrural, intertarsal, and tar-
a minimum of three screws in the tibia and three screws in the
sometatarsal joints in a fumctional position
metatarsal bone. Mark the level of the distal metatarsal plate
screw. Remove the plate, and center the drill on the metatarsal
ANATOMIC CONSIdeRATIONS
bone. Secure the plate with three screws in the metatarsal bone,
The tarsus consists of the tibia, fibula, proximal tarsal, distal
check the plate and joint aligmment, and secure the plate to the
tarsal, and metatarsal bones, forming the tarsocrural, intertarsal,
tibia (see Plate 29B). Fill the remaining plate holes. Ensure that
and tarsometatarsal joints. The tarsocrural joint is formed by
at least two plate screws penetrate the calcaneus to secure the
the fibula and cochlea of the tibia proximally, and by the talus
joint' (see Plate 29C).
and calcaneus distally. The intertarsal joints are formed by
articulations between the tarsal bones, and the tarsometatarsal
CAUTIONS
joints are formed by the articulations between the distal tarsal
All articular cartilage must be removed. Angular and rotational
and metatarsal bones.
alignment of the lirmb should be checked carefully before the
plate is secured to the tibia.
EQuIPMENT
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION
retractors, periosteal elevator, self-centering plate-holding
 The axial aligmment of the limb and the angle of the arthrodesis
forceps, bone curette, high-speed drill and burrs, plating
should be critically observed. Radiographs should be evaluated
equipment
for lirmb alignment and irmplant placerment.
PrePARATION ANd POSITIONING
POStOPeratIVe CAre
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from hip to digits.
A soft, padded bandage should be placed to control bleeding
Position the animal in dorsal recurmbency for greater flexi-
and swelling. A bivalve cast should be used for 6 weeks or until
bility. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow
early radiographic evidence of bone bridging is observed.
maximal manipulation during surgery. Prepare the ipsilateral
Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals until bone
proximal tibia or proximal hurmerus for cancellous bone graft
healing occurs. The animal should be confined, with activity
harvest.
limited to leash walks until bone healing is complete. Implants
are generally removed after 6 to 12 months to avoid soft tissue
PrOCEDUrE
inritation and the common sequella of implant loosening.?
Approach: Incise skin and soft tissue over the cranial medial
surface of the joint, from the distal third of the tibia to the
Expected outcome
middle of the metatarsal bones. Elevate and retract the cranial
Bone healing is expected in 12 to 18 weeks. The animal should
tibial and long digital extensor tendons to expose the distal
have acceptable fumction of the treated limb, as long as stifle
tibia, the tarsus, and the proximal third of the metatarsal bone.
and hip remain free of disease.
If necessary, transect the cranial tibial tendon and the medial
collateral ligament to gain access to the joint. Enter the tarsal
References
joints to expose the articular surfaces (Plate 29A).
1. Johnson KA: Arthrodesis. In Olmstead ML (ed): Small Animal
Alignment: Predetermine the cranial caudal angle for the
Orthopedics. St. Louis, Mosby, 1995.
pantarsal arthrodesis by observing the normal standing angle of
 2. DeCamp CE, Martinez SA, Johnston SA: Pantarsal arthrodesis in
the tarsus in the individual patient. The angle is commonly
dogs and a cat: 1l cases (1983-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:
between 135 and 145 degrees' (see Plate 29C).
1705, 1993.
CHApter 29
PANTaRSAL ARTHRODESIS
91
PlAte 29
Cranial
tibial muscle
Tibia
Talus
 Central
tarsal
bone
Long digital
extensor tendon
92
Part one · surGical procedures for Joint diseases
TARSUS
Proximal Intertarsal
ChaPter 30
or Tarsometatarsal Arthrodesis with a Plate
INDICATIONS
of the fifth metatarsal bone, and a portion of the fourth tarsal
Candidates include animals with severe injury (e.g, fracture,
bone, with the oscillating saw to provide a smooth surface
for the plate (Plate 30B). Place an appropriate-size and
tarsometatarsal joint.
appropriate-contour plate on the lateral surfaces of the calca-
meus, the fourth tarsal bone, and the fifth metatarsal bone.
OBJeCTIVeS
Position the plate with three screw holes over the calcaneus
● To fuse the bones of the proximal intertarsal, the tar-
and three screw holes over the metatarsal bones. Place a screw
sometatarsal joints, or both in a functional position
through the proximal plate hole into the calcaneus. Check the
plate position, and place a screw through the distal plate hole
AnatomIC CoNSIderatIoNS
into metatarsal bones 4 and 5. Fill the remaining plate holes.
The intertarsal joints are formed by articulations between the
 Ensure that the distal screw into the calcaneus also secures the
tarsal bones. The proximal intertarsal joint is a combination of
talus (Plate 30C).
the talocalcaneocentral joint, formed by the articulation of the
talus and central tarsal bone with a continuous joint capsule
CAUTIONS
with the calcaneus, and the calcaneoquartal joint, located
All articular cartilage must be removed. Rotational alignment of
between the calcaneus and the fourth tarsal bone. The tar-
the limb should be checked carefully before the plate is secured
sometatarsal joints are formed by the articulations between the
to the metatarsal bones.
distal tarsal and metatarsal bones.
POStOPeratIVe EValuatION
EQUIPMENT
The axial alignment of the limb should be critically observed.
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi
 Radiographs should be evaluated for limb aligmment and
retractors, periosteal elevator, self-centering plate-holding
implant placement.
forceps, bone curette, high-speed drill and burrs, plating
equipment
POStOPErATIVe Care
A soft, padded bandage should be placed to control bleeding
PrEPARATION AND POSITIONING
and swelling. A bivalve cast should be used for 6 weeks or until
 o       
early radiographic evidence of bone bridging is observed.
Position the animal in dorsal recumbency for greater flexibility
Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals umtil bone
Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow maximal
healing occurs. The animal should be confined, with activity
manipulation during surgery. Prepare the ipsilateral proximal
limited to leash walks until bone healing is complete. Implants,
tibia or proximal hurmerus for cancellous bone graft harvest.
bones, should be removed after joint fusion, usually within 6 to
PROCEDURE
12 months after surgery.
Approach: Incise the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and deep
crural fascia over the lateral surface of the tarsometatarsal
EXPECtEd OUtCOmE
joint. Retract the superficial and deep digital fexor tendons
 Bone healing is usually expected in 12 to 18 weeks, with animals
medially, and elevate the abductor digiti quinti muscle to
obtaining near-normal fumction of the treated limb. Some dogs
expose the calcaneus, fourth tarsal bone, and the base of the
exhibit larmeness, which resolves after implant removal.
fifth metatarsal bone. Enter the affected joint(s) to expose the
articular surfaces (Plate 30A).
References
Alignment: There is no angle to the partial tarsal
1. Piermattei DL, Flo GL: Fractures and other orthopedic injuries of
arthrodesis. Use a straight plate to align the bones
the tarsus, metatarsus and phalanges. In Brinker, Piermattei, and
Stabilization: Stress the paw medially, and remove the
 Flo's Handbook of Small Animal Orthopedics and Fracture Repair,
articular cartilage from the calcaneoquartal and/or tar-
 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997.
sometatarsal joints with a bone curette or high-speed burr,
 2. Dyce J, Whitelock RG, Robinson KV, et al: Arthrodesis of the tar
following the contours of the bone ends. Harvest and place the
sometatarsal joint using a laterally applied plate in 10 dogs. J Small
cancellous bone within the prepared joints. Smooth the base
Anim Pract 39:19, 1998.
CHAPTER30
 PrOXimal IntertarSal Or tarSometarsal ArthrOdesIs With A plate
93
PLATE 30
Tendon of
flexor hallucis
longus muscle
Tendon of
gastrocnemius
muscle
Calcaneus
Peroneus
longus
Peroneus
Tendon of superficial
brevis
flexor muscle
Tendon of
abductor digiti
quinti muscle
Plantarview
94
Part one · surGical procedures for Joint diseases
TARSUS
Proximal Intertarsal
ChAPter 31
or Tarsometatarsal Arthrodesis
with an Intramedullary Pin and Wire
INDICATIONS
(depending on the joints involved) with a bone curette or high
Candidates include animals with subluxation of the proximal
speed burr, following the contours of the bone ends (see Plate
intertarsal or tarsometatarsal joints caused by injury of the
 31A). Drill transverse holes in the base of the calcaneus and the
 plantar tarsal fibrocartilage.'
fourth tarsal bone (for calcaneoquartal arthrodesis), and place
ObJeCTIVeS
ital flexor tendon and crossing at the arthrodesis site (Plate
● To fuse the bones of the calcaneoquartal or tarsometatarsal
 31B). Predrill the calcaneus and place a small IM pin starting at
joints in a fumctional position
the tuber calcanei, through the calcaneus and the fourth tarsal
bone (see Plate 31B). Harvest and place cancellous bone within
ANatoMIC CONSIderatIONS
the prepared joints before tightening the wire. Retract the IM
The tarsus consists of the tibia, fibula, and proximal tarsal,
pin 1 crm, cut the pin, and countersink it into the tuber calcanei.
distal tarsal, and metatarsal bones forrming the tarsocrural,
Tighten the figure-eight wire (Plate 31C).
intertarsal, and tarsormetatarsal joints. The tarsocrural joint is
Altermatively, to fuse the tarsometatarsal joint, predrill the
formed by the fibula and cochlea of the tibia proximally and the
holes for the figure-eight wire through the calcaneus and the
talus and calcaneus distally. The intertarsal joints are formed by
metatarsal bones. Usually only three of the four metatarsal
articulations between the tarsal bones. The proximal intertarsal
bones will be dhilled. Drive the Steinmann pin distally into the
joint is a combination of the talocalcaneocentral joint, formed
base of the fourth metatarsal bone (Plate 31D).
by the articulation of the talus and central tarsal bone with a
continuous joint capsule with the calcaneus; and the calcaneo
CAUTIONS
quartal joint, located between the calcaneus and the fourth
All articular cartilage should be removed. Avoid irritating flexor
tarsal bone. The tarsometatarsal joints are formed by the artic-
tendons with the IM pin or wire.
ulations between the distal tarsal and metatarsal bones.
POStOPERATIVE EVAlUATION
EQUIPMENT
The axial aligmment of the limb should be critically observed.
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohrmann retractors, Gelpi
retractors, periosteal elevator, bone curette, high-speed drill
be evaluated.
and burrs, Jacob pin chuck, intramedullary (IM) pins, ortho-
pedic wire, wire twister, wire cutter, pin cutter
POStOPErATIVE Care
A soft, padded bandage should be placed to control bleeding
PrePaRaTION ANd POSItIONINg
and swelling. A splint should be used for 6 weeks or until
 o     e  
early radiographic evidence of bone bridging is observed.
Position the animal in lateral recurmbency. Drape the limb out
Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals until bone
 Sinp uogeinduu jeuxeu moe on uonisod suaq e uog
healing occurs. The animal should be confined, with activity
surgery. Prepare the ipsilateral proximal tibia or proximal
limited to leash walks umtil bone healing is complete. Pin migra-
humerus for cancellous bone graft harvest.
tion may occur. Implants should be removed if the soft tissue
is irritated.
PrOCEDURE
Approach: Incise the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and deep
Expected outcome
crural fascia over the lateral surface of the tarsometatarsal
 Bone healing is usually expected in 12 to 18 weeks. Anirmals
joint. Retract the superficial and deep digital flexor tendons
should have near-norrmal function of the treated lirmb.
medially, and elevate the abductor digiti quinti muscle to
expose the calcaneus, fourth tarsal bone, and the base of the
fifth metatarsal bone. Enter the affected joint(s) to expose the
articular surfaces (Plate 31A).
Reference
Alignment: Fuse the proximal intertarsal or tarsometa-
1. Piermattei DL, Flo GL: Fractures and other orthopedic injuries of
tarsal joints in a straight line. Use an IM pin to align the bones.
the tarsus, metatarsus and phalanges. In Brinker, Piermattei, and
Stabilization: Remove the articular cartilage from the
 Flo's Handbook of Small Animal Orthopedics and Fracture Repair,
calcaneoquartal joint, the tarsometatarsal joint, or both
3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997.
CHAPTER31
PrOXimal ArthrOdeSIS WIth An IntRaMedullary PIn And WiRe
95
PlAte 31
Tendon of 
flexor hallucis
 longus muscle
Tendon of
gastrocnemius
muscle
Calcaneus
Peroneus
longus
Peroneus
Tendon of superficial
brevis
flexor muscle
Tendon of 
abductor digiti
quinti muscle
96
Part one · surgical procedures for Joint diseases
AMPUTATIONS
Mandibulectomy
ChAPter 32
INDICATIONS1-4
EQuiPMeNt
Mandibulectomy is indicated in the management of tumors
● Standard surgical pack; electrocautery; hemoclips; bone wax
involving the jaw, and in the treatment of open or infected
or suture material for vascular ligation; periosteal elevator;
mandibular fractures in which surgical repair is not an option
Senn or Gelpi retractors; and a saw, Gigli wire, or osteotome
because of economic restrictions, osteomyelitis, or severe bone
for osteotomy of the mandible
and soft tissue loss. Specifically, a rostral mandibulectomy is
indicated for bilateral disease conditions affecting the rostral
PrePaRaTION ANd POSItIONING
mandible to the level of the second or third premolars. Rostral
Prepare mandible from the proximal neck to the chin and lat-
hemimandibulectomy is indicated for tumors in the region of
eral aspect of the face and cheeks. Correct surgical positioning
         
is imperative to provide optimum visualization of the oral
not crossed the symphysis based on clinical and radiographic
cavity. For the rostral mandibulectomy, position the animal in
evaluation.
dorsal recumbency, with the maxilla taped to the operating
table to allow maximal exposure to the oral cavity during sur-
OBJECTIVES5
gery. For a rostral hemimandibulectomy, position the animal in
● To remove the rostral mandible or rostral hemimandible and
lateral recumbency, with the affected side up.
provide the animal with a disease-free, fumctional, and cos-
metic oral cavity
PROCEDURE
Rostral Mandibulectomy:1-3.6 Sharply incise the buccal
ANATOMIC CONSIdErATIONS2.3.5.6
mucosa along the rostral aspect of the mandible (Plate 32A1).
The oral cavity is a complex structure composed of lips, gin-
Elevate the subcutaneous tissue and conmective tissue from the
giva, tongue teeth, palate, and salivary glands and ducts. The
bone, exposing the ventral and lateral aspects of the mandible
ofeu 'tensu aun Aq papond st ynou au on Aiddns remosa
(Plate 32A2). Reflect and retract the tissues caudally and later-
palatine, mandibular alveolar, and facial arteries, which are
ally to the level of the osteotomy. Perforrm an osteotormy with an
branches of the extermal and intermal carotid arteries. Anatormic
oscillating saw, osteotome, or Gigli wire caudal to the canine
a a 'sos an a aaod a g s
teeth or first or second molars (Plate 32B). Locate the mandibuilar
teeth and the second and third premolars, and the mandibular
arteries within the intramedullary canal, and ligate. If the arteries
symphysis. Brisk hemorrhage from the mandibular artery
retract within the intramedullary canal and canmot be located,
may occur at the osteotomy site; this should be identifed
use bone wax and electrocautery to staumnch the hemorrhage.
and either ligated or controlled with bone wax and electro
Incise any remaining conmective tissue, remove the rostral
cautery.
mandible, and subrmit for histopathology and margin evaluation.
Continued
CHAPTER 32
 MandIbulectomy
97
PlATe 32
Oscillating bone saw
 Periosteal elevator
98
PARt ONe · SuRGICal PrOCEdUReS fOR JOINT DISeASES
Rostral Hemimandibulectomy:1-3,6 Sharply incise the
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
buccal mucosa from the mandibular symphysis to the first or
Preemptive multimodal analgesia should be instituted in all
second premolar. Elevate the subcutaneous tissue and connec-
 patients for the first 48 to 72 hours. Postoperative antibiotics
tive tissue from the bone, exposing the ventral and lateral
are recommended for the first 5 to 7 days. The patient should be
aspects of the mandible. Reflect and retract the tissues caudally
fed moist food formed in individual meatballs to protect the sur-
and laterally to the level of the osteotomy (Plate 32C). Separate
gical incision. Access to chew toys and rawhide bones should
   'so   s  
be restricted umtil the incision is healed.
osteotomy with an oscillating saw, osteotome, or Gigli wire
caudal to the canine tooth or first or second molar (Plate 32D).
EXPECTED 0UTCOME1.6.8.9
Locate the mandibular artery within the intramedullary canal,
In a study evaluating owner satisfaction with partial mandi-
and ligate. If the arteries retract within the intrarmedullary
bulectomy or maxillectomy for the treatment of oral tumors,
canal and cannot be located, use bone wax and electrocautery
 85% of owners were satisfied with the results from the surgery.
       o
Forty-four percent noted a change in prehension and difficulty
tissue, remove the rostral hemimandible, and submit for
 in eating, but pain was perceived to be reduced in most animals,
histopathology and margin evaluation.
and cosmesis was acceptable in all 27 cases. Prognosis in dogs
Closure: Replace the lip over the exposed hemimandible(s)
with oral neoplasia varies, depending on the histopathologic
and appose the gingiva and sublingual mucosa with simple con-
type of the turmor, turmor size, the amoumt of bony involvement,
tinuous or interrupted absorbable suture, taking care to avoid
presence of regional and distant metastases, the clinical stage
of the disease, and the location of the tumor within the oral
sary to remove redundant labial tissue to provide a more
cavity. The prognosis is excellent for dogs that undergo partial
cosmetic closure and to prevent excessive drooling (Plates 32F
mandibulectomy for the treatment of mandibular fractures,
and 32G).
with owner acceptance of the cosmetic appearance and
mandibular fumction reported as good to excellent.
CAUTIONS1.3.5.6
It may be necessary to modify the surgical incision to obtain
adequate surgical margins. Preoperative planming is crucial to
References
ensure complete turmor excision. Patients should be thoroughly
 1. White R: Mandibulectomy and maxillectomy in the dog: Long-term
staged and assessed (e.g., with presurgical incisional biopsy;
survival in 100 cases. J Small Anim Pract 32(2):69-72, 1991.
skull, intraoral, and thoracic radiographs; fine needle aspiration
2. Manfra-Marretta S, Schrader S, Matthiesen D: Problems associated
of the local lymph nodes; blood work; coagulation profile; and
with the management and treatment of jaw fractures. Problems in
electrocardiogram) prior to surgery. To decrease the inci-
Vet Med 2(1):220-247, 1990.
dence of postoperative infection, perioperative antibiotics are
 3. Salisbury S: Problems and complications associated with maxillec-
recommended.
tomy, mandibulectomy, and oronasal fistula repair. Problems in Vet
Med 3(2):153-169, 1991.
Postoperative evaluation 1.3.5-7
4. Hoelzler M, Holmberg D: Partial mandibulectomy as the treatment
of a comminuted mandibular fracture in a dog. Can Vet J 42(2):
The mandible and associated musculature should be submitted
143-144, 2001.
for histopathology and margin evaluation. Suture removal is not
5. Matthiesen D, Manfra-Marretta S: Results and complications asso-
ciated with partial mandibulectomy and mexillectomy techniques.
ined at 10 to 14 days for postoperative complications. Possible
Problems in Vet Med 2(1):248-275, 1990.
complications include incisional dehiscence, infection, ranulas
6. White R: The oral cavity. In Hedlund C, Taboada J (eds): Clinical
and sialoceles from iatrogenic salivary duct trauma, subcuta-
Atlas of Ear, Nose and Throat Diseases in Small Animals: The Case
Based. Schlutersche, Hannover, Germany, 2002.
salivation with secondary cheilitis and dermatitis, oral pain,
7. Kosovsky JK, Matthiesen DT, Marretta SM, et al: Results of partial
local turmor recurrence, and distant metastatic disease. Owners
mandibulectomy for the treatment of oral tumors in 142 dogs. Vet
should also be asked about any problerms with prehension or
Surg 20(6):397-401, 1991.
 8. Fox LE, Geoghegan SL, Davis LH, et al: Owner satisfaction with par-
cosmetic concerms. Patients should be evaluated every 3 months
tial mandibulectomy or maxillectomy for treatment of oral tumors
with a complete physical and oral exarmination. Thoracic
in 27 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33(1):25-31, 1997.
radiographs are recommended every 3 months in animals
 9. Lantz G, Salisbury S: Partial mandibulectomy for treatment of
with malignant turmors to evaluate for distant metastasis for the
mandibular fractures in dogs: Eight cases (1981-1984). J Am Vet
first year.
Med Assoc 191(2):243245, 1987.
CHAPTer 32
 MandIbulectomy
66
PLATe 32
Redundant labial
Labial
tissue to be removed
tissue excised
 Redundant labial
tissue to be removed
100
Part one · surGical procedures for Joint diseases
AMPUTAtIOnS
Forelimb Amputation
Chapter 33
with Scapulectomy
INDICATIONS'
 33F). Ligate and sever the axillary vein. Disarticulate the limb
Forelimb amputation is a salvage procedure indicated for
by transecting the pectoral muscles and ligating and dividing
the treatment of neoplasia, osteomyelitis, nonumion fractures,
the lateral thoracic vessels.
o q p  ns n  
Closure: Inverting the muscle bellies, place interrupted
paralysis caused by brachial plexus avulsion, and congenital
Lembert sutures, with 0 to 2-0 absorbable suture material, in the
lirmb deformities.
lateral fascial sheaths of the latissimus dorsi, omotransver-
sarius, and trapezius muscles to the pectoral muscle (Plate
ObJeCtIVeS
33G). Eliminate the dead space with 2-0 to 3-0 absorbable
● To remove the lirmb and preserve the animal's quality of life
sutures in an interrupted cruciate or simple interrupted pattern
in the subcutaneous tissue. Appose the skin edges with inter-
ANATOmIC CONSIDERATIONS2
dermal or skin sutures (Plate 33H).
Forelimb amputation is most commonly performed by removing
the limb at the scapula. More distal procedures have been
CAUTIONS
described, but they are thought to produce less aesthetically
Patients should be thoroughly assessed before surgery is
pleasing results in short-haired animals because of the scapular
initiated (e.g, with electrocardiogram, thoracic radiographs,
spine and acromial prorminence. Anatormic landmarks for the
and blood work). Hemodynamically umstable patients should be
procedure include the scapula and associated musculature.
treated prior to surgery to ensure an umeventful recovery.
Whole blood and plasma products should be on hand in the
EQUIPMENT
event that major hemorrhage occurs.
● Standard surgical pack; electrocautery; hemoclips or ample
suture material for vascular ligation; sterile syringe; 25-gauge
POStOPErATIVe EVALUAtION
needle; 1 to 2 mL of 0.5% bupivacaine, not exceeding 1.5 to
If indicated, the entire limb should be submitted for histo-
2.0 mg/kg of body weight in the dog and 1 mg/kg of body
pathology. Sutures should be removed in 10 to 14 days.
weight in the cat, for brachial plexus injection?
POStoperatiVe Care
PreParatIOn ANd pOSItIOnInG
Postoperative bandaging of the wound for 2 to 3 days may be
Prepare the forelimb circurmferentially from dorsal midline to
desirable to prevent seroma formation. Preemptive multirmodal
carpus. Position the animal in lateral recurmbency, with the
analgesia should be instituted in all patients for the first 48 to
affected lirmb up. Drape the lirmb out from a hanging position to
72 hours. Common pararmeters to evaluate in the postoperative
allow maximal manipulation during surgery.
amputee are heart rate, pulse quality, respiratory rate, capillary
refill time, body temperature, electrocardiogram, pulse
PROCEDURE
oximetry, central venous pressure, serial packed cell volurme,
Amputation:14 Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue in a
total protein, serurm glucose, and activated clotting times.
reverse Y incision from the vertebral border of the scapula to
the acromial process, following the scapular spine, and aroumd
Expected outcome1.2.4
the forelimb medially (Plate 33A). Reflect the skin, and ligate the
The outcome for return to function and quality of life is good to
axillobrachial and omobrachial veins proximal to the greater
excellent. Most animals adapt very well to forelirmb armputation
tubercle of the humerus (Plate 33B). Ligate the cephalic vein
but will have a noticeable gait deficit on ambulation.
distal to the cleidobrachialis muscle. Using electrocautery for
all the muscle incisions, transect the brachiocephalicus muscle
through the clavicular tendon. Sever the omotransversarius and
References
trapezius muscles along the cranial and dorsal edge of the spine
of the scapula. Sever the latissimus dorsi muscle close to its
1. Daly WR: Amputation of the forelimb. In Bojrab MJ (ed): Current
insertion on the humerus (Plate 33C). Rotate the cranial edge of
Techniques in Small Animal Surgery, 4th ed. Baltimore, Williams &
Wilkins, 1998.
the scapula laterally, and sever the insertion of the scalenus,
2. Bone DL, Aberman HM: Forelimb amputation in the dog using
rhomboideus, and serratus ventralis muscles (Plate 33D). Block
humeral osteotomy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:5, 525-529, 1988.
oaun saaiau snxatd qeoeiq pue snedse idns an iaaas pue
 3. Muir WW, Hubbell JAE: Handbook of Veterinary Anesthesia. St. Louis,
each nerve prior to transection with 0.2 to 0.4 mL bupivacaine
Mosby, 1989.
until a bleb forrms umder the epineuriurm proximal to the cut
 4. Harvey CE: Forequarter amputation in the dog and cat. J Am Anim
   n      
Hosp Assoc 10(1):25-28, 1974.
Chapter 33
FOrelimb AmputatiOn WIth ScapulectOmy
101
PLATE 33
B
C
Trapezius muscle
Spine of scapula 
Latissimus
dorsimuscle
Omotransversarius
muscle
Omobrachial
vein
Axillobrachial-
vein
Brachiocephalicus 
 Long head of 
Cephalic ~
muscle
triceps muscle
vein
Deltoideus 
muscle
 Lateral head of
triceps muscle
Rhomboideus
E
muscle
Scalenus
muscle
Serratus
ventralis
muscle
Scalenus
muscle
Axillary
Axillary
First
Deep
Lateral
artery
vein
rib
pectoral
 thoracic
G
muscle
artery,
Trapezius
vein, and
muscle
nerve
Latissimus
√
dorsi muscle
Transfixion
suture
Pectoral
muscle
Omotransversarius
muscle
102
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
AMPUTATIONS
Forelimb Salvage via Partial
Chapter 34
and Complete
 Scapulectomy
INDICATIONS1.2
affected limb up. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to
 Partial and total scapulectomy are limb-sparing procedures
 allow maxirmal rmanipulation during surgery.
imal scapula or in select cases of degenerative joint disease and
PROCEDURE
pain in the shoulder that are not responsive to conservative
Complete Scapulectomy:1 Incise the skin and subcuta
management and in which arthrodesis is not an option.
neous tissue from the dorsal border of the scapula to the prox-
imal third of the humerus, following the dorsal border of the
ObJECTIVES
scapula. Incise along the caudal aspect of the scapula, con-
● To preserve limb function and, in the cases of cancer, to allow
 necting the two incisions at the apices (Plate 34A). Hemorrhage
 for local tumor control
  s   o q 
cautery. Without disturbing the pseudocapsule of the tumor,
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS'
reflect the skin and subcutaneous tissue to expose the
Partial scapulectomy is most commonly performed by
superficial muscles of the trapezius, omotransversarius, rhom-
boideus, and deltoideus (Plate 34B1). Using electrocautery,
humeral joint. Complete scapulectomy is indicated for tumors 
incise these muscles close to their origins on the scapula,
involving the distal part of the scapula, or when more than 90%
without disturbing the tumor. Retract the scapula laterally, and
 of the scapula is involved. Anatormic landmarks for the pro-
elevate the serratus ventralis muscle frorm the medial aspect of
cedure include the scapular spine, neck, acromial process,
the scapula, taking care to preserve the brachial plexus and
glenoid cavity, supraglenoid process, and associated muscu-
axillary artery and vein (Plate 34B2). Identify the supra- and
lature.
subscapular nerves coming from the brachioplexus bundle, and
inject each nerve prior to transection with 0.2 to 0.4 mL bupiva-
EQuipMent
caine until a bleb forms under the epineurium proximal to the
● Standard surgical pack; electrocautery; hemoclips or ample
cut. Transect the tendons of the coracobrachialis, teres minor,
suture material for vascular ligation; Senm, Army-Navy, and/or
infraspinatus, supraspinatus, and subscapularis muscles close
Gelpi retractors; a saw or osteotome for osteotomy of the
to their insertions on the humerus (Plate 34C). Sharply incise
scapula; sterile syringe; 25-gauge needle; 1 to 2 mL of 0.5%
the joint capsule of the shoulder, and transect the teres major
bupivacaine, not exceeding 1.5 to 2.0 mg/kg of body weight in 
 rog 'o a  nam oq go  1  op a
from the caudal aspect of the scapula using electrocautery
plexus injection?
(Plate 34D1). Perform an osteotomy of the supraglenoid tubercle,
preserving the attachment of the biceps tendon (see Plate 34D1).
PreParatION ANd POSItIONInG
The scapula and associated musculature (i.e., infraspinatus,
Prepare the forelimb circumferentially from dorsal midline to
supraspinatus, and subscapularis) may now be removed and
carpus. Position the anirmal in lateral recumbency with the 
 submitted for histopathology and margin evaluation.
Continued
Chapter 34
Forelimb salvaGe Via Partial And complete ScaPulectomy
103
PlAte 34
Omotransversariusmuscle
Trapezius muscle
Trapezius muscle
Omotransversarius muscle
Latissimus
dorsi muscle
B1
Tumor
Skin
Long head of
incision
triceps muscle
 Deltoideus muscle
Lateral head of
triceps muscle
Deltoideus muscle
C
B2
Serratus
Biceps
Infraspinatus
ventralis muscle
 tendon
muscle (cut)
(elevated)
Infraspinatus muscle
 Teres minor muscle
(cut)
Teres minor muscle
Supraspinatus
Long head
of triceps muscle
muscle
(cut)
D1
Teres major muscle
Long head of
triceps muscle
Lateral head of
triceps muscle
104
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
Closure: Secure the biceps tendon and supraglenoid
presurgical fine needle aspiration or biopsy, blood work, coagul-
tubercle to the caudal aspect of the joint capsule using nonab-
lation profile, and electrocar diogram).
sorbable monofilament suture in a horizontal mattress patterm.
Reattach the triceps muscle to the deltoideus, omotransver-
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION
sarius, and trapezius muscles with an interrupted Lembert or
The scapula and associated musculature should be submitted
horizontal mattress suture pattern and nonabsorbable suture.
for histopathology and margin evaluation. The sutures should
Secure the remaining trapezius to the umderlying serratus ven-
be removed in 10 to 14 days. For the first year the patient should
tralis muscle to further eliminate dead space. The subcutaneous
be checked every 3 months with a physical exarmination and
tissue and skin closure is routine.
thoracic radiographs to evaluate for local recurrence of disease.
Partial Scapulectomy:1 A partial scapulectomy is per-
forrmed in a manmer similar to a complete scapulectomy, with
PoStoperatiVe Care
the exception that the scapulohurmeral joint is left intact, and
Postoperative bandaging of the wound for 3 to 5 days may be
the osteotomy is at the level of or proximal to the scapular
desirable to prevent seroma formation. Preemptive multimodal
  a o    ns o  
 analgesia should be instituted in all patients for the first 48 to
size of the turmor, and only the proximal portion of the scapula
72 hours. Rehabilitation and range-of-motion exercises should
is removed (Plate 34D2). Attach the transected muscles of the
be instituted early to prevent joint contraction and loss of
trapezius, omotransversarius, serratus ventralis, and rhom-
fnction.
boideus to the distal scapula via holes drilled into the body
using nonabsorbable suture in a simple interrupted or hori-
EXPeCted OutCome1
zontal mattress patterm. Alternatively, close the remaining mus-
 Postoperative use of the lirmb is usually fair to excellent. Dogs
culature without bone tunmels by suturing transected muscles
that undergo partial scapulectomy are reported to have better
of the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, deltoideus, and the long
fumcti on than dogs with total scapulectomy.
head of the triceps to the serratus ventralis, omotransversarius,
and trapezius muscles. The subcutaneous tissue and skin
closure are routine.
References
CAUTIONS
1. Kirpensteijn J, Straw RC, Pardo AD, et al: Partial and total scapulec-
tomy in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30(4):313-319, 1994.
It may be necessary to modify the surgical incision to obtain
2. Trout N, Pavletic M, Kraus K: Partial scapulectomy for management
adequate surgical margins. Preoperative planming is crucial to
of sarcomas in three dogs and two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
ensure cormplete tuumor excision. Patients should be thoroughly
207(6):586-587, 1996.
 Aasins apaord asaes qu sn anogaq passasse pue pases
3. Muir WW, Hubbell JAE: Handbook of Veterinary Anesthesia. St.
is initiated (e.g., with thoracic and abdorminal radiographs,
Louis, Mosby, 1989.
CHAPTER34
FOrElIMB SAlVAGE VIa PaRTIAl AND COMPlETe SCAPUlECTOMY
105
PLATE34
D2
106
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
AMPUTATIONS
Rear Limb Amputation
CHAPTer 35 
via Coxofemoral Disarticulation
INDICATIONS
ilium. On the medial aspect of the leg, isolate, ligate, and divide the
 Rear limb amputation is a salvage procedure indicated for the treatment
femoral artery and vein in the femoral triangle via placement of a cir-
 of neoplasia, osteomyelitis, nonunion fractures, severe trauma with
cumferential and transfixation suture proximally and a hemostat or cir-
vascular compromise and limb necrosis, paralysis caused by sciatic or
cumferential suture distad (Plate 35D). Identify, block, and sever the
femoral nerve damage, and congenital limb deformities.
femoral nerve. Transect the pectineus, the cranial belly of the sartorius,
the gracilis, and the adductor muscles at the level of the midshaft femur
ObJeCTIVES
(Plate 35E). Transect the iliopsoas muscle at its insertion on the lesser
· To remove the limb and preserve the animal's quality of life
capsule. Incise the joint capsule and sever the round liganment to
AnatoMIC conSideratIonS
remove the limb (Plate 35F).
Rear limb amputation may be performed via two methods: (l) by
Closure: Inverting the muscle bellies, suture the lateral fascial
removing the limb at the midshaft femur; or (2) by removal at the
sheaths of the muscle bellies in an interrupted Lembert pattern with
coxofemoral joint. More distal procedures have been described, but
0 to 2-0 monofilament absorbable suture (Plate 35G). Eliminate the
these produce a nonfunctional limb that may actually inhibit ambula-
dead space with 2-0 to 3-0 absorbable sutures in an interrupted cruciate
tion and that is aesthetically less pleasing. Coxofemoral disarticulation
or simple interrupted pattern in the subcutaneous tissue. Appose the
should be performed in dogs with neoplastic conditions affecting the
skin edges with interdermal or skin sutures (see Plate 35G).
femur to ensure adequate surgical margins, and the entire limb should
be submitted for histopathology to confirm tumor-free margins and
CAUTIONS
tumor identification. Anatomic landmarks for the procedure include the
Preoperative planning will ensure adequate soft tissue coverage and
femur, the coxofemoral joint, and associated musculature.
tension-free closure of the surgical wound. Elizabethan collars should
be employed in animals that lick or chew at the incision.
EQUIPMENT1
· Standard surgical pack; electrocautery, hemoclips, or ample suture
PoStOperatIVe EValuatION
material for vascular ligation; Senn, Army-Navy, and/or Gelpi retrac-
If indicated, the entire limb should be submitted for histopathology.
tors; sterile syringe; 25-gauge needle; 1 to 2 mL of 0.5% bupivacaine,
 Sutures can be removed in 10 to 14 days.
not exceeding 1.5 to 2.0 mg/kg of body weight in the dog and 1 mg/kg
PoStoperatiVe Care
Preemptive multimodal analgesia should be instituted in all patients for
PrePaRATION ANd POSITIONInG
the frst 48 to 72 hours. Common parameters to evaluate in the post-
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from dorsal midline to tarsus.
operative amputee are heart rate, pulse quality, respiratory rate, capil-
Position the animal in lateral recumbency, with the affected limb up.
lary refill time, body temperature, electrocardiogram, pulse oximetry,
 Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow maximal manipu-
central venous pressure, serial packed cell volume, total protein, serum
lation during surgery.
glucose, and activated clotting times. Activity should be restricted for
2 weeks until sutures are removed. It may be necessary to assist ambu-
PrOCEdURe
lation with slings or carts in some cases, until the animal adjusts to its
Coxofemoral Disarticulation: Incise the skin and subcuta-
new center of balance.
neous tissue, using a curved incision on the lateral aspect of the leg that
begins at the flank fold and extends caudodistally to the distal third of
EXpected 0utcome2.3
the femur, and then caudodorsally to the tuber ischii (Plate 35A). Make
Expectations for a return to function and quality of life are good to
a similar incision on the medial aspect of the leg, connecting at either
excellent. Most animals adapt well to hind limb amputation, but they
end. Retract the skin and subcutaneous tissue to expose the muscle bel-
will have a noticeable gait deficit on ambulation, and about one dog in
lies of the biceps femoris and the tensor fascia latae. Using electro-
three has a noticeable change in behavior.
 cautery in the coagulation mode, transect these muscle belly groups at
the level of midshaft femur (Plate 35B). Reflect the muscle bellies prox-
imally to expose the sciatic nerve. Block and sever the sciatic nerve,
injecting it prior to transection with 0.2 to 0.4 mL bupivacaine until a
References
bleb forms under the epineurium proximal to the cut. Using electro-
1. Muir WW, Hubbell JAE: Handbook of Veterinary Anesthesia. St.
cautery, transect the gluteal muscles at their insertions at the greater
Louis, Mosby, 1989.
and third trochanters (Plate 35C). Transect the semitendinosus and
 2. Kirpensteijn J, Van Den Bos R, Endenburg N: Adaptation of dogs to
semimembranosus at the level of the proximal femur, and reflect prox-
 the amputation of a limb and their owners' satisfaction with the pro-
imally (see Plate 35C). Transect the external rotator and quadratus
cedure. Vet Rec 144(5):115-118, 1999.
femoris muscles at their insertions in the trochanteric fossa. Working
 3. Endicott M: Principles of treatment for osteosarcoma. Clin Tech
cranally, transect the rectus femors muscle close to its ongin on the
Small Anim Pract 18(2):110-114, 2003.
CHApter 35
Rear limb AmputatiOn Via coxofemoral dIsarticulatiOn
107
PlAte 35
Lateral View
Deep
Middle
 Superficial
gluteal muscle gluteal muscle  gluteal muscle
Biceps
femoris muscle
Skin
incision
Adductor muscle
Gracilis muscle
Sciatic
Tensor
nerve
Semimembranosus muscle
fascia latae muscle
Semitendinosusmuscle
Vastus
lateralis muscle
Vastus
lateralis muscle
Medial View
Pectineus muscle
Femoral
Pectineus muscle
artery and vein
Illiopsoas muscle
Adductor muscle
Gracilis muscle
Transfixion
Gracilis
suture
muscle
Sartorius muscle
Adductor muscle
Sartoriusmuscle
F Medial View
G
Adductor muscle Quadriceps
lliopsoasmuscle
 Ligament of
Gracilis muscle
the long head
Semimembranosus muscle
of the femur
Rectus femoris
Joint capsule
muscle
Semitendinosus muscle
Sartorius muscle
Biceps femoris muscle
Lateral View
Incision in
 joint capsule
108
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
AMPUTATIONS
Midshaft Femur Amputation
Chapter 36
INDICATIONS
suture proximally, and a hemostat or circumferential suture distad
Rear limb amputation is a salvage procedure indicated for the treatment
(Plate 36E). Identify, block, and sever the femoral nerve. Transect the
of neoplasia, osteomyelitis, nonunion fractures, severe trauma with
remaining pectineus muscle and the cranial belly of the sartorius
vascular compromise and limb necrosis, paralysis caused by sciatic or
muscle to fully isolate the femoral diaphysis. Elevate any remaining
femoral nerve damage, and congenital limb deformities.
tissue or muscle from the proximal femur at the osteotomy site, and cut
the femur using a saw or Gigli wire to remove the limb (Plate 36F).
OBJECTIVES
The level of the osteotomy is located within the proximal third of the
● To remove the limb and preserve the animal's quality of life
femoral shaft to ensure appropriate soft tissue coverage.
Closure: Inverting the muscle bellies, suture the lateral fascial
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
 sheaths of the muscle bellies in an interrupted Lembert pattern with
0 to 2-0 monofilament absorbable suture. Cover the femoral shaft by
the limb at the midshaft femur; or (2) removing it at the coxofemoral
suturing the transected muscle belles of the quadriceps to the
joint. More distal procedures have been described, but these produce a
adductor. Suture the transected biceps femoris to the gracilis, the semi-
nonfunctional limb that may actually inhibit ambulation and that is
tendinosus, and the semimembranosus muscles. Eliminate the dead
aesthetically less pleasing. Midshaft femoral amputation is easier to
space with 2-0 to 30 absorbable sutures in an interrupted cruciate or
perform than is a coxofemoral disarticulation, and therefore it is the
 simple interrupted pattern in the subcutaneous tissue. Appose the skin
method preferred by most veterinarians. Anatomic landmarks for
edges with interdermal or skin sutures.
the procedure include the femur, the coxofemoral joint, and associated
musculature.
CAUTIONS
Preoperative planning is imperative to ensure adequate soft tissue cov-
EQUIPMENT'
erage and tension-free closure of the surgical wound. Elizabethan col-
· Standard surgical pack; electrocautery, hemoclips, or ample suture
lars should be employed in animals that lick or chew at the incision.
       g 
tors; a Gigli wire or saw for midshaft femoral amputation; sterile
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION
syringe; 25-gauge needle; 1 to 2 mL of 0.5% bupivacaine, not
If indicated, the entire limb should be submitted for histopathology.
exceeding 1.5 to 2.0 mg/kg of body weight in the dog and 1 mg/kg of
Sutures should be removed in 10 to 14 days.
body weight in the cat, for local nerve blockade
PoStoPeratIVe Care
PreParaTIOn ANd POSItIoninG
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from dorsal midline to tarsus.
the frst 48 to 72 hours. Common parameters to evaluate in the post-
 Position the animal in lateral recumbency, with the affected limb up.
operative amputee are heart rate, pulse quality, respiratory rate, capil-
Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow maximal manipu-
lary refill time, body temperature, electrocardiogram, pulse oximetry.
lation during surgery.
central venous pressure, serial packed cell volume, total protein, serum
glucose, and activated clotting times. Activity should be restricted for
PROCEdURE
2 weeks until suture removal. It may be necessary to assist ambulation
Midshaft Femoral Amputation:' Incise the skin and subcu-
with slings or carts, until the animal adjusts to its new center of balance.
taneous tissue, using a curved incision on the lateral aspect of the leg
that begins at the flank fold and extends caudodistally to the distal third
EXPeCTeD OUTCoMe2.3
of the femur and then caudodorsally to the tuber ischi (Plate 36A).
The outcome for returm to function and quality of life should be good to
Make a similar incision on the medial aspect of the leg, connecting at
excellent. Most animals adapt well to hind limb amputation, although
either end. Retract the skin and subcutaneous tissue to expose the
they will have a noticeable gait deficit on ambulation. About one dog in
muscle bellies of the biceps femoris, the tensor fascia latae, and the
three has a noticeable change in behavior.
quadriceps (Plate 36Bl). Using electrocautery in the coagulation mode,
transect these muscle belly groups at the level of the distal third of the
femur (Plate 36B2). Identify, block, and sever the sciatic nerve, injecting
References
it prior to transection with 0.2 to 0.4 mL bupivacaine until a bleb forms
1. Muir WW, Hubbell JAE: Handbook of Veterinary Anesthesia. St.
under the epineurium proximal to the cut. At the same level, use elec.
Louis, Mosby, 1989.
 2. Kirpensteijn J, Van Den Bos R, Endenburg N: Adaptation of dogs to
adductor muscles (Plate 36C). On the medial aspect of the leg, transect
the amputation of a limb and their owners’ satisfaction with the
the gracilis and the caudal belly of the sartorius muscles at the level of
procedure. Vet Rec 144(5):115-118, 1999.
the midshaft femur (Plate 36D). Isolate, ligate, and divide the femoral
 3. Endicott M: Principles of treatment for osteosarcoma. Clin Tech
artery and vein via placement of a circumferential and transfixation
Small Anim Pract 18(2):110-114, 2003.
CHAPter 36
Midshaft Femur AmputatiON
109
PlAte 36
Lateral View
B1
Quadriceps
 Semitendinosus muscle
group
Biceps femoris muscle
Skin incision
B2
 Semitendinosus muscle
Semimembranosus muscle
Adductor
muscle
Adductor muscle
Gracilis muscle
 Semimembranosus
muscle
Quadriceps
group
Semitendinosusmuscle
 Biceps femoris muscle
Medial View
 Sartorius muscle
Osteotomy site
(caudal part)
Femoral vessels
Pectineus muscle 
E
Gracilis
muscle
Sartorius muscle
Transfixion
(cranial part)
- suture
Sartorius muscle
(cranial part)
110
Part one · surGical procedures for Joint diseases
AMPUTATIONS
ChaPTer 37
Tlor
INDICATIONS1-3
of the appendage's attachment to the paw (Plate 37C1). Using a scalpel
Digital amputation is indicated for the treatment of neoplasia,
blade, scissors, or digital pressure, remove the digit and suture the
osteomyelitis, nonunion fractures, severe trauma, and severe toe defor-
wound closed with a simple interrupted or cruciate suture and monofil-
mities that result in lameness or pain. Dewclaw removal is indicated for
ament absorbable suture (optional) (Plate 37C2). Usually, neither band-
cosmesis, and as a preventative measure to avoid future injury.
 aging nor suture removal is necessary.
Dewclaws should not be removed in working breeds such as the Briard
or Great Pyrenees, in which double dewclaws on each hindfoot are a
CAUTIONS4
breed standard and requirement. Dewclaws in puppies less than 1 week
go on rpno u pa aq on paau A uosnu ms a
 of age may be amputated with minimal instrumentation. Once the digits 
adequate surgical margins in the cases of neoplasia. Preoperative plan-
 develop, amputation of the dewclaw is more complicated and requires
ning is crucial to ensure complete tumor excision. Patients should be
 general anesthesia.
thoroughly staged and assessed before this limb salvage procedure
surgery is initiated (e.g., with thoracic radiographs, presurgical fine
ObJeCtiVes
needle aspiration or biopsy, blood work, coagulation profile, and elec-
· To remove a digit and preserve the foot function and normal weight-
trocardiogram). Evidence of bone lysis is present in 83% of cases of
bearing capacity
malignant tumors and in 17% of the benign or pyogranulomatous
 masses.
AnatoMIC ConSIdeRatIoNS
The primary weight-bearing digits of the paw are the third and fourth
POStOPERatIVe EVAluatION
digits. Each digit is composed of three phalangeal bones. Anatomic
landmarks for the procedure include the phalanges of digits 1 through 5
 culture and sensitivity. Sutures should be removed in 10 to 14 days.
 and associated tendons and musculature.
Postoperative care5
EQuiPmeNT
The foot should be protected with a soft, padded bandage. Elizabethan
· Standard surgical pack, electrocautery, bone cutters for proximal
collars should be employed until the wound is healed in animals that
 phalangeal amputation, tourmiquet to control hemorrhage (optional)
lick or chew at the bandage or incision. Activity should be restricted for
2 weeks, until suture removal.
Preparation And poSItioning
Clip and prepare the affected paw from the carpus or tarsus distally.
Expected outcome4.6
Position the animal in lateral recumbency with the affected limb up.
The level of amputation depends on the disease; however, pad preser-
Place a tourniquet on the limb below the elbow or above the tarsus
vation is important in ensuring pain-free ambulation. Up to two
(optional). Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow maximal
non-weight-bearing digits may be completely amputated without
 manipulation during surgery.
affecting limb function. Amputation of both digits 3 and 4 may result in
lameness, and therefore should be avoided if possible. The prognosis in
PrOCEdUre
dogs with digital neoplasia varies depending on the histopathologic
Digital Amputation of Digits 3 and 4: Incise the skin and
type of the tumor, the presence of regional and distant metastasis, and
subcutaneous tissue in a reverse Y incision beginning at the mid-
the clinical stage of the disease.
metacarpus of the affected digit, excising the digital pad (Plate 37A1).
Disarticulate the phalanges at the metacarpophalangeal joint, or create
an osteotomy of the proximal phalanx with bone-cutting forceps. Bevel
References
the angle of the osteotomy to ensure adequate soft tissue coverage of
1. Basher A: Foot injuries in dogs and cats. Compend Contin Educ
the protruding bone (Plate 37A2). Using the electrocautery and suture,
Pract Vet 16(9):1159-1176, 1994.
identify and ligate any persistent bleeding vessels. Appose the subcuta-
2. American Kennel Club Staff: Briard. In The Complete Dog Book.
neous tissue and fascia in a simple interupted pattern with monofila.
New York, Howell House Book, 1998.
ment absorbable suture. The remaining closure is routine (Plate 37A3).
3. American Kennel Club Staff: Great Pyrenees. In The Complete Dog
Amputation of Digit 1: Incise the skin and subcutaneous
Book. New York, Howell House Book, 1998.
tissue from the midshaft metatarsus around the medial or lateral digit
4. Marino DJ, Matthiesen DT, Stefanacci JD, Moroff SD: Evaluation of
(Plate 37Bl). Disarticulate the phalanges at the metacarpophalangeal
dogs with digit masses: 117 cases (1981-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc
joint, and identify and ligate or cauterize any persistent bleeding vessels
207(6):726-728.
(Plate 37B2). Appose the subcutaneous tissue and fascia in a simple
5. Swaim S: Management and bandaging of soft tissue injuries of dog
interrupted patterm with monoflament absorbable suture. The remain-
and cat feet. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21(3):329-340, 1985.
ing closure is routine (Plate 37B3).
6. O'Brien M, Berg J, Engler S: Treatment by digital amputation of sub-
Dewclaw Amputation in a Neonate: Crush the tissue
ungual squamous cell carcinoma in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
of the dewclaw using straight or curved hemostatic forceps at the level
201(5):759-761, 1992.
CHAPTER 37
DIGItAl AMPUTATION
111
PLATe 37
 Adult Middle Digit Amputation
A1
A2
A3
Skin
incision
Bone incision
 Proximal phalanx
Middle phalanx
Distal phalanx
Juvenile/Puppy Dewclaw Amputation
$2
Acult Digit 1 Amputation
B1
B2
B3
Metacarpo-
phalangeal
joint
Proximal
(first)
phalanx
Distal
phalanx
112
Part one · surGical procedures for Joint diseases
AdDItIOnAl CorreCTiVe OSteOtOMieS
Oblique Osteotomy Stabilized
ChaPter 38
with a Type HI External Fixator
INDICATIONS
surfaces are parallel (Plate 38C). Cranial caudal joint surface relation-
Candidates include animals with either angular or rotational deformity
ships should mimic the contralateral intact bone. Rotational alignment
of the radius and ulna' or tibia and fibula,2 with minimal length discrep-
is correct if the paw aligns with the radius or tibia when the elbow and
ancy when compared with the contralateral limb.
carpus or stifle and hock are flexed.
Stabilization: Stabilize the bone by adding medial and lateral
ObJectiVes
connecting bars and additional fixation pins to create a type II external
· To realign joint surfaces, reestablish rotational alignment, and pre-
fixation frame? (see Plate 38C).
 serve length of the affected bone
CAUTIONS
AnatoMIC CONSIdeRatIONS
   s   r e o  s 
A physical examination is needed to estimate the degree of rotation. By
when placing the fixation pins. Angular and rotational alignment
flexing the carpus and the elbow or the hock and stifle of the affected
should be monitored during the reduction. Intraoperative radiographs
limb, the degree of angulation of the metacarpal or metatarsal bones
e  e d d   d  o  a
in relation to the radius and ulna or in relation to the tibia can be
ment during reduction and stabilization.
measured. The degree of angulation approximates the degree of rota-
tion. The osteotomy should be planned at the site of greatest curvature
POStOPeRatIVE EVAluATION
visible on the radiographic view that shows the most deformity (usually
Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and implant place
the cranial caudal view) and parallel to the joint surface closest to the
ment. The joint surfaces should be parallel, and a cranial caudal view of
deformed area (usually the distal joint surface) (Plate 38A). Landmarks
the proximal joint should be visible in the same radiograph as a cranial
for the pin placement and the vital structures to avoid vary with the
caudal view of the distal joint. If angular deformity persists, the extermal
affected bone.
fixator should be manipulated by loosening the clamps distal to the
osteotomy and realigning the fixation pins on the connecting bar to
EQUIPMENT
correct the deformity (Plate 38D).
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, small Hohmann retractors, periosteal
elevator, oscillating saw, Jacob pin chuck, low-speed power
POSTOPEratIVE CAre
drill, external fixation equipment, pin cutter, bone curette for har-
Gauze sponges should be packed around the pins; the sponges should
vesting graft
be secured with a bandage, which also incorporates the paw, to limit
        
PREPARATIONANDPOSITIONING
lmited to leash walking. Extermal fixator management includes daily
For the radius, prepare the forelimb circumferentially from above the
pin care and pin packing as needed. Radiographs should be repeated at
shoulder to the phalanges. Position the animal in dorsal recumbency.
6-week intervals to evaluate healing. The fixator may be destabilized by
and suspend the affected limb from the ceiling. Drape the limb out in
removing selected fixation pins, or one connecting bar of the type I1
the hanging position. For the tibia, prepare the affected rear limb cir-
fixator, when early bone bridging is observed. The external fixator
cumferentially from midline to foot. Position the animal in dorsal
should be removed when the osteotomy has healed.
recumbency, and suspend the affected limb from the ceiling. Drape the
         
EXPECTED OUTCOME
humerus as a cancellous bone graft donor site for either osteotomy.
  g s  n g   i  aq 's n 
PrOCEdUrE
 medial lateral angular deformities can be achieved with this technique;
Approach: Position a transfixation pin parallel to the proximal joint
however, minimal correction is anticipated for cranial caudal bowing or
surface in the dorsal plane of the proximal portion of the bone. For the
restoration of large length discrepancies.
radius, start the pin on the lateral surface of the proximal radius or
radial head. Position a transfixation pin parallel to the distal joint sur-
face in the dorsal plane of the distal portion of the bone. For the radius,
start the pin on the lateral surface of the distal radius, just cranial to the
References
ulna. Make a transverse osteotomy of the ulna or fibula at the same level
1. Quinn M, Ehrhart N, Johnson AL: Realignment of the radius in
as the radial or tibial osteotomy. Make an oblique osteotomy of
canine antebrachial growth deformities treated with corrective
the radius or tibia at the area of greatest curvature (Plate 38B). The
osteotomy and bilateral (Type II) external fixation. Vet Surg 29:558,
osteotomy should parallel the distal joint surface in both the dorsal and
2000.
transverse planes.
2. Johnson SG, Hulse DA, Vangundy TE, et al: Corrective osteotomy
Reduction: Lower the table to allow the animal's weight to align
for pes varus in the dachshund. Vet Surg 18:373, 1989.
the bone. Use the distal transfixation pin to manipulate the distal bone
 3. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures: Radial and
segment to align the joint surfaces and derotate the bone. Medial and
ulnar growth deformities. In Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery,
lateral angular alignment is correct when the proximal and distal joint
2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
Chapter 38
113
Plate 38
二
Craniocaudal view
Lateralview
114
Part one · surGIcal procedures for Joint dIseases
AddItiONal COrrECTiVe OSteOtOmieS
Transverse Derotational
Chapter 39 
Osteotomy Stabilized with a Plate
INDICATIONS
Kirschner wire perpendicular to the bone in the transverse
Candidates include animals with isolated rotational deformity
 plane of the distal joint (Plate 39A). The approach depends on
of a long bone caused by fracture malunion. Concurrent angular
the affected bone. Make the transverse osteotomy at the major
deformity may be corrected by performing an oblique osteotomy
region of rotation (Plate 39B).
at the area of greatest curvature and then realigning the joint
Reduction: Rotate the distal segment umtil the Kirschner
surfaces.
wires are in the same plane (see Plate 39B).
Stabilization: Apply an appropriately contoured plate to
ObJeCtIVeS
the bone (Plate 39C). The plate should function as a com-
+ To reestablish rotational alignment
pression plate. Harvest a cancellous bone autograft, and place
it at the osteotomy site.
AnatomIC COnSIderatIOnS
 Rotation should be estimated from radiographic landmarks for
CAUTIONS
the humerus and femur. The rotation for the radius or tibia from
Rotational alignment and reduction should be maintained
a physical examination by flexing the carpus and the elbow or
during implant application. It is important to be sure that the
the hock and stifle of the affected limb. The degree of angula-
plate is centered on the bone. Irrigation is needed during
tion of the metacarpal or metatarsal bones should be measured
dhrilling to reduce bone necrosis. All screws should be tightened
in relation to the radius and ulna or in relation to the tibia. The
after each screw is placed and at the end of the procedure.
degree of angulation approximates the degree of rotation.
Generally, the osteotomy can be made at the mid-diaphysis.
POStOPERATIVE EVALUATION
Landmarks for the approach, and vital structures to avoid, vary
Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and
with the affected bone.
implant placerment. For radius and tibia, it is important to check
the alignment of the metacarpal or metatarsal bones to the
EQUIPMENT
radius or tibia to verify rotational correction.
● Surgical pack, periosteal elevator, Gelpi retractors, Myerding
or Hohrmanm retractors, Kern bone-holding forceps, self-
PoStoperative care
centering plate-holding forceps, high-speed drill, Kirschner
The animal should be confined, with activity lirmited to leash
wires, plating equipment, bone curette for harvesting graft
walking. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals to
evaluate healing. Activity should be increased when bone
PrEPARATION ANd POSITIONING
bridging is observed.
Prepare the affected limb circumferentially from midline to
foot. If a cancellous bone graft harvest is anticipated, prepare a
Expected outcome
donor site as well. Positioning depends on the affected bone.
In most dogs, bone healing is seen in 12 to 18 weeks. Implant
Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow maximal
 removal may be necessary if soft tissues are irritated.
manipulation during surgery.
PROCEDURE
Reference
Approach: Position a Kirschner wire perpendicular to the
1. Johnson AL: Osteotomies. In Olmstead ML (ed): Small Animal
bone in the transverse plane of the proximal joint. Position a
Orthopedics. St. Louis, Mosby, 1995.
CHAPTER39
115
PLATE 39
 Cranial caudal view
 Cranial caudal view
 of proximal femur 
of distal femur
B
118
PArt tWO · surGIcal prOCedureS FOr FraCturES
GeNerAL PrINCIPleS FOr DIAPHYSeAl FrACTUrES
Stabilizing a Transverse
ChaPTer 40
or Short Oblique Diaphyseal Fracture
with a Compression Plate
INDICATIONS
to cause the plate to stand away from the fracture surface by
Candidates include animals with transverse or short oblique
 about 2 mm (see Plate 40A). Make sure the plate is long enough
diaphyseal fractures requiring fixation with implants that
to allow at least 6 cortices secured by screws on both sides of
will securely hold bone for a long time (12 weeks or more). The
the fracture. Compress the fracture line, using the loaded drill
procedure is also indicated in large active older dogs, dogs 
guide to insert one or two screws (Plate 40B). Place the
with multiple limb injuries, toy breed dogs with distal radial
remaining screws in a neutral position (Plate 40C). Short,
fractures, and animals for which postoperative comfort is
oblique fractures may additionally be compressed with a lag
imperative.
screw positioned through the plate or outside of the plate (Plate
40D).23 If indicated, harvest a cancellous bone autograft and
ObJeCtIVeS
place it at the fracture site. Close the incision routinely
● To anatomically reduce and compress the fracture line using
the bone plate as a compression plate
CAUTIONS
 The plate provides rigid fixation and resists axial loading,
Reduction should be maintained during implant application.
bending, and rotational forces at the fracture.
It is important to make sure that the plate is centered on the
bone. Irrigatation during drilling is needed to reduce bone
ANATOMIC CONSIdErATIONS
necrosis. It is necessary to drill, measure, tap, and insert each
Landmarks for the approach, and vital structures to avoid, vary
screw before moving on to prepare the next screw hole. All
with the affected bone.
screws should be tightened after each screw is placed and at
the end of the procedure.
EQUIPMENT
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Hohmann
PoStOperatIVe eValuatION
retractors, periosteal elevator, Kerm bone-holding forceps,
Radiographs are necessary to evaluate for fracture reduction
self-centering plate-holding forceps, high-speed drill, plating
and implant placerment.
equipment, bone curette for harvesting cancellous bone 
autograft
POStOPeRatIVe CAre
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash
PrEPARATION AND POSITIONING
walking. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals
Prepare the affected limb circumferentialy from midline to
to monitor healing. Activity should be increased when bone
foot. If cancellous bone graft harvest is anticipated, prep a
bridging is observed.
donor site as well. Positioning depends on the affected bone.
 Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow maximal
Expected outcome
manipulation during surgery.
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks. A good returm to
PROCEDURE
soft tissues are iritated.
Approach: The required approach varies with the affected
bone.
Reduction: Reduce the fracture by lifing the bone ends
References
from the incision and bringing them into contact. With the bone
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
ends in contact, slowly push the bone segments back into the
 fracture management: Decision making in fracture management. In
morrmal position. Altermatively, use a lever to reduce the frac-
  's  a    s )  
ture. With transverse fractures, mamual maintenance of reduc-
 2. Schatzker J, Muestage F, Prieur WD: Implants and their application.
 In Brinker WO, Olmstead ML, Sumner-Smith G, et al (eds): Manual
oo   a   s s 
of Internal Fixation in Small Animals. New York, Springer-Verlag.
secure the fracture in reduction with self-centering plate
1998.
holding forceps applied to the plate and the bone (Plate 40A).
3. Wittner G, Holz U: Plates. In Ruedi TP, Murphy WM (eds): AO
Stabilization: Contour the plate to match the bone
 Principles of Fracture Management. New York, AO Publishing and
surface. Prestress the plate by bending it an additional armount
Thieme, 2000.
CHAPTER40
 StabIlizinG A dIaphyseal fraCture With A CompreSsIOn plate
119
PLATE40
C
120
PArt tWO · surGIcal prOCedures FOr FraCtureS
General principles For diaphyseal Fractures
Stabilizing a Transverse or Short
CHAPTEr 41
Oblique Diaphvseal Fracture with an
Intramed
Pin and External Fixator
INDICATIONS
the pins (Plate 41B). If additional stability is needed, add a fixation pin,
The procedure is indicated for transverse or short oblique diaphyseal
placed close to the fracture, to both bone segments (Plate 41C). Cut the
fractures in animals with anticipated short healing times (6 to 12
IM pin below the level of the skin (see Plate 4lB), or leave it long and
weeks). It is indicated in smaller dogs and cats that are young, that are
tie it into the fixator (see Plate 41C). Tighten all of the fixation clamps.
healthy, and that have single limb injuries. Owners must be willing and
If indicated, harvest a cancellous bone autograft and place it at the
able to assume fixator management.
fracture. The incision closure is routine.
ObJectiVes
CAUTIONS
· To anatomically reduce the fracture line and stabilize the bone
e ud i an jo uoo au on uoe Aed on pod st 1
The intramedullary (IM) pin resists bending forces at the fracture,
extermal fixation pins in the soft tissues to avoid nerves and
whereas the external fixator resists axial loading and rotational forces
vessels. It is also necessary to ensure that the IM pin does not interfere
at the fracture. IM pins are not indicated in the radius.
with a joint surface.
AnatomIC CoNSIderatIONS
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION
Landmarks for the approach, and the vital structures to avoid, vary with
 Radiographs should be evaluated for fracture reduction and implant
the affected bone.
 placement.
EQUIPMENT
POStOPeratIVe Care
· Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Hohmann retractors,
Gauze sponges should be packed around the pins, and the sponges
 periosteal elevator, Kern bone-holding forceps, Jacob pin chuck, low.
should be secured with a bandage to linit postoperative swelling and
speed power dhill, IM pins, extermal fixation equipment, pin cutter, 
to protect the pin tracts. The animal should be confined, with activity
bone curette for harvesting cancellous bone autograft
lnmited to leash walling. External fixator management includes daily
e paneadai aq pmous sye fopey 'papaau se buoed ud pue areo ud
PrEPARATION AND POSITIONING
6-week intervals to monitor healing. The external fixator should be
removed when bone bridging is observed. If the tie-in is used, the
cellous bone graft harvest is anticipated, prep a donor site as well.
 proximal fixation pin should be left secured to the IM pin (Plate 41D).
Positioning depends on the affected bone. Drape the limb out from a
The IM pin (and proximal fixation pin) should be removed after the
hanging position to allow maximal manipulation during surgery.
fracture has healed.
PROCEDURE
Expected outcome
Approach: The approach varies with the affected bone. Incise the
Bone healing is usually seen in 6 to 12 weeks. Animals usually
skin, and create soft tissue tunnels for fixation pin placement.
experience a good retum to function.
Reduction: Place an IM pin (of a size selected to equal 50% of
the medullary canal at the isthmus) in the proximal segment using
a retrograde (humerus or femur) (Plate 4lAl) or antegrade (tibia,
References
humerus, or femur) (Plate 4lA2) technique.? Retract the pin within the
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
medullary canal of the proximal segment. Reduce the fracture by lifting
 fracture management, decision making in fracture management. In
the bone ends from the incision and bringing them into contact. With
Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby,
the bone ends in contact, slowly push the bone segments back into the
2002.
normal position. Altermatively, use a lever to reduce the fracture. Drive
2. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures, femoral
the IM pin distally to maintain reduction (Plate 41A3).
diaphyseal fractures. In Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery, 2nd
Stabilization: Seat the IM pin in the distal segment of the bone.
ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
Establish rotational alignment, and place external fixation pins through
3. Aron DN, Dewey C: Experimental and clinical experience with an
the proximal and distal metaphyses of the bone. Predrill the bone
 IM pin external skeletal fixator tie-in configuration. Vet Comp
before placing the threaded fixation pins. Secure the connecting bar to
Orthop Traumatol 4:86, 1991.
CHAPTER41
StaBIlIZInG A FraCture WIth AN Im PIn ANd EXTerNal FIXatOr
121
PLATE 4 1
A1
42
Retrograde
Antegrade
 Bridging 
callus
122
PARt TWO · SUrGICal PROCeDUrES FOr FRACtUreS
General principles For diaphyseal Fractures
Stabilizing a Transverse or Short
CHAPTEr 42
Oblique Diaphyseal Fracture with a Type Ib
External Fixator
INDICATIONS
tion through the proximal and distal metaphyses of the bone.
Predrill the bone before placing threaded fixation pins. Secure
and tibial diaphyseal fractures in animals with anticipated short
the conmecting bar to the pins. Add fixation pins, placed 1 cm
or moderate healing times (6 to 18 weeks).' A modiied type Ib
from the fracture, to both bone segments (Plate 42B). Place
extermal fixator may also be used for humeral fractures. Smooth
additional pins to fill out the frarme (Plate 42C). Repeat the steps
fixation pins or a combination of threaded and smooth fixation
to place a similar frame in a cranial-lateral plane at 90 degrees
pins can be used for smaller dogs and cats that are young, that
to the first frame (see Plate 42C). Connect the frames with artic-
ulations proximally and distally (Plate 42D).? Tighten all of the
rapid healing time (6 weeks). Threaded pins should be used in
fixation clamps. If indicated, harvest a cancellous bone auto
large, active, older dogs and in dogs with multiple limb injuies
graft and place it at the fracture. The incision closure is routine.
where postoperative load is increased and anticipated healing
times are longer. Owners must be willing and able to assume
CAUTIONS
fixator managerment.
It is important to pay attention to the direction of the fixation
pins in the soft tissues to avoid nerves and vessels. It is also
ObJectives
● To anatomically reduce the fracture line and stabilize the bone
 pins. Articulations must not interfere with elbow flexion.
The external fixator resists bending, axial loading, and rota-
tional forces at the fracture.
POStOPErATIVe EVALUATION
Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and
AnAtOmIC CoNSIderaTIOnS
 implant placement.
Landmarks for the approach, and the vital structures to avoid,
vary with the affected bone.
PoStoperatiVe Care
Gauze sponges should be packed around the pins, and the
EQUIPMENT
sponges should be secured with a bandage that incorporates
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Hohmann
the paw to limit postoperative swelling. The animal should be
retractors, periosteal elevator, Kerm bone-holding forceps,
confined, with activity limited to leash walking. Extermal fixator
Jacob pin chuck, low-speed power drill, extermal fixation
 management includes daily pin care and pin packing as needed.
equipment, pin cutter, bone curette for harvesting cancellous
Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals to monitor
bone autograft
healing. The fixator should be destabilized by removing the
cranial frame (converting to a type Ia cranial medial frame)
PreparaTIOn ANd pOSItIOninG
when early bone bridging is observed. The rest of the external
Prepare the affected limb circumferentially from midline to
fixator should be removed when the fracture is healed.
foot. For both the radius and the tibia, position the animal in
dorsal recumbency and suspend the affected limb from the
Expected outcome
ceiling. Drape the limb out in the suspended position. If cancel-
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks. The animal will
lous bone graft harvest is anticipated, prep a donor site (usually,
have lirmited function while the extermal fixator is in place, but
the ipsilateral proximal humerus) as well.
 a good return to function is expected.
PROCEDURE
Approach: Perform a limited open reduction to align the
References
bone segments. Pin location and limited open approaches vary
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
with the affected bone. Incise the skin, and create soft tissue
fracture management, decision making in fracture management. In
tummels for fixation pin placerment.
's 'smot is a puz fms euy tus () M1 umssog
Reduction: For the radius and tibia, lower the table
2002.
 2. Aron DN, Palmer RH, Johnson AL: Biologic strategies and a bal-
to suspend the animal from the ceiling.? Allow the animal's
anced concept for repair of highly comminuted long bone fractures.
weight to fatigue the muscles. Use a lever to reduce the fracture
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995.
(Plate 42A).
 3. Lauer SK, Aron DN, Evans MD: Finite element method evaluation:
Stabilization: Establish rotational alignment, and place
Articulations and diagonals in an &pin type lb external skeletal
extermal fixation pins in a cranial-medial to caudal-lateral direc-
fixator. Vet Surg 29:28, 2000.
CHAPTER42
 Stabilizing A fracture With A type Ie external Fixator
123
PLATE 42
Cranial 
view
Left
forelimb
Cranial 
view
124
PArt tWO · surGIcal prOCedureS FOr FraCturES
GeNerAL PrINCIPleS FOr DIAPHYSeAl FrACTUrES
Stabilizing a Long Oblique
ChaPTer 43
Diaphyseal Fracture with Lag Screws
and a Neutralization Plate
INdICAtIONS
Slightly countersink the near cortex (Plate 43B3), measure
The procedure is indicated for long oblique diaphyseal fractures
(Plate 43B4), tap (Plate 43B5), and place the screw (Plate
aas m p sd  oxg aan see 
43B6).? Contour a plate to match the bone surface. The plate
hold bone for a longer period (e.g., 12 weeks or longer). It is
should be long enough to span the bone and allow a minimum
also indicated in large, active, older dogs; in dogs with multiple
of six cortices secured by screws on both sides of the fracture
limb injuries; and in animals for which postoperative comfort is
(Plate 43C). Secure the plate with screws placed in a neutral
imperative.
        o
the plate surface of the bone, secure the reduced segments
ObJectiVes
with cerclage wire. Place the plate and insert the screws which
● To anatomically reduce and compress the fractire line with
are crossing the fracture as lag screws (Plate 43D). Remove the
lag screws
cerclage wire before tightening the screws. If indicated, harvest
Application of a bone plate neutralizes the load on the frac-
a cancellous bone autograft and place it at the fracture. The
ture. The plate and screw combination provides rigid fixation
incision closure is routine.
and resists axial loading, bending, and rotational forces at the
fracture.
CAUTIONS
Reduction should be maintained with reduction forceps during
ANATOMIC CONSIdeRATIONS
lag screw application. It is important to ensure that the plate is
Landmarks for the approach, and the vital structures to avoid,
centered on the bone so the plate holes at the ends of the plate
vary with the affected bone.
are over bone. Irrigation during drilling is needed to reduce
bone necrosis. It is necessary to drill, measure, tap, and insert
EQuipMenT
     o    s 
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Hohmann
retractors, periosteal elevator, Kerm bone-holding forceps,
again at the end of the procedure.
pointed reduction forceps, self-centering plate-holding for-
ceps, high-speed drill, plating equipment, bone curette for
PoStOperatIVe eValuatION
harvesting cancellous bone autograft
Radiographs should be evaluated for fracture reduction and
 implant placement.
PrEPARATION AND POSITIONING
Prepare the affected limb circumferentially from midline to
POStOPerATIVe Care
foot. If cancellous bone graft harvest is anticipated, prep a
The animal should be confined, with activity lirmited to leash
donor site as well. Positioning depends on the affected bone.
walking. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals to
Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow maximal
       
manipulation during surgery.
bridging is observed.
PROCEdURE
Expected outcome
Approach: The approach varies, depending on the affected
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks. Animals usually
bone.
experience a good return to fumction. Implant removal may be
Reduction: Reduce the fracture by distracting the bone
necessary if soft tisslles are irritated.
segments, and approximate the fracture surfaces. Use pointed
tion. Maintain reduction with the pointed reduction forceps
References
(Plate 43A).
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
Stabilization: When the fracture line is perpendicular
fracture management, decision making in fracture management
In Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis,
to the plate surface of the bone, place two or three lag
Mosby, 2002.
screws across the fracture line. Drill the near cortex with a
 2. Schatzker J, Muestage F, Prieur WD: Implants and their application.
drill bit equal to the diameter of the screw threads (Plate
In Brinker WO, Olmstead ML, Sumner-Smith G, et al (eds):
43Bl). Place a drill insert sleeve, and dhill the far cortex
Manual of Internal Fixation in Small Animals. New York, Springer-
with the appropriate dhill bit for the screw (Plate 43B2).
Verlag, 1998.
CHAPTER43
STaBIlIZING A FRACTURe WITh LAG SCReWS ANd NEUTRalIZaTION PlAte
125
PlAte 43
B
B3
36
B4
126
PArt tWO · surGIcal prOCedureS FOr FraCturES
GeNerAL PrINCIPleS FOr DIAPHYSeAl FrACTUrES
Stabilizing a Long Oblique
CHAPTer 44
Diaphyseal Fracture with an Intramedullary
Pin and Multiple Cerclage Wires
INDICATIONS
the reduced fracture at intervals of 0.5 cm to 1 cm. Pass a wire
The procedure is indicated for long oblique diaphyseal fractures
passer aroumd the bone. Feed the plain end of the wire through
in animals with anticipated short healing times (6 to 12 weeks).
the wire passer, and pull the wire around the bone (Plate 44B).
It is also indicated in smaller dogs and cats that are youmg, that
For loop cerclage, tighten the wire by passing the plain end of
are healthy, and that have single lirmb injuries.' It is especially
the wire through the eye of the wire (Plate 44C1). Insert the
useful for immature dogs and cats. Intramedullary (IM) pins are 
wire into the wire tightener, and crank the wire tight (Plate
not indicated in the radius.
44C2). Bend the wire over the eye. Retract the wire tightener,
and finish bending the wire (Plate 44C3). Cut the wire (Plate
ObJeCTIVES
44C4).? For plain orthopedic wire, begin twisting the wire ends
● To anatomically reduce the fracture line and stabilize the bone
by hand (Plate 44D1). Place the wire twisting pliers or needle
The IM pin resists bending forces at the fracture, whereas
holders onto the twist, and tighten the wire by pulling and
the cerclage wire compresses the fracture to resist axial loading
twisting (Plate 44D2). When the wire is tight, cut the wire 3 mm
and rotational forces at the fracture.
from the start of the twist (Plate 44D3). Altermatively, cut the
wire 5 mm to 7 mm from the twist, and bend it over in the direc-
AnatOmIC CONSIderatIoNS
tion of the twist (Plate 44D4).? Cut the IM pin below the level of
Landmarks for the approach, and the vital structures to avoid,
the skin (Plate 44E). If indicated, harvest a cancellous bone
vary with the affected bone.
autograft and place it at the fracture. The incision closure is
routine.
EQUIPMENT
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Hohrmann
CAUTIONS
retractors, periosteal elevator, Kerm bone-holding forceps,
All wires must be tight. It is important to pay attention to the
pointed reduction forceps, Jacob pin chuck, IM pins, ortho
direction of the IM pin in the soft tissues to avoid nerves and
pedic wire (spool or eye cerclage), wire passer, wire tightener
vessels. The IM pin must not interfere with a joint surface.
(pliers, needle-holder, or loop cerclage wire tightener), wire
cutter, pin cutter, bone curette for harvesting cancellous bone
POStOPeratIVe EVAluATION
autograft
Radiographs should be taken to evaluate for fracture reduction
and implant placement.
PrePARATION ANd POSITIONING
Prepare the affected limb circumferentially from midline to 
POStOPeratIVe Care
foot. If cancellous bone graft harvest is anticipated, prep a
The animal should be confined, with activity lirmited to leash
donor site as well. Positioning depends on affected bone. Drape
walking. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals to
the limb out from a hanging position to allow maximal manipu-
monitor healing. The IM pin should be removed after the frac-
lation duing surgery.
ture has healed.
PROCEDURE
Expected outcome
Approach: The approach varies, depending on the affected
Bone healing is usually seen in 6 to 12 weeks. Animals usually
bone.
experience a good return to function.
Jo %2 on %0 [enba 0 pazis) ud  ue a51td :uoonpa8
the medullary canal at the isthrmus) in the proximal segment
using an antegrade (tibia, humerus, or femur) or retrograde
References
(humerus or femur) technique.? Retract the pin within the
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
medullary canal of the proximal segment. Reduce the fracture
fracture management, decision making in fracture management. In
by distracting the bone segments and approximating the frac-
Fossum Tw (ed): Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
2. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures, femoral
ture surfaces. Use pointed reduction forceps to manipulate the
diaphyseal fractures. In Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery, 2nd
bone segments into reduction. Maintain reduction with the
ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
pointed reduction forceps (Plate 44A).
 3. Schatzker J, Muestage F, Prieur WD: Implants and their application.
Stabilization: Seat the IM pin in the distal segment of the
In Brinker WO, Olmstead ML, Sumner-Smith G, et al (eds): Manual
of Internal Fixation in Small Animals. New York, Springer-Verlag.
depending on the length of the fracture) cerclage wires around
1998.
CHAPTER44
127
PLATE 44
Loopcerclage
wist
Alternate
twist
C
128
PArt tWO · surGIcal prOCedureS FOr FraCturES
GeNerAL PrINCIPleS FOr DIAPHYSeAl FrACTUrES
Stabilizing a Comminuted
CHAPTer 45
Diaphvseal Fracture with an Intramedullary
Pin and a Bridging Plate
INDICATIONS
distal ends of the fractured bone. Restore rotational alignment,
The procedure is indicated for comminuted nonreducible (more
and secure the plate to the appropriate bone surface with self-
than one or two large fragments) humeral, femoral, and tibial
centering plate-holding forceps (Plate 45C). The plate should
diaphyseal fractures in large, active, older dogs; and in dogs
span the length of the bone, and the screws should secure a
 o  a  s   
minimurm of six cortices on either side of the fracture. Place
increased and anticipated healing times are longer.' A plate and
bicortical screws in the metaphyses and umicortical screws in
the diaphysis where the IM pin interferes with screw placement.
radial fractures, with the plate stabilizing the radius and the pin
Cut the pin below the skin.?4 Harvest cancellous bone graft and
supporting the ulna.
place it at the fracture site (Plate 45D).
ObJeCTIVES
CAUTIONS
● To restore normal bone length and alignment
The plate should be centered on the bone so that the plate holes
The IM pin restores axial alignment and protects the plate
at the ends of the plate are over bone. Irrigation is needed
from bending forces at the fracture, whereas the plate resists
during drilling to reduce bone necrosis. All screws should be
axial loading, bending, and rotational forces at the fracture.
  a     s    
ANATOMIC CONSIdeRaTIONS
or any joint surface.
Landmarks for the approach, and the vital structures to avoid,
vary with the affected bone.
POSTOPEraTIVE EVALUATION
Radiographs should be taken to evaluate for fracture reduction
EQuipMenT
and implant placement.
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Hohmann
retractors, periosteal elevator, Kerm bone-holding forceps,
POStOPEratIVE CAre
self-centering plate-holding forceps, Jacob pin chuck, IM
The animal should be confined, with activity lirmited to leash
pins, plating equipment, high-speed dhill, bone curette for
walking. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals to
harvesting cancelous bone autograft
       
bridging is observed. The IM pin should be removed when early
PrEPARATION AND POSITIONING
fracture bridging is evident.
Prepare the affected limb circumferentialy from midline to
foot. If cancellous bone graft harvest is anticipated, prep a
Expected outcome
donor site as well. Positioning depends on the affected bone.
The IM pin may cause morbidity and lameness. Bone healing is
 Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allw maximal
usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks. Animals usually experience a
manipulation during surgery.
 good returm to fumction. Plate removal may be necessary if soft
tissues are irritated.
PROCEDURE
Approach: The approach varies, depending on the affected
References
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
to expose the proximal and distal bone segments with minimal
 fracture management, decision making in fracture management. In
disturbance of the fracture hematoma and bone fragments.?
'so 'smot is a puz fms euy ius () M1 umsso
Reduction and Stabilization: Place an IM pin (sized to
2002.
equal 40% to 50% of the medullary canal width at the isthrmus) in
2. Aron DN, Palmer RH, Johnson AL: Biologic strategies and a bal-
the proximal segment using an antegrade (tibia, hummerus, or 
anced concept for repair of highly comminuted long bone fractures.
fermur) or retrograde (humerus or femur) technique. Drive the 
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995.
3. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
 a e p  dn d a m e as a a o d
:(pa) i mssog un 'smanos pe sanld auoq 'uaaee amoeg
distal segment, and insert the IM pin. Distract the bone to length
 Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
4. Johnson AL, Smith Cw, Schaeffer DJ: Fragment reconstruction and
bone-holding forceps (Plate 45A). Contour a plate so that the
bone plate fixation compared with bridging plate fixation for
bend matches a radiographic image of the contralateral intact
treating highly comminuted femoral fractures in dogs: 35 cases
bone (Plate 45B). Torque the plate to match the proximal and
(1987-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:1157, 1998.
CHAPTER45
 StabIliZinG A fraCture With An Im Pin And BrIdgInG Plate
129
PLATE 45
Vastus
lateralis
muscle
retracted
Bicepsfemoris
muscleretracted
Shaft
of femur
Adductor magnus
Vastus
muscle
B
intermedius
muscle
Cancellous
bone
 autograft
130
PArt tWO · surGIcal prOCedures FOr FraCtureS
General principles for diaPhyseal fractures
Stabilizing a Comminuted
Chapter 46
Diaphyseal Fracture with a Type II
External Fixator
INDICATIONS
CAUTIONS
The procedure is indicated for animals with comminuted nonreducible
It is important to avoid the joint surfaces and the fracture lines with the
(more than one or two large fragments) radial and tibial diaphyseal
fixation pins. Intraoperative radiographs are helpful in evaluating bone
fractures. Smooth fixation pins, or a combination of threaded fixation
alignment and pin location.
plus and smooth fixation pins, can be used for animals with rapid
healing times (i.e., 6 to 12 weeks). Threaded pins should be used in
POStOPEratIVe EVALUatION
large, active, older dogs and in dogs with multiple limb injuries in which
 Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and implant loca
postoperative load is increased and anticipated healing times are
tion. If the fractured bone is reduced in a varus or valgus position
longer.r
(i.e., the proximal and distal joint surfaces are not parallel), then the
distal clamps should be loosened and the distal segment should be
OBJECTIVES
repositioned to eliminate the angular deformity. If rotational malalign-
· To restore normal bone length and alignment
ment is present, some correction may be obtained by repositioning the
A type II external fixator is applied to bridge the fracture. The
distal clamps onto the opposite side of the bar.
fixator resists axial loading, bending, and rotational forces at the
fracture.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Gauze sponges should be packed around the pins, and the sponges
Anatomic conSiderations
should be secured with a bandage that incorporates the paw, to limit
Landmarks for the pin placement, and the vital structures to avoid, vary
postoperative swelling. The animal should be confined, with activity
with the affected bone.
hmited to leash walking. Extemal fixator management includes daily
pin care and pin packing as needed. Radiographs should be repeated at
EQUIPMENT
6-week intervals to monitor healing. The fixator should be destabilized
· Surgical pack, Senn retractors, small Hohmann retractors, low-speed
by removing selected fixation pins (or the lateral connecting bar) when
 power drill, Jacob pin chuck, external fixator equipment 
early bone bridging is observed. If the lateral bar is removed, the
associated transfixation pins should be left long enough to exit the skin
PrePARATION ANd POSITIONING
on the lateral surface of the limb. The pins should be covered to prevent
Prepare the affected limb circumferentially from midline to foot. For
 injury to the owner. The external fixator should be removed when the
fracture is healed.
and suspend the affected limb from the ceiling. Drape the limb out in
the hanging position.
Expected outcome
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks. The animal may experi-
PROCEDURE
ence limited function while the external fixator is in place but will even-
Approach: Perform a closed reduction to preserve the integrity of
tually have a good return to function.
the fracture hematoma and the surrounding soft tissues.? If necessary,
use a limited open reduction to line up major bone segments.
References
Pin location and limited open approaches vary depending on the
 1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and frac
affected bone. Incise the skin and create soft tissue tunnels for pin
ture management, decision making in fracture management. In Fossum.
placement.
 q so 's a uz Xms  rs () M
Reduction: Lower the table to allow the animal's weight to align
 2. Aron DN, Palmer RH, Johnson AL: Biologic strategies and a
the fractured bone (Plate 46A).
balanced concept for repair of highly comminuted long bone
Stabilization: Place a centrally threaded fixation pin through
fractures. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995.
the distal metaphyses. Make sure the pin parallels the distal joint sur-
3. Lavarty PH, Johnson AL, Toombs JP, et al: Simple and multiple frac-
face and is in the medial to lateral plane. Predrill the hole with a drill bit
tures of the radius treated with an external fixtor. Vet Comp Orthop
0.1 mm smaller than the selected pin. Insert the pin with a hand chuck
Traumatol 15:97, 2002.
 or low RPM power. Repeat the procedure for the proximal metaphysis
4. Clary EM, Roe SC: In vitro biomechanical and histological assess
(Plate 46B). Align the segments, checking for angular and rotational
ment of pilot hole diarmeter for positive-profile external skeletal
alignment, and secure the pins to medial and lateral connecting bars.
fixation pins in canine tibiae. Vet Surg 25:543, 1996.
 Fill out the frame with either transfixation pins or unilateral fixation
5. Johnson AL, Seitz SE, Smith CW, et al: Closed reduction and type II
pins, depending on the anatomy of the bone and surrounding soft
external fixation of severely comminuted fractures of the radius and
tissues (Plate 46C). Use a guiding device or additional connecting bar
tibiain dogs: 23 cases (1990-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1445, 1996.
and guide clamp to ensure accurate placement of transfixation pins
6. Kraus KH, Wotton HM, Boudrieau RJ, et al: Type I extermal fixation
(see Plate 46C).s6 Be sure that there are at least two pins, or preferably
using new clamps and positive profile threaded pins for treatment of
three pins, above and below the fracture (Plate 46D). Tighten all of the
fractures of the radius and tibia in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
clamps.
212:1267, 1998.
CHAPTER46
StabIlIZinG A FraCture WIth A type II EXterNal FIxatOr
131
PLATE 46
132
PArt tWO · surGIcal PrOCedureS FOr FraCturES
GeNerAL PrINCIPleS FOr DIAPHYSeAl FrACTUrES
Stabilizing a Comminuted
Chapter 47 
Diaphyseal Fracture with an Interlocking Nail
INDICATIONS
the proximal bone segment with a bone-holding forceps, and
The procedure is indicated in comminuted nonreducible (more
continue to drive the nail distally to distract the distal bone
than one or two large fragments) humeral, femoral, and tibial
segment to length (Plate 47B). Ensure that the proximal portion
diaphyseal fractures. It is indicated in dogs that have antici-
of the nail is seated within the proximal segment. Remove the
pated healing times that are short or interrmediate, and when
nail driver, and attach the jig. Drill, measure, and tap the distal
 postoperative comfort is important. Interlocking nails are con-
screw hole, using the jig and associated guides to maintain
traindicated for the radius.
screw aligmment with the hole in the nail. Insert the screw
(Plate 47C). Check rotational alignment, and insert the
ObJeCtIVeS
● To restore normal bone length and aligmment
cellous bone graft and place it at the fracture site (Plate 47D).
The interlocking nail restores axial alignment and resists
Close the incision routinely.
axial loading, bending, and rotational forces at the fracture.
CAUTIONS
ANatOmIC CONSIdEratIONS
It is important to ensure that the nail does not penetrate the
Landmarks for the approach, and the vital structures to avoid,
distal joint. The first screw should be placed in the distal hole of
vary with the affected bone. Pin insertion sites vary with the
the nail to help secure nail and jig alignment. The rotational
affected bone.
alignment must be correct before proximal screws are inserted.
 Irrigation must be done during drilling to reduce bone necrosis.
EQUIPMENT
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Hohmann
POStOPERATIVE EVALUATION
retractors, periosteal elevator, Kerm bone-holding forceps
Radiographs should be taken to evaluate for fracture reduction
interlocking nail equipment, bone screws, high-speed drill,
and irmplant placement.
bone curette for harvesting cancellous bone autograft
PoStoperatiVe care
preparatIon And pOSItIoninG
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash
Prepare the affected limb circumferentially from midline to
walking. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals
foot. If a cancellous bone graft harvest is anticipated, prep a
        
donor site as well. Positioning depends on the affected bone.
bri dging is observed.
Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow maximal
manipulation during surgery.
Expected outcome
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks. Animals should
PROCEDURE
experience a good returm to function. Removal of the inter
Approach: The approach varies, depending on the affected
 locking nail may be necessary if soft tissues are irritated
bone. Use an“open but do not disturb the fragments" technique
to expose the proximal and distal bone segments with minimal
disturbance of the fracture hematoma and bone fragments.2
References
Reduction and Stabilization: Establish the insertion
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
hole in the proximal bone segment, using a reamer of the appro-
 fracture management, decision making in fracture management. In
priate size to prepare for the nail. The nail diarmeter and length 
 Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
2. Aron DN, Palmer RH, Johnson AL: Biologic strategies and a balanced
are estimated from preoperative radiographs of the contra-
lateral bone (Plate 47A). Attach the nail to the extension piece
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995.
and nail driver, and insert it into the proximal bone segment 
 3. Dueland RT, Johnson KA, Roe SC, et al: Interlocking nail treatment
so that it exits at the fracture suurface. Align the distal segment,
of diaphyseal long-bone fractures in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
and drive the nail distally within the medullary canal. Stabilize
214:59, 1999.
Chapter 47
StaBIliZinG A FraCturE WIth AN InterlOCKinG NaIl
133
PLATE 47
Reamer
Extension
piece
and nail
driver
Vastus
lateralis
muscle
retracted
Biceps femoris
Shaft
muscle retracted
 of femur
Adductor magnus
Vastus
muscle
intermedius
muscle
Jic
Cancellous
bone autograft
134
PARt TWO · SurGICal PrOCedUrES FOr FraCtureS
General principles for diaphyseal fractures
Cancellous Bone Autograft
Chapter 48
INdICATIONS
Proximal Tibia: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue
Autogenous cancellous bone grafts are used to promote rapid
over the medial surface of the proximal tibia. Harvest can-
bone formation. Candidates include animals with cortical
cellous bone as previously described (Plate 48C). Closure is
defects after fracture repair amd adult and elderly animals
routine.
with fractures, delayed umions, nonunions, osteotormies, joint
 lliac Wing: Incise the skin over the craniodorsal iliac spine.
arthrodesis, or cystic defects. Autogenous cancellous bone also
Incise subcutaneous tissues, and expose the dorsal surface of
promotes bone formation in infected fractures.
the iliac wing. Elevate the musculature from the lateral
surface and medial surfaces of the craniodorsal portion of
ObJeCtIVeS
the iliac wing. Obtain a corticocancellous graft by using an
● To promote bone formation and bone cell survival by har-
osteotome to remove a cortical wedge frorm the iliac wing.
vesting cancellous bone at the end of the procedure and
Harvest cancellous bone from between the inmer and outer cor-
transferring directly to the recipient site
tical bone of the iliac body with a bone curette (Plate 48D).
ANATOmIC CONSIdERATIONS
ient site. Closure is routine.
Optimal sites for cancellous bone harvest are the proximal
humeral metaphysis, the wing of the ilium, and the proximal
CAUTIONS
tibial metaphysis. All three sites have minirmal soft tissue
coverage and are easily accessible. The proximal humerus and
articular surface or other cortical surfaces with the curette.
iliac wing yield the largest amounts of cancellous bone.
Create round holes in the long bone cortex to minimize stress
concentration and possible fracture. If the recipient site is
EQUIPMENT
infected, or is the site of a turmor, harvest the graft first to avoid
● Surgical pack, Gelpi retractors, Senm retractors, Army-Navy
contarmination of the donor site. Altermatively, use a separate
retractors, drill bit or intramedullary pin, osteotome and
surgical team and insturmentation to harvest the graft.
mallet, rongeur, bone curette, stainless steel cup, syringe
POStOPERATIVE EVALUATION
PrEPARATION ANd POSITIONING
Wound healing at the donor site should be evaluated when the
Select, prepare, and drape the graft donor site so that itis easily
recipient site procedure is evaluated.
accessible when the recipient site is draped.
POStOPeratiVe Care
PROCEdURE
Routine procedures for caring for a surgical wound should be
Proximal Humerus: ncise the skin and subcutaneous
followed.
tissues over the craniolateral aspect of the proximal hurmerus.
Retract the acromial head of the deltoid muscle caudally, and
Expected outcome
expose the flat aspect of the craniolateral metaphysis just distal
Bone formation should be seen at the recipient site by 12 weeks
to the greater tubercle. Make a round hole in the bone cortex
 after surgery. Complications at the donor site include seroma
using an intramedullary pin or drill bit. Insert a bone curette,
formation; infection; and, rarely, fracture. Complications at the
and harvest cancellous bone (Plate 48A). Place the cancellous
recipient site (e.g., failure of grafts to stirmulate bone forrmation)
bone in a stainless steel cup. Use a syringe to collect blood from
are difficult to recognize.
the donor site to add to the graft (Plate 48B). The blood will
clot and form a moldable composite with the graft, facilitating
Reference
handling. Flush and loosely pack the recipient site with graft
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
material. Close subcutaneous tissues aroumd the graft to hold it
fracture management, bone grafts. In Fossum Tw (ed): Small
in position.
Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
CHAPTER 48
CaNCEllOUS BONe AUtOGraft
135
PLATE 48
Deltoid
Syringe
muscle
withblood
Osteotome
blade
Curette
136
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
MANDIbLE
Mandibular Symphyseal Fractures
ChApter 49
INDICATIONS
across and behind the canine teeth, and reinsert it through the
Candidates include animals with mandibular symphyseal frac-
hypodermic needle to exit from the skin incision at the original
tures.
insertion point (Plate 49C). Remove the needle. While holding
the fracture in reduction, tighten the wire (Plate 49D). Leave
ObJeCTIVES
the ends of the wire exposed through the skin incision, and
● To reduce and stabilize the symphyseal fracture and restore
bend therm to decrease the possibility of injury to the owner
 dental aligmment and occlusion
(Plate 49E).
AnatoMIC ConSIderatIonS
CAUTIONS
Realignmment of dental occlusion is important for returm to
The incisor alignment should be observed when tightening the
fumction.
wire, and dental occlusion should be checked after the wire is
tightened.
EQUIPMENT
● Scalpel blade, 18- to 20-gauge (for dogs) or 20- to 22-gauge
POStOPERATIVE EVALUATION
(for cats) orthopedic wire, hypodermic needles sized to
Radiographs should be taken to evaluate symphyseal reduction
accormmodate the orthopedic wire, wire tightener, wire cutter
and implant placement.
PreParaTIOn ANd POSItIoninG
PoStOperatiVe Care
Prepare the ventral aspect of the mandible for aseptic surgery.
It is important to clean the wire daily where it is exposed ven-
Rinse the mouth with an antiseptic. Position the animal in
trally. Hard food, chew toys, and tug of war games should be
dorsal recumbency. It is not necessary to drape the mandible
eliminated until the fracture has healed.
for an isolated symphyseal fracture.
EXPeCted Outcome
PROCEDURE
Symphyseal union is usually seen in 6 to 12 weeks.
Approach: Make a small incision in the skin overlying the
Radiographic evidence of bone bridging or callus formation is
ventral aspect of the symphysis.
usually not evident. Once the fracture has stabilized, the wire
Reduction: Reduce and hold the symphysis with digital
 h a sos m  n   pon aq 
pressure applied to the mandibular canine teeth (Plate 49A).
exposed behind the canine teeth and extracting it by the twist.
Stabilization: Insert the hypodermic needle through the
skin incision and along one lateral mandibular surface (under
the subcutaneous tissues). Exit the needle in the oral cavity
Reference
caudal to the camine tooth, and thread an 18- or 20-gauge wire
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures: Maxillary
through the needle (Plate 49B). Remove the needle and reposi-
 rs )  g  '  
tion it on the opposite side of the mandible. Curve the wire
Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
CHAPTER 49
MaNdIbular SymphySeal FraCtures
137
PLATE 49
138
Part two · surGIcal procedures for fractures
MANDIbLE
Transverse and Oblique
ChAPter 50
Mandibular Body Fractures
INDICATIONS
slightly closer to the fracture line (see Plate 50Al). Drill a similar hole
 Candidates include animals with single fracture lines of the mandibular
on the caudal segment at the same level in the bone so the wire will be
body that can be anatomically reconstructed.
placed perpendicular to the fracture. Feed a 12- to 1&inch strand of
OBJECTIVES
lateral aspect of the mandible. Hold the fracture in reduction, and twist
+ To restore dental occlusion by anatomic reconstruction of the fracture
the wire (Plate 50A2). To ensure the wire contacts the medial cortex,
Stable internal fixation allows a rapid return to function and
 place a forceps between the twist and the lateral mandible, and lever
minimizes aftercare.
the wire away from the bone. Finish tightening the wire, cut the excess,
 and bend the remaining twist into the bone (Plate 50A3). The interfrag-
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
mentary wires applied perpendicular to the fracture line will result in
The mandibular body is easily palpated and surgically approached
compression at the fracture. Transverse fractures are best stabilized
through the skin and subcutaneous tissue. The mandibular alveolar
with two wires (Plate 50Bl); occasionally, however, one wire in the
nerve, which is sensory to the teeth of the mandible, passes through the
rostral mandible is sufficient (Plate 50B2). Interdental wiring may com-
mandibular canal along with the mandibular alveolar artery. These
 plement the interfragmentary wire (Plate 50B3). For oblique fractures,
structures are often damaged during mandibular fractures, although
follow the previous steps, taking care to orient the wire perpendicular
clinical signs are seldom evident. Tooth roots must be avoided when
to the fracture. Stabilize caudal-to-rostral oblique fracture with two
placing implants.
wires placed at right angles to each other (Plate 50C). Stabilize medial-
to-lateral oblique fracture with two wires placed perpendicular to each
EQUIPMENT
other in two planes (Plate 50D).? In both cases, the second wire
· Surgical pack, Gelpi retractors, Senn retractors, small Hohmann
 prevents overriding of the fracture as the wires are tightened.
retractors, periosteal elevator, baby Kern bone-holding forceps, small
Evaluate the oral cavity for open wounds. If large wounds are
pointed reduction forceps, high-speed Kirschner wire driver or Jacob
present, close the mucosa partially to decrease their size. Do not com-
pin chuck, Kirschner wires, orthopedic wire, wire-tighteners, wire
pletely close contaminated wounds; to do so would prevent postopera-
cutters
tive drainage. Place a Penrose drain if infection is present or likely to be
 present. Suture the subcutaneous tissue over the mandibles. Suture the
PrEPARATION ANd POSITIONING
skin incision.
Prepare the ventral aspect of the mandible for surgery. Rinse the mouth
 n        
CAUTIONS
secure the maxilla to the table by placing adhesive tape from one table
Tooth roots should be avoided when drilling through the bone. It is
edge across the maxilla to the opposite table edge. Drape the mandible
out to allow maximal manipulation during surgery by placing one of the
 surface.
drapes into the mouth to cover the maxilla. A cancellous bone graft is
usually not necessary.
POStOPERAtIVE EVALUATION
Dental occlusion should be evaluated. Radiographs should be taken to
PrOCEDURE
evaluate bone alignment and implant placement.
Approach: Incise the skin on the ventral midline between the
mandibles. Extend the incision from the symphysis to 1 cm to 2 cm
PoStoperatiVe Care
caudal to the angular process of the mandibles. Move this incision in
Oral exercise should be linited, soft foods should be provided, and no
either direction to expose both mandibles. If only one mandible is
chew toys should be allowed. Radiographs should be repeated at
involved, incise directly over that mandible. Incise the subcutaneous
6-week intervals until bone bridging occurs.
tissue to expose the ventral portions of the mandibles. Elevate soft
tissues from both sides of the mandibles to expose the fracture(s).
Expected outcome
Preserve the digastricus muscle attachments (Plate 50A1).
 Bone healing is usually seen in 6 to 12 weeks. Animals generally expe
Reduction: Reduce the fracture by securing each bone segment
rience an excellent return to function if dental occlusion is normal.
     sg aoq  
Intraoral wires are removed after fracture healing, but interfragmentary
wires remain in place unless they cause a problem. Damaged teeth may
require endodontic care or extraction.
Because there is little musculature around the mandibular body, reduc-
tion is usually easily accomplished. Anatomic reduction of the
References
 mandibular cortex will realign the teeth.
 1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
Stabilization: For transverse fractures, drill a hole with the
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
 Kirschner wire. Start on the lateral aspect of the cranial mandibular
Saunders, 2004.
segment, 0.5 cm to 1 cm from the fracture line and close to the oral edge
 2. Rudy RL, Boudrieau RJ: Maxillofacial and mandibular fractures.
of the mandible. Aim the wire to exit on the medial side of the mandible,
Sem Vet Med Surg Small Anim 7:3, 1992.
CHAPTER 50
TraNSVerSe ANd OBlIQUe MaNdIbUlAr BOdy FraCturES
139
PlAte 50
A
Hemimandible
A2
A3
Myelohyoideus
muscle
Branch of facial
artery and vein
 Digastricus
muscle
140
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
MANDIBLE
Comminuted Mandibular
ChaPter 51 
Body Fractures
INDICATIONS
Reduction: After the fixation pins are placed, use them as a
Candidates include animals with comminuted fractures of the
handle to realign the major bone segments so the dental occlusion is
mandibular body that cannot be anatomically reconstructed.
restored. Maintain the reduction manually or by securing two fixation
pins on each side of the mandible with clamps and connecting bars
ObJeCTIVES
(biphasic splint) (Plate 51B). Remove the clamps and bars after the
· To align major mandibular segments and restore dental occlusion
acrylic is placed.
Stabilization: Insert at least two and, if possible, three fixation
AnatomIC CoNSIderaTIONS
pins into each major bone segment by predrilling a pilot hole and
The mandibular body is easily palpated through the skin and subcuta-
 placing the pins with a pin chuck. Bend or notch the free ends of the
neous tissue. The mandibular alveolar nerve, which is sensory to the
pins to enhance acrylic purchase. Mix methyl methacrylate acrylic until
teeth of the mandible, passes through the mandibular canal along
it becomes doughy (3 to 4 minutes). Mold the acrylic to form a con-
with the mandibular alveolar artery. These structures are commonly
necting column incorporating all of the pins at a distance of l cm to
damaged with mandibular fractures, although clinical signs are seldom
2 cm from the skin. Place saline moistened sponges around the fixation
evident. Tooth roots must be avoided when placing fixation pins.
pins to dissipate the heat generated by the methyl methacrylate. Check
Normal occlusion is assessed by observing the unobstructed interdigi-
the fracture reduction and hold it in position until the acrylic hardens
tation of the mandibular canine teeth between the maxillary incisors
(8 to 10 minutes) (Plate 51C).
and canine teeth and the mandibular fourth premolar positioned
Evaluate the oral cavity for open wounds. I large wounds are
between the maxillary third and fourth premolars.
present, close the mucosa partially to decrease their size. In order
to allow postoperative drainage, do not close contaminated wounds
EQUIPMENT
completely.
· Surgical pack, low-speed power drill, Jacob pin chuck, positive
profile threaded external fixation pins, extermal fixator equipment,
CAUTIONS
methyl methacrylate acrylic
Tooth roots should be avoided when drilling through the bone.
PrEPARATION ANd POSITIONING
POSTOPErAtIVE EVALUATION
To gain an unobstructed view of dental occlusion, place an endotra-
Dental occlusion should be evaluated. Radiographs should be evaluated
for bone alignment and implant placement.
oral cavity, and locate the pharyngeal area immediately cranial to the
hyoid bones. Incise skin, subcutaneous tissues, and mucous membrane
POStOPeratIVE CAre
to create a passage for the endotracheal tube. Place a forceps through
 The skin and the apparatus should be cleaned daily to avoid food accu
the surgically created passage to grasp the endotracheal tube (with
mulation and skin excoriation. Oral exercise and soft foods should be
connector removed), and reroute it (Plate 5lA). Prepare the ventral
lmited, and no chew toys should be allowed. Radiographs should be
aspect of the mandible for aseptic surgery. Rinse the mouth with an
repeated at 6-week intervals until bone bridging occurs. After the frac-
antiseptic. Position the animal in dorsal recumbency, and secure the
ture has healed, the external fixator should be removed by cutting each
maxilla to the table by placing adhesive tape from one table edge across
'sud penpapu suaouai uun pue auen oe aun aaouai on ud
the maxilla to the opposite table edge. Drape the mandible out to allow
Expected outcome
the mouth to cover the maxilla and the rest of the drapes secured
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks. Large gaps may benefit
around the mandible. A cancellous bone graft is not generally used with
from cancellous bone autograft if healing appears delayed. Excellent
closed reduction.
return to function is expected if dental occlusion is restored.
PrOCEdUrE
Approach: There is no surgical approach to the fracture site for
Reference
 closed reduction of comminuted fractures, only the approaches for the
1. Egger EL: Skull and mandibular fractures. In Slatter D (ed):
fixation pin insertion. Incise the skin at each pin insertion site. Dissect
Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB
the overlaying soft tissues to gain access to the bone surface.
Saunders, 1993.
CHAPTER 51
COmminuted mandIbular bOdy FraCtuRes
141
PLATE 5 1
Thyroid cartilage
Trachea
Point of
incision
Endotracheal tube
rerouted through
pharyngotomyincision
142
Part twO · surgIcal procedures for fractures
SCAPULA
Transverse Scapu
ChAPter 52 
lal
Body Fractures
INDICATIONS
distal segment with pointed reduction forceps, and lift the bone
Candidates include animals with folding or displaced scapular
segments out of the soft tissues umtil the fracture ends are
body fractures.
apposed. While maintaining contact, slowly replace the frag-
ments into the reduced position. Maintain reduction manually
OBJECTIVES
(see Plate 52A).
● To restore normal anatomic contour to the shoulder area and
Stabilization: Lay an appropriately contoured veterinary
internally splint the fracture
cuttable plate(s) across the fracture on the cranial portion of
the body of the scapula, and secure with screws placed through
AnAtOmIC ConSIderatIOnS
the distal and proximal plate holes (Plate 52B). Direct the
Palpable landmarks are the spine and the acromial process of
screws into the thick bone at the junction of the spine and body
the scapula; and the cranial, dorsal, and caudal borders of
of the scapula (Plate 52C). Place additional screws in plate
the scapula. The body and spine of the scapula are easily
holes close to the fracture. Fill additional plate holes with
approached with dissection and elevation of muscle. The
screws. Alternate plate holes may be filled (see Plate 52B).
suprascapular nerve runs over the scapular notch and umder the
When additional support is needed, the veterinary cuttable
acromion process.
plates can be stacked, an additional plate can be positioned on
the caudal border of the scapula (Plate 52D), or both.
EQuIPMENT
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi
CAUTIONS
retractors, periosteal elevator, pointed reduction forceps,
It is important to avoid placing screws in the thin bone of the
plating equipment, high-speed drill 
body of the scapula.
PrEPARATION ANd POSITIONING
POStOPERATIVE EVALUATION
Prepare the scapular region from dorsal midline to carpus.
Radiographs should be evaluated for reduction and implant
Position the animal in lateral recumbency with the affected
 positi on.
limb up. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow
POStOPerAtIVe Care
is usually not necessary.
The animal should be confined, with activity lirmited to leash
walking, until the fracture has healed. Radiographs should be
PrOCEDUrE
repeated at 6-week intervals until the fracture is healed.
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue the
length of the spine distally to the shoulder joint. Transect the
Expected outcome
omotransversarius muscle from the spine, and reflect it
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks. Excellent return
cranially. Incise trapezius and scapular parts of the deltoideus
to fumction is expected.
muscles from the spine, and reflect them caudally. Incise
the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscular attachrments to
References
the spine, and elevate these muscles from the scapular body
1. Jerram RM, Herron MR: Scapular fractures in dogs. Comp Cont
(Plate 52A).2
Educ Small Animal 20:1254, 1998.
Reduction: Use a periosteal elevator or small Hohmann
2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
retractor as a lever to reduce the transverse fracture.
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
Altermatively, secure the spine on the proximal segment and the
Saunders, 2004.
Chapter 52
TranSVerSe Scapular BOdy fraCtures
143
PLATE 52
Supraspinatus
muscle
Infraspinatus
muscle
Acromion
process
Long head of
triceps muscle
B
144
Part two · surgical procedures for fractures
SCAPULA
CHaPTer 53
Supraglenoid Tuberosity Fractures
INDICATIONS
be used if the bone is soft. To place a tension band wire, start
Candidates include animals with avulsion fractures of the
two Kirschner wires in the fragment, and drive them across the
supraglenoid tuberosity.
fracture line to lodge in the main bone segment. Place a trans-
verse drill hole in the main bone segment, pass a fgure-eight
ObJectIVeS
wire through the hole and around the Kirschner wires, and
● To restore the articular surface and compress the fracture
tighten the figure-eight wire. Bend the Kirschner wires and
with a lag screw or tension band wire
rotate the ends over the biceps tendon (Plate 53C).23 For
chronic cases, where fracture reduction is impossible, attach
AnatomiC ConSideratiOnS
the biceps tendon to the proximal humerus with a bone screw
The biceps brachii muscle originates from the supraglenoid
and spiked Teflon washer.? Reattach the greater tubercle with
lag screws (Plate 53D). Repair the acromion osteotomy with a
surface of the scapula. The suprascapular nerve runs over the
tension band wire (Plate 53E).
scapular notch and umder the acromion process.
CAUTIONS
EQuiPMeNT
Articular reduction should be maintained during implant appli-
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi
retractors, periosteal elevator, osteotome and mallet or oscil-
suprascapular nerve.
lating saw, pointed reduction forceps, Kirschner wires, ortho-
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION
Radiographs should be evaluated for articular surface reduction
spiked Teflon washer, wire twister, wire cutter
and implant placement.
PrEPARATION ANd POSITIONING
POStoperatiVe Care
Prepare the forelirmb circumferentially from dorsal midline to
The forelimb should be in a sling for 2 weeks to prevent
carpus. Position the animal in lateral recurmbency. Drape the
weight bearing and to protect the fracture repair.? The animal
limmb out from a hanging position to allow maximal manipula-
should be confined, with activity limited to leash walking, until
tion during surgery. A cancellous bone graft is not necessary.
the fracture has healed. Radiographs should be repeated at
6-week intervals umtil the fracture(s) is healed. The animal
PrOCEDURE
should be slowly returned to normal activity after the fracture
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue from the
is healed.
middle portion of the scapular spine distally to the shoulder
joint. Incise the attachments of the omotransversarius,
Expected outcome
trapezius, and scapular head of the deltoideus muscles to the
Bone healing is usually seen in 6 to 12 weeks. A good returm to
scapula to expose the acromion process. Osteotomize the
fumction is expected, although some degree of lameness may
acromion process, and reflect it distally with the acrormial head
persist.? Degenerative joint disease may result from articular
of the deltoideus muscle. Refect the supraspinatus muscle
traurma, with the severity depending on accuracy and mainte
away from the scapular spine and neck. Identify and protect the
nance of reduction. Implant removal may be necessary if soft
suprascapular nerve. Incise the joint capsule to observe the
tissues are irritated.
articular surface during reduction. For additional exposure,
osteotomize the greater tubercle and reflect the supraspinatus
References
muscle proximally (Plate 53A).
Reduction: Extend the shoulder and reduce the fragment.
1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
 Maintain reduction with pointed reduction forceps (Plate 53B).
Saunders, 2004.
Stabilization: To place a lag screw, drill an appropriate
 2. Johnston SA: Articular fractures of the scapula in the dog: A clinical
 s  e      s
retrospective study of 26 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:157, 1993.
sleeve in the glide hole and drill, measure, and then tap the
3. Piermattei DL, Flo GL: Fractures of the scapula. In Brinker,
thread hole to accept the appropriate screw (see Plate 53B).
Piermattei, and Flo's Handbook of Small Animal Orthopedics and
A cancellous screw is preferred if size perrmits. A washer may
Fracture Repair, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997.
CHAPTER 53
SupraGlenOId tuBerOSIty FraCtuReS
145
PLATE 53
Suprascapular
nerve
Infraspinatus
muscle
B
Teres minor
muscle
Osteotomy
line
Humeral
head
Glenoid
146
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
SCAPULA
Intra-articular and Scapular
Chapter 54 
Neck Fractures
INDICATIONS
 Stabilization: Reflect the cranial fragment, and drill a
Candidates include animals with T fractures of the scapular
glide hole from the center of the fracture surface to exit proxi-
neck, or with scapular neck fractures without an intra-articular
component.
ture. Reduce the fracture, and secure the reduction with
pointed reduction forceps. Place an appropriate-sized drill
ObJeCTIVeS
sleeve in the glide hole and drill, measure, and then tap the
● To achieve anatomic articular surface reduction and rigid
thread hole to accept the appropriate screw (see Plate 54B).
immobilization of the fracture
Reduce the neck fracture, and stabilize it with a small L plate
(Plate 54C) or a veterinary cuttable plate or plates (Plate 54D).
ANAtOMIC CONSIdeRaTIONS
Close the joint capsule, and re-appose the infraspinatus tendon
Osteotomy of the acrormion process allows reflection of a por-
with a tendon suture. Repair the acromion osteotomy with a
tion of the deltoideus muscle and visualization of the joint. The
tension band wire (Plate 54E).23
and under the acromial process, and should be avoided. The
CAUTIONS
axillary artery and nerve are located immediately caudal to the
Articular reduction should be maintained during implant appli-
joint, but these are not usually visualized with routine
approaches.
suprascapular nerve.
EQUIPMENT
POSTOPEratIVe EVAluaTION
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi
Radiographs should be evaluated for reduction and irmplant
retractors, periosteal elevator, pointed reduction forceps,
position.
POStOPeratIVE CAre
wire, wire twisters, wire cutters
The forelimb should be in a sling for 2 weeks to prevent weight
bearing and to protect the fracture repair:? Physical therapy
PrEPaRATION AND POSITIONING
should be performed, flexing and extending the shoulder daily
 Prepare the forelimb frorm dorsal midline to carpus. Position the
after the sling is rermoved, umtil adequate range of motion
animal in lateral recumbency, with the affected limb up. Drape
returms. The animal should be confined, with activity limited to
the limb out from a hanging position to allow maximal manipu-
leash walking, umtil the fracture has healed. Radiographs should
lation during surgery. A cancellous bone graft is generally not
          s
needed.
animal should slowly be returned to normal activity after the
fracture is healed.
PROCEDURE
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue from the
Expected outcome
middle portion of the scapular spine distally to the shoulder
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks. Animals should
joint. Incise the attachments of the omotransversarius, trapezius,
experience a fair returm to function, although some degree of
and scapular head of the deltoideus muscles to the scapula to
lameness may persist.? Decreased shoulder range of motion
expose the acromion process. Osteotomize the acromion process,
occurs but has a minimal effect on fumction. Atrophy of the
and reflect it distally with the acromial head of the deltoideus
shoul der muscles occurs if the suprascapular nerve is damaged.
muscle. Reflect the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles
Degenerative joint disease may result from articular trauma,
away from the scapular spine and neck. Identify and protect the
with the severity depending on accuracy and maintenance of
reduction. Implant removal may be necessary if soft tissues are
tenotomize the infraspinatus muscle. Incise the joint capsule to
irritated.
observe the articular surface during reduction (Plate 54A). For
References
additional exposure, osteotomize the greater tubercle of the
humerus and reflect the supraspinatus muscle.' (See surgical
 1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
procedure for supraglenoid tuberosity fracture, Chapter 53.)
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders, 2004.
Reduction: Reduce the intra-articular fracture anatomi-
 2. Johnston SA: Articular fractures of the scapula in the dog: A clinical
cally, and maintain reduction with pointed reduction forceps
retrospective study of 26 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:157, 1993.
        
3. Piermattei DL, Flo GL: Fractures of the scapula. In Brinker,
fracture, reduce the neck fracture by carefully levering it into
Piermattei, and Flo's Handbook of Small Animal Orthopedics and
 position. Maintain reduction manually.
Fracture Repair, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997.
CHAPTER 54
Intra-Articular And scapular Neck FraCtures
147
PLATE 54
Suprascapular
nerve
Infraspinatus
muscle
Teresminor
muscle
Deltoideus
Humeral
head
muscle
Glenoid
C
148
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
HUMERUS
Proximal Humeral
Chapter 55 
Physeal Fractures
INDICATIONS
Reduction: Secure the greater tubercle with a pointed
Candidates include animals with Salter I and Salter MI fractures
reduction forceps, and secure the proximal hurmeral diaphysis
of the proximal humeral physes.
with a Kern bone-holding forceps. Reduce the epiphyseal
 aa s    ss  
ObJeCtIVES
levering the bone into positi on. Maintain reduction with pointed
● To achieve fracture stabilization and anatomic reduction of
reduction forceps (Plate 55B).
the proximal hurmeral epiphysis and articular surface
Stabilization: Starting proximally at the greater tubercle,
drive two Kirschner wires or Steinmann pins distally and
ANATOMIC CONSIderATIONS
caudally to cross the fracture line and seat in the caudal
Proximally, the greater tubercle and acrormion process of the
metaphysis (see Plate 55B). Stabilize Salter III fractures of
scapula are palpable. The cephalic vein courses within the sub-
the proximal physis by first securing the hurmeral head to the
cutaneous tissue along the craniolateral surface of the limb. The
proximal humerus with two Kirschner wires (Plate 55C) and
configuration of the physis and the cancellous bone surface
then reducing the greater tubercle and securing it to the
provide some rotational stability to the fracture.
hurmerus with two Kirschner wires or Steinrmann pins (Plate
55D). Reattach the incised tendons, and close the incision
EQUIPMENT
routinely.
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi
retractors, periosteal elevator, pointed reduction forceps,
CAUTIONS
Kerm bone-holding forceps, Kirschner wires or small
It is important to avoid damaging the physeal cartilage during
reduction and to avoid penetrating the articular cartilage with
driver, wire or pin cutter
the Kirschner wires. The articular surface should be evaluated
to ensure anatomic alignment.
PrePaRATION ANd POSITIONING
Prepare the forelimb circurmferentially from dorsal midline to
PoStOperatIVe eValuatIOn
carpus. Position the animal in lateral recurmbency, with the
Radiographs should be evaluated for reduction and implant
 affected limb up. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to
placement.
allow maximal manipulation during surgery. A cancellous bone
graft is not necessary.
POStOPErATIVE Care
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash
PrOCEdUrE
walking. Radiographs should be evaluated in 4 weeks. Implant
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue over
 removal may be indicated if soft tissue irritation occurs.
the craniolateral region of the proximal humerus 2 to 3 cm
proximal to the greater tubercle and extending to a point near
EXpeCted Outcome
the midshaft of the hurmerus. Elevate and reflect the brachio-
Rapid bone healing is usually seen, but premature closure of the
cephalicus muscle from the cranial surface of the bone. Elevate
physis may occur.
the deltoideus muscle, and retract it caudally to expose the
insertions of the teres minor and infraspinatus muscles.' Incise
Reference
through the insertions of these two muscles, and retract them
 1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
caudally to expose the lateral surface of the proximal hurmerus
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
(Plate 55A)
Saunders, 2004.
CHAPTer 55
 ProXimal Humeral physeal fractures
149
PlAte 55
Supraspinatus
muscle
Infraspinatus muscle
Teres minor muscle
Head of
humerus
Triceps brachii
muscle
(lateral head)
A
Deltoideus muscle
(acromial part),
 retracted caudally
150
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
HuMeruS
Fractures of the Lateral Portion
ChaPter 56
of the Humeral Condvle
INDICATIONS
 Maintain reduction with pointed reduction forceps across the
Candidates include animals with Salter IV fracture of the lateral
condyles and across the metaphyseal portion of the fracture.
portion of the humeral condyle, or mature animals with
Stabilization: Reflect the lateral condyle fragment later-
condylar fractures.
ally, and drill a glide hole from the center of the fracture surface
to exit cranially and distally to the lateral epicondyle prior to
OBJECTIVES
reducing the fracture (Plate 56B). Reduce the fracture, and
● To achieve anatomic alignment of the articular surface and
rigid fixation of the fracture to allow for rapid return to elbow
Kirschner wire perpendicular to the fracture surface and par-
 function, and to minimize development of degenerative joint
allel to the glide hole. Place an appropriate sized drill sleeve in
disease
the glide hole and drill, measure, and then tap the thread hole to
accept the appropriate screw (Plate 56C). Use a washer with
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
the screw to prevent subsidence ofthe screw head in soft bone.
The lateral portion of the huumeral condyle projects laterally
from the humerus and articulates with the radial head. Fractures
provide additional stability for short oblique or tranverse frac-
occur when the anirmal jurmps or falls, and forces are transrmitted
tures (Plate 56D).? Stabilize long oblique metaphyseal fractures
up the radius to the lateral condyle. The triceps muscle courses
with an additional lag screw (Plate 56E).
in a cranial proximal direction from its insertion on the ole
cranon and crosses the humerus rather than paralleling it. The
CAUTIONS
radial nerve lies beneath the lateral head of the triceps near the
The radial nerve should be protected. A washer should be used
distal third of the hurmerus and must be identified and protected.
in immature dogs. The joint should be inspected to ensure
anatomic alignment of the articular siurface.
EQUIPMENT
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohrmann retractors, Gelpi
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION
retractors, periosteal elevator, pointed reduction forceps,
Radiographs should be evaluated for fracture reduction and
Kirschmer wires, bone screws and instruments for insertion
implant position.
    - a   o
wire cutter
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash
PREPARATION AND POSITIONING
walking, until the fracture is healed. Physical therapy should be
Prepare the forelimb circumferentially from dorsal midline to
performed daily, flexing and extending the elbow, until adequate
carpus. Position the animal in lateral recurmbency, with the
range of motion returns. Radiographs should be evaluated in 4 to
affected limb up. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to
6 weeks and then at 6-week intervals until the fracture is healed.
allow maximal manipulation during surgery. A cancellous bone
graft is not necessary.
EXPECted OutCOMe
PROCEDURE
closure of the physis may occur; generally this does not cause a
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue beginning
clinical problem. Slow healing may be seen in mature dogs,
over the distal third of the humerus, curving cranial to the lat-
especially spaniels. Animals may experience a decreased elbow
eral epicondyle and extending 4 cm to 5 cm distal to the joint.
range of motion. Degenerative joint disease may occur, with the
Incise the deep fascia along the cranial border of the lateral
       
triceps muscle, and continue this incision across the joint
Implant removal may be necessary if soft tissues are irritated.
the extensor carpi radialis and the common digital extensor
removal.
muscle, and continue the incision proximally through the
periosteal origin of the extensor carpi radialis muscle. Retract
References
the muscle cranially to expose the joint capsule and umderlying
 1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
lateral condyle. Incise the joint capsule with an L-shaped inci-
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
sion to visualize the lateral portion of the hurmeral condyle
Saunders, 2004.
(Plate 56A).
2.
 Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures, humeral
Reduction: Reduce the fracture by pushing proximally on
fractures. In Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St.
the medial condyle and distracting the lateral fragment distally
Louis, Mosby, 2002.
CHAPTER56
FraCtureS OF the lateral pOrtION Of the HuMeral CONdyle
151
PlAte 56
Deep fascia
Triceps
brachii muscle
Incision in
 joint capsule
Extensor
carpi
radialis
muscle
Lateral
condyle
exposed
 Common digital
extensor muscle
152
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
HumeruS
T or Y Fractures
CHAPTeR 57
of the Distal Humerus
INDICATIONS
Stabilization: Stabilize the articular fracture with a lag screw.
Candidates include animals with T or Y fractures of the distal humerus.
 Drill a glide hole in the lateral condylar fragment. Place an appropriate
sized drill sleeve in the glide hole and drill, measure, and then tap the
ObJeCTIVeS
thread hole to accept the appropriate screw (see Plate 57B). Secure the
· To achieve anatomic alignment of the articular surface and rigid
condyle to the humeral shaft with a plate/rod combination. Start an IM
fixation of the fracture to allow for rapid return to elbow function,
pin into the medial condyle just below the medial epicondyle.
and to munimuze development of degenerative joint disease
Alternatively, retrograde the IM pin from the fracture site to exit below
the medial epicondyle. Drive the pin proximally across the fracture and
AnatOMIC CONSIdeRatIONS
up the humeral diaphysis to lodge at the greater tubercle. Place a plate
The radial nerve lies beneath the lateral head of the triceps near the
across the lateral fracture line (see Plate 57C). Cut the pin short at the
distal third of the humerus. The median, ulnar, and musculocutaneous
distal humerus. Altermatively, stabilize the medial and lateral fractures
nerves course along the cranial edge of the medial head of the triceps
by applying one plate to the medial surface of the humerus and a second
muscle. The brachial artery and vein accompany the nerves on the
plate to the caudolateral epicondyloid crest (Plate 57D). The plates
medial aspect of the humerus. The medial side of the humerus is flat
should function as compression plates if the fractures are transverse.?
and straight, making it amenable to plate placement. Fitting a plate to
the lateral side of the humerus requires bending and twisting of the
CAUTIONS
plate to fit the surface. The medial condyle is an extension of the
The radial nerve should be protected on the lateral approach and the
 l  d ()   e 's 
neurovascular structures on the medial approach. The joint should be
the medial condyle to the greater tubercle.
inspected to ensure anatomic alignment of the articular surface. The
elbow should be taken through range of motion to check for screws
EQUIPMENT
 penetrating the olecranon fossa.
·Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi retractors,
periosteal elevator, pointed reduction forceps, Kern bone-holding
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION
 eid yo ud qoser e sud e ' naaod pads-ry 'sdag
Radiographs should be evaluated for reduction and implant position.
equipment, pin cutter 
POStOPeratIVe CAre
PrEPARATION AND POSITIONING
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash walking,
Prepare the forelimb circumferentially from dorsal midline to carpus.
umtil the fracture is healed. Physical therapy should be performed daily,
 Position the animal in dorsal recumbency, with the affected limb up.
flexing and extending the elbow, until adequate range of motion returns.
Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow maximal manipu-
Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals until the fracture is
lation during surgery. The proximal humerus serves as a cancellous
healed.
bone graft donor site.
Expected Outcome
PrOCEdUrE
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks. Slow healing may be
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue beginning over
seen in mature dogs, especialy spaniels. Animals may experience
the distal third of the humerus, curving cranial to the lateral epicondyle
decreased elbow range of motion. Degenerative joint disease may
and extending 4 cm to 5 cm distal to the joint. Incise the deep fascia
occur, with severity depending on accuracy and maintenance of reduc-
 along the cranial border of the lateral triceps muscle, and continue this
tion.?4 The IM pin may interfere with elbow function; it should be
incision across the joint over the extensors. Incise the intermuscular
removed after the fracture has bridged with bone. Plate and screw
septum between the extensor carpi radialis and the common digital
removal may be necessary if soft tissues are irritated. Refracture may
extensor muscle, and continue the incision proximally through the
periosteal origin of the extensor carpi radialis muscle. Retract the
condyle. Incise the joint capsule with an L-shaped incision to visualize
References
the lateral humeral condyle and the articular surface (Plate 57Al). To
1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
expose the medial aspect of the fracture, incise the skin and subcuta-
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
neous tissue over the medial surface of the distal humerus. Bluntly
Saunders, 2004.
dissect the subfascial fat, and retract the nerves and vessels to expose
2. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures: Humeral
the humerus (Plate 57A2).1
 a  a  r )  g  s
Reduction: Reduce the articular fracture, and maintain reduc-
Louis, Mosby, 2002.
tion with pointed reduction forceps across the condyles. Inspect the
3. Vannini R, Smeak DD, Olmstead ML: Evaluation of surgical repair of
joint surface to ensure anatomic alignment (Plate 57B). After the lag
135 distal humeral fractures in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp
screw is placed, reduce the humeral metaphyseal fracture. Place an IM
Assoc 24:537, 1988.
pin up the medial portion of the condyle and across the fracture line to
 4. Anderson TJ, Carmicheal S, Miller A: Intercondylar humeral fracture
help maintain reduction (Plate 57C).
in the dog: A review of 20 cases. J Small Anim Pract 31:437, 1990.
CHAPTER57
T or Y fractures of the dIstal humerus
153
PLATE 57
A1
Deep
A2
fascia
Triceps
brachii
muscle
Biceps brachii
muscle
Extensor
Incision in
Neurovascular
carpi
joint capsule
bundle
 radialis
muscle
Lateral
condyle 
exposed
Brachiocephalicus
muscle
Pronatorteres
Common digital
muscle
extensor muscle
Triceps brachii
muscle
(medial head)
 Cranial
Lateral
Caudal
view
view
view
154
Part two · surgical procedures for fractures
HUMERUS
Application of an Intramedullary
ChAPTer 58
Pin or Interlocking Nail to the Humerus
INDICATIONS
clage wire, wire tightener, wire cutter, low-speed drill,
Candidates include animals with single or comminuted humeral
external fixator equipment, pin cutter, ILN equipment
diaphyseal fractures.
including high-speed drill, bone curette for harvesting can-
cellous graft
ObJeCTIVES
· To achieve anatomic reduction of single fracture lines or
PreParaTION ANd POSITIONING
restoration of normal bone aligrment for nonreducible com-
 Prepare the forelimb circurmferentially from dorsal midline to
minuted fractures
carpus. Position the animal in lateral recurmbency, with the
The intramedullary (IM) pin is used in animals with high
affected limb up. Drape the lirmb out from a hanging position to
fracture-assessment scores. The IM pin neutralizes bending
forces at the fracture and is combined with cerclage wire for
 lateral proximal hurmerus or ilial wing for surgery if harvesting
long oblique fractures and with extermal fixation for transverse
cancellous bone.
or short oblique fractures to neutralize rotational and axial
compressive forces. The interlocking nail (ILN) neutralizes
bending, rotational, and axial compressive forces at the frac-
PROCEDURE
ture; it can be used for animals with medium and low fracture-
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissues laterally
assessment scores.
from the cranial border of the greater tubercle to the lateral epi-
condyle. Incise the brachial fascia along the border of the bra-
AnatomIC CoNSIderatIonS
chiocephalicus muscle and the lateral head of the ticeps.
The radial nerve lies superficial to the brachialis muscle and
Visualize and isolate the radial nerve. Incise through the
deep to the lateral head of the triceps; it must be identified and
s a a o os  ne sn s
and stabilization. The humerus has a cranial curvature that
Reflect these two muscles cranially, and the brachialis muscle
positions the long axis of the marrow cavity cranial to the
caudally, to expose the proximal and central humeral shaft.1 To
shoulder joint, allowing normograde or retrograde placerment of 
gain further exposure of the distal humeral shaft, encircle the
an IM pin and normograde placerment of the ILN. The narrowest
brachialis muscle and the radial nerve with a Penrose drain;
part of the medullary canal, the isthrmus, is located within the
retract them caudally to expose the proximal and mid-diaphysis
distal third of bone, just proximal to the supratrochlear
and cranially to expose the distal diaphysis. Insert the IM pin
foramen. The medial portion of the humeral condyle is the
extension of the medullary canal. In cats, the median nerve and
manmer (Plate 58A).? Insert the ILN in a normograde manmer,
brachial artery run through the supracondylar foramen.
starting at the greater tubercle.? Use an “open but do not disturb
the fragments" technique to expose the proximal and distal
EQuIPMENT
bone segments with minimal disturbance of the fracture
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Hohmann
hematoma and bone fragments for nonreducible fractures.4
retractors, periosteal elevator, pointed reduction forceps,
Incise the skin, and create soft tissue tunmels to the bone for
Kerm bone-holding forceps, Jacob pin chuck, IM pins, cer-
fixator pin placement.
Continued
CHAPTER58
155
PLATE 58
Greater
tubercle
Deltoideusmuscle
(acromial part)
Radial nerve
Penrose
drain
Superficial
pectoral muscle
Brachiocephalicus
Brachialis
muscle
muscle
156
Part two · surgical procedures for fractures
Reduction: Place an IM pin (sized to equal 70% to 80% of
POStOPeratIVe eVAluatION
the medullary canal at the isthmus) in the proximal segment.
Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and
Direct the pin toward the caudomedial cortex so it will seat in
implant placement.
the medial portion of the condyle when the fracture is reduced
  d a    s d a 
POStOPErATIVe Care
medullary canal of the proximal segment (see Plate 58A).
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash
Reduce transverse and short oblique fractures by tenting the
walking, umtil the fracture has healed. Extermal fixator manage
bone ends and levering the bone back into position. Reduce
 s    ao   s 
long oblique fractures by distracting the bone segments and
Radiographs should be evaluated in 6 weeks. Fixation pins
approximating the fracture surfaces. Use pointed reduction for-
should be removed after radiographic signs of bone bridging are
ceps to manipulate the bone segments into reduction. Maintain
observed. If a tie-in is used, the top fixation pin and its conmec-
the reduction mamually (for transverse fractures) or with pointed
tion to the IM pin should be retained. Radiographs should be
reduction forceps (for oblique fractures). Reduce comminuted
repeated at 6-week intervals until the fracture is healed. The IM
nonreducible fractures by distracting the distal end with the
 pin should be removed when the fracture is healed.
IM pin or ILN and aligning the major segments of the bone.
Be sure to restore length and normal rotational alignment to
Expected outcome
the bone.
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks (depending on
Stabilization: Apply an IM pin and type Ia extermal fixator
fracture and signalment of the animal).
to the lateral surface of the humerus (Plate 58B). In each seg-
References
close to the fracture. The extermal fixator can be conmected
1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
   o aa a      g
Saunders, 2004.
fracture (Plate 58C). Apply an ILN and four screws to the
2. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures, humeral
humerus for treatment of comminuted nonreducible fractures
fractures. In Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St.
(Plate 58D).
Louis, Mosby, 2002.
 3. Dueland RT, Johnson KA, Roe SC, et al: Interlocking nail treatment
CAUTIONS
of diaphyseal long bone fractures in dogs. J AM Vet Med Assoc
214:59, 1999.
The radial nerve should be identified and protected during the
4. Aron DN, Palmer RH, Johnson AL: Biologic strategies and a bal-
procedure. It is important to avoid the distal joint surface with
the IM pin or ILN. The range of motion of the elbow should be
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995.
palpated to detect pin interference in the joint. Rotational align-
5. Aron DN, Dewey C: Experimental and clinical experience with an
ment should be monitored during the realignment of com-
IM pin external skeletal fixator tie-in confguration. Vet Comp
minuted fractures.
Orthop Traumatol 4:86, 1991.
CHAPTER58
157
PLATE 58
158
Part twO · surGIcal procedures for fractures
HUMERUS
ication of a Plate
Chapter 59
to the Humerus
INDICATIONS
 speed dril, plating equipment, bone curette for harvesting
Candidates include animals with single or comminuted humeral
graft
diaphyseal fractures.
PreparatIon ANd pOSItIonING
ObJeCTIVES
Prepare the forelimb circumferentially from dorsal midline to
● To achieve anatomic reduction and compression of single
carpus. Position the animal in lateral recurmbency, with the
fracture lines, or restoration of normal bone alignment, in
affected limb up for the craniolateral approach. Position
nonreducible comminuted fractures
the animal in dorsal recumbency for the medial approach to the
The plate is used as a compression plate for transverse or
humerus. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow
short oblique fractures; it is combined with lag screws to com-
press long oblique fractures, neutralizing bending, rotational,
proximal humerus or ilial wing for surgery to harvest cancel-
and axial compressive forces. The plate is used as a bridging
lous bone.
plate for nonreducible comminuted fractures and may be com-
PROCEDUrE
plate and to extend fatigue life of the fixation.
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissues laterally
from the cranial border of the greater tubercle to the lateral epi-
ANATOMIC CONSIdeRATIONS
condyle. Incise the brachial fascia along the border of the bra-
The plate may be placed on the cranial, lateral, or medial sur-
chiocephalicus muscle and the lateral head of the triceps.
face of the hurmerus. The cranial and medial surfaces of the
Visualize and protect the radial nerve. Incise through the
hurmerus are relatively flat and amenable to plate placerment.
periosteal insertion of the superficial pectoral and brachio
Fitting a plate to the lateral side of the hurmerus requires
cephalicus muscles at their insertions on the hurmeral shaft.
bending and twisting of the plate to fit the surface. The radial
Reflect these two muscles cranially, and the brachialis muscle
nerve lies superficial to the brachialis muscle and deep to the
caudally, to expose the proximal and central, cranial, or lateral
lateral head of the ticeps; it must be identified and protected
humeral shaft (Plate 59A).? To gain further exposure of the
duing the surgical approach, fracture reduction, and stabiliza-
distal lateral humeral shaft, encircle the brachialis muscle and
tion. In cats, the median nerve and brachial artery run through
the supracondylar foramen. During the medial approach to the
(to expose the proximal and mid-diaphysis) and cranially (to
humerus, care must be taken to isolate and protect the median,
expose the distal diaphysis).
musculocutaneous, and ulnar nerves; and the brachial artery
To expose the medial aspect of the fracture, incise the skin
and vein.? The humerus has a cranial curvature that positions
and subcutaneous tissue over the medial surface of the
the long axis of the marrow cavity cranial to the shoulder joint,
condyle. Incise the deep brachial fascia along the caudal border
medial portion of the condyle is an extension of the humeral
of the brachiocephalicus muscle and the distal portion of the
shaft, allowing an IM pin to travel frorm the medial condyle to
insertion of the supericial pectoral muscle. Retract the biceps
the greater tubercle.
brachii muscle and the nerves and vessels caudally (to expose
aodxa on) Aeen pue (snaumu a jo uonnod qeuxond a
EQuIPMeNT
the middle and distal portion of the humerus) (Plate 59B). Use
● Surgical pack, Senm retractors periosteal elevator, Gelpi
aoxa on anan saueg a qs pou op anq uao, ue
retractors or Hohmanm retractors, Penrose drain, pointed
the proximal and distal bone segments with minimal distur-
reduction forceps, Kerm bone-holding forceps, self-center-
bance of the fracture hematoma and bone fragments for nonre
 sd   d o s  
ducible fractures.?
Continued
CHAPTER 59
ApplicatiOn Of A plate tO the Humerus
159
Plate 59
B
Musculocutaneous
nerve
(proximal branch)
Greater
 Brachiocephalicus
tubercle
Superficial
muscle
pectoral
muscle
Biceps brachii
 Deltoideus muscle
muscle
(acromial part)
(retracted
Radial nerve
Triceps
cranially)
brachii
muscle
Musculocutaneous
nerve
Penrose
(distal branch)
drain
Superficial
pectoral muscle
Brachiocephalicus
Brachialis
muscle
muscle
160
PART TWO · SURGICAL PROCEDUrES FOR FRACTUrES
Reduction: Reduce transverse and short oblique fractures
POStOPErATIVE EVALUATION
by tenting the bone ends and levering the bone back into posi-
Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and
tion. Reduce long oblique fractures by distracting the bone seg-
implant placement.
ments and approximating the fracture surfaces. Use pointed
reduction forceps to manipulate the bone segments into reduc
POStOperatIVe CAre
tion. Maintain the reduction mamually (for transverse fractures)
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash
or with pointed reduction forceps (for oblique fractures).
walking. Physical therapy may be necessary to restore elbow
Reduce comminuted, nonreducible fractures by distracting the
range of motion. Radiographs should be evaluated in 6 weeks.
distal or proximal segments with an IM pin (sized to equal 40%
The IM pin should be removed after radiographic signs of bone
to 50% of the medullary canal at the isthmus) and aligning the
bridging are observed. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-
major segments of the bone (see Plate 59A). Insert the IM pin
week intervals until the fracture is healed. Plate removal may be
into the proximal hurmerus in either a normograde or retrograde
necessary after the fracture heals to relieve soft tissue irritation.
manner. For distal fractures, start an IM pin into the medial
condyle just below the medial epicondyle. Altermatively, retro-
Expected outcome
grade the IM pin from the fracture site to exit below the medial
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks (depending on
fracture and signalment of the animal).
the humeral diaphysis to lodge at the greater tubercle. Be sure
to restore length and normal rotational aligmment to the bone.4
Stabilization: Apply an appropriately contoured plate to
References
the cranial, lateral, or medial surface of the humerus. The plate
1. Hulse D, Hyman W, Nori M, et al: Reduction in plate strain by addi-
can fumction as a compression plate (Plate 59C) when used to
tion of an intramedullary pin. Vet Surg 26:451, 1997.
compress transverse or short oblique fractures; a neutralization
 2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
plate to support a reconstucted fracture (Plate 59D); or as a
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
bridging plate, spanming a nonreducible comminuted fracture
Saunders, 2004.
(Plate 59E).s
 3. Aron DN, Palmer RH, Johnson AL: Biologic strategies and a bal-
anced concept for repair of highly comminuted long bone fractures.
CAUTIONS
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995.
4. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures, humeral
All neurovascular structures should be identified and protected
fractures. In Fossum Tw (ed): Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St.
during the procedure. It is important to avoid the distal joint
Louis, Mosby, 2002.
suurface and olecranon fossa with the IM pin and bone screws.
5. Kasa F, Kasa G, Koestlin R, et al: Fractures of the humerus.
The range of motion of the elbow should be palpated to detect
In Brinker WO, Piermattei D, Flo GL (eds): Handbook of Small
 Animal Orthopedics and Fracture Repair, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB
be monitored during the realignment of commimuted fractures.
Saunders, 1997.
CHAPTER 59
ApplicatION Of A Plate tO the HUMerUS
161
PLATE 59
162
Part twO · surGIcal procedures for fractures
HuMerUS
lication of an External Fixator
Chapter 60
to the Humerus
INDICATIONS
to allow maximal manipulation duing surgery. Prepare the
Candidates include animals with single or comminuted humeral
ipsilateral proximal humerus or ilial wing for harvesting
diaphyseal fractures.
cancellous bone.
ObJeCtIVes
PROCEDURE
● To achieve anatomic reduction of single fracture lines or
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissues laterally
restoration of normal bone aligmment in comminuted
from the cranial border of the greater tubercle to the lateral
fractures
epicondyle. Incise the brachial fascia along the border of the
 The stiffness of the fixator can be increased in animals with
brachiocephalicus muscle and the lateral head of the triceps.
low fracture-assessment scores by adding fixation pins, using
Visualize and isolate the radial nerve. Incise through the
biplanar frames, and incorporating an intramedullary (IM) pin.
periosteal insertion of the superficial pectoral and brachio-
The fracture and fixator combination, the IM pin and fixator
cephalicus muscles at their insertions on the humeral shaft.
combination, or the biplanar fixator alone resists axial loading,
Reflect these two muscles cranially, and the brachialis muscle
bending, and rotational forces at the fracture.
caudally, to expose the proximal and central humeral shaft.? To
gain further exposure of the distal humeral shaft, reflect the
ANAtOMIC CONSIderATIONS
brachialis muscle cranially and the lateral triceps muscle caul-
The radial nerve lies superficial to the brachialis muscle and
dally. Insert the IM pin into the proximal hurmerus in either a
deep to the lateral head of the triceps; it must be identified and
normograde or retrograde manmer (Plate 60A). Use an "open
protected during the surgical approach, fracture reduction,
but do not disturb the fragments" technique to expose the prox-
and fixation pin placement. The humerus has a cranial curva-
imal and distal bone segments with minimal disturbance of the
ture that positions the long axis of the marrow cavity cranial to
fracture hematoma and bone fragments, or a closed reduction
the shoulder joint, allowing normograde or retrograde place
technique for nonreducible fractures.? Incise the skin and
ment of an IM pin. The narrowest part of the medullary canal,
create soft tissue tunnels to the bone for fixator pin placement.
the isthmus, is located within the distal third of bone, just prox-
Reduction: Place an IM pin (sized to equal 70% to 80% of
imal to the supratrochlear foramen. The medial portion of the
the medullary canal at the isthmus) in the proximal segment.
humeral condyle is the extension of the medullary canal. In
Direct the pin toward the caudal medial cortex so it will seat in
cats, the median nerve and brachial artery rum through the
the medial portion of the condyle when the fracture is reduced
supracondylar foramen. The proximity of the thorax prohibits
  d a    s   
use of bilateral frames in the proximal humerus.
medullary canal of the proximal segment (see Plate 60A).
Reduce transverse and short oblique fractures by tenting the
EQUIPMENT
bone ends and levering the bone back into position. Reduce
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, small Hohmann retractors,
long oblique fractures by distracting the bone segments and
Gelpi retractors, periosteal elevator, Kerm bone-holding for-
approximating the fracture surfaces. Use pointed reduction for-
ceps, pointed reduction forceps, Jacob pin chuck, IM pins,
ceps to manipulate the bone segments into reduction. Maintain
low-speed power drill, extermal fixation equipment, pin
the reduction manually (for transverse fractures) or with
cutter, bone curette for harvesting graft
pointed reduction forceps (for oblique fractures). Reduce com-
mimuted, nonreducible fractures by distracting the distal end
PrePARATION ANd POSITIONING
with the IM pin and aligning the major segments of the bone; or
Prepare the forelimb circumferentially from dorsal midline to 
use the distal fixation pin to distract and align the bone during
carpus. Position the animal in lateral recumbency, with the
closed reduction. Be sure to restore length and normal rota-
tional alignment to the bone.
Continued
CHAPTER 60
ApplicatiON Of An EXternal FixatOr tO the HumeruS
163
PLATE 60
Greater
tubercle
Deltoideusmuscle
(acromial part)
Radial nerve
Penrose
drain
Superficial
pectoral muscle
Brachiocephalicus 
muscle
Brachialis
muscle
164
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
Stabilization: Apply an IM pin and a type Ia extermal
by rermoving the unilateral frame (type Ia and IM pin) or the cra-
fixator to the lateral surface of the hurmerus (Plate 60B). In each
nial frame (modified type Ib fixator) when bone bridging is
segment, place a fixation pin in the metaphysis and a fixation
observed. If a tie-in is used, the top fixation pin and its conmec-
pin close to the fracture. The external fixator can be conmected
tion to the IM pin should be retained. The IM pin, the remaining
or tied in to the IM pin to strengthen the fixation. Long oblique
fractures benefit from cerclage wire in addition to the IM pin,
is healed.
Ib external fixator to a comminuted nonreducible fracture
EXPECTED OUTCOME
(Plate 60D). Add an IM pin and tie it into the fixator for addi-
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks (depending on
tional stability for commimuted fractures.
fracture and signalment of the animal). The animal may experi-
ence limited function while the extermal fixator is in place, but
CAUTIONS
a good return to function can be expected.
Identify and protect the radial nerve during the procedure.
Avoid major nerves and vessels and joint surfaces with the
fixation pins. Avoid penetrating the distal joint surface or ole
References
cranon fossa with the IM pin. Palpate the range of motion of the
 elbow to detect pin interference in the joint. Monitor rotational
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
 and angular alignment during the reduction and fixation of corm-
fracture management, decision making in fracture management. In
 so    s   )  
minuted fractures.
2002.
 2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
POSTOPErATIVE EVALUATION
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and
Saunders, 2004.
implant placement. Angular malalignments should be corrected
3. Aron DN, Palmer RH, Johnson AL: Biologic strategies and a bal.
by loosening the clamps and realigning the fixation pins on the
anced concept for repair of highly comminuted long bone fractures.
connecting bar.
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995.
4. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures, humeral
POStOPeRaTIVe Care
      )  g  
Gauze sponges should be packed around the pins, and the
Louis, Mosby, 2002.
5. Aron DN, Dewey C: Experimental and clinical experience with an
sponges should be secured with a bandage. The animal should
IM pin external fixator tie-in configuration. Vet Comp Orthop
be confined, with activity limited to leash walking. Extermal
Traumatol 4:86, 1991.
fixator management includes daily pin care and pin packing as
6. Aron DN: External skeletal fixation system application to the
needed. Physical therapy should be instituted to restore elbow
humerus and femur. In Proceedings of the l0th Annual Complete
range of motion. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week
Course in Extermal Skeletal Fixation, University of Georgia,
intervals to monitor healing. The fixator should be destabilized
127-141, 2002.
CHAPTER60
ApplicatiON Of An EXternal FixatOr tO the HumeruS
165
PLATE 60
166
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
RAdIUS
lication of a Plate
Chapter 61
to the Radius
INDICATIONS
Stabilization: Apply an appropriately contoured plate to the
 Candidates include animals with single or comminuted radial diaphy-
cranial surface of the radius (Plate 6lBl). The plate can function as a
 seal fractures or toy breed dogs with distal diaphyseal fractures.
compression plate when used to compress transverse or short oblique
ObJeCtIVeS
used for distal radial transverse or short oblique fractures (Plate 61B2).
· To achieve anatomic reduction and compression of single fracture
Round hole plates act as tension band plates and do not allow com-
lines, or restoration of normal bone alignment, in nonreducible com-
pression with the plate.? A plate may also be applied to the medial sur-
minuted fractures
face of the distal radius (Plate 6lB3).d Plates are used as a neutralization
 The plate is used as a compression plate for transverse or short
plate to support a reconstructed fracture (Plate 6lC) or as a bridging
oblique fractures; it is combined with lag screws to compress long
plate spanning a nonreducible comminuted fracture (Plate 61D). If addi-
oblique fractures, neutralizing bending, rotational, and axial compres-
sive forces. The plate is used as a bridging plate for nonreducible com-
ulna to support the bridging plate fixation.?
minuted fractures.
CAUTIONS
AnatomIC CoNSIderatIONS
 In immature dogs, crossing the distal radial physis with the plate or
The flat cranial surface of the radius is ideal for plate placement; how-
 screws should be avoided. The articular surface should also be avoided.
ever, interference with tendons is possible. The medial surface may be
 s o oq n uoe ao Ad on n st h
used for plate placement for distal radial fractures. The cephalic vein
avoid rotation of the distal segment.
crosses the medial portion of the distal radius. Limited soft tissue cov-
erage and marginal vascular supply contribute to a high percentage of
PoStOperatIVe eValuatION
delayed unions or nonunions in toy breed dogs.
Radiographs should be evaluated for fracture reduction or bone align-
 ment and implant placement.
EQuiPMeNT
· Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, periosteal
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
elevator, self-centering plate reduction forceps, pointed reduction
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash walking.
forceps, high-speed drill, plating equipment, bone curette for har-
 Radiographs should be evaluated in 6 weeks. The intramedullary pin
vesting graft
should be removed from the ulna after radiographic signs of bone
bridging are observed. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week
PrEPARATION ANd POSITIONING
intervals until the fracture is healed. Plate removal may be necessary
Prepare the forelimb circumferentially from above the shoulder to the
after the fracture heals to relieve soft tissue irritation or thermal
phalanges. Position the animal in dorsal recumbency. Drape the limb
conduction.
out from a hanging position. Roll the animal slightly to allow access to
the medial surface of the limb. The ipsilateral proximal humerus serves
Expected outcome
as a cancellous bone graft donor site.
Generally, bone healing is seen in 6 to 12 weeks; then good function is
expected.? Delayed union may occur in toy breed dogs. Bone resorp
PROCEDURE
tion or osteopenia may occur under the plate in toy breed dogs whose
Approach: Palpate the radius directly under the skin and subcuta-
fractures are stabilized with relatively large, stiff plates.?
neous tissue on the craniomedial surface of the limb. Incise the skin and
subcutaneous tissue to expose the radial diaphysis. Extend the incision
References
distally, and elevate the extensor tendons to expose the cranial surface
 1. Welch JA, Boudrieau RJ, DeJardin LM, et al: The intraosseous blood
of the radius. Extend the incision proximally by incising between the
supply of the canine radius: Implications for healing of distal frac.
extensor carpi radialis muscle and the pronator teres muscle. If needed,
tures in small dogs. Vet Surg 26:57, 1997.
the insertions of the pronator and supinator muscles are incised on the
2.
 Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
radius (Plate 6lA).? Limit the exposure to the distal portion of the radius
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
for distal radial diaphyseal fractures.
Saunders, 2004.
Reduction: Reduce transverse fractures by tenting the bone
 3. Binnington AG, Miller Cw: Fractures of the radius and ulna. In
ends dorsally and levering the bone back into position. Short oblique
Brinker WO, Piermattei D, Flo GL (eds): Handbook of Small Animal
fractures may be better reduced by tenting the bone ends medially and
Orthopedics and Fracture Repair, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB
levering the bone back into position. Distal radial fractures may also be
Saunders, 1997.
reduced by securing a precontoured plate to the distal segment and
Sardinas JC, Montavon PM: Use of a medial bone plate for repair of
reducing the proximal segment to the plate. Maintain reduction by
radius and ulna fractures in dogs and cats: A report of 22 cases. Vet
Surg 26:108, 1997.
5. Larsen LJ, Roush JK, McLaughlin RM: Bone plate fixation of distal
nonreducible fractures by distracting and aligning the major segments
radius and ulnar fractures in small- and miniature-breed dogs. J Am
 of the bone while being careful not to disturb the fragments.
Anim Hosp Assoc 35:243, 1999.
CHAPTEr 61
ApplicatION Of A Plate tO the radIuS
167
PLATE 61
Supinator
muscle
Pronator
teres muscle
Flexor carpi
radialis muscle
Radius
Superficial
digital flexor
Radial
muscle
artery
 Median
 artery
B1
B2
168
Part two · surgical procedures for fractures
RAdIUS
ication of an External Fixator
Chapter 62
to the Radius
INDICATIONS
two (or preferably three) fixation pins in each bone segment. Use posi
Candidates include animals with single or comminuted radial diaphy-
tive profile, end-threaded pins to increase pin bone interface stability.
seal fractures.
Apply a type Ib frame by placing a unilateral frame on the cranial medial
 surface of the radius and an additional unilateral frame on the cranial
OBJECTIVES
lateral surface of the radius (Plate 62D1). Connect the biplanar frames
· To achieve anatomic reduction of single fracture lines or restoration
with articulating bars (Plate 62D2). Apply a type I1 frame by inserting
of normal bone alignment for comminuted fractures
 transfixation pins through the metaphyses and additional fixation pins 1
The stiffness of the fixator can be increased for animals with low
cm to 2 cm from the fracture line. Place additional pins when there is
fracture-assessment scores by adding fixation pins and using biplanar
adequate bone. If the cranial curve of the radius precludes the place-
or bilateral frames. The fracture and fixator combination, or the fixator
ment of transfixation pins, unilateral fixation pins can be applied to the
 alone, resists axial loading, bending, and rotational forces at the fracture.
diaphysis of the radius (Plate 62E).23
ANATOMICCONSIDERATIONS
CAUTIONS
The radius has a flat, wide, cranial surface; narrow medial and lateral
It is important to avoid major nerves and vessels and joint surfaces with
surfaces; and variable cranial bowing of the diaphysis. The proximal
the fixation pins. To accommodate the width of the radius and avoid
radial joint surface parallels the distal radial joint surface when viewed
fracturing the bone, it is advisable to consider using smaller fixation
on a cranial caudal radiograph. The proximal third of the bone is com-
pins when they are inserted medially and laterally. Angular and
pletely covered with muscle, whereas the medial aspect of the distal
rotational alignment should be monitored during the reduction.
two thirds of the radius is covered only by skin and subcutaneous
Intraoperative radiographs are useful to verify joint alignment during
tissue. The cephalic vein crosses the medial portion of the distal radius.
closed reductions.
In general, fixation pins can be applied on the cranial medial, medial,
cranial lateral, and lateral surfaces of the bone.
POStOPErATIVE EVALUATION
Radiographs should be evaluated for fracture reduction or bone align-
EQuipMenT
ment and implant placement. Angular malalignments should be
· Surgical pack, Senn retractors, small Hohmann retractors, periosteal
corrected by loosening the clamps and realigning the fixation pins on
elevator, pointed reduction forceps, Jacob pin chuck, low-speed
the connecting bar.
harvesting cancellous graft
POStOPeratIVe CAre
Gauze sponges should be packed around the pins, and the sponges
PrePaRATION ANd POSItIONING
should be secured with a bandage that incorporates the paw to limit
Prepare the affected forelimb circumferentially from midline to foot.
postoperative swelling. The animal should be confined, with activity
Position the animal in dorsal recumbency, and suspend the affected
   rg r a  o 
limb from the ceiling. Drape the limb out in the hanging position.
e paneadai aq pmous sye fopey 'papaau se buoed ud pue aneo ud
Prepare the ipsilateral proximal humerus for cancellous bone autograft
6-week intervals to evaluate healing. The fixator should be destabilized
donor site if open reduction is used.
by removing one unilateral frame (type Ib fixator), selected fixation pins
(type Ia or type II fixator), or one connecting bar (of the type II fixator)
PROCEDURE
when bone bridging is observed. The external fixator should be
Approach: Perform a limited medial approach to the fracture site
removed when the fracture is healed.
for reducible fractures (Plate 62A). Use closed reduction techniques for
nonreducible fractures (Plate 62B). Incise the skin and create soft
Expected outcome
tissue tunnels to the bone for pin placement.
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks, depending on fracture
Reduction: Lower the table to allow the animal's weight to
and signalment of the animal. Animals experience limited function
fatigue the muscles. For transverse fracture lines, lever the fragments
while the external fixator is in place but should have a good returm to
into position through the limited surgical approach (see Plate 62A).
function.
Maintain the reduction manually. Reduce and maintain long oblique
wires are applied. For closed reduction of cormminuted fractures, use
References
the proximal and distal transfixation pins to manipulate the bone and
 1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
align the joint surfaces. Maintain reduction by securing the connecting
 fracture management, decision making in fracture management. In
bars. Medial and lateral angular alignment is correct when the proximal
 qs smoT  a puz ms ey us ) 1 msg
and distal joint surfaces are parallel (see Plate 62B). Cranial caudal joint
2. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
surface relationships should mimic the contralateral intact bone. Check
fracture management, external skeletal fixators. In Fossum TW (ed):
rotational alignment by flexing the elbow and the carpus after raising
Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
the table: the paw should align with the radius.
 3. Johnson AL, Seitz SE, Smith CW, et al: Closed reduction and type II
 Stabilization: Apply a type la extermal fixator to the cranial
external fixation of severely comminuted fractures of the radius and
medial surface of the radius (Plate 62C). Place fixation pins in the
tibia in dogs: 23 cases (1990-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1445,
metaphysis of each segment and close to the fracture line. Place at least
1996.
CHAPTER62
ApplicatiOn Of An EXternal FixatOr tO the radiuS
169
PLATE 62
Cranial
view
Left
forelimb
D2
Cranialview
170
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
RAdIUS
Distal Radial Physeal Fractures
Chapter 63
INDICATIONS
retract the extensor tendons laterally as needed for fracture
 Candidates include animals with Salter I and Salter II fractures
visualization (Plate 63A).
of the distal radial physis.
Reduction: Carefully reduce the physeal fracture to avoid
crushing or injuring the physeal cartilage. Maintain reduction
ObJeCtIVeS
with pointed reduction forceps or manual pressure (Plate 63B).
● To stabilize the fracture and achieve anatomic reduction of
Stabilization with Crossed Kirschner Wires: Drive
the distal radial physis
a Kirschner wire from the medial styloid process, across the
[ a o p ss n a o si
AnatOMIC CONSIderAtIONS
cortex. Drive a second wire from the lateral aspect of the distal
The cranial medial surface of the distal radius can be easily
radial epiphysis, across the fracture into the metaphysis, and
palpated to serve as a landmark for location of the incision. The
through the medial cortex avoiding the articular surface
cephalic vein crosses the medial portion of the distal radius.
(Plate 63C). If possible, bend the pins and cut off the excess.
 The common and lateral digital extensor tendons lie cranial to
the antebrachial carpal joint and may need to be retracted to
CAUTIONS
expose the antebrachial carpal joint surface. The extensor carpi
It is important to avoid damaging the physeal cartilage or
radialis tendon lies over the medial aspect of the joint. The ante
articular cartilage.
brachial carpal joint is supported by the short radial collateral
ligaments, which arise from the medial styloid process of the
POStOPErATIVE EVALUATION
radius; by the dorsal radiocarpal ligament, which arises from
Radiographs should be evaluated for reduction and implant
the dorsal surface of the distal radius; and by the short ulnar
placement.
collateral and radioulnar ligarments, which arise from the ulnar
styloid process.
PoStOperatiVe Care
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash
EQuipMenT
walking. Radiographs should be evaluated in 4 weeks. Implant
● Surgical pack, Senm retractors, Hohrmanm retractors, periosteal
removal may be required if iritation occurs.
elevator, pointed reduction forceps, Kirschner wires or small
Expected outcome
driver, wire cutter or pin cutter
Rapid bone healing is usually seen, but premature closure of the
physis may occur; this will cause radial shortening if the animal
PrEPARATION ANd POSITIONING
is still growing.
Prepare the forelirmb circurmferentially from shoulder to the
digits. Position the animal in lateral recurmbency, with the
Reference
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures, radial and
Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow maximal
ulnar physeal fractures. In Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery,
o sn e aoq so y ns  ton
2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
necessary.
PrOCEDURE
Approach: Incise skin and subcutaneous tissue dorsaly from
distal radial diaphysis to the proximal metacarpus. Elevate and
CHAPTER 63
 DIstal radIal physeal fractures
171
PLATE 63
 Radial
 diaphysis
Radial
Ulna
metaphysis
Radial
carpalbone
172
Part tWO · surGIcal proCedures fOr Fractures
ULNA
Proximal Ulnar Fractures
Chapter 64 
INDICATIONS
fractures by distracting the fracture and aligning the major segments of
Transverse proximal ulnar fractures, including articular fractures, are
the bone. Be sure to restore length and normal rotational alignment to
treated with either a tension band wire or a plate, depending on the size,
the bone.
activity, and healing potential of the animal. Comminuted reducible
Stabilization: To stabilize a transverse or short oblique frac-
   ei  s  
ture, use a tension band wire. Start two Kirschner wires in the proximal
nonreducible ulnar fractures, are treated with reconstruction of the
fragment, and drive them across the fracture line to lodge in the distal
articular surface and either a neutralization plate or bridging plate. The
bone segment. Alternatively, retrograde the Kirschner wires before
tension band wire converts tensile forces to compressive forces at the
reducing the fracture. Place a transverse drill hole in the distal bone
fracture. The plate provides rigid fixation and resists axial loading.
segment, pass a figure-eight wire through the hole and around the
bending, and rotation.
Kirschner wires, and tighten the figure-eight wire. Bend the Kirschner
wires and rotate the ends over the triceps tendon (Plate 64B).
ObJeCtIVES
Alternatively, apply an appropriately contoured plate to the lateral sur-
● To convert the tensile forces resulting from the pull of the triceps
face of the ulna. Compress the fracture line, using the loaded drill guide
muscles to compressive forces at the fracture; to achieve anatomic
to insert one or two screws (Plate 64C). To stabilize a comminuted
reduction of the articular surface; and to neutralize the forces acting
reducible fracture, reduce the articular fragments anatomically, and
on the fracture or bridge the fracture with a plate
 If an associated luxation of the radial head is present (Monteggia
contoured plate to the lateral surface of the ulna (Plate 64D).
fracture), reduction and stabilization of the radial head are imperative.
Comminuted, nonreducible fractures that do not affect the joint
surface may be bridged with a plate (Plate 64E). Plates may be applied
AnAtOMIC CONSIderATIONS
to the caudal surface of the ulna, if size permits.?
Landmarks for the approach to the proximal ulna are the olecranon and
the palpable caudal border of the ulna. The articular surface of the
CAUTIONS
trochlear notch can be exposed surgically by muscle elevation. The
ulnar nerve courses over the medial aspect of the elbow, caudal to the
medial epicondyle.
The hard bone of the ulna makes drilling wires difficult. It is necessary
to irrigate during drilling to reduce bone necrosis. Pin placement must
EQuipMeNt
follow the contour of the proximal ulna.
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Hohmann retractors,
periosteal elevator, pointed reduction forceps, high-speed drill
POStOPErATIVE EVALUATION
and Kirschner wire driver, Kirschner wires, orthopedic wire, wire
Radiographs should be evaluated for articular surface reduction and
tighteners, plating equipment, bone curette for harvesting cancel-
implant placement.
lous graft
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
preparation And poSItioning
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash walking.
Prepare the forelimb circumferentially from shoulder to carpus.
 Position the animal in lateral recumbency, with the affected limb up.
elbow until adequate range of motion returns. Radiographs should be
-nd  mo o uod y e og o ql a a
repeated at 6-week intervals until the fracture is healed.
lation during surgery. The ipsilateral proximal humerus can serve as a
cancellous graft harvest site.
EXPECTED OUTCOME
Bone healing is usually seen in 6 to 18 weeks, depending on the fracture
PROCEDURE
and signalment of the animal. Animals usually experience a good retun
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue medial to the
to function. Degenerative joint disease may result from articular
caudal border of the ulna, starting at the olecranon and extending dis-
o a p me  dp as n n
tally over the ulnar diaphysis. Elevate the flexor carpi ulnaris and deep
digital flexor muscles medially, and the ulnaris lateralis muscle laterally,
removal may be necessary if soft tissues are iritated.
to expose the bone surface. Reflect the origin of the flexor carpi ulnaris
muscle to expose the trochlear notch and articular surface (Plate 64A).
Use an “open but do not disturb the fragments" technique to expose the
proximal and distal bone segments with minimal disturbance of the
References
fracture hematoma and bone fragments for nonreducible nonarticular
 1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
fractures."
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
Reduction: Extend the elbow to aid reduction. For single frac-
Saunders, 2004.
2. Aron DN, Palmer RH, Johnson AL: Biologic strategies and a
- a   a   o n ad 
balanced concept for repair of highly comminuted long bone frac-
tained with pointed reduction forceps, but in transverse fractures,
tures. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995.
manual maintenance of reduction is necessary. Be sure the articular
 3. Muir P, Johnson KA: Fractures of the proximal ulna in dogs. Vet
surface is anatomically aligned. Reduce comminuted, nonreducible
Comp Orthop Traumatol 9:88, 1996.
Chapter 64 
 PrOXimal ulnar fractures
173
PLATE 64
Flexor
Ulnaris
 carpi
lateralis
ulnaris
muscle
muscle
(ulnar head)
Anconeus
muscle
174
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
PELVIS
Chapter 65
INDICATIONS
iliac wing or by locating the glide hole in the caudal dorsal quad-
Candidates include animals with unstable sacroiliac luxations,
rant of the area of the iliurm under the straight portion of the
especially those that cause pelvic canal narrowing.
dorsal iliac crest (Plate 65C). Drill the glide hole at the prede
termined position with the appropriate-sized drill bit. Advance
ObJectives
● To restore pelvic canal width and stabilize the sacroiliac joint
umtil the tip appears on the medial surface of the ilium. Use the
Kerm bone-holding forceps to manipulate the iliurm caudally into
ANAtOMIC CONSIdeRaTIONS
alignment with the articular surface of the sacroiliac joint.
The sacroiliac joint has two distinct components: (1) a semilumar,
Visually guide the screw tip into the prepared thread hole in the
sacrrurm, and then tighten the screw (see Plate 65C). A second
chondrosis. The landmarks of the notch on the lateral surface of
SCrew may be added if room perrmits. Large or overweight dogs
the sacrum and the crescent-shaped auricular cartilage are used
may benefit from inserting a transilial bolt (generally a small
s a s a no oq a o m a o o
end, threaded, Steinmann pin) through the iliac wings, over the
nerve roots and the sciatic nerve course behind the ilial body.
dorsal surface of L7. Bend the smooth end, and place a mut on
the threaded end to prevent pin migration (Plate 65D).
EQuipMenT
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, periosteal elevator, Gelpi
CAUTIONS
retractors, blumt Hohmann retractor, Kerm bone-holding
The screw must be optimally placed into the sacral body to gain
forceps, bone screws and instruments for inserting screws,
high-speed drill
to avoid damaging nerve roots and to avoid screw insertion into
the spinal canal.
PrEPaRATION AND POSITIONING
Prepare the rear limb circurmferentially from dorsal midine to
POStOPerATIVe EVALuATION
mid-tibia and from 10 crm cranial to the iliac crest to the tail head
 Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and
caudally. Position the animal in lateral recurmbency, with the
implant placement.
affected limb up and with the dorsal midline raised 45 degrees
from the table. A cancellous bone graft is usually unnecessary
POStOPeratiVe Care
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash
PROCEDURE
walking, until the fracture/luxation has stabilized. Radiographs
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue, begin-
should be evaluated at 6 and 12 weeks after surgery.
ning over the dorsal iliac crest and extending caudally parallel
Radiographic evidence of bone bridging or callus formation at
the sacroiliac joint may or may not be evident.
crest. Incise through the periosteal origin of the middle gluteal
muscle on the lateral ridge of the iliac crest and the deep gluteal
Expected outcome
fascia and periosteal origin of the sacrospinalis muscle on the
Bone healing is usually seen in 6 to 12 weeks. Animals should
medial ridge of the iliac crest. The incisions merge caudally,
experience an excellent retum to fumction. Implant loosening
a no s   on s aq   
and migration, with loss of pelvic canal diameter, can occur.°
superficial gluteal muscle. Reflect the ilium laterally to expose 
the sacroiliac joint. Elevate the middle gluteal muscle from the
References
lateral surface of the ilium to further expose the iliurm for screw
1. DeCamp CE, Braden TD: The anatomy of the canine sacrum for lag
placerment.? Position a blunt Hohmann retractor between the
screw fixation of the sacroiliac joint. Vet Surg 14:131, 1985.
ilium and ventral bony shelf of the sacrrum, and reflect the ilium
 2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
ventrally to expose the sacral joint surface (Plate 65A).3
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders, 2004.
of the iliurm to manipulate the hermipelvis (see Plate 65C).
 3. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures: Sacroiliac
luxations/fractures. In Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery, 2nd
Reduction is achieved and maintained with the bone screw.
ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
Stabilization: Use the appropriate-sized drill bit to dill a
 4. DeCamp CE: Principles of pelvic fracture management. Sem Vet
thread hole 2 mm cranial and 2 mm proximal to the center of
Med Surg Sm Anim 7:63, 1992.
the crescent-shaped articular cartilage (Plate 65B). The depth
 5. Piermattei DL, Flo GL: Fractures of the pelvis. In Brinker, Piermattei
of the thread hole in the sacral body should be such that
and Flo's Handbook of Small Animal Orthopedics and Fracture
the screw tip will extend to the midline of the sacral body.4
Repair, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997.
Determine the proper location of the glide hole in the ilium by
 6. DeCarmp CE, Braden TD: Sacroiliac fracture-separation in the dog:
palpating the articular prorminence on the medial surface of the
A study of 92 cases. Vet Surg 14:127, 1985.
Chapter 65
SACrOIlIAC LuXatION
175
PLAte 65
Gluteal surface
Intermediate
of wing of ilium
sacral crest
Hohmann retractor
Middle gluteal muscle
176
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
PelVIS
llial Bod
Chapter 66
F'ractures
INDICATIONS
Reduction: Place Kern bone-holding forceps over the
Candidates include animals with transverse or oblique dis-
caudal ilial segment, and reposition it lateral to the cranial seg-
placed ilial body fractures.
ment. Contour a plate to fit the normal curvature of the lateral
surface of the bone, using a ventrodorsal radiograph of the
ObJeCtIVES
contralateral ilium as a guide.? Attach the plate to the caudal
● To achieve anatomic fracture reduction, rigid fracture stabi-
segment first with bone screws. Use a periosteal elevator as a
lization, and restoration of pelvic canal width
lever to help reduce transverse fractures. Use the Kern forceps
to retract the caudal segment caudally, and use pointed reduc-
AnatomIC ConSiderations
tion forceps to secure long oblique fractures in reduction.
The iliac wing curves medially to hold the middle and deep
Clarmp the cranial portion of the plate to the cranial segment of
gluteal muscles. The bone in the tip of the iliac wing is thin
and may not hold implants well. The sacroiliac joint is located
to maintain reduction (Plate 66B).
medially to the iliac wing. The ilial body is located between the
Stabilization: Secure the plate by placing screws in the
wing of the iliurm cranially and the acetabulurm caudally. The
cranial segment. Screws may penetrate the sacrum for addi-
 o   o    a   
tional bone purchase. Place at least three plate screws in the
are often damaged by the injury. The sciatic nerve is located
cranial segment and two or three (space permitting) in the
medial to the ilial body. Reestablishrment of ilial integrity is
caudal segment (Plate 66C).23
required for weight transfer from the limb to axial skeleton
With ilial fractures, the caudal fragment is often displaced
CAUTIONS
medially and cranially to the wing of the ilium.
It is important to avoid trapping the sciatic nerve during frac-
ture reduction and to avoid penetrating deeply into the pelvic
EQuipMenT
canal with drill bits and taps. The plate should be contoured
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, periosteal elevator, Gelpi
suficiently to open the pelvic canal.
retractors, Myerding retractors, blunt Hohmann retractor,
Kerm bone-holding forceps, pointed reduction forceps, plate
POStOPeRAtIVE EVAluATION
reduction forceps, plating equipment, high-speed drill
Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and
implant placerment.
PREPARATION AND POSITIONING
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from dorsal midline to
POStOPeratIVe Care
mid-tibia and from 10 cm cranial to the iliac crest to the tail
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash
head caudally. Position the animal in lateral recumbency, with
the affected limb up. Drape the limb out from a hanging position
repeated at 6-week intervals until fracture healing is observed.
to allow maximal manipulation during surgery. A cancellous
bone graft is usually unnecessary.
EXPECTED OUTCOME
Bone healing is usually seen in 6 to 12 weeks. Animals should
PROCEDURE
experience an excellent returm to fumction. Generally, plates are
Approach: Incise skin and subcutaneous tissue over the
 not removed after bone healing unless there are problems with
ventral third of the iliac wing from the cranial extent of the iliac
the irmplant.
crest to 1 cm to 2 cm beyond the greater trochanter caudally.
Incise the fascia to separate the tensor fasciae latae muscle and
middle gluteal muscle cranially, and the tensor fasciae latae and
superficial gluteal muscle caudally. Sharply dissect cranially
References
to separate the middle gluteal muscle and long head of the
1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
tensor fascia latae muscle. Elevate the deep and middle gluteal
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
muscles from the lateral surface of the ilium. Sharply dissect
Saunders, 2004.
2. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures: lial frac-
the origin of the middle gluteal from the cranial wing of the
tures. In Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis,
iliurm for additional exposure and easier reduction.’ Maintain
Mosby, 2002.
exposure using Gelpi retractors and by placing a blunt
 3. Olmstead ML, Matis U: Fractures of the pelvis. In Brinker WO,
Hohrmann retractor under the dorsal siurface of the proximal
Piermattei D, Flo GL (eds): Handbook of Small Animal Orthopedics
bone segment (Plate 66A).
and Fracture Repair, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997.
Chapter 66
IlIAl BOdY FRaCtures
177
Ｐlate 66
Middle gluteal muscle
Deep gluteal muscle
Shaft of
ilium
178
Part two · surGIcal procedures for fractures
PelVIS
Transverse or Short Oblique
ChaPter 67
Acetabular Fractures
INDICATIONS
 Candidates include animals with transverse or short oblique fractures
through the dorsal rim of the acetabulum.
(Plate 67B). Otherwise, maintain reduction manually. Visualize the
alignment of the articular surface by distracting the femoral head from
ObJeCtIVeS
the acetabulum.
· To achieve anatomic articular surface reduction and rigid fixation to
 Stabilization: Position a contoured acetabular plate or recon-
encourage full retum to function and minimize development of
struction plate on the dorsal rim of the acetabulum so at least two plate
degenerative joint disease
 s sas ad a e  o a a sas
cranial fragment?d (see Plate 67B). Movethe plate to allow three screws
AnatOMIC CONSIdeRatIONS
purchase in the caudal segment if the fracture involves the cranial
The hip joint is a ball-and-socket joint composed of the femoral head
acetabulum. Close the wound by suturing the gemelli and internal obtu-
and acetabulum. The normal conformation; surrounding musculature
rator tendons to their point of insertion. Reduce and stabilize the
(i.e., gluteals, intermal and extermal rotators, and the iliopsoas muscles);
greater trochanter with two Kirschner wires and a tension band wire
suction-like effect of the synovial fluid; and ligament of the femoral
(Plates 67C and 67D). Suture the fascial layers, subcutaneous tissue,
and skin.
eral face of the acetabulum, with the round ligament on the medial face.
The fibrous joint capsule originates from the lateral acetabular rim and
CAUTIONS
inserts onto the femoral neck. The sciatic nerve courses dorsomedial to
The sciatic nerve must be protected. It is important to avoid penetrating
the acetabulum.
deep into the pelvic canal or into the articular surface with drill bits,
taps, or screws. Accurate plate contouring is essential for maintaining
EQUIPMENT
articular surface alignment.
·Surgical pack, Senn retractors, periosteal elevator, Gelpi retractors,
Myerding retractors, blunt Hohmann retractor, Kern bone-holding
POStOPeratIVe EVAluatION
 Radiographs should be evaluated for joint alignment and implant
 drill and K-wire driver, Kirschner wires, orthopedic wire, wire twister,
placement.
wire cutter
PoStoperatiVe care
PrEPARATION AND POSITIONING
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash walking,
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from dorsal midline to mid-tibia,
 umtil the fracture has healed. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week
and from l10 cm cranial to the iliac crest to the tail head caudally.
intervals until the fracture is healed. Slow leash walking and range-of-
Position the animal in lateral recumbency, with the affected limb up.
motion exercises for the hip should be encouraged.
ndu peu moie on uoisod suy e og ano qu aun aei
Expected outcome
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks. Animals should experi-
PrOCEDURE
ence a good return to function if anatomic reconstruction is achieved
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue starting 3 cm to
4 cm proximal to the dorsal ridge of the greater trochanter and curving
reduction is not anatomic.? Plate removal is generally not necessary.
3 cm to 4 cm, following the cranial border of the femur. Incise the
Kirschner wires and orthopedic wire may be removed after bone
supericial leaf of the fascia lata at the cranial border of the biceps
healing if the implants irritate the soft tissues.
femoris muscle, and retract the muscle caudally. Incise the deep leaf of
the fascia lata, and carry the incision proximally through the insertion
 of the tensor fasciae latae muscle at the greater trochanter and along
the cranial border of the superficial gluteal muscle. Incise through the
References
insertion of the superficial gluteal muscle at the third trochanter.
 1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
Reflect the superficial gluteal muscle proximally, and the biceps femoris
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
caudally, to find and visualize the course of the sciatic nerve. Perform
Saunders,2004.
an osteotomy of the greater trochanter with an osteotome and mallet or
2. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures:
with Gigli wire. Reflect the gluteal muscles and greater trochanter from
the joint capsule with a periosteal elevator. Pre-place a suture through
ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
the insertions of the gemelli muscles and tendon of the intermal obtu-
3. Braden TD, Prieur WD: New plate for acetabular fractures
rator, and incise both structures together at the trochanteric fossa.
 Technique of application and long-term follow-up evaluation. J Am
Elevate the gemelli muscles from the caudolateral surface of the
Vet Med Assoc 188:1183, 1986.
acetabulum with a periosteal elevator. Use the suture to retract the
4. Dyce J, Houlton JEF: Use of reconstruction plates for repair of
muscles proximally and caudally (Plate 67A). Incise the joint capsule to
acetabular fractures in 16 dogs. J Small Anim Pract 34:547, 1993.
expose the articular fracture.
 5. Anson LW, DeYoung DJ, Richardson DC, et al: Clinical evaluation of
Reduction: Expose the tuber ischium, and place a Kern bone-
canine acetabular fractures stabilized with an acetabular plate. Vet
holding forceps on it. Use caudal segment control to reduce the frac-
Surg 17:220, 1988.
CHAPTeR 67
TranSVerSe Or ShOrt OblIQue ACEtabular fraCturES
179
PlAte 67
Osteotomy of the.
 greater trochanter
Tensor fasciae
Superficial gluteal muscle
latae muscle
(retracted proximally)
(retracted cranially)
 Gemelli muscles incised
Sciaticnerve
Osteotomy of the
greater trochanter
Vastus lateralis muscle
C
180
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
FEMVR
Proximal Femoral
Chapter 68
Physeal Fractures
INDICATIONS
Stabilization with Three Kirschner Wires: Insert the
Candidates include animals with Salter I and Salter II fractures
wires frorm the lateral aspect of the femur, paralleling the
of the physis. Occasionally this injury is accompanied by a
fermoral neck anteversion angle. Place the wires parallel to one
trochanteric physeal fracture.
another and position them in the femoral neck so that they lie
in a triangle. Drive the wires until the points are just visible at
ObJeCtIVeS
the fracture surface (see Plate 68B). Reduce the fracture, and
● To achieve anatomic reduction and fracture stabilization
drive the pins into the femoral epiphysis. Estimate the distance
 into the epiphysis, and mark an adjacent pin to provide a guide
AnatomiC CoNSIderAtIONS
(see 68C; the distance between the pin chuck and the forceps
The proximal femoral physis lies between the femoral epiphysis
on the adjacent pin, b, is equal to the distance the pin will be
and femoral neck, and provides neck length until maturity. The
driven into the epiphysis, αa). Drive the rermaining wires into the
blood supply to the femoral epiphysis is a series of cervical
femoral epiphysis using a similar guiding process. Move the
ascending vessels lying outside the femoral neck that cross the
joint through a normal range of motion after each wire to
 sa      o s
ensure that it has not penetrated the articular surface. Bend the
must provide stability against rotational and shearing forces.
pins at the lateral surface, and cut off the excess (Plate 68D).
Closure is routine.
EQUIPMENT
Stabilization of a Trochanteric Physeal Fracture
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Myerding
with a Tension Band Wire: Reduce the trochanter, and
retractors, Hohrmann retractors, pointed reduction forceps,
secure it with a pointed reduction forceps. Start two Kirschner
wires in the fragment, and drive therm perpendicular to and
wire driver, wire cutter
across the physis to lodge in the medial cortex of the proxirmal
femur. Drill a transverse hole in the major bone segment, and
PrEPARATION ANd POSITIONING
pass a figure-eight wire through the hole and aroumd the
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from dorsal midline to
Kirschner wire. Tighten the wire (see Plate 68D).
mid-tibia. Position the animal in lateral recumbency, with the
 affected limb up. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to
CAUTIONS
allow maximal manipulation during surgery. A cancellous bone
graft is not necessary.
the Kirschmer wires.
PROCEDURE
POStOPErATIVE EVALUATION
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue 5 cm
Radiographs should be evaluated for reduction and implant
proximal to the greater trochanter, curving distally adjacent to
 position. Frog leg and extended hip views may help pin position
the cranial ridge of the trochanter, and extending distally for
visualization
 5 cm over the proximal femur. Incise between the tensor fasciae
latae muscle and deep border of the biceps femoris muscle
PoStoperatiVe care
and superficial gluteal muscle. Retract the tensor fasciae latae
The animal should be confined, with activity lirmited to leash
cranially, the biceps caudally, and the middle gluteal muscle
walking for 3 to 4 weeks. Radiographs should be evaluated in 4
proximally. Incise the deep gluteal tendon close to its attach-
to 6 weeks.
ment on the trochanter for one third to one half of its width.
Reflect the vastus lateralis distally to expose the hip joint.
Expected outcome
Incise the joint capsule (or enlarge the traumatic tear) parallel
          
to the long axis of the femoral neck near its proximal ridge.
Premature closure of the physis may result in a misshapen
Continue the joint capsule incision laterally through the point of
femoral head. Partial resorption of the fermoral neck (apple
origin of the vastus lateralis muscle on the cranial face of the
coring effect) usually occurs, but this rarely causes a problem.
proximal femur (Plate 68A).2
Reduction: Grasp the proximal fermur with a pointed
References
reduction forceps, and retract the femoral neck distally so that
1. Tillson DM, McLaughlin RM, Roush JK: Fractures of proximal
it lies cranial and level with the acetabulurm (Plate 68B).
femoral physis in dogs. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 18(1l):1164,
Derotate the femur, and slide the fracture surface of the femoral
1996.
neck caudally into the matching surface of the femoral epiph-
 2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
 ysis. Hold the reduction by pressing against the proximal piece
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
in the acetabulum (Plate 68C).
Saunders,2004.
Chapter 68
 Proximal femoral physeal fractures
181
Plate 68
Tensor fasciae
latae muscle
retracted cranially
Middle gluteal muscle
 retracted proximally
 Deep gluteal muscle
Incision in joint capsule
Vastuslateralismuscle
Biceps femoris muscle
 retracted caudally
B
Distance a = b
C
182
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
FEMVR
Femoral Neck Fractures
Chapter 69
INDICATIONS
visualization is not adequate for anatormic reduction and place
 Candidates include anirmals with transverse and short oblique
ment of implants.?
femoral neck fractures.
Reduction: Place two Kirschner wires so they lie at the
most proximal and distal level of the fracture surface. Drive the
OBJeCTIVeS
pins either from medial to lateral beginming at the fracture sur-
· To achieve anatomic reduction and rigid fixation of the
face or from the lateral surface medially, to exit and lie flush at
fracture to allow early returm to fumction
the fracture surface (Plate 69B). Reduce the fracture, and drive
the Kirschner wires into the fermoral epiphysis to maintain
AnatomIC CONSIderatIonS
reduction (Plate 69C)
The femoral neck/femoral shaft junction in the frontal plane is
Stabilization: Drill a thread hole through the femoral
known as the angle of inclination. This angle is normally 135
epiphysis with the appropriate-sized drill bit parallel to and
degrees and should be approximated when surgical reduction is
centered between the Kirschner wires (see Plate 69C). Measuire
performed. The normal angle of anteversion is 15 to 20 degrees
the length of screw needed, and tap the thread hole. Insert a
and must be considered when inserting screws or pins into the
partially threaded cancellous screw, 2 mm shorter than the
femoral neck.
length measured, so that all the threads cross the fracture plane
and are seated into the femoral head. Leave one or both wires
EQUIPMENT
in place to serve as antirotational devices (Plate 69D). Close the
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Hohmann
incision routinely.
retractors, Myerding retractors, periosteal elevator, Kirschmer
wires, bone screws and instrumments for inserting bone screws,
CAUTIONS
high-speed drill and wire driver, wire cutter
It is important to follow the anteversion angle of the femoral
neck with the implants and to avoid penetrating the articular
preparatIon And pOSItioninG
surface with Kirschmer wires and the bone screw.
Prepare the rear lirmb circurmferentially from dorsal midline to
mid-tibia. Position the animal in lateral recuumbency, with the
POStOPERATIVE EVALUATION
affected limb up. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to
Radiographs should be evaluated for reduction and implant
allow maximal manipulation during surgery. Prepare the ipsilat-
nndun diau Aeu smana d papuaxa pue sal Soig uoisod
eral wing of the ilium for cancellous bone graft harvest.
position visualization.
PROCEDURE
POStOPeratIVe Care
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue 5 cm
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash
proximal to the greater trochanter, curving distally adjacent to
walking. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals
the cranial ridge of the trochanter, and extending distally for
umtil the fracture has healed.
 5 cm over the proximal femur. Incise between the tensor fasciae
latae muscle and deep border of the biceps femoris muscle and
Expected outcome
superficial gluteal muscle. Retract the tensor fasciae latae
Bone healing is usually seen within 6 to 12 weeks. Instability at
cranially, the biceps caudally, and the middle gluteal muscle
the fracture site can result in delayed umion and implant failure.
proximally. Incise the deep gluteal tendon close to its attach-
ment on the trochanter for one third to one half of its width.
Incise the joint capsule parallel to the long axis of the femoral
References
neck near its proximal ridge. Contimue the joint capsule incision
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Femoral metaphyseal fractures. In Fossum
laterally through the point of origin of the vastus lateralis
  s   z s  rs ) 
muscle on the cranial face of the proximal femur. Reflect the
2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
vastus lateralis ventrally to visualize the fracture surface (Plate
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
69A).? A greater trochanteric osteotomy may be required if
Saunders, 2004.
Chapter 69
Femoral Neck fractures
183
Ｐlate 69
Tensor fasciae
latae muscle
retracted cranially
 Deep gluteal
muscle
Middle gluteal muscle
retracted proximally
Vastus lateralis
muscle
Biceps femoris muscle
retracted caudally
184
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
FeMUR
Distal Femoral Physeal Fractures
Chapter 70
INdICATIONS
are just visible at the fracture surface. Reduce the fracture, and
 Candidates include animals with Salter I and Salter II fractures
  p sis g an o sd a a
 of the distal femoral physis.
opposite cortices (Plate 70C).2
Stabilization with an Intramedullary Pin: Insert a
ObJeCtIVeS
pin through the articular cartilage, cranial to the origin of the
● To achieve fracture stabilization, and anatomic or slight over-
caudal cruciate ligament, to the level of the fracture surface.
reduction of the femoral epiphysis
Reduce the fracture, and direct the pin in a normograde fashion
proxirmally into the femur to exit at the trochanteric fossa. The
AnatOmIC CONSIderatIONS
pin should contact the caudal surface of the medullary canal
The distal femoral growth plate is shaped like a W and lies at
 proxirmal to the fracture. Cut the distal part of the pin, and coum-
the joint capsule reflection. A lateral arthrotomy is necessary
tersink it below the level of the articular cartilage. Cut the
for exposure. The configuration of the growth plate and cancel-
excess pin off below the skin above the trochanteric fossa.? Add
lous bone surface provide some rotational stability.
a cross pin at the fracture to establish rotational stability if nec-
essary (Plate 70D). Close the incision routinely.
EQUIPMENT
● Surgical pack, Senm retractors, Gelpi retractors, blunt
CAUTIONS
Hohrmann retractor, periosteal elevator, Kerm bone- holding
The epiphyseal bone is soft: it is important to avoid excessive
forceps, pointed reduction forceps, Steinmann pins and
bone forceps pressure. To avoid the sciatic nerve, the hip
Kirschmner wires, Jacob pin chuck, wire cutter
a a taum pane qu a pue papuaxa aq pmous
medullary pin is driven through the trochanteric fossa.
PreparaTIOn ANd POSItIOninG
Prepare the rear lirmb circurmferentially from dorsal midline to
POStOPeratIVe EValuatION
tarsus. Position the animal in lateral recumbency, with the
Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and
implant placement.
allow maximal manipulation during surgery. A cancellous bone
graft is not necessary.
PoStOperatiVe Care
The animal should be confined, with activity lirmited to leash
PROCEDURE
walking. Physical therapy and early returm to function are
Approach: Incise skin and subcutaneous tissue on the cra-
necessary to avoid extensor tie down. Radiographs should be
nial lateral surface, with the incision centered over the palpable
evaluated in 4 to 6 weeks.
end of the femoral metaphysis. Make a parapatellar arthrotormy
through the distal fascia lata and joint capsule, continuing the
Expected outcome
incision proximally along the caudal border of the vastus later-
Rapid bone healing is usually seen in 3 to 4 weeks. Premature
alis muscle through the interrmuscular septum of the fascia lata.
Reflect the quadriceps muscles, patella, and patella tendon
very young animals.
medially to expose the articular surface of the femoral condyles
(Plate 70A).
Reduction: Reduce the fracture by levering the condyles
References
cranially and distally with a blunt Hohmann retractor placed
between the fracture fragments. Maintain reduction during pin
1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
placement by placing a Kerm bone-holding forceps on the lateral
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
 aspect of the distal fermoral metaphysis. Place a pointed reduc-
Saunders, 2004.
2. Sukhiani HR, Holmburg DL: Ex vivo biomechanical comparison of
tion forceps from the trochlear surface to the jaws of the Kerm
pin fixation techniques for canine distal femoral physeal fractures.
(Plate 70B).
Vet Surg 26:398, 1997.
Stabilization with Crossed Pins: Position two pins to
3. Stigen O: Supracondylar femoral fractures in 159 dogs and cats
enter the epiphysis at a point cranial to the medial and lateral
treated using a nomograde intramedullary pinning technique. J small
epicondyles, and drive them proximally to a point where they
Anim Pract 40:519, 1999.
CHAPter 70
 DIstal Femoral physeal fractures
185
PlAte 70
Quadriceps muscles, patella, and
patella tendon reflected medially
Fascia latae and biceps
 femoris muscles retracted
Joint capsule incised
Lateral head of the
gastrocnemius muscle
Lateral
collateral
ligament
186
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
FeMUR
Application of an Intramedullary
Chapter 71
Pin or Interlocking Nail to the Femur
INDICATIONS
bone-holding forceps, Jacob pin chuck, IM pins, cerclage
Candidates include animals with single or commimuted femoral
wire, wire tightener, wire cutter, extermal fixator clarmps and
diaphyseal fractures.
connecting bars (or ILN equipment, including high-speed
drill),bone curette for harvesting graft
ObJeCTIVES
● To achieve anatomic reduction of single fracture lines or
PrEPARATION AND POSITIONING
restoration of normal bone aligmment for nonreducible com-
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from dorsal midline to
minuted fractures
tarsus. Position the animal in lateral recumbency, with the
 The intramedullary (IM) pin is used in animals with high
affected limb up. Drape the limb out frorm a hanging position to
fracture-assessment scores. The IM pin neutralizes bending
allow maximal manipulation duuing surgery. Prepare the ips-
forces at the fracture; it is cormbined with cerclage wire for long
ilateral proximal hurmerus or ipsilateral ilial wing for surgery for
oblique fractures and with extermal fixation for transverse or
harvesting cancellous bone graft.
short oblique fractures to neutralize rotational and axial com-
pressive forces. The interlocking nail (ILN) neutralizes bending,
PROCEdUrE
rotational, and axial compressive forces at the fracture; it can
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue on the
be used for animals with medium and low fracture-assessment
lateral surface of the thigh, from the greater trochanter to the
scores.
femoral condyles. Incise the tensor fascia lata along the cranial
border of the biceps femoris to expose the vastus lateralis and
AnAtOMIC CONSIderATIONS
biceps femoris muscles. Retract the muscles to expose the
The narrowest part of the medullary canal, the isthmus, is
femur.? Insert the IM pin into the proximal fermur in either a nor-
located within the proximal third of bone, just distal to the third 
 mograde or retrograde manner. Extend the hip and adduct the
trochanter. The distal femur has a pronoumced cranial bow in
 limb when retrograding the IM pin, to avoid injuring the sciatic
most dogs, but it is straight in the cat. Both anatomic features
nerve (Plate 71A)? Insert the LN in a normograde manmer,
constrain the size of the IM pin or ILN selected. The
starting at the trochanteric fossa. Use an "open but do not
trochanteric fossa is directly in line with the medullary canal,
disturb the fragments" techmique to expose the proximal and
allowing normograde or retrograde placement of an IM pin and
 distal bone segments with minimal disturbance of the fracture
mormograde placement of the LN. The adductor magnus
hematoma and bone fragments for nonreducible fractures.*
muscle attaches to the caudal surface of the femur and serves 
 Incise the skin, and create soft tissue tunmels to the bone for
as a guide for rotational alignment. Additionally, the greater
fixator pin placement.
trochanter is 90 degrees to the patella when the rotational align-
Continued
ment of the femur is correct.
EQUIPMENT
● Surgical pack, periosteal elevator, Gelpi retractors, Myerding
or Hohmann retractors, pointed reduction forceps, Kern
CHAPTER71
Application of An Im pin or interlockinG Nail tO the femur
187
PLATE 7 1
Biceps femoris
muscleretracted
Shaft of the femur
Vastus
lateralis
Adductor magnus
muscle
muscle
retracted
Vastus
 intermedius 
muscle
188
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
Reduction: Place an IM pin (sized to equal 70% to 80% of
POStOPErATIVE EVALUATION
the medullary canal at the isthrmus) in the proximal segment.
Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and
 Retract the pin within the medullary canal of the proximal seg-
implant placement.
ment. Reduce transverse and short oblique fractures by tenting
the bone ends and levering the bone back into position. Reduce
POStOPeraTIVe Care
long oblique fractures by distracting the bone segments and
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash
 approximating the fracture surfaces. Use pointed reduction for-
walking, umtil the fracture is healed. Extermal fixator manage
ceps to manipulate the bone segments into reduction. Drive the
 s    ao   s 
IM pin distally to seat in the femoral condyle. Maintain the
Physical therapy is needed to restore stifle range of motion.
reduction manually for transverse fractures and with pointed
Radiographs should be evaluated in 6 weeks. Fixator pins
reduction forceps for oblique fractures. Reduce comminuted
should be removed after radiographic signs of bone bridging are
nonreducible fractures by distracting the distal end with the IM
observed. If a tie-in is used, the top fixation pin and its conmec-
pin or ILN and aligning the major segments of the bone.
tion to the IM pin should be retained. Radiographs should be
Stabilization: Apply an IM pin and a type Ia extermal
repeated at 6-week intervals until the fracture is healed. The IM
fixator to the lateral surface of the femur to stabilize a trans-
 pin should be removed when the fracture has healed.
verse or short oblique fracture. Place fixation pins in the meta-
physis of each segment and close to the fracture line. The
Expected outcome
extermal fixator can be connected or tied in to the IM pin to
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks, depending on
strengthen the fixation (Plate 71B). Apply an IM pin and mul-
fracture and signalment of the animal.
tiple cerclage wires to a long oblique fracture (Plate 71C). An
extermal fixator can be added for additional strength. Apply an
ILN and four screws to the femur to treat comminuted nonre
References
ducible fractures (Plate 71D).
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Decision making in fracture management.
 In Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby,
CAUTIONS
2002.
 To avoid penetrating the sciatic nerve when retrograding the IM
2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
pin, the limb should be held in a hip extended and adducted
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
position while the pin exits the trochanteric fossa. It is impor-
Saunders, 2004.
3. Palmer RH, Aron DN, Purinton PT: Relationship of femoral
tant to avoid the femoral head and distal joint surface with the 
 intramedullary pins to the sciatic nerve and gluteal muscles after 
IM pin or ILN. The range of motion of the stifle should be pal-
 retrograde and normograde insertion. Vet Surg 17:65, 1988.
pated to detect pin interference in the joint. Angular and rota-
4. Aron DN, Palmer RH, Johnson AL: Biologic strategies and a
tional alignment should be monitored during the realignment of
balanced concept for repair of highly comminuted long bone frac-
comminuted fractures.
tures. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995.
CHAPTER71
Application Of An Im pin Or InterlockinG Nail tO the femur
189
PLATE 7 1
190
Part two · surgical procedures for fractures
FeMUR
lication of a Plate
ChaPter 72
to the Femur
INDICATIONS
fractures. Reduce comminuted nonreducible fractures by distracting
Candidates include animals with single or comminuted femoral diaphy-
the distal segment with an IM pin (sized to equal 40% to 50% of
seal fractures.
the medullary canal at the isthmus) and aligning the major segments of
the bone (see Plate 72A). Be sure to restore length and normal rota-
ObJeCTIVES
tional alignment to the bone. Precontour the plate to the cranial caudal
· To achieve anatomic reduction and compression of single fracture
radiographic view of the contralateral femur to prevent angular defor-
lines or restoration of normal bone alignment for nonreducible com-
mities.
minuted fractures
Stabilization: Apply an appropriately contoured plate to the
 The plate is used as a compression plate for transverse or short
lateral surface of the femur. The plate can function as a compression
oblique fractures, and it is combined with lag screws to compress long
 pe n asn sar c   ( a aed
oblique fractures. The plate is used as a bridging plate for nonreducible
fratures; as a neutralization plate to support a reconstructed fracture
comminuted fractures and may be combined with an intramedullary
(Plate 72C); or as a bridging plate, spanning a nonreducible commin-
(IM) pin to reduce strain on the plate and to extend fatigue life of the
uted fracture (Plate 72D).
fixation. The plate neutralizes bending, rotational, and axial compres-
sive forces.
CAUTIONS
To avoid penetrating the sciatic nerve when retrograding the IM pin, the
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
limb should be held in a hip extended and adducted position while the
The plate is placed on the lateral surface of the femur. The trochanteric
pin exits the trochanteric fossa. It is important to avoid the femoral
fossa is directly in line with the medullary canal, allowing normograde
head and distal joint surface with the IM pin or bone screws. The range
or retrograde placement of an IM pin. The adductor magnus muscle
of motion of the stifle should be palpated to detect implant interference
attaches to the caudal surface of the femur and serves as a guide for
in the joint. Angular and rotational alignment should be monitored
rotational alignment. Additionally, the greater trochanter is 90 degrees
 during the realignment of comminuted fractures.
to the patella when the rotational alignment of the fenmur is correct.
POStOperatIVe EVAluatION
EQUIPMENT
Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and implant
· Surgical pack, periosteal elevator, Gelpi retractors, Myerding or
placement.
Hohmann retractors, pointed reduction forceps, Kern bone-holding
POStOPErATIVe Care
pins, high-speed drill, plating equipment, bone curette for harvesting
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash walking.
graft
Physical therapy is needed to restore stifle range of motion.
Radiographs should be evaluated in 6 weeks. If left long, the IM pin
PrePAratION ANd POSItIONinG
should be removed after signs of bone bridging are observed.
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from dorsal midline to tarsus.
 Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals until the fracture is
 Position the animal in lateral recumbency, with the affected limb up.
healed. Plate removal may be necessary after the fracture heals.
Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow maximal manipu-
lation during surgery. Prepare the ipsilateral proximal humerus or ipsi-
Expected outcome
    g     
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks, depending on fracture
 and signalment of the animal.
PROCEDURE
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue on the
lateral surface of the thigh, from the greater trochanter to the femoral
References
condyles. Incise the tensor fascia lata along the cranial border of the
 1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
biceps femoris to expose the vastus lateralis and biceps femoris mus-
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
cles. Retract the muscles to expose the fenmur. Insert the IM pin into the
Saunders, 2004.
proximal femur in either a normograde or retrograde manner.? Use an
2. Palmer RH, Aron DN, Purinton PT: Relationship of femoral
xoid a asodxa on anban ,seng an qs pou op nq uado,
intramedullary pins to the sciatic nerve and gluteal muscles after ret-
imal and distal bone segments with minimal disturbance of the fracture
rograde and normograde insertion. Vet Surg 17:65, 1988.
hematoma and bone fragments for nonreducible fractures (Plate 72A).
3. Aron DN, Palmer RH, Johnson AL: Biologic strategies and a bal.
Reduction: Reduce transverse and short oblique fractures by
anced concept for repair of highly comminuted long bone fractures.
tenting the bone ends and levering the bone back into position. Reduce
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995.
long oblique fractures by distracting the bone segments and approxi-
4. Johnson AL, Smith Cw, Schaeffer DJ: Fragment reconstruction and
 mating the fracture surfaces. Use pointed reduction forceps to manipu-
bone plate fixation compared with bridging plate fixation for
late the bone segments into reduction. Maintain the reduction manually
treating highly comminuted femoral fractures in dogs: 35 cases
(1987-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:1157, 1998.
CHAPTER 72
ApplicatiON Of A Plate tO the femUr
191
PLATE 72
Vastus
lateralis
 muscle
retracted
Biceps femoris
muscle retracted
Shaft
of femur
Adductormagnus
Vastus
muscle
intermedius
muscle
192
Part twO · surGIcal procedures for fractures
FEMVR
ication of an External Fixator
Chapter 73
to the Femur
INDICATIONS
affected limb up. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to
Candidates include animals with single or commimuted femoral
allow maximal manipulation during surgery. Prepare the ipsilat-
diaphyseal fractures.
eral proximal humerus or ilial wing for harvesting a cancellous
bone graft.
ObJeCTIVES
● To achieve anatormic reduction of single fracture lines or
PROCEDURE
restoration of normal bone alignment for comminuted
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue on the
fractures
lateral surface of the thigh, from the greater trochanter to the
The stiffness of the fixator can be increased for animals with
femoral condyles. Incise the tensor fascia lata along the cranial
low fracture-assessment scores by adding fixation pins, incor-
border of the biceps femoris to expose the vastus lateralis and
porating an intramedullary (IM) pin or using biplanar frames.
biceps femoris muscles.? Retract the muscles to expose the
The IM pin and fixator combination resists axial loading,
femur (Plate 73A). Insert the IM pin into the proximal fermur in
bending, and rotational forces at the fracture.
either a normograde or retrograde manner. Use an "open but do
not disturb the fragments" technique to expose the proximal
AnatomIC COnSIderatIonS
and distal bone segments with minimal disturbance of the frac-
The narrowest part of the medullary canal, the isthmus, is
ture hematoma and bone fragments for nonreducible fractures.
located within the proximal third of bone, just distal to the third
Incise the skin, and create soft tissue tunmels to the bone for
trochanter. The distal femur has a pronoumced cranial bow in
fixator pin placement.
Reduction: Place an IM pin (sized to equal 60% to 70% of
constrain the size of IM pin selected. The trochanteric fossa is
the medullary canal at the isthmus) in the proximal segment.
directly in line with the medullary canal, allowing normograde
 Retract the pin within the medullary canal of the proximal seg-
or retrograde placement of an IM pin. The adductor magnus
 ment. Reduce transverse and short oblique fractures by tenting
muscle attaches to the caudal surface of the femur and serves
the bone ends and levering the bone back into position. Reduce
as a guide for rotational alignment. Additionally, the greater
long oblique fractures by distracting the bone segments and
trochanter is 90 degrees to the patella when the femur is in
approximating the fracture surfaces. Use pointed reduction for-
ceps to manipulate the bone segments into reduction. Drive the
prohibits use of bilateral frames in the proximal femur.
pin distally to seat in the femoral condyle. Maintain the reduc-
tion manually for transverse fractures and with pointed reduc
EQUIPMENT
tion forceps for oblique fractures. Reduce comminuted
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, smal Hohmanm retractors,
nonreducible fractures by distracting the distal femur with the
Gelpi retractors, Myerding retractors, periosteal elevator,
IM pin and aligning the major segments of the bone (see Plate
 Kerm bone-holding forceps, pointed reduction forceps, Jacob
73A). Be sure to restore length and normal rotational alignment
pin chuck, IM pins, low-speed power drill, extermal fixation
to the bone.
equipment, pin cutter, bone curette for harvesting graft
Continued
PrePArAtION ANd POSItIONING
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from dorsal midline to
tarsus. Position the animal in lateral recumbency, with the
CHAPTER73
ApplicatiON Of AN External FixatOr tO the femur
193
PLATE 73
Vastus
lateralis
muscle
retracted
Bicepsfemoris
 muscle retracted
 Shaft
of femur
Adductormagnus
Vastus
muscle
intermedius
muscle
194
Part two · surgical procedures for fractures
Stabilization: Apply an IM pin and a type Ia extermal
 monitor healing. The fixator should be destabilized by removing
fixator to the lateral surface of the femur. Place fixation pins in
the umilateral frame (from a type Ia and IM pin combination) or
the metaphysis of each segment and close to the fracture line.
the cranial frame (from a modified type Ib fixator) when bone
The extermal fixator can be connected or tied in to the IM pin to
bridging is observed. If a tie-in is used, the top fixation pin and
strengthen the fixation (Plate 73B).4 Apply a modified type Ib
its connection to the IM pin should be retained. The IM pin, the
extemal fixator and an IM pin to a comminuted nonreducible
remaining extermal fixator, or both should be removed when the
fracture.? Place a cancellous bone autograft at the fracture site
fracture has healed.
(Plate 73C). Long oblique fractures benefit from cerclage wire
[xa pu d  a on uoe u uoxg mas st ro
Expected outcome
fixator (Plate 73D).
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks, depending on
fracture and signalment of the animal. The animal will experi-
CAUTIONS
ence limited function while the external fixator is in place but
 It is important to avoid major nerves, vessels, and joint surfaces
should eventually have a good returm to function.
with the fixation pins and to avoid the distal joint surface with
the IM pin. The range of motion of the stifle should be palpated
to detect pin interference in the joint. Rotational alignment
References
should be monitored during the realignment of comminuted
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
fractures.
 fracture management: Decision making in fracture management. In
'so 'smot is a puz fams euy ius () M1 umsso
POStOPeraTIVe EValuaTION
2002.
Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and
2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
implant placement. Rotational malalignments should be cor-
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
rected by loosening the clamps and realigning the fixation pins
Saunders, 2004.
on the connecting bar.
3. Aron DN, Palmer RH, Johnson AL: Biologic strategies and a bal-
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995.
4. Aron DN, Dewey C: Experimental and clinical experience with an
Gauze sponges should be packed around the pins, and the
sponges should be secured with a bandage. The animal should 
IM pin external skeletal fixator tie-in configuration. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatol 4:86, 1991.
be confined, with activity limited to leash walking. Extermal
5. Aron DN: External skeletal fixation system application to the
humerus and femur. In Proceedings of the loth Annual Complete
needed. Physical therapy is needed to restore stifle range of
Course in Extermal Skeletal Fixation, University of Georgia,
motion. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals to
127-141, 2002.
Chapter 73
ApplicatiOn Of An External FixatOr tO the femur
195
Ｐlate 73
Cancellous
bone
autograft
196
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
TibIal Fractures
Proximal Tibial Physeal Fractures
Chapter 74
and Tibial Tuberosity Fractures
INDICATIONS
 's    s  s s
Candidates include animals with Salter I and Salter II fractures
through the medial cortex. Drive a second wire from the medial
of the proximal tibial physes.
tibial epiphysis across the physis, into the metaphysis, and
through the lateral cortex. Bend the wires to prevent migration
OBJECTIVES
and aid removal (Plate 74C).2
● To achieve anatomic reduction of the proximal tibial physis
Stabilization of an Avulsion of the Tibial Tuberosity:
and fracture stabilization
Drive two Kirschner wires into the tuberosity and across the
physis to lodge in the proximal tibia. Check the repair to see if
ANAtOMIC CONSIdeRaTIONS
stabilization is sufficient to prevent avulsion of the fracture. If
The medial aspect of the proximal tibia is covered only with
not, place a tension band wire by drilling a transverse hole in
skin, subcutaneous tissue, and crural fascia and can easily be
the tibial crest and passing a figure-eight wire through the hole
and around the Kirschner wires. Tighten the wire (Plate 74D).
lies caudal to the medial surface of the proximal tibia.
Most repairs require a tension band wire.
EQuIPMENT
CAUTIONS
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi
 It is important to avoid damaging the physeal cartilage during
retractors, periosteal elevator, pointed reduction forceps,
reduction and to avoid penetrating the articular cartilage with
Kirschmer wires or small Steinmann pins for large dogs,
the Kirschner wires.
orthopedic wire, wire tightener, pin chuck or high-speed wire
driver, wire cutter or pin cutter
PoStOperatIVe eValuatION
 Radiographs should be evaluated for reduction and implant
preparatIOn ANd pOSItioninG
placement.
Prepare the rear limb circurmferentially from the hip to below
the hock. Position the animal in dorsal recumbency for greater
POStOPErATIVe Care
flexibility. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow
The animal should be confined, with activity lirmited to leash
walking. Radiographs should be evaluated in 3 to 4 weeks. The
is ummecessary.
tension band wire should be removed at 3 weeks to allow
physeal fumction. Additional implant removal may be required
PrOCEdUre
if soft tissue irritation occurs.
Approach: Incise the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and crral
fascia craniomedially from the distal fermur to the proximal
Expected outcome
diaphysis of the tibia to expose the fracture. Retract the skin
Rapid bone healing is usually seen, but premature closure of
laterally to expose the lateral tibial epiphysis. Elevate the fascia
the physis will probably occur. Prermature closure of the
and muscle to expose both medial and lateral surfaces of the
tibial tuberosity physis in a very youmg animal may affect stifle
fracture (Plate 74A).
conformation
Reduction: Reduce the proximal physeal fracture by
extending the stifle and gently levering the epiphysis into
References
position. Maintain reduction using a pointed reduction forceps
1. Piermattei D, Flo GL: Brinker, Piermattei, and Flo's Handbook of
(Plate 74B). Reduce the avulsed tibial tuberosity by extending
Small Animal Orthopedics and Fracture Repair, 3rd ed. Philadelphia,
the limb and putting pressure on the tuberosity. Maintain
WB Saunders, 1997.
reduction with a pointed reduction forceps (see Plate 74B)
 2. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures: Tibia and
Stabilization of a Proximal Tibial Physeal Fracture:
fibular physeal fractures. In Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery,
Drive a Kirschner wire from the lateral surface of the tibial
2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
CHAPTER74
197
Ｐlate 74
 Patellar
ligament
Cranial tibial
muscle
198
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
TibIAl FrACTureS
Distal Tibial Physeal Fractures
Chapter 75
INDICATIONS
reduction with pointed reduction forceps or with manual
 Candidates include animals with Salter I and Salter II fractures
 pressure.
 of the distal tibial physis.
Stabilization with Crossed Kirschner Wires: Drive
a Kirschner wire from the medial malleolus, across the physis,
ObJeCtIVeS
into the tibial metaphysis, and through the lateral cortex (Plate
● To achieve anatomic reduction of the distal tibial physis and
75B). Drive a second wire from the medial aspect of the distal
fracture stabilization
tibial metaphysis, across the fracture into the epiphysis, while
avoiding the articular surface (Plate 75C). Altermatively, drive
AnatoMIC ConSideratIOnS
the second wire frorm the lateral aspect of the tibial epiphysis or
The medial malleolus of the distal tibia and the lateral malleolus
the fibular malleolus into the tibia.? In larger dogs, the second
of the fibula extend distal to the articulating surfaces of the
wire may driven from the fibular malleolus across the fibular
distal tibia and talus. The long and short parts of the medial
fracture and into the proximal segrment of the fibula (Plate 75D).
collateral ligaments arise from the medial malleolus of the tibia.
The long and short parts of the lateral collateral ligarments arise
CAUTIONS
from the lateral malleolus of the fibula. These ligaments are
It is important to avoid damaging either the physeal cartilage or
essential for hock stability. Tendons of the cranial tibial and
articular cartilage.
long digital extensor muscles cross the cranial surface of
the distal tibia. The medial saphenous vein crosses the medial
POStOPErATIVE EVALUATION
surface of the distal tibia.
Radiographs should be evaluated for reduction and irmplant
placement.
EQuipMenT
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi
PoStOperatiVe Care
retractors, periosteal elevator, pointed reduction forceps,
 A lateral splint should be used to support the fixation.? The
Kirschmer wires (or small Steinmann pins for large dogs), pin
animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash
chuck or high-speed wire driver, wire cutter or pin cutter
walking. Radiographs should be evaluated in 4 weeks. Implant
removal may be required if soft tissue irritation occurs.
PreParatION ANd POSItIONING
Prepare the rear limb circurmferentially from hip to below the
Expected outcome
hock. Position the animal in lateral recurmbency, with the affected
 Rapid bone healing is usually seen, but premature closure of the
limb up or in dorsal recumbency for greater flexibility. Drape
physis will probably occur.
ndeu euxeu moe on uomisod sueq e uog ano qu a
lation during surgery. A cancellous bone graft is unmecessary.
References
PROCEDURE
1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue on the
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders, 2004.
cranial medial surface from the distal diaphysis to the tarsus to
 2. Piermattei D, Flo GL: Brinker, Piermattei, and Flo's Handbook of
expose the medial surface of the fracture (Plate 75A).' Altema-
Small Animal Orthopedics and Fracture Repair, 3rd ed. Philadelphia,
tively, make a cranial skin incision and retract the extensor ten-
WB Saunders, 1997.
dons. This approach allows visualization of the fibula.?
 3. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures: Tibia and
Reduction: Carefully reduce the physeal fracture in order
fibular physeal fractures. In Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery,
to avoid crushing or injuring the physeal cartilage. Maintain
2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
CHAPTER 75
DIstal tibIal phySeal fractures
199
Plate 75
Tendon of
 cranial tibial 
muscle
Tendon of
caudal tibial
Medial
muscle
collateral
ligament
200
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
TibIAl FrACTureS
Malleolar Fractures
Chapter 76
INDICATIONS
wires, and tighten it. Drill a transverse hole in the fibula prox-
Candidates include animals with transverse or oblique medial
imal to the fracture, and pass a figure-eight wire through the
 or lateral malleolar fractures.
hole. Drive a Kirschner wire into the lateral malleolar fragment,
across the fracture line, and proximally into the fibula. Pass the
ObJeCtIVeS
figure-eight wire around the Kirschner wire and tighten it (Plate
● To achieve anatomic reduction of the malleoli and distal tibial
76C). Alternatively, if the fibula is too small to pass a Kirschner
articular surface, convert the tensile forces resulting from the
wire proximally, drive the Kirschner wire through the lateral
pull of the collateral ligaments to cormpressive forces at the
malleolar fragment and into the tibia.
fracture, and stabilize the tarsus
 To apply the lag screw, drill a gliding hole (equal to the
diameter of the threads on the screw) in the medial malleolar
ANAtOMIC CONSIdeRatIONS
fragment. Place a drill sleeve into the gliding hole, reduce the
Tendons of the cranial tibial and long digital extensor muscles
fracture, and drill a smaller hole (equal to the core diameter of
cross the cranial surface of the distal tibia. The medial saphe
the screw) across the tibia. Measure, tap, select, and place a
nous vein crosses the medial surface of the distal tibia. The long
     o   
and short parts of the medial collateral ligaments arise from the
should occur (Plate 76D). To stabilize the fibular malleolus with
medial malleolus of the tibia. The long and short parts of the
a screw, treat the fibular malleolus as the fragment by drilling
lateral collateral ligaments arise from the lateral malleolus of
a u anou padde a pue eqy a yno aoy su a
the fibula. These ligaments are essential for hock stability. The
tibia (Plate 76E).2
medial malleolus of the distal tibia and the lateral malleolus of
the fibula extend distal to the articulating surfaces of the distal
CAUTIONS
tibia and talus.
application. It is important to take care when manipulating
EQUIPMENT
and drilling the small malleolar fragments to avoid further
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi
fragmentati on.
retractors, periosteal elevator, pointed reduction forceps,
Kirschmer wires, orthopedic wire, wire tightener, wire cutter,
POStOPeratIVe EValuatION
Radiographs should be evaluated for articular surface reduction
speed wire dhriver or drill
 and implant placement.
PrePaRATION ANd POSITIONING
PoStoPeratIVe Care
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from hip to below the
The animal should be confined, with activity lirmited to leash
hock. Position the animal in dorsal recurmbency. Drape the limb
walking. A bivalve cast should be used to extermally support the
out from a hanging position to allow maximal manipulation
tarsus for 4 to 6 weeks.? The cast should be destabilized as
 during surgery. A cancellous bone graft is ummecessary.
healing progresses by elirminating the cranial part of the case.
Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals.
PROCEDURE
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue on the
Expected outcome
cranial medial surface from the distal diaphysis to the tarsus to
Bone healing is usually seen in 6 to 12 weeks with animals expe
expose the medial malleolus (Plate 76A). Approach the lateral
riencing a good return to fumction. Degenerative joint disease
malleolus via a lateral skin incision over the malleolus, and use
blumt and sharp dissection of surrounding tissues to expose the
fracture (Plate 76B).'
may be necessary if soft tissues are irritated.
Reduction: Reduce the fracture (i.e., medial malleolus of
References
the tibia or lateral malleolus of the fibula) by securing the
fragment with small or mini pointed reduction forceps and
1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
placing it into aligmment. In some cases, the fragment may be
Saunders, 2004.
secured with pointed reduction forceps; in other cases, mamual
2. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures: Tibia and
maintenance of reduction is necessary.
fibular metaphyseal and epiphyseal fractures. In Fossum TW (ed):
Stabilization: Start two Kirschner wires in the medial
Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
malleolar fragment. Drive the wires across the fracture line to
 Piermattei D, Flo GL: Brinker, Piermattei, and Flo's Handbook of
lodge in the tibia. Place a transverse dhrill hole in the tibia, pass
Small Animal Orthopedics and Fracture Repair, 3rd ed. Philadelphia,
a figure-eight wire through the hole and around the Kirschner
WB Saunders, 1997.
CHAPTer 76
Malleolar fractures
201
PLAte 76
Tendon of
lateral extensor
digital muscle 
Tendon of
peroneus
brevis muscle
Tendon of
flexor hallucis
longus muscle
Saphenous
vein
Tendon of 
 cranial tibial 
Fibula 
muscle
Caudal
Tendon of
caudal tibial
Medial 
branch of
collateral
Lateral‘
lateral
muscle
ligament
extensor
saphenous
 retinaculum 
artery and vein
Tendon of 
peroneus
longus muscle
Tendon of
lateral extensor
digital muscle
202
Part two · surGIcal procedures for fractures
TIbIAl FRACtuReS
Application of an Intramedullary
Chapter 77
Pin or Interlocking Nail to the Tibia
INDICATIONS
tracting the bone segments and approximating the fracture surfaces.
Candidates include animals with single or comminuted tibial diaphyseal
o shuaas auoq au aemdu on sdaog uoonpan pauod asn
fractures.
reduction. Maintain the reduction manually for transverse fractures and
with pointed reduction forceps for oblique fractures. Reduce commin-
ObJECTIVES
uted nonreducible fractures by distracting the distal bone end with the
· To achieve anatomic reduction of single fracture lines or restoration
IM pin or ILN and aligning the major segments of the bone.
of normal bone alignment for nonreducible comminuted fractures
Stabilization: Apply an IM pin and type Ia external fixator to
 The intramedullary (IM) pin is used in animals with high fracture.
the cranial medial surface of the tibia to stabilize a transverse fracture
assessment scores. The IM pin neutralizes bending forces at the frac-
(see Plate 77B). The IM pin should be smaller (50-60% of the medullary
ture, and is combined with cerclage wire for long oblique fractures and
canal) to accommodate the fixation pins within the medullary canal
with extermal fixation for transverse or short oblique fractures to neu
Place fixation pins in the metaphysis of each segment and about l cm
tralize rotational and axial compressive forces. The interlocking nail
on either side of the fracture line. Apply an IM pin and cerclage wire to
     s   (
a long oblique fracture (Plate 77C). Apply an ILN and four screws to the
the fracture; it can be used for animals with medium and low fracture-
tibia for treatment of comminuted nonreducible fractures (Plate 77D).
assessment scores.'
CAUTIONS
AnAtOMIC CONSIderATIONS
It is important to avoid the joint surfaces with the IM pin or ILN. The
The tibia has a pronounced S-shaped curve in most dogs. The proximal
range of motion of the hock should be palpated to detect pin interfer-
and distal tibial articular surfaces cover the ends of the long bone,
ence in the joint. Rotational alignment should be monitored during the
leaving little nonarticular surface to introduce an IM pin or ILN. The
realignment of comminuted fractures.
nous nerve cross the medial aspect of the tibia. The medial and lateral
POStOPErATIVE EVALUATION
malleoli extend distally to the distal tibial articular surface.
 Radiographs should be evaluated for fracture reduction or bone align-
 ment and implant placement.
EQuipment
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Hohmann retractors
POStOPeratIVe Care
periosteal elevator, pointed reduction forceps, Kern bone-holding
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash walking.
forceps, Jacob pin chuck, IM pins, cerclage wire, wire tightener, wire
External fixator management includes daily pin care and pin packing as
cutter, extermal fixator clamps and connecting bars (or ILN equip-
needed. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals. Fixator
ment, including high-speed drill), bone curette for harvesting cancel-
pins should be removed after radiographic signs of bone bridging are
lous graft
observed. Radiographs should continue at 6-week intervals until the
fracture has healed. The IM pin should be removed when the fracture
PrEPARATION ANd POSITIONING
 has healed.
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from mid-femur to the pha-
langes. Position the animal in dorsal recumbency. Drape the limb out
Expected outcome
from a hanging position. Roll the animal slightly to access the medial
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks, depending on fracture
aspect of the limb. The ipsi-lateral proximal humerus serves as a can-
and signalment of the animal.
cellous bone graft donor site.
PROCEdURE
Approach: Insert the IM pin or the ILN from a point on the proximal
References
medial tibial plateau midway between the tibial tuberosity and the
 1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery
medial tibial condyle (Plate 77A).? Perform a limited medial approach
and fracture management, decision making in fracture management.
through the skin and subcutaneous tissue to the fracture site for
In Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis,
reducible fractures (see Plate 77A).? Use an *open but do not disturb the
Mosby, 2002.
fragments" technique to expose the proximal and distal bone segments
 2. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fractures: Tibial and
with minimal disturbance of the fracture hematoma and bone frag-
fibular diaphyseal fractures. In Fossum Tw (ed): Small Animal
ments for nonreducible fractures. Incise the skin, and create soft tissue
Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
tunnels to the bone for fixator pin placement (Plate 77B).
3. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
Reduction: Place an IM pin (sized to equal 60% to 70% of the
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
medullary canal at the isthmus) in the proximal segment.? Retract the
Saunders, 2004.
pin within the medullary canal of the proximal segment. Reduce trans-
 4. Dueland RT, Johnson KA, Roe SC, et al: Interlocking nail treatment
verse and short oblique fractures by tenting the bone ends and levering
of diaphyseal long bone fractures in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
the bone back into position. Reduce long oblique fractures by dis-
214:59, 1999.
CHAPTER77
ApplicatiOn Of An Im Pin Or InterlockinG Nail tO the tibIa
203
Ｐlate 77
Shaft of the tibia
Cranial branch
of medial saphenous
artery and vein
Saphenousnerve
204
Part two · surgical procedures for fractures
TIbIAl FRACTUReS
ication of a Plate to the Tibia
ChaPter 78
INDICATIONS
with pointed reduction forceps for oblique fractures. Reduce com-
Candidates include animals with single or comminuted tibial
minuted nonreducible fractures by distracting and aligming the
diaphyseal fractures.
major segments of the bone. An intramedullary pin can be used to
obtain axial alignment and distraction of the distal segment. Be
OBJeCTIVES
sure to restore length and norrmal rotational aligrrment to the
● To achieve anatormic reduction and compression of single
bone. Precontour the plate to the cranial caudal radiographic view
fracture lines or restoration of normal bone alignment for
of the contralateral tibia to prevent angular deformities.
nonreducible comminuted fractures
Stabilization: Apply an appropriately contoured plate to
the medial surface of the tibia. The plate can fumction as a
short oblique fractures, and it is combined with lag screws to
compression plate (Plate 78B) when used to compress trans-
compress long oblique fractures. The plate is used as a bridging
verse or short oblique fractures; as a neutralization plate to sup
plate for nonreducible comminuted fractures and may be com-
port a reconstruicted fracture (Plate 78C); or as a bridging plate,
bined with an intramedullary pin to reduce strain on the plate
with or without an intramedullary pin, spanming a nonreducible
and to extend fatique life of the fixation. The plate neutralizes
comminuted fracture (Plate 78D).4
bending, rotational, and axial compressive forces.
CAUTIONS
ANAtOMIC CONSIdErATIONS
Plates are generally placed on the medial surface of the tibia.
tibial physis with the plate or screws. It is also important to
The tibia has an S-shaped curve that must be reproduced when
avoid the distal articular surface. Careful attention must be paid
contouring the plate. The cranial branch of the medial saphe
to bony anatomic landmarks to avoid rotation of the distal
nous artery and vein and the saphenous nerve cross the medial
segment. Failure to contour the plate to the normal S shape
aspect of the tibia. The medial malleolus extends distally to the
of the tibia will result in a valgus angulation of the lirmb.
distal tibial articular surface.
Monocortical screws may be necessary to avoid interference
with the intr amedullary pin.
EQUIPMENT
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Hohmann
POStOPErATIVE EVALUATION
retractors, periosteal elevator, pointed reduction forceps,
 Radiographs should be evaluated for fracture reduction or bone
self-centering plate-holding forceps, high-speed drill, plating
alignment and irmplant placement.
equipment, bone curette for cancellous bone harvest
POStOPeratIVe CAre
PreparaTIOn And pOSItIoninG
The animal should be confined, with activity limited to leash
Prepare the rear limb circumferentially from mid-fermur to the
walking. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week intervals
phalanges. Position the animal in dorsal recumbency. Drape the
umtil the fracture has healed.
limb out from a hanging position. Roll the animal slightly
to allow access to the medial side of the bone. The ipsilateral
Expected outcome
proximal humerus serves as a cancellous bone graft donor site.
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks, depending on
fracture and signalment of the animal. Plate removal may be
PROCEDURE
necessary after the fracture heals if soft tissue iritation or cold
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue on the
sensitivity occurs.
craniomedial surface of the tibia. Incise the crural fascia, and
retract the cranial tibial muscle cranially and the flexor muscles
References
caudally to expose the medial surface of the tibia (Plate 78A).?
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
Use an "open but do not disturb the fragments" technique to
fracture management, plates and screws. In Fossum TW (ed): Small
expose the proximal and distal bone segments with minimal
Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
disturbance of the fracture hematoma and bone fragments for
 2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
nonreducible fractures.?
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders, 2004.
Reduction: Reduce transverse and short oblique fractures
3. Aron DN, Palmer RH, Johnson AL: Biologic strategies and a bal-
by tenting the bone ends medially and levering the bone back into
anced concept for repair of highly comminuted long bone fractures.
position. Reduce long oblique fractures by distracting the bone
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995.
segments and approximating the fracture surfaces. Use pointed
4. Houlton JEF: Fractures of the tibia. In Brinker WO, Olmstead ML
Sumner-Smith G, et al (eds): Manual of Internal Fixation in Small
tion. Maintain the reduction manually for transverse fractures and
Animals. New York, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
Chapter 78
ApplicatiON Of A plate tO the tibiA
205
Ｐlate 78
Shaftofthe tibia
Cranial branch
of medial saphenous
artery and vein
Saphenous nerve
206
Part twO · surGIcal procedures for fractures
TIbIAl FRACTUReS
Application of an External Fixator
Chapter 79
to the Tibia
INDICATIONS
power dril, extermal fixation equipment, pin cutter, bone
Candidates include animals with single or comminuted tibial
curette for harvesting cancellous graft
diaphyseal fractures.
PrEPARATION AND POSITIONING
ObJeCTIVeS
Prepare the affected rear limb circumferentially from midline to
● To achieve anatomic reduction of single fracture lines or
foot. Position the animal in dorsal recumbency, and suspend the
restoration of normal bone alignment for comminuted
  o  a      
fractures
 hanging position. Prepare the ipsilateral proximal humerus for
 The stiffness of the fixator can be increased in animals with
cancellous bone autograft harvest if open reduction is used.
low fracture-assessment scores by adding fixation pins and by
using biplanar or bilateral frames.' The fracture and fixator
PROCEDURE
combination, or the fixator alone, resists axialloading, bending,
Approach: Perform a limited medial approach to the fracture
and rotational forces at the fracture.
site for reducible fractures (Plate 79A).。 Use closed reduction
techmiques for nonreducible fractures (Plate 79B).4 Incise the
AnatomIC COnSIderatIOnS
skin, and create soft tissue tumnels to the bone for pin placerment.
The tibia has a triangular cross section in the proximal third,
Reduction: Lower the table to allow the animal's weight to
with a round cross section over the rest of the bone. The prox-
fatigue the muscles. For single fracture lines, lever the frag-
imal tibial joint surface parallels the distal tibial joint surface.
ments into position through the limited surgical approach (see
The medial aspect of the tibia is covered only by skin and sub-
Plate 79A). Maintain the reduction manually for transverse frac-
cutaneous tissue. The saphenous artery vein and nerve spiral
tures and with reduction forceps for oblique fractures. For
across the medial surface of the mid-diaphysis. In general,
closed reduction of comminuted fractures, manipulate the
fixation pins can be applied on the medial, cranial medial, cra-
proximal and distal fixation pins to align the joint surfaces.
nial lateral, and lateral surfaces of the bone.
Medial and lateral angular alignment is correct when the
proximal and distal joint surfaces are parallel (see Plate 79B).
EQUIPMENT
Make sure that cranial caudal joint surfaces are also parallel.
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, small Hohmanm retractors,
Check rotational alignrment by fexing the stifle and hock after
Gelpi retractors, periosteal elevator, Kerm bone-holding for-
raising the table: the paw should align with the tibia. Maintain
ceps, pointed reduction forceps, Jacob pin chuck, low-speed 
reduction by securing the connecting bars (see Plate 79B).
Continued
CHAPTER 79
ApplicatiON Of An EXterNal FixatOr tO the TibIa
207
PLATE 79
208
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
Stabilization: Apply a type Ia extermal fixator to the
with a bandage that also incorporates the paw. The animal
cranial medial surface of the tibia (Plate 79C). Place fixation
should be confined, with activity limited to leash walking.
pins in the metaphysis of each segment and about 1 cm from
External fixator management includes daily pin care and pin
either side of the fracture line. At least two (and preferably
packing, as needed. Radiographs should be repeated at 6-week
three) fixation pins are placed in each bone segment. Use posi-
intervals to evaluate healing. When bone bridging is observed,
tive profile end-threaded pins to increase pin bone interface sta-
the fixator should be destabilized by removing one umilateral
bility. Apply a type Ib frame by placing a unilateral frame on the 
frame (type Ib fixator), selected fixation pins (type Ia or type II
cranial medial surface of the tibia and an additional
 x n  a o q    o ox
unilateral frame on the cranial lateral surface of the tibia (Plate
extermal fixator should be removed when the fracture is healed.
79D) Connect the biplanar frames with articulating bars. Apply
a type II frame by inserting transfixation pins through the meta-
ExpeCted Outcome
 physes and additional fixation pins about l cm from either side
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks, depending on
of the fracture. Place additional pins when there is adequate
fracture and signalment of the animal. Animals may experience
bone (Plate 79E). Long oblique fractures benefit from cerclage
lirmited fumction while the extermal fixator is in place, but good
wire or lag screw fixation in addition to the extermal fixator (see
retuun to function generally occurs after the fixator is removed.
Plate 79D).
CAUTIONS
References
 It is important to avoid major nerves, vessels, and joint surfaces
1. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
with the fixation pins and to avoid the tibial crest when
 fracture management: Decision making in fracture management. In
Fossum TW (ed): Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby,
be monitored during the reduction. Intraoperative radiographs
2002.
are useful to verify joint aligmment during closed reductions.
 2. Aron DN, Palmer RH, Johnson AL: Biologic strategies and a bal-
anced concept for repair of highly comminuted long bone fractures.
PoStoperatiVe evaluation
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995.
Radiographs should be evaluated for fracture reduction or bone
3. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
alignment and implant placement. Angular malalignments
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
should be corrected by loosening the clamps on the pins
Saunders, 2004.
 4. Johnson AL, Seitz SE, Smith CW, et al: Closed reduction and type II
through the distal segment and repositioning the clamps
external fixation of severely comminuted fractures of the radius and
attaching the fixation pins to the conmecting bar.
tibia in dogs: 23 cases (1990-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1445,
1996.
PoStoperatiVe Care
 5. Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
To limit postoperative swelling, gauze sponges should be
fracture management, external skeletal fixators. In Fossum TW (ed):
packed around the pins, and the sponges should be secured
Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2002.
CHAPTER 79
ApplicatiON Of An EXterNal FixatOr tO the TibIa
209
PLATE 79
210
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
CArPuS/tArSuS
Radial Carpal Bone Fractures
Chapter 80
INDICATIONS
fractures. Reduce large fragments, and maintain reduction with
Candidates include animals with transverse or short oblique
 pointed reduction forceps or Velsellum forceps.
fractures of the radial carpal bone. Dogs with radial carpal bone
Stabilization: Stabilize dorsal slab fractures with one or
fractures may present with chronic lameness; these conditions
od n s g  ss  s o
are more appropriately treated with carpal arthrodesis.
 a haq a sau mas a rn os aug
surface. Stabilize oblique fractures through the body of the
ObJeCtIVeS
radial carpal bone with a lag screw (Plate 80C). Place the head
● To achieve anatomic reduction of the articular surface
of the serew through the insertion of the radial collateral liga-
and rigid fixation of the fracture to promote fumction and
ment to avoid interfering with the joint motion.3
minimize degenerative changes
CAUTIONS
ANATOMIC CONSIdeRATIONS
 It is important to avoid articular surfaces with implants.
The carpus is composed of the proximal (radial, ulnar, and
accessory) and distal rows (ll, Ⅲl, and IV) of carpal bones. The
POStOPeraTIVe EValuaTION
radial carpal bone articulates primarily with the radius and
Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and
a sn nn  a i  im  a s sa
implant placement.
most common carpal bone fractured in companion animals
POStOPeraTIVe CAre
EQUIPMENT
A soft, padded bandage should be placed to control bleeding
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Gelpi retractors, Hohmann
and swelling. A splint should be used for 3 weeks. The animal
retractors, periosteal elevator, pointed reduction forceps,
S         
Velsellum forceps, high-speed drill, bone screws and equip
bone healing is complete. Radiographs should be repeated at
ment for inserting bone screws
6-week intervals until fracture healing is observed.
preparatIon And pOSItIoninG
Expected outcome
Prepare the forelimb circurmferentially from elbow to digits.
 Position the anirmal in dorsal recummbency for greater flexibility.
on fracture and signalment of the animal. Degenerative
[xu moe o oisod q e uog nno qu a a
joint disease and limited range of motion of the carpus may
manipulation during surgery. A cancellous bone graft is not
Occur.1.4
generally lsed.
PrOCEDURE
Approach: An Esmarch bandage or tourmiquet may be used
References
to control bleeding. Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue
1. Tomlin JL, Pead MJ, Langley-Hobbs SJ, et al: Radial carpal bone
mid-dorsally, beginning 3 crm to 4 cm proximal to the radio
fractures in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:173, 2001.
carpal joint and extending distally to the mid-metacarpus.
 2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
Continue deep dissection between the extensor carpi radialis
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders,2004
tendon and the common digital extensor tendon to expose the
3. Piermattei DL, Flo GL: Fractures of the pelvis. In Brinker,
joint capsule. Retract the tendons, and incise the joint capsule
Piermattei, and Flo's Handbook of Small Animal Orthopedics and
to expose the radial carpal bone (Plate 80A).?
Fracture Repair, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997.
Reduction: Remove fragments that are too small to
 4. Li A, Bennet D, Gibbs C, et al: Radial carpal bone fractures in 15
handle and fragments that are associated with chronic
dogs. J Small Anim Pract 41:74, 2000.
Chapter 80
RadIal Carpal BOne fraCtures
211
Plate 80
Abductor pollicis
longus muscle
Radial ~
Radius
carpal bone
Tendon of common
Tendonofextensor
digital extensor tendon
carpi radialis muscle
Palmar
Dorsal
Short radial
collateral
ligament 
212
Part two · surGical procedures for fractures
CArPuS/tArSuS
Tarsal Fractures
Chapter 81
INDICATIONS
pointed reduction forceps, holding the talar body to the cal-
Candidates include animals with transverse or short oblique
canels.
fractures of the calcaneus or the neck of the talus.
Stabilization: For calcaneal fractures, drill a transverse
hole in the proximal segment and in the distal segment. Place a
ObJectIVeS
wire through the proximal hole. Place two Kirschmer wires
● To achieve anatomic reduction and rigid fixation of the
through the proximal bone segment, exiting at the fracture. It
fracture to promote fumction and minimize degenerative
may be necessary to pre-drill the bone for the Kirschner wires.
changes and to convert tension forces to compressive forces
Reduce the fracture, and drive the Kirschner wires distally.
in calcaneal fractures
Retract the wires, cut, and coumtersink them into the calcaneus.
Secure the tension band wire (Plate 81C).? For a talar neck frac-
ANATOMIC CONSIdERATIONS
The calcaneus articulates with the talus to form a stable joint.
head of the talus into the trochlea of the talus (Plate 81D). Drill
Proximally, the Achilles tendon inserts on the tuber calcanei.
the glide hole from inside out before reducing the fracture
The medial and lateral trochleas of the talus articulate proxi-
to center the hole and ensure purchase in the trochlea.
mally with the tibia and fibula, and the body articulates distally
Altermatively, place a screw from the craniomedial surface of
with the central tarsal bone.
the base of the talus into the calcaneus. If the reduction can be
maintained with forceps, the screw may be placed as a position
EQUIPMENT
screw; otherwise, it may be placed as a lag screw (Plate 81E).?
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, Hohmann retractors, Gelpi
retractors, periosteal elevator, pointed reduction forceps,
CAUTIONS
Kirschmer wires, orthopedic wire, wire tighteners, wire
      on   
cutter, high-speed dhill and wire driver, bone screws and
interfere with articular surfaces.
instrurments for inserting bone screws
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION
preparatIon And pOSItioninG
Radiographs should be evaluated for bone alignment and
s n       
implant placement.
Position the animal in lateral recurmbency for calcaneal frac-
tures and in dorsal recurmbency for greater flexibility with talar
POStOPeratiVe Care
fractures. Drape the lirmb out from a hanging position to allow
A soft padded bandage should be placed to control bleeding and
maximal manipulation during surgery. A cancellous bone graft
swelling. A splint should be used for 3 weeks. The animal
is umnecessary.
should be confined, with activity limited to leash walks, until
bone healing is complete. Radiographs should be repeated at
PROCEDURE
6-week intervals until fracture healing is observed. If soft tissue
Approach: For calcaneal fractures, incise the skin, subcuta-
irritation occurs, the orthopedic wire used in the tension band
neous tissue, and deep crural fascia along the lateral surface
should be rermoved after bone healing.
of the calcaneus from just proxirmal to the tuber calcanei dis-
tally to the tarsometatarsal joint. Incise parallel to the lateral
Expected outcome
aspect of the superficial digital flexor tendon, and retract the
 Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks, depending on
tendon medially to expose the caudal surface of the calcaneus
the fracture and signalment of the animal. Degenerative joint
(Plate 81A).′ For talar fractures, incise the skin, subcutaneous
disease and limited range of motion of the hock may occur.
tissue, and deep fascia from the medial malleolus to the
tarsometatarsal joint. Elevate the fascia to expose the bones
References
(Plate 81B).
1.
 Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
Reduction: For the calcaneal fracture, reduce the prox-
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
imal segment by extending the hock and manipulating the frag-
Saunders, 2004.
ment with pointed reduction forceps. Maintain the reduction by
2. Piermattei DL, Flo GL: Fractures and other orthopedic injuries of
driving the Kirschmer wires. For the talar neck fracture, reduce
the tarsus, metatarsus and phalanges. In Brinker, Piermattei, and
the distal fragment by manipulating the fragment with the
 Flo's Handbook of Small Animal Orthopedics and Fracture Repair,
pointed reduction forceps. Maintain reduction manually or with
3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997.
CHAPter 81
TarSal FRaCtureS
213
Plate 81
A
Lateral
Medial
Tendon of
flexor hallucis
longus muscle
Tendon of
gastrocnemius
muscle
Calcaneus
 Tendon of superficial
flexor muscle
Talus
-Tendon of
abductor digiti
quinti muscle
214
PArt tWO · surGICAl PrOCEdUreS FOr FraCturES
Metacarpal bones, metatarsal bones, And digits
Fractures of the Metacarpal
ChaPter 82
and Metatarsal Bones
INDICATIONS
mally across the fracture line to seat in the proximal bone seg-
Candidates include animals with multiple umstable fractures of
ment. Bend the distal end of the pin to prevent migration and to
the metacarpal and metatarsal bones.
simplify removal. Repeat the procedure for at least the third and
fourth metacarpal or metatarsal bones (Plate 82C).?2
ObJeCTIVeS
For older and larger dogs, or animals with expected athletic
● To realign the bones and stabilize the fractures
fumction, use plates or screws (or both) to achieve fracture
stability.* Stabilize oblique or avulsion fractures with lag screws
AnatoMIc conSideratIonS
(Plate 82D, 1). A plate may be used with the lag screws to sup-
The primary weight-bearing bones are the third and fourth
port the repair. Stabilize distal metaphyseal transverse fractures
digits. The superficial dorsal metacarpal or metatarsal artery
courses over the dorsal aspect of the paw. The extensor ten-
fractures with a dynarmic cormpression plate or veterinary
dons course down the dorsal aspect of each digit. The fexor
cuttable plate (see Plate 82D, 3). Stabilize mid-diaphyseal
tendons and superficial and deep metacarpal or metatarsal
transverse fractures with a dymamic compression plate (see
artery and vein lie on the palmar or plantar aspect of the digits.
Plate 82D, 4).
There is minimal soft tissue coverage, and the bones and joints
can be easily palpated.
CAUTIONS
 It is important to avoid placing intramedullary pins where they
EQUIPMENT
will interfere with the joints. The extensor tendons should be
● Surgical pack, Senn retractors, smal Hohmanm retractors,
 protected.
mini pointed reduction forceps, Kirschner wires or small
Steinmann pins, high-speed drill and burr, pin chuck, pin
POStOPErATIVe EVALUATION
cutters, plating equipment, bone curette for harvesting can-
Radiographs should be evaluated for fracture reduction and
cellous bone
 implant placement.
PrEPaRATION ANd POSITIONING
POStOPerAtIVe Care
Prepare the distal limb circumferentially from elbow or stifle to
The fixation should be protected with a splint or cast for 4 to
the digits. Position the anirmal in dorsal recumbency for greater
6 weeks. The animal should be confined, with activity lirmit-
flexibility. Drape the limb out from a hanging position to allow
 ed to leash walking, umtil the fracture has healed. Radiographs
maximal manipulation during surgery. Prepare the proximal
should be repeated at 6-week intervals until the fracture has
humerus or proximal tibia as a donor site for cancellous bone
healed.
harvest.
Expected outcome
PrOCEDURE
Bone healing is usually seen in 12 to 18 weeks. The animal
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue on the
should experience a good returm to fumction if anatomic recon-
dorsal surface of the paw, either on the midline (for fractures of
struction is achieved and maintained.4
the third and fourth bones) or directly over the fractured bone.
Retract the extensor tendons and ligaments of the dorsal
surface of the paw to expose the fractures (Plate 82A).
References
Reduction: Lever transverse fractures into position.
1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the
Maintain reduction with the implants. Use pointed reduction
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
forceps to reduce and maintain the position of oblique
Saunders, 2004.
fractures.
2.
 Johnson AL, Hulse DA: Management of specific fracturesi
Stabilization: Stabilize simple transverse (or very short
Metacarpal, metatarsal, phalangeal and sesamoid fractures and lux-
'o is a p m e  ()  og u so
oblique) fractures in young or small dogs and cats with
Mosby, 2002.
intramedullary pins. Use a high-speed burr to develop a slot
3. Bellenger CR, Johnson KA, Davis PE, et al: Fixation of metacarpal
in the distal dorsal surface of the fractured bone (Plate 82B)
and metatarsal fractures in greyhounds. Aust Vet J 57:205, 1981.
Blumt the tip of the pin to prevent it from penetrating the intact
4.
Muir P, Norris JL: Metacarpal and metatarsal fractures in dogs. J
opposite cortex, and drive the pin through the slot and proxi-
Small Anim Pract 38:344, 1997.
CHAPTER 82
FraCtureS Of the metacarpal ANd metatarsal BOnES
215
PLATE 82
Tendon of common
digital extensor muscle
Palmar
Dorsal
218
PART THREE · SURGICAL PROCEDURES FOR THE SPINE
Ventral Fenestration
ChaPter 83
of Cervical Discs
INDICATIONS'
chondystrophic breeds of dogs. It is characterized by the dys-
Ventral fenestration of the cervical spine is often performed in
trophic calcification of the NP and extrusion of the disc material
combination with ventral decompression and surgical stabiliza-
into the vertebral canal.
tion. It may be performed as a prophylactic or therapeutic
measure for degenerative intervertebral disc (IVD) disease of
EQUIPMENT
the cervical region.
● Standard surgical pack, two medium or large Gelpi retractors
(depending on the size of the dog), bipolar and umipolar
OBJECTIVES
cautery, suction hose and small Frazier suction tip, no. 11
Bard Parker scalpel blade, Adson periosteal elevator, two
bral canal and to resolve clinical signs associated with inver-
tebral disc disease (e.g., pain)
ceps, ear loop, tartar scraper, small bone curette
ANATomIC CONSiderAtIoNS1.2
PrEParATION ANd POSITIONING
The IVD is a complex composite of ligamentous and fibrous
Prepare the patient from the mid-mandible to just past the
tissue; it is located at all interveterbral spaces except C1-2 and
 manubrium. Position the animal in dorsal recumbency, crossing
the fused sacral segments. It is classified as an amphiarthrodial
its forelimbs and securing them caudally. Pay careful attention
joint and collectively constitutes the largest avascular structure
to patient positioning, and make every effort to ensure that the
in the body. Nutition to the discs is via diffusion from the
animal is straight and in tue dorsal recurmbency. Stabilize the
head and neck with towels, sandbags, or a vacuum-activated
movement. The IVD is composed of two anatomically distinct
surgical positioning systerm.* Secure the head by taping the
regions: (l) the anmulus fibrosus and (2) the nucleus pulposus
mandible to the table.
(NP). The anmulus fibrosus is composed of fibrocartilaginous
PROCEDURE
vertebral motion in three directions: (1) lateral, (2) dorsoven-
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue on ven-
tral, and (3) rotation. The ventral and lateral portions of the
tral midline from the caudal aspect of the thyroid cartilage to
anmulus are 1.5 to 3 times thicker than the dorsal anmulus, which
the manubrium. Reflect the skin and subcutaneous tissue medi-
means that the NP is always dorsally eccentric; this explains the
ally and laterally with blunt dissection. Bluntly separate the
 propensity of the mucleus to herniate dorsally. The NP is a gelat-
stermohyoideus and sternomastoideus muscles along the mid-
inous mass that arises from the embryonic notochord. It con-
line. Identify and retract the esophagus and trachea to the left
      s   
with moistened laparotomy sponges and either self-retaining or
network of poorly arranged fibers. In the young animal, the NP
Army-Navy retractors (Plate 83A). Identify the paired carotid
has a high water content, which provides the hydroelastic qual-
 s  go o     
ities needed to maintain fmction. The IVD forms a cushion
Palpate the ventral spinous processes of the vertebral column
between the adjacent bony vertebrae to allow movement, to
minimize and absorb shock, and to unite the segments of the
processes of C6 and the wings of C1 are important anatomic
vertebral column. Age-related metaplastic degeneration results
landmarks that assist in anatomic orientation. Once the IVD
 in significant changes in the biochermistry and biomechanics of
space(s) to be fenestrated have been located, cauterize the mus-
the disc. There are two different types of metaplastic changes
culotendinous attachments of the longus colli muscle to the
that have been described: (1) fibroid and (2) chondroid meta-
ventral spinous processes. The use of cautery will reduce the
plasia. Fibroid metaplasia occurs in nondystrophic breeds. It is
amount of muscular bleeding and improve visualization. Once it
characterized by a slow degeneration or fibrocytic change of
is free of its attachments, elevate the longus colli muscle to
the anmulus fibrosus, resulting in the thinning of the anmulus
expose the ventral anmulus fibrosus at the affected disc space
u jo uogsaiduoo todn osp au jo uogsnoid e pue Aesop
(Plate 83B).
spinal cord. Chondroid metaplasia occurs primarily in the
Continued
*Hug-U-Vac, South Salem, Oregon.
CHAPTER 83
Ventral FenestratiOn Of cerVical dIscs
219
PLATE 83
Sternohyoideus
Longus colli
muscle
muscles
 Trachea
Sternocephalicus
muscle
220
PART THREE · SURGICAL PROCEDURES FOR THE SPINE
Cervical Disc Fenestration: Using a no. 1l blade,
that there was spondylosis and narrowing of the IVD space
excise a rectangular window in the ventral anmulus that is large
associated with the ventral fenestration procedure.
enough to allow removal of the calcified NP (Plate 83C).
Remember that the IVD space angles cranially, and angle the
POStOPeratIVe CAre
instrurmentation accordingly to facilitate complete disc
removal. Remove all disc material with an ear loop, tartar
all neurosurgery patients. Clean, dry, soft, padded bedding is
scraper, or small bone curette (Plates 83D and 83E).
Lavage and close longus colli in one layer with a simple con-
      
tinuous suture patterm. Remove the retractors, and returm the
48 hours or umtil the animal is able to eat and drink without
trachea and esophagus to their normal positions. Lavage the
assistance. Urine output and quantitation should be closely
soft tissues, and close the stermohyoideus and stermomas-
monitored for the first 24 to 48 hours, and bladder expression or
toideus with a simple continuous suture pattem. Close the sub
catheterization (or both) should be provided in those patients
cutaneous tissues and skin in a routine fashion.
mented as soon as the acute postoperative pain has subsided
CAuTIoNS'.3
(usually after 24 hours). Depending on the level of neurologic
Ventral fenestration is a techmically easier procedure to perform
dysfunction, therapy may consist of massage, assisted standing,
in comparison to ventral decompression; however, complete
proprioceptive exercises, and controlled therapeutic exercise.
removal of disc material frorm the vertebral canal is not pos-
Neck and buckle collars should be exchanged for a harness.
sible, and therefore complete resolution of the clinical signs
associated with disc hermiation may not be achievable with this
EXPECTED 0UTCOmE3-5
procedure alone. Animals that display more advanced dysfunc-
tion associated with spinal cord compression (e.g, paresis or
dysfunction. Most animals will improve following surgical inter-
paralysis) are candidates for ventral decompression. In addi-
vention, given a sufficiently long convalescent period.
tion, in vitro studies of cadaveric spines have shown that ven-
tral fenestration produces sagittal instability of the caudal
References
cervical spine, which may contribute to the development of sec-
1. Macy NB, Les CM, Stover SM, et al: Effect of disc fenestration on
ondary instability and subsequent disc hermiation ("domino
sagittal kinematics of the canine C5-C6 intervertebral space. Vet
lesions") at adjacent disc sites.
Surg 28(3):171-179, 1999.
2. Bray JP, Burbidge HM: The canine intervertebral disc. Part two:
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION1.3-6
Degenerative changes—nonchondrodystrophoid versus chondrody-
The neurologic status of the patient should be serially evaluated
strophoid discs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34(2):135-144, 1998.
upon recovery from anesthesia and surgery. Neurologic deterio-
3. Wheeler SJ, Sharp NJH: Cervical disc disease. In Wheeler SJ, Sharp
ration associated with ventral fenestration has been reported in
 NJH (eds): Small Animal Spinal Disorders: Diagnosis and Surgery.
the literature; it is thought to be caused by residual disc mate-
London, Mosby, 1994.
rial hermiating into the canal. Most animals experience a
4. Nakama S, Taura Y, Tabaru H, et al: A retrospective study of ventral
fenestration for disc diseases in dogs. J Vet Med Sci 55(5):781-784,
1993.
recovery times may vary, depending on the severity of neuro-
5. Tomlinson J: Tetraparesis following cervical disc fenestration in two
logic dysfunction. Postoperative radiographs or ancillary
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187(1):76-77, 1985.
imaging (computed tomography or magnetic resonance
6.
.Dallman MJ, Moon ML, Giovannitti-Jensen A: Comparison of the
imaging) of the cervical vertebrae is usually not indicated. A
width of the intervertebral disc space and radiographic changes
clinical stuidy evaluating the width of the IVD space and the
before and after intervertebral disc fenestration in dogs. Am J Vet
radiographic changes before and after IVD fenestration foumd
Res 52(1):140145, 1991.
CHAPTER 83
Ventral feneStratION OF CerVIcal dIscs
221
PLATE 83
222
PART THREE · SURGICAL PROCEDURES FOR THE SPINE
Ventral Cervical Slot
Chapter 84
INDICATIONS'
scalpel blade, Adson periosteal elevator, Senn retractors
Ventral decompression of the cervical spine is performed for
amd/or Army-Navy retractors, DeBakey thumb forceps,
intervertebral disc (IVD) disease of the cervical spine. It is often
Lempert rongeur, Kerrison rongeur, pneumatic drill system
performed in combination with ventral fenestration. Surgical
with burr guard and a variety of sizes of roumd and oval burrs,
candidates for a ventral slot are those animals that have exhib-
bone wax,* gelfoam,f or Avitene Sheets (Microfibrillar
ited multiple bouts of cervical pain, that are umresponsive to
Hemostat).
previous conservative treatment, or that are nonambulatory
Additional instrumentation that is useful for removing
tetraparetic or quadriplegic and that have been diagnosed with
extruded disc material from the vertebral canal includes a Buck
extradural compression of the spinal cord via myelography,
ear curette, Ball burnisher, tartar scraper, double-ended curette,
computed tomography, or magnetic resonance imaging.
Iris spatula, and small bone curette.
ObJECTIVES
PreParATION ANd POSITIONING
● To relieve compression of the cervical spine from extruded or
Prepare the patient from the mid-mandible to just past the
 protruded disc material
 mamubrium. Position the animal in dorsal recumbency, crossing
its forelimbs and securing them caudally. Pay careful attention
ANATOMIC CONSIdERATIONS2-4
to patient positioning, and make every effort to ensure that the
Cervical spinal cord compression accounts for 15% of the
 animal is straight and in tue dorsal recurmbency. The head and
reported cases of IVD in the dog, with 80% occurring in the chon
neck can be stabilized with towels, sandbags, or a vacuum-
 drodystrophic breeds. The most common site of disc protusion
activated surgical positioning system. Secure the head by
is C2-C3, followed by C34 and C7-T1. Clinical signs associated
taping the mandible to the table.
with disc disease can vary from a nerve root signature and neck
pain to quadriplegia, depending on the degree and location of
PROCEDURE
spinal cord compression. Myelography or ancillary imaging of
Approach: Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue on the
ventral midline from the caudal aspect of the thyroid cartilage to
important for both diagnostic confirmation and neuroanatom-
the manubriurm. Reflect the skin and subcutaneous tissue medi-
ical localization of the lesion; they also determine lateralization
ally and laterally with blunt dissection. Blumtly separate the
of the disc extrusion and rule out the presence of multiple
stermohyoideus and stermomastoideous muscles along the mid-
lesions.
line. Identify and retract the esophagus and trachea to the left
 d   ns  n go o  
with moistened laparotomy sponges and either self-retaining or
avoid the internal vertebral venous plexus. The intermal verte-
Army-Navy retractors (Plate 84B). Identify the paired carotid
bral venous plexus or simuses comprise two valveless veins,
sheaths, and gently maneuver them out of the surgical field.
which reside on the floor of the vertebral canal. These two thin-
Palpate the ventral spinous processes of the vertebral column
walled veins converge and diverge at the vertebral midbody and
to locate the appropriate disc space(s). The large transverse
IVD space, respectively. To avoid damage of these vertebral
processes of C6 and the wings of C1 are important landmarks
simuses and instability of the vertebral spine, the dimensions of
that assist in anatomical orientation. Once the IVD space(s) has
the slot must be no greater than one third the width and length
been located, cauterize the musculotendinous attachments of
of the body of the vertebra, centering the slot slightly cranial to
the longus colli muscle to the ventral spinous processes. The
the IVD space (Plate 84A).
use of cautery will reduce the amount of muscular bleeding and
improve visualization. Once it is free of its attachments, elevate
EQUIPMENT
and retract the longus colli muscle to expose the ventral
● Standard surgical pack, two medium or large Gelpi retractors
anmulus fibrosus at the affected disc space and the adjacent ver-
(depending on the size of dog), bipolar and unipolar cautery,
tebral bodies (Plate 84C), and remove the ventral spinous
suction hose and small Frazier suction tip, no. 11 Bard Parker
process with a rongeur (Plate 84D).
Continued
*Bone wax, Ethicon, Johnson & Johnson, Somerville, New Jersey.
Gelfoam, Pharmacia and Upjohn, Kalamazoo, Michigan.
Avitene, Davol, Cranston, Rhode Island.
Hug-U-Vac, South Salem, Oregon.
Chapter 84
Ventral cerVical SlOt
223
PlAte 84
Slot is 1/3 the width
 of the vertebral body
B
Sternohyoideus
muscle
Trachea
Slot is centered
slightly cranial
to interspace
Carotid sheath
 Sternocephalicus
muscle
Longus colli
muscles
224
Part three · surGIcal procedures for the Spine
Ventral Cervical Slot: Drill the proposed ventral slot site
tomography or magnetic resonance imaging) of the cervical ver-
with a pneumatic air drill using a burr of appropriate size (Plate
tebrae is usually not indicated.
84E). Generally, select a burr that is equal to the width of the
slot to promote even bone removal. Slowly trickle warm saline
POStOPeratIVE CAre
over the burr while drilling to prevent heat transfer from the
u paneoipu are puauaseueu ued pue areo aapoddns jeratan
bur to the hemilaminectomy site, and intermittently lavage the
all neurosurgery patients. Clean, dry, soft padded bedding is
entire laminectomy site to remove bone debris and to keep the
important for patients that are nonambulatory or weakly armbu-
  s a  an   p  
smaller bit can be used to remove the edges of inner cortical
48 hours, umtil the animal is able to eat and drink without assis-
bone plate. Any bone bleeding may be controlled with bone
tance. Urine output and quantitation should be closely moni-
wax. Once the inmer cortex has been removed, use a nerve root
tored for the first 24 to 48 hours, and bladder expression or
probe, ear loop, or tartar scraper to palpate the inner bone and
catheterization should be provided for those patients that are
periosteal shelf. When it is thin and pliable, use a probe to pen-
not urinating on a voluntary basis. Rehabilitation may be imple
etrate the site gently and create a long window to allow a
mented as soon as the acute postoperative pain has subsided
Kerrison rongeur to remove any remaining bone in the oblong
(usually after 24 hours). Depending on the level of neurologic
window. If necessary, excise the dorsal longitudinal ligament
dysfunction, therapy may consist of massage, assisted standing,
with a no. 11 blade to visualize and decompress the cord.
proprioceptive exercises, and controlled therapeutic exercise.
 Remove any remaining extruded disc with a Buck ear curette,
Neck and buckle collars should be exchanged for a harness.
ball burmisher, or iris scapula (Plate 84F). Avoid damaging the
venous sinuses that circumferentially surroumd the slot ventral
EXPected 0utcome5.7
to the cord. If a venous sinus is damaged, control the bleeding
Most patients with cervical IVD have a fair to good prognosis;
with the gelfoarm or Avitene Sheets. Wait 5 mimutes for the ces-
however, expected outcomes vary depending on the level of
sation of bleeding before removing the hemostatic devices and
neurologic dysfumction. Most animals improve following sur-
  tds   s xa  
gical intervention, given a convalescence period of reasonable
been fully decompressed, all sinus bleeding should cease.
length (6 to 8 weeks). Recurrence of signs associated with IVD
Closure: Lavage and close the longus colli in one layer with
has been reported within the literature and should be discussed
a simple continuous suture pattem. Remove the retractors, and
with the owner prior to surgery.
retum the trachea and esophagus to their normal position.
Lavage the soft tissues, and close the stermohyoideus and ster-
nomastoideus with a simple contimuous suture patterm. Close
References
the subcutaneous tissues and skin in a routine fashion.
 1. Macy NB, Stover SM, Kass PH: Effect of disk fenestration on sagittal
kinematics of the canine C5-C6 intervertebral space. Vet Surg
CAUTIONS1.5
28:171-179, 1999.
2. Tombs JP: Cervical intervertebral disk disease in dogs. Compend
Proper anatomic orientation is key to the identification of the
correct surgical site. Postoperative or intraoperative radio-
Contin Educ Pract Vet 14:1477-1488, 1992.
3. Lemarie RJ, Partington BP, Hosgood G: Vertebral subluxation fol-
graphs should be taken if there is any doubt about lesion loca-
lowing ventral cervical decompression in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp
tion. Severe hemorrhage can occur as a result of ventral sinus
Ass0c 36(4):348-358, 2000.
laceration. It is important to cross-match any anirmal that is a
 4. Bagley RS, Tucker R, Harrington ML: Lateral and foraminal disk
candidate for a coagulopathy before surgery.
extrusion in dogs. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 18:795-804,
1996.
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION1.5-8
 5. Wheeler SJ, Sharp NJH: Cervical disc disease. In Small Animal
The neurologic status of the patient should be serially evaluated
Spinal Disorders. London, Mosby- Wolfe, 1994.
upon recovery from anesthesia and surgery. Neurologic deteri-
6. Dallman MJ, Giovannitti-Jensen A: Comparison of the width of the
oration associated with ventral fenestration has been reported
 intervertebral disk space and radiographic changes before and after
intervertebral disk fenestration in dogs. Am J Vet Res 52(1):140- 145,
in the literature and is thought to be due to the hermiation of
1991.
residual disc material into the canal. Most amimals experience a
 7. Nakama S, Tabaru H, Yasuda M: A retrospective study of ventral fen-
 decrease in cervical pain associated with IVD disease; however,
estration for disk diseases in dogs. J Vet Med Sci 55(5):781-784,
recovery times may vary depending on the severity of the neu-
1993.
rologic dysfumction and the intraoperative complications.
8.Tomlinson J: Tetraparesis following cervical disk fenestration in two
Postoperative radiographs or ancillary imaging (computed
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187(1):76-77, 1985.
Chapter 84
Ventral cervical slot
225
PLATe 84
一
Slot is centered
 slightly cranial
to interspace
226
Part three · surGIcal procedures for the Spine
Hemilaminectomy
Chapter 85
INDICATIONS1-3
no. 15 Bard Parker scalpel blades, Freer periosteal elevator,
Surgical candidates for a hemilaminectomy are those animals
Senn retractors, Lempert rongeur, Kerrison rongeur, pneu-
that have exhibited multiple bouts of thoracolumbar pain, that
matic drill system with burr guard and a variety of sizes of
round and oval burrs, DeBakey thumb forceps, bone wax,*
   o  o a jo s 
gelfoam,f or Avitene Sheets* (Microfibrillar Hemostat)
diagnosed with cormpression of the spinal cord via myelography,
Additional instrumentation that is useful for removing
computed tomography, or magnetic resonance imaging.
extruded disc material from the vertebral canal includes a Buck
ear curette, Ball burnisher, tartar scraper, double-ended curette,
OBJectiVes1.4
Iris spatula, and small bone curette.
● To decompress the spinal cord of the thoracolurmbar spine
Hermilaminectomy is often performed in combination with
 preparation And positioning 1.4.6.7
lateral fenestrati on.
Position the animal in sternal recurmbency, and prepare the
         
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS5
 a o as a o s  g  hos
The vertebrae are key components of the axial skeleton; they lie
or use a vacuum-activated suurgical positioning system. If
along the midline of the body. Vertebral body anatomy varies
needed, further secure the animal in position with white tape to
depending on the location in the axial skeleton, but each has a
basic structural configuration despite minor differences in mor-
alignment assist in the approach and ensure proper orientation;
phology. Each vertebral bone has a body that lies directly
however, some surgeons prefer that the patient be rotated
beneath the spinal cord. Interposed between and connecting
slightly, with the operated side being most dorsal.
each vertebral body is an intervertebral disc (see Chapter 83 for
an in-depth discussion of disc anatomy). The spinal cord is sur-
PrOCedUre
rounded and protected by the lamina and pedicle, which
Approach:1.4.8.7 Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue on
collectively make up the vertebral arch. Dorsal spinous
dorsal midline centered from the mid-thoracic vertebra to the
processes project from the lamina. In the cranial thoracic ver-
mid-lumbar region, and suture in two quarter drapes to decrease
tebra, these processes are tall and slant caudally; however, they
skin contarmination. The incision location and length will vary
change direction and decrease in size at the anticlinal vertebra,
somewhat depending on the lesion location(s) and the nurmber
usually located at T10. In the lurmbar region, the processes
of sites that need to be decompressed. Incise the thoracodorsal
become more substantial, shorter, and wider. Each vertebra
fascia and supraspinous ligaments with a no. 15 scalpel blade,
also has two sets of articular facets located on the dorsal lateral
extending the incision at least two dorsal spinous processes
aspect of the vertebral arch, which demarcate the position of
proximal and distal to the site(s) to be decompressed. In order
the intervertebral forarmina, where the nerve root exits the
to minimize muscular hemorrhage, deviate the incision toward
spinal canal. In addition to articulating with each other, the tho-
the side of the hemilaminectomy at each dorsal spinous process
racic vertebrae also articulate with a pair of ribs just ventral and
and then returm the incision back to midline. Elevate the epaxial
caudal to the intervertebral foramina. Each rib projects in a per-
 musculature (multifidus thoracis and lumborum muscles) away
pendicular fashion from the vertebral body. Location of the
from the dorsal spinous process, pedicle, and lamina to the
proximal rib head with the vertebra is an important anatormic
level of the articular facet using an Adson or Freer periosteal
elevator. Retract the elevated muscles using two Gelpi self-
space. The articulation of the rib head with the vertebral body
retaining retractors (Plate 85A). Using the bipolar cautery, call
is easily palpated and distinguished from the transverse process
terize the musculotendinous attachments of the longissimus
 of the lurmbar vertebra, which slopes craniolaterally from the
muscles originating on the articular facets, avoiding the nerve
vertebral body. A Freer or other small periosteal elevator may
root coursing deep and caudoventrally under the facet. Elevate
any remaining tissue attached to the exposed facet, larmina, and
tissue dissection.
caudal to the hemilarminectomy, to provide adequate exposure.
EQUIPMENT
Reposition the Gelpi retractors to improve visualization, and
● Standard surgical pack, two medium or large Gelpi retractors
remove the articular facets with a Lempert rongeur (Plate 85B).
(depending on the size of the dog), bipolar and unipolar
cautery, suction hose and small Frazier suction tip, no. 1l and
Continued
*Bone wax, Ethicon, Johnson & Johnson, Somervill, New Jersey.
Gelfoam, Pharmacia and Upjohn, Kalamazoo, Michigan.
Avitene, Davol, Cranston, Rhode Island.
Hug-U-Vac, South Salem, Oregon.
CHAPter 85
HemilAMinectOMY
227
PlAte 85
T13
228
PART THREE · SURGICAL PROCEDURES FOR THE SPINE
Hemilaminectomy:1.4,8 Drill the proposed hemilaminec-
subsided (usually after 24 hours). Depending on the level of
tomy site with a pneumatic air dril using a burr of appropriate
neurologic dysfunction, therapy may consist of massage,
size. Generally, select a burr that is equal to the width of the
assisted standing, proprioceptive exercises, and controlled
hermilarminectomy site to promote even bone removal (Plate
therapeutic exercise. Most overweight animals also benefit
 85C). Slowly tickle warm saline over the burr while drilling to
from a weight loss program, because excessive weight can
prevent heat transfer from the burr to the hemilarminectomy
impair neurologic recovery.
        
remove bone debris and to keep the tissuies moist. Once most of
EXpected 0utcome1-3.12
the bone has been removed, a smaller bit can be used to remove
Most patients with thoracolumbar intervertebral disc disease
the edges of inner cortical bone plate. Any bone bleeding may
have good to excellent progmosis; however, expected outcomes
be controlled with bone wax. Once the inmer cortex has been
will vary, depending on the level of neurologic dysfunction.
removed, use a nerve root probe, ear loop, or tartar scraper to
palpate the inmer bone and periosteal shelf. When it is thin and
90% chance of full recovery. Prognostic indicators for time to
pliable, use a probe to gently penetrate the site and create a
ambulation after hemilaminectomy include the presence of
long window to allow admission of a Kerrison or small Lempert
postoperative volumtary motor function. Most animals improve
rongeur to remove any remaining bone in the oblong window
following surgical intervention given a convalescent period of
(see Plate 85C). Remove the extuded disc with a Buck ear
reasonable length (6 to 8 weeks). Recurrence of signs associ-
curette, ball burmisher, or iris scapula (Plate 85D). Gently pass
ated with intervertebral disc disease has been reported within
a neural probe under and dorsal to the spinal cord to ensure
the literature and should be discussed with the owner prior to
complete decompression. Avoid damaging the venous sinuses
surgery.
ventral to the cord. If a venous sinus is damaged, control the
bleeding with the gelfoam or Avitene Sheets. Wait 5 minutes for
the cessation of bleeding before removing the hemostatic
devices and reinitiating the exploratory. Once the spinal cord
References
has been decompressed, gently lavage the hemilaminectomy
1. Harari J, Marks S: Surgical treatments for intervertebral disc
site, and harvest a fat graft from the subcutaneous region of the
disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 22(4):899-915, 1992.
back. Place the fat graft over the hermilarminectomy site to pre-
2. Kornegay J, Simpson S, Bailey CS, Joseph R: How do I treat?
vent fibrous scarring and adhesion. Suture the epaxial muscular
Degenerative thoracolumbar intervertebral disc disease in small 
fascia in a simple continuous pattern with absorbable suture.
breed dogs. Prog Vet Neuro 4(3):81-83, 1993.
Close the subcutaneous tissues and skin in a routine fashion.
 3. Coates J: Intervertebral disk disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 30(1):77-110, 2000.
4. Seim Hl: Dorsal decompressive laminectomy for T-L disk disease.
CAUTIONS&-11
Canine Practice 20(6):6-10, 1995.
No more than four adjacent contimuous hemilaminectomy sites
 r n u  g  ds 'rs r s
(or, bilaterally, up to two adjacent sites) should be performed to
 NJH (eds): Small Animal Spinal Disorders: Diagnosis and Surgery.
prevent destabilizing the spinal colurmn. Accurate anatomic
London, Mosby, 1994.
identification of the hemilarminectomy site is important for the
 6. Wheeler SJ, Sharp NJH: Thoracolumbar disc disease. In Wheeler SJ,
B jo qdeopen e aams a on od Aams a go ssaons
Sharp NJH (eds): Small Animal Spinal Disorders: Diagnosis and
sterile needle placed in a dorsal spinous process can be used to
 Surgery. London, Mosby, 1994.
assist in vertebral body identification.
 7. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the thoracolumbar verte-
POStOPeRaTIVe EVALuAtION
to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia,
WB Saunders, 2004.
 The neurologic status of the patient should be serially evaluated
8. Schulz KS, Waldron DR, Grant JW, et al: Biomechanics of the tho-
upon recovery from anesthesia and surgery. Urinary continence
racolumbar vertebral column of dogs during lateral bending. Am J
generally returms with the advent of voluntary ambulation.
Vet Res 57:1228-1232, 1996.
9. Corse M, Renberg W, Fris E: In vitro evaluation of biomechanical
POStOPeraTIVe Care
effects of multiple hemilaminectomies on the canine lumbar verte-
bral column. Am J Vet Res 64(9):1139-1145, 2003.
all neurosurgery patients. Clean, dhy, soft, padded bedding is
10. Hill T, Lubbe A, Guthrie A: Lumbar spine stability following hemil-
aminectomy, pediculectomy, and fenestration. Vet Comp Orthop
latory. Maintenance fluid therapy is routine for the first 24 to
Traumatol 13:165-171, 2000.
48 hours or until the animal is able to eat and drink without
l1. Hosgood G: Wound complications following thoracolumbar
laminectomy in the dog: A retrospective study of 264 procedures.
assistance. Urine output and quantitation should be closely
 J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28(1):47-52, 1992.
monitored for the first 24 to 48 hours, and bladder expression or
12. Davis GJ, Brown DC: Prognostic indicators for time to ambulation
catheterization (or both) should be provided in those patients
after surgical decompression in nonambulatory dogs with acute
that are not urinating on a voluntary basis. Rehabilitation may
thoracolumbar disk extrusions: 112 cases. Vet Surg 31(6):513-518,
be implermented as soon as the acute postoperative pain has
2002.
CHAPTER 85
HEMIlAMINECTOMY
229
PLATe 85
230
Part three · surGIcal procedures for the Spine
Fenestration of
Chapter 86
Thoracolumbar Discs
INDICATIONS1-3
retractors, Lermpert rongeur, Kerrison rongeur, DeBakey
Dorsolateral fenestration of the thoracolumbar spine may be
thumb forceps, bone wax,* gelfoam,f or Avitene Sheets
performed as a prophylactic or therapeutic measure for degen-
(Microfibrillar Hemostat).
erative intervertebral disc disease; however, considerable
Additional instrurmentation that is useful for removing in situ
debate exists regarding the indications and therapeutic benefit
calcified disc material from the vertebral canal includes a Buck
 of fenestration. To date, clinical studies have yet to prove its
ear curette, Ball burnisher, tartar scraper, double-ended curette,
Iris spatula, and small bone curette.
addition, thoracolurmbar fenestration has not been proven to
prevent future herniation of discs. In general, most surgeons
PrEParATION ANd POSITIONING
electing to perform this procedure do so in combination with a
Position the animal in sternal recumbency, and prepare the
hemilaminectomy at adjacent intervertebral discs that are
  n  n     
calcifed in situ.
Support the animal with sandbags on each side of the abdomen, 
ObJeCtIVeS
 needed, further secure the animal in position with white tape to
● To prevent hermiation of a degenerative intervertebral disc
into the vertebral canal and to resolve clinical signs associ-
alignment assist in the approach and ensure proper orientation;
ated with intervertebral disc disease (e.g., pain)
however, some surgeons prefer that the patient be rotated
slightly, with the operated side being most dorsal.
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS4.5
A dorsolateral approach (as described here) may be used to
PROCEDURE
gain access to intervertebral disc sites from T10 to L5. Discs
Thoracolumbar Fenestration: After performing the
above and below these sites are not routinely fenestrated via
hemilaminectomy via a dorsal approach (Plate 86A) (see
this approach because of technical difficulties in the approach
Chapter 85), locate the intervertebral disc site(s) to be fenes-
caused by anatomic differences and to avoid inadvertent
trated. Craniolaterally retract the spinal nerve and artery,
damage to the femoral nerve segments. The intervertebral disc
site of the thoracic vertebra lies just cranial and ventromedial to
aspect of the anmulus fibrosis (Plate 86B). With a no. 11 scalpel
the tubercle of the rib and adjacent to the head of the rib. The
blade, resect a rectangular section of the lateral anmular wall
intervertebral disc site of the lurmbar vertebra lies just cranial to
that is large enough to allow access to and removal of the
the area where the transverse process joins the vertebral body.
calcified nucleus pulposus (see Plate 86B). With a tartar
 Retraction of the multifidus thoracis or lurmborum and longis-
simus dorsi muscles with the blunt end of a Senm retractor
remove as much of the calcified disc material as possible (Plate
reveals the spinal nerve and artery, which lie over the lateral
86C). To avoid damage to the peridisc neurovascular structures,
wall of the anmulus fibrosus.
o aoue emopuadad e pe paumas ootoinau a weuu
the longitudinal and transverse axis of the spine. Lavage and
EQUIPMENT
remove the retractors from the epaxial musculature. Suture the
● Standard surgical pack, two medium or large Gelpi retractors
epaxial muscular fascia in a simple continuous patterm with
(depending on the size of the dog), bipolar and unipolar
absorbable suture. Close the subcutaneous tissues and skin in a
routine fashion.
Bard Parker scalpel blade, Freer periosteal elevator, Senn
Continued
*Bone wax, Ethicon, Johnson & Johnson, Somerville, New Jersey.
Gelfoam,Pharmacia and Ujohn, Kalamazoo, Michigan.
Avitene, Davol, Cranston, Rhode Island.
Hug-U-Vac, South Salem, Oregon.
CHaPter 86
FeneStratION Of thOraCOlumbar dIscS
231
Plate 86
B
T13
232
PART THREE · SURGICAL PROCEDURES FOR THE SPINE
CAUTIONS5.6
assisted standing, proprioceptive exercises, and controlled
 Fenestration of the disc space alone is not an appropriate treat-
therapeutic exercise.
 ment in animals with neurologic deficits (e.g., significant ataxia
or loss motor function) because it does not ameliorate spinal
Expected outcome1.6
cord compression stemming from disc extrusion. Animals that
The prognosis varies depending on the level of neurologic dys-
display more advanced dysfunction associated with spinal cord
fumction. Most animals improve following surgical intervention,
compression (e.g., paresis or paralysis) are candidates for
given an adequate convalescent period.
decompression via hermilaminectomy.
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION3.5-8
References
The neurologic status of the patient should be serially evaluated
 1. McKee WM: A comparison of hemilaminectomy (with concomitant
 upon recovery from anesthesia and surgery. Neurologic deterio-
disc fenestration) and dorsal laminectomy for the treatment of tho
ration associated with thoracolumbar fenestration has been
racolumbar disc protrusion in dogs. Vet Rec 130(14):296-300, 1992.
reported in the literature and is thought to be caused by
2. Hill T, Lubbe A, Guthrie A: Lumbar spine stability following hemil-
residual disc material hermiating into the canal. Postoperative
aminectomy, pediculectomy, and fenestration. Vet Comp Orthop
radiographs or ancillary imaging (computed tomography or
Traumatol 13:165-171, 2000.
3. Dallman MJ, Moon ML, Giovannitti-Jensen A: Comparison of the
magnetic resonance imaging) of the thoracolumbar vertebrae is
width of the intervertebral disc space and radiographic changes
usually not indicated.
Res 52(1):140-145, 1991.
POStOPeRaTIVe Care
4. Bray JP, Burbidge HM: The canine intervertebral disc. Part two:
 General supportive care and pain management are indicated in
Degenerative changes nonchondrodystrophoid versus chondrody-
all neurosurgery patients. Clean, dhy, soft, padded bedding is
strophoid discs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34(2):135-144, 1998.
5. Macy NB, Les CM, Stover SM, et al: Effect of disc fenestration on
latory. Maintenance fluid therapy is routine for the first 24 to
sagittal kinematics of the canine C5-C6 intervertebral space. Vet
 48 hours or umtil the anirmal is able to eat and drink without
Surg 28(3):171-179, 1999.
6. Wheeler SJ, Sharp NJH: Cervical disc disease. In Wheeler SJ, Sharp
assistance. Urine output and quantitation should be closely
 NJH (eds): Small Animal Spinal Disorders: Diagnosis and Surgery.
monitored for the first 24 to 48 hours, and bladder expression
London, Mosby, 1994.
and catheterization (or both) should be provided in those
7. Nakama S, Taura Y, Tabaru H, et al: A retrospective study of ventral
patients not urinating on a volumtary basis. Rehabilitation may
fenestration for disc diseases in dogs. J Vet Med Sci 55(5):78l-784,
seu ued aageiadonsod anoe au se toos se panauandu aq
1993.
subsided (usually after 24 hours). Depending on the level of
8.Tomlinson J: Tetraparesis following cervical disc fenestration in two
neurologic dysfumction, therapy may consist of massage,
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187(1):76-77, 1985.
234
Part three · surGIcal procedures for the Spine
Dorsal Laminectomy of L7-S1
Chapter 87
INDICATIONS1-4
disease process. Regardless of the point of etiology, the disease is
Surgical candidates for a lumbosacral dorsal laminectomy are those
caused by nerve root entrapment by either hard or soft tissue.
 animals that have exhibited multiple bouts of lumbosacral pain and
that are nonresponsive to conservative treatment of rest and non-
EQUIPMeNT
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or those animals that exhibit loss
· Standard surgical pack, two medium or large Gelpi retractors
of voluntary motor function and urinary or fecal incontinence and that,
(depending on the size of the dog), bipolar and unipolar cautery, suc-
ideally, have been diagnosed with compression of the cauda equina
tion hose and small Frazier suction tip, no. 1l and no. 15 Bard Parker
via epidurography, computed tomography, or magnetic resonance
scalpel blades, Freer periosteal elevator, Senn retractors, Lempert
imaging.
rongeur, Kerrison rongeur, pneumatic drill system with burr guard and
a variety of sizes of round and oval burrs, DeBakey thumb forceps,
OBJECTIVES1-6
bone wax,* gelfoam,′ or Avitene Sheets+ (Microfibrillar Hemostat)
· Lumbosacral dorsal laminectomy is performed for exposure to and is
Additional instrumentation that is useful for removing extruded disc
indicated for decompression of the cauda equina
material from the vertebral canal includes a Buck ear curette, Ball bur-
 Lumbosacral dorsal laminectomy is often performed in combination
nisher, tartar scraper, double-ended curette, Iris spatula, small bone
with foraminotomy to relieve individual nerve root impingement.
curette, and nerve root retractor.
ANAToMIC CoNSIDeRaTIoNS2
PreParATION ANd POSItiONing7-10
Because of the differential rate of growth between the bony vertebral
 Position the animal in stermal recumbency, and prepare the lower back
column and the spinal cord, the spinal cord terminates between L4 and
and sacrum from the mid-lumbar region to the tail head. Elevate the
L6 in the dog. At the end of the spinal cord or conus medullaris, the
hind end with sandbags, and position the rear limbs forward, with the
nerve root segments exit, forming the cauda equina, and then course
hips and stifles flexed. Support the animal with sandbags on each side
obliquely and caudally to their respective intervertebral foramina.
of the abdomen, or use a vacuum-activated surgical positioning system.
Specifically, the cauda equina is composed of nerve roots from the sev-
d on an a  isod un  a as mg 'au 
enth lumbar, three sacral, and a varying number of caudal spinal seg-
vent malpositioning during surgery. Perfect positioning and alignment
ments. Nerve roots affected by degenerative lumbosacral stenosis or
 assist in the approach and ensure proper orientation.
cauda equina syndrome include the sciatic nerve (which arises from the
L6 to Sl-S2 spinal cord segments), the pudendal and pelvic nerves
PROCEDURE
[  a (   i a   )
 Approach:11-13 Incise the skin and subcutaneous tissue on dorsal
nerves (L6-S1), and the caudal gluteal nerve (L7-Sl). The femoral nerve,
midline from the L5 dorsal spinous process to the first or second caudal
arising from the L4 L6 spinal cord segments, is usually spared from lum-
vertebrae. Suture two quarter drapes to the subcutaneous tissue to
bosacral entrapment because of its early exit from the spinal canal at
decrease skin contamination. Incise the lumbosacral and gluteal fascia
the L6-L7 intervertebral disc space. Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis
with a no. ll scalpel blade, from the L6 dorsal spinous process to the
or cauda equina is a multifactorial disease process, with clinical signs
caudal median sacral crest. Bilaterally elevate the sacrocaudalis dorsal
 pue sisa edeed pue 'ssauaue pua pu 'ued peoesoquni og suge
medialis muscles away from the dorsal spinous process, pedicle, and
ataxia of the hind end or tail to fecal and urinary incontinence.
lamina to the articular facets of L7-Sl and the intermediate sacral crest,
Degenerative intervertebral disc disease; congenital lumbosacral
using an Adson or Freer periosteal elevator. Retract the elevated
stenosis, malformation, or malarticulation; and degenerative changes
muscles using two Gelpi self-retaining retractors (Plate 87A). Excise the
-        
interarcuate ligament between the laminae of L7-Sl with a no. 15 blade
 ment, and articular facet joint capsule have all been associated with this
to expose the epidural space and the cauda equina.
Continued
*Bone wax, Ethicon, Johnson & Johnson, Somerville, New Jersey.
Gelfoam, Pharmacia and Upjohn, Kalamazoo, Michigan.
Avitene, Davol, Cranston, Rhode Island.
Hug-U-Vac, South Salem, Oregon.
Chapter 87
Dorsal laminectomy 0f l7-s1
235
PLATe 87
 Spinous
process L7
Spinous
process S1
236
Part three · surGIcal procedureS for the spine
Dorsal Laminectomy of L7-S1:4.12 Remove the dorsal
 presentation, as determined by magnetic resonance imaging, has been
spinous processes of L7 and Sl with a rongeur (Plate 87B). Drill the pro-
found to be independent of disease severity and thus should not be used
-ode go iq e  ' re oeud e ya ans i psod
in prognostication. Young animals with mild signs of lumbosacral pain,
priate size (Plate 87C). Slowly trickle warm saline over the burr while
ataxia, and weakness have a fair to good prognosis for full recovery.
drilling to prevent heat transfer from the burr to the laminectomy site.
 Urinary or fecal incontinence and extreme age have been associated
 Intermittently lavage the entire laminectomy site to remove bone debris
with poor or guarded recovery. Most animals improve after surgical
and to keep the tissues moist. The laminectomy site should extend from
intervention, given a reasonable convalescent period (4 to 6 weeks).
the cranial aspect of the dorsal spinous process of L7 to the caudal
Recurrence of signs has been reported at a varying rate of 15% to 67%
aspect of S1, preserving the articular facets (Plate 87D). Once most of
 and should be discussed with the owner before surgery.
the bone has been removed, a smaller bit can be used to remove the
edges of inner cortical bone plate. Control any bone bleeding with bone
References
wax. Once the inner cortex has been removed, use a nerve root probe,
1. De Risio L, Sharp NJ, Olby NJ, et al: Predictors of outcome after
ear loop, or tartar scraper to palpate the inner bone and periosteal shelf.
 dorsal decompressive laminectomy for degenerative lumbosacral
When it is thin and pliable, use a probe to gently penetrate the site and
stenosis in dogs: 69 cases (1987-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc
create a long window to allow admission of a Kerrison or small Lempert
219(5):624-628, 2001.
rongeur to remove any remaining bone in the oblong window (Plate
2. De Risio L, Thomas WB, Sharp NJ: Degenerative lumbosacral
          
 stenosis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30(1):11l-132, 2000.
bulging or extruded intervertebral disc, hypertrophied dorsal longitu-
3. Linn LL, Bartels KE, Rochat MC, et al: Lumbosacral stenosis in 29
dinal ligament, or stenotic intervertebral foramina or canal. Trace each
    oog  a 
nerve root with a nerve root retractor along its path toward its respec-
surgical intervention (1990- 1999). Vet Surg 32(1):21-29, 2003.
 4. Danielsson F, Sjostrom L: Surgical treatment of degenerative lum-
decompression of a nerve root may be necessary by performing a
discectomy (Plate 87F), dorsal longitudinal ligament resection, facetec-
 5. Mayhew PD, Kapatkin AS, Wortman JA, et al: Association of cauda
tomy, or foraminotomy. Once the nerve root(s) has been decompressed,
equina compression on magnetic resonance images and clinical
 gently lavage the laminectomy site, and harvest a fat graft from the
signs in dogs with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis. J Am Anim
 subcutaneous region of the back. Place the fat graft over the hemilam-
Hosp Assoc 38(6):555-562, 2002.
inectomy site to prevent fibrous scarring and adhesion. Suture the
6. Jones J, Banfield C, Ward D: Association between postoperative
aeqnosge hsn uand snonuuo adns e u eseg rnosmu preda
 outcome and results of magnetic resonance imaging and computed
 suture. Close the subcutaneous tissues and skin in a routine fashion.
      
stenosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216(11):1769-1774, 2000.
CAUTIONS14-17
7. Wheeler SJ, Sharp NJH: Thoracolumbar disc disease. In Wheeler SJ,
Every effort should be made to preserve the articular facets of the lum-
Sharp NJH (eds): Small Animal Spinal Disorders. London, Mosby 1994.
bosacral junction to promote lumbosacral stability. An accurate and
8. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the thoracolumbar verte
thorough identification of each nerve root will improve the postopera-
brae through a dorsal incision. In An Atlas of Surgical Approaches
tive outcome. However, it is often difficult to identify a compressive
to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. Philadelphia,
lesion because of the anatomic complexity of the area. Owner educa-
WB Saunders, 2004.
tion is very important to the success of the surgery, because small but
9. Seim HI: Dorsal decompressive lamuinectomy for T-L disk disease.
significant lesions may be missed by ancillary imaging such as magnetic
Canine Practice 20(6):6-10, 1995.
resonance imaging and computed tomography. Therefore, all lumbosacral
10. Harari J, Marks S: Surgical treatments for intervertebral disc
disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 22(4):899-915, 1992.
 sizing the diagnostic and therapeutic significance of the surgery.
11. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: Approach to the lumbar vertebra 7 and
the sacrum through a dorsal incision. In An Atlas of Surgical
POStOperatIVe EVAluatION
Approaches to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed.
The neurologic status of the patient should be serially evaluated upon
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004.
recovery from anesthesia and surgery. Gentle retraction and manipula-
12.
Wheeler SJ, Sharp NJH: Lumbosacral disease. In Wheeler SJ, Sharp
tion of the nerve roots is often necessary to access the compressive
NJH (eds): Small Animal Spinal Disorders. London, Mosby, 1994.
lesion; however, peripheral nerve injury stemming from retraction is
13. Lenehan T, Tarvin G: Surgical treatment of cauda equina compression
usualy transient and responsive to appropriate supportive care.
         
PoStoperatiVe Care
14. Schulz KS, Waldron DR, Grant JW, et al: Biomechanics of the
 Neurosurgery patients require general supportive care and pain man-
thoracolumbar vertebral column of dogs during lateral bending. Am
agement. Clean, dry, soft, padded bedding is needed for nonambulatory
J Vet Res 57:1228-1232, 1996.
15. Corse M, Renberg W, Fris E: In vitro evaluation of biomechanical
the first 24 to 48 hours or until the animal can eat and drink unaided.
effects of multiple hemilaminectomies on the canine lumbar verte-
Urine output and quantitation are closely monitored for the frst 24 to
bral column. Am J Vet Res 64(9):1139-1145, 2003.
48 hours, and bladder expression or catheterization (or both) are pro-
16. Hill T, Lubbe A, Guthrie A: Lumbar spine stability following hemil.
vided in patients not urinating voluntarily. Rehabilitation may be imple-
aminectomy, pediculectomy, and fenestration. Vet Comp Orthop
mented as soon as the acute postoperative pain has subsided (usually
Traumatol 13:165-171, 2000.
after 24 hours). Depending on the level of neurologic dysfunction,
17. Hosgood G: Wound complications following thoracolumbar
therapy may consist of massage, assisted standing, proprioceptive exer-
laminectomy in the dog: A retrospective study of 264 procedures.
cises, and controlled therapeutic exercise. Activity should be restricted
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28(1):47-52, 1992.
for 4 to 6 weeks. Barring extreme paresis or ataxia, normal activity is then
18. Davis GJ, Brown DC: Prognostic indicators for time to ambulation
slowly reintroduced. For animals with excessive weight, which can
aft er surgical decompression in nonambulatory dogs with acute thora-
impair neurological recovery, a weight loss program may be beneficial.
columbar disk extrusions: 112 cases. Vet Surg 31(6):513-518, 2002.
19. Coates J: Intervertebral disk disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
EXPECTED OUTCOME1-6.10.12.18-20
Pract 30(1): 77-110, 2000.
Most animals with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis have good to
20. Kornegay J, Simpson S, Bailey CS, Joseph R: How do I treat?
excellent prognosis, but expected outcomes vary, depending on the
Degenerative thoracolumbar intervertebral disc disease in small
level of neurologic dysfunction. Degree of compression at the time of
breed dogs. Prog Vet Neuro 4(3):81-83, 1993.
CHAPTER 87
 Dorsal laminectomy 0f l7-s1
237
Ｐlate 87
Spinous
process L7
removed
Ligamentum
flavum
Completed
laminectomy
Inner
cortical
layer
 Page numbers followed by p refer to plates.
Anconeal muscle (Continued)
Biceps femoris muscle (Continued)
in luxation of elbow, lateral, 18, 19p 
 in femoral head and neck ostectomy with
A
in ununited anconeal process, 22, 23p
 joint capsule interpolation, 46, 47p
 Abductor digiti quinti muscle
 Anconeal process
 in femoral neck fractures, 182, 183p
 in Achilles tendon repair, 75p
 in lateral elbow luxation, 18, 19p
 in femoral physeal fractures
 in intertarsal or tarsometatarsal arthrodesis
ununited, 22-24, 23p, 25p
distal, 185p
with intramedullary pin and wire, 94, 95p
Antebrachial carpal joint
proximal, 180, 181p
with plate, 92,93p
in pancarpal arthrodesis, 32
in hip luxation
 in talus osteochondrosis of lateral
 in partial carpal arthrodesis with
and extracapsular stabilization, 38, 39p
trochlear ridge, 85p
intramedullary pins, 36
and intracapsular stabilization, 42
 in tarsal fractures, 213p
di 'og 'sam pios eum pue epen u
 in rear limb amputation
 Abductor policis longus muscle
Arthrodesis
at coxofemoral joint, 106, 107p
in pancarpal arthrodesis, 33p
of carpus, 32, 33p
at midshaft of femur, 108, 109p
 in radial carpal bone fractures, 21lp
with intramedullary pins, 36, 37p
in stifle luxation, 56, 58
Acetabulum
with plate,34,35p
and intra-articular repair of cranial
 contact with femur in ostectomy of
of elbow, 28, 29p
cruciate ligament, 65p
 femoral head and neck with joint
 of shoulder, 14, 15p
medial patellar, 53p, 55p
capsule interpolation, 46
of stifle, 72, 73p
Bone graft
fractures of, transverse or short oblique,
of tarsus, 90, 91p
 in carpal arthrodesis, 32
178, 179p
with intramedullary pin and wire, 94, 95p
with intramedullary pins, 36
in hip luxation, 38, 40, 44
with plate, 92, 93p
with plate, 34
in triple pelvic osteotomy, 48, 50
Arthrotomy of stifle
in diaphyseal fractures, 134, 135p
Achilles tendon repair, 74-76, 75p, 77p
in intra-articular repair of cranial cruciate
comminuted, 128, 129p, 132, 133p
 pin and tension band method, 76, 77p
ligament, 64, 65p
femoral, 186, 192, 194, 195p
single locking-loop method, 76, 77p
in lateral fabellar suture repair of cranial
long oblique, 124, 126
three-loop pulley method, 76, 77p
cruciate ligament, 60, 61p
short oblique or transverse, 118, 120, 122
 Acromion process
in medial patella luxation, 52, 53p
tibial, 202, 204, 205p, 206
 in arthrodesis of shoulder, 14
 in meniscectomy, 68, 69p
in elbow arthrodesis, 28
 in neck of scapula fractures, 146
Avulsion fracture of supraglenoid tuberosity,
 in shoulder arthrodesis, 14
 in supraglenoid tuberosity fractures, 144
144, 145p
 in tarsal arthrodesis, 90
 in transverse scapular body fractures, 142,
Axillary artery and vein
with intramedullary pin and wire, 94
143p
 in forelimb amputation with scapulectomy,
with plate, 92
 Acrylic external fxation in mandibular body
100, 10lp
 in transverse derotational osteotomy
fractures, 140, 141p
in forelimb salvage with scapulectomy, 102
 stabilized with plate, 114
 Adductor muscles of thigh
 Axillary nerve in osteochondrosis of
 in triple pelvic osteotomy, 48, 50
 in femoral diaphyseal fractures, 129p, 133p
shoulder, 2
 Brachialis muscle in humeral diaphyseal
 and extermal fixator, 192, 193p
 Axillobrachial vein in forelimb amputation 
fractures
 and intramedullary pin or interlocking
with scapulectomy, 100, 101p
 and external fixator, 162, 163p
nail, 186, 187p
and intramedullary pin or interlocking nail,
 and plate application, 191p
154, 155p
in rear limb amputation
Biceps brachi muscle
and plate application, 158, 159p
at coxofemoral joint, 106, 107p
 in forelimb salvage with scapulectomy,
Brachiocephalicus muscle
at midshaft of femur, 108, 109p 
103p, 104
 in forelimb amputation with scapulectomy,
in triple pelvic osteotomy, 48, 49p
in humeral diaphyseal fractures and plate
100, 101p
Amputations
application, 158, 159p
 in humeral diaphyseal fractures
avoidance of, via scapulectomy, 102-104,
in humeral distal fractures, T or Y type,
and extermal fixator, 162, 163p
103p
153p
and intramedullary pin or interlocking
of digit, 110, 11lp
in shoulder arthrodesis, 14, 15p
nail, 154, 155p
of forelimb, 100, 101p
 in shoulder luxation, medial, 7p
and plate application, 158, 159p
of mandible, 96-98, 97p, 99p
 Biceps femoris muscle
 in humeral distal fractures, T or Y type,
of rear limb
in Achilles tendon repair, 74
153p
at coxofemoral joint, 106, 107p, 108
in femoral diaphyseal fractures, 129p, 133p
Bridging plate in diaphyseal fractures
at midshaft of femur, 106, 108, 109p
and extermal fixator, 192, 193p
of femur, 128, 129p, 190, 191p
 Anconeal muscle
and intramedullary pin or interlocking
of humerus, 158, 160, 161p
 in arthrodesis of elbow, 28, 29p
nail, 186, 187p
of radius, 166, 167p
in fracture of proximal ulna, 173p
and plate application, 190, 191p
of tibia, 128, 204, 205p
239
240
INDEX
C
Compression plate, 118, 119p
Diaphyseal fractures (Continued)
 Calcaneoquartal joint 
in femoral diaphyseal fractures, 190, 191p
radial, 166-168, 167p, 169p
 in partial tarsal arthrodesis
in humeral diaphyseal fractures, 158, 160,
 short oblique or transverse
with intramedullary pin and wire, 94
16lp
compression plate in, 118, 119p
with plate, 92
 in metacarpal and metatarsal fractures,
 intramedullary pin and external fixator
 in shearing injury with tarsal luxation, 78
214, 215p
in, 120, 12lp
Calcaneus
 in radial diaphyseal fractures, 166, 167p
type Ib extermal fixator in, 122, 123p
 in Achilles tendon repair, 75p
in tibial diaphyseal fractures, 204, 205p
tibial, 202-208, 203p, 205p, 207p, 209p
 in talus osteochondrosis of lateral
Condylar fractures of humerus, 150, 15lp
 Digastricus muscle in mandibular body
trochlear ridge, 85p
Contracture of infraspinatus muscle, 4, 5p
fractures, 138, 139p
 in tarsal arthrodesis, 90
 Coracobrachial muscles in medial shoulder
 Digit amputation, 1l0, 111p
with intramedullary pin and wire, 94, 95p
luxation, 6, 7p
 Disarticulation, coxofemoral, in rear limb
with plate, 92, 93p
Coronoid process of ulna, fragmented, 16,
amputation, 106, 107p, 108
 in tarsal fractures, 212, 213p
17p
 Disc disorders, intervertebral. See
 in tarsal shearing injury and luxation, 80
Coxofemoral joint
Intervertebral disc disorders
 Carotid sheath in ventral cervical
 disarticulation in rear limb amputation,
 Dynamic proximal ulnar osteotomy in
decompression, 222, 223p
106, 107p, 108
ununited anconeal process, 22, 24, 25p
Carpometacarpal joint
 in extracapsular stabilization of hip
 in pancarpal arthrodesis, 32
luxation, 38-40, 39p, 41p
E
 in partial carpal arthrodesis
in intracapsular stabilization of hip
Elbow disorders
with intramedullary pins, 36
luxation, 42-44, 43p, 45p
arthrodesis in, 28, 29p
with plate, 34
 in ostectomy of femoral head and neck
distal ulnar ostectomy, 26, 27p
Carpus disorders
with joint capsule interpolation, 46,
humeral fractures, 150, 151p, 152, 153p
arthrodesis in, 32, 33p
47p
lateral luxation, 18-20, 19p, 21p
with intramedullary pins, 36, 37p
 in triple pelvic osteotomy, 48-50, 49p, 5lp
osteochondrosis and fragmented medial
with plate, 34, 35p
Cruciate ligaments in stifle luxation, 56, 58,
coronoid process, 16, 17p
metacarpal fractures, 214, 215p
59p
ununited anconeal process, 22-24, 23p,
radial carpal bone fractures, 210, 21lp
 intra-articular repair of, 64 66, 65p, 67p
25p
radius or ulna styloid process fractures, 30,
lateral fabellar suture in repair of, 60-62,
Extensor carpi radialis muscle
31p
6lp, 63p
 in carpal arthrodesis, 33p
a e qn u a n
with meniscus damage, 68, 69p
with intramedullary pins, 37p
 scapulectomy, 100, 101p
with plate, 35p
Cerclage wires, 126, 127p
D
 in elbow luxation, lateral, 18, 19p
 in femoral diaphyseal fractures, 126, 186,
 Deltoideus muscle
 in humeral fractures, distal
188, 189p
 in forelimb amputation with scapulectomy.
lateral condylar, 150, 151p
 in humeral diaphyseal fractures, 126
10lp
T or Y type, 152, 153p
external fixator used with, 164, 165p
 in forelimb salvage with scapulectomy,
 in radial carpal bone fractures, 210, 21lp
intramedullary pin used with, 126, 156,
102, 103p, 104
Extensor digital muscles 
157p, 164
 in humeral diaphyseal fractures, 155p,
in carpal arthrodesis, 32, 33p
 in mandibular symphyseal fractures, 136,
159p, 163p
with intramedullary pins, 36
137p
in humeral physeal fractures, proximal,
with plate, 34, 35p
 in tibial diaphyseal fractures
148, 149p
 in elbow luxation, lateral, 18, 19p
extermal fixator used with, 208, 209p
 in infraspinatus muscle contracture, 4, 5p
 in humeral fractures, distal
intramedullary pin used with, 126, 202,
in scapular neck fractures, 146, 147p
lateral condylar, 150, 15lp
203p
 in shoulder arthrodesis, 14, 15p
T or Y type, 152, 153p
 Cervical disc disorders
in shoulder luxation, lateral, 10, 11p
 in metacarpal and metatarsal fractures,
ventral decompression in, 218, 220,
in shoulder osteochondrosis, 2, 3p
214,215p
222-224, 223p,225p
Derotational osteotomy, transverse,
 in radial carpal bone fractures, 210, 21lp
ventral fenestration in, 218-220, 219p,
stabilized with plate, 1l4, 115p
 in stifle arthrodesis, 73p
221p, 222
 Desmotomy in medial patella luxation,
in talus osteochondrosis
Collateral ligaments
52, 53p
of lateral trochlear ridge, 82, 83p, 84, 85p
lateral
Dewclaw amputation, 1l0, 11lp
of medial trochlear ridge, 87p
Diaphyseal fractures. See aiso specific bones
 in tibial malleolar fractures, 20lp
lateral fabellar suture, 62, 63p
 bone grafts in, 134, 135p. See aiso Bone
 in ulnar ostectomy with fat graft, distal,
in elbow arthrodesis, 28, 29p
graft, in diaphyseal fractures
26, 27p
 in elbow luxation, lateral, 20, 21p
comminuted
Extensor hallucis longus muscle in talus
 in stifle arthrodesis, 73p
interlocking nail in, 132, 133p
osteochondrosis, 82, 83p, 87p
in stife luxation, 56, 58, 59p
 intramedullary pin and bridging plate in,
Extermal fixation
 in tarsal shearing injury and luxation, 78
128, 129p
 in comminuted diaphyseal fractures, 130,
medial
type Il external fixator in, 130, 131p
13lp
in stifle luxation, 56, 57p
femoral, 186-194, 187p, 189p, 191p, 193p,
 in femoral diaphyseal fractures, 192-194,
 in talus osteochondrosis of medial
195p
193p, 195p
trochlear ridge, 88, 89p
humeral, 154164, 155p, 157p, 159p, 161p,
 intramedullary pin used with, 120, 186,
 in tarsal shearing injury and luxation, 78,
163p, 165p
188, 189p, 192-194, 193p, 196p
80
long oblique
 in humeral diaphyseal fractures, 120,
 in tibial distal physeal fractures, 198, 199p
intramedullary pin and cerclage wires in,
162-164, 163p, 165p
 in tibial malleolar fractures, 200, 201p
126, 127p
cerclage wires used with, 164, 165p
radial, in radial carpal bone fractures, 210,
 lag screws and neutralization plate in,
intramedullary pin used with, 120,
21lp
124, 125p
162-164, 165p
INDEX
241
Extermal fixation (Continued)
Femur (Continued)
Fractures
type Ia external fixator in, 156, 157p,
 in femoral head and neck ostectomy with
of carpus,210, 211p
164, 165p
joint capsule interpolation, 46, 47p
of diaphysis. See Diaphyseal fractures
type Ib extermal fixator in, 164, 165p
in femoral neck fractures, 182, 183p
of femur, 180-194, 181p, 183p, 185p, 187p,
 in mandibular body fractures,
in fermoral physeal fractures, 180, 18lp
189p, 191p, 193p, 195p
comminuted, 140, 14lp
 in intracapsular stabilization of hip
of humerus, 148-164, 149p, 15lp, 153p,
 in radial diaphyseal fractures, 122, 168, 169p
luxation, 42-44, 43p, 45p
155p, 157p, 159p, 161p, 163p, 165p
 in radial oblique osteotomy, 112, 113p
transverse derotational osteotomy
of mandible, 96-98, 97p, 136-140, 137p,
 in short oblique or transverse diaphyseal
stabilized with plate, 114, 115p
139p, 14lp
fractures
Fenestration
of metacarpal and metatarsal bones, 214,
intramedullary pin used with, 120, 121p
 of cervical discs, ventral, 218-220, 219p,
215p
type Ib extermnal fixator in, 122, 123p
22lp, 222
of pelvis, 174-178, 175p, 177p, 179p
 y  s s 
of thoracolumbar discs, 226, 230-232,
of radius, 30, 31p, 166-170, 167p, 169p,
80, 81p
23lp
17lp
 in tibial diaphyseal fractures, 122, 206-208,
Fibula, distal
of scapula, 142-146, 143p, 145p, 147p
207p, 209p
 in malleolar fractures, 200, 201p
of tarsus, 212, 213p
intramedullary pin used with, 120, 202,
in talus osteochondrosis
of tibia, 196-208, 197p, 199p, 201p, 203p,
203p
 of lateral trochlear ridge, 82, 84
205p,207p, 209p
 in tibial oblique osteotomy, 1l2, 113p
of medial trochlear ridge, 86, 88
of ulna, 30, 31p, 172, 173p
in tarsal arthrodesis, 90
F
with intramedulary pin and wire, 94
G
Fabella in stifle luxation and instability, 52, 58
 in tarsal shearing injury and luxation, 80
Gastrocnemius muscle
 and lateral suture repair of cranial cruciate
in tibial physeal fractures, 198, 199p
 in Achilles tendon repair, 74, 75p
ligament, 60-62, 61p, 63p
 Flexor carpi radialis muscle
 in femoral physeal fractures, distal, 185p
Apoq enquu u uaa pue aanre eg
 in elbow osteochondrosis and fragmented
 in tarsal arthrodesis
fractures, 139p
medial coronoid process, 16, 17p
with intramedullary pin and wire, 95p
Fascia lata
in radial fractures
with plate, 93p
graft in cranial cruciate ligament repair,
diaphyseal, and plate application, 167p
 in tarsal fractures, 213p
65p, 66
of styloid process, 3lp
Gemellus muscle
 in physeal femoral fractures, distal, 185p
 in ulnar styloid fractures, 31p
 in acetabular fractures, 178, 179p
tensor muscle of. See Tensor fascia latae
 Flexor carpi ulnaris muscle
 in extracapsular stabilization of hip
muscle
 in elbow arthrodesis, 28, 29p
luxation, 38
Fat graft, distal ulnar ostectomy with, 26, 27p
in ulnar fractures, proximal, 172, 173p
 in intracapsular stabilization of hip
 Femoral artery and vein in rear limb
Flexor digital muscles
luxation, 42, 43p
amputation
in Achilles tendon repair, 74, 75p
 Glenohumeral ligament
at coxofemoral joint, 106, 107p
in elbow osteochondrosis and fragmented
 in lateral shoulder luxation, 10-12, 1lp, 13p
 at midshaft of femur, 108, 109p
medial coronoid process, 16, 17p
in medial shoulder luxation, 6-8, 7p, 9p
Femur
in radial diaphyseal fracture and plate
 Gluteal artery and vein in triple pelvic
coxofemoral disarticulation in rear limb
application, 167p
osteotomy, 50, 5lp
amputation, 106, 107p
 in talus osteochondrosis of medial
Gluteal muscles
diaphyseal fractures of
trochlear ridge, 88, 89p
in acetabular fractures, 178, 179p
external fixator in, 120, 186, 188, 189p,
in tarsal arthrodesis
 in femoral head and neck ostectomy with
192-194, 193p, 195p
with intramedullary pin and wire, 94,
joint capsule interpolation, 46, 47p
 interlocking nail in, 132, 133p, 186-188,
d96
 in femoral neck fractures, 182, 183p
187p, 189p
with plate, 92, 93p
in femoral physeal fractures, proximal,
 intramedullary pin in. See Intramedullary
in tarsal fractures, 212, 213p
180, 181p
pins, in femoral diaphyseal
Flexor hallucis longus muscle
in hip luxation
fractures
 in Achilles tendon repair, 75p
and extracapsular stabilization, 38, 39p
 plate application in, 128, 129p, 190, 191p
in talus osteochondrosis
 and intracapsular stabilization, 42, 43p
distal
 of lateral trochlear ridge, 85p
 in ilial body fractures, 176, 177p
 in arthrodesis of stifle, 72, 73p
of medial trochlear ridge, 88, 89p
 in rear limb amputation with coxofemoral
 in deranged stifle luxation, 56, 57p
 in tarsal arthrodesis
disarticulation, 107p
 in femoral physeal fractures, 184, 185p
dg aia pue ud Aempaueun y
 in sacroiliac luxation, 174, 175p
 in intra-articular cranial cruciate
with plate, 93p
in triple pelvic osteotomy, 50, 5lp
ligament repair, 64, 65p, 66, 67p
 in tarsal fractures, 213p
Gluteal nerve in triple pelvic osteotomy, 50
 in meniscectomy, 68, 70
in tibial malleolar fractures, 201p
Gracilis muscle
 in notchplasty for cranial cruciate
Forage procedure
 in rear limb amputation
ligament repair, 64, 65p
 in elbow osteochondrosis, 16
at coxofemoral joint, 106, 107p
 in tibial physeal fractures, 196, 197p
in shoulder osteochondrosis, 2
at midshaft of femur, 108, 109p
 in wedge recession trochleoplasty for
Forelimb
 in triple pelvic osteotomy, 48, 49p
medial patella luxation, 52, 53p
amputation with scapulectomy, 100, 101p
Grafts
fractures of, 180-194, 181p, 183p, 185p,
carpus disorders, 30-36, 31p, 33p, 35p,
 of bone. See Bone graft
187p, 189p, 191p, 193p, 195p
37p
 of fascia lata and patellar tendon in cranial
midshaft level rear limb amputation, 106,
digit amputation, 1l0, 11lp
cruciate ligament repair, 65p, 66
108,109p
elbow joint disorders, 16-28, 17p, 19p, 21p,
of fat, distal ulnar ostectomy with, 26, 27p
proximal
23p, 25p, 27p, 29p
in acetabular fractures, 178, 179p
salvage with scapulectomy, 102-104, 103p
H
 in extracapsular stabilization of hip
shoulder joint disorders, 2-14, 3p, 5p, 7p,
Hemilaminectomy, thoracolumbar, 226-228,
luxation, 38-40, 41p
9p, 1lp, 13p, 15p
227p, 229p, 230
242
INDEX
Hemimandible
Ilium (Continued)
Intramedullary pins (Continued)
 in rostral hemimandibulectomy, 96, 98, 99p
 in intracapsular stabilization of hip
 in metacarpal and metatarsal fractures,
 in transverse and oblique mandibular body
luxation, 42
214,215p
fractures, 139p
in sacroiliac luxation, 174, 175p
 in radial diaphyseal fractures and plate
Hip disorders
in triple pelvic osteotomy, 50, 51p
application, 166
acetabular fractures, 178, 179p
Imbrication
 in short oblique or transverse diaphyseal
femoral fractures, 180, 18lp, 182, 183p
in hip luxation
fractures, 120, 121p
femoral head and neck ostectomy with
and extracapsular stabilization, 40
 in tarsal arthrodesis, partial, 94, 95p
 joint capsule interpolation in, 46, 47p
and intracapsular stabilization, 44
in tibial diaphyseal fractures, 202, 203p
 luxation and instability
in patella luxation, 54
cerclage wires used with, 126, 202, 203p
extracapsular stabilization in, 3840,
 Infraspinatus muscle
external fixator used with, 120, 202,
39p, 4lp
contracture of, 4, 5p
203p
 intracapsular stabilization in, 42-44, 43p,
 in forelimb salvage with scapulectomy,
plate used with, 128, 204, 205p
45p
102, 103p
 Ischium.
triple pelvic osteotomy in, 48-50, 49p, 5lp
 in humeral physeal fractures, proximal,
 in extracapsular stabilization of hip
Humerus
148, 149p
luxation, 38
 diaphyseal fractures of
in scapular body fractures, transverse, 142,
 in femoral head and neck ostectomy with
cerclage wires in, 126, 156, 157p, 164,
143p
 joint capsule interpolation, 46
165p
 in scapular neck fractures, 146, 147p
 in intracapsular stabilization of hip
extermal fixation in. See External
in shoulder arthrodesis, 14, 15p 
luxation, 42
fxation, in humeral diaphyseal
in shoulder luxation, lateral, 10, 1lp, 12,
 in triple pelvic osteotomy, 48, 49p
fractures
13p
 interlocking nail in, 132, 154-156, 155p,
157p
Instability. See Luxation and instability
Joint disorders
 intramedullary pin in. See Intramedullary
 Interlocking nail in diaphyseal fractures
amputations in, 96-110, 97p, 99p, 101p,
pins, in humeral diaphyseal
of femur, 132, 133p, 186-188, 187p, 189p
103p, 107p, 109p, 11lp
fractures
of humerus, 132, 154-156, 155p, 157p
of carpus, 30-36, 31p, 33p, 35p, 37p
 plate application in, 128, 158-160, 159p,
of tibia, 132, 202, 203p
of elbow, 16-28, 17p, 19p, 21p, 23p, 25p,
16lp
 Intertarsal joint
27p,29p
distal
 in pantarsal arthrodesis, 90
of hip, 38-50, 39p,41p, 43p, 45p, 47p, 49p,
in arthrodesis of elbow, 28, 29p
in partial tarsal arthrodesis
51p
 in fragmented medial coronoid process
with intramedullary pin and wire, 94, 95p
of shoulder, 214, 3p, 5p, 7p, 9p, 11p, 13p,
and osteochondrosis, 16, 17p
with plate, 92, 93p
15p
 in intercondylar T or Y type fractures,
 in shearing injury with tarsal luxation, 78, 80
of stifle, 52-72, 53p, 55p, 57p, 59p, 61p,
152, 153p
 Intervertebral disc disorders
63p, 65p, 67p, 69p, 71p, 73p
 in lateral condylar fractures, 150, 151p
cervical
of tarsus, 74-94, 75p, 77p, 79p, 81p, 83p,
 in luxation of elbow, lateral, 18-20, 19p,
ventral decompression in, 218, 220,
85p, 87p, 89p, 91p, 93p, 95p
21p
222-224, 223p, 26p
 in ununited anconeal process, 22, 25p
ventral fenestration in, 218-220, 219p,
个
fractures of, 148-164, 149p, 15lp, 153p,
221p, 222
Kirschner wires
155p, 157p, 159p, 16lp, 163p, 165p
lumbosacral laminectomy in, 234 236,
 in acetabular fractures, 178, 179p
proximal
236p, 237p
 in femoral neck fractures, 182, 183p
 in arthrodesis of shoulder, 14, 15p
thoracolumbar
 in femoral physeal fractures, proximal,
in bone grafts, as donor site, 134, 135p
fenestration in, 230-232, 231p
180, 181p
 in forelimb amputation with 
hemilaminectomy in, 226-228, 227p,
 in hip luxation and extracapsular
scapulectomy, 100
229p, 230
stabilization, 40, 41p
 in forelimb salvage with scapulectomy,
Intramedullary pins
 in humeral condylar fractures, 150, 151p
102
 in carpal arthrodesis, partial, 36, 37p
 in humeral physeal fractures, proximal,
 in humeral physeal fractures, 148, 149p
in comminuted diaphyseal fractures, 128,
148, 149p
 in lateral shoulder subluxation, 10-12,
129p
 in radial physeal fractures, distal, 170, 171p
11p, 13p
 in femoral diaphyseal fractures, 186-188,
 in radial styloid fractures, 30, 31p
 in medial shoulder luxation, 6-8, 7p, 9p
187p, 189p
in tarsal fractures, 212, 213p
 in osteochondrosis, 2, 3p
cerclage wires used with, 126, 186, 188,
in tibial malleolar fractures, 200, 20lp
 in scapular neck fractures, 146, 147p
189p
 in tibial physeal fractures
 in supraglenoid tuberosity fractures, 144,
extermal fixator used with, 120, 186, 188,
distal, 198, 199p
145p
189p, 192-194, 193p, 195p
proximal, 196, 197p
plate used with, 128, 129p, 190, 191p
in ulnar styloid fractures, 30, 3lp
 in femoral physeal fractures, distal, 184,
 liopsoas muscle in rear limb amputation
185p
with coxofemoral disarticulation, 106,
 in humeral diaphyseal fractures, 154 156,
Lag screw fixation, 124, 125p
107p
155p, 157p
 in elbow arthrodesis, 28, 29p
Llium
cerclage wires used with, 126, 156, 157p,
 in femoral diaphyseal fractures, plate
 in bone grafts, as donor site, 134, 135p
164
 application with, 190, 191p
 in extracapsular stabilization of hip
extermal fixator used with, 120, 162-164,
 in humeral fractures, distal
luxation, 38
163p, 165p
lateral condylar, 150, 151p
 in femoral head and neck ostectomy with
plate used with, 128, 158-160, 159p, 161p
T or Y type, 152, 153p
 joint capsule interpolation, 46
 in long oblique diaphyseal fractures, 126,
 in metacarpal and metatarsal fractures,
 in fractures of ilial body, 176, 177p
127p
214,215p
INDEX
243
Lag screw fixation (Continued)
Mandible (Continued)
Omobrachial vein in forelimb amputation
 in radial carpal bone fractures, 210, 21lp
 symphyseal, cerclage wire in, 136, 13p
with scapulectomy, 100, 101p
 in radial fractures
transverse and oblique, orthopedic wire
Omotransversarius muscle
diaphyseal, plate application with, 166,
in, 138, 139p
167p
tumors of, mandibulectomy in, 96-98, 97p,
100, 101p
 in styloid process, 30, 31p
d66
 in forelimb salvage with scapulectomy,
in sacroiliac luxation, 174, 175p
Mandibular artery
102, 103p, 104
 in scapular neck fractures, 146, 147p
 in fractures of mandibular body, 138, 140
Osteochondrosis
 in shoulder arthrodesis, 14, 15p
in mandibulectomy, 96, 98
of elbow, 16, 17p
 Mandibular nerve in mandibular body
of shoulder, 2, 3p
145p
fractures, 138, 140
of talus
 in tarsal fractures, 212, 213p
Mandibulectomy, 96-98, 97p, 99p
 in lateral trochlear ridge, 82-84, 83p, 85p
in tibial fractures
Maxillectomy, 98
in medial trochlear ridge, 86-88, 87p, 89p
 diaphyseal, plate application with, 204,
Mayo mattress suture, modified, in medial
205p
 patella luxation, 54, 55p
P
malleolar, 200, 201p
 Median artery in radial diaphyseal fractures 
 Pancarpal arthrodesis, 32, 33p
in ulnar fractures
and plate application, 167p
Pantarsal arthrodesis, 90, 91p
distal, in styloid process, 30, 31p
Meniscectomy, 68-70, 69p, 71p
Patella
 proximal, plate application with, 172,
 Meniscus in stifle luxation and instability, 56,
 in arthrodesis of stifle, 72, 73p
173p
68-70, 69p, 71p
 in femoral physeal fractures, 184, 185p
in ununited anconeal process, 22, 24, 25p
 and intra-articular repair of cranial
medial luxation of, 52-54, 53p, 55p
Laminectomy
cruciate ligament, 64, 66
Patellar ligament in proximal tibial physeal
lumbosacral dorsal, 234-236, 235p, 237p
 and lateral fabellar suture repair of cranial
fractures, 197p
thoracolumbar hemilaminectomy, 226-228,
cruciate ligament, 60, 61p, 62
Patellar tendon
227p, 229p, 230
Metacarpal bones
 in cranial cruciate ligament repair, 66
Latissimus dorsi muscle in forelimb
fractures of, 214, 215p
 in femoral physeal fractures, 184, 185p
 amputation with scapulectomy, 100, 101p
 in pancarpal arthrodesis, 32
 in medial patella luxation, 52, 54
Longus colli muscles
in partial carpal arthrodesis 
 Pectineus muscle
 in ventral cervical decompression, 222,
with intramedullary pins, 36
 in rear limb amputation
223p, 224
with plate, 34
at coxofemoral joint, 106, 107p
 in ventral cervical fenestration, 218, 219p,
Metacarpophalangeal joint in digital
at midshaft of femur, 108, 109p
220
amputation, 110, 11lp
 in triple pelvic osteotomy, 48, 49p
Lumbosacral laminectomy, dorsal, 234 236,
 Metatarsal bones
 Pectoral muscles
235p, 237p
fractures of, 214, 215p
 in forelimb amputation with scapulectomy.
Luxation and instability
 in pantarsal arthrodesis, 90
100, 101p
of elbow, lateral, 18-20, 19p, 21p
 in partial tarsal arthrodesis
 in humeral diaphyseal fractures
of hip
1 'am pe ud Aemp 
and extermal fixator, 162, 163p
extracapsular stabilization in, 3840,
with plate, 92
39p, 41lp
 in shearing injury with tarsal luxation, 80
nail, 154, 155p
 intracapsular stabilization in, 42-44, 43p,
Monteggia fracture, 172
 and plate application, 158, 159p
45p
 Musculocutaneous nerve in humeral
in shoulder luxation, medial, 6, 7p, 8
of sacroiliac joint, 174, 175p
 diaphyseal fractures and plate
Pelvis
of shoulder
application, 158, 159p
 in acetabular fractures, 178, 179p
lateral, 10-12, 1lp, 13p
 Mylohyoideus muscle in mandibular body
 in extracapsular stabilization of hip
medial, 6-8, 7p, 9p
fractures, 139p
luxation, 3840, 39p, 41p
of stifle
 in femoral head and neck ostectomy with
 intra-articular repair of cranial cruciate
N
 joint capsule interpolation, 46, 47p
ligament in, 64-66, 65p, 67p
 Nail, interlocking. See Interlocking nail in
 in ilial body fractures, 176, 177p
 lateral fabellar suture repair of cranial
diaphyseal fractures
 in intracapsular stabilization of hip
cruciate ligament in, 60-62, 61p, 63p
 Neutralization plate in diaphyseal fractures,
luxation, 42 44, 43p, 45p
meniscectomy in, 68-70, 69p, 71p
124, 125p
 in sacroiliac luxation, 174, 175p
 suture anchors, screws, and sutures in,
of femur, 190, 191p
in triple osteotomy, 48-50, 49p, 51p
56-58, 57p, 59p
 of humerus, 158, 160, 16lp
 Peroneus muscles
wedge recession trochleoplasty,
of radius, 166, 167p
 in talus osteochondrosis
 desmotomy, tibial tuberosity
of tibia, 204, 205p
of lateral trochlear ridge, 82, 83p, 84, 85p
transposition, and retinacular
 Notchplasty, femoral, in intra-articular repair
of medial trochlear ridge, 87p
imbrication in, 52-54, 53p, 55p
 of cranial cruciate ligament, 64, 65p
 in tarsal arthrodesis
of tarsus, in shearing injury, 78-80, 79p,
with intramedullary pin and wire, 95p
81p
with plate, 93p
 Oblique osteotomy stabilized with type II
 in tibial malleolar fractures, 201p
M
external fixator, 112, 113p
 Phalangeal bones in digital amputation, 110,
Malleolar fractures of tibia or fibula, 200,
 Obturator nerve in triple pelvic osteotomy,
11lp
201p
48, 50
Physeal fractures
Mandible
Olecranon of ulna
of femur
fractures of
in arthrodesis of elbow, 28, 29p
distal, 184, 185p
comminuted, acrylic extermal fixation in,
in lateral elbow luxation, 18, 19p
proximal, 180, 181p
140, 14lp
in ununited anconeal process, 22-24, 23p,
of humerus, proximal, 148, 149p
mandibulectomy in, 96-98, 97p, 99p
25p
of radius, distal, 170, 171p
244
INDEX
Physeal fractures (Continued)
Q
Retinaculum
of tibia
Quadriceps muscles
extensor
distal, 198, 199p
 in femoral physeal fractures, distal, 184,
 in lateral trochlear ridge of talus
proximal, 196, 197p
185p
 osteochondrosis, 83p
Pin fixation. See aiso Intramedullary pins
 in rear limb amputation
 in medial trochlear ridge of talus
 in Achilles tendon repair with tension band 
at coxofemoral joint, 106, 107p
osteochondrosis, 86, 87p
wire, 76, 77p
 at midshaft of femur, 108, 109p
in tibial malleolar fractures, 201p
 in femoral physeal fractures, distal,
in stifle luxation, 52, 56
lateral, in medial patella luxation, 52, 53p, 54
crossed pins in, 184, 185p
 Rhomboideus muscle
 in hip luxation, modified toggle pin in,
R
 in forelimb amputation with scapulectomy,
4244, 43p, 45p
Radial artery in diaphyseal fractures of
100, 101p
 in humeral physeal fractures, proximal,
 radius and plate application, 167p
 in forelimb salvage with scapulectomy,
148, 149p 
Radial carpal bone 
102, 104
 in mandibular body fractures stabilized
fractures of, 210, 211p
Rotational deformity, transverse derotational
with acrylic external fixation, 140,
in pancarpal arthrodesis, 32, 33p
 osteotomy stabilized with plate in, 114,
14lp
 in partial carpal arthrodesis
115p
 in radial diaphyseal fractures and external
with intramedullary pins, 36, 37p
fxator, 168, 169p
with plate, 34, 35p
S
 in radial styloid fractures and tension band
 in physeal fractures of radius, 17lp
Sacroiliac luxation, 174, 175p
wire, 30, 31p
Radial nerve
Saphenous artery
 in ulnar styloid fractures and tension band
 in diaphyseal humeral fractures
 in tibial diaphyseal fractures, 202, 203p
wire, 30, 31p
and extermal fixator, 162, 163p, 164
and plate application, 204, 205p
 Plate application
and intramedullary pin or interlocking
 in tibial malleolar fractures, 20lp
in acetabular fractures, 178, 179p
nail, 154, 155p, 156
Saphenous nerve in tibial diaphyseal
in carpal arthrodesis
and plate application, 158, 159p 
fractures, 202, 203p
pancarpal, 32, 33p
 in distal humeral fractures, 150, 152
 and plate application, 204, 205p
partial, 34, 35p
Radius
Saphenous vein
 in comminuted diaphyseal fractures, 128,
diaphyseal fractures of
 in talus osteochondrosis of lateral
129p
external fixator in, 122, 168, 169p
trochlear ridge, 82, 84
in elbow arthrodesis, 28, 29p
 plate application in, 166, 167p
 in tibial diaphyseal fractures, 202, 203p
 in femoral diaphyseal fractures, 128, 129p,
distal
 and plate application, 204, 205p
190, 191p
 in pancarpal arthrodesis, 32, 33p
in tibial malleolar fractures, 200, 201p
 in humeral fractures
 in partial carpal arthrodesis with
Sartorius muscle
diaphyseal, 128, 158-160, 159p, 161p
 intramedullary pins, 36, 37p
 in rear limb amputation
distal, T or Y type, 152, 153p
in partial carpal arthrodesis with plate,
at coxofemoral joint, 106, 107p
 in ilial body fractures, 176, 177p
at midshaft of femur, 108, 109p
 in long oblique diaphyseal fractures, 124,
 in physeal fractures, 170, 171p
 in stifle luxation, 56, 57p
125p
in radial carpal bone fractures, 210, 21lp
 Scalenus muscle in forelimb amputation with
 in metacarpal and metatarsal fractures,
in styloid process fractures, 30, 3lp
scapulectomy, 100, 101p
214,215p
fractures of
Scapula
 in radial diaphyseal fractures, 166, 167p
diaphyseal, 122, 166-168, 167p, 169p
 in arthrodesis of shoulder, 14, 15p 
 in scapular fractures
 physeal distal, 170, 171p
 in body of scapula, transverse, 142,
styloid process, 30, 31p
100, 10lp
143p
 oblique osteotomy stabilized with type II
 in forelimb salvage with scapulectomy,
 in neck of scapula, 146, 147p 
extermal fixator, 1l2, 113p
102104, 103p
 in short oblique or transverse diaphyseal
proximal
 in luxation of shoulder
fractures, 118, 119p
 in arthrodesis of elbow, 28, 29p
lateral, 10-12, 11p, 13p
 in shoulder arthrodesis, 14, 15p
in lateral elbow luxation, 18-20, 19p, 21p
medial, 6-8, 7p, 9p
in stifle arthrodesis, 72, 73p
in osteochondrosis of elbow and
neck of scapula fractures, 146, 147p
 in tarsal arthrodesis
 fragmented medial coronoid
 supraglenoid tuberosity fractures, 144,
pantarsal, 90, 91p
process, 16, 17p
145p
partial, 92, 93p
in ununited anconeal process, 22, 25p
transverse scapular body fractures, 142,
 in tibial diaphyseal fractures, 128, 204,
Rear limb
143p
205p
 coxofemoral disarticulation in amputation,
Scapulectomy
 in transverse derotational osteotomy, 114,
106, 107p, 108
 in forelimb amputation, 100, 101p
115p
digital amputation, 1l10, 11lp 
 in forelimb salvage, 102-104, 103p
 in triple pelvic osteotomy, 50, 5lp
hip joint disorders, 38-50, 39p, 41p, 43p,
 Scapulohumeral joint
 in ulnar fractures, proximal, 172, 173p
45p, 47p, 49p, 51p
 arthrodesis of, 14
 Prepubic tendon in triple pelvic osteotomy,
 midshaft femoral amputation, 106, 108,
 in forelimb salvage with partial 
48, 49p
109p
scapulectomy, 102, 104
 Pronator teres muscle
stifle disorders, 52-72, 53p, 55p, 57p, 59p,
 in lateral shoulder luxation, 10-12, 11p,
 in elbow osteochondrosis and fragmented
61p, 63p, 65p, 67p, 69p, 7lp, 73p
13p
 medial coronoid process, 16 
tarsus disorders, 7493, 75p, 77p, 79p, 8lp,
 in medial shoulder luxation, 6-8, 7p, 9p
in humeral distal fractures, T or Y type,
83p,85p,87p, 89p, 91p,93p, 95p
Sciatic nerve
153p
Rectus femoris muscle
 in acetabular fractures, 178, 179p
 in radial diaphyseal fractures and plate
in medial patella luxation, 52
 in femoral diaphyseal fractures, 186, 188
application, 166, 167p
in rear limb amputation with coxofemoral
 and plate application, 190
 Pubis in triple pelvic osteotomy, 48, 49p
disarticulation, 106, 107p
 in ilial body fractures, 176
INDEX
245
Sciatic nerve (Continued)
Stifle disorders (Continued)
Tarsocrural joint
 in intracapsular stabilization of hip
 intra-articular repair of cranial cruciate
 in pantarsal arthrodesis, 90
luxation, 42, 43p, 44
ligament in, 64-66, 65p, 67p
 in partial tarsal arthrodesis with
 in rear limb amputation with coxofemoral
lateral fabellar suture repair of cranial
intramedullary pin and wire, 94
disarticulation, 107p
 cruciate ligament in, 60-62, 6lp, 63p
 in shearing injury with tarsal luxation, 78
 in triple pelvic osteotomy, 50
medial patella luxation, 52-54, 53p, 55p
Tarsometatarsal joint
Screw, lag. See Lag screw fixation
meniscectomy in, 68-70, 69p, 71p
 in pantarsal arthrodesis, 90
 Screw and washer combination
suture anchors, screws, and sutures for
 in partial tarsal arthrodesis
in elbow luxation, lateral, 18, 20, 21p
stabilization in, 56-58, 57p, 59p
with intramedullary pin and wire, 94,
 in hip luxation, 40, 41p
tibial physeal fractures, 196, 197p
d96
 in humeral condylar fractures, 150
Styloid process fractures of radius and ulna,
with plate, 92
 in shoulder luxation
30, 31p
 in shearing injury with tarsal luxation, 78
lateral, 10, 12, 13p
 Subscapularis muscle
Tarsus disorders
medial, 6, 8, 9p
 in forelimb salvage with scapulectomy,
Achilles tendon rupture, 74-76, 75p, 77p
 in stifle luxation, 56-58, 57p
102
 arthrodesis in, 90, 91p
 and intra-articular repair of cranial
 in medial shoulder luxation, 6, 7p, 8
with intramedullary pin and wire, 94,
cruciate ligament, 66, 67p
Supinator muscle in radial diaphyseal
95p
 in supraglenoid tuberosity fractures, 144,
fractures and plate application, 166,
with plate, 92, 93p
145p
167p
fractures, 212, 213p
 in tarsal luxation, 78-80, 79p
 Supraglenoid tuberosity fractures, 144, 145p
metatarsal, 214, 215p
 Semimembranosus muscle in rear limb
 Suprascapular artery
tibial malleolar, 200, 201p
amputation
in scapular neck fractures, 146
tibial physeal, 198, 199p 
at coxofemoral joint, 106, 107p
 in shoulder arthrodesis, 14
osteochondrosis
 at midshaft of femur, 108, 109p 
 Suprascapular nerve
of lateral trochlear ridge of talus, 82-84,
 Semitendinosus muscle in rear limb
in scapular neck fractures, 146, 147p
83p, 85p
amputation
 in shoulder arthrodesis, 14
of medial trochlear ridge of talus, 86-88,
at coxofemoral joint, 106, 107p
in shoulder luxation, medial, 6, 8
87p, 89p
 at midshaft of femur, 108, 109p
 in supraglenoid tuberosity fractures, 144,
shearing injury with luxation, 78-80, 79p,
 Serratus ventralis muscle
145p
8lp
 in forelimb amputation with scapulectomy,
 Supraspinatus muscle
Teeth
100,10lp
in forelimb salvage with scapulectomy,
occlusion of
 in forelimb salvage with scapulectomy,
102, 103p
 in comminuted mandibular body
102, 103p, 104
 in humeral physeal fractures, proximal,
fractures, 140, 14lp
 Shearing injury with tarsal luxation, 7880,
149p
 in symphyseal mandibular fractures, 136,
79p, 81p
in infraspinatus muscle contracture, 5p 
137p
 Shoulder disorders
in scapular body fractures, transverse, 142,
 in transverse and oblique mandibular
 arthrodesis in, 14, 15p
143p
body fractures, 138, 139p
contracture of infraspinatus muscle, 4, 5p
in shoulder arthrodesis, 14, 15p
removal in mandibulectomy, 96, 97p
humeral physeal fractures, 148, 149p
 in shoulder luxation
 Tension band wire
lateral luxation, 10-12, 11p, 13p
lateral, 1lp
in acetabular fractures, 178, 179p
medial luxation, 6-8, 7p, 9p
medial, 6, 7p, 8
 in Achilles tendon injuries, 76, 77p
 osteochondrosis, 2, 3p
 Suture anchor system
 in femoral physeal fractures, proximal,
scapular fractures, 142-146, 143p, 145p,
 in elbow luxation, lateral, 18, 20
180, 181p
147p
in hip luxation, 40, 4lp
 in hip luxation and extracapsular
Spine
in shoulder luxation 
stabilization, 40, 41p
 cervical disc disorders
lateral, 10, 1lp
in radial styloid fractures, 30, 31p
ventral decompression in, 218, 220,
medial, 6, 8, 9p
in scapular neck fractures, 146, 147p
222-224, 223p,225p
 in stifle luxation, 56-58, 57p, 59p
 in supraglenoid tuberosity fractures, 144,
ventral fenestration in, 218-220, 219p,
 Symphyseal fracture of mandible, cerclage
145p
221p, 222, 224
wire in, 136, 137p
 in tarsal fractures, 212, 213p
lumbosacral laminectomy, 234 236, 235p,
in ulnar fractures
237p
T
distal, in styloid process, 30, 3lp
thoracolumbar disc disorders
Talocalcaneocentral joint
proximal, 172, 173p
fenestration in, 226, 230-232, 231p
 in partial tarsal arthrodesis
 Tensor fascia latae muscle
hemilaminectomy in, 226-228, 227p,
with intramedullary pin and wire, 94
in acetabular fractures, 178, 179p
229p, 230
with plate,92
 in femoral head and neck ostectomy with
Sternohyoideus muscle
 in shearing injury with tarsal luxation, 78
 joint capsule interpolation, 46, 47p
 in ventral cervical decompression, 222,
 in femoral neck fractures, 182, 183p
223p,224
luxation, 78
 in femoral physeal fractures, proximal,
in ventral cervical fenestration, 218, 219p,
Talus
180, 181p
220
 in pantarsal arthrodesis, 90, 91p
in hip luxation
 Sternomastoideus muscle
in partial tarsal arthrodesis with
and extracapsular stabilization, 38, 39p
 in ventral cervical decompression, 222,
intramedullary pin and wire, 94
 and intracapsular stabilization, 42, 43p
224
 in shearing injury with tarsal luxation, 78, 80
 in rear limb amputation with coxofemoral
 in ventral cervical fenestration, 218, 220
 in tarsal fractures, 212, 213p
disarticulation, 106, 107p
 Stifle disorders
trochlear ridge osteochondrosis of
in triple pelvic osteotomy, 50, 5lp
 arthrodesis in, 72, 73p
lateral, 82-84, 83p, 85p
Teres major muscle in forelimb salvage with
femoral physeal fractures, 184, 185p
medial, 86-88, 87p, 89p
scapulectomy, 102, 103p
246
INDEX
 Teres minor muscle
Tibial muscles (Continued)
Ulna (Continued)
 in forelimb salvage with scapulectomy,
 in lateral trochlear ridge of talus
fractures of
102, 103p
osteochondrosis, 82, 83p
distal, in styloid process, 30, 3lp
 in humeral physeal fractures, proximal,
in medial patella luxation, 53p, 54, 55p 
proximal, 172, 173p
148, 149p
in medial trochlear ridge of talus
 in physeal fracture of radius, 17lp
osteochondrosis, 86, 87p
proximal
 in scapular neck fractures, 147p
 in stifle arthrodesis, 72, 73p
fractures of, 172, 173p
 in shoulder arthrodesis, 14, 15p
in tarsal arthrodesis, 90, 91p
 in fragmented medial coronoid process,
 in shoulder luxation, lateral, 1lp
 in tarsal shearing injury and luxation,
16, 17p
 in shoulder osteochondrosis, 2, 3p
79p
in luxation of elbow, lateral, 1820, 19p,
 in supraglenoid tuberosity fractures, 145p
in tibial malleolar fractures, 200, 201p
21p
 Thoracic artery and vein in forelimb
 in tibial physeal fractures, 197p, 198,
 in ostectomy for elbow arthrodesis, 28,
amputation with scapulectomy, 101p
199p
29p
 Thoracic nerve in forelimb amputation with
Toggle pin, modified, in intracapsular
in ununited anconeal process, 22-24,
scapulectomy, 101p
 stabilization of hip luxation, 42 44, 43p,
23p, 25p
Thoracolumbar disc disorders
45p
Ulnar artery and vein, in elbow
fenestration in, 226, 230-232, 231p
Trachea
 osteochondrosis and fragmented medial
hemilaminectomy in, 226-228, 227p, 229p,
 in cervical disc decompression, 222, 223p
coronoid process, 16
230
 in cervical disc fenestration, 219p
Ulnaris lateralis muscle
Tibia
Transverse derotational osteotomy stabilized
in arthrodesis of elbow, 28, 29p
 diaphyseal fractures of
with plate, 114, 115p
in distal ulnar ostectomy with fat graft, 26,
cerclage wires in, 126, 202, 203p, 208,
Trapezius muscle
27p
209
 in forelimb amputation with scapulectomy,
 in proximal ulnar fractures, 172, 173p
external fixator in, 120, 122, 202, 203p,
100, 10lp
206-208, 207p, 209p
 in forelimb salvage with scapulectomy,
A
interlocking nail in, 132, 202, 203p
102, 103p, 104
Vastus intermedius muscle
 intramedullary pin in. See Intramedullary
Triceps brachi muscle
 in femoral diaphyseal fractures, 129p,
 pins, in tibial diaphyseal fractures
 in forelimb amputation with scapulectomy,
133p,187p
 plate application in, 128, 204, 205p
10lp
 and extermal fixator, 193p
distal
 in forelimb salvage with scapulectomy,
and plate application, 191p
 in lateral trochlear ridge of talus
102, 103p, 104
 in patella luxation, medial, 52
osteochondrosis, 82, 84
 in humeral fractures
Vastus lateralis muscle
 in malleolar fractures, 200, 201p
diaphyseal, and plate application, 158,
 in femoral diaphyseal fractures, 129p,
 in medial trochlear ridge of talus
159p
133p, 186, 187p
osteochondrosis, 86, 88
distal, T or Y type, 152, 153p
and extermal fixator, 192, 193p
in pantarsal arthrodesis, 90, 91p
lateral condylar, 150, 151p
and plate application, 190, 191p
 in partial tarsal arthrodesis with
proximal physeal, 149p
 in femoral head and neck ostectomy with
intramedullary pin and wire, 94
in infraspinatus muscle contracture, 5p
joint capsule interpolation, 46, 47p
 in physeal fractures, 198, 199p
 in scapular body fractures, transverse,
 in femoral neck fractures, 182, 183p
 in shearing injury with tarsal luxation,
143p
 in hip luxation
78, 80
in shoulder osteochondrosis, 2, 3p
and extracapsular stabilization, 38, 39p
 oblique osteotomy stabilized with type II
in ununited anconeal process, 22, 23p
and intracapsular stabilization, 42, 43p
external fixator, 1l2, 113p
Trochanteric fracture of femur, 180, 181p
in patella luxation, medial, 52
 physeal fractures of
Trochanteric osteotomy of femur
 in rear limb amputation with coxofemoral
distal, 198, 199p
in acetabular fractures, 178, 179p
disarticulation, 107p
proximal, 196, 197p
in extracapsular stabilization of hip
Vastus medialis muscle in medial patella
proximal
luxation, 38
luxation,52
in arthrodesis of stifle, 72, 73p
 in intracapsular stabilization of hip
 in bone grafts, as donor site, 134, 135p
luxation, 42
M
 in deranged stifle luxation, 56, 57p, 58
Trochlear ridge of talus osteochondrosis
Wedge recession trochleoplasty in medial
 in intra-articular repair of cranial
lateral, 82-84, 83p, 85p
patella luxation, 52, 53p
cruciate ligament, 64, 65p, 66, 67p
medial, 86-88, 87p, 89p
Wire techniques. See aiso Kirschner wires
in lateral fabellar suture repair of cranial
Trochleoplasty of femur in medial patella
 in acetabular fractures, 178, 179p
cruciate ligament, 60, 62, 63p
luxation, 52, 53p
 in Achilles tendon injuries, 76, 77p
 in meniscectomy, 68, 70
Tuberosity of tibia
 in femoral diaphyseal fractures, 126, 186,
physeal fractures of, 196, 197p
fracture of, 196, 197p
188, 189p
tuberosity fracture, 196, 197p
transposition in medial patella luxation, 52,
 in femoral physeal fractures, proximal,
 tuberosity transposition in medial
54, 55p
180, 181p
patella luxation, 52, 54, 55p
 in hip luxation and extracapsular
Tibial muscles
U
stabilization, 40, 41p
caudal
Ulna
in humeral diaphyseal fractures, 126
 in medial trochlear ridge of talus
distal
external fixator used with, 164, 165p 
osteochondrosis, 88, 89p
fracture of styloid process, 30, 31p
 intramedullary pin used with, 126, 156,
 in tibial malleolar fractures, 20lp
in ostectomy with fat graft, 26, 27p
157p, 164
 in tibial physeal fractures, distal, 199p
in pancarpal arthrodesis, 32
 in long oblique diaphyseal fractures, 126,
cranial
in partial carpal arthrodesis with
127p
 in intra-articular cranial cruciate
 intramedullary pins, 36
 in mandibular body fractures, transverse
ligament repair, 65p
 in partial carpal arthrodesis with plate, 34
and oblique, 138, 139p
INDEX
247
Wire techniques (Continued)
Wire techniques (Continued)
Wire techniques (Continued)
 in mandibular symphyseal fractures, 136,
 in tarsal arthrodesis, partial, 94, 95p
 in tibial malleolar fractures, 200, 201p
137p
in tarsal fractures, 212, 213p
 in tibial physeal fractures, proximal, 196,
 in radial styloid fractures, 30, 31p
 in tibial diaphyseal fractures
197p
 in scapular neck fractures, 146, 147p
extermal fixator used with, 208, 209p
 in ulnar fractures
 in supraglenoid tuberosity fractures, 144,
 intramedullary pin used with, 126, 202,
distal, in styloid process, 30, 3lp
145p
203p
proximal, 172, 173p