Manualof
British
Canine and
mall Animal
Veterinary
Association
Feline Wound
Management
and Reconstruction
Edited by
David Fowler
and John M. Williams
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
BSAVA Manual of
Canine and Feline
Wound Management
and Reconstruction
Editors:
David Fowler
DVM MVSc Diplomate ACVS
Department of Veterinary Anesthesiology, Radiology & Surgery.
Westerm College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, S7N 5B4, Canada
and
John M. Williams
MA VetMB CertVR FRCVS Diplomate ECVS
Oakwood Referrals, 267 Chester Road,
Hartford Road, Northwich, Cheshire CW8 1LP
Published by:
British Small Anirmal Veterinary Association
Kingsley House. Church Lane
Shurdington, Chetenharm 
GL51 5TQ, United Kingdorm
A Cormpany Limited by Guaran tee in England.
Registered Cormpany No. 2837793.
Registered as a Charily.
Copyright 1999 BSAVA
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmited, in form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying,recording or otherwise without prior written permission of the
copyright holder.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the Brtish Library
ISBN 0 905214 38 2
The publishers and contributors; cannot take responsibility for information
provided on dosages and methods of application of drugs mentioned in this 
publication. Details of this kind must be verified by individual users fo the
appropriate literature.
Typeset by: Fusion Design. Fordingbridge. Hampshire. UK
Printed by: Lookers, Upton, Poole, Dorset
Other titles in the BSAVA Manuals series:
Manual of Canine and Feline Emergency and Critical Care
Manual of Canine and FelineGastroenterology
Manual of Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology
Manual ofCompanion Animal Nutrition and Feeding
Manualof CanineBehaviour
Manual ofExotic Pets
ManualofFelineBehaviour
Manual of Ornamental Fish
Manual of Psittacine Birds
Manual of Raptors. Pigeons and Waterfowl
Manual of Reptiles
ManualofSmall Animal Anaesthesia andAnalgesia
ManualofSmall Animal Arthrology
Manual ofSmall Animal ClinicalPathology
Manual of Small Animal Dentistry, 2rd edition
Manual of Small Animal Dermatology
Manual of Small Animal Diagnostic Imaging
Manual ofSmall Animal Endocrinology,2rd edition
Manual ofSmall Animal Fracture Repair and Management
Manual of Small Animal Neurology, 2rd edition
ManualofSmall Animal Oncology
ManualofSmallAnimalOphthalmology
Manual ofSmall Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
In the last 20 years canine and feline wound management has advanced
dramatically. This has been based on a better understanding of wound
healing and its potential problems as well as development of
reconstructive techniques which range from basic tension relieving
procedures through to the use of microvascular techniques. The goal
d paz a an m smge sh uonnssa punom jo
to normal function as cosmetically as possible, though the final
aesthetic appearance is of secondary importance.
This manual will help you understand how wounds heal and why
they sometimes do not heal as well as we would like, and will help you
in the management process. The chapters will take you through the
decision making from the basic principles: whether to close the wound;
choosing an appropriate wound dressing; through to wound closure
techniques. A vast array of closure techniques are discussed, from the use
of simple tension relieving techniques, dealing with fluid accumulation,
axial pattern skin flaps to skin grafting. Consideration is also given to
deeper wounds and using 
either muscle flaps or microvascular
reconstructive techniques.
 This is a truly transatlantic venture with contributions from acknow-
ledged experts in their field from both the UK and North America. The
editors would like to thank the authors for their time and excellent
contributions. This book has been long in 'construction* and we are
indebted to Marion Jowett for her patience and gentle cajoling as
deadlines approached.
This is the ideal book when faced with your next degloving injur.-.
John Williams
Dave Fowler
June 1999
rt.
List of contributors
Foreword
vi
Preface
!IA!
Wound Management and Reconstruction
1
 John M. Williams and David Fowler
The Aetiology and Classification of Wounds and Skin Deficits
5
Richard A.S. White
Wound Healing and Influencing Factors
13
Clare R. Gregory
Wound Closure Options and Decision Making
25
 Jamie R. Bellah and John M. Williams
 Open Wound Management
37
 John M. Williams
Surgical Drains
47
Stephen J. Bailies
 Tension Relieving Techniques and Local Skin Flaps
57
David Fowler
Axial Pattern Flaps
69
Audrey Remedies
Skin Grafting
83
Richard A.S. White
Pedicled Muscle Flaps
95
 Jonathan Chambers
Reconstructive Microsurgery
105
 David Fowler
 Special Considerations in Wound Management
123
 John M. Williams
Complications of Wound Healing
137
Audrey Remedios
Case Examples
145
 David Fowler and John M. Williams
index
157
Contributors
Stephen J. Baines
NLA VetMB CertVR CertSAS MRCVS
Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 OES
Jamie R. Bellah
DVM Diplomate ACVS
University of Florida, College of Veterinary Medicine, Box 100126 HSC, Gainesville, FL 32610-0126, USA
Jonathan Chambers
DVM Diplomate ACVS
 Department of Small Animal Medicine, University ofGe0rgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA
David Fowler
DVM MVSc Diplomate ACVS
Department of Veterinary Anesthesiology, Radiology & Surgery, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, S7N 5B4, Canada
Clare R. Gregory
DVM Diplomate'ACVS
2112 Medical Science 1A, Veterinary Medical Surgery, University of California at Davis, Davis,
CA 95616, USA
Audrey Remedios
DVM MVSc Diplomate ACVS
 Department of Veterinary Anesthesiology, Radiology & Surgery, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, S7N 5B4, Canada
Richard A.S. White
BVetMed PhD DSAS DVR FRCVS Diplomate ACVS Diplomate ECVS RCVS Specialist in Small
.Animal Surgery
Department ofClinical Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 OES
John M. Williams
MA VetMB CertVR FRCVS Diplomate ECVS RCVS Specialist in Small Animal Surgery (Soft Tissue)
 Dakwood Referrals, 267 Chester Road, Hartford Road, Northwich, Cheshire CW8 1LP
V1
Foreword
The expectations of pet owners regarding corrective and reconstructive
 surgery have undoubtedly been raised by the ever-increasing number of
television. Moreover, surgery of this nature presents both a challenge to
the surgeon and visible rewards in the case of a successful outcome.
 During the production of this Manual, the Editors have made every
effort to ensure that the text is copiously illustrated with excellent colour
photographs, and that the various surgical techniques are clearly explained.
The sections on skin grafting and complications of wound healing will be
of particular interest to any veterinary surgeon presented with patients
following road traffic accidents and include comprehensive advice on the
 postoperative therapeutic management of such cases.
The title of this Manual might appear slightly forbidding, but a glance
at the various chapters of the book will illustrate that it contains much
useful advice for the general practitioner, not just the ambitious surgeon.
John F.R. Hird
BSAVA President 1998-99
vii
Pref
face
In the last 20 years canine and feline wound management has advanced
dramatically. This has been based on a better understanding of wound
healing and its potential problems as well as development of
reconstructive techniques which range from basic tension relieving
procedures through to the use of microvascular techniques. The goal
to normal function as cosmetically as possible, though the final
aesthetic appearance is of secondary importance.
This manual will help you understand how wounds heal and why
they sometimes do not heal as well as we would like, and will help you
in the management process. The chapters will take you through the
decision making from the basic principles: whether to close the wound;
choosing an appropriate wound dressing; through to wound closure
techniques. A vast array of closure techniques are discussed, from the use
of simple tension relieving techniques, dealing with fluid accumulation,
axial pattem skin flaps to skin grafting. Consideration is also given to
deeper wounds and using either muscle flaps or microvascular
reconstructive techniques.
 This is a truly transatlantic venture with contributions from acknow-
ledged experts in their field from both the UK and North America. The
editors would like to thank the authors for their time and excellent
a am pu xuonsuo, u uol uaaq sey yooq su 'suonuo
indebted to Marion Jowett for her patience and gentle cajoling as
deadlines approached.
 This is the ideal book when faced with your next degloving injury.
John Williams
Dave Fowler
June 1999
Wound Management and Reconstruction
John M. Williams and David Fowler
INTRODUCTION
not the surgeon. Amputation may be preferable to
reconstruction when faced with excessively debilitat
Over the past two decades, wound management and
ing extremity wounds.
reconstruction has become an increasingly exciting
The choice of reconstructive techniques suitable
and demanding area of veterinary surgery. Our knowl-
to any given case is not black and white. Accom-
edge ofthe biology of wound healing and ofthe factors
plished surgeons differ in opinion and approach. The
that contribute to abnormal wound healing has ex-
process ofevaluation and decision making is demon-
panded greatly. Open wound management has been
strated in Chapter 14. Future prospective clinical
revolutionized by the development of "new' wound
research will undoubtedly lead to more specific
dressing products that serve to optimize the wound
recommendations, but it is important to realize that
healing environment (see Chapter 5). Historically,
there will always be a great deal of latitude in the
wounds in veterinary patients were allowed to heal by
selection of reconstructive options, so long as the
second intention, or were reconstructed using rela-
surgeon adheres to basic principles.
tively simple procedures. Many more advanced
reconstructive techniques have been described more
recently. Axial patterm skin flaps (see Chapter 8),
THE GOAL OF WOUND
pedicled muscle flaps (see Chapter 10) and microvas-
RECONSTRUCTION
cular free tissue transfer (see Chapter 1l) have ex-
panded the anmamentarium of the reconstructive
The goal of wound reconstruction is to retum the
individual to the best possible function as quickly as
surgeon. Knowledgeable application of these newer
reconstructive techniques has facilitated more rapid
possible and with the best cosmetic results. To achieve
this goal, it is imperative that the veterinary surgeon
and more functional recoveries, with fewer wound-
related complications.
umderstands the basic biology of wound healing, the
reconstructive options available, factors that may af
It is important to remember that no one
fect the wound positively or negatively, and potential
reconstructive technique should be considered
superior to any other. Rather, the specific advantages
adverse sequelae. The art of successful wound recon-
struction is to match management and reconstructive
and disadvantages of each reconstructive technique
techniques optimally to the specific requirements of
must be understood and matched to the requirements
the wound.
of the wound. In many cases a combination of
techniques may be required to effect a satisfactory
reconstruction.
BASIC SURGICAL PRINCIPLES
The veterinary surgeon must always remember that
wound reconstruction following trauma or oncologi-
As with all surgery, wound reconstruction relies heav-
cal resection may be an exciting surgical challenge, but
ily on the basic principles of surgery which were put
it must ultimately be for the benefit of the patient and
forward by Halstead in 1911 (Figure 1.1) and these
should be closely adhered to. Performing surgery
without regard to the surviving tissues will inevitably-
Gentle tissue handling
lead to failure.
Accurate haemostasis
Halstead's principles can be augmented by ensur-
 Preservation of local blood supply
 ing that tissues do not dry out under hot theatre lights
Aseptic technique
and that correct instrumentation is used. Instruments
Close tissues without tension
used to handle delicate tissues, such as the skin, should
Careful approximation of tissues
cause minimal trauma. Coarse rat-toothed forceps and
Ensure no dead space
Allis tissue forceps have no role to play in reconstructive
Figure 1.1: Halsteud's principles of surgery.
surgery. Skin edges should be handled as little as
 Manual ofCanine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Type of injury
Time to act
Examples
Threatening
 Must act within minutes
Cardiac affest
Airway obstruction
 Respiratory affest
 Rapid arterial/venous haemorrhage
Severe
Must act within the
Hypovolaemia
first hour
Shock
 Penetrating wounds to thorax of abdomen
Loss of consciousness
 Respiratory distress
 Spinal trauma and neurological deficits 
Serious
Must act within the
 Multiple deep lacerations
first few hours
Blunt trauma
Moderate degree of shock
Compound fractures
Septicaemia
Major
Need to act within
 Fractures
24 hours
 Deep puncture wounds
Figure 1.2: Triage organization chart.
possible and fine instruments such as skin hooks,
trauma must be dealt with immediately and which may
Debakey or fine-toothed Adson forceps are least trau-
be safely leff. It is, however, important to realize that
matic. Alternatively, fine monofilament stay sutures
any injured patient may destabilize fapidly and there-
can be used. All incisions should be carfied out with a
fore all patients should be assessed at regular intervals.
scalpel and not scissors, as the latter crush and teaf
 In addition to a broad sweep assessment it is useful
tissues. Similarly, sutures and suture material should
 to have an organized rapid system for evaluating the
be of fine gauge monofilament with swaged on feverse
patient. An example is shown in Figure 1.3.
cutting needles used. Needle holders are often a matter
In evaluating a patient following trauma, consid-
of personal preference but should be fine tipped so as
eration should be given, where appropriate, to radio-
not to break and to allow accurate placement.
graphy: this should not only cover the affected part of
the body (e.g. the pelvis of a distal limb) but also
include thoracic radiography to look for evidence of air
PATIENT EVALUATION
Or fluid within the thorax. Limb ffactures will of
necessity fequire management, and the surgeon must
Initial evaluation of the trauma patient
prioritize what needs to be dealt with first. The use of
When presented with a dog or cat which has been
external fixators has helped considerably in the man-
involved in trauma, resulting in a grotesque open
 agement of fractures associated with open wounds (see
wound, it is all too easy to concentrate on the wound
and to forget that other body systems may also be
traumatized. It is therefore essential on presentation to
A
Airway
evaluate fully the injured patient to ensure that there are
C
Cardiovascular
no other life-threatening injuries. Following initial
evaluation it is equally essential to manage the whole
R
Respiratory
 patient appropriately.
 It is vital to develop a routine for rapid but accurate
A
Abdomen
evaluation of the trauma patient, which allows full
S
Spine
assessment of vital parameters and the institution of
rapid life-preserving measures when required. With all
H
Head
trauma patients the most important step is to determine
P
 Pelvis
that there is a patent airway and that the cardiorespira-
 tory system is functional; all other body systems are
L
Limbs
secondary to this.
A
Arteries
It is useful to use charts of plans to ensure that no
N
systems afe missed. Figure 1.2 outlines one such plan,
Nerves
which gives general guidelines as to which types of
Figure 1.3: ACRASH PLAN.
Wound Management and Reconstruction
3
the BSAVA Manual of Small Animal Fracture Repair
Histology of the primary tumour (biopsies must
and Management). External fixators may be applied
be planned such that all biopsy tracts can be
early following presentation, where other methods of
subsequently excised at time of surgical resection)
fixation may be inappropriate, and will allow any open
Size and full extent of primary tumour
wound to be dressed as needed.
Evaluation of local draining lymph nodes for
 In the initial period it is important to remember that
metastatic spread
the traumatized patient will be suffering pain and that
 Radiographic evaluation of the thorax for
this must be attended to. The choice is that of the
evidence of distant spread
individual veterinary surgeon and will require judi-
With certain tumour types, it may be necessary
cious use of opioids and/or non-steroidal anti-inflam-
to assess other organs and body systems with
matory drugs (NSAIDs) as the situation dictates.
radiography, ultrasonography, computerized
 A full discussion on trauma management is outside 
tomography or magnetic resonance imaging.
the scope of this chapter and readers are referred to the
BSA VA Manual of Canine and Feline Emergency and
Although surgery remains the cormerstone for the
Critical Care and the reading list.
management of most solid tumours, it is essential to
It is inevitable that in some situations, wound
understand the roles of chemotherapy, radiotherapy
 management and return to normal function may not be
and immunotherapy in designing an optimal treatment
possible. For example, where there is a severe wound
plan. The surgeon should work closely with medical
to a distal extremity the surgeon should consider the
 oncologists, pathologists and radiologists so that ap-
 possibility of limb amputation or, in some extreme
propriate multimodality treatment can be instituted.
situations, euthanasia. It is essential not to lose sight of
This may include pre- or postoperative chemotherapy.
the fact that, despite advances in wound care and
reconstruction, we must provide the patient with an
is planned, it is essential that the timing of surgery is
adequate quality of life. In some cases it is also impor-
such that adjunctive therapy has the minimum delete-
tant to remember that not all clients can afford exten-
rious effect on wound healing.
sive and expensive management.
Planning management and reconstruction
Evaluation of the cancer patient
All wounds are not created equal. The veterinary
Many major advances in reconstructive surgery have
 surgeon has an opportunity to control the wound envi-
been in response to the development of aggressive
ronment in surgically created tissue deficits (e.g.
 tumour resections). Particular attention is paid to mini-
ing of the biology oftumours, in particular the sarco-
mizing contamination, preserving vascular supply,
mas, has moved the surgeon away from simple
and limiting tissue trauma. In contrast, the surgeon
"lumpectomies" to radical excisions. Such deficits
has no control over the initial status of traumatic
have meant that the surgeon must not only plan to
wounds. A thorough understanding of the wound's
excise a tumour with adequate margins but must also
aetiology, the degree of contamination, the likelihood
plan how to close the resultant wound.
 of significant vascular disruption, and the potential for
 In evaluating a patient with a solid tumour it is
 ongoing tissue necrosis is imperative. These factors
necessary to stage the patient according to the TNM
are discussed in more detail in Chapter 4.
classification system (Figure 14; Owen, 1980). Such
The depth of tissue injury and the involvement of
staging allows the veterinary surgeon to gauge the full
"critical" tissues or structures must also be considered.
extent and type of the primary tumour, together with
Traumatic wounds associated with long bone fracture
knowledge as to whether it has spread within the
(grade III b open fracture) or with exposed neurovas-
patient; such information is essential to arrive at an
cular structures benefit from early reconstruction
accurate prognosis and treatment strategy. The sur-
using well vascularized tissues. Early reconstruction
 geon and the client must have the maximum amount of
of the fracture using muscle flaps is associated with a
information possible so that an informed judgement
lower incidence of osteomyelitis, an earlier onset of
can be made on management.
callus fonmation and more rapid union. Superficial
The minimum database available for an oncologi-
wounds are amenable to more prolonged periods of
cal case should be:
open wound management, allowing delayed recon-
struction or second intention healing.
TNM STAGING SYSTEM
 Successful reconstruction of any wound relies on
sy uoans aun g nsaq Aiqeqond si n suuue[d inam
T
Primary Tumour
more than one plan in mind. One ofthe leading human,
N
 Regional Lymph Nodes
plastic and reconstructive surgeons of the twentieth
century, Sir Harold Gillies, was quoted as saying 'Never
M
Distant Metastasis
do today what can best be done tomorrow' (Converse.
Figure 1.4: The TSM tumour classification system.
1977). Although thorough preoperative planning should
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
lead to identification of an optimal reconstructive strat-
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
egy, occasionally we find that the initial reconstructive
READING
plan is inadequate due to poor local or distant blood
supply or, in the case of oncological surgery, because the
Converse JM (1977) Reconstructive Plastic Surgery. WB Saunders.
original excision becomes larger than was initially an-
Philadelphia
Coughlan A and Miller A (1998) BSAVA Manuat of Smatt Animat
ticipated. The most successful reconstructions tend to be
Fracture Repair and Management. BSAVA, Cheltenham
those where the surgeon had more than one plan in mind
King L and Hammond R (1999) BSA VA Manuat of Canine and Fetine
at the outset and was prepared to implement back-up
Emergency and Criticat Care. BSAVA, Cheltenham
Owen LN (1980) TNM Ctassification of Tumours in Domestic A nimats.
strategies without further delay.
WHO.Geneva
CHAPTER TWO
The Aetiology and Classification
of Wounds and Skin Deficits
RichardA. S. White
contamination within the wounded tissues and the
The treatment of wounds is a branch of the
associated trauma that determine patient morbidity.
greatest importancein the practice of farriery
For that reason and despite the fact that there is no
yet it is very imperfectly understood, and many
umiversally accepted wound classification system it
foolish and injurious opinions are entertained
is useful to categorize wounds according to their
on the subject.
aetiology since this will usually provide some indica-
Lawson, Modern Farrier, 1832
tion of their likely complications in terms of:
 The severity and complexity of the skin deficit
 The likely degree of accompanying bacterial
INTRODUCTION
contamination
 The extent of trauma to the surrounding tissues.
A wound can be defined as:
An interruption in the continuity of the extermal
INCISIONAL INJURIES
surface of the body or of the surface of an
intemal organ.
Aetiology
This chapter examines those aspects of the aetiology
Incisions are created by a sharp object moving in a
 and classification of wounds that relate specifically to
 plane parallel to the skin surface. The incising object is
the extermal surface and its associated structures. Since
most commonly a scalpel blade at the beginning of a
wounds have a wide variety of aetiologies and their
surgical procedure but in traumatic wounds it may be
patterns of tissue trauma vary considerably, it follows
a glass fragment or a jagged tin edge responsible for the
that the clinician must have a thorough appreciation of
wound. Incisional wounds arc typified by their clean,
their causation and complications in order to provide
regular edges which gape open as the result of the
the most effective treatment for the individual wound
inherent elasticity of the adjacent skin (Figures 2.1 and
type. Although initially the clinician's attention may
2.2). Depending on its aetiology, the depth of the
be drawn to the superficial part ofthe wound or to the
incision can vary considerably along its length and
skin deficit itself, it is often the severity of bacterial
 despite minimal involvement ofthe surrounding tissue
Figure 2.2: Incisionat wound. An incised traumatic wound
resulting from the malicious placement of an elastic band
Figure 2.1: Incisional wound. The ctean surgically incised
over the lower jaw. Note that despite its traumatic aetiology
wound is characterized byregularedges,minimal trauma to the
the wound still retains regular, well defined edges with litte
associated tissuesand has litte opportunity for contamination.
damage apparent to the deeper tissues.
Copyrighr @R.A.5. Whine
opyrighs
6
Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
there may be extension to the deeper tissues resulting
DEGLOVING AND AVULSION
in section of muscles, tendons or nerves.
WOUNDS
Complications
Aetiology
The mechanism of the injury does not lend itself to
Although degloving and avulsion injuries have dif-
inoculation of microorganisms into the wound and
fering aetiologies it is convenient to discuss them
consequently incisions tend to be free of major
together since they are often similar in appearance
contamination. Additionally, incised wounds bleed
 and have the same complications. A degloving injury
freely and this irigating and cleansing effect is valu-
describes the tearing away of skin from an extremity.
able in terms of preventing what superficial bacterial
usually a limb, in a manner similar to the removal of
contamination there may be from becoming estab-
a glove from a hand. The process of degloving may be
lished in the tissues. Incisions are for the most part,
either mechanical or physiological.
therefore, much less prone to infection than other
Mechanical degloving. sometimes described as
types of wounds and this often penmits their safe
a stretch laceration, occurs as the overlying skin is
primary closure at a comparatively early stage. The
torm from its subdenmal attachments. This is most
edges of the wound and surrounding tissues are rarely
frequently seen in road traffic injuries as a car wheel
contused but exploration of the full depth of the
runs over a limb or as the result of severe abrasive
wound is indicated to ensure that trauma to deeper
injuries (Figure 2.3).
structures is not overlooked.
Physiological degloving is the consequence of
damage to the vascular supply as the skin and sub-
cutaneous tissues are sheared from the deeper fascia,
ABRASIONS
leading to subsequent sloughing ofthe overlying skin
 over a period of days (Figure 2.4). The aetiology of
Aetiology
either mechanism may, however, be similar.
An abrasion refers to damage caused to the epidermis
Avulsion injuries refer to the forcible separation of
and superficial dermis by frictional contact with a
tissue from its attachments. Avulsions are commonly
surface moving in a plane parallel to that of the
seen as the sequel to dog fights in which large areas of
skin. In practice, this tenm is also often used to refer to
skin are simply torm from their attachments. Some of
 any wound caused through abrasive injury, even though
the most severe avulsions occur in dog fights and fights
tissues much deeper than the dermis may be involved.
with badgers or foxes in which typically the dog's
In small animal practice, abrasions are most com-
mandible can be extensively exposed or even removed
monly encountered in road traffic injuries and occur as
(Figure 2.5).
 the animal becomes trapped between the road surface
and the moving vehicle with either, or both, providing
Complications
the abrasive surface. Less commonly, abrasions are
Both degloving and avulsion injuries may initially be
found involving digital pads as the consequence of
free of bacterial contamination although they may be
prolonged exercise or contact with rough surfaces.
complicated by associated orthopaedic injury.
The
sloughing process in physiological degloving may
Complications
take several days and secondary infection of the necrotic
The mechanism of abrasion usually results in the
tissue may become a problem. The major management
wound becoming heavily contaminated with micro-
 concerm is the reconstruction of what is often a large
organisms and debris from the abrading surface.
cutaneous deficit over an extremity where spare adja-
Moreover, the force of the abrasion ensures that these
cent skin is at a premium. The degloved skin may
contaminants are deeply embedded in the tissue and
remain attached by a pedicle, in which case an imme-
will require careful removal during the initial stages
of wound management. The debridement stage for
abrasions will, therefore, often be prolonged and
early wound closure is rarely a safe option. In its
strictest sense, abrasion refers to a wound in which the
umderlying dermis remains intact and, therefore, with
 suitable management of the wound the dermis should
be capable of providing subsequent regrowth of the
epidermal layers and reconstruction will not be a
Figure 2.3: Mechanicat degloving.The wound involving the
consideration. For many so-called abrasion wounds,
forelimbresultedfromroad traffc trauma.The limb was
trappedunder thecar'swheel and the skinwas stripped
however, there is extensive tissue loss and involve-
away between the tyre androad surface.The wound isful-
ment of the deeper dermal layers and the subsequent
circumference andwas heavily contaminatedwithmaterial
replacement or reconstruction of skin becomes an
from the road surface on initiat presentation.
important longer term consideration.
Cnpyrighi RA.5. Mhile
The Aetiology and Classification of Wounds and Skin Deficits
Figure 2.4: Physiological
(2)
degtoving.This injury was
dueto ischaemic damage
following road traffic
trauma,(a) The dog's
forelimb48 hours afterthe
injury. Cutaneous necrosis
is beginning as the result
ofvascular damage
sustained at the time of the
original injury，(h) The
extentof thefinat area of
stoughing after7 days.
Copyright  R.A.S While
diate reconstruction can be considered, or totally
detached, in which case it can be used as a free graff.
Avulsions involving the mandible represent a consid-
erable reconstructive challenge due the difficulty of
attaching skin to bone devoid of a periosteum.
SHEARING INJURIES
Aetiology
· earing injuries have a similar aetiology to degloving
wounds and are usually the result of road traffic trauma.
They involve the limbs and tend to be encountered in
immature dogs. The medial aspect of the carpus,
Figure 2.5:Avutsion wound.Almost the entire softtissue
phalanges and particularly the tarsometatarsal joints
covering has been removed from the ventral aspect of a
terrier'smandible - the result of a confrontation with a
 are particularly prone to this type of injury ( Figure 2.6).
badger.
Copyright K.A.5. White
[Complications
in addition to damage to the skin and associated
 structures, shearing wounds involve bones and, more
seriously, joints. Like degloving wounds, shearing
injuries are heavily contaminated with bacteria and
derbis from the abrading surface. These wounds are
ext remely prone to infection and can be expected to
require long-term open wound care to prevent this. In
case
of joint involvement there may be deep
 pemertation ofthe joint surfaces bythe contamination.
The bacterial load within the joint is considered to be
the major determinant for primary wound closure and
" wounds should be lef to heal secondarily rather
than reconstructed or grafted at an early stage. Joint
Figure 2.6: A shearing wound. There is loss of supporting
injaries are further complicated by the damage to their
soft tissue structures,exposure of the joint and deep
 associated supporting sof tissuestructures such as
contamination within the joint surfaces on the medial aspect
 ligaments ortendons which gives rise toinstability anefa hock.
Occasionally valgus deformityofthe carpus ortarsusCopyrighr RA.5s. While
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
CAST AND BANDAGED WOUNDS
Penetration injuries involving the oropharynx are
encountered in dogs exercised by retrieving sticks. In
Aetiology
this situation, the dog's own momentum takes it on to
Wounds fesulting ffom veterinary attention are an
the stick which becomes fixed upright in the ground.
 important and unavoidable consideration in small ani-
These wounds may involve the tongue, the floor of
mal practice. Amongst the more common causes are
the mouth, the walls of the pharynx or, in the most
injuries caused through poor casting of bandaging
severe cases, the oesophagus. Less common puncture
technique. Such iatrogenic wounds result from ischae-
aetiologies include snake and insect bites, and firearm
 mic injury following the overly tight application of the
wounds.
support in combination with a failure to carefully
inspect the wound regularly. Thin-skinned dogs such
Complications
as Greyhounds, Whippets and Lurchers are especially
Puncture wounds are characterized by a felatively
 prone to this type of injury.
small skin wound with a minimal deficit which is often
of little significance in terms of wound management
Complications
(Figure 2.8). However the accompanying, and often
Affected areas usually involve some point of pressure
unseen, injury to the deeper tissues and the conse-
(e.g. over digits, olecranon). Less serious casting wounds 
quences of their bacterial contamination by the pen-
include sloughing of dermal layers, whilst the more
etrating object are of far greater importance (Figure
serious may lead to loss of digits and even limbs (Figure
2.9). The penetrating teeth may inoculate superficial
2.7). Gangrenous changes may be a further complication.
tissue, including hair and bacteria from the oral cavity
and skin surface, deep into the traumatized tissues.
This combination of a closed wound without any
PUNCTURE WOUNDS
natural route for drainage, contused muscle and hae-
 matoma or seroma accumulation in a dead space de-
Aetiology
prived of its normal vascular supply creates the most
A puncture wound is the result of a sharp object moving
ideal medium possible for bacterial growth promoting
rapidly in a plane perpendicular to the skin. A perforat-
rapid infection. The prevalent skin bacteria fesponsi-
ing wound normally refers to a puncture injury with both
ble for wound infections in small animals are Staphy.
an entry- and an exit wound, whilst a penetrating wound
lococcus spp., Streptococcus spp. and Pasteurella
 has only an entry wound. The most commonly encoun-
spp., the latter predominating in the cat. However, the
tered type of puncture wound in small animal practice is
absence of any drainage or communication with the
the bite injur.' in which the puncturing object is a tooth,
surface wound through the naffow wound tract, which
particularly the canine. As the tissues are gripped, the
may close prematurely, further complicates the wound
comparatively mobile superficial layers are penetrated
 by creating a hypoxic environment favouring the growth
by the teeth whilst the fixed deeper tissues are subjected
of anaerobic organisms such as Clostridium spp. The
to more sefious injuries due to the accompanying crush-
growth of these organisms is further assisted by their
ing and shearing effects. Bites may become further
ability to inhibit neutrophil migration and to function
 complicated through traction of the crushed tissues, and
in a fegion of already impoverished vascular supply
lacerations, contusions and separation of large areas of
(Figure 2.9). In 'little dog:big dog* confrontations the
skin may develop.
bite wounds may be severe enough to enter body
Figure 2.8: Puncture wound. A stake wound in the axilla ofa
dog. The modest skin injury conceals a residuat tength of
Figure 2.7: Bandage wound. Extensive fid I thickness skin
wooden stake which has lacerated the axillary artery and
lossfollowing inadequate management of bandagingfora
brachiat plexus.The traumatized environment provides an
skin wound.
ideal medium for anaerobic bacterial growth.
Copyrighi  R.A.5. fIfe
Copyrighi D K.A.5. While
The Aetiology and Classification of Wounds and Skin Deficits
SNAKE AND INSECT BITES/STINGS
Aetiology
 Snake and insect bites are specialized forms of punc-
ture wound which have theif own specific complica-
 tions as a consequence of the substances inoculated.
The adder is the only venomous snake found natur-
ally in the UK and occasionally snake bites involving
an extremity afe encountered in dogs exercised on
areas of heath and moorland, although not all cases
involve venom.
 In northern Europe there are few insect species
capable of causing significant wound complications,
although secondary infection following incomplete
femoval of tick mouthparts is a well recognized prob-
lem. Wasp and bee stings may cause acute localized
swelling particularly in the oral cavity.
The brown recluse spider, found in south-eastein
 parts of the USA, inoculates a necrotizing substance
into the subcutaneous tissues, leading to serious
wound complications.
(a
/11
009935
Figure 2.10: Puncture wound. A pharyngeat stick injury in
Figure 2.9: Puncture wound. A bite wound to the forearm of
the dog resulting from the dog running on to a stick thrown
a dog. (a) Less than 48hours after injury there is atready
for retrieva! by the owner.The depth of penetration is
gross swelling of the lower limb, (b) Surgical exploration of
demonstrated by the stick and the exit levet of the drain.
the wound shows widespread myonecrosis. This was due to α
clostridial infection.
Copyrighi i: RA.S. Whie
cavities. Here, the thoracic wounds may be compli-
cated by rib trauma and pneumothorax, whilst abdomi-
nal wounds may be accompanied by fuptures of the
 abdominal wall and penetration of the viscera. Neck
injuries may involve perforation of the upper airway
 with subcutaneous air leakage into the cervical tissues.
Stick injuries involving the floor of the mouth of
pharyngeal wall cause dysphagia (Figure 2.10). Inju-
fies involving the oesophagus are usually of a more
acute and sefious nature due to bacterial contamination
25X
extending to the mediastinum through the perforation
(Figure 2.11). Often fragments ofwood are left embed-
ded in the wound and eventually form a septic focus
Figure 2.1l: Puncture wound.Amputation of the oesophagus
which discharges via sinus tracts opening into the
from its rostra! aftachment following a pharyngea! stick injury.
cervical region or into the pharynx itself.
Copyrighi f. HA.5. White
10
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Figure 2.12:Snake bite.
(a)An envenomizedadder
wound, resuting in
widespreadstoughingof
theskin overlying the
forelimb in a Retriever.
(b) Complete loss of the
skin to theforelimb7days
after the originat bite.
Copyrighu ZR.A.5. Whit ?
Complications
 prolonged periods on faulty or badly monitored heat-
Snake venom may cause a variety of both local and
 ing beds during surgery or in intensive care units may
systemic problems. The local changes caused by adder
sustain iatrogenic bums (Figure 2.13). Hypothermic
bites include myonecrosis and damage to the blood
burns occur through frostbite and usually involve the
vessel walls, leading to ischacmia and tissue sloughing
extremities (tail tips, pinnae and nose). Although un-
(Figure 2.12). The venom inoculated by the brown
common in the UK, they are encountered more fre-
recluse spider is capable of causing extensive and
quently in the northem parts of the European and
alanmingly rapid tissue necrosis, confined initially to
American continents.
the skin and subcutaneous structures, but in some cases
this can severe enough to cause the loss of a digit or
Chemical burns
even a limb.
Chemical bums result from contact with caustic ma-
terials such as battery acid, alkalis and phenol. The
wounds may involve the footpads or,
.in cases of
BURNS
ingestion, there may be oropharyngeal and oesopha-
 geal burming.
Aetiology
Burns are injuries caused by an extreme of heat or cold
Figure 2.13:
Burn.An
or by another physical agent having a similar effect,
e.g. electricity, caustic agents or radiation.
iatrogenic
hyperthermic
injury caused by
Thermal burns
a hot water bottle
Thermal bums are the consequence of extremes of heat
being placed in
(hyperthermic) or cold (hypothermic). As a general
directcontact
with the patient's
comment, the small animal species seem remarkably
dorsum during
a routine
wounding. Hyperthermic bums may be the result of:
mastectomy
scalds; contact with hot surfaces (car exhaust during
procedure.
road traffic injuries); or malicious immersion in, fol-
Copyright Z R.A.5. While
lowed by ignition of, flammable fluids. Classically,
scalds are encountered involving either the dorsum or
ventrum of the animal. Dorsal scalds are the result of
domestic accidents involving boiling water or fat be-
ing tipped over the animal; ventral scalds are seen in
animals which are either dropped, or not uncommonly
jump, into boiling water. Recumbent patients left for
The Aetiology and Classification of Wounds and Skin Deficits
11
sustain burns to relatively large surface areas (>50%)
without experiencing the severe systemic and meta-
 bolic complications common in human burn patients.
 Nevertheless, these complications may be recognized
in the small animal patient and include dehydration,
hyper/hyponatraemia, hyper/hypokalaemia, acidosis,
azotaemia and anaemia, and pulmonary oedema fe-
sulting from smoke inhalation.
Although secondary infection of the wound is
common, septicaemia is an unusual complication.
Burnt tissue ofen shows a distinct line of demarca-
tion at its junction with the healthy surrounding tissue
Figure 2.14: Burn.An etectrical contact burn in ayoung
within a few hours. Early resection of the devitalized
puppy that chewed through a live electrica! wire.Notice the
area with immediate reconstruction is now consid-
extent of the lip wound and exposure of the mandibte. There
ered preferable to the practice ofretaining the eschar
wasadditional damage to the tongue and to the hard palate.
in situ. In addition to shortening the period of wound
Copyrighi 6 R.A.5. Hbte
management it also helps to limit the potential for the 
other sefious long-term complication associated with
Electrical burns
burn wounds, namely, scarring (Figure 2.15). First
Electrical burns can result from the animal touching a
degree burns normally heal without major cosmetic
low-tension electrical source (contact burns) or ffom
change but second degree bums will result in scarring
indirect contact with a high-tension source (flash or arc
whilst in third degree injuries all layers of the skin
burns). Contact burns fesult from the current passing
will have been destroyed requiring reconstruction.
into the body and commonly are the result of puppies
All scars and grafts tend to contract and there is the
chewing through unearthed electrical cables (Figure
potential for loss of limb function through contrac-
2.14). Flash burns are superficial thermal injuries seen
ture of the overlying tissues.
 occasionally in animals coming close to high-voltage
Electrical contact bums are most often seen in
cables (e.g. failway lines) as the current is earthed.
 young puppies that chew through unearthed cables.
The consequences can be extremely sefious; initially
Radiation burns
this is because the bum may involve or completely
 Radiation bums can fesult from exposure to doses of
destroy lips, tongue, palate or mandible and create
ifradiation greater than 40-50 Gy, depending on the
severe feeding problems. Secondly, the burnt tissues 
fadiation tolerance of the irradiated tissue. Tissue
are immature and easily damaged and their reconstruc-
overlying bone appears to be particularly prone to this
tion in the longer term is complex. Flash burns usually
type of burn. Rarely a problem in everyday practice,
involve a limb or other extremity and, although they
fadiation burns can pose considerable complications in
may pose serious feconstruction problems, they are
the oncological patient.
less likely to be accompanied by such severe damage
to underlying structures.
Complications
The problems associated with bums in small animals
are poorly understood (see Chapter 12). Bums have
Figure 2.15: Bum.
 been classically described according to their depth:
Extensive scarring
following an
 First degree bum:
involves only the
immersionscald
injury.Note the
epidermis
Second degree bum:
epidermis and variable
axillae, groin and
depth of the dermis
ventrum.causing
Third degree burn:
entire skin thickness +/-
severe restriction of
orthopaedic function.
underlying tissues.
Copyrighi 6 HAS. WhiU
This classification has been gradually abandoned,
although estimation of the affected proportion of the
patient's surface area remains an important descriptive
method.
Much information has been incorrectly extrapo-
lated ffom experience with human bum patients and it
is evident there are several very important differences.
In particular, it is quite clear that small animals can
12
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Figure 2.16: Firearm
wound.Ahigh-velocity
batistic wound involving
the foretimb ofa dog that
was shot by a 0.223 catibre
military weapon, (a) The
entry wound is smatt,
round and regular with
litte indication ofthe
undertying trauma,(b) The
size ofthe exit wound
emphasizes the conicat
shape of the wound caused
by the shockwave ofthe
impacting batistic.The
distat two-thirds of the
radius and utna had been
removedbythe shockwave
through the exit wound.
Copyright t. RA.S. White
(a)
FIREARM INJURIES
a regular diameter (i.e. cylindrical) tract with com-
paratively minor damage.
Aetiology
Medium- and high-velocity missiles traumatize tis-
 The mechanics of fireanm wounds is complex and far
sue by imparting their kinetic energy to the surrounding
beyond this brief discussion (see Chapter 12). It is
tissues, causinga compression wave which moves ahead
convenient to categorize firearm injuries according to
of the ballistic. This energy is converted either into
the type of weapon involved, since the patterm of trauma
stretching forces within the tissue or to disruption creat-
is determined in the first instance by the velocity ofthe
 ing cavitation of the tissues. The greater the velocity, the
missile. As the velocity ofthe missile increases, so the
greaterthe tendency to cavitation. Entry wounds may be
kinetic energy which it is capable of imparting to the
modest but exit wounds are large (Figure 2.16). The
impacted tissue increases exponentially:
severity of the wound patterm is further influenced by the
type of ballistic. Expanding bullets extend the size of the
 Kinetic Energy = Mass x Velocity2
cavity, as does any tendency for the bullet to 'tumble'
through the tissues causing an expanding (i.e. conical)
2g
tract (see Chapter 12).
where # · acceleration cdue to graviry.
Missiles from shotguns, airguns and handguns have
FURTHER READING
a muzzle velocity of <300 m/s and are regarded as
being of low velocity. Hunting rifle projectiles have
Beardsley SL and Schrader SC (1995) Treatment of dogs with wounds
muzzle velocities of 300-800 m/s and are classified as
of the limbs caused by shearing forces: 98 cases (1975 1993).
medium velocity, whilst military rifle missiles travel at
Journat of the American Veterinary Medicat Association 207,
>1000 m/s and are considered as high velocity.
107 1-1075
Kolata RJ and Burrows CF (1981) The clinical features of injury by
chewing electrical cords in dogs and cats.Journat of the American
Complications
Animat Hospitat Association 17, 219-222
 Pavletic MM (1986) Gunshot wounds in veterinary medicine: projectile
The entry and exit wounds of low-velocity missiles
ballistics.Part 1. Compendium on Continuing Education for the
are generally of small diameter and the tissue tract
Practicing Veterinarian 8.47-60
PavleticMM(1986) Gunshot wounds in veterinary medicine: projectile
has a regular diameter. In the case of shotgun wounds
ballistics. Part 2. Compendium on Continuing Education for the
the proximity of the weapon and resulting density of
Practicing Veterinarian 8, 125-134
Pope ER (1993) Bums: thermal, electrical, chemical and cold injuries.
missile spread also determine the type of entry
In: Textbook ofSmatt Animat Surgery. 2nd edn, ed. DH Slater,
wound and may result in extensive removal of skin
pp.3S5-369. WB Saunders. Philadelphia
 and associated tissues. The deepertissues are trauma
 Renegar WRand Stoll SG ( 1980) Gunshot wounds involving the canine
carpus: surgical management. Journat of the American Animat
tized mainly by laceration and compression, leaving
HospitatAssociation16.233-239
CHAPTER THREE
Wound Healing and Influencing Factors
Clare R. Gregory
THE PRINCIPLES OF WOUND
tissues. Although the locally formed fibrin clot (Figure
HEALING
3.1) is important for temporarily sealing the wound and
for providing a lattice framework for subsequent mi-
The phrase "wound healing* is often used exclusively
gration of neutrophils, monocytes, fibroblasts and endo-
to describe the process that occurs in the skin as the
 thelial cells, it is also an impediment to wound healing.
body restores the integrity of lost tissue by the forma-
It increases the amount of devitalized cellular debris
tion of a collagenous scar. However, similar processes
that must be removed by inflammatory and cellular
to those that occur in the skin also occur during repair
processes, it enlarges wound dead space and it pro-
in a variety of other tissues and organs.This repair may
vides an excellent medium for microbial growth.
represent maintenance of wear and tear injuries that
The migration of cells into the injured tissue ap-
occur in joints, replacement of highly proliferative
 pears to occur in sequence. Increased vascular perme-
cells with short life spans, such as epithelial cells lining
ability and release of prostaglandins, together with the
the intestinal tract, or the repair of traumatic injuries.
release of chemotactic substances such as complement
-os pue pazjuesio ue suassjn adA Aue jo Ain!u
factors, interleukin- 1, tumour necrosis factor-a. (TNF.
plex cascade of cellular and biochemical events that
a), transforming growth factor-13 (TGF-P), platelet
result in a healed wound. These processes can lead to
factor 4 and bacterial products, stimulate neutrophil
pathological conditions ifhealing is excessive or defi-
migration within hours of wounding. Neutrophils are
cient. Wound healing failures can pose a significant
followed by monocytes, lymphocytes and fibroblasts.
clinical problem with a large impact on morbidity.
All cells participating in wound healing must be acti-
mortality and medical costs. A grasp of the fundamen-
vated. Activation entails the phenotypic altering of
tal physiology of wound healing results in a better
cellular, biochemical and functional properties in-
umderstanding of the pathophysiological processes that
duced by local physical and biochemical mediators.
impair wound healing.
Activation may induce new cell surface antigen ex-
The wound healing process is often divided into
pression, increased cytotoxicity, or increased produc-
three overlapping phases:
tion and release of cytokines and growth factors.
 Neutrophils, macrophages and lymphocytes predomi-
1. Haemostasis and inflammation
nate during inflammation, but the contribution of each
2. Proliferation
cell population to the successful outcome of wound
 3. Maturation and remodelling.
healing is variable. Macrophages and lymphocytes
exert critical roles, but neutrophils are not essential,
Haemostasis and inflammation
 provided that no bacterial contamination is present,
Traumatic injuries, such as those caused by roadtraffic
since their role in phagocytosis and antimicrobial
 defence may be taken over by macrophages.
accidents or gunshots, account for many wounds in
domestic animals. Other wounding factors include
In contrast, healing is severely impaired when
physical agents such as heat and cold, chemicals,
macrophage function is suppressed. The activation of
ionizing radiation, microbial infection, neoplasia and 
 macrophages has fundamental implications in several
surgical intervention. Haemorrhage occurs to varying
areas of wound healing including debridement, matrix
degrees in all wounds and must be controlled. The
 synthesis and angiogenesis. Wound macrophages are
rupture of vessels exposes the subendothelial collagen
derived from blood monocytes that migrate
into
to platelets and results in aggregation of platelets and
injured tissue. The initial release of chemotactic and
the activation of the intrinsic part of the coagulation
growth factors from platelets is the first stimulus, and
cascade. The contact between collagen and platelets,
a strong one, of macrophage activation. The phago-
as well as the presence of thrombin, fibronectin and
cytosis of cellular debris such as fibronectin or colla-
their fragments, results in the release of cytokines and
gen also contributes to their activation. This activation
growth factors from platelets and the surrounding
also leads to the release of additional cytokines and
14
4  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
clotinwound defect
epidermis
basal epithelial cells
migrating along cut
edge of dermis
capillary
collagen bundlesin dermis
fibroblast and
undifferentiated
mesenchymal cell
mononuclearleucocyte
polymorphonuclear
leucocyte
dilatedvenulewith
leucocyte migration
and plasma leakage
Figure 3.1: Clot formation and migration of leucocytes in a skin wound.
Repnxr uced from Pascoe I i992) wish permission.
nitric oxide (NO), which mediate angiogenesis and
the principal components of the extracellular
fibroplasia. Activated macrophages can activate other
connective tissue matrix. Wound fibroblasts are
cells such as lymphocytes via cytokines which, in tum,
thought to be derived from pluripotential perivascu-
release lymphokines (interferons, interleukins) that
lar mesenchymal cells and from local tissue
act back on macrophages to release additional cytokines
fibroblasts. The stimulus for the phenotypic altera-
such as TNF-a and interleukin-1 (IL-1). This inter-
tion or activation of wound fibroblasts originates
action ensures a prolonged presence of cytokines in the
mainly from macrophage-derived cytokines such
wound bed and illustrates the network of interactions
as TGF-p, epidermal growth factor (EGF) and plate-
between cells during healing. The rate of production 
let derived growth factor (PDGF). The matrix
and the half-life of these chemotactic factors
and
surrounding the cells, such as the presence of
cytokines directly regulate macrophage function and
fibronectin, tissue oxygen content and acidity, also
modulate the healing process (Figure 3.2).
influences their activation.
The primary function of the fibroblast is to
While the inflammatory responses to wounding
synthesize and deposit proteoglycans and collagen.
result in a marked cellular response within hours to days,
Wound Healing and Influencing Factors
15
Phagocytosis,
Macroph
Angiogenesis
antimicrobialfunction
Wound
Cell recruitment
debridement
Matrix synthesis
and activation
regulation
Growthfactors
. Oxygen radicals
βFGF,VEGF
HOO2,OH
-Cytokines
Nitric oxide
TNF-.
.Growthfactors
TGF-β.EGE.PDGF
·Cytokines
TNF-α,IL-1,IFN-y
. Phagocytosis
.Enzymes
Growthfactors
.Enzymes
PDGF,TGF-β,EGF.IGF
collagenase,arginase
collagenase,elastase
-Prostaglandins
.Cytokines
TNF-α,IL-1,IL-6
PGE2
.Fibroncctin
Figure 3.2: The central role ofthe macrophage in wound healing.
ReradudfromWineand Barbol992ihepermisionWB Sanders
diminished inflammatory responses and suppressing
Neutrophils and lymphocytes undergo apoptosis
fibroblastic activity profoundly limit subsequent heal-
and are ingested by macrophages. The connective
ing. For example, reduced inflammation induced by
tissue spaces that were initially filled with
corticosteroid administration decreases cell migration,
proteoglycans, protocollagen and tropocollagen
proliferation and subsequent angiogenesis.
begin to display clearly differentiated, thin collagen
fibrils lying parallel to the longitudinal axis of the
Proliferation
fibroblasts. Growing between the immature
Approximately 2
24-36 hours after wounding,
fibroblasts, the developing capillaries are surrounded
fibroblasts and endothelial cells adjacent to the wound
by tropocollagen, which condenses to form a support-
margins begin to divide and multiply. The growth
ing framework of collagen fibrils. As healing con-
factors and cytokines responsible for the prolifera-
tinues, many of the earlier capillaries transform into
tion of these two cell types are derived mainly from
larger vessels or stop functioning and disappear.
platelets and activated macrophages. Some are
Lymphatic channels develop in a manner that is
stored in the matrix of the fibrin clot which is invaded
similar to, but much slower than, blood vessels, so
by the cells. Fibroblasts and endothelial cells can
that lymphatic drainage of the wound is poor during
also be activated to release additional growth factors
early wound healing.
which act in an autocrine manner. Endothelial cells
The tissue that fills the wound space, called granu-
proliferate from intact venules close to the wound and
lation tissue, is a mixture of branching capillary loops
form new capillaries by the process of angiogenesis.
surrounded by mesenchymal cells and extracellular
Endothelial buds develop on these capillaries and
matrix. This tissue is highly resistant to infection
amed aenoie ue ul aspa supeal aun spiemon mo
saseqdoioeu pue sansognueis jo auoz aujo asneaaq
(Figure 3.3). Each endothelial bud unites with
on its outer surface. Granulation tissue does not usually
another endothelial bud in an open wound, with a
grow beyond the surface of any organ, especially if the
cut vessel in a skin graft, or with another vessel on
epithelial regeneration that has been occurring simul-
the opposite side of a surgically apposed incision.
taneously is complete.
After fusion, the endothelial bud is canalized and
spasmodic blood flow begins. Mitotic activity in
Maturation and remodelling
adjacent mesenchymal cells increases as a regular
Restoration of tissue continuity afer injury and the
blood flow is established. As the vascular network
strength of the ensuing repair tissue depend almost
advances, the connective tissue cells left behind
entirely on the period of fibroplasia. Additional ten-
become more clearly recognizable as fibroblasts.
sile strength develops during the maturation and
16
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstniction
epidermis
epithelial cells
migrating beneath
scab,bridgingwound
fibroblasts migrating
suope punom oul
fibrin strands
capillary
fibrin strands
mononuclear leucocyte
endothelial bud
* collagen bundles
venule
Figure3.3:Proliferation and migration offibroblasts and endothelial cells.
//992)wishpermissiot
remodelling phase as the new collagen undergoes
 There is a slow, steady increase in wound tensile
structural modification. From a clinical viewpoint,
strength due to the gradual intermolecular and intra-
this is the most important phase of wound healing
molecular cross-linking of the tropocollagen mol-
because the rate, quality and total amount of matrix
ecules and the remodelling,-dissolution and
deposition determine the strength of the scar. This
refonmation of collagen fibres, which produce a
period begins about 15 days after wounding and can
stronger, more efficient weave. Generally, the colla-
continue for many months depending on the tissue
 gen fibres remaining in a scar are oriented along lines
involved, being prolonged in tendon healing. After
of tension, but the scar that is fonmed is rarely as
granulation tissue fills the defect, there is a gradual
strong as the tissue it has replaced. After 1 week, the
diminution in the number of synthesizing fibroblasts,
wound has only 3%, and after 3 weeks, 20% of its
a regression of the capillary network, and a decline in
final strength. After 3 months it has approximately
the rate of collagen synthesis until it balances the rate
 80% of the strength of unwounded skin, but there is
of collagen breakdown.
no further increase thereafter.
Wound Healing and Influencing Factors 
17
Wound contraction
broad, thin pseudopodia over the exposed surface
Wound contraction is the reduction of part or all
of the collagen bundles. Epithelial cells in the
of a defect by movement of the normal surrounding
layers behind the basal cells migrate over them until
tissue towards the centre of the defect. Wound
contact with the wound surface is made. This
contraction is the approximation of the wound edges
process continues with cells from the proliferating
and wound contracture is the shortening of the
edge sliding forward over the attached cells until
scar itself. Several theories have been proposed for
the surface is covered.
the mechanisms of wound contraction. One suggests
After the basement membrane is established,
that a special cell, the myofibroblast, is responsible
the epithelial cells proliferate to restore the normal
for contraction, leading the skin edge across the
columnar architecture of stratified squamous
wound. Another theory suggests that the locomotion
epithelium (Figure 3.5). Cellular differentiation
of all fibroblasts leads to a reorganization of the
occurs, characterized by keratinization of the
matrix and to contraction. Wound contraction starts
outer cell layers. The intense cellular activity that
almost immediately following wounding and contin-
produces epithelial cells and makes them ready
ues for 2-3 weeks.
for migration occurs within 2-5 mm of the wound
Healing skin wounds are readily distorted
margin. About 10 days after wounding, epithelial
when the skin on one side of a defect is less mobile
 projections grow down into the underlying connec-
than the skin on the opposite side. Distortions
tive tissue. These epithelial spurs regress by the
that produce an undesirable cosmetic effect are
36th day following wounding leaving the basal
common with facial wounds, particularly those
border of the regenerated epidermis relatively
involving the eyelids, lips and ears. Contraction
smooth. Once the new epidermis has been estab-
of wounds involving the skin and soft tissue
lished, the rate of cell division rapidly declines,
structures around joints may also result in struc-
and the epidermal thickness is reduced. The epi-
tural deformities of limbs with subsequent impair-
dermis over the
wound often remains several
ment or loss of function. In tubular organs like the
cells thicker than the surrounding epidermis for
digestive tract, contraction may result in shortening
at least a year.
or stricture of the organ. Contraction may stop
 The route and rate of epithelial migration depend
before the defect is obliterated if the surrounding
on the environment of the wound. Because the
skin tension exceeds the contractile force of the
epithelial cells only
/ migrate over viable tissue,
granulation tissue, or if myofibroblast development
they must move beneath a scab or eschar. Epithelial
or function is impaired. Contraction may be
cell migration and mitosis appear to be maximized
 impaired by the administration of corticosteroids,
when the wound environment is moist, devoid of
by antimicrotubular drugs and by the local appli-
both infection and eschar, protected with an
cation of smooth muscle relaxants. Mechanical
oxygen-permeable membrane, and exposed to
splinting of open wounds only inhibits contraction
hyperbaric oxygen. In clinical practice, optimum
until the splints are removed. Split-thickness skin
epithelial repair occurs in a moist, well oxygenated
grafts may occasionally slow con-traction, but
environment
without eschar or infection. The
full-thickness skin grafts or skin flaps markedly
use of wet-to-dry dressings, although effective
inhibit contraction.
in debriding necrotic tissue in wounds, is often
detrimental to epithelial repair. The moist environ-
Epithelialization
ment encourages epithelial repair, but the newly
Epithelial surfaces provide an important barrier to
fonmed epithelium is also debrided as the dried
external infection and intermal fluid loss. In linear
dressing is removed.
and superficial epithelial wounds, epithelial regen-
Wherever suture material penetrates the epider-
eration usually covers the wound before new
mis or epidenmal appendages, epithelial migration
connective tissue forms. In deeper open wounds in
occurs along the suture tract. Once the tract is lined
which there is extensive loss ofbasement membrane
with epithelium, proliferation and keratinization may
and underlying connective tissue, epithelial repair
 produce a foreign body reaction, sterile abscess and a
occurs in concert with the development of new
scar. In most situations, this type of scarring is rela-
connective tissue. The surface area ofnewly formed
tively unimportant in domestic animals because of
epithelium is then gradually reduced as the under-
their coat of hair.
lying granulation tissue contracts. Epidermal repair
In fullthickness open skin wounds, epithelial
involves the mobilization, migration, proliferation
migration occurs only from the wound margins. If
and differentiation of epithelial cells (Figure 3.4).
islands of dermis containing transected adnexal struc-
Migrating epithelial cells lose many of their
tures (hair follicles and sebaceous glands) or islands
desmosomal attachments to the basement mem-
 of full-thickness skin remain, there is epithelial
brane and to other epithelial cells. Basal cells at
migration from these structures as well as from the
the wound edge develop microvilli and extend
wound margins.
18
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
cab
proliferation of
epithelial cells
inwound
beneath scab
capillary
fibroblast
new collagen
fibreselaborated
byfibroblasts in
wound defect
new vessel in
wound defect
projection of
endothelial buds
intowound
venule
Figure 3.4: Mobilization,migration, proliferation and differentiation of epithelial cells.
Reprodue ed from Pase
coei992/wihpermission
FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE WOUND
 Systemic factors that influence wound healing
HEALING
include:
Traditional influences
Hypoproteinaemia and hypovolemia
Local factors that influence wound healing include:
Oedema
Malnutrition and vitamin deficiency
 The surgical technique and experience of the
The administration of corticosteroids
surgeon
 Diabetes mellitus
The quality of the vascular supply to the area
 The administration of cytotoxic drags
The presence of a deleterious infection 
Mechanical stress on the wound
 Jaundice
Abrasive or inflammatory suture material
Uraemia
Radiation injury.
Advanced age.
Wound Healing and Influencing Factors
19
scab
sloughed
depressed
epithelial scar
epidermisshowing
normal stratification
overwound
maturation and
strengthening of
new collagen
fibroblast
new vessel in scar
restoration of
vessel patency
venule
Figure 3.5: Final remodelling stages with normal epidermal stratification and maturation of new collagen.
Reproduced from Pascoe i992) winh permission
The essentials of good surgical technique that
Avoiding tissue necrosis from excessive use of
ligatures or cautery
following:
 Minimizing dead space by close approximation
of tissue layers
 Minimizing wound trauma by gentle tissue
Minimizing mechanical stress (tension) on
handling and decreasing the duration of the
wound edges
procedure
Selection of appropriate suture materials and
 Thorough debridement and removal of foreign
suturing techniques.
bodies to minimize contamination and to reduce
the possibility of infection
Infection slows gain of wound strength in animal
 Meticulous haemostasis to prevent haematoma
studies. Corticosteroids are known to affect healing
and seroma formation, while maintaining the
adversely, particularly due to a lack in the development
vascular supply of the tissue
of tensile strength. A varietv of cvtotoxic drims also
20
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
delay gain in wound tensile strength. It is customary to
It increases the synthesis of proteins such as
delay administration of an antineoplastic agent in a
fbronectin that aid in cell attachment and migra-
postoperative cancer patient until the acute healing
tion. EGF has been shown to accelerate epidermal
phase is over, usually 2-3 weeks. Skin wounds in
regeneration in pig skin, and corneal lesions in
animals that receive a radiation dose within 2 days
rabbits and primates. Wounds treated with EGF
after wounding have 50$ of the strength of control
show increasing numbers of fibroblasts and a larger
incisions at 7 and 14 days. The effect of radiation on
scar area. In human clinical trials. EGF increased
epidermal regeneration of dermatome wounds, in-
ing is probably negligible. Tissue irradiated prior to
creased the healing in chronic wounds and promoted
surgery often heals poorly because of its inadequate
epithelialization of cormeal wounds.
blood supply. Malnutrition, hypoproteinaemia
1and
anaemia have been shown to delay wound healing in
Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-p)
 many animal models.
TGF-P is synthesized by platelets, macrophages,
lymphocytes, fibroblasts, bone cells and kera-
Peptide growth factors
tinocytes. Nearly all cells have TGF-p receptors.
The purpose of this section is to give a brief introduc-
TGF-P inhibits the growth of several types of cells
tion to a very rapidly expanding area of biology: the
including smooth muscle cells and leucocytes, but it
acceleration of tissue healing in nonmal and physio-
is mitogenic for fibroblasts. It is stored in a latent
logically compromised wounds. This section will in-
form and requires activation by plasmin or low pH.
troduce the five major families of peptide growth
In wounds, TGF-P stimulates the chemotaxis of
factors currently under study. The names of most will
inflammatory cells and stimulates the synthesis of
come and go as their expectation does not meet clinical
extracellular matrix; it may be the most important
needs, but a few will be successful and will probably be
regulatory peptide in wound healing.
a common item on the shelf of the veterinary phanmacy
We studied the effectiveness of TGF-P for the
in a few years.
healing of chronic soft tissue wounds that had not
Peptide growth factors play a key role in initiating
healed, or were not expected to heal, using standard
and sustaining wound healing. Platelets degranulate
therapies. Biopsies of several wounds were taken, both
and release PDGF. TGF-p. EGFand insulin-like growth
prior to and following treatment. After cleansing.
factor-1 (IGF-1). These substances stimulate the chemo-
TGF-P (0.1 mg/ml in 3% methyl cellulose) was ap-
taxis of inflammatory eel Is, fibroblasts, epithelial cells,
plied topically, once daily, every 3 days in volumes
and vascular endothelial cells. As mentioned above,
ranging from 0.1 to 0.5 ml. The following are examples
growth factors released from inflammatory cells,
of the animals treated and the results.
fibroblasts, macrophages, epithelial cells and others
sustain the wound healing process: in growth of blood
Case One
vessels, formation of collagen and formation of sec-
Golden Retriever, female, ovariohysterectomized,
ondary glands and structures.
7 years old
Peptide growth factors stimulate the continuous
 Diagnosis: Immune-mediated polyarthritis
mitosis of quiescent cells in complete media that lack
Treatment: Prednisolone and amoxicillin
serum. They are synthesized and secreted by many
Problem: Full thickness ulceration of the skin over
types ofcells. Growth factors can act on the producer
the left elbow joint
cell (autocrine), adjacent cells (paracrine, juxtacrine)
Further treatment: Prednisolone therapy was contin-
or on distant cells (endocrine). Growth factors all act
ued. Four weeks afer the initiation of TGF-P therapy.
by binding to and activating specific, high affinity
the elbow lesion was healed. The wound remained
receptor proteins on the cell membranes of target
 healed 9 weeks afterTGF-P therapy was discontinued.
 cells. However, growth factors are rapidly degraded
by proteases
Case Two
Five families of growth factors are currently recog-
Golden Retriever, female, ovariohysterectomized,
nized for their potential role in wound healing: epithe-
6 years old
lial growth factor (EGF). transforming growth factor
 Diagnosis: Osteosarcoma of the radius
beta (TGF-P), insulin-like growth factor (IGF), plate-
Treatment: Limb sparing using a cortical allograft
let-derived growth factor (PDGF) and fibroblast growth
and intralesional cisplatin
factor (FGF).
Problem: Full thickness skin ulcer over the allograft; 5
week duration. A biopsy of the wound edge revealed
Epithelial growth factor (EGF)
necrotic connective tissue and epidermal hyperplasia
EGF is synthesized by renal cells, lacrimal glands,
Further treatment: Intravenous cisplatin was con-
 salivary glands and megakaryocytes. It is found in
tinued. Three weeks following the initiation of
tears, saliva and urine. EGF promotes healing by
TGF-p therapy, the wound was healed.
stimulating migration and division of epithelial cells.
Wound Healing and Influencing Factors 
21
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and
Case Three
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
Tibetan Terrier, female, ovariohysterectomized, 9
PDGF and VEGF are in the same family. PDGF is
years old
secreted by platelets, placental cells, fibroblasts, smooth
Diagnosis: Immune-mediated dermatitis and iatro-
muscle cells, vascular endothelial cells and
 genic hyperadrenocorticism
macrophages. It is a potent chemotactic agent for
Treatment: Prednisolone and azathioprine
macrophages and smooth muscle cells and is an early
Problem: Full thickness ulceration of many footpads
 Further treatment: Prednisolone and azathioprine
promoter of cell migration and fibrogenesis. PDGF
causes increased granulation tissue fonmation in dia-
treatment continued. Eight weeks following initia-
tion of TGF-f3 therapy, all pad lesions were healed
betic cats and increased healing of pressure ulcers in
human patients.
except for one, a 1 x 1 mm lesion. A biopsy from the
healing pad lesion revealed fibroplasia, despite im-
munosuppressive therapy, and bacterial infection.
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)
FGF is bound by heparin in the extracellular matrix of
 most tissues; bound FGF is protected from proteolysis.
Case Four
It is thought that the release ofheparinase, cathepsin D
Golden eagle, adult, male
and collagenase by tissue injury causes the release of
 Diagnosis: Self-inflicted injury to the left wing with
FGF. It is a mitogen for endothelial cells, fibroblasts,
both tendon and bone exposed
keratinocytes, chrondrocytes and smooth muscle
Treatment: The wound was 75% healed at 6'/2
cells. In animal models it induces cell migration,
weeks following the initiation of TGF-fi therapy
neovascularization and formation of granulation tis-
and treatment was discontinued. The wound went
sue. FGF is produced by fibroblasts, astrocytes, endo-
on to heal completely.
thelium, smooth muscle cells, chrondrocytes,
 macrophages and osteoblasts.
Case Five
 All the recognized peptide growth factors appear to
Asian elephant, female, 36 years old
work in concert in wound healing. Little is understood
 Problem: A 28-year history of a full thickness skin
about the initiation, control or inhibition of their ac-
ulcer, approximately 8 cm in diameter, over the left 
tions. Growth factors are also implicated in pathologi-
hip
cal situations, where their effects have a detrimental
Treatment: The wound was 75 % healed following 8
effect (e.g. coronary vascular disease, renal fibrosis.
pue paeinueis Ajanalduoo pue Aderau jo syaam
exuberant scar fonmation). Many clinical trials will
 covered following 12 weeks of therapy.
have to be performed before the exact indications for
the use of growth factors are known. In preliminary
In these cases, TGF-{3 appeared to accelerate the
work, it appears that growth factors, especially TGF-pl
healing of soft tissue wounds: it was effective in patients
are effective in accelerating wound healing in
with immune-mediated disease that were receiving im-
 immunosuppressed patients and others that have com-
munosuppressive therapy. In all cases, TGF-(3 was
promised healing.
effective in the presence of infection in the wound bed.
The role of anti-growth factors in
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)
modifying tissue healing
IGF is found in two forms: IGF 1, which is secreted by
Over the last several years, many investigators have
cells ofthe brain, liver, heart, lung, kidney, pancreas,
been seeking new. more effective and less toxic
cartilage and muscle; and IGF2, which is more im-
immunosuppressive agents. Cyclosporin led the way
portant in fetal development. IGF is reversibly bound
by demonstrating two important facts: 1) immuno-
by high-affinity IGF binding proteins in the serum:
suppression can be specific to cells of the immune
only free IGF is active. It is a potent chemotactic
aq uo shae aaissadonsou ( p iass
agent for vascular endothelial cells and results in
profitable. The specific mechanism of action of
increased neovascularization, it stimulates the mito-
cyclosporin also led to a rapid advancement in the
sis of fibroblasts, osteocytes and chrondrocytes and it
understanding of T cell activation and the interrelated
enhances dermal and epidermal regeneration. IGF
roles of macrophages, platelets, cytokines and growth
secretion is stimulated by growth hormone. They
factors in the organ and tissue rejection response.
work in concert: together they stimulate skeletal
Understanding the underlying cellular and subcellu-
cartilage and bone growth, and increase organ size.
lar events that produce graft rejection led to the search
IGF has been shown to stimulate thymic regrowth
for agents that could specifically interrupt one or
and improve T lymphocyte function. In our labora-
more elements of the rejection process.
tory, IGF 1 promoted thymic growth in young cats and
 Chronic graft rejection is a complex process that
increased T cell function in cats with feline immuno.
ultimately results in failure of the transplanted organ.
deficiency syndrome.
 Unlike acute rejection, chronic rejection can progress
 22  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
for months to years, often undetected. In all organs,
Growth factor-induced proliferation of fibroblasts,
two lesions stand out: fibrosis of the interstitial
endothelial cells, hepatocytes and smooth muscle cells
afeas with loss of native architecture, and occlusion
is inhibited by RPM. Molecule for molecule, RPM has
of arteries and/or bronchioles by proliferating
 been the most effective antiproliferative agent tested in
smooth muscle cells and extracellular matrix. This
our laboratories in both in vitro and in vivo models of
afterial intimal thickening results in regional hypoxia,
 arterial intimal thickening.
ischaemia and tissue death. The cause of chronic
fejection is unknown, but it is associated with ongoing
Mycophenolic acid
immune injury, acute rejection episodes, prolonged
Mycophenolate mofetil is a prodrug which, when
warm ischaemia times and a small donor to large
hydrolysed by liver esterases, produces the active
recipient relationship. It appears to be a low-grade,
metabolite, mycophenolic acid (MPA). MPA is a non-
chronic ongoing inflammatory process marked by
 competitive, feversible inhibitof of IMPDH, an en-
inappropriate fibrosis and vascular occlusion.
zyme critical for the synthesis of purines during
Smooth muscle cell proliferation and migration
lymphocyte activation. MPA suppresses DNA synthe-
can also be seen following balloon catheter angioplasty
sis by depleting the guanosine nucleotide pool. In
 performed for the correction of vascular narrowing
 addition to its effects on T cells, MPA inhibits DNA
caused by atherosclerosis. Many types of trauma result
synthesis in fibroblasts and endothelial cells. Also,
in arterial intimal thickening: mechanical trauma,
MPA has been shown to inhibit FGF-stimulated DNA
 chemical trauma, ischaemic injur)' and immune injur)
synthesis in smooth muscle cells. By itself, MPA
 have all produced artefial intimal thickening. In each
reduces arterial intimal thickening following both
case smooth muscle cell proliferation and migration
mechanical and immune-mediated injury. RPM com-
 and the production of extracellular matrix is thought to
 bined with MPA was the most effective antiproliferative
 be mediated by growth factors and cytokines (e.g.
agent tested in our laboratories. The different mecha-
PDGF, FGF, IL-1, TGF-0, interferon-y, RANTES)
nisms of action appear to combine to produce a very
that are released by activated platelets, injured endo-
effective antiproliferative effect.
thelial cells, smooth muscle cells, macrophages and
from the extracellular matrix.
Leflunomide
 In addition to studying the anti-T cell effects of
 This is known as LEF. It is a synthetic organic isoxazole
various potential immunosuppressive agents, ouf
derivative that is metabolized to the active form, A77
laboratories began to study the effects of each
1726. LEF effectively inhibits T cell proliferation and
agent on growth factor-induced smooth muscle cell
T cell-dependent antibody synthesis in vivo, and suc-
proliferation, and on in vivo models of arterial
cessfully treats several animal models of autoimmune
intimal thickening. Our goal was to find safe, effec-
diseases in which antibodies play a significant role.
tive immunosuppressive agents that might have
While not completely understood, the primary mecha-
the potential to reduce the incidence ofchronic rejec-
nism of action of LEF appears to be blockage of the
tion. The following is a discussion of three agents
pyrimidine biosynthetic pathway, thereby inhibiting
that are currently in clinical trials for the control
DNA synthesis. In addition to its ability to inhibit both
of allograft rejection or for the treatment of rheu-
cellular and humeral responses, LEF also inhibits
matoid arthritis. Each agent may prove extremely
 afterial intimal thickening following alloimmune in-
useful for the control of wound healing or to mini-
jur)' in animal models in vivo.
mize fibrosis.
 Several other immunosuppressant agents are also
effective in preventing the proliferation of nonimmune
Sirolimus
 cells. However, they are not expected to be developed
This is also known as RPM. It is a natural microbial
for clinical use, or their future is very unceftain.
substance produced by the actinomycete Streptomyces
What are the potential uses for these agents that
hygroscopicus.
 RPM is a hydrophobic macrocyclic
inhibit the proliferation of non-immune cells? All
lactone. It passes through cell membranes easily and
 cellular inflammatory reactions appear to depend on
binds to a cytosolic binding protein, FKBP. RPM
the interaction of cell surface molecules, cytokines
suppresses protein synthesis in T cells, and this effect
and/or growth factors. The formation of scar tissue,
may be related to the inhibition ofa kinase, 70-kDa S6
exubefant granulation tissue, keloids and cancers
kinase, which increases the protein synthetic activity
 all depend on the stimulation of fibroblasts, endothe-
of the S6 ribosomal protein. While cyclosporin and
lial cells and macrophages to produce a structural-
FK506 block the T cell cycle progression at G。- 
G
vascular complex. Our work has already shown that
RPM prevents cells from progressing from G, to the S
the three agents listed above are able, in vivo, to prevent
phase of the cell cycle. RPM also directly inhibits B
Of feduce arterial intimal thickening associated with
cell immunoglobulin synthesis caused by interleukins.
various types of injury. The effectiveness of these
RPM's antagonism of cytokine and growth factof
 agents should be tested in other models ofinappropri-
action is not limited to cells of the immune system.
ate or exaggerated wound healing.
Wound Healing and Influencing Factors 
23
Nitric oxide
tion of L-arginine to hypercholesterolaemic animals
 Nitric oxide (NO) is a biological messenger that plays
results in a significant reduction in atherosclerotic
an important role in intracellular communication. NO
lesions due to inhibition ofmonocyte-endothelial cell
is generated from the guanidine nitrogens of the amino
interaction. The administration of L-arginine after bal-
 acid L-arginine. Endothelium-derived NO has a very
loon angioplasty inhibits myointimal hyperplasia; this
short life and is quickly converted to the stable end
effect is antagonized by NO synthase inhibitors.
products nitrate and nitrite. The reaction is catalysed
We found that the administration ofi.-arginine to rats
by NO synthase; there are at least two constitutively
(a 2.25% solution in tap water) following the creation of
expressed isoforms of this enzyme and one inducible
random patterm skin flaps resulted in a 97c increase in
form. One constitutively expressed isoform (endothe-
flap survival over animals receiving no treatment. When
lial NO synthase, eNOS, type M) produces small 
rats were given a NO antagonist, flap survival fell almost
amounts of NO and is responsible for changes in
2% from the survival of flaps from untreated rats. The
vascular tone, and the second isoform (neural NO
 increased survival ofthe flaps on rats that had received
 synthase, nNOS, type I) is found in neural tissue where
L-arginine was attributed to vasodilation induced by
 NO can act as a neurotransmitter. The inducible isofonm
nitric oxide; thus, arterial vasospasm was reduced
(induced NO synthase, iNOS, type I) found in
preserving perfusion in the distal aspects of the
macrophages, smooth muscle and other cells can pro-
random patterm flaps. L-Arginine was also administered
 duce large amounts of NO over long periods of time.
to rats receiving growth factors. In combination,
NO rapidly reacts with other molecules and passes
L-arginine and growth factors, and in particular TGF-pl
easily through cell membranes to react with intracellu-
significantly increased flap survival. This approach to
lar protein. It has a high affinity for several metals, such
augmenting nitric oxide levels following or prior to
as iron and copper, and inhibits the function of several
wounding may have application in several clinical situ-
 metal-containing proteins. The inhibitory actions of
ations. In particular, i.-arginine could be administered
macrophage-derived NO on tumour cell lines include
prior to surgery to animals that may be prone to poor
inhibition of DNA synthesis, mitochondrial respira-
wound healing, such as diabetics, burm patients and
tion and the loss of intracellular iron.
patients with severely infected wounds.
NO is postulated to be an endogenously generated
immunomodulator. Cytokines (IL-2, INFy) released
by alloreactive T cells, stimulate NO production by
CONCLUSIONS
graft-infiltrating cells, in particular, macrophages. In
Wound healing can be enhanced by simple, inexpen-
vivo and in vitro studies have shown that excessive NO
production during an immune response will inhibit
sive and readily available means. Preoperative evalu-
lymphocyte proliferation, acquisition of cytotoxic ef-
 ation should identify impediments to healing, such as
fector function and antibody synthesis. While antigen-
malnutrition, anaemia, hyperglycaemia and steroid
 presenting cell/T cell interactions do not appear to be
use and allow
v correction prior to surgery.
 affected by NO, intracellular processing and presenta-
 Intraoperatively, the surgeon should apply proper and
tion of antigen by macrophages may be inhibited. NO.
gentle technique, appropriate antibiotic use and pre-
induced via the administration of L-arginine. has also
vention of vasoconstriction by maintaining plasma
been shown to inhibit arterial smooth muscle prolifera-
volume and body temperature. Postoperatively, the
 clinician should focus on the prevention of vasocon-
striction through pain relief, warming, and mainte-
This is believed to be a direct effect on the medial
smooth muscle cells: nitric oxide synthase activity is
nance of plasma volume as well as the maintenance of
mduced in the rat carotid artery within 24 hours of
nonmoglycaemia. In chronic non-healing wounds, the
 institution of growth factor and/or nitric oxide therapy
injury and NO suppresses the proliferation of cultured
smooth muscle cells.
may stimulate more rapid healing.
 The production of NO, in large amounts, may
inhibit the activation of platelets and neutrophils, the
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
proliferation and activation of T cells, the release of
READING
growth factors and the migration and proliferation of
smooth muscle cells. NO has been shown to inhibit
Carlson MA (1997) Acute wound failure. Surgicat Ctinics ofNorth
platelet adherence and aggregation; it also inhibits the
America 77,607-636
adherence of leucocytes, both polymorphonuclear and
Hunt TK and Williams Hopf H (1997) Wound healing and wound
mononuclear, to endothelium. The impainment of en-
infection. Surgicat Ctinics of North America 77. 587-606
Pascoe JR ( 1992) Wound healing. In.Attas of Smatl Animat Surgery, ed.
dothelial NO production by hypercholesterolaemia,
IMG Gourle> and CR Gregory, Pp. 1.2-1.11. Gower Medical
diabetes mellitus and hypertension appears to play a
Publishing. New York
Witte MB and Barbul A (1997) General principles of wound healing.
role in the initiation of atherosclerosis. The administra-
Surgical Ctinics of North America 77, 509-528
CHAPTER FOUR
Wound Closure Options
and Decision Making
Jamie R. Bellah and John M. Williams
INTRODUCTION
 Analgesic agents include the opioids, non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NS AIDs) and local anaesthet-
There are many different types of wound encountered
ics (Figure 4.1). Opioids are the cormerstone of analgesic
in veterinary practice, e.g. lacerations, degloving
regimens in the trauma patient despite their potential
wounds (either anatomical or physiological), wounds
side effects of respiratory depression, bradycardia, al-
tered mental state and vomiting. In general, patients in
wounds and surgical wounds. No one method can be
pain are less likely to exhibit these side effects. NS AIDs
applied for their management. One of the first ques-
are valuable as analgesics but must be administered with
pa uaym iamsue isnu uoasans Areuaa e suon
care in traumatized patients due to their potential ad-
with a traumatic wound is whether or not the wound is
verse effect on renal and gastrointestinal function.
amenable to immediate closure. If the answer is no,
Newer NSAIDs such as carprofen and meloxicam
aq isnu quauageueu punom uado aeudoidde uam
have minimal effects in this area. Local and regional
instituted, and a decision made regarding the appropri-
anaesthetic techniques have the advantage of dimin-
ate timing of subsequent wound closure. Finally, the
ished systemic effects, whilst providing total local
veterinary surgeon must decide on an acceptable, or
analgesia. Either lignocaine (lidocaine, USA) or the
optimal, method of wound reconstruction. This chap-
longer acting bupivicainc can be used. It is important
ter sets out the chronological priorities of wound
to remember that cavalier use of local anaesthetic
 management and the factors that must be considered in
agents can lead to systemic toxicity. Therefore, total
 instituting appropriate wound therapy. Specific details
tolerable doses should be calculated prior to adminis-
of many procedures are covered in later chapters.
tration. Detailed descriptions of these techniques are
found in many texts including the BSA VA Manual of
Small Animal Anaesthesia and Analgesia.
SYSTEMIC EVALUATION AND PAIN
 Fractious patients, in pain, frequently require seda-
MANAGEMENT
tion or general anaesthesia prior to thorough evalua-
tion of the wound. Sedatives can be used alone or in
When the patient first presents it is imperative to assess
combination with analgesics, either solely to aid in
the magnitude of injury completely. Animals suffering
calming and reducing pain in the trauma patient or as
from traumatic wounds frequently have concomitant
a premedicant prior to proposed general anaesthesia.
injury to other organ systems. Systemic injury must be
Of the three major groups of sedatives (phenothiazines,
-aqu on iond Aiaenclouclde paean pue pazjusooan
a, agonists, benzodiazepines), a. agonists are not
menting specific therapy for the more obvious cutane-
recommended in trauma patients due to their poten-
ous wounds (see Figures 1.2 and 1.3). Haemorrhage,
tially profound depression of the cardiovascular and
hy povolemia, urinary tract trauma, thoracic and pul-
respiratory systems. A detailed discussion of sedative
monary injury, orthopaedic injury and head trauma are
and anaesthetic protocols for the traumatized patient is
all common in animals presenting with traumatic open
outside the scope of this manual and the reader is
wounds, depending upon the aetiology of the injury.
referred to the BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline
Once the animal is stabilized it is appropriate to
Emergency and Critical Care and the BSA VA Manual
consider sedation, analgesia or general anaesthesia
of Small Animal Anaesthesia and Analgesia.
depending on the condition of the patient and the status
of the wound. Pain relief is important for animal
welfare and also helps minimize the risk of the patient
EVALUATING THE WOUND : TO
becoming catabolic, with its adverse effects on wound
CLOSE OR NOT TO CLOSE?
healing and increased risk of nosocomial infection.
Careful selection of analgesics also aids in the choice
Wounds are often complicated by contaminating bac-
of anaesthetic regimen.
teria and foreign debris, or may be infected secondarily
K
Drug
Side effects
Eficacy
Dose
Route
 Duration of action
Comments
Buprenorphine (Opioid;
 Respiratory depression, bradycardia,
 Slow tinsel
Cats, dogs:
iv., im. or
3-8 hours
 Licensed for use in dogs
 partial agonist)
 altered mental state, vomiting
0.006-0.02 mg/kg
s.e.
(Schedule 3 Controlled Drug
of pain 
m the UK)
 Dose 'plateau' means that 
 increase in dosage is not 
beneficial
 Butorphanol (Opioid;
 Respiratory depression, bradycardia,
 Questionable efficacy as
Cats: 0.2-0.8 mg/kg
i.m. or s.e.
Short acting
 Licensed for dogs and cats
agonist/antagonist)
 altered mental state, vomiting
 sole analgesic agent
Dogs: 0.2-0.5 mg/kg
Dogs: Upto 3 hours
(Schedule 3 Controlled Drug
Cats: 2-4 hours
in the UK)
 Morphine (Opioid;
Respiratory depression, bradycardia,
=n 
15 min
Cats: 0.1-0.4 mg/kg
s.e, im. or
Variable; depends on
Non-licensed lor use in dogs
agonist)
 altered mental state, vomiting
 Powerful analgesia
Dogs: 0.2-1.0 mg/kg
 slow i.v.
degree of pain
and cats
(may be
1 -4 hours
(Schedule 2 Controlled Drug
hypotensive)
 in the UK)
 Pethidine (meperidine,
 Respiratory depression, minimal
Rapid onset
Cats, dogs: 2-5 mg/kg
i.m.
2 hours (max)
Licensed for use in dogs
USA) (Opioid; agonist)
 bradycardia, altered mental state,
 Short duration
(Schedule 2 Controlled Drug
vomiting, histamine release if given i.y.
in the UK)
 Oxymorphone (Opioid;
 Respiratory .depression, bradycardia,
Cats: 0.02-0.1 mg/kg
iv., im. or
2-6 hours
Licensed for use in dogs in
agonist)
vomiting
Dogs: 0.05-0.2 mg/kg
s.e.
the USA
 Less of an altered mental state
 induced in cats compared to other drugs
 Methadone (Opioid;
 Respiratory depression, bradycardia,
 Poor analgesic effect
Cats, dogs: 0.25 mg/kg
i.m.
Variable
 Non-licensed for use in dogs
agonist)
 altered mental state, vomiting
 Minimal practical
 and cats
value
(Schedule 2 Controlled Drug
m the UK)
Fentanyl (Opioid;
 Profound respiratory depression,
Rapid onset (2-7 min)
Cats, dogs: 2-5 ug/kg
i.v.
Short
 Non-licensed for use in dogs
agonist)
 profound bradycardia, altered mental
Very potent analgesic BUT
15-20 min
 and cats
state, vomiting
apnoea may occur - best
(Schedule 2 Controlled Drug
reserved for intraoperative
in the UK)
balanced anaesthesia
 Fentanyl transdermal
 Respiratory depression, bradycardia,
Slow onset 12-24 hours
Cats, dogs: 2-4
 Transdermal
72 hours
Non-licensed for use in dogs 
patch (Opioid; agonist)
 altered mental state, vomiting
Continuous delivery
ug/kg/h
Four sizes of
 and cats
Contraindicated in hepatic disease
Can partially cover delivery
patch: 25,
(Schedule 2 Controlled Drug
 membrane for cats and
 50, 75 and
m the UK)
small dogs
100ug/h
Carprofen (NSAID)
 Gl irritation and ulceration, renal 
Minimal side effects but DO
Cats, dogs: 4 mg/kg
i.m., s.e. or
Lasts up to 24 hours
 Licensed for dogs and cats
papillary necrosis
NOT give within 24 hours
iv.
Do not use in dehydrated or
of other NSAlDs
 hypovolemic cases
 Do not use with corticosteroid
Figure 4.1: Common anaigesics.
Wound Closure Options and Decision Making
27
as wound contamination progresses into wound infec-
Contaminated wounds
tion. It is important to assess the host's natural defence
These have heavy contamination, often associated with
mechanisms, to estimate the number and vimlence of
foreign material within the wound. Surgical procedures
bacteria that have contaminated the wound, and to
with a major break in aseptic technique, such as spillage
consider the time interval and the care provided to the
 of gastrointestinal contents, or acutely presented trau-
wound since injury.
matic wounds are considered contaminated.
The question of whether to close, and when to
close, any cutaneous wound must be asked continually
Dirty wounds
from the moment of initial wound inspection and
These are associated with wound infection, as would
punom uado jo saseqd quanbasqns Aue qnoqsnou
be expected from a perforated viscus or in an old
management. There are no hard and fast rules as each
traumatic wound with a septic purulent exudate.
wound is different; however, if there is any doubt,
uado sneunen “uoniuyap Aq "eu quaredde si l1
especially with regard to the level of contamination
and infection, the wound should not be closed. Rather,
wounds are always contaminated or dirty at the time of
presentation. Also, by definition, traumatic open
appropriate open wound management should be insti-
wounds can never be converted into a clean state.
tuted (see Chapter 5 for further details) until such time
Wound closure should be considered when, and only
as wound closure is possible. Closing a wound that is
when, the wound has been converted from a contami-
contaminated can have disastrous consequences for
both the wound and the patient. This is a lesson which,
nated or dirty state into a clean-contaminated state
unfortunately, has been leamed, and forgotten, in many
through lavage and debridement.
major wars of the twentieth century. It is now fully-
Extent ofwound ischaemia
accepted, in both human medical and veterinary
Vascular injury that results in tissue ischaemia predis-
wound care, that open management is an appropriate
poses to wound infection. The vascular damage result-
and often essential step in optimal wound care.
ing from crush injuries and high-velocity gunshot
Individual wounds vary depending on their
wounds extends beyond the grossly identifiable bounda-
aetiology and the degree and duration of contamina-
ries of the wound. Tissue viability is often difficult to
tion resulting from the trauma. The type of wound
discerm accurately at the time of the injury, and re-
(abrasion, avulsion, incision, laceration, puncture,
peated debridement is frequently required. If in doubt
or crushing injury) is indicative of the severity of
as to the viability of tissues surrounding the wound, it
injury and the potential for ischaemia, contamination
is best to institute open wound management (see Chap-
and the type of bacterial flora that may contribute to
ter 5). The wound is assessed, lavaged and debrided on
eventual wound infection. The two most important
a daily or twice-daily basis until ongoing tissue necro-
factors in detenmining the suitability of any wound
sis is controlled. Layered debridement of the wound is
for closure are:
generally preferred. However, if structures surround-
ing the wound are non-vital, and if the wound is located
 The degree of wound contamination
anatomically in an area with ample soft tissue, en bloc
· The extent of wound ischaemia.
debridement is camied out.
In assessing the effects of wound ischaemia, it is also
Level of contamination
important to consider vascular damage to deeper, criti-
Wounds are classified as: clean; clean-contaminated;
cal tissues, such as bone. Open fractures associated with
contaminated; or dirty/infected.
extensive soft tissue loss are prone to the development
of osteomyelitis, delayed healing and non-union. Early
Clean wounds
reconstruction ofthe wound with vascularized tissue is
These are made under sterile conditions without inva-
indicated in the management of such wounds. Identifi-
sion of gastrointestinal, respirator }', genitourinary or
cation of non-viable tissue and adequate debridement
 oropharyngeal cavities. By definition, clean wounds
are still essential, but prolonged periods of open wound
 are limited to surgical procedures.
management should be avoided. Most wounds can be
converted from a contaminated or dirty state into a
Clean-contaminated wounds
clean-contaminated state, with no ongoing tissue ne-
These have minimal contamination, which is readily
crosis, within 72 hours of injury if aggressive and
removed or reduced to a biologically insignificant
appropriate open wound management is employed.
 level. Surgical wounds involving the gastrointestinal,
respiratory, genitourinary or oropharyngeal cavities
are considered clean-contaminated. Traumatic
TIMING OF WOUND CLOSURE
wounds should not be considered clean-contaminated
at the time of initial presentation, but may be converted
Wounds of the integument may be treated by primary
to a clean-contaminated state through lavage and
closure, delayed primary closure or secondary closure.
debridement.
or may be left to heal by second intention (Figure 4.2).
28
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Closure option
Wound type
Technique
 Primary closure
Clean
 Immediate closure without tension
 May require grafting or appropriate flap technique
Delayed primary
Clean-contaminated or
Lavage and debridement of open wound
closure
contaminated, questionable
Appropriate dressing used
tissue viability, oedema,
Closure performed 2-3 days after wounding
skin tension likely
May require grafting or appropriate flap technique
Secondary closure
Contaminated or dirty
Lavage and debridement of open wound
Appropriate dressing used
Closure carried out 5-7 days after wounding
May require grafing or appropriate flap technique
Second intention
Wound unsuitable for
Lavage and debridement of open wound
healing
closure technique, large
Appropriate dressing used
skin deficits, extensive
Allowed to heal by granulation, contraction and
contamination and
epithelialization
devitalization
Figure 4.2: Closure options and wound type.
Primary closure
the level of wound contamination (must be clean-
This is performed immediately after presentation, fol-
contaminated) and the viability of tissues surrounding
lowing acute lavage and debridement of the wound.
the wound (must be free of ongoing tissue necrosis).
Closure of the wound leaves little risk of infection,
However, not all surgeons elect to close or reconstruct 
with the expectation that normal wound healing will
wounds at the earliest opportunity. In many instances,
occur. Primary closure should only be perfonmed on
it may be more economical to allow wounds to heal by-
clean or clean-contaminated wounds with little poten-
second intention. Early wound reconstruction is ad-
tial for ischaemic injury (e.g. recent sharp lacerations).
vised, however, if:
Vital structures are exposed
Delayed primary closure
This is done 3-5 days after the wound occurs. This
 Tissue reconstruction is needed for structural
support
delay allows elimination of exudate and/or contamina-
·
Wounds are located over the flexor surface of a
tion that might cause complications of the normal
joint, where prolonged open wound management 
wound healing process, as well as identification and
may favour the development of contracture and
debridement of non-viable tissues. By definition, de-
layed primary closure is performed prior to the appear-
joint dysfunction.
ance of granulation tissue within the wound.
In deciding whether or not to close a wound it
is important to take into account the function of
Secondary closure
the surrounding tissue. In some cases it is wholly
This is done following open wound treatment that
inappropriate to allow a wound to close by contrac-
extends beyond 5 days, allowing complete debride-
tion and epithelialization. Wound contraction and
ment and management of an infected wound before
epithelialization may result in an inability to extend
 closure. By definition, secondary closure is per-
a joint if a large wound over the flexor surface is
 formed after the appearance of granulation tissue in
allowed to heal by second intention (Figure 4.3). This
the wound.
complication is termed wound contracture. In con-
tracture, the inelastic scar tissue produced leads to
Second intention healing
contraction, preventing complete extension of the
This is defined as wound healing by granulation,
limb. Scar tissue will also restrict the gliding motion
contraction and re-epithelialization. Second intention
of tendons and, secondarily, limit flexion of joints
healing is generally reserved for wounds located in
such as the carpus.
areas with abundant surrounding skin, or for smaller
Wound contraction or tension from reconstruction
wounds located on the extremities.
may also interfere with the function ofeyelids or lips.
Therefore, surgical restoration of skin coverage in
Factors determining timing of wound
these areas must maintain function. Preservation of
closure
vital weight-bearing tissues such as footpads is also
As indicated above, the most critical factors in deter
important in wound reconstruction after tumour re-
mining how quickly the wound can be closed include
moval or traumatic injur) involving the paws.
Wound Closure Options and Decision Making 
29
Figure 4.3: (a) Wound over the flexor
surface of the elbow in a mixed breed
dog. Allowing such a wound to heat by
second intention would resutt in severe
reduction of jointfunction.This wound
was managed by using a tubed pedicte
flap,(b)Afully functional etbow
following resection of the pedicle tube.
(a)
（b
Final ly, function may be compromised by the wound-
tiplication for up to 3 hours, with a maximal effect at
ing incident itself. Figure 4.4 shows a Sheltie that had
around 1 hour. It is, therefore, better to have high
sustained a degloving injur)" to its tail immediately prior
circulating levels of antibiotics at the time of the
to presentation. Careful examination revealed that the
trauma/contaminating incident than afterwards. This
dorsal two thirds ofthe anal sphincter had avulsed with
obviously is not clinically realistic, except in the in-
the skin and the right perineal diaphragm was disnipted.
stance of surgically induced wounds.
The wound was classified as contaminated. After
 If systemic antibiotics are to be used, they should be
stabilization of the dog, the wound was clipped, pre-
directed against the most likely contaminants, usually
pared and thoroughly lavaged, and primary closure was
coagulase-positive staphylococci, Escherichia coli or
achieved. The tail was amputated, the right perineal
Pasteurella sp., depending upon the aetiology of the
diaphragm was repaired and the skin was apposed in two
wound. In the case of established wound infection, the
layers to the rectal wall and mucosa and anal sphincter
selection of a specific antibiotic should be based on
remnant. The dog's quality of life was salvaged, though
culture and sensitivity results. Antibiotics are not a
normal faecal continence could not be restored.
substitute for wound lavage and debridement and should
 only be used in conjunction with these procedures.
There is little controversy regarding the need for
THE ROLE OF SYSTEMIC
systemic antibiotics in the management of clinically
ANTIBIOTICS
infected wounds. In this instance, antibiotics are used
therapeutically to treat an established infection. Inva-
The role of antibiotics in wound management is con-
sive bacterial infection in the wound is generally asso-
troversial. Systemic antibiotics prevent bacterial mul-
ciated with systemic signs of illness, such as fever,
Figure 4.4:(a) A male Sheltie sustained a complete tail degloving injury following a road traffic accident.The dog was
presented immediately afterthe injury,(b)Elevation of the degloved tailrevealed that the dorsal two thirds of theanalsphincter
was missing and the right perineal diaphragm was torn,(c) Reconstruction was carried out following thorough lavage and tail
rectat wall and mucosa and theventrat anat sphincter remnant.
30
malaise and inappetance. Complete blood counts fre-
minimal interference with local blood supply. Sutures
quently reveal varying degrees of neutrophilia and left
should not be tied too tightly as, in addition to causing
shift associated with significant wound infection. Ex-
pue A[ddns pooq [eool ndnusp Im Aaun rojuros
cessive inflammatory reaction at the wound, character-
lead to delayed healing. Figures 4.5 and 4.6 show
ized by severe soft tissue swelling, erythema, pain and
optimal placement; note the slight wound eversion
purulent discharge is also indicative of wound infection.
on needle placement which will flatten out as the
The role of systemic antibiotics for the manage-
wound heals. Care must be taken when using tension
ment of contaminated wounds is much less clear. In the
relieving sutures as it is all too easy to overtighten
absence of established wound infection the use of
these, especially mattress sutures where large areas of
antibiotics is prophylactic. In other words, antibiotics
skin can potentially become devitalized.
are used to decrease the risk or incidence of wound
Wound contraction can be noted in healing open
infection. The use of prophylactic antibiotics in non-
wounds in 5-9 days, and results in a centripetal
infected open wounds, however, may not reduce the
reduction in the size of the wound. The process of
actual incidence of wound infection because of the
wound contraction stops when wound margins
ongoing exposure of the wound to new hospital con-
contact each other or when tension from the skin
taminants. In the instance of contaminated wounds
adjacent to the wound is equal to, or greater than, the
treated open, systemic antibiotics may, in fact, encour-
contractile forces generated by myofibroblasts within
age the establishment of nosocomial or antibiotic-
the granulation tissue. In dogs and cats, wound
resistant infections. Therefore, contaminated wounds 
are probably best managed through judicious debride-
ment and lavage, with antibiotic use reserved for
instances of established or developing wound infec-
tion. It should also be remembered that, following the
appearance of healthy granulation tissue in the wound,
the risk of wound infection is quite low.
WOUND CLOSURE TECHNIQUES
Once the decision has been made to close a wound, the
surgeon must decide on the optimal method of wound
closure or reconstruction. Regardless of the specific
reconstructive technique used, it is essential to adhere
to Halstead's principles of surgery (see Figure 1.1).
Tissues must be handled gently to prevent further
vascular injury and an increased inflammatory
re
sponse. Control of haemorrhage reduces the risk of
systemic complications secondary to hypovolemia,
reduces the risk of postoperative infection, and dimin-
Figure 4.5: Simple interrupted sutures piaced with stight
ishes the incidence of haematoma and seroma forma-
eversion of the wound edges. The wound edge can he everted
tion. Accurate identification of tissue layers and precise
using fine tissue forceps, skin hooks or a thumb.
apposition of tissues reduce the incidence of dehis-
cence and improve the quality and cosmetic result of
the reconstruction. All wound edges, following surgi-
cal debridement, should be vertical, to allow true
apposition with minimal scar formation. Dead space is
common following wound reconstruction and should
be managed by suture apposition of deep tissue layers
 or application of passive or active drains.
One of the cardinal rules of wound reconstruction
is to avoid excessive wound tension. Wounds with
adequate elastic surrounding skin can be closed using
direct skin mobilization. Appositional suturing tech-
niques can be used to minimize tension on the wound.
Placement of skin sutures is important so that optimal
healing will occur; sutures should be placed some
Figure 4.6: Simple interrupted sutures taking in a greater
 5 mm from wound edges and spaced at intervals of
amount of the deep part of the dermis.This helps maintain
5 mm so that tension is spread evenly and there is
direct wound apposition.
Wound Closure Options and Decision Making
31
contraction is more fapid on the trunk than the ex
flaps, axial pattern skin flaps or free skin grafts, should
tremities because of the larger amount of skin avail-
be considered. Once debridement and preparation are
able and its inherent elasticity.
complete, surgical feconstfuction is planned.
Wound contraction is facilitated by:
Reconstructive techniques help to achieve early covef-
age of vital structures and promote an early return to
 A moist wound bed
function. The following sections introduce various
Adequate debridement
 feconstructive techniques used for wound closure; these
:Control of wound infection.
will be discussed in greater depth in later chapters.
Inadequate debridement is the most common fea-
Axial pattern skin flaps
 son for delayed wound healing and persistent wound
Axial pattern flap circulation depends on preserving a
 infection. Wound contraction is delayed by:
direct cutaneous artery at the flap's base. The flap will
survive based only on the vascular attachment. These
Wound infection
flaps can be made much longer than subdermal plexus
Desiccation
flaps; therefore, their utility is greater and their ability
Exposed bone
to manage large defects of the extremities or the trunk
Exuberant granulation tissue.
by immediate closure is an advantage. In addition,
axial flaps provide full thickness skin and can be
The normal process of wound contraction can be
combined in some regions with muscle, resulting in
facilitated by:
musculocutaneous composite flaps. The major dis-
advantage of axial flaps is that Ilap designs are fe-
 Presuturing lesions prior to excision
stricted to the sites with an extensive direct cutaneous
Placement of tension sutures
aftery. (See Chapter & for further details.)
 Using skin stretching devices across open wounds.
Skin grafts
Closure of large trunk wounds, of smaller wounds
Free skin grafts may be of split or full thickness
of the extremities, may be difficult without excessive
with little or full hair growth, respectively. They may be
tension. The elastic properties of skin can be used to
applied immediately to sterile wound beds with good
 advantage in these situations. Presuturing of wounds,
blood supply, such as regions ofthe face of on musculaf
by the placement of several mattress sutures adjacent
surfaces, or to mature granulation tissue. Variations of
to the area of excision, can be used to mobilize skin for
free skin grafts include sieve, punch, meshed and strip
subsequent wound feconstruction in planned exci-
grafts. (See Chapter 9 for more details.)
sions. In traumatic wounds, intradermal tension su-
tures can be placed along the wound edges. The
Pedicled muscle flaps
continuous intradermal suture is tightened on a daily
These flaps are used to provide vascularized soft tissue
basis, facilitating contraction of the wound margins.
coverage of vital structures and for padding of bony
This process of 'enhanced contraction" will greatly
prominences such as the elbow. For example, cranial
reduce the length of time required to achieve closure of
saftorius muscle flaps are used to close abdominal wall
large cutaneous deficits.
defects of to cover exposed bone after disarticulated
fear limb amputations. Musculocutaneous flaps sup-
Managing large tissue deficits
plied by the thoracodorsal artery and vein, including
If simple tension relieving techniques appear to place
cutaneous trunci and a portion of the latissimus dorsi
undue tension on the wound, more advanced
muscle, can be used to cover defects involving the
feconstructive techniques, such as subdermal plexus
elbow in dogs of cats (Figure 4.7). Pedicled muscle
Figure 4. 7: (a) A iarge,
raised open wound fatera!
and caudatin the region of
the elbow that was suspected
to be an infected hygroma.
The wound did not respond
to antimicrobial treatment
and biopsy revealed an
anaptastic sarcoma, (b) En
bloc tumour excision was
Xgpamojof'pauofiad
reconstruction using a
thoracodorsal axial pattern
flap together with the
underlying latissimus dorsi
muscte.The margins ofthe
flap have been outlined.
32
Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
(a)
Figure 4.8: la) Lateral thoracic radiograph of a mixed breed dog with bite wounds over the thoracic cavity. This view and the
ventrodorsal view showed no detectable abnormat findings when taken 2 hours after the injury, (b) Surgical exploration of the
bite wounds revealed intercostal lacerations exposing the diaphragm and pleural cavity. This wound required aggressive
debridement, thorough lavage and chest drain insertion before closure.
flaps are also useful for covering exposed bone or
examination, radiographs of the thorax and abdomen
joints after traumatic exposure with skin loss. (See
should be obtained to assess potential injury to deeper
Chapter 10 for more details.)
structures. Pleural or peritoneal air and fluid, rib
fracture, diaphragmatic hermia, and stermal or verte-
Microvascular free tissue transfer
bral subluxation or fracture may be identified. It
Free flap transfer using microvascular anastomosis to
must be remembered that radiographs made soon
restore circulation after temporary interruption of
after the traumatic event may not reveal intemal
blood supply provides a technically difficult but very
injuries (Figure 4.8a).
useful method of covering difficult architectural de-
Once the patient is stabilized, and if concomitant
fects by primary repair. Cutaneous, musculocutane-
injuries do not preclude anaesthesia and surgery, the
ous and muscle flaps can be harvested from distant
bite wounds should be explored to identify the extent
sites, moved directly to recipient areas, and sutured in
of damage under the skin. If the wound penetrates
place after vascular anastomosis. (See Chapter 11 for
a body cavity the dissection is extended to explore
further details.)
the cavity, as needed, to assess intra-abdominal or
intrathoracic injury. Thoracic bite wounds should
be explored with the anticipation of entering the
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS
pleural space (Figure 4.8b). Intercostal lacerations
are common and may or may not result in dramatic
The following case examples demonstrate the
pneumothorax. When abdominal bite wounds are
 practical application of various options for wound
explored and traumatic herniation is evident, the
 management.
entire abdomen must be explored for visceral
damage. Thorough lavage with isotonic isothermic
Bite wounds
fluid is indicated to dilute contamination. Free blood
Bite wounds are very common injuries in small ani-
clots within body cavities are removed as they
 mals. Most are managed routinely by lavage, debride-
provide a nidus for bacterial growth, isolated from
ment, temporary drainage and wound closure. Bite
host defence mechanisms. Blood clots attached to
wounds that occur over body cavities are often serious;
damaged viscera, such as liver or splenic fractures
although the skin puncture wounds are very small,
and pulmonary lacerations, should be left in place so
there may be soft tissue and, occasionally, orthopaedic
that haemorrhage or air leakage is not re-started.
damage beneath (see Figures 12.12 and 12.13). Bite
Appropriate drainage of the pleural space via tube
wounds result in a combination of crushing and lacer-
thoracostomy is usually required for 24-48 hours.
ating injury to tissue, with significant vascular disrup-
Depending on the degree of abdominal contamina-
tion and inoculation of oral flora. Abdominal wall
tion, and following debridement of all wounds, the
hernia or vascular injury to splanchnic and
 peritoneal cavity may be closed primarily or open
gastrointestinal viscera may occur with bites over the
peritoneal drainage may be undertaken.
abdominal cavity. Pleurocutaneous fistulae and
diaphragmatic lacerations can occur when the thoracic-
Extremity wounds
cavity is involved.
Allowing wounds to heal, at least in part, by second
Animals with bite wounds that occur over body-
intention can make secondary closure by local meth-
cavities should be examined carefully for evidence
ods easier to perfonm and may help reduce tension
of shock or visceral injury. In addition to physical
across a wound (Figure 4.9). Wounds of the extremi-
Wound Closure Options and Decision Making
33
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: (a) A Yellow Labrador Retriever sustained this anatomic degloving injury of its ventral body wall when hit by a car.
Partial closure was performed afterthe initial lavage and debridement, (b) Secondary closure by localskin mobilization using
watkingsutures was achieved 3 weeks after the original injury. Granulation tissue was mature and wound contraction had begun
to narrow the diameter of the wound.
Wounds without exposure of vital structures, but
that have severe contamination or the presence of
wound infection, benefit from open wound manage-
 ment prior to definitive closure. Repeated debridement
to remove debris, devitalized tissue or bone fragments,
 and open wound management to dfain exudate ffom
the wound, are essential to prepare for delayed primary
closure of feconstruction (Figure 4.11).
(6)
Figure 4.10: (a) A linear wound with injury to muscle and
Exposed bone in a mixed breed dog hit by a car. (b) Initial
surgical debridement wasfollowed by wet-to-dry wound
dressings. Granufation tissue production, wound contraction
and ze-epithelializotion resulted in nearly complete
resolution of the wound within 4 weeks.
ties that are oriented parallel to the limb will heal by
second intention with a nafrow linear scar (Figure
4.10). Early after the trauma such a wound may appear
wide and difficult to repair primarily, but swelling
often makes the tissue defect appear wider than it
actually is. Once swelling subsides, in 3-5 days, a
Figure 4.1l: A male Yorkshire Terrier sustained severe
definitive closure can be planned. Attempts to close
injuries to both shoulders secondary to a dogfight. Skin,
extremity wounds early after trauma can result in
subcutaneous tissue, muscle andscapular injury occurred.
circumferential tension and obstruction of lymphatic
Devitalized tissue including scaputar bone fragments were
and venous return from the distal regions of the limbs.
debridedfrom both shoulders, fa) Wet-to-dry dressings were
 In the absence ofexposed vital structures, it is appro-
used, shown here on the leftshoulder, (b) Mature
granutation tissue isshown in the right shoulder, (c) Both
priate to consider delaying wound closure until swell-
shoulder wounds were subsequently closed over Penrose
ing subsides.
drains (right shoulder illustrated).
34
Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Figure4.12:(a)AToy Poodle
bamrier to infection between exposed vital structures
sustaineda shearing injury to
and the environment, allows access for cellular and
the antebrachium and carpus,
resulting in extensortendon
humoral immune mechanisms to access the wound,
injuryandexposedradiocarpat
and provides a good surface for the fonmation of
and intercarpat joints.(b,c)After
granulation tissue.
debridement,lavageand
stabilizationoftheradiocarpal
Wounds associated with orthopaedic
joint,a releasing incision was
made onthe contralateratside
injury
ofthe antebrachium anda
'bipedicalflap'wasadvancedto
Joint trauma
cover the exposed portion of the
 Injuries associated with joint trauma should be debri-
carpusand implants,(d) The
releasing incisionwound healed
ded carefully of debris, clots and cartilage fragments
readilx b\ second intention.
and lavaged thoroughly. Large fragments that have
soft tissue attachment may be rigidly stabilized and.
where possible, the surrounding ligaments and joint
capsule sutured using fine monofilament absorbable
suture material. The joint should be covered by well
vascularized soft tissue, if possible, and stabilized.
Stabilization may be accomplished using extermal co-
aptation (e.g. a half cast that can be changed daily) or
by use of extermal or ring fixators to stabilize the
articulation more rigidly while granulation tissue is
produced within the wound (Figure 4.13). Stabilization
is especially important if the joint surface cannot be
covered with vascularized tissue.
Fractures
Wounds associated with orthopaedic injury are
sufficiently painful that stabilization of the injury by
intermal or extemal fixation is required to decrease
discomfort. Additionally, stabilization facilitates
wound healing by reparative tissues. Figure 4.14a is
a lateral thoracic radiograph of a dog with a stermal
fracture and an associated pleurocutaneous fistula.
One of the major reasons for exploring this wound
(Figure 4.14b), in addition to determining the extent
lapun aeuep em isau pue anssn snoaunagns go
the skin, was to alleviate the pain associated with
sternal luxation and instability. Similar benefits
(c)
are noted with complicated fractures of the extremi-
ties or mandible.
Vital structures are sometimes exposed in trau-
matic wounds (Figure 4.12a). Debridement and early
Figure 4.13: A
coverage with vascularized tissue is indicated to pro-
transarticularexternat
tect these vital structures from desiccation and addi-
fixator has been used to
tional trauma. If there is insufficient local tissue to
stabilize an open wound
invoiving the tibiotarsat
cover the vital structures easily, mobilization of mus
joint in a Great Dane.
 cle or skin flaps may be perfonmed. A releasing inci-
This allowed for daily
sion, parallel to the long axis of the limb, is one method
wound care and
of mobilizing local skin on the extremity to allow
protection of reparative
granulation tissue.
coverage of open joint surfaces or exposed tendons
(Figure 4.12b,c). The wound created by the releasing
incision forms granulation tissue readily and heals
quickly (Figure 4.12d).
Muscle flaps in the vicinity of an injur }' can also be
mobilized and rotated on a vascular pedicle to provide
 coverage of exposed joint surfaces, depending on the 
joint involved. Such vascularized tissue provides a
Wound Closure Options and Decision Making
35
Figure 4.14:
(a) Lateral thoracic
radiograph showing
severe sternal fracture
displacement,(h) The
sternal fracture
displacement which had
resulted from a dog bite
injury.The heart beat
was easily palpable
through the wound.
(a)
Atypical wounds
 Proliferative granulomatous lesions secondary to
Wounds that appear to be traumatic or associated
phycomycosis, pithiosis and mycobacterial infection
with foreign bodies are sometimes actually second-
are diagnosed only by culture of wound tissue. Silver
ary to atypical infection or neoplasia. Such wounds
stains for fungal organisms or acid-fast stains for myco-
typically do not respond completely to conventional
bacterial organisms can reveal the organisms on tissue
open wound management. Figures 4.7,4.15 and 4.16
imprints made for cytological examination. Complete
demonstrate infected wounds that did not respond to
surgical debridement may be possible depending on the
appropriate wound care because of anaplastic sar-
location of the wound; however, recurrence is common.
coma, pithiosis, and phycomycosis, respectively.
Mycobacterial infection often responds to macrolide or 
Atypical mycobacterial infection can also produce
 tetracyline antimicrobial therapy, whereas pithiosis and
chronic non-healing wounds or draining tracts (Fig-
phycomycosis tend to recur locally. Pithium spreads
ure 4.17). Surgical biopsy is indicated for prolifera-
locally and systemically via lymphatic channels and
tive or ulcerative wounds that do not respond
infection can mimic neoplastic disease.
Neoplastic disease that is secondarily infected is
diagnosed by biopsy; prognosis depends on the ability
Figure 4.15: A
to obtain surgical tumour-free margins and the indi-
draining vulvar mass,
vidual tumour's anticipated clinical behaviour, and
non-responsive to
stage of disease (see Chapter 1).
antimicrobial therapy,
Figure 4.18 shows the footpad of a large mixed
was diagnosed as
pithiosis by biopsy and
breed dog examined for a chronic draining footpad
cutture in this 4-year-
wound that the owners thought had occurred second-
oid femate Chow Chow.
 ary to a penetrating foreign body. Antimicrobial treat-
ment and general wound care had resulted in no
 improvement. Incisional biopsy revealed the fimm mass
to be a sweat gland carcinoma. En bloc excision using
frozen sections to detect margins resulted in salvage
of as much metacarpal pad as possible and normal
Figure 4.16: A chronic
non-responsive
proliferative wound
secondary to a
cutaneousfungat
infection, and
complicated by self-
trauma is present in
this Rhodesian
Ridgeback.
ouriesy of Dr Can Ellisoh.
Figure 4.17:A Cocker Spaniet sustained bite wounds that
were initially treated by surgical debridement and closure
overa Penrose drain. Swelling and drainage occurred within
10days. The mass was re-excised but again recurred. A third
excision was examined histopathologically and acid-fast
organisms were seen. A cutture was not performed, but 3
months of erythromycin resulted incessation of clinicat
signs, and atypicat mycobacteriat infection was suspected.
36
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
(b)
C
Figure 4.18: (a) A large mixed breed dog was examined because ofa draining tract from a carpal footpad thought to originate
from stepping on a foreign body. Biopsy revealed sweat gland carcinoma, (b) Frozen sections were obtained at surgery until
clean surgicat margins were detected to allow conservation of as much footpad tissue as possible, (c) Reteasing incisions
usiou podoof an ioaoud oi siop i7 iofpasn sum suds uoods y pod podio annbapo
 weight-bearing was achieved in the long term.
FURTHER READING
Squamous cell carcinomas frequently present as
ulcer-like lesions on the skin or oral cavity or other
Harari J (1993) Surgicat Complications and Wound Healing in the
 mucocutaneous junctions; failure to heal or respond to
Smati Animat Practice. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Swaim S and Henderson R (1997) Smatt Animat Wound Management.
 medical therapy indicates that a biopsy is required.
Williams and Wilkins.Baltimore
CHAPTER FIVE
1 Wound Management
ben
John M. Williams
EVALUATION OF THE WOUND
but also inhibits the effective functioning of neutrophils.
It is important to consider the time from the traumatic
When evaluating a wound it is essential to assess the
incident to presentation. The expression 'golden
patient's vital parameters and deal with any concurrent
period* is often quoted, the time interval which, his-
injuries, e.g. orthopaedic injuries, thoracic injuries.
torically, has been described as being a safe period
With any wound a thorough understanding of the
in which to close a wound primarily. Such an all-
principles of wound healing and bacteriology is essen-
encompassing time interval makes no allowance for
tial. Wounds can be classified in a number of ways, but
local blood supply to the wound, the degree of
from the standpoint of treatment there are essentially
contamination or the extent of tissue injuries. Each
only two types of wound: those that have suffered
wound must be evaluated individually. If there is any
tissue loss and those that have not. Wounds that have
doubt, it is best to assume that the wound is contami-
not lost tissue are those caused by sharp lacerations,
nated, to manage it as an open wound and to consider
e.g. surgical incisions. Avulsion injuries, crush inju-
 surgical closure at a later stage.
ries, bite wounds and bums will lead to deep as well as
Open wound management allows for continued
surface tissue destruction. The severity of the wound
wound drainage, regular wound inspection, lavage and 
affects factors such as the duration of healing and the
 debridement as required. Finally a decision can be 
 probability of complications.
made as to the preferred closure technique once all
The most important question to ask about a wound
contamination and devitalized tissue have been re-
is whether closure is possible without complications
moved. This is summarized in Figure 5.2.
(see Chapter 4). To answer this it is essential to
consider the degree ofcontamination that will indicate
the likelihood of wound infection developing (Figure
WOUND LAVAGE
5.1), remembering that contamination does not imply
infection. The presence ofblood, breakdown products
Wound lavage is an essential part of wound manage-
of haemoglobin, dirt and devitalized tissue will pro-
ment as it significantly reduces bacterial numbers as
vide an ideal environment for bacterial multiplication.
well as removing free foreign material. The pressure
This not only provides a source for bacterial nutrition
required for adequate lavage is between 4 and 15
Figure 5.1: Factors that
BACTERIALEXPOSURE
determine whether
bacterial exposure results
BACTERIAL
in infection.
NUTRITIONFOR
INOCULUM
BACTERIAL
Amount
Virulence
GROWTH
Devitalized/necrotic tissue
Blood products
IMPAIREDHOST
Seroma
RESISTANCE
Foreign material
Local factors
Nutrition
Drugs
Underlying disease
Trauma
CLINICALINFECTION
when thereare 10organisms
per gram of tissue
38
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
TRAUMA
Necrotic tissue
Lavage
Debride
Healthy
Excise
wound
Dress
Granulation
Wound
tissue formed
closure
HEALED
WOUND
Figure 5.2: Steps to be taken in wound management.
pounds per square inch (psi). A pressure of 8 psi can be
and povidone-iodine at 1%. Chlorhexidine appears
achieved using a 20-30 ml syringe, adapted for rapid
to be superior to povidone-iodine in minimizing
refilling by attachment to the distal end of an intra-
wound infection, and its ability to bind to surface
venous giving set via a three-way tap (Figure 5.3).
proteins provides it with prolonged residual activity.
High pressure lavage should not be used, e.g. water-pik
Povidone-iodine has very limited residual activity in
type instruments (at the mid or high setting these will
the presence of organic matter, and its value must
produce 40-50 psi), as this will drive debris and
therefore be questioned in managing contaminated
bacteria further into the tissues. Ideally a sterile
iso-
wounds. Similarly the addition of topical antibiotics
tonic solution should be used, e.g. Hartmann's (lac-
has no advantage over systemic antibiotics as the
tated Ringer's) solution.
latter will readily and rapidly achieve high local
There is some debate as to whether or not to add
tissue concentrations.
 antiseptic solutions to the lavage solution. As it is the
physical flushing of the wound that is important, it is
likely that their addition is not essential. Tap water
has been used as a readily available altemative to
isotonic solutions and can be delivered via a shower
head attachment. However, recent work has shown
Hartmann's
solution
Giving set
that tap water is not ideal as it is cytotoxic to fibroblasts,
 due to its alkaline pH, hypotonicity, and the presence
of various trace elements. Perhaps surprisingly, the
same report indicated that nonmal saline is also cyto-
toxic, due to its lack of a buffering system and its acid
pH. Thus Hartmann's solution would seem to be the
20-30ml
ideal lavage solution as it has no cytotoxic effects. If
syringe
an antiseptic is felt to be necessary then it should be
Needle
used at very low concentrations so as not to interfere
3-way
tap
with the healing process. Chlorhexidine should be
used at a concentration of0.05% (a 1 in 40 dilution)
Figure 5.3: Simple set-up for wound lavage.
Open Wound Management
39
TOPICAL WOUND MANAGEMENT
Sodium hypoehlorite (Dakin's solution)
Solutions of sodium hypochlorite normally have a pH of
Antibiotics
 11 and are highly irritant but when suitably buffered (as
There is little positive value in the use of topical anti-
 Dakin's solution) can be used as a lavage and cleansing
biotics in open wound management especially if there is
agent. During World War I it was used extensively
ongoing infection. Antibiotics are a poor substitute for
and helped in feducing wound sepsis and dissolution
aggressive wound lavage and debridement.
of necrotic debris. When used it is at a strength of
0.125-0.25%, and there is concern that even at such
dilutions significant cytotoxicity occurs. The use of such
Antisepties
a potentially irritating solution has declined dramatically
 The antiseptics chlorhexidine and povidone-iodine
with the advent of antibiotics and especially the hydrogels.
have been discussed earlier under wound lavage.
Organic acids
Hydrogels/hydroactive dressings
Products containing benzoic acid, malic acid, salicylic
Hydrogels can be considered as topical wound agents
acid and propylene glycol are used extensively as
and are probably the most exciting development in
wound cleansing and debriding agents. The mode of
open wound management over the past decade. They
action is by achieving separation following differential
are available as commercial wound dressings. The
swelling of necrotic and healthy tissue, this being
 concept of hydroactive dressings will be considered
achieved by the low pH ofthe solution and the reaction
in detail in the section on dressings (see below).
of the organic acids in separating collagen chains.
Their efficacy has been questioned and, with hydrogels
Honey
being able to achieve gentler autolysis, theif role in the 
Honey was reported as an effctive topical wound
future will be limited.
 agent by the Egyptians in c 1600 Bc (this was descibed
in the so-called Edwin Smith papyrus; c AD 1700). It
Larval therapy
has two positive effects: it is bacteriostatic and it
 In human wound management larval therapy (with
helps with wound cleansing. The former is a function
 maggots) is becoming increasingly popular as a means
of the low pH (- 3.7) which is achieved at the wound
of gently debriding wounds. The concept has been
surface; this has been shown to kill and inhibit strep-
around for several hundred years and the practice only
tococci and coagulase-positive staphylococci. Honey
waned during the 1940s with the advent of antibiotics.
has been shown to take 3-6 days to render a wound
The most popular larvae are those ofLucilia sericata,
sterile in human clinical studies. The cleansing effect
the greenbottle fly. The greenbottle eggs are collected
and cleaned aseptically to allow the larvae to hatch in
draws fluid from the tissues. It is likely that honey has
a sterile environment: they afe then stored in a cool
a fole to play in wound management, though there are 
environment until they are fequired.
few reports ofits use in veterinary wounds. It can be
Skin sufrounding the wound is protected by strips
 considered as an alternative to h\drogels where cost
of a hydrocolloid sheet approximately 2 cm wide.
is an issue.
About 10 larvae per cm? of wound area are introduced
into the wound and held in place by a piece of sterile net
Enzymatic debriding agents
trimmed to overlap the edges of the wound by about 1
Enzymatic debridement is relatively selective in
cm. The net is attached to the hydrocolloid dressing
removing necrotic tissue and its loosening effect on
with adhesive tape, ensuring the edge is completely
necrotic debris may avoid the need for surgical
sealed to prevent the maggots escaping.
debridement. The agents used act on collagen,
The hydrocolloid frame provides anchoring for the
 protein, fibrin, elastin and/or nucleoproteins. The
net, and protects the skin around the wound from the
precise method of action depends on the product
being used. Tunnelling wounds and sinuses would
larvae. It also stops the larvae from migrating on to
seem particularly suitable for these products as they
intact skin. Moistened gauze swabs of a hydrocolloid
femove debris which may be difficult to visualize or
dressing are placed on the outside of the net to prevent
reach surgically. In the UK there are no licensed
the larvae from drying out.
veterinary topical enzymatic agents, though a number 
The "dressing* is leff in place for 48-72 hours, after
of human preparations are available on prescription,
which time the larvae are washed off the wound and the
e.g. streptokinase/streptodornase. In the USA a
wound feassessed. Such treatment is femarkably well
commonly used enzymatic debriding agent is suti-
tolerated by people and its use could be considered for
lains ointment derived from Bacillus subtilis. Their
veterinary wounds where there are particularly large
fole has always been limited in veterinary wound
amounts of necrotic tissue present. The larvae have
 management and in human wound management their
powerful enzymatic systems, which have yet to be
use has been supplanted by the hydrogels.
fully charactefized.
40
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstniction
Miscellaneous agents
Hydrogen peroxide, wound powders and intra-
(i) Pack wound with sterile swabs or tape
mammary antibiotic preparations have no positive
value in wound management and their use should be
discouraged. Hydrogen peroxide damages cells, espe-
cially the capillary' bed, and significantly delays heal-
ing. Wound powders also significantly delay healing
as they are essentially foreign particles which must be
(i) Partially close wound with simple interrupted
cleared by inflammatory cells, and they predispose to
sutures and then start excision with a scalpel
foreign body granuloma formation.
SURGICAL DEBRIDEMENT
Following copious lavage ofthe wound, further gross
necrotic material and debris should be removed by
(Hi) Excise 'wound' and swabs. Suture resulting defect
carrying out surgical debridement. This can be defined
as the removal of dirt, foreign objects, damaged tissue
and cellular debris from a wound, so as to minimize
infection and promote healing.
Wound debridement should be considered a surgi-
cal procedure and strict aseptic techniques employed.
In many instances general anaesthesia should be used
to allow for proper preparation of the patient and a
thorough evaluation of the wound.
1. A wide area is clipped around the wound with a
No. 40 clipper blade
2. The wound is packed with a water-soluble jelly
Figure 5.4: En bloc wound debridement.
or saline-soaked swabs to prevent clipped hair 
from contaminating the wound
3. The gel is rinsed or wiped out with sterile swabs
(i) Start superficially
after clipping
at skin surface and
 debride down into 
 4. The clipped area should be prepared with a
deeper tissues
suitable antiseptic.
with a scalpel
 No alcohol or detergent-based antiseptic solutions
 should be used as they may delay the healing process.
Detergents should never be used in conjunction with
povidone-iodine as they may combine to fonm surfactants
which damage tissue and enhance infection.
En bloc debridement is used to describe the com-
plete wide local excision of a contaminated wound
followed by primary closure of the resultant clean
deficit. This is a technique rarely used in veterinary
(i) Cross-section of
patients. It can be used on the trunk or proximal limbs
wound,showing
but there is rarely enough tissue in distal limbs to allow
depth ofexcision
this to be carried out. The major advantage of this
technique is that it allows for primary wound closure
- Represents line of excision
 and therefore will reduce time and cost in management
Figure 5.5: Layered wound debridement.
of an open wound (Figure 5.4).
 The surgical procedure most commonly carried out
Over an area of tissue, it should be excised. In distal
is layered debridement. This begins by excising de-
extremities there is some merit in managing the wound
vitalized tissue, and removing any debris at the surface,
with dressing (see below) for 2-3 days until a clear
and progresses to the deeper tissues (Figure 5.5). A
 demarcation exists between healthy and necrotic tissue.
scalpel is preferred to scissors as it produces a sharper
 Keeping as much tissue as possible is of vital importance
incision and tissue is cut back until it bleeds. Haemor-
for large deficits where as much skin and other tissues as
rhage is an indication of healthy tissue. If there is doubt
 possible should be preserved in order to allow closure.
Open Wound Management
41
SYSTEMIC MEDICATION
biosis beyond the first 24 hours is questionable, as
persistent use may predispose to nosocomial super-
At the time of presentation a wound is likely to be
 infection with organisms such as pseudomanads and
contaminated and the use of systemic antibiotics
Klebsiella spp.
should be considered. Ideally antibiotics should be
used to prevent bacterial multiplication but with
traumatic wounds the level of contamination may
BANDAGING PRINCIPLES FOR
already be significant and therefore antibiotics are
WOUND MANAGEMENT
relied on to help reduce the number of bacteria. If they
 are to be used prophylactically then they must be
The role of bandaging in open wound management is
administered within 3 hours of the trauma. It must
always be remembered that antimicrobial prophy-
contraction and epithelialization can occur. The func-
laxis is not a substitute for effective lavage, debride-
tions of a bandage and dressing are to:
ment and dressings. The choice of antibiotic should
ideally be based on the results ofbacterial culture and
 Exert pressure for dead space obliteration and
sensitivity; as these will not be known at the time of
reduction of oedema and haemorrhage
 presentation a suitable broad spectrum antibiotic can
Pack a wound
be used which is effective against the most likely
·
 Debride a wound and absorb exudate
contaminants in the wound, which will be either
 Protect the wound from environmental bacteria
coagulase-positive staphylococci or Escherichia coli.
 Immobilize the wound and support adjacent
A rough indication of the contaminants can be ob-
 osseous structures
tained by performing a Gram stain on a direct smear
 Provide comfort
from the wound. The choice of antibiotic must also
Act as a vehicle for antibiotics and antiseptics.
take into account the potential risk of infection and its
consequence and the cost of the antibiotic. The pre-
Generally bandages have three basic component layers
ferred antibiotics to use are clavulanic acid-potentiated
(Figure 5.6):
amoxycillin, second-generation cephalosporins or
fluoroquinolones. The antibiotic can be changed if
 Primary (Contact) layer
the results of culture and sensitivity dictate this. It is
Secondary (Intenmediate) layer
also worthwhile considering the basic actions of
Tertiary (Outer) layer.
antibiotics when making a choice, for example:
Primary (contact) layer
· Pseudomonads are resistant to (3-lactam
The contact layer is critical in that when correctly
antimicrobials as well as first- and second-
generation cephalosporins
has been shown to occur under the following conditions:
·Potentiated sulphonamides have very poor
 activity against abscesses and areas of grossly
Moist (not too wet and macerated)
necrotic tissue
 No infection/necrosis
Anaerobes are generally resistant to
 No toxins/particles/loose fibres
fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides.
Optimum temperature (35-37°C)
Undisturbed
It is best to have a few well chosen antibiotics
·
Minimal infection
and to use them routinely, rather than use a wide
 pH is maintained around 6 which inhibits
range of drugs. The justification for continued anti-
 bacterial multiplication.
Outer layer
Figure 5.6: The layers
of a bandage.
Intermediatelayer
Contact layer
42
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Figure 5.7: Moist versus dry-
Semi-occlusive dressing
wound healing.
Moist
No dressing
exudate
Normal scabformation
Dry
Wound.
exudate
surface
Wound
Epidermis
surface
Dry
dermis
Neoepithelialization
Modem semi-occlusive dressings will allow many of
Diy-to-dry dressings: These are reserved for wounds
these criteria to be achieved. Since the early 1960s it
which still have considerable amounts of foreign debris
has been accepted that wounds which are kept moist
or loose necrotic tissue which is not amenable to further
(Figure 5.7) will heal more rapidly by up to 40%
surgical debridement. Altematively they may be ap-
compared to wounds allowed to dry out.
plied to wounds that possess large volumes of
The primary layer must be sterile and remain in
Jow-viscosity exudate which does not tend to aggregate.
close contact with the surface of the wound while
 Dry sterile gauze swabs have a good absorptive capa-
the patient is either resting or moving. If any space
 city, allowing debris and necrotic material to adhere to
is present between the dressing and the wound,
them. The bandage should be left in place until both the
drainage is likely to be impaired and tissue macera-
 contact and intenmediate layers have absorbed exudate
tion may occur. It is essential that this layer there-
and the primary dressing has dried. Removal of the
fore conforms to the body contours. In wounds
contact layer results in debridement of the wound. Dry-
which are exudative or draining it is essential that
to-dry dressings are by their nature extremely painful to
the contact layer allows fluid to pass through to the
remove from wounds since they tend to remove viable
secondary or absorbent layer of the dressing. Dress-
 as well as necrotic tissue. In some instances it may be
ings applied to non-exudative wounds should pre-
 preferable either to infiltrate the dressing with a local
vent exogenous contamination. Meshed materials
anaesthetic during removal or to anaesthetize the
should be fine enough to prevent penetration by
patient. Because of the length of time required to dry the
fibrinous tissue. The contact layer should minimize
primary layer, there is increased risk with dry-to-dry
 pain, prevent unnecessary loss of body fluid, and be 
dressings of granulation tissue infiltrating between the
non-toxic and non-irritating to tissues.
 mesh of the gauze. With the advent of hydrogel dressing
materials dry-to-dry dressings are now rarely indicated.
Adherent contact layer
Adherence to the wound is only indicated early on
Wet-to-diy dressings: Wet-to-dry dressings have his-
in wound healing (debridement stage). At this
torically been the mainstay of early wound manage-
Aip Aidde oi 1ayiaym apeut aq isnut uoisioap e asens 
ment where there is viscous exudate plus necrotic
or wet dressings, depending on the amount
of
tissue and debris. They also serve to preserve the moist
exudate/transudate coming from the wound. Such
environment which is preferred for wound healing.
dressings are useful in further debriding a wound
The sterile gauze is preferably soaked in sterile
once gross debris and necrotic tissues have been
Hartmann's solution, though both sterile isotonic
removed surgically.
saline and water have been advocated in the past. The
Adherence occurs by one of two mechanisms:
majority of the fluid is then squeezed out and the
dressing applied to the wound; this is followed by an
 Proteinaceous exudate penetrates the dressing,
absorbent secondary layer and a tertiary layer, which
which then dries by absorption into the
will allow some evaporation. The water in the gauze
secondary layer
dilutes the exudate, allowing its absorption; as the
dressing dries out, debris and necrotic material will
OR
adhere to it (Figure 5.8). Such dressings need to be
· There is penetration of the dressing mesh by
changed at least every 24 hours and more often if there
 granulation tissue; an indication that the dressing
are copious amounts of exudate present. There may be
has been left in place for too long.
some pain and discomfort on removal. If too wet, such
Open Wound Management
43
Figure 5.8: Wet-to-dry dressing.
Exudate absorbed
into intermediate layer
Debris/necrotictissue
in woundadheresto
contact dressing
a dressing may allow tissue maceration or bactefial
tension and can therefore be used in the presence
strikethrough as bacteria flourish in the wet local
of epithelialization. Such dressings have an outer semi-
environment. Because of this fisk some authors advo-
permeable polyethylene film with some form of ab-
cate the use ofantiseptics in the wetting solution, such
sorbent layer and they allow absorption of wound
as 0.os% chlorhexidinc solution.
exudate whilst maintaining adequate oxygen levels at
Recently hydrogels (see below) have been advo-
the wound surface to allow re-epithelialization. These
cated as a suitable alternative 'wetting' agent. Their
dressings are to a greater or lesser degree non-adher-
advantage is an increased absorptive capacity, they act
ent. Figure 5.9 shows some ofthe products available.
^s a desloughing agent and allow for a much gentler
iebridement when the dressing is femoved. These
 Type of dressing
 m
Manufacturer
froducts also reduce the number of dressing changes
 fequired. Hydrogels can also be applied under absorp-
Perforated film
 Melolin
Smith & Nephew
tive non-adherent dressings and debride the wound
absorbent
Release
Johnson & Johnson
equally well. The amorphous hydrogels can be left in
dressings
Skintact
Robinson Healthcare
Inee for 48 hours with most wounds, which reduces the
Cutilin
TSK Animal Health
_mber of dressing changes required. The appearance
· t the gels at the time of dressingchange often resembles
Foam dressings
 Lyofoam
Ulta Laboratories Ltd
-'_>. and clients should be warned of this if they are
Cutinova Foam
TSK Animal Health
fresent during dressing changes. This is the normal
Tielle
Johnson & Johmson
^rpearance of hydrogels following fluid absorption.
Allevyn
Smith & Nephew
Hvdrogels
lntrasite
Smith & Nephew
Non-adherent contact layer
Granugel
ConvaTec
I.ee granulation tissue is forming, and prior to epithe-
Nu-Gel
Johnson & Johnson
^ilization, the contact dressing should not be allowed
 AquaFoarm
TSK Animal Health
c adhere to the wound, but should be able to absorb
Cutinova Cavity
TSK Animal Health
.date. The use ofhydrogels in the amorphous form
Cutinova Hydo
TSK Animal Health
-einueie aouo yoeoudde ino pagueuo seu siaaus <! .
Biodres
DVM Phamaceuticals
c is present as there is no real need to change the type
dressing. However if a classical wet-to-dry or dry-
Hvdrocolloid
Tegasorb
3M
:r- dressing has been used, it is essential to change
dlressings
Granuflcx
ConvaTec
i non-adherent contact layer.
Comfeel
Coloplast Ltd
Lirly non-adherent dressings
Alginate
Kaltogel
ConvaTec
dlressings 
Kaltostat
ConvaTec
. -lv such a dressing is wide meshed gauze im-
 AlgiSite
 Smith & Nephew 
y.ed with petroleum jelly. Such dressing should
Algosteril
 TSK Animal Health
xhe used ifthere is evidence of peripheral epitheliali-
Sobsam
: in as the jelly reduces oxygen tension in the wound
Animalcare Ltd
Tegagel
3M
EA: therefore delays epithelialization. This is a very
~^ window of opportunity and given the wide range
 Semi-pemeable
Cutiflm
BDF Medical Ltd
 rTjellent non-adherent semi-occlusive dressing now
adhesive flm
Opsite
Smith & Nephew
_re for open wound management, there are few If
Tegadenn
3M
: ..jiions for the use of these older products.
Bioclusive
Johnson & Johnson
Figure 5.9: A guide to commercially availabie wound
non-adherent dressings
dressing products. This list is not designed to be
Absorbent semi-occlusive non-adhering dressings
comprehensive or exhaustive, but is an indication of what
a moist wound without feducing oxygen
is available.
44
Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Perforated film dressings: Regrettably, apart from
solutions or wound exudate. The amorphous hydrogels
semipermeable films and hydroactive dressing materi-
have shown themselves to be particularly effective in
 als the majority of contact dressings show some ten-
the management of wounds with necrotic tissue and
 dency to adhere to the surface ofthe wound. The films
debris present (Figure 5.10) The gel rehydrates dead
that are applied to the dressing surface to reduce
tissue and allows nonmal autolytic processes to de-
 adherence are essentially sheets of plastic with micro-
bride the wound. Amorphous hydrogels will not only
scopic pores. The size and number of these pores is
swell but tend to flow to the shape of the wound as
critical for the success of these dressings. Below a
they reduce in viscosity. Some earlier workers added
critical size, wound exudate will stay on the wound
antibiotics such as metronidazole to the product but it
surface and will predispose to local inflammation
is now felt that this is largely unnecessary, as the
under the dressing itself. It is also common with such
hydrogel itself has a significant antibacterial acti vity.
perforated film dressings to find secondary damage at
Amorphous hydrogels are particularly suited
to
the site of the pores due to local dehydration secondary
wounds with large defects and cavities. They do need
to moisture evaporation. Such problems have now-
to be applied with a suitable secondary dressing to
been largely overcome by the development of foam-
keep them in place.
based dressings.
Sheet hydrogels have a fixed three-dimensional
structure, this does not change its physical form but
Foam dressings: These are a recent development in
will swell due to fluid absorption.
wound mangement, produced in order to overcome the
 limitations ofthe earlier perforated film dressings. One
Hydrocolloids: Hydrocolloids
S comprise a self-
commercial multi-layered product has a perforated
adhesive gel of carboxymethylcellulose and usually
 non-adherent polyurethanc film, a polyurethane foam,
gelatin, and are held in place by a thin polyurethane or
hydrophilic core and an outer polyurethane film; this
foam sheet. Initially the hydrocolloids are totally im-
has excellent absorptive capacity and maintains a
 pervious to water and arc therefore extremely valuable
warm (35°C) moist well oxygenated environment. The
in rehydrating a wound to precipitate autolysis and
major advantage of this product is the large absorptive
debridement. As the gel forms the product becomes
capacity of the foam (1400 g/m2/24h) even when
more water penmeable and allows fluid to escape from
compressed. The backing layer also allows controlled
the dressing; this allows the hydrocolloids to cope with
evaporation and acts as a very effective bacterial
moderate amounts of wound exudate though they
barrier. The capacity of the foam and the backing layer
cannot manage large volumes.
are such that it prevents dehydration at the wound
 Hydrocolloid dressings are ideal products where
surface and therefore minimizes any risk of adherence
there is superficial injur)' with minimal exudate or they
or localized dehydration at the pore site of the surface
can be used to secure a hydrogel or alginate in place.
polyurethane film.
Thin hydrocolloids are associated with very low infec-
tion rates at the wound site; due to low local pH and the
Hydroactive dressings: Hydroactive dressings have
fact that the dressing is impervious to bacteria, it would
become one of the major ways of dealing with open
appear to be particularly effective in reducing local
wounds in that they aid moist wound healing, allowing
infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. There is rela-
 autolysis and debridement. These dressings fall into
tively rapid wound healing, which may be due to a high
three basic categories, namely amorphous hydrogels,
concentration of wound cytokines trapped by the dress-
 sheet hydrogels and hydrocolloids. Alginates by their
ing at the surface. There is minimal pain associated
activity can also be considered as hydrocolloids
with its use or removal. Hydrocolloids are effective in
Essentially hydrogels consist of insoluble poly.
enhancing autolytic wound debridement due to main-
 mers, which have the ability to absorb and retain large
tenance of a moist wound surface as with all hydroactive
volumes of water following interaction with aqueous
dressings and need only be changed twice a week.
Amorphoushydrogel
Rehydrates
Debrides
andabsorbs
Figure 5.10: Amorphous hydrogel rehydrates, debrides via autotysis and absorbs necrotic tissue.
Open Wound Management
45
Sheet hydrocolloids adhere to nonmal skin surface
Secondary (intermediate) layer
while the area over the wound interacts to form a
It is essential that all layers of a bandage are cor
non-adherent gel. This type of dressing is designed
rectly and meticulously applied in order to avoid the
to be applied to moderately exudative wounds
common complications that can arise from inade-
through to granulating wounds. The dressing should
quate, unskilled or incorrect application. The role of
be left in place for 2-3 days; such a product not
the secondary layer in wound management, in addi-
only encourages desloughing and debriding but will
tion to providing support and comfort, is absorption.
predispose to rapid epithelialization and reduced
It acts as a 'trap' for exudative fluids from the
wound contraction.
wound, evaporation from this layer helps prevent
A hydroactive dressing is, in this author's opinion,
bacterial strikethrough. To aid its absorptive role
one of the most valuable materials that can be applied
this layer needs to have good capillarity and should
to a wound, either in sheet or amorphous form. The
be thick enough (single or preferably multi-layered)
only real disadvantage, apart from cost, is that
to collect the fluid and pad the wound. The interme-
hydroactive dressings should not be used directly on
diate layer must be in close contact with the primary
wounds which are highly exudative though the sheet
dressing but it should not be applied so tightly as to
hydrocolloids can be used as secondary dressings over
limit exudate absorption (Figure 5.11). Suitable
a primary dressing such as an alginate.
 materials are hospital-quality absorbent cotton wool,
or synthetic materials.
Alginates: Alginate dressings are possibly the most
underused and undervalued of all the primary wound
dressings available. They are generally woven
products, of both calcium and sodium alginate, de-
Outerlayer
rived from brown seaweeds (e.g. giant kelp). Cal-
cium alginate is relatively insoluble but will form a
Intermediate
gel in the presence of sodium ions. These may be
layer
provided by the wound exudate or are included in
Contact layer
the dressing itself; the advantage of the mixed
(i) Carrect compression-allowing
salts is that they tend to form a gel more rapidly. The
absorptionof maisture/texture
gel formed is extremely hydrophilic, which aids
moist wound healing and promotes autolysis. The
absorptive capacity of alginate swabs is some three
times that of an equivalent-sized gauze swab. They
also appear to allow rapid healing with minimal
wound discomfort, when the wound is exudative.
There is some evidence that calcium alginate may
(i) Over compressed-reducing capillary effect
promote fonmation of fibroblasts and thus actively
aid in the healing process. There is no pain asso-
Figure 5.1l: Intermediate layer compression.
ciated with their removal due to the gel fonmation.
In cases where there is minimal exudation, a
Tertiary (outer) layer
non-adherent dressing should be placed over the
 The outer layer serves to hold all the other layers of
dressing. In general, alginate dressings need only
the bandage in place. In a multi-layered bandage
be changed every 2-3 days. Alginates have both
(e.g. modified Robert Jones), intermediate layers of 
haemostatic and absorptive properties. The haemo-
 conforming gauze and absorbent material may be
static activity is believed to be due to exchange of
used prior to applying an outer covering such as an
calcium and sodium ions in the blood, allowing
adhesive wrap or preferably a self-adhering dress-
activation of platelets and coagulation. An alginate
ing. It is important that the outer layer allows evapo-
should not be placed in deep wounds or within
ration of fluid but minimizes external fluid
body cavities as it can set up a severe foreign
absorption. Plastic bags which may be placed over
body reaction, they arc not designed as absorbable
the distal dressing should only be left in situ for a
haemostatic agents for intraoperative use.
minimal period to prevent excessive fluid retention
with the increased risk of bacterial strikethrough
Semipermeable film dressings: Granulating wounds
 and tissue maceration.
with little or no exudate can be dressed with an adhe-
sive poly urethane filhm which acts as an excellent semi-
Tie-over (bolus) dressings
occlusive dressing, maintaining moisture at the surface
Tie-over (bolus) dressings are a useful method of
 and thereby encouraging epithelialization. The main
securing contact layers to parts of the body, where
problem with dogs and cats is non-adherence to the
con ventional bandaging techniques are of limited value,
nonmal skin.
e.2. over the greater trochanter. The most common
46
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
a non-adherent foam dressing which was held in place
by umbilical tape to good effect.
Pressure relief bandages
Dressing wound
Pressure relief dressings are indicated for decubital
Suturesor
ulcer type lesions or superficial ulceration secondary
umbiical tape
to bandages or casts. Generally doughnut-shaped and
Skin
 pipe insulation bandages are employed to protect the
 area concermed. Care should be taken when using
doughnut-shaped bandages, as they can in some in-
stances be counterproductive as they produce a 'halo'
compression of the skin around a bony prominence.
This compression can occasionally be severe enough
to compromise the circulation and therefore delay-
healing. Soft foam pad (pipe insulation) can be used
 parallel to the lesion so as not to encircle the wound and
therefore not compromise the circulation.
Figure 5.12: Tie-over bolus dressing.
FURTHER READING
method of securing such a dressing is to use loops of
 3m (2/0) monofilament nylon sutures that are placed
Pavletic M (1990) Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery. Veterinary
some 2 cm from the wound edge. Umbilical (nylon)
Clinics of North America: Smatt Animat Practice 20
Pavletic M (1993) Atlas of Smatt Animat Reconstructive Surgery.
tape is passed through these loops to secure the dress-
Lippincott, Philadel phia
ing (Figure 5.12).
Swaim SFand Henderson RA(1997) Smatt Animat Wound Management.
 Non-adherent dressing is applied to the wound, and
Znd edit. Wiliams and Wilkins. Baltimore
 cotton wool is then placed in the centre of the dressing.
Thomas S (1990) Wound Management and Dressings. The
Pharmaceutical Press. London
The edges of the dressing are then folded over and
secured either with sutures or umbilical tape. Recently
Further information on wound dressings can be obtained from the
Surgical Materials Testing Laboratory. Bridgend General Hospital.
the author has used an amorphous hydrogel covered by
Mid-Glamorgan website at http://www.smtl.co.uk
CHAPTER SIX
cgical Drains
Stephen J. Babies
INTRODUCTION
Surgical reduction of dead space may not be
sufficient, may risk damage to the underlying
This chapter will review the types of drains available,
structures by sutures, and may increase the wound
the indications for their use in wound management and
infection rate because of implanted foreign material
reconstruction, and potential complications. Some
and potential damage to the blood supply of the
controversy still exists over the effectiveness, thera-
tissue. Surgical closure of dead space alone is not
peutic indications, applications and maintenance re-
advocated for routine use in contaminated wounds.
quirements of drains. This is due, in part, to the fact that
In addition, if a seroma does fonn, the presence
their value depends on both the method of application
of buried tacking sutures results in the formation
and case selection.
of many, smaller pockets, which do not communi-
cate with each other. This makes it difficult to
establish drainage.
GENERAL INDICATIONS
 Pressure bandages may only supply pressure for a
few hours, may apply excessive pressure resulting in
ond yum yuedu iaans Aroda n si uep 
 compromised blood supply, or may be inappropriate
vides and maintains a channel of exit forthe purpose
 for certain sites (e.g. head and neck).
of removing fluids (blood, serum, exudate), foreign
material and air from a wound or body cavity. The
 Removal of fluid accumulation from a
correct application of drains will reduce the wound
wound
infection rate and shorten the healing time. How-
Fluid accumulation within a wound reduces host
ever, the misapplication of drains increases morbid-
resistance to infection and reduces healing by the
ity and mortality.
following mechanisms:
Surgical drains have two main indications:
 The opsonic activity of antibodies is
 To eliminate the potential for dead space
progressively lost in fluid
 To remove fluid accumulation from a wound.
 Fluid interferes with the access of phagocytes to
Elimination of dead space
bacteria
 Fluid provides a substrate for bacterial growth
Dead space is an abnormal space within a wound,
Wound fluid may compromise the blood supply
containing fluid or gas. Wounds involving extensive
to the surrounding tissue
subcutaneous dissection, created by removal of a large
 Fluid accumulation may interfere with graft
mass or reconstructed with skin grafts or flaps will
acceptance.
contain an appreciable amount of dead space. Elimina-
tion of dead space promotes early union of divided
tissues. Dead space may be eliminated by:
The use of surgical drains is indicated where:
 Surgical means: e.g. tacking sutures
· Fluid accumulation will recur after simple
 Pressure bandages
evacuations, e.g. large seromas
 Surgical drains.
Fluid cannot be readily removed, e.g. abscesses 
Wounds cannot be completely debrided, and
Surgical drains can and should be used in conjunction
contain foreign material or necrotic debris
with the other two methods. If dead space can be
 Fluid will remain or be produced after surgery.
eliminated using the first two methods, then drains
e.g. salivary mucocoele, skin flap
should not be used. However, these methods have their
 Massive contamination is inevitable, e.g. perianal
own inherent disadvantages.
wounds.
48
Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstniction
Wound factors
Is there a need for
Surgical drainage systems may be classified by the
drainage?
following characteristics:
What type of discharge
 Mechanism of action: passive or active
is present or expected
 Type of implant: surface-acting or tube drain
(viscosity,volume)?
 Suction system: commercially available or
What type of wound is
'home-made'
present?
Where is the wound
Mechanism of action
located?
Passive drainage
Patient factors
Will thepatient tolerate
 Passive drains provide a path of least resistance to the
the presence of a drain?
exterior and function chiefly by overflow of fluid from
Hospital environment
What drains are
the wound. They are assisted by gravity and are influ-
available?
enced by pressure differentials within the wound,
What standard of
which may be induced by normal tissue movement or 
postoperative care will
by a pressure bandage. Fluid normally passes over the
be available?
surface of the drain and therefore a drain's efficacy is
largely dictated by its surface area. Passive drains
Drainage system
Which type of drain will
 placed non-dependently lose their efficacy. Passive
be most effective?
drains placed in certain locations (e.g. the axillary and
Is an active or passive
inguinal regions) may allow air to be sucked into the
drain indicated?
wound as the tissues move, resulting in emphysema.
Use the most cost-
The most widely used passive drains are the Penrose
effective for the type of
drain (Figure 6.2) and the corrugated drain (Figure 6.3).
wound
Active drainage
Figure 6.1: Factors affecting the choice of surgical drain.
An active drain uses an extermal source of suction to
remove fluid from the wound. Suction increases the
Another frequently quoted, but wholly unsubstanti-
efficiency of dependently placed drains and can re-
ated, role for drains is their prophylactic placement as a
move fluid against the influence of gravity. Suction
means of detecting fluid accumulation within a wound.
drains are of use if dependent drainage is difficult to
The prophylactic use of drains is not a substitute for
 obtain or where the patient's posture frequently alters
good surgical technique and careful patient evaluation.
the point of dependency. They are also of more use if
The use of drains is not without the risk of complications
large volumes of fluid are expected.
and other more satisfactory and less invasive methods
of detecting fluid accumulations exist. Hence surgical
drains should not be used in this maimer.
CHOICE OF SURGICAL DRAIN
General guidelines rather than absolute rules exist; it is
important to evaluate each patient individually. The
factors in Figure 6.1 need to be considered to ensure
that the drainage system is a success.
Figure 6.2: Penrose drain.
opyrighs
KA.5.Whi
TYPE AND TECHNIQUE OF DRAINAGE
 In addition to the use of surgical implants it is impor-
tant to realize that wound drainage may also be achie ved
by the following means:
 Open wound drainage, i.e. the wound is not closed
 Fenestration of part of the skin surface, e.g.
meshed skin grafts
Use of a physiological implant, e.g. placing of
Figure 6.3: Corrugated drain (left) and Yeates drain (right).
omentum.
Copyrighr @ R.A.5. mie.
Surgical Drains
6
Closed suction: This uses negative pressure applied to
a single-lumen drain with no air vent. This allows the
wound and dressing to be kept dry, prevents bacteria
ascending via the drain and markedly reduces the
infection rate. The incidence of postoperative haema-
toma and seroma is also reduced compared with pas-
sive drains. Closed suction drains help keep skin flaps
in apposition to the wound bed and result in early
revascularization and enhanced healing (Pope and
Swaim, 1986).
Vented suction: This uses a continuous source of
suction and a multi-lumen drain (sump drain) and is
the most efficient way of removing large volumes of
fluid. High-volume suction (20 1/min) is more likely
to result in wound contamination than low-volume
suction (4 1/min). In addition, a large volume of air
moving through the wound may be traumatic to the
tissues. This volume ofsuction requires that the drain
is attached to a wall-mounted or mobile suction
generator. For these reasons, vented suction has little
use in the management of wounds in small animals
(Swaim and Lee, 1990).
pheric bandage' sufficient to obliterate the dead space
without damaging tissues. Suction may be applied
continuously or intermittently (at least every 6
hours). Continuous suction is more effective, and
more useful where high volumes of fluid are anti-
cipated. The continuous, uninterrupted flow reduces
the likelihood of drain occlusion and results in a
shorter period of drainage. Intermittent suction
allows the system to be secured between suction
episodes, reducing the risk ofinadvertent disconnec-
tion. Ideally, the suction device should incorporate
a one-way valve to prevent reflux of fluid from the
reservoir into the wound.
The suction device may be a portable reservoir,
which is taped, sutured orattached to the patient with
a bandage, or a wall-mounted or mobile suction
Figure 6.4: Two types of commercial suction device.
generator. The former are more convenient and more
Copyrighi C RA.5. While.
widely used in wound management, and may consist
of a commercially available reservoir or may be
wound (Figure 6.5a). On wound closure the needle is
'home-made'.
introduced into the evacuated tube to provide suction
Commercial reservoirs consist of either a rigid
(Figure 6.5b).
evacuated container or a flexible, compressible recep-
 Ifa syringe is used, it is attached to the tube drain
tacle (Figure 6.4). Commercially available units are
and the plunger retracted until the desired pressure is
convenient to use, are less likely to become detached
achieved. A pin or 18-gauge needle is then inserted
(H o) sainssaid ramol e aiiado pu
than
through the plunger, above the syringe barrel, so re-
home-made devices, thus reducing the risk of tissue
taining it in place (Figure 6.6). The tip ofthe needle 0r
trauma and occlusion or collapse of the tube.
pin must be covered or blunted so that it will not
Home-made devices may be constructed using a 10
traumatize the patient.
ml evacuated glass tube (Figure 6.5) or a large (30 or
Small blood tubes are effective and less cumber-
60 ml) syringe (Lee et a/., 1986) (Figure 6.6).
 some to handle and incorporate into a bandage than a
The evacuatedglass tube is combined with a butter-
syringe. However, they are more fragile and may
fly scalp needle. The syringe adapter is detached, the
need to be changed several times a day in highly
extension tubing is fenestrated and implanted into the
productive wounds.
50
Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
(a)
Figure 6.5: 'Home-
(b)
made'suction device
using an evacuated
glass tube and butterfly
needle,(a)A 19-gauge
butterfly needle with
multipie fenestrations;
the Luer-Lock
attachment has been
removedfrom the
extension tubing,
(b) Placement of drain
and connection of
suction device.
should not be done. The Penrose drain is not suitable
for use as an active drain since the negative pressure
will cause the drain to collapse.
A strip drain is a thin strip of latex cut from a quarter-
Needle inserted
 inch diameter Penrose drain. This is used as a narrow flat
through syringe
plunger
drain when an entire drain would be too wide.
Penrose drains are soft, easily sterilized and readily
available. They are malleable and do not exert pressure
on adjacent structures. They are readily tolerated by
most patients. However, latex and other types of rub-
ber incite more tissue reaction than silicone rubber or
polypropylene drains and cause more rapid formation
of a fibrous tract. This makes this type of drain more
suitable for drainage of abscesses, where a sinus tract
may be desirable.
Common mistakes in placing Penrose drains are
 making the skin exit wound too small, or tunnelling
Figure 6.6:'Home-made'suction device using a syringe and
the drain too far subcutaneously before entering the
tube.The drain is placed,the syringe attached and the
wound, both of which result in an inadequate opening
plunger withdrawn to achieve the desired negative pressure.
for fluid passage.
A pin is placed through the plunger to secure it in place.
Corrugated drains
TYPE OF IMPLANT
These are ribbed, malleable strips of nibber or PVC
(see Figure 6.3). They have no intermal lumen and
The following types of drain are available:
 drainage only occurs over their surface. Like all pas-
sive drains, their efficacy is dictated by their surface
 Surface-acting drains: Penrose drains, corrugated
area. These drains are more rigid than Penrose drains
drains
and have the potential to cause more tissue irritation. A
Tube drains (single lumen)
variant of this drain, the Yeates tissue drain, consists
 Sump drains (multi-lumen)
of a series of small tubes attached together in a flat
·
Sump-Penrose drains (multi-lumen).
sheet. This will drain both over its extermal surface
 and via the lumina.
Penrose drains
This is a flattened, cylindrical, soft latex rubber tube
Tube drains
(Figure 6.2). Sizes range from 0.5 to 5 cm wide, and
These are cylindrical tubes with at least one lumen and
from 30 to 90 cm long. This is a passive drain, which
 may function as either passive or active drains (Figure
functions primarily by capillary action and gravity
6.7). They may be constructed of rubber, silicone nib-
flow, and must be placed with its exit in a dependent 
ber, PVC, polyethylene or other plastics. Sizes range
position. Some fluid will exit via the lumen, particu-
from 37: to 40 French (1-13 mm intermal diameter). As
larly immediately following placement, but the major-
 passive drains they remove fluid intraluminally by grav-
ity of the fluid passes extraluminally over the surface
ity, with a small amount extraluminally. As active drains
of the drain. Fenestration of Penrose drains reduces
they remove fluid exclusively by the intermal lumen. To
their surface area, and hence their efficiency, and
Aaun pade si uons uaum up au no asdenoo proan
Surgical Drains
51
Coating Containe
TEFLON
Figure 6.8:Foley catheter with syringe adapter removed.
Copyrighr E I/1.6". While.
Figure 6.7: Latex tube drain.
Copyrighi B RA.S. While
Figure 6.9: Foley catheter fenestrated at tip.
are manufactured from more rigid materials than are
Copyrighi : RA.5. While
passive drains. Hence, they are more likely to cause
tissue irritation and patient discomfort.
The section of drain within the wound needs to
be fenestrated to increase the efficiency of fluid
egress and to reduce the likelihood of obstruction
by tissue or exudate. Fenestrations may be cut into
a non-fenestrated tube. They should be oval, and
should not occupy more than one third ofthe circum-
ference of the tube to avoid kinking or breakage.
Figure 6.10: Sump-Penrose drain.
Potential disadvantages include occlusion of the
Codyrigh I RA.S White.
lumen and collapse on applying suction. Red rubber
tubes are more irritant to tissues than any other drains,
and gauze padding may be incorporated between the
whereas a minimal response occurs with silicone rub-
Penrose drain and the sump drain to increase the
ber tubes. An impurity in cetain polyethylene tubes
efficiency of capillary action and to reduce tissue
has been demonstrated to support bacterial growth.
trauma by the more rigid sump drain. The Penrose
 drain is attached by encircling sutures at either end.
Sump drains
The advantage is that the outer fenestrated Penrose
These are tube drains with two or more lumina. The
drain allows fluid to exit while preventing tissue adher-
larger primary lumen provides the egress channel from
ence to the sump drain. This design allows the drains
the wound, while the smaller secondary lumen acts as
to remain functional in tissues for long periods. These
a vent for access and circulation of air into the wound.
drains were initially designed for intra-abdominal drain-
This venting action reduces the likelihood of tube
age but have now been superseded by the technique of
occlusion and increases the efficiency of drainage by
 open peritoneal drainage.
displacing fluid from the wound. In general, the more
A modijfied sump-Penrose drain contains another
lumina, the greater the efficacy of the drain.
tube within the Penrose drain. These are available
Sump drains are available commercially or may be
commercially, or may be made by adding a rubber
made from a Foley catheter. The syringe adapter is cut
urethral catheter to the Penrose-Foley catheter outlined
off (Figure 6.8) and the catheter is fenestrated at the tip
above. The presence of three lumina allows suction to be
(Figure 6.9). Air is allowed into the wound by remov-
applied to one lumen, an irrigating fluid to be introduced
ing the inflatable bulb or ensuring the fenestrations
via the second, and air to enter via the third.
encroach on the bulb inflation channel. The wider,
central channel acts as the egress, and the smaller
inflation channel allows venting. The main disadvan-
DRAIN PLACEMENT AND
tage is the possibility of contamination of the wound
MANAGEMENT
via the ingress chamiel. For this reason this portal
should be fitted with a bacterial filter.
The following general guidelines apply to drain place-
ment and management:
Sump-Penrose drain
This is a triple-lumen drain created by placing a
Drains should be manufactured from soft, inert
double-lumen sump drain inside a Penrose drain
radiopaque materials which induce minimal
(Figure 6.10). The Penrose drain may be fenestrated,
tissue reaction
52
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
 A sterile dressing and a light bandage should be
applied and changed as often as required to
maintain asepsis
 The suction device should be changed as often as
 required to maintain suction.
The Penrose drain should be placed into the wound
before closure via a separate, dependent stab incision:
A pair of haemostatic forceps is used to create a
tunnel between the ventral aspect of the wound
 and a point just beneath the skin ventral to this
A stab incision is made over the forceps and the
forceps used to grasp the drain and pull it into the
wound (Figure 6.12a)
 The drain should be anchored proximal ly within
the wound with a single absorbable suture. As
small a bite as possible is taken of the drain so
that it will easily tear through on removal
(Figure 6.12b)
Alternatively, the proximal end of the drain may
be anchored to the skin with a monofilament
suture passed through the skin and through the
drain (Figure 6.12c). The suture is then passed
back out through the skin and tied externally
Figure 6. 1l: Penrose drain exiting dependently, away from
The drain should be cut so that only 1-2 cm
sutured wound.
protrudes beyond the skin. This end is then 
Copyrighi C RA.5. Whine.
anchored to the skin with a single monofilament 
suture (Figure 6.12d).
 Drains should not exit through the primary
 incision or make contact with the suture line as
The drain may also be placed with separate stab
this will interfere with healing (Figure 6.11)
incisions above and below the wound and be
 Drains should not be placed near major
anchored to the skin at each point (Figure 6.12e).
neurovascular bundles of anastomotic sites, since 
However, there will be no effective drainage ffom
they may cause erosion of these structures
the non-dependent exit hole and this technique
· Sutures placed to close the wound should be
increases the likelihood of wound contamination,
placed carefully to avoid incorporating the drain
and should be avoided.
For surface-acting drains, the exit holes should
Tube drains are also placed prior to closure via
be ofa sufficient size to allow adequate drainage,
 a separate stab incision. All of the fenestrated part of
but not so large as to fisk herniation of tissue
the drain should lie within the wound. Commercially
from the wound. For a Penrose drain, this is
available tube drains may have a trochar at the
 approximately 1.5 to 2 times the diameter of
non-fenestrated end to allow atfaumatic passage of
the drain
the drain fom wound to external skin surface
 For passive drains exit holes must be
(Figure 6.13). A tube drain may be placed into a
 gravitationally dependent
wound that has already been closed or into a wound
 The minimum effective number of exit holes
cavity using a trochar in the drain of using the Seldinger
should be used, which should be dependent if
guide wire technique.
using passive drains
Tube drains are not usually anchored within
 A large area of hair should be clipped around the
the wound and therefore secure fixation to the skin
wound, particularly dependently
at the exit hole needs to be achieved. A Chinese finger
 Petroleum-based jelly may be applied beneath
trap ffiction suture of a tape butterfly sutured to
the exit hole to prevent excoriation, but should
the skin may be used. If suction is to be applied to
not occlude the hole
the drain, then an airtight seal is required at all
 Drain placement should allow aseptic
points of the wound. Routine primary closure and
postoperative care
the fesulting fibrin seal may be adequate in most
The protruding drain and the exit holes should be
cases, although this can be augmented by the judi-
cleaned at least twice daily to avoid obstruction
cious application of topical antibiotic ointment
and to reduce the fisk of ascending infection
(Pavletic, 1993).
Suraical Drains
53
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 6.12:Penrose drain placement,
(a) Stab incision over tip ofhaemostats
tunnelled subcutaneously fromthe
wound, Ib) Drain anchored internally by
simpleinterrupted absorbable suture
placed through wound tissue and edge of
drain,
(c)Drain anchored externally by
simpleinterrupted non-absorbable suture
placed through skin and drain.The
suture is then passed back out through
the skin and tied externally, (d) Distal
end ofdrain anchored to skinwith simple
interruptednon-absorbablesuture.
(e)Single exit drain, anchored to the skin
distalh:
(d)
(e)
Hence there will always be some fluid at the exit port
ofany drain; this may be up to 50 ml/day in a large
wound. Drains should be removed as soon as possible
to reduce the possibility of wound contamination and
the development ofa sinus tract, which will generally
take 3-5 days.
Drains placed in small potential cavities to evacu-
 ate capillary bleeding may usually be removed in 24
hours. Drains placed to evacuate exudate from a site
of bacterial infection may need to be left for 2-3
days. Drains placed to facilitate union of tissues,
such as affer excision of large masses, should be
removed once the dead space has been obliterated.
This may take 5-10 days, although occasionally-
longer periods of up to 2-3 weeks may be required.
Figure 6.13: Trochar used for atraumatic passage of a tube
Prolonged wound drainage is common in traumatic
drain.
wounds with extensive muscle trauma (e.g. dog
Copyrighl Z R.A.S. Hbie.
bites) and in elbow hygromas. In most patients, the
drain should be removed when the fluid diminishes
DRAIN REMOVAL
to a small con-sistent volume and is scrosanguinous
in consistency.
As a guideline, a drain should be left in sifu until the
 The drain is removed by first cutting the suture
drainage subsides. The drain should be inspected
that anchors the drain to the skin. In the case of
regularly and the amount of fluid in the reservoir or
a Penrose drain, where a suture retains the drain
the dressing noted. All drains incite a foreign body
within the wound, the drain is removed with a sharp
reaction which results in the production of fluid.
downward tug.
54
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstniction
If both ends of the drain exit the wound:
Wound dehiscence
There is an increased risk of incisional dehiscence and
1. The first suture is removed
hermiation of tissues if drains exit through the primary
 2. The drain is stretched and cut at a section which
wound, or if large exit holes are made. Drains should be
lay in the wound
placedthrough a separate stab incision, which should be
 3. The second suture is cut and the remainder of the
as small as possible whilst still being compatible with
drain removed.
good drainage.
Premature loss or retention
Immediately after removal, the drain should be
inspected to ensure that none has been left behind in
Inadequate fixation of the drain may result in the drain
falling out, orbeing easily removed by the patient. The
the wound. The exit hole is left to heal by second
intention.
 presence of strong adhesions in the wound, a large bite
of drain incorporated in an anchoring suture, or large
fenestrations in the drain may cause the drain to frag-
COMPLICATIONS
ment in the wound.
The number, size and length of any drains placed
should always be noted in the patient's record. Drains
It is important to realize that drains are not benign. If
used incorrectly, the complications associated with
should be fixed securely in place and suitable measures
drain placement may be more serious than the problem
taken to prevent the patient from interfering with the
they were used to treat.
drains, e.g. Elizabethan collar orbandage. Radiopaque
 drains allow their detection ifthey are retained within
Wound infection
a wound.
Drain placement increases the risk of wound infec-
Failure of drainage
tion. The physical presence of the drain will result in
 This can usually be traced to one of the following:
impairment of the local tissue resistance to bacterial
infection because of the foreign body reaction, pres-
·
 Improper drain placement
sure ischaemia and tissue adhesion breakdown at
 Use of a tube of inadequate diameter
drain removal. The presence of an exit hole increases
·
 Loss of negative pressure in the suction system
 the likelihood of bacteria gaining access to the wound.
because of detachment or overfilling of the
The infection rate increases directly with the duration
reservoir
of drainage. The infection rate also depends on the
·
Obstruction of the drain.
type and technique of drainage. A survey of 18,045
clean surgical wounds showed that drainage increased
 In most cases a loss of negative pressure can be
the infection rate and that this was higher with passive
corrected by re-attaching another reservoir, or evacu-
drains than with closed suction drains (Figure 6.14)
ating the one attached.
(Cruse, 1973).
A tube drain may be obstructed by tissue or dis-
charge. It may be possible to relieve such an obstruc-
This complication is minimized by strict asepsis
when placing and managing the drain. A large area of
tion by flushing with a small volume of sterile irrigating
fluid. However, this introduces the potential for con-
skin should be clipped surrounding the drain and a
tamination and should be avoided. If the drain is
sterile dressing may be of benefit. The fewest number
 and smallest diameter drains compatible with good
already in a contaminated or infected wound (e.g. an
abscess) and drainage is essential, then flushing may
drainage should be selected. They should be placed
judiciously to pre vent motion of the drain, and should
be justified. Otherwise the drain should be removed.
Another drain should be inserted if continued drainage
be left in situ for the minimum length of time.
is required. The use of a fenestrated drain reduces the
likelihood of this complication.
Type of drainage
Pain and irritation
Infection rate
The presence of drains will cause some irritation and
Undrained
1.53%
pain, and may be responsible for an elevated tempera-
ture postoperatively. This may cause the patient to
Closed suction
1.8%
remove the drain or to mutilate the wound. Suitable
Penrose drain
2.4%
restraint devices and adequate analgesia should be
(separate stab incision)
 provided at all times.
Penrose drain
4%
Drain tract cellulitis
(through primary incision)
This is a minor but common problem. Clinical signs
Figure 6.14: Influence of drains on wound infection rate.
include erythema, induration and pain at the exit site.
{Data from Cruse, 1973.)
The likelihood and severity of the inflammation in-
Surgical Drains
55
creases the longer the drain is left in the wound. This
problem generally resolves on removing the drain.
Misuse and over-reliance
The surgeon should not rely on the drain tocompensate
for improper intraoperative or postoperative manage-
ment. Drains cannot substitute for proper haemostasis,
gentle tissue handling and adequate debridement and
lavage. Drains may tempt a surgeon to close a wound
that would be better left open.
PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Figure 6.15: Closed suction tube drain placed afer wound
Although many drainage systems are available, the
reconstruction with skin flaps.
practical choices in most cases are much simpler. The
Copyrighr 6 H7-S. Mhine.
most commonly used drains in wound management
are the Penrose drain and theclosed suction tube drain.
to use a closed suction drain under a skin flap (Figure
Although the commercially available closed suction
6.15). This drain should be secured to prevent it mov.
units are more expensive than Penrose drains, this
 ing beneath the flap and interfering with adhesion and
additional cost is relatively small when considering the
should exit at a point away from the pedicle to preserve
large investment in terms of medical care and surgery
the blood supply.
already made on behalfof the patient, and the reduced
morbidity. This cost may be reduced ifa'home-made'
suction device is constructed.
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
READING
Specific applications
Subcutaneous drainage (e.g. in traumatic wounds,
Cruse PJE (1973) A five year prospective study of 23.649 surgical
abscesses, wounds with dead space following large
wounds. Archives of Surgery 107, 206-210 *
mass removal, elbow hygroma) can be achieved with
Conner GS and Ellison GW(1986) The use and misuse of abdominal
drains in small animal surgery. Compendium of Continuing
simple drains such as a Penrose drain. Deep pocket
Education_8.705-712
wounds may be drained with either a Penrose drain or
 Fox S (1988) The best methods of wound drainage in pets. Veterinary
Medicine 83.462-472
a closed suction drain, the advantages of the latter
Hampei N (1993) Surgical drains. [n: Surgical Complications and
making them more useful.
WoundHealingin theSmallAimalPractice,ed.J.Harari,pp.319
Adequate drainage is critical to the survival of skin
347.WB Saunders.Philadelphia
Hosgood G (1990) The history of surgical drainage. Journal of die
flaps and grafts. Haematoma and seroma formation
American Veterinary Medical Association 196.42-44
under free skin grafts is the most common cause of
Lee AH. Swaim SF and Henderson RA (1986) Surgical drainage.
their failure (Pavletic, 1993). The most effective tech-
Compendium ofContinuing Education 8,94-103
Pavletic(1993) Atlas of Small Animal Reconstructive Surgery. JB
nique for removing fluid from full thickness free skin
Lippincott. Philadelphia
grafts is continuous closed suction (Pope and Swaim,
 Pope ER and Swaim S(1986) Wound drainage from under ful thickness
skin grafts in dogs. I: Quantitative evaluation of four techniques.
1986). The other techniques, in decreasing order of
VeterinarySurgery15,65-71
effectiveness, are: an expanded meshed graft; a non-
Swaim SF and Henderson RA(1997) SmallAnimal Wound Management.
2edn.Williams and wikins.Baltimore
expanded meshed graft; and multiple parallel rows of
Swaim SFand Lee AH (1990) Wound drainage techniques. In: Current
 stab incisions ("pie crust' incisions).
TechiguesinmalAnimaSrgeryedMJrabp2933a
and Febiger. Philadelphia
Williams JM,-McHugh D and White RAS (1992) Use of drains in small
crust' incisions in a free skin graft (see Chapter 9) and
animal surgery. //; Practice 14, 73-81
CHAPTER SEVEN
Tension Relieving Techniques
and Local Skin Flaps
David Fowler
INTRODUCTION
 maximum distensibility and is usually perpendicular to
the line of maximum tension.
The elasticity of skin and, therefore, the ease with
Excessive tensile forces acting on wounds pose
which large wounds may be reconstructed varies tre-
several problems for the surgeon:
mendously among species. Dogs and cats have highly
elastic skin, which minimizes the difficulty of manag-
 Direct wound closure may prove impossible if
ing tensile forces affecting wounds. The free mobility
forces are of sufficient magnitude
of canine and feline skin is attributed to two factors.
Excessive tension during wound closure may
First, skin in these species is nourished by cutaneous
embarrass blood flow through surrounding skin,
arteries which supply relatively large regions of skin.
increasing the risk of incisional dehiscence
 Skin, therefore, can be moved freey on underlying
 Restricted movement and postoperative pain may
tissues without compromising its vascular supply.
be seen, especially in wounds situated near flexor
Secondly, dogs and cats have a well developed system
or extensor surfaces
of cutaneous musculature, consisting of the platysma
Excessively taut closure of extremity wounds can
muscle (head and neck) and the cutaneous trunci
cause a toumiquet effect, resulting in oedema or
muscle (thorax and abdomen). Cutaneous vasculature
disruption of vascular flow to the distal limb
courses deep to this musculature, which is free of deep
(Figure 7.2).
fascial attachments.
Intact skin is normally under the influence of tensile
Tension can result in hypertrophic scar formation,
forces, and dermal collagen is remodelled accordingly.
although this is of greater concerm in people than in
This is intuitively obvious because skin, when incised,
dogs and cats.
retracts to form a gap. The magnitude oftensile forces,
 Surgical techniques that utilize local tissues for the
as well as their direction, varies according to location.
management of tensile forces during wound closure
Tension lines have been described previously and are
include undermining of surrounding skin, walking
orientated in a direction similar to the stripes on a zebra.
sutures to redistribute tension throughout the wound,
The direction of maximum tension is easily detenmined
incisional "plasties' designed to redistribute tension in
by pinching folds of skin in multiple planes to see which
altermative directions, and local (random patterm or
offers the least resistance (Figure 7.1). The direction in
subdermal plexus) skin flaps used to move tissues from
which skin is most easily moved is tenmed the line of
 areas of relative excess into areas of relative need.
Figure 7.2: Taut skin ctosure on an extremity has resutted in
compromise of venous and tymphatic drainage, and swelling
Figure 7.l: The elasticity of skin in different plants t
ofthe foot, in this cat with a metatarsat injury. Retease ofthe
closure is required to prevent secondary injury to distat tissues.
58  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
The decision as to which procedure is best depends
on multiple factors, including location of the wound,
First suture
regional availability of skin, magnitude of tensile
Third suture
forces or distensibility surrounding the wound, risk of
Second suture
delayed closure and preference of the surgeon. In
2
general, the simplest and most cost-effective tech-
niques should be used. However, it is important to
identify in advance wounds that will benefit from more
advanced or aggressive reconstructive techniques.
Examples might include traumatic soft tissue wounds
3
associated with open fractures or extensive oncologi-
cal resections.
PATTERNS OF WOUND CLOSURE
Figure 7.3:Tissue should be distributed eventy when closing
ovoid excisions with unequat margins. This is accomplished
Simple side-to-side closure is frequently not the most
by first placing a single suture at the mid-point of both sides.
efficient or cosmetic method of wound reconstruction.
Remainingdefectsare closed bysequentiat placement of
further'dividing'sutures.
Determining the ideal patterm of wound closure de-
pends on assessing the magnitude and direction of
planes of tension and distensibility surrounding the
wound, as well as the shape of the defect. Wounds
should be closed with the least tension and the best
cosmetic appearance possible.
Managing 'dog-ears'
The term dog-ear refers to a bunching of tissue at the
ends of a wound. Dog-ears are fonmed when fusifonm
defects with sides of unequal length are closed, or
when wounds with a small length:width ratio are
sutured side-to-side. Small dog-ears are frequently
ignored, and resolve as redistribution of wound ten-
sion occurs over time. Larger dog-ears should be
addressed at the time of wound reconstruction to
provide a cosmetic closure. Many techniques have
been described for the elimination or prevention of
dog-ears:
 Dog-ear fonmation can be minimized by
distributing length discrepancies between
unequal sides of a fusiform defect throughout the
suture line (Figure 7.3). This is most easily
accomplished by first placing a suture at the mid-
point of both sides, resulting in the formation of
two smaller defects with unequal sides.
Additional sutures are placed at the mid-points of
each of these defects. Suturing continues until
the defect is closed. By suturing in this fashion
the length discrepancy between sides is
distributed throughout the suture line rather than
Figure 7.4: Closure of round or oval defects resutts in the
concentrated at one end.
formation of triangular'dog-ears'. When excess tissue is
availabte,dog-ears are most easily managed by simple
 Larger dog-ears are more easily managed by
excision of the redundant tissue.
excision (Figure 7.4). The simplest technique
involves elevation of the dog-ear to form a
Circular and ovoid wounds
triangular shape. Sharp incision is made
Various techniques facilitate the cosmetic closure of
through the skin on either side of the base
circular defects (Swaim and Henderson, 1997). The
of the triangle and the resulting defect is
technique of choice depends primarily on the amount
closed routinely.
of redundant skin surrounding the defect:
Tension Relieving Techniques and Local Skin Flaps
59
Direct closure of circular defects results in the
 The amount of tissue that needs to be excised
formation of large dog-ears. This can be prevented
to ensure a cosmetic closure can be reduced by
by excising triangular pieces of skin from
performing a three-point closure of circular
opposing ends ofthe defect, thereby converting a
defects (Figure 7.6). A single subcutaneous
circular defect into a fusiform defect with a 4:1
or intradermal suture is placed into three
length:width ratio (Figure 7.5). Skin surrounding
equidistant points and tied, thereby converting
the wound should be manipulated to detenmine the
the circular defect into three smaller fusiform
lines of greatest and least tension, and skin
defects. Dog-ears will be formed at the ends of
excision should be performed such that the
all three fusiform defects; they should be
resulting fusiform defect is orientated parallel to
sutured as described previously.
the line of greatest tension.
When little or no elastic or redundant skin is
available for reconstruction, a combined
V closure should be considered (Figure 7.7).
V-shaped incisions are made at opposing sides
of the circular defect such that the arms of the
V form two sides of an equilateral triangle
pointing toward the centre of the defect. The
height of this imaginary equilateral triangle
equals the radius of the defect. Following
incision, the flaps are undermined and
transposed within the defect. The tips of the
flaps are sutured such that five smaller fusiform
defects result, all of which have roughly equal
sides. Continued routine closure results in an
Figure 7.5: Dog-ear formation can be avoided by converting
irregularly shaped suture line with minimal
round or ovoid excisions into fusiform excisions with a 4:1
dog-ear formation.
length:\vidth ratio.The shaded area indicates tissue to be
excised.This technique is usefut in areas with redundant or
elastic skin.
Square, rectangular and triangular wounds
Square, rectangular and triangular defects are most
easily closed using a technique of centripetal closure
(Figure 7.8). Subcutaneous or intradermal closure be-
gins at the four cormers of the defect. Tissues are
 progressively apposed until all suture lines converge.
When dealing with square defects, all four suture lines
will converge at the centre of the defect. In rectangular
 defects, suture lines at opposing ends of the rectangle
will converge with each other and the remaining defect
is closed side-to-side in a routine maimer. Dehiscence
is not uncommon at the junction of multiple suture
lines. Tissues in these regions should be manipulated
with care, and sutures placed precisely to minimize
vascular disruption.
MOBILIZATION TECHMQUES
Direct closure techniques are often inadequate when
dealing with large wounds, or wounds located in
 areas with little redundant skin. By using techniques
that capitalize on the viscoelastic properties of skin,
however, the surgeon is often able to achieve wound
closure without resorting to more advanced
reconstructive options, such as skin flaps or skin
grafts. Options to enhance mobilization of skin
Figure 7.6: In areas with minimal skin elasticity,dog-ear
include undermining, walking sutures, presuturing,
formation canbe minimized by triangulating the closure of
round defects.Small dog-ears formed at the ends of each arm
multiple punctate relaxing incisions and acute or
of the closure can be excised.
subacute skin expansion.
60
Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Figure 7.8: Square or rectangular defects are most easily
closed using a centripetat closure beginning at each corner
of the defect and extending toward the centre.
 ing surrounding skin. Skin is then undermined parallel
to the proposed direction of advancement (Figure 7.9).
Skin edges are periodically assessed for ease of ad-
vancement over the wound and undermining is discon-
ou usnonq ane sunsieu us suisoddo uaqm panun
apposition with minimal tension.
 Undermining, while reducing tension and facili-
tating wound closure, also increases wound dead
space. In most instances, drains should be used for
 dead space management after extensive tissue under-
Figure 7.7: Combined Vclosure can be used in areas with
litte or no elastic skin surrounding a round excision, (a) The
mining. Either passive latex drains or activ.e closed-
arms of theV to be incised are indicated.Arrows indicate the
suction drains can be used successfully. Drains may
direction of maximat tension,(b) The arms of the Vhave
be unnecessary in locations where the application of
been incised,(c)Undermining and transposition ofthe flaps
resu its in a redistribution of tension.
 planes and in reducing shearing forces acting upon
tissue layers within the wound.
Undermining
Undermining skin surrounding a wound is one of the
Walking sutures
simplest and most effective methods of reducing tension 
Walking sutures have a two-fold purpose:
during wound closure. Loose connective tissue attach-
ments are severed between the skin and deeper tissues,
They serve to obliterate dead space after
thereby facilitating cutaneous advancement over the
undermining and distribute tensile forces
wound. Extensive undermining should be performed
throughout the wound surface, as opposed to
deep to cutaneous musculature, in areas where such
concentrating forces at the skin margins
exists, to preserve the vascular integrity of the skin.
?
 They facilitate the progressive advancement of
There is no absolute formula to determine the
undermined skin into the wound defect.
extent to which surrounding tissue must be under-
mined. The directions of tensile forces acting on the
Initial sutures are placed between the dermis, at the
wound are first determinedby grasping and manipulat-
 deepest portions of undermined skin, and fascia within
Tension Relieving Techniques and Local Skin Flaps
6
Figure 7.9: (a) Open arrows indicate the direction of maximal tension acting on this wound, (b) Tissue undermining is used to
facilitate skin advancement over the defect. Tissue is undermined parallel to the direction of anticipated skin advancement.
the wound bed relatively nearer its centre (Figure
7.10). Proper suture placement into the dermis is
confinmed  by the  formation  of  a  dimple  when  the
suture is tied or placed under tension. As the suture is
tied, the 'base' of the undenmined skin is advanced
slightly towards the wound's centre. A second tier of
walking sutures is then placed to provide further tissue
advancement. Each tier of walking sutures thereby
serves progressively to advance the skin edge toward
the centre of the defect. Skin margins should lie in
close apposition, with little tension, after completing
the placement of walking sutures.
Walking sutures have twosignificant disadvantages:
When used for closure of clean-contaminated
wounds, the incidence of infection may be
increased due to the multiple ischaemic foci
formed and the quantity of foreign material
placed within the wound
Walking sutures may also compromise cosmetic
appearance and increase postoperative pain due
to the fixation of normally moveable skin to
relatively immobile underlying fascia. Because
of these sequelae, the author only uses this
technique to achieve wound closure if it is
absolutely necessary.
Presuturing
Presuturing is a means of mobilizing tissue in
instances where advanced planning is feasible, such
as surgical removal of a large lesion. This technique
utilizes the properties of cutaneous viscoelasticity
and mechanical creep to facilitate subsequent wound
closure.
Plicating sutures are placed across the proposed
area of excision 8-24 hours prior to surgery. Immedi-
(C)
ately prior to surgery, the sutures are removed and the
Figure 7.10: Watking sutures can be used to facilitate skin
lesion is excised. Subsequent closure is achieved with
advancement and to distribute tensile forces over a large
Jess tension and a reduced incidence of tissue strangu-
surface area,(a)Skinisfirstunderminedanda suturebiteis
 lation and dehiscence.
taken into the dermis at the deep margin ofundermined skin,
Skin stretching is similar to presuturing in prin-
(b) A second bite is taken into fascia, relatively closer to the
wound's centre, (c) Tying this suture advances the dermis to
ciple, but is used after the formation of an open
the point of fasciat fixation.A'dimpte*isformed in the skin
wound. Skin stretchers consist of externally applied
whena suture is placed at an appropriate depthinto the dermis.
62
Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Figure 7.il: Mesh expansion is used to facilitate skin advancement over large open wounds, (a) Staggered parallel rows of 1-2
cm incisions are made on either side of the defect,(b)As skin is advanced,the small incisions expand,resutting inthe formation
of many small open wounds. Second intention healing of these smaller wounds progresses at a much more rapid rate than does
second intention healing of a single large wound.
adhesive 'hook-pads' and elastic bands with a series
tageous position for advancement or rotation over
of 'pile-pads' attached to their surface. The hook-
the defect. The incision for subcutaneous implan-
pads are placed on either side of the wound and are
tation of the expander also must be planned so that it
connected under tension using the elastic bands.
is located at the leading edge of the advancement
Tension is incrementally increased several times
or rotation flap that will be fonmed at the time of
daily over a 2-4 day period until apposition of
wound reconstruction.
wound margins is achieved.
After implantation, the chamber is inflated over a
course of days to weeks. Intraluminal pressure within
Multiple punctate relaxing incisions (mesh
the chamber is monitored and is maintained below
expansion)
normal capillary pressure. Expected tissue responses
Relaxing incisions are considered when, after under-
include epidenmal hyperplasia, dermal collagen com-
mining skin surrounding the wound, tension continues
 pression and the formation of granulation tissue and a
to preclude direct closure. Staggered rows of punctate
fibrous capsule around the expander.
incisions are made, full thickness, through skin sur-
Skin expanders are associated with some problems:
rounding the defect, beginning nearest the wound
margin (Figure 7.1l). Incisions may vary but are
 If pressures generated are too high, reduced
normally 1-2 cm in length. Incisions should be sepa-
vascular perfusion can cause necrosis of
rated by several centimetres to ensure that adequate
overlying skin
blood supply is maintained to the elevated skin. Mul-
 Infection can occur, especially when expanders
tiple staggered rows of incisions are made on either
 are used adjacent to contaminated wound beds
side of the wound.
 Patient discomfort and pain during expansion has
As the skin margins are advanced to cover the
been reported in people, but has been difficult to
wound, the punctate incisions form gaps, allowing the
evaluate in animals
undermined skin to expand. The amount of skin expan-
 The fibrous capsule that forms around the tissue
sion obtained is directly proportional to the length of
expander limits the pliability of overlying skin,
the incisions and the number of incisions made. The
making it difficult to mobilize over the wound
multiple small open wounds created using this tech-
 Tissue expanders generally require staged
nique are bandaged and allowed to heal by contraction
reconstructive procedures separated by days to
and epithelialization.
weeks, although acute intraoperative tissue
expansion can be used to achieve an effect
Skin expanders
similar to presuturing.
There is very little literature describing the use of
skin expanders in small animal surgery. Skin expand-
ers consist of inflatable silastic chambers and are
REDISTRIBUTION OF TENSILE
available in many different sizes and configurations.
FORCES USING INCISIONAL
They are placed subcutancously, adjacent to the
'PLASTIES'
wound bed, or adjacent to lesions prior to surgical
excision. It is important to plan the location of the
V-Y plasty
expander relative to the wound, since the expanded
The V-Y plasty is most commonly employed to
correct functional consequences of wound contrac-
Tension Relieving Techniques and Local Skin Flaps 
63
(a)
Figure 7.12: Previous cryosurgery has resulted in the
can be used to reduce tensile forces on the upper lid.
tion on normal stfuctures adjacent to the wound.
For example, wounds adjacent to the eyelid can
fesult in the formation of an ectropion due to tensile
forces placed on the eyelid during wound contraction
(Figure 7.12). The goal of reconstruction in this
situation is to feduce or redistribute these tensile
forces, allowing the eyelid to assume a more func-
 tional position.
The V-Y plasty, in essence, is a single pedicle HIap
(b)
 that is advanced towards its base father than towards its
apex (Figure 7.13):
Figure 7.13: V-Y plasty is performed by converting a V-
shaped incision into a Y-shaped closure, (a) The base of the
V is situated at the leading edge of tissue advancement.
1. The initial incision is in the form of a V, with the 
Arrows indicate the direction of skin movement, (b) Side-to-
 base of the flap oriented perpendicular to the line
side closure beginning at the apex of the V is performed unti!
of tension and the vertex pointed opposite to the
an adequate degree of tissue advancement is achieved. The
direction of movement
arms of the resulting Yare then closed in a routine manner.
2. The V flap is undermined and the point of the
resulting defect is closed side-to-side, forming
The Z plasty is composed of a central limb and two
the tail of a Y
amis, all ofequal length (Figure 7.14). The lengths of 
 3. Side-to-side suturing is continued until tissue
 the central limb and arms, as well as the angles formed
advancement has adequately counteracted the
between them, are directly proportional to the extent to
pre-existing pathological tensile forces
which redistribution oftension occurs. Angles varying
4. The arms of the Y are then sutured routinely.
from 30 to 90 degrees can be used, but angles approxi-
mating 60 degrees are the most useful.
 Flap advancement is achieved at the expense of
The Z plasty is formed such that the central arm of
increased tensile forces in a plane perpendicular to
the Z is oriented parallel with the tension on the
the direction of advancement.
.Therefore， it is
wound of scar. The triangular flaps created after
important to ensure that increased tension in this
incising the central limb and both arms are under-
plane will not fesult in additional adverse functional
mined and translocated, resulting in a feversal of the
Of cosmetic effects.
Z, and a reduction of tension in a plane parallel to the
original central arm. This feduction of tension is
Z plasty
achieved at the expense ofincreased tensile forces in
 Z plasties are used to redistribute tension in opposing
the perpendicular plane. The tension relief provided
planes; a decrease in tension in one plane is achieved
 by multiple Z plasties is additive. In situations where
at the expense of increased tension in the opposite
the lengths of the central limb and the arms are limited
 direction. They are most useful for the correction of
by regional anatomy, multiple Z plasties may be
wound contracture, a pathological state referring to a
 performed (Figure 7.15). Whether peiforming single
loss of function of mobility as a result of excessive
 Of multiple Z plasties, it is important for the surgeon
wound contraction. A Z plasty may also be used as a
 to manipulate the surrounding skin prior to surgery to
relaxing incision to feorientate skin tension adjacent to
determine if sufficient tissue is available for the
an open wound.
fedistribution of tension.
64
Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Figure 7.14: Z plasty is used for
redistribution of tensionin opposing
directions, (a) The Z plasty consists of a
centrat limb and two arms of equal
length.The angles between the arms
and the central limb approximate 60
degrees. Arrows indicate the line of
maximum tension,(b) Incision is
followedby undermining of the
resulting triangular flaps. The flaps are
then reversed. Numbers indicate points
of suture placement, (c) Flap reversat
results in the formation of a closure
oriented in an opposite direction to that
ofthe initiat incision.Length has been
gained in the direction of maximum
(a)
(b)
(G)
tension, at the expense of increased
tension in the opposing plane.
The vascular integrity of subdermal plexus Haps is
less consistent than is that of axial patterm flaps. Thus,
the size of subdenmal plexus flaps is limited and the
 base of attachment at the donor site must be relatively
broad. It is difficult to make generalizations about 
safe length:width ratios for subdermal plexus flaps
since this ratio varies according to factors such as
anatomical site and wound tension. However,
length:width ratios of 2:1 are generally considered
quite safe; ratios exceeding 3:1 are at a progressively
increasing risk of distal necrosis.
Deep sutures, such as walking sutures, should be
avoided in the fixation of subdermal plexus flaps since
they can compromise the vascular supply. Instead,
subcutaneous or intradenmal sutures are used to ad-
(a)
(b)
vance flaps and to distribute tension towards the base
 of the flap. Dead space can be managed with passive or
Figure 7.15: The effect of multipte Z plasties is additive.
In situations where a long restrictive scaris present with
active drains.
litte tissuentheoposinplanemutiplastian
Flaps are tenmed single pedicle, double pedicle, or
be considered.Arrows show the line of maximum tension.
 island, based on donor site attachment:
(a) Numbers indicate points of suture apposition.
(b) Appearance offinal reconstruction.
 Single pedicle flaps maintain one cutaneous
donor site attachment
LOCAL FLAPS
 Double pedicle flaps maintain two cutaneous
donor site attachments
Skin Haps are used to provide tissue to achieve closure
 In island flaps, all cutaneous attachments are
of open wounds, or to redistribute tension away from
transected, but a vascular attachment is
wound margins. Flaps always maintain a vascular
maintained.
attachment at the donor site. Flaps are classified
according to their vascular supply, the number and
Subdenmal plexus flaps are rarely dissected as
type of attachments maintained at the donor site, or
island flaps due to the uncertainty of their vascular
the method by which they are moved from donor to
anatomy. Axial patterm flaps are routinely elevated as
island flaps.
recipient site.
They are tenmed'axial pattem' or 'subdenmal plexus
 Flaps can be moved from donor to recipient site 
(random pattern)' based on their vascular supply:
either directlv or indirectlv:
Axial patterm flaps incorporate a direct cutaneous
Direct movement implies that the flap is elevated
artery and vein in the flap design (see Chapter 8)
from the donor site and moved immediately into
Subdermal plexus flaps do not incorporate a
the recipient site
 direct cutaneous artery and vein and are
 Indirect movement implies staged procedures
 dependent upon blood flow through the
whereby the flap is moved progressively from
 subdermal vascular plexus for nourishment.
 donor to recipient site.
Tension Relieving Techniques and Local Skin Flaps
65
Figure 7.16: Singte pedicte advancement flaps can be used
to redistribute tension away from intoterant structures such
as the eyelid,(a) This Golden Retriever presented with a
1cm basal cell tumour located immediately adjacent to
the upper eyelid margin, (b) Excision of the mass was
performed,eavingarectangulardefect,(c)Asingtepedice
advancementflap wasformed,extending distallyfrom the
eyelid margin. Burrow's triangles were excised on either side
of the flap base to facilitate advancement without dog-ear
formation,(d) Redistribution of tension away from the eyelid
margin,and towards the base ofthe flap,has been
accomplished with litte or no resulting eyelid deformation.
dl
Indirect flaps can be used when the donor site is
5.
 The remaining closure is performed side-to-side,
too distant from the recipient site to allow direct
thereby distributing tension along the length of
movement of tissues into the defect. Indirect sub-
the advancement flap.
dermal plexus flaps are rarely used currently, how-
ever, since altermatives such as axial patterm flaps,
Length: width ratios should be minimized, although
skin grafts and microvascular tissue transfer facili-
larger length:width ratios are more effective at distrib-
tate single-stage reconstruction of distant wounds.
uting tension and facilitating closure than are smaller
Direct subdermal plexus flaps are sub-classified
ones. Delay procedures can be used if length:width
as advancement, rotation or transposition flaps,
ratios exceed 3:1 or if the surgeon is concermed about
according to the type of movement employed to
the vascular integrity of the flap. To perform a delay
reach the recipient wound bed.
procedure, the flap is incised and undermined. The flap
is not advanced into position, but rather is immediately
Single pedicle advancement flaps
sutured into its original position. Secondary flap eleva-
Single pedicle advancement flaps are used to facilitate
tion is performed after approximately 3 days, at which
closure of square or rectangular defects when tissue is
time the flap is advanced into the recipient site. Delay
available for closure only on one side of the wound
is of established benefit in extending flap survival, but
(Figure 7.16). Examples include wounds near the
carries the price of staged reconstruction and pro-
eyelids or mouth.
longed open wound management. As a general rule,
altermative reconstructive procedures should be thor-
1. The flap is created by extending parallel
oughly considered prior to embarking on a staged
incisions from opposing edges of the wound
reconstruction.
2.
 The long axis of the flap is oriented parallel to
Dog-ears inevitably form at the base of advance-
the direction of maximal skin distensibility
ment flaps. If small, these may be disregarded and
3.
 The resulting flap is undermined and is advanced
expected to resolve with time. Larger dog-ears may be
 directly into the wound bed, without changing
 prevented by the excision of Burow's triangles at the
the orientation of the donor site attachment
base of the flap, prior to advancement:
4. The leading comers of the advancement flap
are sutured to the most distant corners of the
1. Equilateral triangular pieces of skin are excised
wound defect
from either side of the flap
66
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Figure 7.17: Bilateral single pedicle
advancement flaps are used to close defects
where tissue is availabte for advancement from
either side ofa tissue defect,(a)Excision of a
tumour invotving the upper lip has resulted in
the formation of a fult thickness lip defect in
this cat. (b) Full thickness singte pedicte
advancement flaps have been formed from the
lips bilaterally, and have been advanced to
reconstruct the defect.
2. The side of the triangle should approximate the
Bipedicle flaps
distance the flap is to be advanced
Bipedicle flaps maintain two cutaneous donor site
3. Excision of Burolv*s triangles must extend away
attachments at opposing ends of the flap (Figure
from the base of the flap rather than into the base
7.18). This type offlap is used most often to facilitate
of the flap, since the latter will compromise
wound closure on the extremities. Movement of the
blood supply.
flap into the recipient site results in the formation of
a secondary open wound. Tissue is, therefore, moved
Bilateral single pedicle advancement flaps
to cover critical structures such as exposed bone, and
When tissue is available on opposing sides of the
the secondary defect is planned so that it is situated
wound, single pedicle advancement flaps can be ele-
over vascularized, non-compromised tissue such as
vated and advanced from both sides, a technique also
muscle. The secondary defect can then be managed
referred to as an H plasty (Figure 7.17). The principles
safely as an open wound, or can be reconstructed
ie sce uaae apad aus  pasn
using altermative techniques such as full thickness
with the exception that two opposing flaps are elevated
 skin grafts. The term 'single relaxing incision' is used
and each is advanced to cover approximately half of
to describe the formation of a bipedicle flap immedi-
the wound defect.
ately adjacent to a wound.
(b)
Figure 7.18: Bipedicle flaps are usually usedto
facilitate closure of wounds overlying critical structures
such as exposed bones and nerves on the extremities,
(a) An open wound is situated over the dorsat surface of
the distal radius and carpus,(b)Afull thickness skin
incision has beenmade extending longitudinatly along
the patmar aspect of the radius.Abundant soft tissues
are present in this location. The resulting skin flaps are
undermined,(c) The skin flaps are advanced from either
side to reconstruct the dorsat defect. The paimar defect
is left to heat by second intention, or can be resurfaced
using a skin graft.
Tension Relieving Techniques and Local Skin Flaps 
67
 4. The tip of the flap is advanced to the most distant
 point of the wound defect and sutured
 5. Subcutaneous or intradermal sutures are placed
to distribute tensile forces along the length of the
incision and into the base of the flap.
Skin fold advancement flaps
Skin fold advancement flaps utilize redundant tissue in
the axillary and inguinal skin folds for advancement
 into large wounds involving the pectoral and abdomi-
nal regions (Figure 7.20):
Figure7.19:Rotation flaps are used toredistribute tension
awayfromintolerantstructuressuchastheeyelidor
prepuce.Thelengthofincisionshouldbeapproxinately
fourtimesthedistanceof flap advancement.
Rotation flaps
 Rotation flaps are used for the reconstruction of trian-
gular-shaped defects, particularly when direct recon-
struction of the wound might distort critical structures
such as the eyelid, prepuce or anus (Figure 7.19).
 1. Tissues surrounding the wound are manipulated to
determine from which direction the skin is most
easily moved (i.e. where tension is least prevalent)
 2. An arcuate, or semicircular, incision extending 
away from one side of the defect is created. As a
Figure 7.20:Axial and inguinal skin fold flaps are useful for
 general rule, the length ofthe incision should be 
the reconstruction of large wounds invotving adjacent sites,
approximately four times the distance the flap is
(a)The proposed incisionisindicated,(b)The skinfold
should be pinched to ensure that tension-free closure is
to be moved
possible following creation of the flap,(c,d) The resulting
3. The entire flap is undermined deep to subcutaneous
flap can be transposed on to the adjacent thoracic or
and superficial cutaneous muscle layers
abdominat wall.
68  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction 
1. To form the skin flap, the axillary or inguinal
Quite a large flap can be harvested safely using this
skin fold is grasped between the surgeon's 
technique without compromising limb function and
fingers and a level of incision is detenmined
range of motion.
that will allow tension-free closure of the
resulting defect
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
 2. The base of the skin fold is incised from either
READING
side, beginning at the limb and extending
Hunt GB (1995)Skin fold advancement flaps forclosing large stemal and
towards the body. This results in the formation
inguinal wounds in cats and dogp.Veterinary Surgery 24. 172-174
of a U-shaped skin flap with an attachment to
Keller WG, Aron DN. Rakich PM, Crowe DTand Marks MA (1994)
the body wall
in the distal portion of the hindlimb of dogs: an experimental study.
3. The donor site is closed using a direct side-to-
VeterinarySurgery23.31-39
Madison JB. Donawick WJ, Johnston DE and Orsini R A (1989) The use
side closure
of skin expansion to repair cosmetic defects in animals. Veterinary
 4. The edges of the flap are unfolded and
Surgery 18. 15-21
Swaim SFand Henderson RA(1997) SmattAnimat Wound Management,
transposed to reconstruct adjacent defects.
2'-'edn. Williams & Wilkins. Baltimore
CHAPTER EIGHT
Axial Pattern Flaps
JIucl re y Rem edios
INTRODUCTION
platysma, sphincter colli superficial, prepucialis and
supramammaricus muscles. Where the panniculus
Large skin wounds, afising ffom trauma or surgical
muscle is absent, such as in the middle and distal
excision, can present reconstructive problems to the
portions of the limbs, the subdermal plexus courses in
veterinary surgeon. The amount oflocal skin tension
the subcutaneous tissue on the deep face of the dermis.
and the paucity of adjacent tissue may preclude pri-
 Branches from the subdermal plexus ascend to supply
mary closure of wounds, especially those involving
the dermis and epidermis. Thus, disruption of the
the head, limbs and perineal regions. Other manage-
subdermal plexus impairs circulation to the superficial
ment options include second intention healing, tissue
skin layers.
expanders, skin grafts and skin flaps. Second inten-
tion healing is associated with prolonged healing
time and may result in a ffagile epithelial surface and
CLASSIFICATION OF SKIN FLAPS
excessive wound contracture. Tissue expanders are
implanted in the subcutaneous space and slowly ex-
Skin flaps afe classified according to blood supply
pand the skin adjacent to a wound (Madison et ai,
as axial pattern or subdermal plexus. Axial pattern
1989). The redundant skin is then used to reconstruct
flaps are based on the angiosomes of direct cutane-
the defect. Some disadvantages of expanders are
ous afteries and veins. All tissues within a defined
implant cost, expander failure, and wound dehis-
cence and expander exposure. Free skin grafts are
avascular and require optimal recipient beds and
fapid revascularization for survival. Accordingly,
traumatic wounds often require prolonged periods of
open management prior to skin graft transfer. Skin
flaps, which retain intact circulation from donor sites,
afe used in early wound reconstruction of suboptimal
wound beds and are associated with fewer complica-
tions than second intention healing, tissue expanders
Of grafts.
BLOOD SUPPLY TO THE SKIN
 In the dog and cat, the cutaneous circulation is con-
nected to deep segmental vessels by direct cutaneous
arteries and veins. These direct cutaneous vessels
travel through intermuscular fascial septae and fun
parallel to the overlying skin at the subdermal level.
 Each direct cutaneous artery supplies an angiosome, of 
telfitory, composed of the superficial cutaneous mus-
culature, subcutaneous tissue and skin (Figure 8.1).
The subdermal plexus is the major conduit of
arterial supply to the skin. Where a layer ofcutaneous
Figure 8.1:Selective angiography of the vascular territory of
muscle is present, the subdermal plexus lies both
the caudat superficial epigastric artery. This vessel suppties
superficial and deep to it. In small animals, the major
the glandutar and subcutaneous tissue and skin of mammary
cutaneous muscles include the cutaneous tfunci,
glands 2, 3, 4 and 5 in the cat.
701
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
 Early wound reconstruction without prolonged
MAJORDIRECTCUTANEOUSVESSELSINTHECAT
periods of open wound management is feasible
 The blood supply associated with axial pattern
flaps minimizes the fisk of postoperative
infection. In instances of infection, overall HIap
survival is not adversely affected if treated with
appropriate antibiotics (Trevor et ai, 1992)
 Axial pattern flaps are relatively simple to
 dissect and do not fequire specialized equipment.
There are some disadvantages associated with axial
pattein flaps:
Extensive surgical dissection of the donor bed is
Figure 8.2: Identification of direct cutaneous vessels and
their associated axial patternflaps has been reported in the
required for flap elevation
cat and dog. Such skin flaps can be used to reconstruct
 Closure of the donor bed may fequire
wounds invotving the head and neck,theforelimb,the
undermining and walking sutures to appose the
hindlimb and perinea!regions.
surgically created defect
The cosmetic appearance of the recipient afea
vascular territory can be elevated from the body and
differs from that of the surrounding skin:
will survive as long as the direct cutaneous vascular
characteristics such as hair direction, colour and
pedicle femains intact. Direct cutaneous arteries
length, glandular formation and the amount of
 that sustain a large area of skin allow the develop-
subcutaneous fat are retained from the donor site
ment of axial pattein flaps of considerable length
(Figure 8.3).
without vascular compromise. Subdermal plexus
flaps are dependent upon terminal branches of the
cutaneous circulation. As such, subdermal plexus
flaps are limited in length when compared to axial
pattern flaps. The mean survival area of axial pattern
flaps is 50% greater than that of similarly sized
subdermal plexus flaps.
AXIAL PATTERN SKIN FLAPS
Each axial pattern flap is based on the vascular territory
supplied by distinct direct cutaneous vessels (Taylof
and Palmer, 1987). These vessels and their angiosomes
have been identified and mapped in the dog and cat
(Figure 8.2). In general, the location of each vasculaf
 pedicle and the relative sizes of the supplied territories
afe similar in dogs and cats. However, the extremely
pliable feline skin and similarity in body size and limb
length facilitates more distal limb coverage provided
 by axial pattern flaps in cats than dogs.
 Because axial pattern skin flaps have an excellent
blood supply, they have several advantages over other
methods of reconstruction:
Axial pattern flaps can cover most large defects
using one-stage procedures
 They have excellent survival rates, fanging from
96-100%
 Unlike free skin grafts, axial pattern flaps can be
used to feconstruct indicated wounds associated
Figure 8.3: A caudal superficial epigastric flap has been
with less than optimal conditions such as
rotated from the ventral abdomen to cover a distal tibial
defect in a cat. Thisaxiat pattern flap is transferred with its
contamination, uneven surfaces of exposed bone,
associated mammary glands and subcutaneous fat. Direction
tendon and cartilage
of fur growth is different from the recipient bed.
Axial Pattem Flaps
71
For example, closure of a large wound involving the
ounfuon u uaned [ixe ue aiinbai Aeu gae [eaunad
tion with a subdermal plexus flap; coverage of an
extensive limb wound may require both an axial
patterm flap and skin graft. For distant skin wounds,
an extended axial patterm flap that incorporates an
 adjacent angiosome can be harvested. Blood supply
between the additional angiosome and the primary
flap is maintained by anastomotic 'choke' vessels.
These communications, however, are fragile, and
survival of the entire extended flap is less predictable
than the primary flap.
It is essential to know the following: the anatomical
landmarks associated with the location of the vascular
pedicle; the direction in which these vessels travel in
relation to the underlying tissues; and the boundaries
of vascular territory. A felt-tipped marker should
be used preoperatively to delineate the anatomical
location of the vascular pedicle and the limits of the
flap (Figure 8.4). The patient must be positioned
carefully prior to outlining the proposed flap, since
skin distortion may alter the relationship ofthe skin to
the underlying anatomical landmarks.
Axial patterm flaps can also be harvested as penin-
sular or island configurations. Peninsular axial patterm
flaps are incised at each flap edge but retain a border of
intact skin directly adjacent to the vascular pedicle
Figure 8.4: Prior to surgery; the limits of the caudat
(Figure 8.5). Mobility of the peninsular flap is de-
superficial epigastric flap are drawn on the skin with a
creased because of the skin attachment. Island axial
felt-tipped marker.
 patterm flaps have no cutaneous attachments and are
connected to the donor bed only by the direct cutane-
Preoperative considerations
ous artery and vein (Figure 8.6). The island configura-
The cause and nature of a wound are important
tion enhances flap mobility and prevents 'dog-ear'
 preoperative considerations that influence the appro-
formation at the flap base. However, the vessels lose
priate time of closure. Surgically created defects, most
some protection from the overlying skin and may be
commonly associated with tumour excision, are usu-
kinked or placed under tension more easily during flap
ally clean wounds. Because these wounds are uncon-
rotation. Island flaps and peninsular axial patterm flaps
taminated and devoid of residual necrotic tissue, axial
have similar survival areas.
patterm flaps can be harvested and transferred directly
on to the fresh wound bed. Traumatic wounds are
contaminated or dirty, and are often associated with
continued tissue necrosis for several days after injury.
Such wounds often require several days of open man-
 agement prior to delayed primary reconstruction using
an axial pattem flap.
Adequate planning must be undertaken prior to
dissection of axial patterm flaps. It is essential to know
which flaps are most appropriate given the size,
dimensions and location of the wound. The vascular
limits of each flap detenmine the size and length of
flap that can be harvested and transferred to an adja-
cent or distant location. Preoperatively, measure-
ments should be taken to ensure the length and size of
flap can reach and cover the wound. A smaller flap,
Figure 8.5: The peninsular axiat pattern flap retains a
less than total vascular flap territory, can be raised if
border of intact skin directty adjacent to the vascular pedicle.
dictated by the size and location ofthe wound. How-
This caudat superficiat epigastric flap maintains connection
to the skin in the area of the inguinat ring where the vacular
ever, with large skin defects, all possible flap designs
pedicle emerges.Rotation of this flap distally is limited by
and methods of reconstruction should be considered.
the peninsular configuration.
72
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
5. The entire axial patterm flap is rotated to cover
the wound. It is important that the vascular
pedicle is not kinked or placed under tension
during flap transfer and rotation. Flap rotation up
to 180 degrees can be performed safely
6. Wounds that are located distant to the donor bed
require a bridging excision of intact skin to
connect the donor and recipient sites (Figure 8.7)
7. Prior to closure, passive or active drains are
placed within the recipient bed
8.9
Subcutaneous tacking sutures are best avoided at
the recipient site to prevent inadvertent
impainment of the flap vasculature. Subcutaneous
walking sutures are, however, useful to decrease
 dead space, diminish tension and appose the skin
edges in the donor bed
 9. The flap borders are sutured on to the recipient
borders using several simple interrupted skin
sutures to tack the flap into position. The
remaining incision lines can be filled in rapidly
using a series of simple continuous sutures or
skin staples. The skin edges of the donor bed are
closed routinely.
Postoperative considerations
The most common postoperative complications
associated with axial pattern skin flaps are oedema,
seroma fonmation and poor wound drainage (Trevor
Figure 8.6: This caudat superficiat epigastric flap is
et al, 1992). These problems arise as a consequence
harvested in an istand configuration and does not retain any
of the extensive soft tissue dissection performed at
cutaneous attachments.Although rotation of thisflap is
the donor and recipient beds. Passive or active suc-
enhanced, care has to be taken to avoid kinking the vessels.
tion drains are placed for at least 3-4 days after
surgery to decrease dead space and prevent seroma
Flap dissection
formation. The application of soft padded bandages
This is done in the following way:
protects drains from contamination, decreases dead
space and helps to prevent fluid accumulation. Soft
1. Dissection of an axial pattem flap begins with
padded bandages must be applied without excessive
sharp incision of the flap borders followed by
tension to prevent compromise of the flap's pedicle.
elevation of the flap
Other complications that can occur following the
2. It is easiest and safest to establish the plane of
use of an axial pattem flap are distal flap necrosis,
dissection at the border furthest from the
 dehiscence and infection. Errors in preoperative plan-
vascular pedicle. The level of surgical dissection
should always be beneath the cutaneous muscle
layer so as to preserve the subdermal plexus. In
areas devoid ofthis muscle, such as the middle to
distal limbs, dissection should be performed in
the deep subcutaneous layer
3. Once the appropriate tissue plane is identified,
elevation of the entire flap is performed, using
sharp scissor dissection, towards the vascular
pedicle. Haemostasis can be achieved using
electrocautery. Upon approaching the direct
cutaneous artery and vein, dissection must
proceed cautiously to avoid inadvertent
laceration of these vessels
Figttre H. 7: This distat tibiat wound required a bridging
4. The vascular pedicle does not have to be entirely
excision over intact skin on the mediat side of the femur to
exposed; rather, a surrounding cushion of
connect the donor bed (caudal superficial epigastric flap) to
subcutaneous fat can be left in place
the recipient one.
Axial Pattem Flaps
73
Figure 8.8: The
superficial branch of
the omocervica!
artery; used in the
omocervical flap
originates at the
prescapular lymph
node and branches
Superficial
craniodorsally. This
flap is hardy and very
cervical branch
usefut in head and
ofomocervical
neck reconstruction.
artery
ning may lead to a flap that exceeds its vascular
the spine of the scapula. After delineation of the
territory, resulting in distal necrosis and dehiscence.
edges with a marker, the flap borders are
Postoperative infection is not common, due to the
incised sharply
excellent blood supply provided by axial pattem flaps.
3. Dissection is commenced at the dorsal border
 If infections do occur, dehiscence at the flap-recipient
first and the flap is elevated in a dorsal to ventral
skin edge is an early and prominent clinical feature.
direction, at a level below the sphincter colli
 Drainage, debridement, lavage and appropriate anti-
superficialis muscle. As elevation nears the
biotic administration are required. With control of
ventral border and the emergence of the
local infection, the overall survival of axial patterm skin
 superficial cervical artery, dissection must 
flaps is not adversely affected.
proceed cautiously
4.
The donor and recipient beds can be connected
Head and neck reconstruction
by a bridging excision of intact skin lying
Axial patterm flaps for the reconstruction of head and
between these two areas (Figure 8.10a)
neck wounds include the omocervical, the superficial
 5. Following rotation of the flap and drain
temporal and the caudal auricular flaps (Pavletic, 1981;
placement, the flap is tacked into place with a
Smith etai, 1991; Fahie and Smith, 1997).
Omocervical flap
 The axial patterm flap which is based on the superficial
cervical branch of the omocervical artery is often
referred to as the omocervical flap. This vessel origi-
nates at the prescapular lymph node and radiates
craniodorsally (Figure 8.8):
 1. After the patient is anesthetized and placed in
lateral recumbency with the forelimb, head and
neck at natural angles, the cranial shoulder
depression is identified (Figure 8.9). This point 
denotes the emergence of the superficial cervical
Figure 8.9: This patient required facial reconstruction
branch of the omocervical artery from the deep
following extensive orbital and periorbital tumour
excision. The cranial shoulder depression is identified as
vasculature. A line from the distal aspect of the
the point ofemergence ofthe superficial branch ofthe
 prescapular lymph node to the acromion defines
omocervical artery.Theflap borders are then delineated.
the ventral flap limit
A linefrom the prescapular tymph node to the acromion
2. The dorsal edge is formed by the dorsal
defines the ventrat flap limit. The dorsal edge is formed by
the dorsal midline. The cranial limit of the flap is at a
midline. The cranial limit of the flap is at a
point equal to the distance between the cranial shoulder
point equal to the distance between the cranial
depression and the scapular spine. This border extends
shoulder depression and the scapular spine. This
dorsally.parallel to the scapular spine.The caudat
border is a line parallel with the scapular spine.
border extends dorsally, parallel to the scapular
spine. The caudal border is a line parallel with
Couriesy of Dr D. Fulier
74
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
few simple interrupted sutures, and the
remaining edges apposed
6. The donor bed is closed primarily (Figure 8.10b).
This reliable and versatile flap can be used to cover
defects that involve the face, head and ear.
 For large facial defects, extended omocervical flaps
can be raised. This configuration incorporates the
contralateral omocervical angiosome, thus creating a
flap of sizeable dimensions:
1. Dissection of this extended flap proceeds as in
the primary omocervical flap except that the flap
borders continue across the dorsal midline to the
contralateral shoulder depression
 2. At this point, the contralateral superficial branch
of the omocervical artery is identified and ligated
3. The flap is then rotated to cover any facial
defects that are located rostrally in the nasal,
mandibular and maxillary regions.
Superficial temporal flap
An axial patterm flap based on the superficial temporal
 artery has been described experimentally in cats to
reconstruct maxillofacial skin defects (Fahie and
Smith, 1997). At the moment, there is minimal clinical
Figure 8.10: Following elevation and rotation, the flap is
information describing the use ofthis technique. The
sutured into place with a combination of simple interrupted
superficial temporal artery, a terminal branch of the
and continuous sutures. The donor bed is closed primarily.
extermal carotid artery, supplies the frontalis muscle
Couriesy ajD. Fowier.
and skin of the temporal area. This vessel emerges at
the ventral base of the auricular cartilage and travels
halfway along the scapular spine and extending
dorsally. The lateral orbital rim defines the rostral limit
dorsally defines the caudal border. Two parallel
of the flap and the caudal limit is the further caudal
lines extending from the atlas to the scapular
aspect ofthe zygomatic arch. The lateral limits extend
spine fonm the dorsal and ventral limits.
to the dorsal orbital rims of the right and left eye.
Elevation should be performed below the level of
Elevation should be performed below the level of the
the platsyma muscle
frontalis muscle. The superficial temporal flap has a
4.
 After rotation, this flap could potentially be used
similar area of coverage as the omocervical, as both
to cover defects of the head and neck.
will reach to the rostral nasal area.
Forelimb reconstruction
Caudal auricular flap
Axial pattem flaps used in the cutaneous reconstruc-
The caudal auricular axial patterm flap, which is based
tion of forelimb wounds in small animals include the
 on the stemocleidomastoideus branches of the caudal
thoracodorsal and superficial brachial flaps (Pavletic,
auricular artery and vein, has been developed in dogs:
1981; Shields Henney and Pavletic, 1988; Remedios ex
α/., 1989).
 1. The stemocleidomastoideus branches originate
from the caudal auricular artery at its base on the
Thoracodorsal flap
ventrolateral surface of the annular cartilage. The
The thoracodorsal flap is based on a cutaneous branch
vessels then course caudally to supply the skin of
of the thoracodorsal artery and vein. These vessels
the neck
emerge from the intermuscular fascia at the caudal
 2. The stemocleidomastoideus branches can be
shoulder depression, approximately at the level of the
difficult to identify, and extreme care should be
acromion. The vessels then branch and travel
taken when dissecting the base of the flap
caudodorsally (Figure 8.11). The cranial limit of the
 3. Harvesting a peninsular axial flap which retains
thoracodorsal flap is defined by a line extending along
an intact skin border at the base may prevent
the scapular spine dorsally. The caudal edge is parallel
damage to these fragile vessels. The lateral
to the cranial incision and originates at a point approxi-
aspect of the wing of the atlas forms the cranial
mately equal to the distance from the scapular spine to
border of the flap. A line starting at a point
the caudal shoulder depression. The ventral limit is
Axial Patterm Flaps
75
Figure 8.1l: The thoracodorsal artery emerges at the cauda!
shouiderdepression and radiates caudodorsally. The crania!
limit of the thoracodorsal flap is defined by the scapular
spine. The caudal edge is parallel to the cranial incision and
Figure 8.13: The borders of the thoracodorsal flap are
originates at a point equal to the distance from the scapular
incised. Dissection should begin at the dorsaledge and
spine to the caudal shoulder depression.The dorsal border is
proced ventrally. At the vascularpedicle (the location is
the midline and the ventral borderis marked by a line
denoted by the haemostat). the surgeon shoutd exercise
extending from the acromion to the axilla.
caution.
marked by a line extending ffom the acromion caudal ly
4. Initially, surgical elevation of the flap can be
to the axilla. The dorsal border is defined by the dorsal
rapid, but as the vascular pedicle is approached,
midline, although the contralateral angiosome can be
cautious and meticulous dissection should be
harvested to increase IIap dimensions:
performed (Figure 8.13)
 5. To avoid thrombosis and damage, the vascular
 1. With the patient in lateral recumbency and
pedicle does not have to be completely stripped
thoracic limb positioned to simulate a natural
of surrounding fat; rather, isolated only to
standing angle, the borders of the thoracodorsal
achieve adequate mobility (Figure 8.14a)
flap are drawn on the skin surface (Figure 8.12)
6. After elevation, the thoracodorsal flap is rotated
2. The location of the vascular pedicle at the caudal
to cover defects of the thorax, shoulder and
shoulder depression should be palpated and
axillary fegions.
identified accordingly
3. Dissection of the thoracodorsal flap starts at
However, the most clinically useful application of
the dorsal midline and extends, below the level
the thoracodorsal flap is in reconstruction of forelimb
of the cutaneous trunci muscle, towards the
defects (Figure 8.14b,c). The fotated thoracodorsal
ventral border
 flap reliably covers the mid- to distal antebrachium in
dogs and the proximal carpus in cats (Figure 8.15).
 Extended thoracodorsal flaps that incorporate adja-
cent angiosomes have been described. Dissection of
these flaps extends over the dorsal midline to the
contralateral thoracodorsal vascular pedicle. As the
adjacent angiosome depends upon choke communica-
tions with the primary flap, distant survival of these
extended flaps is less reliable.
 Superficial brachial flap
The superficial brachial Hlap has been described, to
reconstruct skin defects involving the lower antebra-
chium of dogs. The superficial brachial artery emerges
at a point 3 cm cranioproximal to the elbow, travels
medial to the cephalic vein and branches to the skin of 
the craniodistal humerus. The base of the flap is
centred over the cranial flexor surface of the elbow.
The flap extends and tapers proximally to the greater
tubercle, parallel to the shaft of the humerus.
The superficial brachial artery is a small diameter
  n  i  p
Figure 8.12: The borders of the thoracodorsal flap are
These conditions limit  the clinical application of
drawn on the skin surface with afelt-tipped marker.
this flap as it is susceptible to vascular damage and
76
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Figure 8.15: JI rotated thoracodorsal flap provides coverage
to the proximat carpus in cats.
Figure 8.16: JI superficial brachiat flap was rotated to cover
α wound created following removal of a large tumour
invotving the caudat aspect of the antebrachial/!.
Figure 8.14: (a) This thoracodorsat flap was harvested in an
subsequent necrosis (Figures 8.16 and 8.17). The
island configuration to facilitate flap rotation. However, in
thoracodorsal flap, which can also be used for forelimb
order to avoid inadvertent injury; the surrounding fat was not
 reconstruction, is preferred because ofits reliable and
stripped from the vascular pedicle, (h) The thoracodorsal
robust blood supply.
flap was then rotated through 180 degrees to cover α
decubital uicer at the point of the elbow, (c) The
 Should a superficial brachial flap be used, dissec-
thoracodorsatflap wassutured in place andaPenrose drain
 tion should be performed in the deep subcutaneous
placed to minimize dead space and allow forfluid drainage.
layer. Minimal elevation of the flap base should be
Axial Pattem Flaps
77
The reverse saphenous conduit flap, which gives off
direct cutaneous vessels that supply the hindlimb, is
also extremely useful for reconstruction of distal limb
wounds (Pavletic et al, 1983).
Caudal superficial epigastric flap
The caudal superficial epigastric is one of the most
useful and versatile flaps. The flap is based on the
caudal superficial epigastric artery, which is a branch
ofthe extemal pudendal artery. This vessel emerges at
the inguinal ring and courses cranially along the mam-
mar}′ chain, parallel to the ventral midline, to supply
the ipsilateral mammary glands, subcutaneous tissue 
and overlying skin (Figure 8.18). The caudal border of
Figure 8.17: As the superficiat brachiatflap is susceptible to
the flap is defined by the inguinal ring. The cranial
vascular damage, its survival is ratherunpredictable.
limit extends to the second mammary gland. The
Subsequent flapnecrosis hasresuted ina largeforelimbdefect.
ventral midline delineates the medial limit and the
lateral edge extends from a point twice the distance
umdertaken, in an attempt to preserve the superficial
from the nipple to the ventral midline. The flap is
brachial vasculature and associated microcirculation.
created as follows (Figure 8.19):
 The rotated superficial brachial will cover the foreleg
to the distal antebrachium.
1. Once the borders of the flap are identified and
incised, the caudal superficial epigastric flap is
Hindlimb reconstruction
elevated, starting at the cranial border
Axial partem flaps that have been described for hindlimb
2.
 Creation of an island axial patterm flap greatly
reconstruction in small animals include the caudal
facilitates transfer of a caudal superficial
superficial epigastric and genicular (Pavletic,
，1980;
epigastric flap to a lower limb defect
Kostolich and Pavletic, 1987: Remedios etal., 1989).
 3. It is essential to undermine the flap just ventral to
 the aponeurosis of the external abdominal oblique
muscle. Once manipulation nears the area of the
inguinal ring and location of the vascular pedicle,
dissection should proceed with care
4. The donor bed is connected to the recipient area
on the limb by a bridging excision of intact skin
 5. The flap is then rotated and sutured onto the
wound site.
 In dogs, depending on the breed conformation, the 
caudal superficial epigastric flap will cover to mid- or
distal tibia. In cats, due to their more pliable skin and
their similar body sizes and limb lengths, the caudal
superficial epigastic flap can extend to the proximal
metatarsus.
Genicular flap
 This is described as a peninsular axial patterm flap and
is based on the short genicular branch of the saphenous 
artery and the medial saphenous vein:
· The genicular vessels arise from the saphenous
artery, which supplies blood to the medial and
lateral skin of the stifle
Figure 8.18: The caudal superficial artery- emerges at the
· The single or paired genicular vessels emerge at
inguinatringand supplies the ipsilateralmammary glands
the medial aspect of the stifle, running
subcutaneous tissue and skin.The caudal flap borderis
 proximolaterally, parallel to the femoral shaft
defined by theinguinatring:thecranial limit is defined by
the second mammary gland.The ventrat midline is the medial
The flap is developed from the lateral aspect of
limit and the lateral edge extends from a point twice the
the femur. The distal base of the flap extends
distance from the nipple to the ventral midline.
from just proximal to the patella to immediately
78
Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Figure 8.19:(a) This wound encircles the limb and extends from the distal third ofthe tibia to mid-metatarsus, (b) The caudal
superficial epigastric flap is harvested from the donor bed. A bridging excision is made in the intact skin between the donor bed
and the lower limb wound, (c) The cauda! superficia! epigastric flap is then transferred to the lower limb and sutured in place.
(d) At suture removal 14 days following surgery, the entire flap is viabte.
distal to the cranial tibial tuberosity. The cranial
that supply the flap at the level of the tarsus
and caudal limits fun proximally, parallel with 
proximally to the stifle (Figure 8.20)
the femoral shaft, but taper at the proximal edge
3. The proximal limit of the flap lies at the level of
as defined by the base of the greater trochanter
the patella. A cranial to caudal skin incision is
The harvested flap can be fotated to cover
made on the medial aspect ofthe stifle at this level
defects located on the lateral or medial aspects of
 4. The saphenous artery and medial saphenous vein
the tibia, up to the level of the tibiotarsal joint.
are ligated and transected
The extent of distal cutaneous coverage provided
5.
 The cranial and caudal limits of the flap are
by the genicular flap is comparable with that of
formed by two medial incisions that extend and
the caudal superficial epigastric flap.
taper distally to the tibiotarsaljoint. These
incisions are located approximately 0.5-1 cm
Reverse saphenous flap
cranial and caudal to the borders of the cranial
The feverse saphenous conduit HIap has been devel-
and caudal branches of the saphenous artery and
oped for reconstruction ofcutaneous defects involving
medial saphenous vein
the tarsus and metatarsus of dogs and cats. This flap is
6. This flap is described as a peninsular flap, so
not a tme axial pattern flap, but is based on the
the distal skin limit, as defined by the tarsus, is
saphenous vessels, which give off small direct cutane-
not incised
ous vessels that supply the distal limb. Upon develop-
 7. The flap is undermined, starting at the stifle in a
ment, the blood flow ofthe flap is reversed through the
distal direction, and extending beneath the
cranial and caudal branches of the saphenous artery
saphenous vasculature in the deep subcutaneous 
and medial saphenous vein:
layer. To avoid the caudal branch of the
saphenous artery and medial saphenous vein, a
1. Preoperatively, measurements are taken to
portion of the medial gastrocnemius muscle may
determine the length of flap required to reach and
be included in the flap
cover the lower limb wound
8. At approximately the distal one-third of the
2. This flap is harvested from the medial aspect of
medial tibia, the tibial nerve joins the descending
the tibia and is based on direct cutaneous vessels
caudal branches of the saphenous artery and
Axial Patterm Flaps
79
Figure 8.20:(a)Wide surgical excisionof this cutaneous
tumourlocatedatthelateral5thmetatarsalarealeave
significam defect thatrequires surgical reconstruction.(b)A
reversesaphenousflapisharvestedfromthemedial aspectof
thetibia.Theproximal limitoftheflapliesat the levelof the
patellaThecranialandcaudallimitsftheflapareformed
bytwoincisionsthattaperdistallytothetibiotarsaljoint.
(c.d)The flapis dissected from thestifletowards the
tibiotarsal joint,atthelevelofthedeepsubeutaneous layer.
Care hastobetakenin the distal one-thirdofthemedial
tibiawherethetibialnerveandperonealartery andveinare
located.（ef.g)Once dissectionreachesthetarsus,theflapis
rotatedtocoverthemetatarsaldefect.
80 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
medial saphenous vein. Dissection should be
 4. Since this region is in close proximity to the
 continued cautiously to avoid nerve injury
highly contaminated anal area, the use of an
9. Frequently, ligation of the peroneal artery and
active closed suction drain is recommended. The
vein are needed to facilitate flap mobility
drain should exit from a separate stab incision
10. At the level of the tarsus, the flap can be rotated to
proximal to, and away from, the anus. The
cover metatarsal defects. Care has to be taken to
suction bulb can be bandaged over the dorsal
avoid excessive flap tension at the tibiotarsal joint.
flank region.
 In addition to postoperative complications, such as
Deep circumflex iliae flap
seroma formation, distal flap necrosis, dehiscence and
 This is based on the deep circumflex iliac artery, which
infection, the reverse saphenous flap is especially
 arises directly from the aorta. The superficial branch of
susceptible to oedema and congestion. As reversed
the deep circumflex iliac artery emerges from the
blood flow is created during flap elevation, venous
lateral abdominal wall, just cranioventral to the iliac
valvular obstruction and dilatation, and hypertension
wing. Here, it divides into a dorsal and ventral branch.
probably account for both oedema and congestion of
The branches can be used separately for flap develop-
the flap (Figure 8.21). It is common for this flap to
ment. The dorsal flap is more appropriate for recon-
[nun Aiagins 1aye syaam 7 oi dn 1og paisaguos 1eadde
struction of defects located in the flank, lumbar, caudal
the formation of venous collateral circulation occurs.
thorax, lateral thigh and pelvic areas. However, the
The cautious use of soft padded bandages may be
ventral flap can be harvested as an island flap and used
beneficial in decreasing oedema.
to cover wounds involving the perineal region:
Perineal reconstruction
1. To delineate the ventral deep circumflex iliac
Large skin defects involving the perineal area are
flap, the animal should be lying in lateral
limited by the lack of available skin and the need to
recumbency and the hindlimbs positioned at
preserve the integrity of the anal and genitourinary
natural relaxed angles
areas. Reconstruction can be perfonmed in this area
2. The cranioventral wing of the ilium should be
using the caudal superficial epigastric and the deep
palpated and the borders ofthe flap are then
circumflex iliac flaps (Pavletic, 1981):
identified (Figure 8.22). The distal limit is
 defined by a point midway along the femoral
1. To reconstruct a perineal defect, elevation of an
shaft. The dorsal midline forms the dorsal border
island caudal superficial epigastric flap is
 3. The caudal incision is formed by a line midway
 perfonmed as described previously
between the cranial edge of the iliac wing and
2. The flap is then rotated 180 degrees to extend
the greater trochanter and directed distally,
coverage to the perineum. Extreme care has to be
 cranial to the femoral shaft
taken to avoid kinking and minimize tension on
4.
 The cranial incision runs parallel with the
the flap pedicle in the highly mobile inguinal
caudal and is at a point that is equal to the
region
distance between the caudal incision and the
 3. Although a large amount of dead space is
cranial iliac wing
created, elimination of this problem through the
5. The flap should be elevated from the deep
use of soft padded bandages is difficult in this
subcutaneous layer, starting at the distal border
area. Placement of drains is the best choice to
6. Following elevation, the flap can then be rotated
decrease dead space and prevent fluid
and sutured on to the perineal wound. Closed active
accumulation in this area
suction drains are recommended in this location.
DAI
1
Figure 8.21: (a) Congestion and oedema are common following the rotation of a reverse saphenous flap. Venous valvular
obstruction and dilation are probable causes, (b) These problems resolve upon formation of collaterat circulation 2-3 weeks
after surgery.
Axial Pattern Flaps 
81
Figure 8.22: The ventrat deep
Ventral branch of deep
circumflex itiac flap is used to
circumflex iliac artery
cover wounds in the perineat
region. It is based on the
superficiat branch ofthe deep
circumflex itiac artery; which
emerges at the cranioventrat
aspect ofthe ilium. The distat
od o g paufp s?u
midway atong the femoral
shaft. The dorsat midline forms
the dorsat border. The caudat
incision is formed by a tine
midway between the craniat
edge ofthe diat wing and the
greater trochanter.The cranial
incision is parattet to the
caudat, and is at a point that is
equal to the distance between
the caudat incision and the
craniat iliac wing.
To cover large perineal defects, an extended ventral
 deep circumflex iliac flap can be raised by capturing
in the dog. Veterinary Surgery 9, 103-107
Pavletic MM (1981) Canine axial pattern flaps, using the omocervical.
the contralateral angiosome. Dissection of this flap
thoracodorsal and deep circumflex iliac direct cutaneous arteries.
continues over the dorsal midline to the cranioventral
American Journat of Veterinary Research 42, 391-406
 border of the ilium where the deep circumflex pedicle
Pavletic MM, Watters J, Henry RW and Nate LA (1983) Reverse
saphenous conduit flap in the dog. Joumat of the American
 originates. This extended flap is used cautiously, as the
Veterinary Medicat Association 182. 380-389
survival of the distal portion is less predictable than
Remedios AM. Bauer MS and Bowen CV (1989) Thoracodorsal and
that of the primary flap.
caudal superficial epigastric axial paterm skin flaps in cats.
Veterinary Surgery 18,380-385
 Shields Henney LH and Pavletic MM (1988) Axial patterm flaps based
on the superficial brachial arterv in the dog. Veterinarx Surgery 17,
REFERENCES
311-317
Smith MM, Payne JT, Moon ML and Freeman LE ( 1991) Axial pattem 
Fahie MA and Smith MM (1997) Axial pattem flap based on the
flap based on thecaudal auricular artery in dogs. American Joumat
superficial temporal arterv in cats: an experimental study. Veterinary
of Veterinary Research 52.922-925
Surgery 26, 86-89
Taylor Gl and Palmer JH (1987) The vascular territories (angiosomes)
Kostolich M and Pavletic MM (1987) Axial pattern flap based on the
genicular branch of the saphenous arterv in the dog. Veterinary-
Joumat of Plastic Surgery 67, 177-187
Surgery 16,217-222
Madison JB, Donawick WJ, Johnston DE and Orsini RA (1989) The use
Trevor PB, Smith MM, Waldron DR and Hedlund CS (1992) Clinical
 of skin expansion to repair cosmetic defects in animals. Veterinary
evaluation of axial patterm skin flaps in dogs and cats: 19 cases
(1981-1990). Joumat of the AmericanVeterinary Medicat
Surgery 18. 15-21
Association 210. 608-612
CHAPTER NINE
Skin Grafting
RichardA.S. White
INDICATIONS
 Full thickness (containing the epidermis and the
entire denmis) or
The use of free skin grafts is confined primarily to
Split thickness (containing the epidenmis and
the reconstmction of large skin deficits involving
only part of the dermis).
the extremities of the limbs, which present the sur-
 geon with some unique problems. Eisewhere in the
Full thickness grafts
body, the primary solution for dealing with skin
Full thickness skin grafts are generally considered to
deficits is simple coaption of the wound but this is
be the more suitable depth of graft for small animal
usually precluded for limb sites due to the lack of
reconstructive use. They are robust and capable of
adjacent mobile skin. Secondary healing can be
withstanding considerable handling during collection
allowed to proceed for some limb skin defects,
and positioning over the recipient site. Because the
although there is a risk of developing unsightly scars
grafts retain all the dermal structures they can provide
and those in the vicinity of joints may seriously
far more cosmetic skin regrowth in the longer tenm.
impair limb function should excessive scar tissue
Their greater tissue content, however, means that the
form. Other options include local or random flaps
nutritional requirements during the 'take* period (see
which may be indicated for the reconstruction of
 below) are considerably more fastidious than those of
some larger wounds but their use is again restricted
the thinner split thickness graft and hence they 'take'
in the case of limbs by the limited availability
less readily.
of adjacent skin. Heterotopic pedicle grafts, using
microvascular anastomosis to relocate axial flaps
Split thickness grafts
based on a single arteriovenous supply, can provide
Split thickness skin grafts contain the epidermis and
an altermative solution but are used infrequently
part ofthe dermis. They are sometimes referred to as
because of the complexity of the surgical procedure
Thiersch grafts and can be further subclassified as
(see Chapter 1l). Direct flaps offer an altermative
thin, medium or thick split thickness depending on
solution in some cases by positioning the limb deficit
the depth of dermis harvested in the graft. Despite
under pedicles of skin created on the flank, although
their widespread use in human plastic reconstruc-
this may not be appropriate for the temperament of
tions, split thickness grafts have a number of impor-
all patients.
tant disadvantages in small animal surgery and are
In many cases therefore, free skin grafts provide
used infrequently. They are rather fragile by com-
the only viable altermative to the problem of recon-
parison with full thickness grafts and require consid-
structing some of the larger skin deficits involving
erably more care during collection and placement.
the distal limb. It should always be borne in mind,
Due to the variable absence of the denmal structures
however, before undertaking a skin graft, that the
 the grafted sites tendtohave poor durability, a greater
technique can be very time-consuming, not only in
tendency to contracture and to produce sparse hair
terms of the surgery but also in the postoperative
regrowth. Equally important, the donor site heals by
care. Since the successful outcome of the graft can
 epithelialization and hence its final cosmetic appear-
never be guaranteed, it pays to consider carefully
ance is poor. Although they are potentially useful for
all other possible alternatives before selecting a
the reconstruction of very large wounds where the
skin graft.
supply of donor skin is at a premium, it is unusual
to be unable to harvest sufficient skin to permit
full thickness grafting in the majority of cases. The
TYPES OF SKIN GRAFT
complexity of accurate collection and the significant
cost of the harvesting equipment tend to argue addi-
 Skin grafts are classified in two ways. First, according
tionally against the use of split thickness grafts in
to the depth of skin harvested (Figure 9.1) as:
small animals.
84
4Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Completecoverage
Anatomyofcanine skin
Sheet
Partial coverage
Full thickness graft
Pinch
Punch
Stamp
Split thicknessgraft-thick
Strip
Figure 9.2: Types of skin graft. Classification according t0
wound coverage.
Copyrighi Z RA.s. Whitle.
Secondly, skin grafts are classified according to the
extent of wound coverage they offer (Figure 9.2) and
is paredaid ane Aau yum u auuu au
Split thicknessgraft-medium
Sheet grafts, providing full wound coverage, or
Pinch, punch, stamp or strip grafts, for partial
coverage of granulating wounds.
Sheet grafts
Sheet grafts are the most frequently used skin grafts in
small animal reconstruction. They provide complete
Split thickness graft-thin
coverage of the wound and will ultimately provide the
most functional and cosmetically acceptable result.
Pinch, punch, stamp and strip grafts
These provide partial coverage of granulating wounds.
Figure 9.1: Types of skin graft. Classification according to
They are used simply as a means of promoting heal-
skindepth.
ing of granulation tissue by vastly increasing the
Copyrighu Z HA5 While.
surface of epithelializing tissue within the wound.
Skin Grafting
85
Their collection and placement is labour intensive
Occasionally there may be an indication for the use
and they provide a poor final cosmetic and functional
of pinch, punch, stamp or strip grafts although, as
result in a wound that heals largely by epithelializa-
already indicated, they provide a very poor cosmetic
tion and contraction.
 result and are limited to partial coverage of granulating
wounds. These are normally harvested in full thick-
ness. Pinch grafts are harvested by scalpel excision of
HARVESTING THE GRAFT
small areas of skin raised by means of hypodermic
needle. Punch grafts are most easily collected by
Ideal donor sites for skin grafts in the small animal
 means of the Keyes biopsy punch. Stamps are removed
 species should have:
as small rectangular sheets, whilst strips are collected
as 0.5 cm wide lengths.
Durable skin of a suitable thickness (usually
avoiding the thin skin over the ventral abdomen)
Split thickness grafts
 An abundant supply of easily mobilized skin, to
Split thickness grafts dictate accurate collection
allow easy and cosmetic closure of the donor site
through the denmal layer itself by means of a blade
 Hair of a colour, length and density similar to
pre-set to the required depth. A wide array of instru-
that which it is intended to replace at the
ments are available for this, including the Humbly
recipient site (less important for split thickness
and Silva knives and also the Brown dermatome
grafts).
(Figure 9.3); the former are hand-held whilst
dermatomes are either pneumatically or electrically
The flank usually satisfies most of these criteria
driven. Most instruments have some device for pre-
and offers the best opportunity to remove a suffi-
setting the depth of cut and, with the skin held in
ciently large area of skin to cover wounds involving
tension, the blade is either drawn to and fro across the
the limb. In the case of full thickness grafts, however,
surface or progresses by means of an oscillating
hair length from this site can be noticeably greater
blade. Split thickness grafts are quite fragile and
than that which it replaces. The skin should be col-
should be carefully supported on a moist dressing
lected under strictly aseptic conditions and, once
until positioned over the recipient site.
harvested, should be rolled in saline- or antibiotic-
'panbar lnun uoneooisap suaaard on sasuods paxeos
Harvested skin prepared in this fashion can be pre-
PREPARING THE GRAFT
served for several days by refrigeration at 4°℃ .
Once harvested, the underlying hypodenmal and loose
Full thickness grafts
adipose tissue is carefully removed from the full thick-
Full thickness grafts are collected by elevating the
ness graft with fine scissors until the pigment of the
skin, including its hvpodennal attachments, from
denmal layer is apparent, in order to maximize subse-
the loose fatty tissue below, without disturbing the
quent vascular access to the graft from the recipient
underlying panniculus muscles. This can be more
bed. Less ideally, this can be performed by careful
easily accomplished with the use of skin hooks or
scraping with a scalpel blade but overly vigorous
fine monofilament nylon stay sutures strategically
scarification of the denmal structures should be avoided.
placed at the periphery of the graft as it is elevated.
The graft can be laid on the bevelled surface of a skin
The need to pre-cut the graft in the shape of the
recipient wound will depend on whether the graft is
to be subsequently meshed or not. Meshing enables
the sheet to be manipulated to the outline of the
recipient bed and requires minimal pre-shaping
whereas unmeshed sheet grafts are less flexible and
require accurate pre-shaping. However, even
unmeshed sheets have some degree of elasticity
which will penmit stretching to accommodate small
irregularities. Where a graft is to be pre-shaped to a
template it is best achieved with the help of a moist
surgical swab cut to the outline of the recipient area
and then laid over the donor skin. The general
outline of the graft to be harvested is marked with a
sterile marker, allowing some overlap (0.5-1.0 cm)
to ensure collection of an adequate area. Donor sites
require primary surgical repair with closure of the
Figure 9.3: The Brown oscillating dermatome.
subcutaneous tissues.
Copyrigh  HAS. Hbue
86
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
0006.02
Figure 9.5: Remova! of hypoderma! tissue. The graft is
Figure 9.4: Removal of hypodermat tissue. A skin graff
draped over the surgeon's finger to permit remova! of the
board with the unwanted tissue being removed by scalpe!.
unwanted tissue by carefut trimming with scissors.
Copyrigh CO HAS Whine.
Copyrighr Z R.1.S. Whie
graft board (Figure 9.4) to achieve this, although many
surgeons prefer to drape the graft over their fingers
whilst the tissue is removed (Figure 9.5). Sheet grafts
can now be further prepared as unmeshed. meshed of
'pie-crusted' (Figure 9.6).
Unmeshed sheets
Unmeshed sheets are left intact after removal of the
hypodermal tissues so that there is no disruption to
(a)
contiguity of the dermal sheet. This type of graft pro-
vides potentially for the best cosmetic result and in the
event that there is full "take' there will be little to
distinguish the grafted area ffom normal skin elsewhere.
Despite this apparent advantage, there are some signifi-
cant drawbacks which make unmeshed grafts a father
impractical and infrequently used option. The most
(b)
important of these is that the intact sheet provides no
foute for the drainage of the exudate which inevitably
accumulates between it and the recipient site during the
'take* period. This fluid promotes lifting of the graft
from the recipient bed and may lead to its eventual loss.
 This can be countered by aspirating exudate from under
the graft using a hypodermic needle on a daily basis of
(）
 by the use ofa fine suction drain placed under the graft
(see Chapter 6). but these options are likely to be less
successful than a system of ffee drainage through the
graft itself. Less importantly, unmeshed grafts must be
pre-cut to the outline of the recipient site since they have
only limited ability to stretch to wound shapes.
(d)
Meshed sheets
Figure 9.6: Skin meshing:(a) unmeshed;(b)fully meshed;
Meshed sheets arc prepared by the creation of perfora-
(c) partially meshed; (d) 'pie-crusted'
tions through the entire thickness of the skin. This can
be peformed by hand or mechanically by means of a
Copyrighr C R.A.S. Mhite.
meshing table (Figure 9.7) or roller mesher. Meshing
can be complete, partial or 'pie-crusted* and confers a
be fully 'opened' to cover the required area
number of significant advantages on the graft:
whilst in the naffower regions the meshes are leff
'unopened'. This obviates the need to pre-shape
The graf has much greater flexibility and
the graft and most wound shapes can be
elasticity which enables it to be easily shaped to
accommodated from a simple rectangle whose
the outline of irregular wounds. In the widef
general dimensions approximate those of the
fegions of the wound the meshings of graft can
recipient bed 
Skin Grafting
87
exudate from the wound is not a consideration for
these grafts since the wound surface itself remains
largely open.
THE RECIPIENT SITE
A major determinant in the success of free skin
grafting is the proper preparation of the recipient site.
Sites should be well supplied with the active capillar }"
vessels necessary to provide nutritional support and
Figure 9.7:A table meshing instrument.The graftis laid
overthetablewhich consists ofparallelrows ofbladesand
ultimately revascularization of the graft. All non-
thenfirmlyrolledwiththeTeflon?rollingpintoproducea
viable tissue debris or epithelialized tissue which
fullymeshedgraft.
may prevent capillary ingress into the graft should be
Copyrigh @R.A.5. While.
removed. Any major bacterial contamination likely
to lead to infection should be dealt with prior to
 The greater flexibility of the graft also enables
 grafting. Suitable recipient tissues for skin grafing
it to conform closely to uneven wound surfaces.
Meshed grafts will readily conform to wounds
wounds; or fresh surgical wounds.
with convex surfaces (e.g. over the elbow,
hock) without the need for copious additional
Granulation tissue
sutures through the graft surface to ensure
Granulation tissue is an ideal graft recipient tissue, since
immobilization
it contains an abundant supply of vascular capillaries in
 The graft can be expanded simply by pulling the
a stable matrix of collagen ready to support the over-
meshing open, allowing it to cover a greater area
lying graft. Its appearance in the wound within 3-6
 of wound. Meshing may therefore help to solve
days of the original injury is an indication that all septic
the problem of covering large wounds in
processes have been controlled and that grafting can
situations where the amount of skin available for
proceed safely. Although grafting can be considered as
grafting is limited
soon as granulation tissue first appears in the wound it
 By far the greatest advantage of meshing lies in its
is often delayed for several days until the wound is
inherent capacity to penmit ongoing drainage of
completely covered and the prospects for successful
any exudate from the recipient surface during the
"take' are considerably increased. Chronic granulation
'take' phase. The greater the number of mesh
tissue that remains ungrafted, on the other hand, is less
openings and the wider they are opened, the
likely to support a graft because its capillary content is
greater is the potential for this fluid to drain
 significantly reduced by the increasing proportion of
without interfering with 'take'. However, the areas
connective tissue. This can, however, readily be con-
pou op sgujuado ysau aqn rapun punom auijo
verted to healthy tissue with a well vascularized surface
have any dermal covering and hence these regions
heal secondarily by granulation, contraction and
 or better still, 24 hours before grafting to minimize the
epithelialization, the consequence of which is an
risk of haematoma or seroma development. Where the
area of alopecia. The goal is therefore to achieve a
granulation tissue is less chronically inactive, simple
 balance between providing adequate drainage and
 Sue m oud shep z-l og nuauapnqap rerueuoau
accomplishing a good cosmetic result.
will be sufficient to promote surface revascularization
(Figures 9.8 and 9.9). All vascular oozing should be
'Pie-crusted sheets'
controlled using diathenmy to minimize the risk of fluid
Tie-crusted' sheets represent a compromise between
accumulating below the graft.
meshing (which provides drainage) and leaving the
graft as an intact sheet (for optimal cosmetic results).
Tie-crusting' describes the preparation of the graft by
making a limited number of stab incisions through the
graft, sufficient to permit adequate drainage whilst
causing minimal damage to the cosmetic result.
Pinch, punch, stamp and strip grafts
 Pinch, punch, stamp and strip grafts should also have 
Figure 9.8:Preparation of granulation tissueforgrafting.
the hypodermal tissue removed, as for sheet grafts,
Thisdeglovinginjuryiscoveredwithchronicgranuiation
although this is often difficult and time consuming
andwillnotsupporta skingraft.
due to their small size and multiplicity. Drainage of
88
Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Managerment and Reconstniction
Figure 9.9:Preparation of granulation tissue for grafting.
The same wound as that in Figure 9.8following wet-to-dry
dressing overa48-hour period. The granulation tissue now
appears much more active and is suitable for grafting.
Copyrighr Enn.5. Whife.
Surgically 'clean' wounds
Figure9.10:Fresh surgicalwounds can begrafted
Recent wounds that have been debrided and retain a
immediately,althoughtheproblemsof seroma development
suitable vascular supply can undergo immediate graft-
arelikelyto bemoresevere.Apartiallymeshedgraftis
placedover awoundcreated bytheresectionof a benign
ing. Examples of this include degloving and avulsion
umourovera carpusfollowingcarefulhaemostasis.
wounds in which the skin has been removed but is still
available to be replaced in its original location. Con-
Copyrighr RA.S.White
 tamination ofthe wound and the subsequent collection
 of exudate are, however, considerably greater risks in 
this type of recipient bed.
Fresh surgical wounds
Fresh surgical wounds are frequently overlooked
as potential sites for skin grafting. They are very
suitable recipient sites providing that the wound is
well vascularized (Figure 9.10). The development
of haematomas or serous exudate below the graff
is, however, a much more frequent problem and it
is essential that some kind of provision is made
for drainage. Delaying the graft by even as little
as 24-48 hours after the original surgery to en-
courage early granulation substantially reduces
this problem.
APPLICATION OF THE GRAFT
Unmeshed or 'pie-crusted' sheets
Unmeshed or "pie-crusted" sheets require pre-
shaping to the recipient site (Figure 9.1l) allowing
a few millimetres overlap on all edges to provide
Figure 9. 11: A pie-crusted'graff in sifu over a distal limb
deficit.Note that some sutures are placed through the graft
for any contracture as the graf 'takes". Grafts are
itself to the recipient bed to ensure stability.
sutured in place with loosely applied and widely
spaced simple interrupted 2 metric (3/0) mono-
Copyright  HAS. Whir,:
filament nylon around their periphery. Anchoring
the graft so that it is under a little tension ensures
Meshed sheets
good contact with the recipient surface but care
 Meshed sheets do not require pre-shaping and the graft
should be taken to avoid over-tensioning. In the case
can be placed over the wound and expanded to fit the
of large or convex wounds it is also wise to place
wound as necessary with the edges left overlapping the
loose mattress sutures through the graft itselfinto the
wound (Figure 9.12). The maximal expansion of the
underlying granulation tissue or wound to prevent
meshed graff is usually up to 2-4 times the original
graft movement. A fine suction drain should be
width ofthe graft but this is achieved at the expense of
implanted to prevent the fluid accumulation in the
some reduction in graft length. Grafts are anchored as
case of unmeshed sheets.
for other sheet grafts.
Skin Grafting
89
Adherence
Adherence refers to the development of a 'scaffold'
of fibrin between the graft and the underlying recipi-
ent surface. The fibrin is exuded from the recipient
surface w ithin a few hours of the graft covering it
and serves not only to anchor the graft but also
provides a means of support for the subsequent
ingrowth of new capillaries from the recipient tissue.
The fibrin is progressively replaced by fibrous
tissue, further adding to the stability of the grafted
skin during the first week. The process of fibrin
adherence is essential for the subsequent processes
which contribute to graft nutrition.
Nutrition
Nutrition of the graft comprises three separate
processes:
 Plasmatic imbibition
·
Inosculation
·
 Revascularization.
Plasmatic imbibition
 Plasmatic imbibition, sometimes called plasmatic cir-
culation, occurs during the first 2-3 days. The graft
behaves rather like physiological blotting paper at tins
 stage and absorbs the fibrinogen-free serum proteins
and erythrocytes which are exuded from the recipient
Figure 9.12: Afidly meshed graft positioned over a deficit
surface. As a result it takes on an oedematous appear-
over the elbow.The graft has been expanded to provide
ance and is often darkly pigmented through absorption
wound coverage. Note how in thefill ty meshed form the graft
of haem degradation products. The swelling of the
conforms to the convex wound surface.
graft at this stage can be sufficient to cause the mesh
Copyrighr S R.A.5. While.
openings in partially meshed and 'pie-crusted' grafts 
to close over, thereby impeding the drainage of any
Partial coverage grafts
exudate. The rather unhealthy appearance of the graft
Although stamps and strips can be sutured in place,
at this stage is often mistaken for early rejection.
pinch and punch grafts cannot be attached to wound
 Plasmatic imbibition, however, is thought to be impor-
surfaces in the manner described above and can only be
 tant in providing early nutritional support until capil-
positioned by finmly embedding them in granulation
 lary ingrowth begins to develop.
tissue. Punch grafts are placed in holes cut in the
 granulation tissue with a biopsy punch; pinch grafts are 
Inosculation
aenbs u pauonisod are sdlueis saloy qeis ciui paspam
 Inosculation is the development of a rudimentary
holes; whilst strips are placed in longitudinal grooves.
vascular circulation within the graft and begins
All partial coverage grafts are inherently unstable and
around the second or third day. New capillary buds
require careful pressure bandaging until they gain
develop from the recipient tissue and cross the fibrin
stability at the end of 24-48 hours.
 scaffold into the graft. Instead of simply distributing 
throughout the tissue they are able to locate the old
vessels in the graft and anastomose with these. This
GRAFT 'TAKE'
 process of connection between the new capillaries
and old blood vessels is thought to provide sluggish
The processes whereby a graft survives from the time
and disorganized movement of blood. It is not clear
that it is placed over the recipient site until it becomes
how important this process is in contributing to the
fully revascularized by the underlying capillaries are
long-term survival of the graft but it may be respon-
often collectively termed graft 'take'. They involve
 sible for the more viable appearance that successful
much more than simple ingrowth of new capillaries
grafts take on towards the middle of the first week.
from the recipient bed. Two separate, but interrelated,
It is vitally important that the graft remains
processes are important for the take of a graft: adher-
immobilized during this period to enable this delicate
ence and nutrition.
vascular 're-plumbing' to take place.
90
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Revascularization
bacterial proliferation. The first dressing change is
 Revascularization, or vascular penetration, may take a
normally undertaken within 48 hours of grafting and.
further l-2 weeks to complete, by which time the
since graft adherence is only partially developed at this
healthy appearance of the grafft underlines the fe-
time, great care should be taken to avoid disturbing the
establishment of circulation in the skin.
gtaft as the contact layer is peeled away (Figure 9.15).
The fequency of subsequent changes will depend on
the amount of exudate produced by the graft site but
CARE OF THE GRAFT
during the first week. Fresh surgical wounds are more
 It is comparatively easy to prepare the recipient bed.
 productive and will certainly require daily changes
harvest the graff and position it over the recipient
during this period.
bed. However, it is considerably more difficult to
ensure that what happens over the following few days
results in a successful 'take'. The survival of a skin
gtaft depends on optimization of the conditions that
promote adherence and nutrition and it is essential
that the surgeon fully appreciates all of the stages
involved in graft growth described above in order to
achieve this.
Dressing and bandaging
Suitable dressing and bandaging during the period of
 graft "take* is critical and serves a number of functions:
 Promotes good contact between graft and
trecipient tissue
Figure9.13:A low-adherence conact layer,in thiscase a
 Minimizes graft movement
siliconmeshdressing.isplacedoverthegrafibeforebandaging.
 Removes exudate from the region of the graft
CopyrightRA.S.Whie
 Prevents soiling and bacterial contamination of
the wound.
The use of 'tie over', or bolus, dressings (see
Chapter 5) has been advocated to create firm uniform
downward pressure across grafts but these are difficult
to attach to circumferential limb wounds. Instead, a
properly constructed bandage support should be used
comprising:
·A low-adherent contact layer, usually consisting
of a commercially available peforated silicon
sheet (Figure 9.13) of a plastic sheet backed with
 an absorbent material which allows the dressing
to be removed regularly with minimal disruption
 of the graft during dressing changes
·An absorbent intermediate layer (e.g.cotton
wool) to remove any exudate ffom the wound
and to provide support to limit movement of
the limb
An outer protective layer into which can be
incorporated a gutter splint for additional
immobilization of the limb during the first 5 days
(Figure 9.14).
Graft inspection
It is essential to prevent exudate ffom accumulating
Figure 9.14: The graftsite on the limb is placed within a
below the graft by regular dressing changes, since
well padded Robert Jones bandage to prevent movement at
excess exudate will not only mechanically interfere
the graft site.
with 'take* but also provide an excellent medium for
Copyright O R.A.S. While.
Skin Grafting
91
Figure 9.15: Jfull thickness graft 48 hours after
placement. Note the oedematous appearance of the graft
due to serum imbibition which is now causing the mesh
Figure 9.16: During the first 5-7days coagutated debris
openings to close. Fluid from the recipient bed can be seen
should be carefully removed from the mesh openings and
Exuding through the mesh openings. The dark red/bluish
accumulated exudate removed by rolling a cotton bud along
cofour is normal at this stage.
the graff.
Copyrighi i. HAS. While.
Copyrighi C K AS. While.
At each dressing change the graft should be
layer should be maintained until all exudation has ceased.
inspected for any indication of fluid accumulating
In some grafts there may be accumulation of dried debris
between it and the wound. This is most likely to be a
on the surface of the graft which can be managed by very
problem in the case of unmeshed and "pie-crusted'
careful wct-to-dry dressing for 24-48 hours. It should be
sheets, and early detection and intervention is impor-
femembered that grafted skin is not fully functional, nof
tant to save a graft before it becomes completely
is it resistant to normal abrasive use for 4-6 weeks. It
separated ffom the wound. In the case of unmeshed
should be treated with care during this period to mini-
grafts, exudate can be removed by careful aspiration
mize the development of excessive connective tissue
using a fine hypodermic needle ifa fine suction drain
within the graft which will limit its cosmetic and func-
has not been placed. For meshed and pie-crusted
tional result. Grafts are often lacking in natural secre-
grafts, a cotton bud should be used to open carefully
tions during their early life and frequent application of
each mesh which may have become plugged with
lanolin-based creams will improve its appearance and
coagulated exudate; by carefully rolling the bud along
functionality. Patients often find the graf site pruritic
the graft with light downward pressure, any accumu-
during its first few weeks and steps should be taken to
lated fluid can be expressed through the mesh open-
prevent late graft loss through self-trauma.
ings (Figure 9.16).
Longer-term care
COMPLICATIONS
Although graf "take' will normally be obvious within
the first 4-5 days, ongoing care of the graft will be
The most common causes of graft failure include: an
necessary for several weeks. Once the graft is firmly in
inadequately vascularized recipient bed; movement;
place the need for immobilization declines and dress-
and infection. Where graft loss does occur, it is not
ings can normally be progressively feduced in ffe-
sua isod saep t-e is aun ioy iuaedde Aensn
quency and quantity depending on the graft appearance.
Initially, as the graft fails it will become blanched but
A low-adherence contact layer and absorbent second
then quickly progress to a black, dehydrated appearance
92
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconsmiction
(Figure 9.17) unless remedial action is taken. Once the
same time activating the fibrinolytic system which
limit ofthe graft necrosis can be definitively identified,
dissolves the all-important fibrin attachment between
the dead tissue should be trimmed away as soon as
recipient bed and graft. Selective resection may
possible to minimize the risk of bacterial proliferation
salvage any unaffected regions but often the process
 and pre vent loss of any remaining graft.
is rapid and comprehensive.
Fluid accumulating below the graft normally has a
The incidence of sepsis can be minimized by
serosanguinous appearance and although it demands
attention to aseptic technique at both donor and
rapid removal if the graft is to be saved it does not 
recipient sites. Pre-soaking the graft in antibiotic
necessarily indicate imminent loss provided that there
solutions is reported to reduce the incidence of sepsis
is no indication of purulent content.
although the use of systemic antibiotics is probably
Some grafts appear to discard their epidenmal
 more rational. Topical antibiotics can be used if the
layer after 5-7 days and an apparently complete
risk of infection is perceived to be significant; these
graft will seem to separate from the recipient bed,
are best delivered by spray and should be active
leaving no obvious evidence of "take' in the wound.
against Pseudomonads and P-lactamase-producing
xisog, e nsn g uausp ag uno s
organisms (see also Chapter 5).
outline of the dernal graft will appear within the
Figure 9.18 describes some methods of 'trouble
next week and the graft progress on to a completely
shooting' for graft problems.
satisfactory result.
Infection
INTERPRETING GRAFT
Infection associated with skin grafting is uncommon
APPEARANCE
if aseptic techniques are properly observed. Where
infection does occur, Pseudomonas or Klebsiella
During the period of 'take' the graft will undergo a
organisms are often implicated and can lead to rapid
variety of physical changes which can be difficult to
and disastrous graft loss. The septic process may
 interpret and occasionally lead to viable grafts being
result in sufficient exudation from the wound to
discarded prematurely.
separate it physically from the graft whilst at the
What to expect
·From Day 1 onwards the graft should be
surprisingly well fixed to the recipient bed and
 capable of withstanding reasonable disturbance
during dressing changes
During the first 2-3 days as plasmatic
imbibition peaks, the graft will become
engorged and oedematous, its colour will
darken and regions of the graft will take on a
range of hues from light through dark blue.
At this stage, areas of blue coloration are
 healthy and the surgeon should not be tempted
to discard!
· Towards the end of the first week the graft will
 become less oedematous and assume a pinker
 appearance as modest circulation begins;
however, it will be several days before it has a
 well vascularized appearance
 Signs of hair regrowth will normally appear
towards the end of the second or third week,
although this is variable and complete regrowth
may take several weeks.
What not to expect
Figure 9.17: An entire fall thickness graft shoeing faiture at
 Any movement of the graft evident during
5 days post grafting. Note the blanched white and black
areas indicative of necrosis. Faiture in this case was due to
dressing changes is a concerming feature,
inadequate preparationof an underlyingindotent
 although it is perhaps less disastrous during
granulation tissue in a bun wound.
the first 24-48 hours, whilst there is still
Copyrighr R.A.5. While.
 potential for plasmatic imbibition to continue to
Skin Grafting
93
Problem and cause
Pathophysinngy
Management
Fluid accumulation below the graft
Fluid separtes he gmh from
Drainage can be achieved by:
All recipientbeds exude somefluid
therecipieetbed mdemoes
using a meshed graft
but excessive fluidmaybeproduced
the serummtimal source
placing an active suction drain
after:
The fibrin scaffold is broken
below the graft
poor haeimostasis in the wound
aspirating fluid with a
surface
isprevented
hypodermicneedle on a daily
grafting over fresh wounds
basis
Graft movement
Someminormovemeancf he
The graft should be sutured
Inadequate immobilization of the graft:
graft within the firs 24 bous is
under slight tension with
poor sutureplacement
acceptable and does ot
mattresssuturesthrough the
insufficient bandaging to prevent
necessarily indicate graft loss
graft to therecipient surface if
limb movement
Subsequent movement will ead
necessary
to shearing of new capillhries
An appropriate three-layer
growing into the graft and
Robert Jones bandage should be
failure of revascularization
employed during the first week
Infection
Toxin release and cell death
Good aseptic technique
Poor aseptic technique
causes lysis of the fibrin
Pre-soaking graft in antibiotic
Pre-existing infection in the graft bed
scaffold and failure of
solution
revascularization
Systemic antibiotic therapy
Rapid resection of any areas of
infection
Graft necrosis
Early failure (first 3-4 days)
Check dressings
Early
throughpoornutritionis due
Resect non-viable areas as soon
Inadequate debridement of the dermal
to impaired serum
as apparent
side of the graft
exudation/imbibition.
Start over if the cause is a poor
Poorly vascularizedrecipient bed
Later failure (beyond 3-4 days)
granulation bed
(e.g.indolent granulation tissue)
indicates failure of
Late
revascularization
Graft dressings overly tight
Impaired systemic health of the patient
Figure 9.18: Trouble shooting for skin grafting.
support the graft without total stability and for
the long-term strength and durability of the graft. In the
re-establishment of adherence
first instance, therefore, the dermal component is de-
Beyond this period, any instability in the graft
termined by the depth of skin harvested for the graft:
will result in the failure of angiogenesis
 Blue coloration is an encouraging feature
· Full thickness grafts contain their full
Aigou *sinooo ago 1ng ,axen, yeg jo
complement of hair follicles and hence have the
blanched white or black, usually indicate
potential for complete regrowth, although even
graft death
 u  n is aq  asa
Some grafts may show signs of superficial
over-enthusiastic removal of hypodermal and
 infection but any evidence of any purulent fluid
dermal tissue during preparation
under the graft is usually a disastrous
Split thickness grafts retain fewer hair follicles
 development and graft salvage proves impossible
and can never provide complete hair regrowth.
in most cases.
Dermal density is also determined by the propor-
tion of the wound which heals by epithelialization,
THE COSMETIC RESULT
since these regions will contain no hair follicles and
detract from the cosmetic result:
The final cosmetic appearance of grafted skin in small
animals depends primarily on the amount of dermal
Fully meshed sheets with wide open meshes heal
tissue applied and which 'takes' at the graft site. This
 with a significant proportion of epithelialized
detenmines not only the density ofhair follicles grafted
 skin and hence have a sparse hair covering
but also the other dermal structures which contribute to
(Fi sure 9.19)
94
Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
(a)
Figure 9.19:The appearance of a fully meshed,full thickness
Figure 9.20: (a) A degloving injury overlying the distat limb.
graft at 21 days.The areas of early hair regrowth are
Carpat function is limited by exuberant scar tissue, (b) Two
interspersedwithregions of epithelialization corresponding
monthsafter grafting with afid! thickness'pie-crusted’ graf.
to themeshopenings.Widetyopened,fullymeshedgrafs
Hair regrowth is good and carpal function restored.'Pie-
Crusted'meshing achieves near-normal finat hair density.
Copyrighr G HA5. While.
Copyrighr E R.A.5. While.
"Pie-crusted" sheets result in almost normal hair
FURTHER READING
regrowth (Figure 9.20)
Unmeshed skin provides the densest result in
Pavletic MM (1992)Free grafts.In Atas of Reconstructive Sturgery, cd.
MM Pavletic. pp.241-261. Lippincott. Philadelphia
theory
    u   (al  
 Partial coverage techniques produce the most 
Znd Edition. bl. D Scatter, pp. 325-340. W B Saunders. Philadelphia
inferior results of all, with most of the wound
Swaim SF and Henderson RA (l997) Wounds on limbs. ln Small
Animal Wound Managemenr. 2nd Ediion, ed. SF Swain and RA
healing by epithelialization.
Henderson, p. 3ll-318. Williams and Wilkins. Baltimore 
CHAPTER TEN
Pedicled Muscle Flaps
Jonathan Chambers
INTRODUCTION
The ideal muscle for rotation is one that can be
transposed to the injured area on a vascular pedicle that
Local rotation of muscle is a powerful and versatile
is constant in its location and has a reliable area of
reconstructive tool for the veterinary surgeon and does
 perfusion. But the muscle (or portion thereof) and its
 not require special instrumentation or training. The
pedicle must also be distant enough from the injured
most common indication for local transposition of
area to ensure that neither is compromised by the
muscle is to replace or augment tissues lost or severely
disease process. The proposed muscle flap must be of
 damaged by trauma, surgical resection, radiation
appropriate dimensions for the task at hand. Excessive
therapy or disease. The most important functions of the
bulk can create mechanical and cosmetic problems,
transposed muscle are:
but atrophy secondary to denervation should be al-
lowed for. The transposed muscle should be function-
To restore a vascular covering for exposed
ally expendable; rarely is this a dilemma because of the
ischaemic tissues
 synergistic action of muscles.
To protect exposed tissues against infection and
other environmental injury (e.g. desiccation,
 mechanical trauma).
RELATIONSHIPS OF PEDICLES AND
PERFUSION
Related benefits of the vascularized muscle are:
Most muscles are supplied by multiple vascular pedicles 
 Provision of substrates for wound healing
of varying size (Figures 10.1 and 10.2). but the trans-
(radiation injur})
 posed muscle must be sustained by a pedicle that has a
 Bulk to fill dead space and restore cosmetic
consistent extramuscular location and distribution ofits
contours
 A vehicle for delivery of systemic antibiotics.
Figure 10.2: Arteriogram of the
craniat head of the sartorius
The transposed muscle provides an immediate vascu-
muscle in the dog. Note that the
larized surface to support transposed or grafted skin.
muscte is supplied for the most
Muscle flaps can also be used to patch defects in
part by a large pedicte from the
superficial circumflex iliac
hollow organs.
arteryand vein, but the
proximal and distal ends are
perfusedbymuch smaller
TYPICALSKELETALMUSCLECIRCULATION
(minor) pedictes from the
iliotumbar anddescending
Small(minor)
genicular vesseis, respectively.
Large
pedicle
(major)
Reprodueedfrof
al. {/990b} wih
pedicle
Figure 10.i: T'ypical vascular supply to a sketetat muscle.
Note that it is composed of a combination of large and small
pedicles,and the pedicle systems often share small
anastomotic channeis at their borders.
96
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management 
Reconstruction
MUSCLEAFTERMINORPEDICLELIGATION
MUSCLEAFTERMAJORPEDICLELIGATION
Intact small (minor)
Small(minor)
Ligated
pedicle
Intact
pedicle
major
'dominant'
pedicle
pedicle
Figure 10.4: The probable consequence ofbasing muscle
Figure 10.3: Perfusion ofa muscle will be sustained
flap perfusiononaminor pedicle system.Thevolume of
throughout after ligation ofminor pedicles because the
bloodthatcanbeforcedthroughandreturnedvia
remaining dominant pedicleis sufficiently large to maintain
anastomotic channels is insufficient, and a large portion of
arterial and venous flow:
muscle becomesseverelyischaemic,ifnotnecrotic.
intramuscular perfusion field. Dominant pedicles are
 The dissection should start well away from the
those of sufficient size to perfuse the entire muscle flap
sustaining vascular pedicle, and gradually and
predictably. Dominant pedicle systems have small in-
meticulously approach it as the muscle becomes
tramuscular anastomoses with other minor pedicle sys-
progressively more mobile
tems serving the same muscle, and reverse flow through
Tendons of insertion and origin should be
these 'choke' vessels will maintain perfusion through-
sectioned with impunity to relieve tension and
out the entire muscle after the minor pedicles have been
increase the arc of rotation. Small branches of
severed in preparation for transposition (Figure 10.3).
the sustaining artery to other muscles should also
Conversely, perfusion of entire muscle flaps through
be ligated and sectioned to increase the length of
only minor pedicles (distal flap) is much less reliable
the pedicle
(10.4). Some muscles, e.g. the semitendinosus, have co-
 The safest method of routing the muscle flap to
dominant pedicles entering at both ends; thus, the entire
the recipient location is to create a liberal
muscle can be rotated in a wide arc proximally or
connecting incision. The pedicle and muscle
distally, based on either of these pedicles.
must be observed closely during repositioning to
 Prospective flaps in dogs and cats have been pro-
guard against kinking, twisting or excessive
posed from anatomical studies, and perfusion studies
tension. Gentle rotation or inversion of the flap
have been done on a few. However, clinical trials
will not usually create significant ischaemia.
involving numerous cases are lacking in veterinary
 Intenmuscular and subcutaneous tunnels can be
surgery, and until such information is developed, cau-
created, but great care must be taken not to leave
suonelodenxa uo suondunsse isurese pansassns si uon
the muscle or pedicle constricted
based solely on gross morphology.
 The flap and pedicle must be scrutinized during
wound closure. The colour of the muscle is a
relatively accurate measure of nonmal blood
GENERAL OPERATIVE TECHNIQUES
flow. Brisk haemorrhage from a cut edge or
 intraoperative monitoring with Doppler
 Several principles must be followed when transposing
ultrasonography or oximetry are good measures
a pedicled muscle flap:
of arterial perfusion but are poor indicators of
the adequacy of venous drainage. It is
 The arc of rotation of a prospective muscle flap
especially important to realize this because
should be estimated based on an individual's
technical errors may have a greater effect on
standard landmarks to assure that the flap will
the comparatively low pressure flow though
reach the desired location; variations should be
the venous pedicle
anticipated relative to extremes in body
Tensionless closure of the skin over the
 conformation. Optimal patient positioning
transposed muscle is critical, and tension-relieving
should be planned for access to both donor and
techniques, such as adjacent relaxing incisions,
recipient sites
V-Y or Z plasties or axial patterm flaps, are
1
 It is wise to anticipate use of the entire muscle
used as necessary. If these procedures appear
during exposure, dissection and mobilization. The
impractical or insufficient to alleviate pressure on
muscle will contract as it, or its tendon, is sectioned,
the underlying muscle, the wound should be left 
but it will relax back to at least the original length
 open for immediate or delayed skin grafting. Well
 when its innervation is cut. Excessive length can
perfused muscle flaps serve as excellent beds for
be trimmed after transposition
free split thickness skin grafts.
Pedicled Muscle Flaps   97
COMMON MUSCLE FLAPS
Arc of rotation: The distal end of the muscle can be
rotated to the lateral thigh or hip. or the proximal end
The pelvic limb
can be inverted on to the hip region. The distaltip of the
muscle will reach the midline dorsally and the umbili-
The superficial gluteal flap
cus cranially in most dogs.
Major pedicles: Caudal gluteal artery and vein proxi-
Suggested indications for use:
mally entering the deep face near the origin on the
sacrum and sacrotuberous ligament
Pressure sores
 To fill dead space left by traumatic injuries or
Arc of rotation: Caudally to the anal sphincter.
surgical resections in the regions of the greater
trochanter and tuber ischium (Figure 10.6)
Suggested indications for use: Dorsal augmentation
 Repair of caudal abdominal and femoral hermias
of standard perineal hermia repair and perianal wounds
?
 Repair of rupture of the prepubic tendon.
Flap dissection: The tendon of insertion of the superfi
Flap dissection: The caudal arc of rotation can be
cial gluteal muscle can be sectioned and rotated caudally
increased by dissecting the superficial circumflex pedi-
with the muscle to augment the repair of perineal hermia.
cle towards the femoral artery and vein and dividing
Sectioning of the originating tissues will increase the
small branches to other muscles such as the caudal
caudal mobilization but must be done with extreme care
sartorius and tensor fasciae latae. Additional length
to avoid damaging the major pedicle(s).
can also be attained by passing the muscle beneath the
tensor fasciae latae muscle; this will be required in
most dogs to reach the tuber ischium.
The internal obturator flap
Major pedicle(s): Obturator branch of the medial
The caudal sartorius flap
circumflex femoral artery and vein, which enters the
muscle after passing through the obturator foramen
Pedicles: The caudal sartorius muscle is segmentally
from ventral to dorsal at its cranial border.
supplied by a series of relatively small pedicles distrib-
uted along its length, with intramuscular anastomoses
Arc of rotation: Dorsomedially to the ipsilateral dorsal
between adjacent pedicle fields.
anal sphincter.
Flap development and use: Although there is little
Suggested indications for use: Ventrolateral augmen-
doubt that isolated segments of the muscle can be
tation of standard perineal hermia repair.
transposed locally, it has been suggested that the entire
Flap dissection: The intermal obturator muscle is ele-
vated subperiostcally from its origin on the caudal
floor of the pelvis and the tendon of insertion may be
cut to mobilize the flap. It is then everted medially and
its borders sutured to surrounding tissues to repair
perineal hernias (Figure 10.5). Care must be taken
when elevating the cranial portion of the muscle and
sectioning the tendon of insertion to avoid damage to
the major vascular pedicle.
The cranial sartorius flap
Major pedicle: All of the muscle except the most
 aipad e Aq pandans si son [s pue [exod
the superficial circumflex iliac artery and vein,
which splits into proximally and distally directed
branches before entering the caudal border of the
muscle at the junction of the proximal and middle
Obturatorbranch
thirds (see Figure 10.1). The blood supply to the
ofmedial circumflexfemoral artery
single sartorius muscle in the cat is similar to that to
Figure 10.5: The internal obturator muscleflap,as elevated
the cranial sartorius in the dog and can thus be used
and inverted,based ontheobturatorbranchofthemediat
as a flap in the same fashion.
circumflexfemoral artery and veinto repaira perineat hernia.
98
 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
muscle can be transposed based on the more distal
A
pedicle(s). This then requires that perfusing blood to
the proximal portion of the muscle crosses one or more
perfusion fields. Although this perfusion via minor
 pedicles is theoretically possible, caution is advised if 
robust perfusion to a recipient area is required.
The rectus femoris flap
Majorpedicle: A single branch of the lateral circum-
flex femoral artery and vein, which enters the proximal
end of the muscle on the caudal surface.
Tensorfasciaelatae muscle
Arc of rotation: The distal end of the rectus femoris
 muscle can be rotated to the lateral thigh and hip regions.
Suggested indications for use:
Cranial
headof
Pressure sores
sartorius
 To fill dead space left by traumatic injuries or
muscle
surgical resections in the adjacent regions of the
Superficial
thigh and greater trochanter
Flap alternatives: The rectus femoris flap is compara-
tively robust, and offers nothing over the cranial sar-
torius if it is available.
The semitendinosus flap
Major pedicles: Co-dominant pedicles of the caudal
gluteal and distal caudal femoral vessels which enter
the proximal and distal ends, respectively, along the
cranial border (Figure 10.7); either pedicle system will
 perfuse to the entire muscle.
Caudal gluteal artery
D
Distal caudal
femoralartery
Figure 10.6: Approach, elevation and eversion ofthe cranialF
Figure 10.7: Blood supplyto the semitendinosus muscle in
sartoriusmuscle,basedonthesuperficialcircumflexiliac
the dog.Pedicles ofapproximately equal size enter at each
pedicle,tocoverapressureulcerorrepairawoundoverthe
end,and eitherwill sustainflowfortheentire lengthof
greater trochanter or tuber ischium.
muscle via the anastomotic network.
Reproduced fram Chambers et aL f99obi wish permission.
Reproduzed from Ciuimixrs and Ran. lings I i99ty "ifi permission.
Pedicled Muscle Flaps
99
Figure 10.8:Transposition
of the semitendinosus muscle,
Externalanal
Levatoranimuscle
based on the proximal caudal
sphinctermuscle
gluteal pedicle,to aid in the
Lateral coccygeal
repair of complicated
muscle
perineal hernia.
Semitendinosus
Obturatorinternus
Reproducedfrom Chem henand Rowlings
muscle
muscle (elevated)
Caudal gluteal
artery
Arc of rotation: Dorsally to just beyond the midline;
Cranial tibial flap
cranially to the junction of the iliac body and wing;
caudomedially to the contralateral tuber ischium;
Pedicles: Segmental branches of the cranial tibial
distally to the tarsus.
artery and vein.
Suggested indications for use:
Arc of rotation: Adjacent areas of the mid and distal
cfus.
 The distal end can be fotated to surround the
 anus for repair of wounds or complicated
Suggested indications for use: Avulsion wounds of
perineal hernias (Figure 10.8). This flap is
the crus, especially open tibial fractures.
particularly useful for repair of perineal hernias
with large ventral components, and those for
Flap dissection: The distal end of the cranial tibial
which either the internal obturator or superficial
muscle can be transposed locally on a short pedicle
gluteal flaps have failed
(Figure 10.9). Other isolated portions can presumably
 Wounds over the cms can be fepaired, and
be transposed, based on their respective pedicles, but
exposed tibia covered by a semitendinosus flap
no clinical trials have been reported.
based on the distal pedicle.
Muscles of the trunk, thoracic limb, head
Flap altermatives: The semitendinosus is a father
and neck
fobust flap for transposition to the cms, and the cranial
tibial or lateral gastrocnemius flaps should be consid-
Rectus abdominus flap
ered as alternatives.
Major pedicles:
Co-dominant end pedicles from the
Cranial border of the lateral head of the
 cranial and caudal epigastric vessels, respectively.
gastrocnemius muscle
Arc of rotation: Adjacent areas of the trunk.
Major pedicle: A long pedicle of the popliteal vessels,
which courses superficially ffom proximal to distal.
Suggestedindicationsforuse: Reconstruction of wounds
Of replacement of resected portions of the body wall.
Arc of rotation: Adjacent areas of the proximal cms.
Flap altematives: Cranial portion of the external
Suggested indications for use: Wounds adjacent to
abdominal oblique muscle, which is thinner and
the stifle.
mofe pliable.
Cranial portion of external abdominal oblique
muscle
Major pedicle:  A pedicle of the cranial abdominal
artery and vein.
Arc of rotation: Adjacent portions of the trunk wall;
medial to the midline.
Suggested indications for use:
 Reconstruction of wounds
 Replacement of resected portions of the body wall
 Augmentation in repair of complex
diaphragmatic hermias.
Flap alternatives - Rectus abdominus.
Latissimus dorsi flap
Branchesof
cranial tibial
artery
Major pedicle: A large branch of the thoracodorsal
artery and vein, which enters the deep face near the
 junction of the cranial and middle thirds.
Arc of rotation: Adjacent areas of the thoracic wall:
cranially to the lateral shoulder and brachial regions;
distally to the proximal antebrachium; medially (in-
trathoracic) to the opposite chest wall.
Suggested indications for use:
To cover defects left bv tumour resection (Figure
10.10)
 Patching of intrathoracic leaks (lung, trachea,
oesophagus)
 Augmentation of myocardial blood supply and
Figure10.9:Transposition of the distalend of the cranial
tibiat muscle to cover adjacent wounds of the crus.
function.
Thoracodorsal artery
Lung
Figure 10.10: The latissimus dorsi muscle flap for rotation to adjacent areas of the thoracic wall, shoulder, or arm, or for
intrathoracic transposition.
Pcdicled Muscle Flaps  101
Figure 10.11: Transposition of
the cervical portion of the
trapeziusmuscle,basedon
pedicles from the superficial
cervicat artery and vein.
Prescapular branch of
superficial cervical artery
Flap dissection: The latissimus dorsi muscle is re-
Suggested indications for use: Wound reconstruc-
leased from its segmental attachments to the ribs
tion, especially open injuries to the stermum.
Flap development: Distinct anastomoses between the
Cervical portion of the trapezius muscle
intermal thoracic and lateral thoracic pedicle systems
have been identified, but it is unknown whether the
Major pedicle: Branches of the prescapular division of
entire deep pectoral muscle will survive on either
the superficial cervical artery and vein, which enter the
pedicle system, as in man.
midcranial border close together (Figure 10.11).
Arc of rotation: The muscle can be rotated cranially on
Humeral head of the flexor carpi ulnaris muscle
to the adjacent neck by inversion; distally on to the
shoulder and brachium.
Major pedicles: A consistent pedicle of the caudal
interosseous vessels, which enters on the deep face
Suggested indications for use: Wounds about the
near the tendon of insertion on the accessory carpal
neck, shoulder or arm.
bone (Figure 10.12). Intramuscular branches anasto-
mose with branches of the ulnar and deep antebrachial
Flap
alternatives:
Caudal
portions
ofthe
vessels and mid muscle.
stemoccphalicus, stemothyroideus or stemohyoideus
Arc ofrotation: Adjacent areas of the distal antebra-
muscles.
chium and carpus; distally to the metacarpal-phalan-
geal junction.
Deep pectoral muscle (craniodorsal third)
Suggested indications for use: Avulsion wounds,
Major pedicle: A pedicle of the lateral thoracic artery
especially open fractures of the distal antebrachium,
and vein, which enters cranially.
carpus and manus.
Arc of rotation: Adjacent areas of the trunk and neck.
Flap dissection: The muscle can be rotated or inverted
 in either direction around the distal forearm or carpus 
Suggested indicationsfor use: Wound reconstruction.
to cover the more problematical surfaces.
Deep pectoral muscle (caudoventral third)
Ulnaris lateralis flap
Pedicles: A series of pedicles of the intermal thoracic
Pedicles: A consistent pedicle of the cranial interos-
vessels, which enter along the stermal border.
seous artery and vein, which enters on the deep face
proximally. An inconsistent pedicle of the caudal
Arc of rotation: Adjacent areas of the trunk; on to and
interosseous artery and vein, which enters the deep
across the ventral midline.
face near the musculotendinous junction.
102  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Arc of rotation: Adjacent areas of the caudal neck.
Suggested indication(s) for use:
·Repair wounds
 Patch and cover defects in viscera such as the
UInaris
lateralis
Flexor carpi
 oesophagus and trachea.
muscle
ulnaris muscle
(ulnarhead)
Flap dissection: These three muscles, especially the
stermothvroideus and stermohyoideus, intimately share
 the ramifications of their caudal pedicles, and it may be
Caudal
easier and safer to transpose them as a unit.
interosseous
artery
Flap alternative: Cervical portion of the trapezius
Flexor carpi
muscle.
ulnaris muscle
(humeral head)
Cranial portions of the sternocephalicus,
sternothvroideus and sternohyoideus muscles
Major pedicle: The cranial thyroid artery and vein (see
Figure 10.13).
Arc of rotation: Adjacent areas of the cranial neck and
head.
 Suggested indicationsfor use: Patching and covering
 defects of the cranial oesophagus, trachea and larynx.
Figure 10.12: Transposition of the humerat head ofthe flexor
carpi utnaris muscle, based on its distat interosseous pedicte.
Repraduced from Chambers a al. (r95) wih permission.
Arc of rotation: Adjacent areas of the antebrachium.
Cranial
thyroid
artery
Suggested indication(s) for use: Wound reconstruc-
tion, especially coverage of severe open fractures of
 the proximal and mid antebrachium.
Flap development: The ulnaris lateralis is one of
several antebrachial muscles that can be elevated on
relatively short proximal pedicles and advanced to
immediately adjacent areas. The ulnaris lateralis has
been proposed for use distally in much the same way as
the humeral head of the flexor carpi ulnaris. but caution 
 is advised because the caudal interosseus pedicle is not
identifiable in all specimens.
Flap alternative: Humeral head of the flexor carpi
ulnaris muscle.
Branchesof
ascending
cervical
artery
Caudal portions of the sternocephalicus,
sternothvroideus, and sternohyoideus muscles
Figure 10.13: Vascular supply to the sternocephalicus.
Major pedicle: Ascending branch of the superficial
sternothyroideus and sternohyoideus muscles. The cranial or
cervical artery and vein, which courses along and
caudal portions of these muscles can be transposed to
 provides pedicles into the dorsal borders (Figure 10.13).
adjacent areas, based on their respective pedictes.
Pedicled Muscle Flaps  103
Flap dissection: Small intramuscular anastomotic
covering trauratic tissue defects over the canine tibia. Journal of
the AmericanAnimal HospitalAssociation 23, 617-628
branches have been identified at the mid portion of
Charmbers JN. Purinton PT, Allen SW and Moore JL (1990a)
these muscles between the cranial thyroid and ascend-
Identification andanatomical categorization ofthe vascular pattems
ing cervical pedicle systems. If the perfusion across
to the pelvic limb muscles of dogs. American Journal of Veterinary
Research 51,305-313.
these 'choke* vessels is sufficient, then the entire
Chambers JN, Purinton PT. Allen SW. Schneider TA and Srmith JD 
length of these muscles could be tfansposed to recon-
(1998) A flexor carpi ulnaris (humeral head) muscle flap for
reconstruction of distal forclimb injuries in does.VeterinarySurgery
struct oral and nasal tissues, but this has yet to be
27.342-347
investigated.
 Chammbers JN. Purinton PT. Moore JL and Allen SW(1990b) Treatment
of trochanteric ulcers with cranial sartorius and rectus femoris
muscle flaps. Veterinary Surgery 19. 424-428
ChambersJ N and Rawlings C A(199i)Applications of asemitendinosus
Temporalis flap
muscle flap in 2 dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association 199. 84-86
Major pedicles: Branches of the superficial and deep
Gregory CR and Gourley IM (1991) Identification of muscle flaps in
temporalis vessels with arborization parallel to the
srmall animals. Microsurgery 12. 136-139
Hardie EM. Kolata Rl. Earley TD. Rawlings CA and Gorgaz El (1983)
muscle fasciculi.
of perineal hermia in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 12. 69-72
Arc of rotation: Immediately adjacent areas.
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice 20,
127-146
Suggested indications for use: Cosmetic and func-
Pavletic MM (1993) Myocutaneous flaps and muscle flaps. In: Atlas of
Small Animal Reconstructive Surgery, cd. MM Pavletic pp. 310
tional reconstruction of the orbit and paranasal sinuses.
323. Lippincott. Philadelphia
Philibert D and Fowler JD (1996) Use of muscle flaps in reconstructive 
Flap dissection: The overlying fascia is included in the
surgery.Compendium ofContinuing Education for the Practicing
Veterinarian 18.395-404
flap to avoid damage to the superficial pedicles. Facial
Philibert D. Fowler JD and Clapson JB (1991) The anatomical basis
 felease and resection of orbital ligament and cranial
for a trapezius muscle flap in does. Veterinary Surgery 21.
429-434
zygoma facilitate cranial mobilization of the flap.
 Purinton PT. Chambers JN and Moore JL (1992) Identification and
categorization of the vascular patterns to muscles of the thoracic
limb,thorax,and neck of dogs.American JournalofVeterinary
Research 53, 1435-1445
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
Sylvestre AM. Weinstein MJ. Popovitch CA and BnkKTan Dl (1997)
READING
 The sartorius rmuscle flap in the cat: an anatormical study and Iwo
case reports. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
33,91-96
Alexander LG, Pavletic MM and Engler ST (1991) Abdominal wall
Tomlinson J and Presnell KR (198l) Use ofthe temporalis rmuscle flap
reconstruction with a vascular external abdominal oblique
in the dog.Veterinary Surgeiy 10,77-79
myofascial flap. Veterinary Surgery 20. 379-384
Weinstein Ml. Pavletic MM and Boudrieau Rl (1988) Caudal sartorius
Basher AWP and Presnell KR (1987) Muscle transposition as an aid in
muscle flap in the dog. Veterinary Surgeiy 17. 203-210
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Reconstructive Microsurgery
David Fowler
INTRODUCTION
 The tissue flap and its associated vessels should
be relatively easy to identify and dissect.
The tenm microsurgery' simply implies the use of mag-
nification at some point during an operative procedure.
Microvascular free flaps are identified according to the
The use of operating loupes and surgical microscopes
tissue type(s) included within the flap. Commonly
 has been commonplace in human neurosurgery, oph-
used tissues include free cutaneous flaps, muscle flaps,
thalmic surgery and reconstructive surgery for decades.
omental flaps, bowel flaps and vascularized bone grafts.
Microvascular free tissue transfer refers to the
Combinations of tissues may also be incorporated into
dissection of an 'island' of tissue based on a feeding
flap designs, resulting in the formation of myocutaneous
artery and vein, complete transection of the tissue from
flaps, myo-osseous flaps, osteomusculocutaneous flaps,
its donor site, transfer of the tissue to a recipient wound
etc. Free flaps are further identified according to the
bed and revascularization of the tissue through micro-
specific source of tissue. Examples include the trap-
vascular anastomosis ofthe donor artery and vein to an
ezius muscle flap, the latissimus dorsi myocutaneous
appropriately sized recipient artery and vein. Tissues
flap, the cranial abdominal myoperitoneal flap and the 
transferred in this manner are referred to as microvas-
free vascularized ulnar bone graft.
cular free tissue transfers, free flaps, microvascular
The overall success rate reported for veterinary
free tlaps or autogenous vascularized grafts.
microvascular free tissue transfer is approximately
93%. This compares quite favourably with reported
 Experience with microvascular free tissue transfer is
limited in veterinary surgery. Fewer than one hundred
success rates in people. Training in microvascular
procedures, using fewer than ten different flap designs,
technique is becoming relatively commonplace in vet-
have been reported. Despite this fact, the utility of
erinary surgical training programmes, and microvas-
microvascular free tissue transfer for one-stage recon-
struction of difficult problems has been established.
in several veterinary referral centres. Increasing levels
Early reconstruction of traumatic tissue loss, using
of experience will undoubtedly result in the use of
vascularized tissue, is feasible, as is functional and
microvascular tissue transfer as the reconstructive
cosmetic reconstruction after ablative cancer surgery.
technique of first choice for complex and difficult
Any tissue, or combination of tissues, may be used
reconstructive problems.
in the development of a microvascular free flap, as
long as it meets several criteria:
MICROVASCULAR TECHNIQUE
 The tissue must be nourished by a single source
Instrumentation
artery and drained by a single vein; generally the
 Equipment required for microvascular free tissue trans-
artery and vein parallel one another, although
fer is not extensive, but is relatively expensive. The
this is not an absolute requirement for a
following are basic requirements.
successful  flap
 The source artery and vein must be of sufficient
Operating microscope
size to accommodate successful microvascular
An operating microscope (Figure 11.1) is essential for
anastomosis; vessels less than 1 mm in diameter
successful repair of the small vessels generally used
show progressively increased rates of thrombosis
in microvascular reconstruction (1-2 mm diameter).
at the anastomosis
The microscope should have a foot control for adjust-
The donor tissue must be dispensable.
ment of coarse focus, fine focus and magnification,
Reconstructive microsurgery has been referred to
leaving the surgeon's hands free for surgical mani-
as 'the art of robbing Peter to pay Paul"; it is
pulations. The range of magnification used varies from
essential to ensure that 'Peter' will not miss the
approximately 5X to 30X. It is also beneficial to have
substance of which he is being robbed
a foot-controlled 'X-Y axis' on the microscope. This
106 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.1: (a) An operating microscope is needed for successfut microvascular surgery. This microscope is fitted with a beam
adjustment of themicroscope,leaving the surgeon'shands free.This foot pedal has adjustments for zoom,focus,and anX-
axis that allows repositioning of the field of vision.
allows the surgeon to move the head of the operating
Very fine microsurgical scissors are required for
 microscope in two planes and is useful when dissecting
adventitial dissection and vessel transection. It is
along the length of a vessel or shifting between vessels.
beneficial to have both straight and curved
Ideally, the operating microscope has a beam-splitter
scissors to facilitate vascular dissection in all
that provides an identical stereoscopic visual field to
planes
two surgeons. Although microvascular anastomosis
 Both straight and curved microsurgical needle
may be accomplished by one surgeon, it is greatly
 drivers are available, with varying tip
facilitated bv a second.
dimensions.
Surgical instruments
Very small suture material and  needles are also
The following instruments are used (Figure 11.2):
recommended for microvascular anastomosis (Fig-
ure 11.2).
 Jeweller's forceps are required for manipulation
of small vessels. Number 3 and number 5
 Microvascular approximating clamps
jeweller's forceps are generally of greatest use.
Microvascular approximating clamps (Figure 11.3)
Number 3 forceps are used for handling of the
may have several different features, depending
vessel during initial dissection. Number 5
upon the specific use and the preference of the sur-
 forceps are used for final dissection, during
geon. Approximating clamps are used to stabilize
anastomosis, or for handling very small vessels.
vessel ends in approximation, and to block blood
Curved or angled jeweller's forceps are useful
flow in the vessel and haemorrhage at the site during
for grasping the "back-side' of the vessel wall
anastomosis:
during vascular dissection
Vessel dilators are similar tojeweller's forceps,
 Double clamps consist of two clamps (one for
 but have a blunted tip to help prevent intimal
each vessel end) connected on a sliding bar.
injury. Vessel dilators are inserted into the vessel
After placing the donor and recipient vessel
lumen prior to anastomosis and are used to dilate
 ends into opposing clamps, the clamps are
the end of the vessel gently, thereby facilitating
adjusted on the sliding bar to bring the vessels
handling and suturing of the vessel end
 into approximation
Reconstructive Microsurgery
107
Vessel diameter
Suture size
Needle size
<1mm
11-0
50μm
1-2mm
10-0
70or100um
Figure 11.3: Vascular approximating clamps are availabte
in various sizes and as single or double clamps. It is
>2mm
9-0or10-0
100μm
important that clamp size is matchedto vessel size to ensure
security ofthe vessel during anastomosis,but to avoid vessel
Figure 11.2:Fine microsurgical instrurments are required for
injury frorn excessive clamp pressure.
atraumatic handling and dissection of small vessels. An
assortment of fine adventitial scissors, vessel dilators,
jeweller's forceps and vascular clips is shown.Fine suture
undoubtedly follow. It must be remembered that
materiats and needles are also required: the recommended
microvascular free flaps are totally dependent upon a
sizes are shown in the tabte.
single vascular source for survival after transfer, and
that inadvertent damage to the vascular supply during
 Double clamps can be provided with a wire
 flap dissection can have disastrous consequences.
frame. Long suture ends from previously placed
Flap dissection is begun distant to the vascular
sutures may be affixed to the wire frame to gain
pedicle. The tissues should be handled gently. When
additional stability and to provide specific-
multiple tissue planes are present, such as in a
positioning of the vessel in preparation for the 
myocutaneous flap, sutures are placed, as needed, to
next suture. These are generally reserved for
prevent shearing of tissue planes during dissection.
 situations where an assistant surgeon is not
Vascular branches that are isolated distant to the vas-
available
cular pedicle may be controlled by traditional ligature
· Single clamps are used to control haemorrhage
or cautery techniques. As dissection approaches the
temporarily after vessel transection, but prior to
vascular pedicle, great care must be taken to ensure a
anastomosis
non-traumatic dissection of the vessels. Small vascular
·
Microvascular clamps are available in varying
branches arising from the vascular pedicle may be
sizes. Each size will accommodate a specific
carefully ligated using 9-0 or 10-0 suture material.
 range of vessel diameters. It is important that an
Small vascularhaemostatic clips may be used on larger
appropriately sized clamp is used. Too large a
vascular branches. Bipolar cautery may be used cau-
clamp will produce a crush injury, while too
tiously to coagulate vascular branches, but cautery
small a clamp will allow the vessel end to slip.
must be performed sufficiently distant to the parent
artery that endothelial thermal injury is avoided.
Flap dissection
 The vascular pedicle is "skeletonized’ after its
'Aessanau Aiaingosqe pou ysnoule 'snoageueape st 1
identification, by dissecting along the vessels' adven-
to have two surgical teams during microvascular free
titial surfaces. The full thickness of the vessel wall
tissue transfer.
One surgical team harvests
must not be grasped during manipulation since this
the flap (Figure 1l.4) while the second surgical
will result in injury to the intimal surface. Instead,
team exposes recipient vessels and prepares the
jeweller's forceps are used to grasp only the adventitial
wound bed for transfer. The use of two surgical teams
surface and gently elevate the vessel to allow dissec-
will significantly reduce operating time. When only
tion. The artery and vein are dissected to a length
one experienced team is available, the flap is dissected
beyond that estimated to be required to ensure excess
first, leaving the vascular pedicle intact. Following
length of the vascular pedicle after transfer to the
preparation of the recipient site, the vascular pedicle of
recipient site. The vessels are then trimmed to an
the flap is transected and transferred.
appropriate length at the time of anastomosis. Once
It is imperative that the surgeon understands the
vascular dissection is complete, the flap is wrapped in
vascular anatomy of the flap to be dissected. Many
 moist sponges. The vascular pedicle should not be
flaps have been identified and described in the
transected until the recipient site is prepared in order to
veterinary literature, and descriptions of new flaps will
minimize flap ischaemic time.
108Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
(e)
Landmarks and proposed incision for harvest of the trapezius mxocutaneous flap are indicated, (b) Skin incision is made and
small bleeding vesseis are carefidly controlled using electrocautery.Dissection is begun distant from and continued towards
majorvascuiar pedicles,(c)Vascular pedictes must be identified and preserved duringflap dissection,id) The vascular pedicle
is skeletonized after its identification. As much length of the vascular pedicle as possibie should be harvested (e)Final
appearance of the dissected mxocutaneous flap,showing the vascular pedicle and its associated muscte and skin territories.
Recipient site preparation
location of regional vessels. There are several criteria
Preparation of the recipient wound bed is extremely
that must be considered when selecting an appropriate
important. Free flaps are not a solution to suboptimal
recipient artery and vein:
wound management. Wound beds must be free of
ongoing tissue necrosis and active infection. Infected
 Recipient vessels should be dissected outside the
wounds, especially those with osteomyelitis, may be
margins of the 'zone of trauma" to ensure the use
managed with microvascular free flaps as part of a
of vessels without pre-existing intimal injury
 One-stage operation, but thorough debridement of all
 Recipient vessels must approximate the diameter
infected tissue remains a necessity (Figure 11.5).
of flap vessels when performing end-to-end
Consideration must be given to selecting an appro-
anastomosis
priate recipient artery and vein to be used in
A size discrepancy of approximately 1.5:1 may
revascularizing the free flap. This requires a thorough
 be accommodated fairly easily when performing
kmowledge of regional vascular anatomy. In cases
end-to-end anastomosis, but a greater size
of severe and extensive trauma, preoperative angio-
 discrepancy leads to an increasing incidence of
 graphy is indicated to document the integrity and
thrombosis
Reconstructive Microsurgery
109
Figure 11.5: Necrotic and heavily contaminated tissue must be excised prior to wound reconstruction. Aggressive debridement and
openwound management has convertedthis heavilycontaminatedforelimbinjury toa clean contaminated state overa 3-day period.
 Recipient vessels should be larger than donor
End-to-end anastomosis
vessels when performing end-to-side
This technique is illustrated in Figure 11.7.
anastomosis
 Incisions used to access recipient vessels are
1. The donor and recipient vessels are placed into
planned such that suture lines will not directly
approximation, using a double microvascular
overlie the vascular pedicles. Curved incisions,
approximating clamp, and the lengths of the
resulting in the formation of a skin flap over the
dissected vessels are checked to ensure that they
recipient vessels, are generally indicated
are not twisted or kinked. Excessive tension and
 It is important to consider flap location and the
vessel redundancy must be avoided. If vessels
position of vascular pedicles prior to starting
are too long, the vessels are transected at an
dissection of recipient vessels. Anticipation of
appropriate length. Inadequate vessel length
the exact location where anastomosis will be
presents a more difficult problem. In this
 perfonmed will limit the amount of recipient
 instance, the intervening space must be bridged
vessel dissection that needs to be performed.
using a vein graft
2.
 Once the vessel ends have been trimmed and
End-to-end anastomosis 'steals' the vascular supply of
placed into the approximating clamp, the clamps 
the recipient artery from its terminal destination and
are adjusted along the slide bar such that the
diverts that blood supply into the microvascular free
 vessels are not quite in contact with one another.
flap. This is an important consideration in situations
This allows for easy identification of the vessel
involving compromised vascularity to structures distal
lumen during suture placement, but prevents
to the reconstmction. In these instances, end-to-side
undue tension on the sutures while tying. Contrast
anastomosis should be performed in order to ensure
background material is placed beneath the vessels
vascular integrity of distal structures (Figure 11.6).
to facilitate handling and visual identification 
Figure 11.6:(a) End-to-end
arterial anastomosis results
in diversion of arteriat flow
awayfrom distal structures
normatly nourished by the
Flap
recipient artery, (b) End-to-
Recipient
side arteriat anastomosis
artery
allows revascularization of
the transferred tissue while
Donorartery
maintaining distal arteriat
flow.
Distalreciplent
artery
Distal flow
Distalflow
interrupted
preserved
a)
110  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
0000
Figure 11.7: Steps in achieving end-to-end anastomosis.
(a) The recipient and donor vessel ends are placed into an
approximating clamp.Vessel ends are flushed with
heparinizedsalinesolution(l0IU/ml)andtheclamp is
adjusted to bring the vessel ends into approximation.
(b) Loose adventitial tissue is excised from the vessel ends,
(cj and (d) Simple interruptedsutures are placed at the 10
and 2 o 'clock positions. Forceps are used to appty back
pressure during suture placement. The full thickness of the
vessel wall shoutd never be grasped with forceps, (e) The
front wall' ofthe anastomosis is completed.(J) The 'back
clamp,(g) Closure is completedand the approximating
(d)
clamp is removed.
3. Adventitial tissue isextremely thrombogenic and
 in a 'shirt-sleeve' fashion. The vessel end is
must be dissected from the vessel ends to avoid
easily identifed through the translucent
its incorporation into the anastomosis. This is 
 adventitia, and the excess adventitia is amputated
most easily accomplished by grasping the loose
 at the level of the vessel end. The adventitia is
adventitial tissue withjeweller's forceps and
then allowed to retract back onto the vessel,
placing traction on the vessel. Theadventitial
leaving the terminal few millimetres of the vessel
tissue is pulled beyond the level ofthe vessel end
free of adventitia
 Reconstructive Microsurgery
111
4. After adventitial dissection, vessels are flushed
· The microvascular approximating clamp is
with a heparin:saline solution, prepared at a
then turmed over such that the previous 'back
concentration of 10 IU heparin per 1 ml saline,
wall is brought into the superior position.
to remove debris and blood elements
Previously placed sutures are inspected to
5. The size of needle and suture material used is
ensure proper placement
critical (see Figure 11.2b)
 A simple interrupted suture is placed at the
6. Several suturing techniques have been described
central point of the remaining defect, and the
for end-to-end anastomosis, but the front wall'
anastomosis is completed by placing
technique is most commonly employed:
additional simple interrupted sutures.
 The vessel lumen is divided into thirds. With
the 12 o'clock position defined as the
End-to-side anastomosis
centremost position of the superior vessel
This technique is illustrated in Figure 11.8.
wall, simple interrupted sutures are placed at
the 10 and 2 o'clock positions
1. 1
 End-to-side anastomosis is performed when
 Jeweller's forceps are used to place counter-
dealing with a marked size discrepancy, the
pressure gently against the vessel wall during
recipient vessel being larger than the donor
needle placement. The full thickness of the
vessel. Adventitial tissue is dissected from the
vessel wall should not be grasped since this
donor vessel as described for end-to-end
will cause intimal injury at the anastomosis 
anastomosis and a single microvascular clamp
 A third simple interrupted suture is placed at
is placed, if needed, across the donor vessel 
the 12 o'clock position
to facilitate handling and prevent passive
 Further sutures are placed as needed to
efflux of blood from the vessel during
 complete apposition of the front wall'
anastomosis
0000
(a)
0000
(b)
0000
le)
0000
Figure 11.8: End-to-side anastomosis, (a) The recipient
vesset is secured in a double approximating clamp.
Adventitial tissue is dissected and an opening approximating
the size of the donor vesset is made,(b) Blood is flushed
from therecipientvesselusing heparinized satine sotution,
(c)Simple interrupted sutures are placedat the6and 12
o'clock positions, (d) Retraction of the donor vessel in one
direction facilitates closure of one side of the anastomosis,
(e) Retraction in the opposite direction allows completion of
the anastomosis.
0000
112 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Figure 11.9: The venous
Artory
Vein
occtusion test is a safe
and reliabte method to
assess patency of both
the arteriat and the
venous
anastomoses,
(a) Gentte occtusion of
astomotlc slte
the recipient vein
'downstream from the
anastomosis resutts in
distension ofthe vein
'upstream'Rapid
distension reveats a
patent arteriat
anastomosis,(b) Rapid
relief of venous
distension fottowing
retease ofthe vein is
compatibte with a patent
venous
anastomosis.
(a)
2. The recipient vessel wall is dissected free of
7. Finally, a suture is placed at the 6 o'clock
 adventitial covering for a length of several
 position, and the anastomosis is completed.
 millimetres at the proposed site of anastomosis.
 A double microvascular approximating clamp is
Assessing patency
placed on to the recipient vessel, such that one
The order of vascular repair, artery first or vein first,
clamp is situated proximal and one distal to the
is largely a matter of personal preference. Flow should
site of anastomosis
not be re-established through either anastomosis
 3. An opening must be made into the recipient 
until both are completed. At that time, the venous
vessel to accommodate the donor vessel. The
anastomosis should be released, followed by the
size and precision of this opening is critical to
arterial anastomosis. The order of clamp release is
the success of the anastomosis:
donor vein, recipient vein, donor artery and, finally.
 The vessel wall is grasped using jeweller's
recipient artery.
forceps and a full-thickness cut is made into
Thrombosis at the anastomotic site, resulting from
the vessel at an angle of approximately 45
faulty technique, is usually apparent within 15 minutes
degrees using fine dissection scissors
of re-establishing blood flow. Blood flow should be
 The depth of the cut should be sufficient to
confirmed a few minutes after clamp release, and again
 result in an opening ofapproximately 50% of
at 15 minutes after clamp release. Several methods
the size of that required
have been described for this purpose. Simple visual
A matching cut is then made from the
inspection of the vessel is not a reliable indicator of
opposing side, and is planned such that the
blood flow since longitudinal pulsation may be seen in
terminal ends of each cut meet precisely
a thrombosed artery.
 The resulting opening will assume a round to
One of the simplest reliable tests for vascular pat-
 oval configuration due to tensile forces from
ency is the venous occlusion test (Figure 11.9):
the vessel wall.
 4. Heparinized saline solution is used to lavage 
The vein is visualized under magnification
blood elements and debris gently from the donor
Jeweller's forceps are used to occlude the
and recipient vessels
recipient vein gently, immediately 'downstream'
 5. The donor vessel is brought into approximation
from the anastomosis
with the recipient vessel and simple interrupted
sutures are placed at the 3 o'clock and 9 o'clock
the occlusion indicates a patent arterial
positions
anastomosis
6. A third suture is placed at the 12 o'clock position
Once venous engorgement is seen (this
 and interposing sutures are used to complete the
requires only a few seconds) the jeweller's
anastomosis along one side ofthe vessel.
forceps are released. Immediate relief of
Retraction of the donor vessel by the assistant
venous distension indicates a patent venous
facilitates suture placement
anastomosis.
Reconstructive Microsurgery
113
Figure I1.i0: The empty and refilt test can be used to test both arterial and venous patency, (a) The vesset is grasped gently-
using two jeweller's forceps 'downstream'from the anastomosis. Blood is 'milked’from a vessel segment, (b) Release of the
'upstreamforceps shouldresultinrapidrefill of theemptiedsegment.
A second commonly used patency test is the 'empty and
location of vascular pedicles, or additional vascular
refill' test (Figure 11.10), using twojeweller's forceps:
dissection. Medicinal leeches may be used for the
management of venous insufficiency in the presence
 The vessel is occluded with one pair of jeweller's
of adequate arterial inflow.
Antithrombotic and anticoagulant drugs are not
anastomosis
routinely recommended. Patency rates in excess of
 A second pair of jeweller's forceps is used to
95% are expected, given proper planning and meticu-
'milk' blood gently from the vessel lumen, and
Jous technique. Antithrombotic agents are not a substi-
subsequently occlude the vessel 1-2 cm further
tute for accurate surgical technique. In animals at risk
'downstream'
of development of thrombosis, low-dose aspirin or
· The 'upstream' forceps are released and the
systemic heparin therapy may be beneficial.
vessel is observed. Rapid refill of the emptied
segment is indicative of a patent anastomosis.
SPECIFIC FLAPS IN THE DOG AND CAT
Postoperative care
Astute postoperative care and monitoring are essential.
Cutaneous flaps
Flaps are reliant upon the integrity of a single artery and
Cutaneous angiosomes ('territories' of tissue that are
vein for vascular flow. Restrictive bandages must be
supplied by a single source artery and vein) have been
avoidedand patient positioningmust be planned to
described thoroughly in the dog and cat and this
avoid compression of the vascular pedicle. The patient's 
information has been used forthe development of large
hydration is maintained by provision of intravenous 
axial pattem skin flaps (see Chapter 8). These flaps
 balanced electrolyte solutions or colloids. Flaps are kept 
may also be used for free microvascular transfer,
warm by application of circulating warm water blan-
assuming adequate size of the vascular pedicle for
kets, heat lamps, or loosely applied bandages.
successful anastomosis. Vessel diameters for most
Bandages are applied loosely to protect the flap
described cutaneous flaps in dogs of average size
from trauma or self-mutilation. A window is cut through
approach 1-2 mm.
 The  superficial cervical
the bandage to allow frequent visual inspection. Cuta-
(omocervical) axial pattem flap, the caudal superficial
neous flapsshould maintain a pinkappearance. Blanch-
epigastric axial patterm flap, and the saphenous
ing of the flap is a possible indication of arterial
fasciocutaneous conduit flap have been used clinically
insufficiency，
while congestion and purplish
for microvascular transfer.
discolouration is consistent with venous insufficiency.
Detailed anatomical descriptions of flap dissection
 Brisk flow of bright red blood following pin-prick with
are given in Chapter 8. Two points are worth empha-
a 20-22 gauge needle indicates adequate perfusion.
sizing here:
Sluggish flow of dark blood is consistent with poor
perfusion or arterial insufficiency. Transcutaneous
 The microvascular supply to axial patterm flaps,
doppler flow transducers may be used to verify flow
 in areas where superficial cutaneous musculature
through a superficially located arterial pedicle.
exists, courses deep to this muscular layer.
Early detection of failing flaps often leads to suc-
 Dissection must, therefore, be performed deep to
cessful salvage. Re-exploration ofthe vascular pedicle
the superficial cutaneous musculature. For
 is indicated at the first suggestion of poor perfusion.
example, the cutaneous trunci muscle must be
Corrective action depends on the specific cause of
included with the dissection of the thoracodorsal
failure, but may necessitate repeat anastomosis, re-
cutaneous flap
114 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
During flap dissection, there is a tendency for
 A sensor}' branch of the ulnar nerve parallels the
tensile or shearing forces to cause a separation
arterial pedicle through the carpal canal, and may
between tissue layers. Placement of occasional
be used for sensory re-innervation
simple interrupted sutures between cutaneous
 The carpal footpad is not situated in a weight-
musculature, subcutaneous tissue and dermis
bearing position, but it shares the physical
helps to stabilize these tissues and prevent 
characteristics of a weight-bearing footpad. Loss
trauma to the microvasculature.
 of the carpal footpad is of no functional
consequence.
Footpad flaps
Footpads are specialized cutaneous/subcutaneous struc-
Both the digital footpad and carpal footpad flaps are of
tures designed for resistance to weight-bearing stresses.
limited size relative to most weight-bearing defects
Injun.' to large portions of the footpads inevitably results
requiring reconstruction. Careful positioning of footpad
 in compromised function. Reconstruction of such defects
tissue is required at the recipient site, to ensure fixation
requires the use of like" tissue to replace lost tissue:
in a central weight-bearing position. Excessive shear
forces and partial incisional dehiscence of the flap
· The fifth digital footpad has been described as a
margins inevitably occur if the footpad becomes
microvascular free flap based on the deep plantar
displaced (Figure 11.13). In the author's experience,
metatarsal artery IV and the superficial
several minor revisional procedures for flap reposition-
 metatarsal vein IV
ing are commonly required. Over time, the transferred
 The digital footpad and associated soft tissues
footpads hypertrophy, thereby adopting a more func-
are harvested following excision of the phalanges
tional weight-bearing role at the recipient site.
through a dorsal incision (Figure 11.11)
 Sensory re-innervation may be provided by
Muscle flaps
repair of the deep plantar metatarsal nerve IV to
Muscle is probably the most useful of any single tissue
 an appropriate sensor)' nerve at the recipient site.
used  for  wound 
1 reconstruction. It facilitates
However, the necessity of sensory re-innervation
revascularization of ischaemic wound beds, delivers
of transferred footpads has not been established.
nutrients to the wound and decreases the incidence of
significant wound complications, such as infection and
The accessory carpal footpad has also been used as a
 delayed healing. Muscle flaps are generally quite easily
microvascular free tissue transfer based on the caudal
dissected due to their enveloping fascial layers. Vascu-
interosseous artery and the cephalic (Figure 11.12):
lar pedicles are easily identified and protected. Most
DPMV-
DPMA
DPMN
B
Figure l1.1l:Harvest ofthefifth digitatfootpad flap.(A)The incisionis initiated laterally over the fth metatarsat bone and
curves distally to end on the dorsat aspect of the coronary band.(B) The phalangeat bones are dissected extraperiosteally.Care
the superficial dorsat metatarsal vein (SDMV), the deep plantar metatarsal artery (DPMA) and deep plantarmetatarsal nerve
(DPMN),is identified.The brokenline indicates the levelof skinincision through theinterdigital skinto compteteflapformation.
(D) Appearance of the dissected flap, as viewed from the deep surface.
IReproduced
ion from Basheret al.. r990.)
Reconstructive Microsurgery
115
CV
AC
SDF
CIA
UN
TCI
TCL
AML
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 11.12:Anatomical landmarks for dissection of the carpal footpad flap,(a) Circumferentiat skin incision around the
footpad is extended proximally, parallel to the cephalic rein (CV). (b) Deep subcutaneous dissection is initiated from the latera!
aspect until the small arterial branch to the footpad is identified. The accessor}- carpal bone (AC) and the transverse carpa!
ligament (TCL) are shown, (c) After dissection through the carpal canal, the caudal intermsseous arten- (CIA) and a superficia!
branch of the uinar nerve (UN) are identified as they course between the transverse carpal ligament and the accessory
metacarpeum ligament (AML). The pedicte ctosety parattets the tendon of the superficiat digitat fiexor muscte (SDF). Venous
drainage is provided by the cephalic vein.
{Reproducedvifipermision from Moens andFowler. 7997.)
muscles may be harvested with little resulting donor site
morbidity. In nearly all instances, synergistic muscle
groups adapt to the loss of a single muscle with little
functional consequence. When muscle alone is used for
reconstruction of wounds, overlying cutaneous resur-
facing is accomplished by immediate placement of a full 
thickness skin graft on to the transferred muscle. The
success of such grafts is consistently excellent.
The vascular supply to muscles may be divided into
 One of five basic types, based on the number and size
of vascular pedicles nourishing the muscle. This clas-
sification system, and the specific vascular anatomy of
commonly used muscles, is described in Chapter 10.
Muscles with a type I, type II, or type V vascular
pattern are preferred for microvascular transfer since
their survival is expected, based entirely upon
revascularization ofonly the dominant vascular pedi-
cle. The trapezius muscle flap and the latissimus dorsi
muscle flap are most commonly used for microvascu-
lar transfer.
Trapezius muscle flap
Figure 11.13: Shearstresses acting upon weight-bearing
The cervical portion of the trapezius muscle has a type
incisions frequently result in partia! dehiscence and flap
II vascular partem, with the prescapular branch of the
migration. Minor revisional procedures are ofen required
superficial cervical artery forming the dominant vascu-
after footpad transfer.
116 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
2. A flap of skin, subcutaneous tissue and
superficial cutaneous musculature is elevated
from the underlying trapezius muscle
3. The direct cutaneous branch of the superficial
cervical artery (the vascular pedicle of the
superficial cervical axial pattern skin flap) is
identified and ligated as it exits the septum
formed by the trapezius, the omotrans versarius
and the cleidocervicalis muscles
4. The cervical portion of the trapezius muscle is
incised from its attachment to the scapular spine.
Dorsal fascial attachments are incised and bleeding
Figure11,14:Radiographof thevascularterritoryofthe
vessels are cauterized or ligated as required.
prescapular branchofthe superficiat cen-ical artery.The
 5. The muscle is gently elevated and several vascular
vascular pedicte is in the centre. The trapezius muscle is shown
branches extending to deep musculature are
in the lowerlef,asegmentoftheomotransversariusmusclen
the centre,and thecutaneous territory inthe upper portion.
identified, ligated and transected. At this point the
superficial cervical vascular system is readily
lar pedicle (Figure 11.14). Survival of the entire cervical
visualized. In some dogs, the vessels adopt a
portion of the trapezius muscle has been documented
course immediately beneath the body of the
consistently based on this dominant pedicle:
trapezius muscle; in others, the vessels parallel the
cranial border of the trapezius muscle. Dissection 
1. Dissection of the trapezius muscle flap is
performed through a curvilinear incision
preserve the integrity of the vascular pedicle
6. Dissection is continued towards the vascular
point of the shoulder, extending dorsally parallel
pedicle, incising between the trapezius and
to the scapular spine and curving cranially below
cleidocervicalis muscles. One or two small
the dorsal midline (Figure 11.15)
vascular branches to the omotransversarius
(C
Figure 11.15: Dissection of the trapezius muscle flap (see aiso Figure 11.4). (a) Anatomicat landmarks identified inctude the
scapular spine. The position of the direct cutaneous artery is marked with an X. The dashed line indicates the proposed incision.
and dorsat fascial attachments.Vascular branches emanatingfrom theparent pedicle are identified on thedeep surface of the
muscle. Several branches extending into the deep cervicat musculature are ligated and divided,(c) After identification of the
vascular pedicle, cranial and ventrat dissection of the trapezius muscle is completed, (d) The vascular pedicle is skeletonized but
not transected. Perfusion is maintained with the flap protected in moist sponges untit the recipient site is prepared.
Reconstructive Microsurgery
117
with overtlying akin graft immediately afier transfer,(b)Appearance of the same flap,in profile.6weeks after transfer.
muscle are identified, ligated and transected,
vascular supply; the thoracodorsal artery and vein
 completing elevation of the trapezius muscle
serve as the dominant vascular pedicle and enter the
7. The artery and vein are then skeletonized for a
muscle near its insertion. Survival of the entire muscle
length of at least 2-3 cm. The prescapular lymph
based solely on this dominant vascular pedicle has
node is intimately associated with the vascular
been documented.
pedicle and may be incorporated in the dissection,
or cautiously dissected free ofthe vascular
1. The muscle is approached through a curvilinear
pedicle. Inclusion of the lymph node in the
incision beginning at the axilla and extending
dissection will result in a bulky vascular pedicle
dorsally and caudally to the level of the muscle's
and may cause difficulty in closing incisions
origin (Figure 11.17)
overlying the vascular pedicle at the recipient site.
2.
 Skin, subcutaneous tissue and cutaneous trunci
muscle are elevated
The trapezius muscle is broad and flat and, therefore,
3.
 The latissimus dorsi muscle is transected along
lends itself well to the cosmetic reconstruction of many
its fascial origin caudally and dorsally
wounds. The bulk of the flap also rapidly diminishes
4.
 Elevation of the muscle reveals several segmental
due to denervation atrophy (Figure 11.16). Vascular
vascular branches extending from the intercostal
density of muscle flaps has been shown to be main-
vessels. These vessels are either cauterized or
tained despite progressive muscle atrophy.
ligated and transected, allowing continued
Significant donor site morbidity includes immedi-
dissection of the muscle toward its origin
ate postoperative pain and the development of seromas.
5.
 The dominant thoracodorsal artery and vein are
Narcotic analgesics are generally required for 24-48
easily seen as they course along the deep surface
hours, followed by the administration of NSAIDs for
of the muscle
3-5 days. Seroma fonmation occurs to variable extents
 After identification and protection of the vascular
in all trapezius flap donor sites. Prophylactic drainage,
pedicle, the tendinous insertion of the latissimus 
using either a closed suction or passive system, should
dorsi muscle is transected. The vascular pedicle
be provided.
is skeletonized along its length in preparation for
transfer.
Latissimus dorsi muscle flap
The latissimus dorsi muscle is a large, relatively flat
The size ofthe thoracodorsal pedicle in the cat is less
muscle. It is used commonly for the reconstruction of
than 0.8 mm; therefore, dissection of the vascular
large soft tissue deficits in people, and has been used to
 pedicle to the level of the subscapular artery and vein
a limited extent in dogs and cats. It has a type V
is recommended in this species.
118 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
have the advantage of providing viable cellular ele-
ments that contribute actively to bone healing. They
are more resistant to infection and heal more rapidly
than do non-vascularized cortical allografts. After trans-
fer, vascularized grafts rapidly remodel and hyper-
trophy, according to the stresses placed upon them at
the recipient site. They have the disadvantage of neces.
sitating the harvesting of a segment of cortical bone
from a donor site, with an attendant risk of morbidity.
Experience using microvascular transfer of cortical
bone is limited in veterinary medicine, and few experi-
mental studies exist. However, several potentially use-
ful vascularized bone grafts have been described.
Vascularized fibula graft
 The canine fibula has been used as an experimental
model for the study of the biology of vascularized bone
grafts:
 The fibula graft is based on either the caudal
tibial or the popliteal vascular pedicle
 The popliteal artery branches into a larger cranial
tibial and a smaller caudal tibial artery. The
caudal tibial artery continues deep to the flexor
hallicus longus muscle within the interosseous
space
 The nutrient artery of the fibula arises from the
caudal tibial artery, entering the fibula medially
in its proximal third
 Dissection of the vascularized fibula graft, as
with all vascularized bone grafts, is performed to
include a surrounding myoperiosteal cuff of
tissue. The flexor hallicus longus muscle belly is
 preserved with the graft, ensuring the integrity of
the caudal tibial artery and vein.
Transfer of the fibula with the caudal tibial artery and
vein results in a relatively short vascular pedicle of
Figure 11.17:(a) Landmarksfordissection of the latissimus
 limited diameter. Dissection to the level of the pop-
dorsi muscle flap. The ventral line indicates the proposed
skin incision,(b)Elevation of the skinrevealsthe superficial
liteal artery and vein yields a more substantial vascular
aspect of the latissimus dorsi muscle,(c)The muscteis
pedicle, but necessitates ligation of the cranial tibial
dissected from its origin towards its insertion. Several
artery and vein. Iatrogenic damage to the peroneal
segmental intercostalvessels must he ligated and transected
nerve must be avoided during proximal dissection.
near the muscle's origin.The thoracodorsal vascular pedicle
 Microvascular free transfer of the fibula is prob-
is shown on the deep surface of the muscle near its insertion.
ably of limited use in the dog. The fibula has a small
diameter and would provide little of the structural
Vascularized bone grafts
integrity needed for long bone reconstruction. How.
The indications, contraindications and clinical utility
ever, the fibula may prove useful for augmentation of
of non-vascularized cortical allografts are well estab-
more traditional fracture repairs, or for the manage-
lished. They provide immediate structural integrity in
ment of non-union fractures.
instances of segmental bone loss. Ultimate success of
non-vascularized allografts, however, is dependent
Vascularized rib graft
ye jo ssanoid e Aq pamoog uonezuelnseaan uodn
Microvascular transfer of the canine rib has been
resorption and new bone production that requires years.
reported experimentally. Like the fibula, the rib is
The risk ofinfection, delayed union, implant loosening
likely to be of minimal benefit to the veterinary
 or graft collapse is substantial.
surgeon perfonning reconstructive surgery, due to
Vascularized autogenous cortical bone grafts are
its curved shape and poor structural integrity. The
immediately revascularized following transfer, and
rib is harvested with the intercostal artery and vein.
Reconstructive Microsurgery
119
vessels continue distally in the interosseous space,
and give rise to the nutrient arteries ofthe radius and
the ulna at the junctions oftheir proximal and middle
thirds. Multiple periosteal branches arise throughout
its course.
Vascularized ulnar transfers based on either aproxi-
mal or distal dissection have been described in dogs:
 The ulna is harvested through a caudolateral
curvilinear skin incision for both proximal and
distal dissections
 Fasciotomy is perfonmed on both the extensor
and flexor muscle groups to facilitate their
elevation and retraction.
The proximal ulnar graft is based on the common
interosseous vascular pedicle. Retraction of the exten-
sor carpi ulnaris and lateral digital extensor muscles
proximally reveals their muscular branches. These
muscular branches serve as a landmark for the level of
the common interosseous pedicle.
Harvesting of the proximal ulnar graft proceeds in
a stepwise fashion (Figure 11.19):
1. Lateral radial periosteum is incised along the
cranial surface of the abductor pollicis longus
muscle, and subperiosteal dissection of the radius
is continued into the interosseous space
Figure 11.18: Perfusion patterns of the forelimb in a
 2. The medial radial periosteum is similarly incised
specimen after injection of barium into the brachial artery:
and elevated
The utna derives its vascular suppty from the caudal
3. The appropriate length of bone graft is
interosseous artery, which arises from the short common
detenmined, according to the requirements of the
interosseous artery and extends distally in the interosseous
space between the radius and the ulna.
recipient site. The location of the proximal
osteotomy is determined immediately proximal
to the common interosseous pedicle, and the
The pedicle may be formed by either the dorsal
locaton of the distal osteotomy is calculated
intercostal artery and vein or the ventral intercostal
based on measurement from this point
 artery and vein. Dorsal dissection includes the nutri-
 4. Distal osteotomy is performed first and the
ent artery and vein, while ventral dissection yields a
caudal interosseous vessels are located, ligated
 graft solely dependent upon its myoperiosteal vas-
and divided within the interosseous space
cular supply for survival.
5. Circumferential subperiosteal elevation of the
ulna is performed at the level of the proximal
Vascularized ulna graft
osteotomy prior to its performance
The canine ulna is of little importance for structural
6. After completion of both osteotomies,
weight-bearing, and may be partially resected with few
subperiosteal elevation of the radius is continued
functional sequelae. Given this fact, and the innate
in the interosseous space. Sharp transection of
structural properties of the ulnar diaphysis, it is a
the interosseous ligament is required
logical choice for microvascular transfer.
7. The common interosseous artery and vein are
The ulna derives its blood supply from the caudal
identified and dissected to their point of origin
interosseous artery and vein (Figure 11.18). The
 from the median artery and vein, after elevation
common interosseous artery arises from the median
of the ulna.
artery at the level ofthe proximal radius. After enter-
ing the interosseous space from the medial side, the
 Dissection of the distal ulna graft is similar, but is based
common interosseous artery bifurcates into caudal
on the caudal interosseous vascular pedicle rather than
and cranial interosseous branches. The cranial inter-
the common interosseous vessels (Figure 11.20):
osseous artery emerges from the interosseous space
laterally and gives rise to muscular branches to the
1. The caudal interosseous vessels are identified,
extensor carpi ulnaris and the lateral and common
ligated and transected as they exit the
digital extensor muscles. The caudal interosseous
interosseous space distally and caudally
120
Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management
Reconstruction
Figure I1.20: The distat utna is dissected using the same
approach as described for the proximat utna.Proximat
The caudat interosseous vessetsform the vascutar pedicte.
4. Proximal osteotomy of the ulna is performed at a
level that will yield 2-3 cm greater length than is
required at the recipient site. The ulna is
carefully dissected subperiosteally at this level to
avoid trauma to the interosseous vessels, and
 proximal osteotomy is perfonmed
5. The ulna is carefully elevated and the caudal
interosseous artery and vein are ligated and
transected
6. The caudal interosseous artery and vein are
subsequently dissected under the operating
microscope for a length of2-3 cm from the
 proximal osteotomy, and the 'extra* length of 
ulna is excised to provide the length needed for
reconstruction.
 Both proximal and distal ulnar grafts are harvested
with a myoperiosteal sleeve, including the ulnar head
of the deep digital flexor, the pronator quadratus and
the abductor pollicis longus muscles. The nutrient
artery of the ulna is incorporated in the proximal
dissection, while distal dissection results in preserva.
tion of the myoperiosteal blood supply only. Both
result in predictable survival. Proximal dissection has
the disadvantage of requiring osteotomy of the ulna
Figure 11.19: Dissection ofthe proximat utna in preparation
near the elbow joint.
for vascutarized bone transfer, ta) An arcuate skin incision is
 Fixation of vascularized grafts at the recipient site
made over the caudotaterat aspect of the foretimb.
deserves special mention. Since vascularized grafts
(b) Fasciotomy of extensor andftexor muscte groups
facilitates their etevation.
Vascutar branches to the extensor
depend substantially or wholly upon the integrity of
musctes are identified tateratly and mark the tevet ofthe
their myoperiosteal blood supply, it is imperative that
mediatty tocated common interosseous vessets, (c) Mediat
fixation techniques be used that minimize embarrass-
dissection of the utna is carried into the interosseous space,
ment of this vasculature. Therefore, extermal skeletal
taking care to present a myoperiosteat soft tissue cuff
fixation is recommended (Figure 1l.21).
surrounding the bone, (d) Distat and proximat osteotomies
mittimetres proximat to the tevet ofthe common interosseous
Compound flaps
vessets. The tevet ofdistat osteotomy is dependent upon the
Compound flaps refer to flaps that incorporate more than
tength of bone required for the reconstructive application,
one type of tissue: musculocutaneous flaps, osteocutaneous
(e) Dissection ofthe specimen has been compteted. The short
common interroseous vascutar pedicte is shown.
flaps and myo-osseous flaps are ex amples.
As with all microvascular flaps, the only prerequisite
is that all the tissues are nourished by a single source
2. The ulna is circumferentially dissected and
artery and vein. A detailed knowledge of vascular
ostcotomized immediately distal to this level
anatomy allows a great deal of flexibility in flap design.
3. Incision and elevation of the medial and lateral
The trapezius
flap may be harvested as a
radial periosteum is performed as described for
myocutaneous flap by preserving the direct cutaneous
the proximal ulna graft
branch of the superficial cervical artery and vein. The
Reconstructive Microsurgery
121
associated axial pattern skin flap is then included with
dissection of the trapezius muscle. Skin is either used
to resurface the muscle, or is dissected free of the
underlying muscle to resurface portions of the wound
bed adjacent to the muscle flap (Figure 1l.22).
The latissimus dorsi flap may be harvested as a
myocutaneous flap by inclusion of the direct cutane-
ous vessels arising from the thoracodorsal artery and
vein. The thoracodorsal axial pattern skin flap is then
used in a manner similar to that described for the
trapezius myocutaneous flap. Skin directly overlying
the latissimus dorsi muscle can also be included as a
myocutaneous flap without preservation of the direct
cutaneous artery of the thoracodorsal skin flap. This
region of skin is supplied by intercostal cutaneous
perforators and does not mandate inclusion of the
direct cutaneous artery and vein in the flap design.
The scapular spine has been successfully included
with the trapezius flap, resulting in the formation of a
myo-osseous or osteomusculocutaneous flap (Figure
11.23). The scapular spine does not lie within the
primary angiosome of the superficial cervical vessels,
but survives based on blood flow through 'choke
vessels'. These are small calibre vascular channels that
Figure 11.21: External skeletat fixation is recommended for
stabilization of vascularized bone transfers. This form of
(b)
Figure 11.23: (a) A dissected trapezius myo-osseous flap.
Figure 11.22: Composite flaps can be used to facilitate
The flap consists of the trapezius muscle and the scapular
reconstruction of large wounds. The muscular portion of a
spine,(b) The scapularspine does not lie within the primary
sasnuqsuu
angiosome oftheprescapular branch ofthe superficial
lateral and dorsal aspects of this wound,while the cutaneous
cervical artery and vein. Survival of the scapular portion of
portion has been used for resurfacing the medial aspect of
thisjlap is dependentupon vascularflow through smal!
the wound.
'choke'vessels that interconnect adjacent angiosomes.
122  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
 connect adjacent angiosomes. In the event of vascular
Plastic Reconstructive Surgery 79, 81-90
 injury, choke vessels increase in size, allowing a redis-
FowlerJD, Miller CW, Bowen V and Johnston GH (1987) Transfer of
 free vascular cutaneous flaps by microvascular anastomosis: result
 tibution of blood supply. The trapezius-scapular spine
in six dogs. Veterinary Surgery 16(6),446-450
myo-osseous flap may be used for the reconstruction
Levitt L, Fowler JD, Longley M, Bowen V and Wilkinson AA (1988)
 of small bone defects (such as metatarsal or metacarpal
A developmental model for free vascularized bone transfers in the
do>. Veterinary Surgery 17(4), 194-202
 injuries) associated with extensive soft tissue trauma.
Miller CW, Chang P and Bowen V (1986) Identification and transfer of 
free cutaneous flaps by microvascular anastomosis in the dog.
Veterinary Surgery 15(2), 199-204
Moens NMM and Fowler JD ( 1997) The microvascular carpal foot pad
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
flap: vascular anatomy and surgical technique. Veterinary
Compendium of Orthopedic Traumatotogy 10,183-186
READING
NicollSA,Fowler JD,Remedies AM,Clapson jB and GeorgeD (1996)
Developmentof a free latissimus dorsimuscle flap incats.Veterinary
Basher A WP, Fowler FD, Bowen CV, Clark EG and Crosby NL ( 1990)
Surgery 25(1).40-48
Microneurovascular fr digital pad transferin the dog. Veterinary
Ostrup LT and Fredrickson JM (1974) Distant transferof a free, living
Surgery 19(3), 226-231
 bone graft by microvascular anastomoses. Plastic Reconstructive
Brown K, Marie P, Lyszakowski T, Damel R and Cruess R (1983)
Surgery 54(3),274-285
Epiphysial growth after free fibular transfer with and without
PhilibertD and Fowler JD( 1993) The trapezius osteomusculocutaneous
microvascular anastomosis. Joumat of Bone and Joint Surgery
flap in dogs. Veterinary Surgery22(6), 444-450
(Br} 65B(4), 493-501
Degner DA, Walshaw R, Lanz O, Rosenstein D and Smith RJ (1996)
Themedial saphenous fasciocutaneous free flapin dogs. Veterinary
Veterinary Surgery 21(6),435-440
Surgery25(2), 105-113
Szentimrey D and Fowler D (1994) The anatomic basis of a free
Fisher J and Wood MB (1987) Experimental comparison of bone
vascularized bone graft based on the canine distal una. Veterinary
revascularization by miusculocutaneous and cutaneous free flaps.
Surgery 23(6), 529-533
CHAPTER TWELVE
Special Considerations
in Wound Management
John M. Williams
CHRONIC DRAINING SINUSES
A thorough history, e.g. working gundogs may
be more prone to foreign body penetration from
A sinus is a fibrous tissue tract lined by chronic.
working in thick undergrowth
oedematous, granulating tissue and is usually associ-
Thorough clinical examination, looking for
ated with purulent, serous or serosanguinous discharge.
evidence of concurrent disease, especially if
A fistula differs from a sinus tract in that itconnects the
 neoplasia is suspected
skin surface with a mucosal surface of a viscus and may
 Palpation and probing of the tract, with the
be lined with epithelium.
 patient under general anaesthesia, to determine
Causes of sinus tracts include bacterial infection,
its likely extent
foreign bodies deep within tissues, bone sequestra,
Plain/survey radiographs of the area (Figure
surgical implants (sutures, meshes, orthopaedic im-
12.1). It may be necessary to radiograph some
plants) and neoplasia. The clinical signs associated
way from the exit site as some tracts can extend
with sinus tracts (pain, swelling, discharge) may be
considerable distances. Plain radiographs may
ameliorated and can subside completely when treated
reveal radiodense foreign bodies, bone sequestra,
with courses of antibiotics. However, the tract and
areas of discospondylitis, or surgical swabs
clinical signs will recur after the medication is stopped.
(sponges) inadvertently left following some
All sinus tracts should therefore be thoroughly inves-
previous surgery
tigated and explored surgically to determine and
Instillation of radiopaque contrast material
eliminate (if possible) the cause. If the cause is not
(fistulogram) to delineate the extent of the tract
eliminated, a tract will recur. Chronic sinus tracts can
should be considered. Fistulography can be
be extremely frustrating to manage for the patient,
useful in some cases where it may allow
client and veterinary surgeon, as small fragments of
delineation of a foreign body (filling defect in the
foreign material can be elusive and repeated surgical
tract) and the full extent of the tract to be shown.
intervention may be required.
It can be frustrating in some cases as contrast
 It is important to develop a systematic approach to
does not always remain in the tract and may leak
the investigation of sinus tracts. This should include:
out of the tract (Figure 12.2), especially if
injected under pressure. If the tract is wide
enough a Folev catheter is inserted and the bulb
Figure 12.1: Plain taterat abdominat radiograph ofan
Engtish Springer Spaniet that had a discharging sinus on the
Figure 12.2: Positive contrastfistutogram ofthe case in
teft flank At surgery, the sinus was found to extend to the
Figure 12.1. Note the delineation of the tract and the toss of
intervertebrat space between thoracic vertebrae Il and 12.
contrast medium from the sinus. The contrast medium did
Nocardia was cutured from the disk space.
not enter the whote tength ofthe tract.
124 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
re-presenting some weeks or months later due to
recurrence of a problem that was thought to have
been solved
All previously implanted surgical materials
should be removed
If no foreign material is found, dissect out the
tract and close the wound. Submit the tract for
bacteriological culture and sensitivity as well as
for histopathology.
PHARYNGEAL STICK PENETRATION
INJURIES
Figure 12.3: Multiple sinus rracis.visible following hair
clipping.
Injuries to the canine pharynx are infrequent, but the
pharynx is particularly susceptible to wooden stick
injury, particularly in those breeds which chase or
gently inflated (to prevent leakage); for narrow
carry sticks. Such injuries have been most commonly
tracts a 16- or 18-gauge intravenous catheter can
 described in young, medium to large dogs, especially
be used. Sterile iodine-based water-soluble
Collie types. This has been suggested to be due to the
contrast is injected slowly. It is helpful even
-yord uaum pclope shop iagie[ eu uonisod ,umop peau.
when a Foley catheter is used to apply some
ing up sticks from the ground (White and Lane, 1988).
digital pressure to the proximal tract to reduce
Pharyngeal stick injuries present either acutely,.
the occurrence of backflow
within a short time of the injury occurring, or chroni-
A dye such as methylene blue can be instilled
 cally, when they may present only with a discharging
into the tract to facilitate surgical exploration
sinus (see above).
 Prior to surgery, clip and aseptically prepare a
Acutely presenting patients will either have a
large area around the tract, especially if the
known history of stick injury or, if presented within
extent of the tract is unknown (Figure 12.3)
a few days of trauma, they usually have dysphagia.
Explore and excise all tracts encountered
This is due either to temporomasseteric trauma or to
If foreign material is found look for more! There
pharyngeal laceration and secondary cellulitis.
is nothing more frustrating than a patient
Pharyngocervical pain is common. The potential track
Figure 12.4: Potential paths of a
taterat pharyngeat stick injury:
(i) penetrating the inter mandibular
or cranial thoracic region;
(ii) entering the cenicat
Lateral pharyngeal wound
parapharyngeal tissues.
ntermandibular
Thoracic
Lateral
Ventral
(i) Cervica
Special Considerations in Wound Management
125
Figure 12.5: Potential paths of a
dorsat pharyngeat stick injury:
Sticks entering the mouth from
directty infront of thedogmay
(i) enter steeply,lacerating the
Dorsalpharyngeal wound
soft palate and entering the
retropharynx,or(ii)enterat a
(Retropharyngeal
lower angle and be more likely to
penetrate the oesophagus.
(li) Oesophagea
(Mediastinal)
taken by a stick entering the oropharynx has been
Where the stick has penetrated the retrobulbar area,
well described (White and Lane, 1988) and two
drainage is achieved via the oral cavity by using a
common routes are shown (Figures 12.4 and 12.5).
haemostat to enlarge the wound or by penetrating the
Crepitation due to subcutaneous air accumulation
'1eou isel aun o [epnes esoonu [easuaeu
may be noted within a few days, occurring secondary
to pharyngeal or oesophageal lacerations.
 The fresh pharyngeal or suspected pharyngeal
DERMOID CYST/PILOMDAL SINUS
laceration should be explored immediately, in order to
minimize the development of chronic complications.
This is an inherited condition of Rhodesian Ridgebacks
This is especially" important if oesophageal penetration
(which has also been reported in Boxers and Shih-
has occurred. In the author's experience oesophageal
Tzus). There is a failure of the neural tube to separate
lacerations should be explored within 24 hours of
completely from the skin in the embryo. The extent of
trauma, otherwise wound dehiscence is common with
failure is variable but the defect may reach from the
subsequent death of the patient. Prior to obtaining
skin to the dura mater.
results of culture and sensitivity from the wound (swab
Diagnosis is usually made based on the breed and
and tissue culture should be done); broad-spectrum
age at presentation. These are usually young dogs with
intravenous antibiotics should be instituted, with the
palpable cords of tissue in the dorsal cervical area
addition of metronidazole to combat anaerobic infec-
cranial to the characteristic 'ridge' along the dorsum.
tion. For all suspected dorsal or lateral pharyngeal
Other tracts can develop in the region secondary to the
penetration injuries, a ventral midline cervical
deep pyoderma which may occur. Occasionally dogs
 approach should be used. This will allow the full extent
 may exhibit neurological signs if the tract extends to
of the injury to be established and the area to be
the dura mater and a concurrent meningiomyelitis
explored fully for fragments of foreign body.
occurs. The full extent of the tract should be defined by
Pharyngeal and oesophageal lacerations should be
performing a fistulogram using a non-ionic iodine-
debrided and sutured with 1.5 or 2 metric absorbable
based water-soluble contrast medium (Figure 12.6). If
material (the oesophagus is best closed with two layers
there is communication with the spinal cord a cervical
of simple interrupted sutures). The oesophageal wound
myelogram may also be of value.
should be supported, either by suturing the cranial
 In order to resolve the problem, surgical excision of
 portion of the stermothyroid muscle to the wound or
 the epithelium-lined tract is required. A dorsal approach
with lengthened omentum (see below). A gastrostomy
to the neck is employed and the surgeon must be
tube should be placed (see below) for 7 days to allow
prepared for a deep dissection through the neck muscles.
 healing to occur. Drains should be placed in the area of
In the majority of cases the tracts narrow at, or just dorsal
the dissection (see Figure 2.10).
to, the nuchal ligament. Occasionally it is necessary to
126 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstmction
Figure 12.6: Positive contrast radiograph ofa 4-month-old
Rhodesian Ridgeback. showing the extent of the pilonidal
sinus.
split the nuchal ligament; if this is done, then on closure
the ligament should be reapposed with a modified
Figure 12.7: A modijfied Kesster locking loop suture pattern
 Kessler locking loop suture partem (Figure 12.7) using
for reapposing cut tendons.
 non-absorbablc suture material such as polypropylene.
A proportion of these tracts stop immediately dor-
with the anus and spreading a thin film of faeces
sal to a vertebral spinous process, the dorsal portion of
over the perineal region. Anal sacculitis is also a
which should be excised with the tract. If the tract
 perpetuating factor; the anal sacs should be removed
extends into the dura mater, a dorsal laminectomy is
if surgery is likely to be successful.
 required and the part of the dura connecting with the
The range of clinical signs seen with anal furuncu-
 sinus is excised with it. Samples of tract should be
losis varies immensely, from the case which shows few
submitted for both bacterial culture and histopatho-
signs, apart from licking the perianal region, to the
logy. Postoperative seroma formation is common at
this site and drainage must be established; closed
suction drainage is preferable (see Chapter 6).
 The prognosis is good forcases with noevidence of
 meningiomyelitis, but if this is present then the prog
nosis is guarded. Though the heritability ofthis condi-
tion is not fully understood, owners should be advised
not to breed from affected animals.
ANAL FURUNCULOSIS
Anal furunculosis (perianal fistulation) is a frustrating
disease encountered commonly in Genman Shepherd
 Dogs and Border Collies, and is characterized by
chronic infection and ulceration of the tissues around
the anus (Figure 12.8). More importantly, there are
often deeply infiltrating sinus tracts which can fonm
true fistulae with the rectum.
The underlying cause of this disease remains
elusive. Recent studies have shown that dogs respond
well to immunosuppressive drugs (Mathews el ah.
1997). which suggests an immune-mediated com-
 ponent. There is also some evidence that there is an
association with inflammatory bowel disease as
there is in humans who suffer from Crohn's disease
and concurrent perianal fistulae (Harkin etal., 1996;
Mathews ex a., 1997). Factors that have been pro-
 posed as perpetuating the problem include the con-
formation of the German Shepherd Dog, allowing
the broad base of the tail to remain in close contact
Figure 12.8: Typical appearance of anal furunculosis.
Special Considerations in Wound Management
127
advanced case where damage and scarring of the anal
dehiscence occurs, and is not excessive, it can be
sphincter and rectum prevents normal dilation of the
allowed to heal by secondary intention. All cases
anus. These dogs can show severe faecal tenesmus,
should be checked 2-3 days after surgery.
dyschezia and pain. Conversely, some dogs with
Recurrence is not uncommon and all cases should
severe anal furunculosis lose the ability to close the
be reassessed after 6 weeks when further surgery may
anal sphincter and become faecally incontinent.
be contemplated. A proportion of dogs do not respond
No single technique has been shown to result con-
to surgery.
sistently in a cure for anal furunculosis. The author
Due to the possible link with inflammatory bowel
currently favours open excision of the anal sacs, com-
conditions, the use of immunosuppressive agents has
bined with sharp dissection of the sinuses, closure of
been reported. Two distinct treatment regimens have
the dead space with fine synthetic absorbable sutures,
been described. One regimen used moderate doses of
and primary wound closure. Surgical removal of the
prednisolone, initially at 2 mg/kg for 2 weeks then
infected tissue, with or without reconstruction of the
reducing the dose over4-6 weeks (Harkin etal., 1996).
surrounding skin, provides a reasonable outcome in a
The other used cyclosporin, a potent immunosuppre>-
majority of cases.
sive agent that requires monitoring of blood levels on
Surgery is carried out with the patient placed in
a weekly basis to ensure that therapeutic levels are
sternal recumbency with the tail tied upward and
maintained (Mathews et ai, 1997). Results from these
forward and the hindlimbs hanging over the end ofthe
two studies, so far, suggest that such regimens should
table. To facilitate surgery, the table can be tipped at an
be considered as part ofthe future management of anal
angle to raise the animal's tail end, taking care not to
furunculosis/perianal  fistulae.
exceed 25-30 degrees. A tilt greater than this may-
Interestingly, in human patients perianal fistulation
compromise respiration, due to cranial shift of the
is frequently managed successfully by application of
abdominal organs. The area is clipped and prepared as
topical hydroactive dressings (see Chapter 5) for
aseptically as possible. Enemas are avoided to prevent
several weeks. This is not a practical alternative for
perianal leakage of liquid faeces, gauze swabs soaked
jssop isou
in 17 povidone-iodine may be inserted per rectum and
the perineal area is draped out.
The procedure of choice for removing the anal sacs is
open excision. Resins and other materials to pack the anal
sac are to be avoided, as they may leak into surounding
Guide
tissues producing a chronic focus for infection.
Anal sacculectomy is a straightforward procedure
requiring no specialized instrumentation.
1. A small haemostat or scalpel guide is inserted
through the anal sac opening and incised on to
Analsac
with a No. 15 scalpel blade (Figure 12.9). With
this technique there is minimal risk of damaging
the deep portion of the anal sphincter muscle or
Scalpel
the caudal rectal branch of the pudendal nerve
 2. Using fine thumb forceps, the anal sac lining is
Figure 12.9: J guide is inserted through the anal sac
grasped and dissected free from the surrounding
opening and incised on to with a No. 15 scaipe! blade.
tissues (Figure 12.10). In severe disease it is
common to find only remnants of the anal sacs,
which must be removed
 3. Sharp excision of all sinuses and tracts is carried
out, paying careful attention to haemostasis.
It may be necessary in severe cases to excise part O1
all of the external anal sphincter muscle. Owners
should be wanted of this possibility with its attendant
potential risk of postoperative faecal incontinence.
Postoperative care should include suitable analgesia
with eitheran opioid ora non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
 drug such as carprofen. The intraoperative use of
epidural analgesia can be invaluable in the immediate
postoperative period. Wound interference may be a
problem and an Elizabethan collar may help. If wound
Figure 12.10: The ana! sac isgrasped and dissected free.
128  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
BITE WOUNDS
The mouths of both dogs and cats are heavily con-
taminated with aerobic, anaerobic, Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria. Cats, in particular, have
abundant numbers of Pasteurella multocida, a fre-
quent cause of cellulitis. All bite wounds are contami-
nated and must be managed as such. In addition to
inoculating bacteria under the skin, the jaws and teeth
of animals can cause severe trauma, not only to the
skin but especially to the underlying deep tissues
Figure 12.il: A cat's canine teeth can cause wounds to
(Figure 12.11). The jaws of large dogs in particular
tissues underlying the skin wound.
produce significant tearing and crushing forces, within
the deeper tissue, which makes smaller dogs and cats
very susceptible to injur}". Common sites of injury arc
the neck, thorax and abdomen, where there is poten-
tial for damage to the airway, oesophagus, thoracic
cage and intra-abdominal organs, notably the kid-
neys. Such damage also leads to devitalization of
underlying tissues, which will then make an ideal
substrate for bacterial colonization.
It is essential that all suspected bite wounds are
ex amined carefully and not dismissed as trivial puncture
marks on the skin. What is seen at the initial presentation
is usually just the 'tip of the iceberg' with respect to
damage to the underlying structures. It is also of para-
mount importance to assess the patient as a whole,
because if there is trauma to the upper airway, oesopha-
 gus or thorax this will need dealing with promptly.
 Dogs and cats with suspected bite wounds should be
clipped over the area so as to note the full extent of any
contusions and to find small puncture wounds, which
Figure 12.12: The thorax of a Jack Russell Terrier, 5 days
can be readily masked by hair. All bite wounds should
posttrauma.The dog had been bitten on the thorax,resulting
be explored surgically and debrided (Figure 12.12);
in fractured ribs,an open pneumothorax and extensive skin
loss. The wounds were treated as open woundsfollowing
prior to doing this it may be necessary to stabilize the
aggressive debridement of devitalized tissues.
patient. If there is severe necktrauma with transection of
the trachea, immediate surgical intervention may be
required in order to establish a patent airway. If wounds
are not explored such a patient will frequently be re-
 presented in 24-48 hours with complications associated
with the deep tissue trauma (Figure 12.13).
BURNS
 Bum injuries have the potential to destroy large areas
of skin which can result in the loss of two of its most
important functions: prevention of loss of body fluids;
and protection against infection.
The severity of the clinical signs seen depends on
both the surface area involved and the depth of skin
loss. Fortunately, bums are not a common presentation
in small animal practice, with only sporadic reports in
the literature. In comparison, human bum injuries
Figure 12.13: Cervicat radiograph ofa Yorkshire Terrier
account for some 10,000 hospital admissions in the UK
that had been bitten on the neck 24 hours previousty.
and an estimated 115,000 hospital admissions in the
Note the extensive subcutaneous emphysema.Care fid
USA annually. Causes of burms in animals include:
re-evaluation of the original radiograph reveated damage
to the tracheal rings.
exposure to fire and smoke; accidental or malicious
Special Considerations in Wound Management
129
application of hot liquids; electricity; chemicals; and
 allows us to develop strategies for patient management.
the effects of radiation (both ultraviolet and X-ray).
To understand the bum victim fully, it is easier to
Iatrogenic bums are the commonest in small animals,
consider systems in isolation, though when dealing with
due to hot air dryers, electric and water-heated pads,
a patient we deal with the problems as a whole.
and poorly earthed diathermy units.
In order to manage a bum patient successfully
Pathophysiology of burns
the clinician must identify the severity and extent of
the skin trauma. This allows measures to be instituted
Skin injury
which will combat the problems encountered follow-
The area and depth of skin damage are the most
ing severe fluid loss and infection. In addition to
important factors in determining the extent of patho-
skin lesions, many burn patients may also have
physiological change in the patient. This damage is a
airway damage, due either to smoke inhalation or to
function of the temperature reached and the duration of
direct thermal injury to oropharyngeal and airway
contact with the skin (Figure 12.14); cellular death
tissues. Clearly such injuries must be attended to
begins at 40°C. Bums are classified as superficial
without delay.
partial deep partial andfull thickness skin loss (Figure
 Following thermal skin injury, patients suffer burn 
12.15). This classification is important with respect to
shock', a series of severe pathophysiological changes
the subsequent healing of the bum wound.
which are secondary to capillary fluid and protein loss
and are complicated by sepsis and immunocompromise.
Superficial partial thickness skin loss: Hair follicles
The majority of our understanding of bum injury is
and a substantial part of the dermis are spared. This is
extrapolated from human bum patients. This can serve
the least serious of the skin injuries inflicted by bums
us well in the basic understanding of the disease
and is recognized less often in cats and dogs than in
mechanisms involved but it is important to remember
people due to the insulating properties of the hair coat.
that dogs and cats have a substantial hair coat and that
As there is no superficial vascular plexus as found in
the microanatomy of their skin differs substantially
humans, the degree of erythema is less and blisters
from that of humans.
rarely form. This is the type ofburn suffered following
Understanding the underlying pathophysiology of
exposure to ultraviolet radiation or following thera-
the bum patient together with basic wound healing
peutic doses of irradiation. It produces moderate ery-
thema, followed by desquamation and thickening of
the skin. As the injury is very superficial there are
 minimal systemic effects and the skin heals rapidly by
 re-epithelialization.
(O)
Tissue destruction
Deep partial thickness skin loss: Leaves only a small
number of hair follicles and part of the dermis follow-
ing a bum. Such thermal trauma produces a marked
inflammatory response. Subdenmal oedema due to
increased vascular permeability follows activation of
 the complement system, the creation of free oxygen
345
15
30
radicals and xanthine oxidase products. Though bum
Minutes
Hours
 depth can be difficult to assess at the time of injury,
Seconds
Time of exposure
such wounds are classically described as being moist,
Figure 12.14: Tissue damage from burning depends on
 blanching on pressure and responding to pain stimuli.
temperature and time of exposure.
A deep partial thickness skin wound may heal by
Figure 12.15: Schematic
representationofthe depth
of skin damage caused by a
Superficial
burn injury.
partial
Partial
thickness
thickness
Full
thickness
130  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
second intention but this tends to be slow due to a
tory distress develop within hours of a serious thermal
 paucity of epithelial elements. It is essential that such
injury, and patients will require either emergency
a wound is managed correctly (see below) or it may
 intubation or, more likely, emergency tracheostomy
transfonm to full thickness skin loss.
tube placement. It is fortunately rare for thermal inju-
ries to extend into the lower respiratory tract, due to the
Full thickness skin loss: No dermis or epidermal rem-
 extremely efficient heat dissipation ability of the upper
 nants survive and there is often thermal injury to
airway. When thermal injury of the lower respiratory
deeper structures. There is severe inflammation and
tract does occur, the animal will experience broncho-
oedema and systemic signs are common. This type of
spasm, presenting with productive, wheezing coughs.
 bum therefore carries a much poorer prognosis.
 In addition to oedema secondary to burns, patients
 are also susceptible to carbon monoxide poisoning
Area affected
and smoke inhalation. Incomplete combustion of
The amount of body surface area affected has a marked
materials frequently leads to carbon monoxide pro-
influence on the severity of systemic effects. The most
duction, which may be as high as 8% in inhaled air in
important early pathological change is that of in-
house fires. Since carbon monoxide has a much
 creased capillary permeability. The extent of capillary
higher affinity for haemoglobin than does oxygen,
damage is closely related to the percentage total body
levels as low as 1 % CO in inhaled air may produce
surface area (TBSA) burmed. To assess TBSA we can
carboxyhaemoglobin levels of >50% within 10 min-
adapt and apply the useful Rule of Nine' which is used
utes. Generally, levels above 60% are associated with
for adult human bums (Figure 12.16). There will be
a high mortality rate. Clinically, such patients will
breed and age variation to this 'rule', but it does allow
have cherry red mucosae. In the absence of a hyper-
 a rapid evaluation for the management of the patient.
baric oxygen chamber, oxygen supplied by mask or
For any canine or feline patient with full or partial
via a tracheostomy tube will help reduce the half-life
thickness bums of more than 50% TBSA, euthanasia
of carboxyhaemoglobin to 45-60 minutes.
may be advisable due to the severity of the injuries,
Smoke inhalation injuries, though uncommon,
though dogs and cats may survive with such injuries
occur due to the toxic material found in smoke par-
(see Chapter 2).
ticles, which are directly irritant to the tracheo-
bronchial tree and produce mucosal inflammation,
Airway injury
oedema and necrosis plus pulmonary oedema. In
Any animal who suffers bums around the head will
some cases tracheal mucosal sloughing is so severe
develop severe oropharyngeal oedema, especially if
that the debris may physically obstruct the lower
the thermal agent has affected the inside of the orophar-
airways. This may also be associated with the devel-
ynx or the upper respiratory tract. Stridor and respira-
opment of pulmonary oedema, usually within 72
Figure 12.16: The 'Rute of
Nine',adapted from human
medicine. A rapidand
effective estimate of the
percentage total body
surface area affected can be
caiculated using this
5%
diagram.
18%
18%
9%
9%
Ventral
Dorsal
Special Considerations in Wound Management
131
hours of the inhalational injury; its occurrence in
Haemolytic streptococci
human patients is associated with a mortality rate as
Haemolytic staphylococci
high as 70%. Currently, the best option for manage-
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
ment of smoke inhalation is the use of bronchodilators 
in conjunction with humidified oxygen delivered by
Pseudomanads pose a special problem in the
positive pressure ventilation.
burm patient as they can cause death without the
The damage to the tracheobronchial tree makes
animal exhibiting signs of fever or leucocytosis. The
bacterial infection a common sequel and this is a
risk of developing sepsis increases with increasing
major cause of death. Pneumonic infection arises
TBSA affected; if the TBSA affected is less than
either by contamination via the airway or by haema-
30% then sepsis is generally not a problem. Bum
togenous spread.
sepsis may go unnoticed until the eschar that has
formed over the wound begins to separate. The eschar
Fluid loss
is the brown/black, leather-like, discoloured area
Following a severe bum there will be varying degrees
which is the result of the heat damage to skin and
of capillary damage. The increase in capillary perme-
other tissues, which eventually becomes organized
ability leads to loss of fluid, primarily into the intra-
as tough collagen elements.
cellular spaces; the vast majority of this fluid loss is
Infection is a major contributor to mortality in bum
not seen and is therefore readily overlooked. The
patients and is in part due to the severe compromise to
leakage is maximal during the first 8 hours after
 defence mechanisms, which prevents the patient mount-
burning and then gradually decreases over 48-72
ing an effective response. There is:
hours until the animal creates enough fluid to com-
pensate. The exact timing will depend on age and
Loss of skin as extermal barrier
degree of damage; fluid balance retums more quickly
 Depletion of complement and other factors of the
 in the young animal and more slowly in those with
non-specific defence system
extensive burns. With burms affecting up to 20-30%
Poor specific immunity due to loss of
TBSA, fluid leakage tends to be local to the wound
immunoglobulins (IgA and IgG) through
site; for burns affecting >30% TBSA, the increase in
vascular permeability and compounded by
capillary permeability tends to be generalized. Even
depression of cell-mediated immunity.
with a 20% TBSA bum, 28% ofthe plasma volume of
a dog can be lost within 6 hours. When the affected
 As a consequence, septicaemia is a common sequel
 TBSA is >40% the animal may lose up to 50% ofits
to local wound infection in bum patients and must be
plasma volume within 2-3 hours.
treated aggressively with high doses of systemic anti-
biotics, based on the results of bacterial blood culture
Electrolytes
and sensitivity tests.
Bum patients suffer from electrolyte imbalances. Ther-
mal injury has a profound effect on cell membrane
Anaemia
potential; this, combined with the affinity that sodium
Anaemia is a common consequence of bums and
has for denatured collagen in bum wounds, leads to a
occurs due to a number of mechanisms. There is
major shift of both sodium ions and water into the
immediate thermal destruction of red blood cells,
interstitial and intracellular spaces. Hyponatraemia
followed by physiological lysis some hours later. In
rarely becomes a clinical problem as intravenous
addition, some red cells are so morphologically dam-
therapy is with sodium-containing fluids.
aged that they will be filtered out by the spleen.
 In the bum patient there may be an early transient
Erythrocyte membrane damage also occurs due to
hyperkalemia due to erythrocyte destruction; this is
various catecholamines, prostaglandins and altered
rarely a problem as long as renal function is main-
plasma lipids, and this reduces red cell life span.
tained. Diuresis secondary to fluid therapy may pre-
 Patients with severe bums also have reduced levels of
cipitate hypokalemia requiring the addition of
erythropoietin, depressing erythropoiesis and result-
potassium to the fluids. Potassium can be added at 20
ing in a nonmocytic, nonmochromic anaemia.
mEq/1 and administered at a rate up to 0.5 mEq/kg/h.
Any hypokalemia will be accentuated if there is
Metabolic response
respiratory alkalosis due to hyperventilation.
Due to massive capillary leakage, a large amount of
protein is lost both through the wound and into the
Sepsis
intravascular spaces. This sets up a massive negative
Surface burn wounds are extremely susceptible to
nitrogen balance and the body attempts to compensate
secondary infection. Initially the wound will be con-
with increases in both metabolic and catabolic rates to
taminated only by the skin's resident flora. By 2 weeks
1-1.5 times normal; this increases the patient's nutri-
post bum there is colonization of the wound by exo-
tional protein requirement by 2-3.5 times. Even with
genous bacteria, in particular:
132  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
tion it is not possible to reverse the process until
Pain relief
healing is complete. In order to address this, a suitable
It is important to provide pain relief for bum patients;
high-quality commercial diet which has the correct
opioids should be the first choice. The use of
protein/energy balance should be used. This will at
corticosteroids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatories
least go some way towards countering the severe
is controversial. There is no evidence that
negative nitrogen balance.
corticosteroids will be harmful; NSAIDs are best
avoided until renal function is clearly established.
Managing the patient with burns
With any thenmal injury it is essential to remove the
Total parenteral nutrition
source as quickly as possible and to cool the tissue
A burm patient may be unable to eat, particularly if it is
rapidly with cold water or ice. Large wounds should be
suffering from oropharyngeal oedema. In such cases
covered during transportation; cling film is a suitable
non-oral enteral feeding techniques should be consid-
 covering which will help protect the wound. Applying
ered. In the majority of cases the intestinal tract will be
a dressing to the affected area will produce some local
functioning and all that is required is a fonm of tube
 feeding which bypasses the oral cavity.
analgesic effect.
It is essential to deal with any life-threatening
 Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) should only be
problem the patient may have. Notably there is a need
considered in those cases where there is intestinal
to check and maintain an airway and to attend to any
dysfunction. TPN is a high-risk option in these cases
evidence of bum shock by fluid administration.
due to the possibility of introducing infection in an
already immunocompromised patient. Either tube
Fluid therapy
oesophagostomy or tube gastrostomy will work well.
As it is not possible to stem the leakage of fluid, it is
 Oesophagostomy placement is particularly well suited
essential to maintain the patient's circulating volume,
to cats and is less likely to cause problems than a
otherwise hypovolemic shock with the potential for
pharyngostomy tube. Oesophagostomy tubes are
placed with the patient anaesthetized and in right
renal failure will occur.
lateral recumbency, with the left cervical area clipped
For fluid replacement:
and prepared aseptically:
·Lactated Ringer's (Hartmann's) solution should
1. Long curved artery forceps are placed in the
be used initially
 proximal oesophagus and the tip pushed towards 
Avoid colloids during the first 24 hours after
burming, as the capillaries are permeable to
the skin
2. A 10- to 14-gauge needle is pushed through the
molecules up to a molecular weight of 125,000;
skin between the jaws of the forceps
therefore the colloid will be lost into the
3. A catheter is passed down the needle into the
extravascular space along with the plasma.
oesophagus. The catheter (14-18 French) should
extend so that it terminates in the distal third of
The rate of fluid administration can be calculated
the oesophagus. Measure from the point of
based on a number of different formulae. A suitable
 proposed oesophageal entry to the seventh 
rate for the first 24 hours post burm is that based on the
intercostal space; this will minimize the risks of
Parkland Hospital Formula:
gastro-oesophageal reflux.
· Use 4 ml Hartmann's solution per kg per %TBSA
Altermatively, a gastrostomy tube can be placed.
Give half of the calculated fluid requirement in
This is done either transabdominal^ with the aid of an
the first 8 hours post thenmal injury
 endoscope (percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy) or
· Give the remaining half over the next 16 hours
surgically via a paracostal incision:
After the first 24 hours, colloids or plasma are
1. A left-sided tube gastrostomy is perfonmed via a
added to the fluid therapy regimen to maintain both
sublumbar paracostal incision
cardiac output and plasma volume:
 2. A silicone 20- to 26-gauge Foley catheter is
placed through the skin and muscles caudal to
· The dose of colloid needed is 0.3-0.5 ml colloid
the skin incision via a tunnel created by blunt
per kg per % TBSA
 dissection with artery forceps through a stab
Ultimately the rate of fluid administration
incision in the skin
depends on the responses of the patient, i.e. heart
3. The Foley catheter is drawn through the tunnel
rate, capillary refill time, and urine output
into the abdominal cavity
 The patient should produce between 1 and 1.5
4. A purse string suture with 2 or 3 metric
ml/kg/h of urine if adequate renal perfusion is
polydioxanone is preplaced in the fundic portion
occurring; if not, then fluid administration rates
of the gastric wall and a stab incision made
should be increased.
within the suture into the lumen
Special Considerations in Wound Management  133
 5. The Foley catheter is then placed into the
wound environment and be non-adherent (see Chap-
stomach, the balloon inflated and the purse string
ter 5). In humans there is a move towards using
suture tightened
biological dressings such as ffeeze-dried porcine
6. Omentum is wfapped around the Foley catheter
xenografts of cultured keratinocytes.
and the purse string suture passed through the
There is considerable debate as to the efficacy BI
abdominal wall for added security
topical antimicrobials in burn patients. Some authors
7. The Foley catheter is placed under traction to
advise their immediate use whilst others wait until
draw the stomach into firm contact with the
there is clinical evidence of infection. The most com-
abdominal wall and is fixed in place externally
monly used agent to this effect is silver sulphadiazine
either with a Chinese ffiction finger trap suture
1% cream, which has a broad spectrum of activity
 pattern or by means of zinc oxide butterfly tapes.
against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria as
well as Candida spp. Systemic antibiotics should not
The bum patient's nutritional requirements can be
be used until an infection is found to be present and
estimated and the diet should provide at least 4 g of
should be chosen based on the fesults of microbial
protein per 100kcalindogsand6gper l00kcal in cats.
culture and sensitivity tests.
The injured patient should be fed at least 1.5 times its
resting energy fequirement (RER). The RER can be
 calculated using appropriate formulae:
PROJECTILE INJURIES
 Patient of 2-45 kg body weight:
In the UK high powered gunshot injuries are rela-
RER (kcal) = 30 x W+ 7(T
tively uncommon in dogs and cats. It is, however,
 Patient <2 kg or >45 kg body weight:
common to find airgun pellets as incidental findings
RER (kcal) = 70 x BWeis
in cats and shotgun pellets in working gundogs
(Figure 12.17). Ballistic injuries vary, depending
Management of the burn wound
on the shape, mass, stability, and velocity of the
The extent of the injuries can be assessed rapidly
bullet/pellet and the degree of ffagmentation
by the 'Rule of Nine' (see Figure 12.16) and wound
created within a wound. All penetrating injuries of
management instituted. The goals ofwound manage-
this type will be contaminated and must be debrided
ment are:
aggressively.
There are two types of bullet wound: those caused
 To prevent further thermal injur)'
by high-velocity bullets and those caused by low-
 To minimize contamination and infection
velocity bullets. The degree and extent of damage
To remove dead tissue
caused varies considerably between them (see also
Reconstfuction.
Chapter 2).
High-velocity bullets have a huge amount of
Surgical debridement
energy, and are fired with velocities of 800-1000 m/s.
Though topical dressings are beneficial in burn wound
When such bullets enter tissue they cause extensive
 management, it is current practice to debride large of
damage through cavitation and shock waves. Such
deep wounds at an early stage. This helps to minimize
cavities may be 30-40 times greater than the diametef
infection fates by minimizing eschar formation. The
of the bullet (Figure 12.18). Once the bullet has
aim is to graft of reconstruct the wound as soon as
passed through the animal, the cavity will collapse:
possible. Ifclosure following debridement is not pos
due to the subatmospheric pressure present it will
sible, then the site should be treated as an open wound.
suck air, debris, hair and bacteria into the wound.
 Such an approach is associated with high success rates
Such injuries have the capacity to produce large
in human patients.
Two basic techniques for burn wound debride-
ment (escharotomy) are described in humans: tan-
gential and fascial. Tangential debridement is
associated with increased blood loss and involves
'shaving' the dead tissue away fom the surface.
With most deep wounds it is preferable to perform
fascial debridement which is, essentially, an en bloc
fesection of the dead tissues down to healthy tissue
(see Chapter 5).
Dressings
 Once debrided. burn wounds are best managed by the
Figure 12.17: Radiograph showing shorgun pellets as an
use of dressings. Dressings should maintain a moist
incidenta! finding in a working gundog.
134 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstmction
unless they involve a vital structure. The majority of
low- and high-velocity bullet wounds will, in addi-
-aseueu punom uado aiinbai "uauapuqap on uon
ment before attempting closure, because of the high
level of contamination. This is especially true of
high-velocity injuries.
Thoracic ballistic injuries, as in humans, can, fol-
lowing debridement ofthe superficial wounds, be left
unexplored unless there is evidence of haemothorax or
tension pneumothorax. Limb injures which involve
shattered bone are best addressed by open wound
management and application of an extermal fixator.
Gunshot wounds to the neck are frequently associated
with lacerations of the trachea or oesophagus which
will require prompt repair following debridement.
Around 90% of abdominal gunshot wounds will have
Figure 12.18: Tissue cavity produced by a high-velocity
bullet.The arrows indicate the direction and magnitude of
associated visceral injury and will require extensive
expended kinetic energy.
surgical exploration.
Confirmation of the need to perfonm laparotomy
can be obtained by abdominocentesis, diagnostic
amounts of dead and devitalized, contaminated tis-
peritoneal lavage and abdominal radiographs. If
sue. The amount of damage depends on the tissue
there is any evidence ofhaemorrhage, peritonitis, or
involved. Homogenous structures such as liver or
food or air within the abdominal cavity, surgical
muscle are very sensitive to damage, whereas lung is
exploration should be performed as soon as the
relatively resistant. Bone, because of its inelastic
patient is stable. If findings are equivocal, radio-
nature, tends to shatter.
graphs and diagnostic peritoneal lavage should be
Low-velocity bullets are relatively heavy and de-
 repeated after 24 hours.
signed for use in hand guns. They travel at 200-300 m/s,
have relatively low kinetic energy and are usually
Laparotomy
used at a range of less than 100 m. These bullets tend
Exploratory laparotomy should be thorough and well
to bore a hole through tissue and only damage those
y paredand pue paddo uaned au mim pauueid
tissues with which they are in direct contact. They
extension of the incision into the thorax if necessary.
cause life-threatening problems only when vital
Any major haemorrhage should be dealt with first, then
tissues such as blood vessels are in their path. Their
a systematic exploration is caried out for evidence of
path through the body can be very unpredictable, with
lacerations. The examination should start with the dia-
no relationship between entry and exit holes, as they
 phragm and liver, followed by examination of the
 may be deflected by organs such as the liver or spleen
gastrointestinal tract in its whole length running from
(Figure 12.19).
the stomach caudal to the descending colon. It is also
 Shotgun injuries in working gundogs can be an
important to assess the pancreas, spleen, kidneys, ureter
 incidental finding when the patient is radiographed
and bladder. Small single lacerations of the viscera
for another complaint. Usually such penetration
 should be debrided and closed. Large defects may
occurs outside the effective range of most shotguns
(30-40 m), with the pellets only entering the sub-
cutaneous and deep fascial layers where they cause
 little or no harm. Occasionally dogs may be shot at
Exithole
closer range, allowing the pellets to penetrate deep
into the body; if they are shot from extremely close
range there will be extensive tissue damage over a
relatively wide area.
Wound management
All ballistic wounds are grossly contaminated, with
potential for large amounts of devitalized tissue,
therefore all such wounds should be explored and
debrided wherever possible. The entry and exit wounds
Entryhole
should be located, explored and debrided. Bullets that
Figure 12.19: A low-velocity bullet follows an unpredictabte
are relatively superficial should be removed, although
path.The entry point is on the laterat thorax;foliowing
those which are inaccessible are probably best left
ricochet from the liver, this bullet exits dorsally.
Special Considerations in Wound Management  J
135
require partial excision oftissue, such as partial hepatic 
Omentum is readily used to manage chronic non-
lobectomy, splenectomy, nephrectomy or enterectomy.
healing inguinal and axil Ian-wounds in cats (Broc kman 
It' there are multiple lacerations of the intestinal tract it
et ai, 1996; Lascelles et ai, 1998) (Figure 12.22). In
may not be possible to resect all affected areas and
cats it is essential to rule out any underlying cause (e.g.
multiple serosal patching should be performed. Ifthere
feline leukaemia virus or feline immunodeficiency
has been extensive contamination of the peritoneal
 virus infection) prior to undertaking surgery.
cavity, open abdominal drainage should be considered.
1. The non-healing wound is preferably excised and
a laparotomy (either midline or paracostal)
VASCULAR AUGMENTATION OF
 performed
WOUND BEDS USING THE OMENTUM
2.(
Omentum is exteriorized (Figure 12.22b) and a
pedicle created of suitable length to reach the
The double peritoneal sheet of the bursal omentum has
wound
been used to advantage clinically since 1896 and has
gained widespread use in human and veterinary sur-
gery. It has classically been used to seal and repair
intra-abdominal structures, and in recent years has
 been used extra-abdominally as a pedicle graft.
 Omentum is a mesothelial membrane and its surgi-
cal manipulation relies on its extremely rich vascular
and lymphatic supply. The omentum can function in
Spleen
the presence of infection, induce vascularization and
adhere to tissues. Omentum mobilizes large numbers
of macrophages, mast cells and lymphocytes, which
release cytokines that modulate and induce the healing
process. These white cells are able to exit the omental
lymphatics via 'milk spots* or omental lymphoid
organs (OLO) which are aggregates of blind bulbous 
lymphatic capillaries.
Stomach
 In veterinary surgery, omentum can be used: to aid
Pancreas
reconstruction of wounded tissue; to provide drainage
Figure 12.20: The dorsat leaf of the omentum is detached
of lymphoedema; to seal abdominal (and thoracic)
from the pancreas and spleen. Omental and splenic vessels
viscera (Hosgood, 1990); and to aid in the management
are figated as necessan:
of prostatic abscesses (White and Williams, 1995) and
retention cysts (Bray et ai, 1997). The omentum can
be used surgically as a double or single leaf, both
Stomach
within and outside the abdominal cavity.
Creating an omental pedicle
An omental pedicle is created by detaching the dorsal
omental leaf from the pancreas and the spleen (Figure 
12.20), thus doubling the length of available omentum.
Lengthening the omentum in this way allows it to be
used from the axilla to the proximal hindlimbs (Ross
and Pardo, 1993).
Occasionally it may be useful to create a pedicle
which reaches the distal forelimbs, hindlimbs or the
head of an animal. In such cases the omentum is incised
in an inverted L* shape, starting immediately caudal to
the gastrosplenic ligament (Figure 12.21). In most
cases it is sufficient to extend only the dorsal portion.
Use of omental pedicles
Omentum can be used in managing chronic non-
healing wounds in two ways. One relies on primary
wound closure over the site (Brockman et al., 1996)
and the other uses omentum as a vascular bed for a free
skin graft (Smith et al., 1995).
Figure 12.21: Inverted 'U extension of the omentum.
136  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction 
been created following trauma or radical oncological
resections. An example ofthis is chest wall reconstfuc-
tion following removal of three or more ribs in the
management ofa rib-based tumour. The large thoracic
defect is initially stabilized by means of synthetic non-
absorbable mesh. This is either reinforced by mobili-
zation of the latissimus dorsi muscle or by an omental
pedicle. Both types of reinforcement serve to help seal
the thoracic wall and to provide a bed over which the
skin deficit can be closed.
Full thickness wounds that cannot be closed con-
ventionally can be managed by placement of omentum
into the wound bed (Smith et ai, 1995). Following
aggressive debridement and early wound management
an omental pedicle is exteriorized via a paracostal
incision, passed through a subcutaneous tunnel, and
sutured with simple interupted absorbable sutures to
the bed of the wound. The omentum is then dressed as
for an open wound for up to 14 days when it is deemed
suitable as a granulated bed for application of a ffee
meshed skin graft (see Chapter 9).
 For chronic non-healing wounds or for large defects
which appear to have non-viable wound beds (which
would not support ffee skin grafting), creating and
exteriorizing an omental pedicle should be considered.
This is a readily performed technique and survival of the
omentum is excellent as long as it is handled gently.
REFERENCES
 Bray JP. White RAS and Williams JM (1997) Partial resection and
omentalization: a new technique for management of prostatic
Figure 12.22: (a) A chronic non-healing axillary wound in α
retention cysts in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 26, 202-209
cat. (h) Omentum is exteriorized via a paracostal incision,
Brockman DJ, Pardo AD. Conzemius MG. Cabell LM and Trout NJ (1996)
(c) The omenium isdrawn very gently through α
Omentum enhanced reconstuction of chronic non-healing wounds in
cats: techniques and clinical use. Veterinary Surger~ 25.99-104
subcutaneous funnel, to the axillary wound.
Harkin KR. Walshaw R and Mullaney TP (1996) Association of
perianal fistula and colitis in the German shepherd dog: response to
high dose prednisone and dietary therapy. Journal of the American
3. A subcutaneous tunnel is created from the
Animal HospitalAssociation 32.515-520
laparotomy wound to the non-healing wound
potential surgical applications in dogs and cats. Compendium on
site. The omentum is then drawn very gently
ContinuingEducationfor the PracticingVeterinarian12,45-51
Lascelles BDX. Davison L.Dunning M. Bray JPand White RAS (1998)
through the tunnel (Figure 12.22c). Great care
 Use of omental pedicle graffs in the rmanagement of non-healing
must be taken in handling omentum, and its 
axillary wounds in I0 cats. Journal ofSmall Animal Practice 39.
vascular pedicle must not be fotated as this may
475-480
Mathews KA, Ayres SA. Tano CA. Riley SM, Sukhiani HR and Adarms
compromise its blood supply and lymphatics
C (1997) Cyclosporin treatment of perianal fistulas in dogs.
4. The laparotomy wound is closed and the exit
Canadian Veterinary Journal38.39-41
Pavletic M (1993) Atas of Small Animal Reconstructive Surgery.
hole for the omentum should be large enough so
Lippincott. Philadelphia
 as to cause no vascular damage while ensuring
Ross WE and Pardo AD (1993) Evaluation of an omental pedicle
that visceral herniation does not occuf
 Smith BA. Hosgood G and Hedlund CS (1995) Omental pedicle used to
5. The omentum is sutured into the chronic wound
manage a large dorsal wound in a dog. Journal of Small Animal
site with simple interrupted absorbable 2 metric
Practice 36.267-270
SwaimnSFand Henderson RA(1997) SmallAnimal Wound Management.
sutures, avoiding the blood and lymph vessels 
Znd edn. Williams and Wilkins. Baltimore
6.
 Skin is then mobilized over the wound and
Westaby S (1989) Trauma:Pathogenesis and Treatment.Heinemann.
 closed in a foutine fashion.
Oxford
White RAS and Lane JG (1988) Pharyngeal stick penetration injuries in
the dog.Journal ofSmall Animal Practice29.13-35
Omentum or muscle (see Chapter 10) can be used
to aid reconstruction where large tissue deficits have
abscesses in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 24. 390-395
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Complications of Wound Healing
Audrey Remedies
INTRODUCTION
controlled with direct manual pressure for 10-15 min-
utes. However, moderate to severe bleeding will require
Wound healing is an extremely complicated process
the application of pressure bandages or surgical ligation
that proceeds along four basic and sequential steps:
of the offending vessels. Once haematoma formation is
evident, resolution may be accelerated by the applica-
Inflamm ation
tion of warm compresses on to the affected area for 10
Epithelialization
minutes, three times a day. Dissipation of the haema-
Contraction
toma generally requires approximately 7 days.
· Collagen formation.
These phases are interrelated and influenced by
SEROMAS
factors such as the local wound environment and patient
health, which can delay and prevent nonmal healing. In
Creation of dead space, either through trauma or by
addition, the application or misapplication of basic
surgical dissection, can result in the accumulation of
surgical principles will also influence healing. Techni-
sterile fluid within the subcutaneous space, a seroma.
cal considerations, including the use of sharp incisions,
This fluid tends to form in areas that have redundant,
atraumatic tissue handling, minimal dissection, adequate 
loosely attached skin (Figure 13.1) and are associated
 debridement, achieving haemostasis and appropriate
with excessive motion (shoulder, axilla and dorsum).
wound closure, all promote successful wound repair. If
Other than the presence of fluid, seromas are associated
these are not adhered to, complications occur. Although
with few clinical signs. They are not painful, erythema
 most wound complications are not life-threatening, they
tous, oedematous or associated with incisional dehis.
involve prolonged periods of animal discomfort and
cence. In fact, seromas most often are a source of owner
veterinary care, and increased costs to owners.
anxiety, rather than patient discomfort. In some special-
ized reconstructive procedures, such as skin grafting,
seroma fonmation can be detrimental to the critical
POSTOPERATIVE HAEMORRHAGE
adherence ofthe tissue to the wound bed. Seromas will
AND HAEMATOMAS
also delay the ultimate healing of affected tissues.
Surgical incisions involve the disruption of blood
vessels with an initial tissue response of vasoconstric-
tion. However, in the immediate postoperative period,
vasodilation, bleeding and haematoma formation can
occur. Overt incisional haemorrhage is a burden in
patient management, but is usually a minor complica-
tion. Haematoma formation, however, can predispose
to wound infection, cause discomfort, and prevent
healing of reconstructive tissues (e.g. skin grafts) on to
wound beds.
Prevention of haemorrhage and subsequent hae-
matoma formation is more prudent than postoperative
treatment. During surgery, using appropriately sized
ligatures or electrocautery can decrease haemorrhage.
Figure 13.1: Redundant and loosely attached skin predispose
Minimizing the amount ofsubcutaneous dissection will
the dorsum to seroma formation after surgery: Areas that are
associated with excessive motion, and procedures that create
also prevent the accumulation of blood within a defined
extensive dead space, also contribute to fluid accumulation
space. Postoperatively, minor incisional oozing can be
withinthesubcutaneousspace
138  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Differentiation from abscesses
Treatment
Seromas must be differentiated from subcutaneous
 Seromas that occur after surgery usually do not require
abscesses. Seroma formation can be distinguished
intervention. Attempts at aspiration are futile and risk
from an incisional abscess clinically. Whereas
contaminating a sterile environment. Similarly, drain
 seromas are associated with minimal clinical signs,
placement often results in recurrence after drain re-
abscesses provoke intense local inflammation. Thus,
moval and predisposes to iatrogenic infection. Seromas
abscesses are associated with local skin erythema,
do resolve spontaneously, but this process may require
oedema, heat, incisional dehiscence, fever and
2-3 weeks.
pain. Veterinary surgeons should rely on their clini-
cal skills and judgement to distinguish between
seromas and abscesses. Inexperience and a dubious
OEDEMA
 nature may propel individuals to aspirate the seroma
contents and examine the fluid. In this situation, it
Early wound healing is associated with the process of
is very easy to convert a pre-existing seroma into
inflammation. During this process, vascular and lym-
an abscess. Should such an impulse be followed,
 phatic obstruction and the presence of cell- and plasma-
derived mediators result in the exudation of fluid into
complications. The area should be shaved and surgi-
the interstitial subcutaneous space (oedema forma-
cally prepared. The operator should wear sterile
tion). Traumatic wounds generally manifest more
gloves and use a sterile syringe and needle to avoid
oedema than surgical wounds. However, depending on
inoculating bacteria into the seroma. Aspirated
the extent of dissection and the nature of the procedure,
seromas should be monitored daily to diagnose any
surgical wounds can also appear oedematous in the
untoward complications.
first 3-4 days after surgery. Regional mastectomies,
for example, often result in marked peri-incisional
Prevention
oedema formation (Figure 13.2).
Prevention of seroma fonmation is accomplished by
 Some reconstructive procedures, such as skin flaps
practising gentle tissue handling and eliminating
and grafts, are also associated with marked postopera-
dead space. Surgeries that involve extensive soft
tive oedema. The reverse saphenous skin flap, which
tissue dissection and mobilization, such as regional
depends on a reversal of blood flow through the cranial
mastectomies and skin flap transfers, will create large
and caudal branches of the saphenous artery and
amounts of dead space. Subcutaneous sutures, active
medial saphenous vein, is particularly susceptible to
or passive drains, and bandages are techniques that
oedema and congestion. Oedema formation in these
can be used individually, or in combination, to de-
flaps will be prolonged for up to 2 weeks after flap
crease seroma formation. Although all of these could
transfer. Skin grafts are associated with oedema during
be applied in clean surgical procedures, the use of
 the stage of plasmatic imbibition, reaching a maximum
buried suture material in clean-contaminated cases
at 2-3 days after harvest.
should be avoided. In these situations, drains and
Large skin wounds of the distal limbs which are
bandages are preferable. Open system drains (e.g.
managed with second intention healing can also result
Penrose drains) should always be covered with band-
in impaired lymphatic and venous drainage, and oedema
 ages to avoid ascending infection.
formation. Especially when wounds exceed 50% of the
circumferential limb diameter, the tension created by
wound contracture creates a tourmiquet effect and
distal limb swelling.
Postoperative oedema can be treated using com-
pression bandages. As loosening occurs, new band-
ages need to be applied daily to maintain even pressure.
The application of warm compresses to the affected
area 3-4 times daily promotes circulation and de-
 creases oedema formation. If oedema is confined to the
 limbs, active movement increases circulation and pro-
motes lymphatic and venous return.
WOUND DEHISCENCE
 Dehiscence is defined as the breakdown of a surgically
closed wound. Immediately after closure, a problem
Figure 13.2: Marked local oedema and hyperaemia are often
associated with surgeries that involve extensive subcutaneous
incision may be erythematous, oedematous or painful.
dissection, such as regionat mastectomies.
Complications of Wound Healing
139
Incisions
Incisions, of either traumatic or surgical origin, can
also break down due to inappropriate surgical tech-
miques. In deep layers, incisional dehiscence will lead
to hemiation of intemal contents. Breakdown after
closure of the abdominal wall is probably the most
common and most serious scenario. Several factors
can result in abdominal hemiation:
 The size and choice of suture material must be
 appropriate. Abdominal incisions are closed with
3-0 suture material in cats and small breed dogs,
2-0 in medium-sized dogs, 0 in large breed dogs,
and 1 in giant dogs. Recommended suture
 materials include polyglycolic acid, polyglactin
Figure 13.3: Incisionat dehiscence is glaringty evident 3-5
910, and polydioxanone.
days after surgery.
 It is especially important to ensure that square
knots are created rather than 'granny' or slip
the wound edges. Generally, irrefutable evidence of
knots. Generally, the minimum number of 
incisional breakdown becomes apparent at 3-5 days
throws necessary to make secure simple
after surgery. Areas ofnon-viable necrotic tissue may
interrupted knots is three for polyglycolic acid
also be evident at that time (Figure 13.3).
 or polyglactin 910, and four for polydioxanone.
Wound dehiscence is rarely due to an intrinsic
Secure square knots to start and finish a
inability to heal; rather, problems associated with
simple continuous pattern should have at
surgical judgement or technique and the wound bed
least six throws.
are incriminated. Probably the most common reason
 Probably the most common cause of abdominal
for dehiscence after closure of a traumatic wound is
wall dehiscence is the misjudgement and lack of
incomplete debridement of contaminated material and
recognition of the layer of strength at the time of
necrotic tissue. As all traumatic wounds are contami-
closure. Whether an abdominal incision is midline
nated, a thorough assessment of the cause and nature of
or paramedian, the layer of strength is the extermal
the wound must be perfonmed initially.
leaf of the rectus sheath. Studies have shown that
the strength of incisions closed by suturing the
Crush injuries
intermal and extermal rectus sheaths is similar to
Wounds that are associated with crush injuries, such as
that ofthe extermal sheath alone (Rosin and
dog bites and vehicular degloving, and wounds that are
Richardson, 1987). In addition, closure of the
 grossly contaminated with debris, should not be closed
peritoneum is unnecessary and predisposes to
primarily. These injuries require at least 2-3 days of
 adhesion formation. Typically, abdominal wall
 daily open wound management (debridement and lav-
dehiscence arises from inadvertent closure of the
age; see Chapter 5) in order to assess local blood supply
 subcutaneous layer instead of the extermal rectus
and to be sure that non-viable or contaminated tissues
sheath. Especially in large breed or obese dogs,
have been removed. If surgical closure is attempted in
the delineation between the extermal sheath and
these cases, then the underlying necrosis and infection
 subcutaneous tissue is subtle. The surgeon must 
will undoubtedly lead to wound dehiscence.
strive to separate these layers to ensure
appropriate closure.
Sharp lacerations
Wounds that are a result of sharp lacerations still
Superficial  wounds
require stringent initial assessment prior to primary
Closure of superficial wound layers also requires the
closure. Here, the surgeon must adhere to sterile prin-
application ofappropriate surgical techniques in order
ciples regarding patient preparation and instrument
to minimize the risk of dehiscence. Excessive tension
 preparation. The wound should be evaluated and pre-
on the suture line is a common cause of cutaneous
aq isnu anssn ioadsns [e 'uoyseg [eonains e ul paed
dehiscence. In dogs and cats, the abundance of loose
debrided to healthy, bleeding edges, and liberal lavage
skin in the thoracic and abdominal regions allows for
 should be performed. It is best to avoid burying deep
the closure of most wounds by undermining and
and subcutaneous sutures in these clean/contaminated
advancing the wound's edges with walking subcu-
wounds, as they can serve as anidus ofinfection. Using
taneous sutures (see Chapter 7). In some cases, use of
 drains or pressure bandages to eliminate dead space is
tension relieving suture patterms, such as far-near-
more appropriate upon primary or delayed primary
near-far or far-far-near-near, may be necessary to
closure of traumatic wounds.
appose the skin edges.
140  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Wounds associated with the limbs can pose prob-
sheath is a common surgical error, an effort must be
lems for closure, however. Where the wound is less
made to identify the layer of strength and to close it
than one third of the limb circumference, multiple
with appropriate suture material. Incisions that break
punctate releasing incisions can be made in a parallel
down because ofexcessive skin tension can be treated
fashion in the adjacent skin (Figure 13.4). When the
 as open wounds, allowing for second intention healing
primary incision is closed, these punctate incisions
to occur, or application of other surgical techniques,
will expand to fonm a mesh and minimize tension. The
such as skin flaps and grafts may be necessary.
small multiple punctate incisions are lef to heal by
second intention. Large wounds involving the limbs
often require skin flaps or grafts to provide additional
INFECTION
soft tissue coverage (see Chapter 9).
A break in the skin barrier, from either trauma or
Management
surgery, inevitably leads to bacterial contamination.
When wound dehiscence does occur, management
Postoperative infection has been documented to occur
 must first be directed at identifying any contributing
 in approximately 5% of all small animal surgical pro-
factors. In traumatic wounds, residual contamination
cedures and in 2.5% of clean surgeries (Vasseur, 1988).
or necrotic tissue is often the cause of incisional
 In most patients, host defence systems will phagocytose
problems. Such incisions should be opened and as-
microbes and prevent infection. However, when bac-
sessed thoroughly. Wound debridement and lavage
terial numbers exceed a critical level (>10° organisms
should be performed. If doubt remains as to tissue
 per gram of tissue), infection will occur. Several factors,
viability or degree of contamination, then open wound
 including local wound conditions, the type of bacteria
management should be continued for 2-3 days prior to
involved and the status of the patient, may dampen
 closure. Incisional hermiations require surgery to ex-
nonmal defence mechanisms and predispose to infec-
 plore the hermia contents and apply appropriate surgi-
tion. In traumatic wounds, the most common source of 
cal techniques to affect successful closure. Since closure
infection is the presence of non-viable tissue.
ofthe subcutaneous layer instead ofthe extermal rectus
Normally, after an incision or laceration, neutrophils
migrate to the wound and engulf and destroy microbes.
Macrophage recruitment occurs later and enhances
neutrophil phagocytosis. Any local condition that pre-
vents the ability of these cells to contact and kill
bacteria will potentiate infection. Haematoma or seroma
formation will prevent the adherence of neutrophils to
the bacterial cell walls and may also serve as a substrate 
for microbial growth. Implantation of foreign bodies,
such as drains and sutures, will decrease the number of
bacteria necessary to cause an infection. Animals that
 are immunocompromised because of pre-existing
diseases (hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus, or
neoplasia), or because of exogenous medications
(corticosteroids) are more susceptible to infections.
 Undeveloped or senescent resistance processes may
also affect the very young or old animal.
Bacterial species
 The kind of bacteria affecting a wound will influence
greatly the risk of infection. In dogs, soft tissue infec-
tions not involving the gastrointestinal system are
usually associated with Sraphylococcusspp. However,
Escherichia coli and anaerobic bacteria, such as Bacter-
oidesmd Clostridium, frequently contaminate wounds
 that are located near the portals of the alimentary tract.
In cats, Pasteurella is the most common isolate from
soft tissue infections. Some bacteria which elaborate
Figure 13.4: One method of overcoming excessive skin
endotoxins, such as E. coli. cause direct cellular toxi-
tension on the suture line is the use ofmuttiple punctate
city and prevent phagocytosis by host defence cells.
releasing incisions. The 0.5 cm parallet skin incisions are
 Others, including Clostridium, may produce exotoxins
made in staggered rows approximately 2 cm apart. When
undermined,these incisions will expand to formamesh and
that cause a more rapid onset of infection with fewer
facilitate skin closure.
bacterial numbers.
Complications of Wound Healing
141
Clinical signs
 prepared with a 5-7 minute scrub using a germicidal
The clinical signs of a wound infection usually mani-
detergent, then painted with isopropyl alcohol. In
fest at 2-3 days after surgery. The animal may
addition, antimicrobial plastic drapes can be used to
show systemic signs ofillness, such as inactivity and
isolate the surrounding skin from the incised wound.
inappetence, or have an elevated body temperature.
More often, skin wounds are associated with local
Scrubbing up
changes only. The affected area is warm, erythema-
Wearing aclean scrub suit, cap and mask, the veterinary
tous, oedematous and painful. The incision may be
surgeon should perform a 3-5 minute scrub of both
 gaping and associated with a serosanguinous, mucoid
hands and forearms. Careful gowning, gloving and
 or purulent discharge.
draping techniques should be used as these often are
sources of transgressions in operating sterility. Punc-
Dia gnosis
tures in gloves are common (as many as 90%),
especially during long surgeries. Although the numbers
deep aspirates of the wound are recommended to
of microbes are low after a surgical scrub, bacterial
 confirm the diagnosis and isolate the offending organ-
contamination will increase during long surgeries and
isms. To avoid inadvertent contamination, a sterile
especially once blood contacts the surgeon's hands. The
surgical preparation of the skin should be performed
safest practice is to wear two pairs of gloves, with the
prior to aspiration. The operator should also wear
outer gloves a half size larger. This is especially impor-
sterile gloves and use sterile implements. The speci-
tant in procedures that involve the intermal implantation
men is then examined cytologically and cultured for
of bone cement, such as total hip replacement.
 aerobic and anaerobic bacteria.
Surgical technique
Prevention
 The importance of surgical technique and judgement 
Prevention of infection is more practical and cost-
in the prevention of postoperative infection cannot be
efficient than treating postoperative complications. In
overemphasized. Even in clean surgeries, the implan-
clean surgeries, minimizing bacterial contamination
tation of buried suture predisposes to bacterial growth.
from the patient and adhering to sound surgical tech-
Historical studies (Elek and Conen, 1957) have shown
that, while more than a million staphylococcal organ-
tion. Avoidance of bacterial contamination is
isms are required to create an infection when inocu-
 implemented by controlling the operating room envi-
lated into normal subcutaneous tissue, as few as 100 of
 ronment, appropriate patient preparation, and constant
the same bacteria can promote infection in the pres-
vigilance by the surgeon.
ence of multifilamented suture material (Figure 13.5).
The operating room
 The creation of dead space and the subsequent
Many moderm surgical theatres are equipped with
fonmation of haematomas or seromas will also en-
unidirectional or laminar flow ventilation systems that
hance infection and dampen local immune responses.
 In clean surgeries, elimination of dead space is best 
limit airbome contamination. Although the costs asso-
performed using subcutaneous sutures and bandages.
ciated with such engineering designs are prohibitive
Although there is an attendant risk of infection associ-
 for most private practices, there are some rules that can
be implemented to help decrease infection:
ated with buried sutures, this must be balanced against 
the effect of haematoma and seroma formation. In
 The surgical theatre should be an enclosed area
clean-contaminated surgeries and traumatic wounds,
that is isolated from noise and 'traffic'
use of closed or open drains may be preferable to
 A separate area should serve for anaesthesia
buried sutures when decreasing dead space.
induction and patient preparation
 Prior to closure of any traumatic wound, all devital-
"Traffic' in and out of the operating room should
ized tissue and foreign bodies should be removed.
be limited
Should any doubt remain as to tissue viability, then the
 Activity and talking should be minimized
wound should be managed as an open defect, and
 Strict sterilization techniques for instruments 
 primary closure delayed for 3-5 days.
must be followed.
Prophylactic antibiotics
Patient preparation
The use of prophylactic antibiotics to prevent post-
Removal of fur from the surgical area should be
operative infection remains controversial. Clean sur-
extensive and complete, and performed immediately
geries, which are associated with low infection rates
before an operation. Shaving an operative site 24 hours
(2.5%), do not benefit from perioperative administra-
before surgery will increase infection rates by 100%
tion of antibiotics. Only when the duration of surgery-
(Alexander et al, 1983). As the skin is an important
exceeds 90 minutes or when inexperienced operators
source of contaminants, appropriate preparation is
perform the surgery does prophylaxis reduce infection
essential in preventing complications. The skin is
rate (Vasseur, 1988).
142 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstniction
Treatment
 Treatment of postoperative infection requires initial
consideration as to cause. However, regardless of
aetiology, the safest management approach involves
surgical exploration of the infected site. The wound
must be debrided of all necrotic tissue or foreign
bodies. If not performed previously, swabs should be
taken for aerobic and anaerobic culture at this time.
Copious lavage will aid in reduction of bacterial num-
bers. Surgical infections are generally not closed pri-
marily but managed as open wounds for several days
prior to closure. Antibiotic treatment is based on cul-
ture results and is continued for 10-14 days.
DELAYED AND INCOMPLETE
WOUND HEALING
Wounds that are left to heal by second intention can be
complicated by delayed healing and incomplete epi-
thelialization. Skin defects over loose-skinned areas,
such as the thorax and abdomen, are generally not
affected. However, wounds that encompass half the
circumference of the limbs or greater are at risk for
these complications. As the size of a defect increases,
tension in the surrounding skin is created which over-
comes the contraction of myofibroblasts. Since the
Figure 13.5: Buried sutures are foreign material and can
myofibroblasts cannot pull the wound edges together.
predipose to infection even in clean surgeries, such as a
ventral abdominal ovariohysterectomy.Fewer bacteria are
required to promote infection following the use of
multifilamented suture material.
Clean-contaminated procedures are associated with
slightly higher rates of postoperative infection (4.5%)
(Vasseur, 1988). In such cases, the degree and source of
contamination, and the ability to minimize bacterial
numbers during surgery, are important considerations in
judging the necessity of prophylactic antibiotics. For
example, clinical problems tend to arise only if large
amounts of small intestine contents are spilled into the
abdomen. However, higher bacterial numbers associ-
ated with colonic contents render any spillage more
hazardous. Although prophylactic antibiotic adminis-
tration is indicated in these scenarios, minimizing bac-
terial numbers through copious lavage is probably the
best tactic for decreasing postoperative infection.
If they are used, prophylactic antibiotics are most
effective when given preoperatively and continued
throughout surgery. Effective therapeutic blood levels
are achieved through intravenous administration. If
antibiotic administration is delayed for 1-2 hours after
contamination has occurred, efficacy is significantly
diminished. If given after wound closure, there is no
benefit provided by the use of antibiotics. Continuation
of antibiotic administration in the postoperative period
is of no value and will not decrease infection rates. The
Figure 13.6: Prolonged healing times and wide epitheliat
scars are often associated with limb wounds managed by
choice of antibiotics should be targeted at bacteria that
second intention healing. This method of treatment is costly
arc most likely to be present at the surgical site.
and resutts in thinner,morefragile scarepithelium.
Complications of Wound Healing  143
the net effect is to delay and even stop wound contrac-
may lead to decreased range of joint motion and
tion. Further healing can occur only by epithelial
subsequent lameness. Defects involving any orifice
migration over the wound bed. Epithelial migration
(eye, mouth and anus) can result in stenosis and func-
begins at the wound edges and moves centripetally. As
tional deformity. Specialized reconstructive proce-
the defect size increases, the regenerated epithelium
dures (e.g. Z plasties, advancement flaps; see Chapter
becomes thinner and complete coverage may not oc-
7) can be perfonmed to restore nonmal function.
cur. In addition, scar epithelium is thinner and thus,
more prone to injur)- than normal skin (Figure 13.6). In
cases where large wounds involving the limbs are
REFERENCES
Alexander JW. Fischer JE. Boyajiain M. Palmquist J and Morris MJ
reconstmctive procedures (skin flaps and grafts) should
(1983) Infuence of hair-removal methods on wound infections.
be perfonmed.
Archives-of-Surgery_118. 347-348
Elek SD and Conen PE (1957) The virulence of Staphylococcus
pyogenes for man. A shudy in the problems of wound infection.
BritishJournal ofExperimentatPathotogy38.573-576
WOUND CONTRACTURE
Rosin E and Richardson S (1987) Effect of fascial closure technique on
 Strength of healing abdominal incisions in the dog: a biomechanical
study.Veterinary Surgery 16.269-272
Wound contracture, especially following second in-
Rosin E and Robinson GM (1989) Knot security of suture materials.
Veterinary Surgery 18, 269-273
tention healing, can lead to loss or altered function. The
Vasseur PB (i988) Surgical wound infection rates in dogs and cats.
contracture of wounds situated over flexor surfaces
Veterinary Surgery 17.60-64
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Case Examples
David Fowler and John M. Williams
CASE ONE: 8-year-old spayed female Labrador Retriever cross with a basal cell
tumour of the footpad
History
The bitch was presented with a subtle forelimb lameness attributed
 a go poy [eoa aun ul paool uoisa u e o
forelimb (Figure 14.1).
Assessment and management options
Biopsy of the mass led to a histopathological diagnosis of basal
cell tumour. This is a relatively benign tumour in the dog, and
Figure 14.1
resection with minimal margins is usually curative. However,
local resection in this case necessitated resection of more than 50%
of the metacarpal footpad. Wound breakdown and inadequate
 resistance to weight-bearing stresses can be anticipated following
resection of a large portion of this footpad. Reconstructive options
 included footpad grafts or digital footpad transposition.
Footpad grafts were considered. However, footpad grafts
include only the dermal and epidermal components of the pad. The
footpad cushion, which is important in the diffusion of weight-
Figure 14.2
bearing stresses, cannot be transferred with footpad grafts. There-
fore, a digital footpad transposition technique was used as the
reconstructive option of choice (Figure 14.2).
Treatment
The 3rd and 4th digits bear the majority of the weight-bearing stress
of the foot, but loss of the 2nd or 5th digit is associated with little,
if any, loss of function. Therefore, the 2nd or 5th digital footpads can
be used to provide footpad tissue for transposition to neighbouring
locations that are more crucial to weight-bearing function.
 In this case, the 5th digital footpad was dissected, using a
digital filleting technique (Figure 14.3). The phalangeal bones
were excised through a dorsal midline longitudinal incision,
taking care to preserve all soft tissues and neurovascular struc-
Figure14.3
tures. Following removal of the phalangeal bones, a bridging
incision was made through the interdigital web, extending from
the donor to the recipient site. The digital footpad was then simply
transposed on to the recipient wound bed and all incisions closed
primarily (Figure 14.4).
In such cases, protection from weight-bearing stresses, using
heavily padded bandages and exercise restriction, is required until 
soft tissue healing is advanced - usually 3 to 4 weeks. Subsequent
weight-bearing stresses should be introduced gradually to allow
Figure 14.4
 progressive remodelling of the wound.
146 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
CASE TWO: Five-year-old female Samoyed with a full thickness burn
History
The bitch was initially presented to the referring veterinary surgeon with a closed pyometra. She was
 depressed and mildly dehydrated; laboratory assessment revealed profound neutrophilia with a left shift. The
bitch was stabilized by administering intravenous balanced electrolyte solution and was started on systemic
antibiotics. Subsequent ovariohysterectomy and recovery from anaesthesia were uncomplicated. At the time
 Of suture removal 10 days after surgery, an area of skin necrosis was apparent over the caudal lumbar region.
She had been placed on an electric heating pad during ovariohysterectomy and skin necrosis had occurred
secondary to thermal injury.
Wound assessment
This lesion (Figure 14.5) represented a full thickness burm wound with
minimal exudate and no evidence of infection. Debridement of all
necrotic tissue with subsequent open wound management was indicated.
Reconstruction could be considered once all ongoing tissue necrosis had
been controlled.
Figure 14.5
Treatment
 En bloc debridement of all necrotic skin
and subcutaneous tissue was performed
(Figure 14.6). The use of sterile instru-
ments and aseptic technique minimized
further contamination and decreased the
risk of nosocomial infection. Immediate
reconstruction was considered. However,
Figure 14.6
Figure 14.7
as it is often difficult to ascertain the
extent of non-viable tissue after initial debridement, a judicious approach was adopted and the wound was
managedopen, using a wet-to-dry contact layer with a tie-over bolus type dressing (Figure 14.7) A hydrogel
rather than an adherent contact dressing could have been considered as an altermative. The bandage was
Further assessment
Three days after initial debridement, there was no evidence of ongoing
tissue necrosis and tissues within the wound were well vascularized
(Figure 14.8). The wound was now classified as clean-contaminated, and
was appropriate for delayed primary closure.
Figure 14.8
Further treatment
A great deal of mobile skin was present on the trunk. Direct
suture closure, facilitated by tissue imdermining, can be achie ved
in lesions of this size. Reconstruction was performed under 
surgically aseptic conditions. Skin surrounding the lesion was
undermined deepto the cutaneous trunci muscle to preserve the
vascular supply to the skin (Figure 14.9).
Tissues are advanced in the direction of greatest elasticity
 or distensibility, determined by grasping the skin and at-
tempting advancement in different directions. Backhaus towel
 clamps were used at key locations to maintain skin edges in
Figure 14.9
Figure 14.10
apposition during suturing (Figure 14.10).
CASE TWO continues·
Case Examples  1-
Tissue advancementresulted in the formation of aY-shaped closure.Tissue
appositionwasmaintainedusing absorbable suturematerial placed ina cruciate
patterninto subcutaneoustissue along theskin margin.
Walking sutureswere notrequired toachieve tissue apposition,therefore
minimizing the amountofburied suturematerialwithin thewound.Dead space
was managed using a closed suction drain (Figure 14.11),which wasremoved
after 4 days.
Outcome
Subsequent healingwasuneventful.
Figure 14.11
CASE THREE: 2-year-old castrated male Domestic Shorthair with a non-healing
chronic axillary wound
History
 The cat was presented with a 6-week history of a chronic axillary
wound following a leg entrapment in its collar. The wound was 2 cm
in diameter, non-healing and with chronic granulation tissue present
(Figure 14.12). The cat was negative for both FIV and FeLV.
Management options
 Non-healing chronic axillary wounds can be very difficult to manage
due to the constant motion at the site. It was therefore decided to use a
flap to minimize tension and to utilize omentum to enhance the healing
Figure 14.12
 potential of the area. A number of options were available in this case,
e.g. advancement flap, a 45 degree transposition flap, or a thoracodorsal
axial flap. Omentum provides the necessary angiogenic factors to allow
 relatively rapid healing.
Treatment
O sse me o s ods ro pp pe pd sem o a
 both the axilla and the paracostal area. The wound was excised.
A separate incision was made in the paracostal area to exteriorize
Figure 14.13
the omentum (Figure 14.13); there was no need to carry out omental
extension in this case. A subcutaneous tunnel was created between the
 axilla and the paracostal incision. Omentum was drawn through the
tunnel to the axilla (Figure 14.14). A skin incision was made at the
proximal end of the axillary wound to release tension. A standard
advancement flap was found not to be necessary, due to the elastic
nature of the cat's skin. Sutures were only placed in the wound edges;
 no walking or tacking sutures were used in the body of the flap. The
wound was closed in an L shape (Figures 14.15 and 14.16) with
Figure 14.14
simple interrupted sutures of 3 metric monfilament nylon. The
paracostal  incision  through  the
muscles was partially closed so as
not to compromise omental blood
supply and the skin incision was
closed routinely.
Outcome
Healing in this case was uneventful.
Figure 14.15
Figure 14.16
148 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
CASE FoUR: 3-year-old spayed female Dobermann Pinscher
History
The bitch was presented acutely following a traumatic injur)' to the forelimb. She had been caught in a grain
 auger and had suffered a severe laceration/avulsion injur) to the flexor surface of the distal radius and ulna.
Initial assessment
The wound was heavily contaminated with soil and grain. The radius was intact, but the ulna had sustained
a fracture with segmental bone loss. All major flexor muscles were disrupted with significant loss of tissue.
The neurovascular supply to the distal extremity and foot was intact.
Initial treatment
 Due to the extent of contamination, immediate reconstruction
was considered inappropriate. The bitch was systemically
 stable, and was placed under general anaesthesia for aggressive
 local debridement and lavage. The wound was managed open,
Figure 14.17
using a wet-to-dry contact dressing with daily debridement and
wound was considered to be clean-contaminated (Figure 14.17).
Further assessment and management options
This was a devastating injury, necessitating complex local reconstruction.
Amputation was considered, but was declined by the owner. Factors considered in selecting an
appropriate method of reconstruction included: the presence of exposed bone; extensive loss of soft
tissues; and the loss of weight-bearing support provided by the flexor muscles. Carpal arthrodesis was
required to provide structural integrity during weight-bearing, but should not be performed in a
contaminated wound bed. Therefore, rapid reconstruction of the wound using well vascularized tissue
was considered essential for rapid rehabilitation of the wound and to facilitate staged carpal arthrodesis
at the earliest opportunity. A free microvascular transfer of the trapezius muscle, resurfaced with a full
thickness skin sraft was chosen.
Reconstruction
The trapezius muscle is a broad, flat muscle with a dominant
vascular pedicle formed by the superficial cervical artery and
vein. This muscle is very versatile for use in reconstruction of
 complex extremity wounds. The muscle was dissected from the
 lateral cervical region; simultaneously the recipient site was
surgically debrided and a suitable recipient artery and vein were
Figure 14.18
identified. The vascular pedicle ofthe trapezius muscle was then
transected and the muscle was moved to the recipient site and
inset with several absorbable sutures (Figure 14.18).
Using an operating microscope and standard microvascular
technique, the muscle was revascularized by end-to-side anas-
tomosis of the donor artery to the radial artery, and end-to-end
anastomosis of the donor vein to the cephalic vein. Successful
establishment of blood flow was documented 30 minutes after
 completion of both anastomoses. Following vascular anastomo-
Figure14.19
sis, placement of the flap was completed and dead space deep to
 the muscle flap was managed using a latex drain (Figure 14.19).
The muscle was immediately resurfaced with a meshed full
thickness skin graft (Figure 14.20). The graft was covered with a
heavily padded splint. Bandage changes were performed daily to
 allow evaluation of the skin graft and the underlying muscle flap.
Figure 14.20
CASE FOLK continues·
Case Examples  149
Figure 14.21 shows the appearance after 13 days.
Further treatment
Carpal arthrodesis was perfonmed using a dorsal ap-
proach to the distal radius, carpus and metacarpus. The
articular surfaces of the distal radius and the radiocarpal
bone were excised using a saggital bone saw. The inter-
articular cartilage was removed using a high speed burr.
Figure 14.21
 All joint surfaces were flushed thoroughly and packed
with cancellous bone graft harvested from the proximal
humerus. The carpus was stabilized in 10 degrees exten-
sion, using a 3.5 mm dynamic compression plate.
Outcome
 Subsequent healing was uneventful and weight-bearing
function was restored, with a satisfactory cosmetic out-
come (Figure 14.22).
Figure 14.22
CASE FIVE: Ten-month-old male German Shepherd cross with a ful thickness abrasion
History
 The dog was presented acutely following a road traffic accident. Intrave-
nous balanced electrolyte solution was initially administered at shock
doses. Thorough evaluation revealed no evidence of injury other than an
ventral abdominal wall (Figure 14.23). Opioid analgesic agents were
administered and the dog was observed for 24 hours prior to initiating
specific wound therapy. Although delay of wound debridement can
Figure14.23
 increase the risk of wound infection, general anaesthesia is best delayed
until the presence or absence of concomitant injuries is fully assessed.
Initial wound tre atment
Layered wound debridement (Figure 14.24) was perfonmed under
general anaesthesia. An extensive open wound was present, involving
the ventral abdominal wall to the left of the prepuce; a smaller open
Figure14.24
wound was present to the right of the prepuce. The prepuce itself was
spared from injury. The wound was managed using a bolus tie-over
dressing with a wet-to-dry contact layer (Figure 14.25). Tie-over
dressings are indicated in areas that are otherwise difficult to bandage
because of conformation or location. The bandage was changed daily
Figure14.25
controlled. Antibiotics were not used.
 Management options
Healthy granulation tissue covered the wound, there was no ongoing
tissue necrosis, and wound exudate was minimal by 7 days after injury
(Figure 14.26). Management options were considered. Second intention
healing was not an option since wound contraction would probably have
Figure 14.26
CASE FIVE continues·
150  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
resulted in loss of hindlimb mobility due to fibrosis of the inguinal fold,
as well as de viation of the prepuce. Local tissue advancement and mesh
expansion are difficult in this location, since skin is only available from
the cranial wound margin. Skin grafts can be used in this location, but
control of motion and shear stresses acting on the graft during healing are
difficult to control. As the goal was to redistribute tension away from
aaum srarn mun pue (oe (enlun pue aondand au) sannns [nn
Figure 14.27
tension is better tolerated, a rotation subdenmal plexus flap, based on the
lateral thorax, was chosen for reconstruction in this dog (Figure 14.27).
Treatment
 Ideally, the arc of incision of a rotation flap should be approximately
four times the distance the flap is moved, but the size of the defect in
this dog precluded a flap of this dimension. Careful preoperative
planning was required to ensure that flap viability would be maintained
and that the flap could be rotated into the desired position. The base of
Figure14.28
the rotation flap in this case incorporated the cranial superficial
epigastric artery and vein, ensuring a relatively robust vascular supply.
 Retraction of the defect and contraction ofthe flap occurred following
dissection of the rotation flap (Figure 14.28).
The advancing tip ofthe rotation flap was first sutured to the most
distant aspect of the defect, using a subcutaneous absorbable suture.
The length ofthe flap was then sutured to the length ofthe donor and
recipient site defects by first placing a single suture at the midpoints of
both cutaneous margins. Additional sutures were placed at the mid-
Figure 14.29
points of the two smaller resulting defects. By placing sutures in this
fashion, tension was equally distributed throughout the incisional
margin (Figure 14.29). Walking sutures are avoided in subdenmal
plexus flaps, since they can damage the blood supply.
Outcome
 The completed closure revealed reconstruction of the entire wound
with minimal effect on the prepuce or inguinal fold (Figure 14.30).
Figure 14.30
CASE SIX: 4-year-old castrated male crossbreed dog with a degloving wound of the
proximal antebrachium
History
The dog was involved in a road traffic accident and subsequently developed
severe swelling of the left foreleg from the elbow distally. Radiographs made
at the time revealed no evidence of bone damage. The swelling persisted for
10 days, when a serosanguinous discharge was noted from the elbow area.
The skin on the cranial aspect of the limb sloughed at this time. The area was
debrided and managed as an open wound.
At presentation at the referral clinic (3 weeks post injury) a severe skin
deficit was noted from the distal humerus to the proximal third of the
antebrachium. The wound was granulating and re-epithelializing, with a
deep pocket undenmining the proximomedial aspect (Figure 14.31). Con-
tracture was noted and there was little, if any, joint movement. Radiographs
taken at this time revealed no bone or joint changes. The wound surface and
pocket were swabbed; culture revealed no evidence of bacteria.
Figure 14.31
CASE Six continues *
Case Examples   151
Assessment and management options
The main concerm in managing this wound was to maintain/restore limb function. It was therefore necessary
to excise the granulating tissue and to reconstruct. Due to the potential mobility of the wound a free skin graft
wound, skin viability of the flap was thought to be best served using an axial patterm flap. In this area either
an omocervical or thoracodorsal flap could be considered. Either flap would need to be of the extended type,
which pass across the patient's midline to the opposite scapula. It is important to note that such an 'extended'
excision goes well beyond the boundaries ofthe flap's primary angiosome;
the 'extended' portion of this flap should in fact be considered a subdermal
plexus flap in terms of its perfusion and reliability. Due to the large
epithelialized pocket on the craniomedial aspect of the wound, which might
have interfered with the omocervical blood supply, a thoracodorsal flap was
chosen.
Treatment
The chronic granulating tissue and epithelial pockets were excised and a
thoracodorsal artery-based flap was raised, with the distal extremity of the
flap at the contralateral acromion. This allowed complete coverage of the
excised wound (Figure 14.32). Donor site closure was routine, due to the
elastic nature of the skin over the dorsum. Penrose drains were placed to
manage dead space. The flap achieved excellent coverage of the wound. Due
Figure 14.32
to the nature ofthe dog it was necessary to dress the wound.
Postoperative assessment and further management
 Five days post surgery it was clear that the distal extremity of the flap was
not vascularized. By day 7 it was grossly necrotic (Figure 14.33). The patient
was taken back to the theatre and the ischaemic area debrided.
As there was concerm that infection was present deep to the ischaemic
portion of the flap, the distal portion of the flap was managed as an open
wound (wet-to-dry dressings) for 5 days to allow granulation tissue to
develop, then a free skin graft was applied. The graft donor site was the flank
ofthe dog, which healed without complications. The graft was applied as a
meshed full thickness graft and dressed with a non-adherent dressing. Graft
immobilization proved very difficult in this case due to the patient's
temperament and repeated traumatization of the dressings. Eventually an
area on the distal antebrachium was allowed to heal by secondary intention
due to free skin graft failure (Figure 14.34 ). Note the fragile appearance of
the covering epithelium. It was decided not to pursue further reconstruction
Figure 14.33
at this time as the dog was using the limb well.
Re-presentation
The dog was re-presented 2 years later due to extensive
self-trauma to the fragile re-epithelialized area.
Assessment and management options
The priority at this time was wound coverage to protect the
 delicate epithelium. It was decided that the best option was
to repeat a free skin graft following resection of the
epithelial tissues. The resected tissue was submitted for
histological evaluation to ensure that no neoplastic tissue
Figure 14.34
was present.
Treatment
 Following excision, the recipient site was managed as an open wound with a hydrogel and an absorptive
foam dressing. After 5 days a free skin graft was applied (as before). The wound was dressed for 5 days
CASE SIX continues
152 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstmction
initially, after which time the graft was found
to be infected (Figure 14.35). Culture of a
swab sample showed haemolytic staphylo-
cocci; antibiosis was instituted based on the
results of in vitro sensitivity testing.
After 14 days of antibiotic therapy a third
 skin graft was applied.
Outcome
Figure l-f.35
The third skin graft 'took', though the grafted
area was denuded of hair in comparison to the
surrounding skin (Figure 14.36).
Figure 14.36
CASE SEVEN: 8-year-old male Collie cross with a perineal hernia
History
 The dog was presented to the hospital with a complaint of tenesmus of several
months. Severity of clinical signs had worsened progressively and the owner had
noticed an enlarging 'bulge' located to the right side of the anus (Figure 14.37).The
a jo srae g ie ao oialad paans sau jo Arsu [aiun ue pey sop
A ssessment and management options
Rectal examination revealed a loss of support from the perineal diaphragm on the
right side, consistent with a diagnosis of perineal hemia. The prostate gland was
non-painful but was moderately and symmetrically enlarged. Perineal hermias
typically occur in intact male dogs and their development is thought to be
 hormonally dependent. Castration is routinely recommended as part of the surgical
management of this problem. In addition, reconstmction of the perineal diaphragm
Figure 14.37
js essential to provide support to the rectal wall during elimination. The preferred
option for reconstmction of the perineal diaphragm is through the use ofa pedicled intermal obturator muscle
flap. In this case, the integrity of this flap was questioned due to the previous history of pelvic fracture.
Treatment
Routine castration was performed. The perineal space was subsequently explored and hermia contents
levator ani muscles were identified, along with the extermal anal sphincter and the sacrotuberous ligament.
The intermal obturator muscle was fibrotic and atrophied. Therefore, the semitendinosus muscle was chosen
 as an altermative muscle flap for reconstmction of the perineal diaphragm.
The muscle was approached through an extended incision along the caudal aspect of the thigh (Figure
14.38). The semitendinosus muscle has codominant vascularpedicles, one located proximally and one distally.
The muscle will survive on either pedicle. The muscle was dissected, the distal vascular pedicle was ligated
and transected, and the proximal vascular pedicle was identified and preserved (Figure 14.39). The proximal
 pedicle was protected and the origin of the muscle was transected to facilitate rotation of the muscle around
the vascular pedicle (Figure 14.40). It is important to protect the pedicle from
Figure 14.38
Figure 14.39
Figure 14.40
CASE SEVEN continues ·
Case Examples
153
Dissection was continued ventral to the
ischial arch and into the obturator foramen.
The semitendinosus muscle flap was then
rotated 180 degrees, and the distal aspect of
the muscle was advanced ventral to the
ischial arch and through the obturator
foramen. The resulting position of the flap
Figure 14.41
was in an ideal location for repair of the
perineal diaphragm (Figure 14.41). Margins of the muscle flap were
sutured to the external anal sphincter, remnants of the levator ani and
 coccygeus muscles, and the sacrotuberous ligament. The donor site was
closed routinely and dead space was managed using a passive latex
(Penrose) drain for 3 days (Figure 14.42).
Outcome
Subsequent healing, limb use and pelvic function was uncompromised.
Figure 14.42
CASE EIGHT: Four-year-old spayed female Bull Terrier with a full thickness burn
History
The bitch was presented to the referring veterinary surgeon acutely,
following a thermal injury. S
She had been trapped beneath the hot
exhaust manifold of a car for several minutes. A small full thickness
bum was present over the craniolateral aspect of the left tibia and
(Figure 14.43). No other injuries were present.
Figure 14.43
Initial treatment
Acute treatment included provision of analgesia using both opioids and
NSAIDs. Cold compresses were used locally for an analgesic effect, as
well as to help limit progressive tissue injury. Hair was clipped from the
region to allow identification and debridement of necrotic tissue.
Progressive necrosis resulted in the fonmation of two large open
wounds involving the left flank and lateral thigh. Closure of the flank
wound using undermining of local tissues and mesh expansion was
attempted (Figure 14.44). The second wound overlying the left thigh
remained open.
Further wound assessment
Tension on wound margins dramatically increases the risk of incisional
dehiscence. In this dog, the negative effect of tension was compounded
Figure 14.44
by the location of the wound in the flank fold, an area subjected to
excessive motion. Ultimately, this combination of factors
led to incisional dehiscence. The bitch was referred for a
second opinion 2 weeks later.
 Three open wounds were identified: one involving the
left flank fold; the second overlying the left thigh; and a third,
smaller wound over the craniolateral aspect of the left tibia
(Figure 14.45). Mature, but relatively inactive, granulation
tissue was present in all wounds. This was visually apparent
by the glistening fibrous appearance of the wound bed.
Figure 14.45
CASE EIGHT continues
134 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Management options
Each wound was addressed separately in considering reconstructive options. The flank fold is subject to a
great deal of movement; therefore, reconstruction ofthis area requires the transposition of'new' tissue into
the wound bed. Well vascularized extremity wounds can be reconstnicted using many methods. Skin grafts
were chosen in this case because of the lateral location of the wounds.
Treatment
A caudal superficial epigastric axial pattern skin flap, formed by
the caudal mammary glands and dependent upon the caudal super-
ficial epigastric artery and vein which exit the external inguinal
ring, was chosen. This flap was easily dissected and transposed
into the region of the flank fold (Figure 14.46). Because of the
 potential for vascular injury during previous tissue undermining
and mesh expansion, the integrity of the vascular pedicle was
Figure 14.46
substantiated using a Doppler flow probe prior to surgery. The flap
donor site was closed primarily and the flap transposed on to the
recipient wound bed (Figure 14.47).
The extremity wounds in this dog were not suitable for immediate
reconstruction using skin grafts because of the uneven contour and
fibrous nature of the granulation tissue. Superficial debridement of
both limb wounds was performed, and the wounds were subsequently
bandaged using a bolus tie-over dressing with a petrolatum gauze
Figure 14.47
contact layer. Bandages were changed every other day.
Further assessment of extremity wounds
A well vascularized active granulation bed was established within
5 days of debridement (Figure 14.48). The surface of the wound bed
was uniform and the wound was free of necrosis, infection and
wound exudation. Application of full thickness skin grafts could
be safely considered at this time.
Treatment of extremity wounds
Meshed full thickness skin grafts were harvested from the lateral
thorax and stabilized over the wound beds using skin staples
(Figure 14.49). Full thickness skin grafts are generally preferred
over split thickness grafts since all adnexal structures are trans-
Figure 14.48
ferred with the graft. The
mesh incisions allow escape
of wound fluid into an over-
lying absorptive bandage.
The limb required band-
aging to limit motion and
prevent shear stresses on the
graft during the process of
revascularization.
 Bandages
were changed after 24 hours
and subsequently at 3-day in-
tervals, with complete removal
after 14 days.
Outcome
Graft survival was 100% (Fig-
ure 14.50).
Figure 14.49
Figure 14.50
Case Examples 155
CASE NINE: 2-year-old castrated male Domestic Shorthair with hindlimb
contracture following degloving injuries
History
This cat had had bilateral hindlimb degloving injuries of 3 months
duration; the wounds had been debrided and dressed at regular intervals
in that period. At presentation, both hindlimbs showed se vere contracture
and muscle atrophy and the granulation tissue present was chronic with
little vascular potential (Figure 14.51). The patient showed severe diffi-
q    ps sm o a  s  u n
 negative for both FeLV and FIV; the test was carried out as both viruses
have been associated with poor wound healing.
 Management options
 The main concerm was hindlimb function. In order to attempt relatively
rapid resolution of the injury, it was thought that excision ofthe chronic
tric flap could be used. It was decided that both limbs should not be
recontructed simultaneously and a staged procedure was planned.
Figure14.51
Treatment
En bloc debridement of the right limb's granulation bed was carried out
down to healthy fascia. A caudal superficial epigastric flap was raised, with
its distal extremity at the second mammary gland (Figure 14.52). The flap
was rotated into the defect via a bridging incision (Figure 14.53). The
wound edges were sutured with simple interrupted sutures of
 2 metric monofilament nylon;
no sutures were placed in
the body of the flap. The
donor site was closed rou-
tinely, though it was found
to be under some tension.
Tension relief was managed
by undermining and place-
ment of subcuticular as well
as dermal sutures. A Penrose
Figure 14.53
drain was placed for 3 days.
Figure 14.52
Postoperative assessment and further treatment
The flap healed well, though the distal extremity showed some evidence
of superficial necrosis (Figure 14.54); this was confined to the most
superficial layers and did not affect the final appearance. The donor site
dehisced (Figure 14.55) and required management as an open wound,
with hydrogel dressings over 7 days until satisfactory closure was
achieved.
The problem with the donor
site led to a reassessment of the
plan for the left leg and it was
decided to amputate this limb.
Outcome
The patient made an excellent
recovery and is fully mobile 2
Figure 14.55
 years after the surgery.
Figure 14.54
156  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
CASE TEN: 5-year-old female Irish Wolfhound with a chronic non-healing elbow
punoM
History
 The bitch was presented with a 12-month history of a non-healing
wound over the 'point* of the right elbow (Figures 14.56 and
14.57). About a year earlier she had undergone surgery to excise
a hygroma.
Assessment and management options
Swab cultures and biopsy samples revealed no evidence of bac-
Figure 14.56
terial infection or neoplasia. Radiographs of the elbow showed no
radiographic bony changes.
The problem with excising such a lesion is that any subsequent
reconstruction lies over the point of the elbow and will be readily-
traumatized; dehiscence is a potential problem. Options for man-
aging this case following en bloc debridement included: a
wall; and the use of multiple releasing incisions. It was decided to
use a bipedicled advancement tlap. This was to ensure that all
Figure 14.57
suture lines were away from the point of the ulna.
Treatment
Following en bloc debridement, a releasing
 incision was made on the medial aspect. The
skin of the flap was undermined as deeply as
possible to minimize vascular embarrass-
 ment. No sutures were placed in the body of
the flap and the flap was sutured to the lateral
 margin of the wound with simple interrupted
sutures of 3 metric monofilament nylon. The
medial releasing incision was allowed to
heal by second intention (Figure 14.58). No
dressing was applied to the wounds; this was
in order to minimize pressure and potential
vascular compromise to the flap.
Figure 14.5S
Figure 14.59
Outcome
The wound healed with no complications. Although following contraction of the open medial wound the
lateral incision had been pulled to the caudal aspect of the elbow (Figure 14.59), no dehiscence occurred.
Abrasions 6, 149-50
Bums 10-11, 128-33
Active drainage 48-50
aetiology 10
Airway injury 130-1
anaemia 131
Alginate dressings 43, 45
chemical 10
Anaemia 131
complications 11
Anal furunculosis
：126-7
electrical 11
Analgesia 26
full thickness 146-7. 153-4
burn patients 132
management 132-3
Anastomosis
metabolic loss 131-2
end-to-end 109-11
pathophysiology 129-31
end-to-side 111-12
airway injury
130-1
Anti-growth factors 21-2
area affected 130
Antibiotics 29-30
electrolytes 131
prophylactic 141-2
fluid loss 131
topical  39
sepsis 131
Antiseptics 39
skin injur.-
129-30
Atypical wounds 35-6
radiation  11
Avulsion wounds 6, 7
thermal  10
Axial pattern flaps 31,69-81
Butorphanol  26
blood supply to skin 69
classification 69-70
Cancer patients, evaluation 3
flap dissection 72
Carpal arthrodesis 148, 149
forelimb reconstruction 74-77
Carprofen  26
head and neck reconstruction 73-4
Cast wounds 8
hindlimb reconstruction 77-80
Caudal auricular flap 74
perineal reconstruction 80-1
Caudal sartorius flap 97-8
postoperative considerations
72-3
Caudal superficial epigastric flap 77, 78
preoperative considerations 71, 72
Chemical burns 10
Axillary wound 147
Chlorhexidine 38
Clean wounds 27
Bacittus subtilis 39
Clean-contaminated wounds 27, 146, 148
Bacteroides 140
Closed suction 49
Bandaged wounds 8
Clostridium spp. 8. 140
Bandaging 41-6
Closure see Wound closure
primary (contact) layer 41, 42-5
Complications
adherent layer 42, 43
bums 11
early non-adherent dressings 43
incisional injuries 6
late non-adherent dressings 43, 44-5
skin grafting 91,92,93
non-adherent layer 43
surgical drains 54-5
secondary (intermediate) layer 45
wound healing 137-43
tertiary (outer) layer 45,46
delayed/incomplete healing 142-3
Basal cell tumour of footpad  145
infection 140-1. 142
Bilateral single pedicle advancement flaps 66
oedema 138
Bipedical flaps 34, 66, 156
Bite wounds 32, 35,128
seromas 137-8
Bone grafts, vascularized 118-20
wound contracture
143
fibula 118
wound dehiscence
138,139,140
rib 118-19
Compound flaps 120, 121-2
una 119, 120, 121
Contaminated wounds 27
Brown dermatome
85
Contracture see Wound contracture
Buprenorphine 26
Corrugated drain 48, 50
158  Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Cranial sartorius flap 97, 98
omocervical flap 73, 74
Cranial tibial flap 99, 100
superficial temporal flap 74
Cutaneous flaps 113-14
Hindlimb reconstruction 77-80
caudal superficial epigastric flap 77, 78
Dakin's solution 39
genicular flap 77-8
Dead space, elimination of 47
reverse saphenous flap 78-80
Debridement 148, 149
Honey 39
enzymatic debriding agents 39
Hydroactive dressings 39, 44
surgical 40, 133
Hydrocolloid dressings 43, 44-5
Deep circumflex iliac flap 80, 81
Hydrogels 39,43
Deep pectoral flap 101
Hydrogen peroxide 40
Degloving 6, 7,150-2,155
mechanical 6
Incisional injuries 5-6
physiological 6, 7
aetiology 5-6
Dehiscence 54,138-40
complications 6
crush injuries 139
dehiscence 139
incisions 139
lnfection 140-2
management 140
bacterial species
140
sharp lacerations
139
clinical signs 141
superficial wounds 139,140
diagnosis 141
Dermoid cyst 125, 126
prevention 141,142
Dirty wounds 27
treatment 142
'Dog-ears* 58,59
and wound drainage 54
Drain tract cellulitis 54-5
Inflammation 13, 14, 15
 Dry-to-dry dressings 42
lnosculation 89
Insect bites/stings 9-10
Elbow wound 156
lnsulin-like growth factor 21
Electrical burns 11
Internal obturator flap 97
Electrolyte imbalance 131
lschaemia 27
Enzymatic debriding agents 39
Epidermal growth factor 14
Joint trauma 34
Epithelial growth factor 20
Epithelialization 17, 18,19
Larval therapy 39
Escherichia coti 41，140
Latissimus dorsi flap 100-1, 117, 118
External abdominal oblique muscle flap 100
Lavage 37-8
Extremity wounds 32-4
Leflunomide 22
Local skin flaps 64-8
Fentany] 26
bilateral single pedicle advancement flaps 66
Fibroblast growth factor 21
bipedical flaps 66
Fibula, vascularized graft 118
rotation flaps 67
Firearm injuries 12
single pedicle advancement flaps 65-6
Fistulogram 123
skin fold advancement flaps 67-8
 Flaps see Local skin flaps: Microsurgery; Pedicled muscle flaps
see atso Axial pattern flaps
Flexor carpi ulnaris flap 101, 102
Lucilia sericata
39
Fluid accumulation 47-8
Fluid loss 131
Macrophages 15
Fluid therapy 132
Maturation and remodelling 15-16
Foam dressings 43,44
Mesh expansion 62
Footpad, basal cell tumour 145
Meshed skin grafts 86-7, 88, 89, 154
Footpad flaps 114, 115, 145
Methadone 26
Forelimb reconstruction 74-7
Microsurgery 105-22
superficial brachial flap 75-6,77
assessing patency 112-13
thoracodorsal flap 74-5, 76
compound flaps 120,121-2
Fractures 34,35
cutaneous flaps 113-14
end-to-end anastomosis 109, 110-11
Gastrocnemius flap 99
end-to-side anastomosis 1l1-12
Genicular flap 77-8
flap dissection 107, 108
Granulation tissue 87
footpad flaps 114. 115
instrumentation 105-7
Haematomas, postoperative 137
microvascular approximating clamps 106-7
Haemorrhage, postoperative 137
operating microscope
105-6
Haemostasis 13, 14, 15
surgical instruments 106, 107
Halstead's principles of surgery 1 -2
muscle flaps 114-18
Hartmarufs solution 38
postoperative care 113
Head/neck reconstruction 73-4
recipient site preparation 108-9
 caudal auricular flap 74
vascularized bone crafts 118-20, 121
Index 159
Microvascular approximating clamps 106. 107
Perineal hernia 152-3
Microvascular free tissue transfer 32
Perineal reconstruction 80-1, 152
Morphine  26
Pethidine 26
Muscle flaps see Pedicled muscle flaps
Pharyngeal stick penetration injuries 9, 124-5
Mycophenolic acid 22
Pie crust incisions 55
Pie crusted skin sheets 86, 87, 88
Nitric oxide 23
Pilonidal sinus 125-6
Oedema 138
Pinch grafts 87
Omental pedicles 135-6.147
 Plasmatic imbibition 89
Omocervical flap 73-4
Platelet-derived growth factor 14. 21
Open wound management 37-46.146. 151,155
Postoperative haematoma 137
9-1t upuea
Postoperative haemorrhage
137
primary (contact) layer 41,42,43, 44-5
Povidone-iodine 38, 39
secondary (intermediate) layer 45
 Pressure relief bandages 46
tertiary (outer) layer 45, 46
Presuturing 61-2
surgical debridement 39, 40
Projectile injuries 133, 134-5
systemic medication 41
Proliferation 15. 16
topical 39-40
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
44，131
antibiotics 39
Punch grafts 87
antiseptics 39
Puncture wounds 8, 9
enzymatic debriding agents 39
honey 39
Radiation bums 11
hydrogels/hydroactive dressings 39
Rectus abdominus flap 99
Jarval therapy 39
Rectus femoris flap 98
Relaxing incisions 62
organic acids 39
sodium hypochlorite 39
Revascularization 90
wound evaluation 37, 38
Reverse saphenous flap 78-80
wound lavage 37, 38
Rib, vascularized graft 118-19
Operating microscope 105, 106
Rotation tlaps 67, 150
Organic acids 39
Rule of nine 130
Oxymorphone 26
Semipermeable film dressings 43, 45
Partial coverage grafs 89
Semitendinosus flap 98-9, 152-3
 Passive drainage 48
Sepsis 131
Pasteurella mutocida
128
Scromas 137-8
Pasteuretla spp. 8, 140
Shearing injuries 7
 Patient evaluation  2-4
Single pedicle advancement flaps 65-6
cancer patients 3
Sinus tracts 123-4
 planning management and reconstruction  3-4
Sirolimus 22
trauma patients 2-3
Skin expanders 62
Pedicled muscle flaps 31-2,95-103, 114-18
Skin flaps see Local skin flaps
caudal sartorius 97-8
Skin fold advancement flaps 67-8
cervical portion of trapezius 101
Skin grafting 31, 83-94, 148-9
cranial border of lateral head of gastrocnemius  99
application of graft 88,89
cranial portion ofexternal abdominal oblique muscle  100
care of graft 90,91
cranial sartorius 97-8
complications 91,92,93
cranial tibial 99, 100
cosmetic result 93-4
deep pectoral 101
full thickness bum 153-4
humeral head of flexor carpi ulnaris 101. 102
full thickness grafts 83, 84, 148, 149, 151, 154
internal obturator 97
harvesting 85
latissimus dorsi 100-1,117,118
graft interpretation 92-3
 operative techniques 96
graft 'take' 89-90
pedicles and perfusion 95-6
harvesting of graft 85
rectus abdominus 99
pinch, punch, stamp and strip grafts 84-5
rectus femoris 98
preparation 87
semitendinosus 98-9
preparation of graft 85, 86
stemocephalicus, sternothvroideus and stemohyoideus
meshed sheets 86, 87
102-4
pie-crusted sheets 86, 87
superficial gluteal 97
pinch, punch, stamp and strip grafts 87
temporalis 103
unmeshed sheets 86
trapezius 115. 116, 117
recipient site 87, 88
ulnaris lateralis 101-2
sheet grafts 84
Penrose drain 48. 50. 52
split thickness grafts 83, 84
Peptide growth factors 20-1
harvesting 85
see also individuat growth factors
Snake bites 9, 10
Perforated film dressings 43, 44
Sodium hypochlorite 39
160 Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Stamp grafts 87
Ulna, vascularized graft 119, 120, 12l
Staphylococcus spp.8, 140,152
Ulnaris lateralis flap 101-2
Stemocephalicus flap 102-3
Undermining 60
Stemohyoideus flap 102-3
 Stemothyroideus flap
102-3
Streptococcus spp. 8
V-Y plasty 62-3
Streptomyces hygroscopicus 22
Vascular approximating clamps 107
Strip drain 50
Vascular augmentation of wound beds
135-6
Strip grafts 87
Vascular endothelial growth factor 21
Sump drain S1
Vented suction 49, 50
Sump-Penrose drain 51
Superficial brachial flap 75-7
Superficial epigastric flap 154, 155
Walking sutures 60,61
Superficial gluteal flap 97
Wet-to-dry dressings 42, 43
 Superficial temporal flap 74
Wound closure 25-36
Surgical drains 47-55
decision to close 25, 27
choice of 48
patterms of 58, 59
complications 54-5
 practical applications 32-6
drain tract cellulitis 54-5
atypical wounds 35-6
failure of drainage 54
bite wounds 32
misuse and over-reliance S5
extremity wounds 32-4
 pain and irritation 54
orthopaedic injury 34. 35
 premature loss or retention 54
systemic antibiotics 29-30
specifc applications S5
systemic evaluation and pain management 25-6
wound dehiscence 54
techniques 30-2
wound infection  54
timing of 27-9
drain removal 53-4
Wound contracture
17,143, 155
elimination of dead space 47
Wound healing 13-23
 placement and management S1-3
epithelialization 17, 18, 19
removal of fluid accumulation 47-8
factors influencing 18-23
type ofimplant 50-1
anti-growth factors 21-2
corugated drains 48, 50
epithelial growth factor 20
 Penrose drains 48. 50
fbroblast growth factor 21
sump drains 51
insulin-like growth factor 21
sump-Penrose drain 51
nitric oxide 23
tube drains 50, 51
platelet-derived growth factor 21
type and technique of drainage 48-50
traditional 18-20
active drainage 48-50
transforming growth factor beta 20-1
passive drainage 48
vascular endothelial growth factor 21
haemostasis and inflammation 13-15
Temporalis flap 103
maturation and remodelling 15-16
Tension relieving techniques 57-68
proliferation 15, 16
incisional plasties 62-4
wound contraction 17
local flaps 64-8
Wound management and reconstruction 1 -4
bilateral single pedicle advancement flaps 66
 goal of wound reconstruction 1
bipedical flaps 66
patient evaluation 2-4
rotation flaps 67
cancer patients 3
single pedicle advancement flaps 65-6
planning management and reconstruction 3-4
skin fold advancement flaps 67-8
trauma patients 2-3
mobilization techniques 59-60, 61, 62
surgical principles  1-2
patterms of wound closure 58, 59, 60
Wound mobilization 59-62
see aiso Axial pattem flaps
multiple punctate relaxing incisions 62
Thermal bums 10
presuturing 61-2
Thoracodorsal fap 74-5,76, 151
skin expanders 62
Tie-over (bolus) dressings 45. 46
undenmining 60
TMN tumour classification system  3
walking sutures 60,61
Total parenteral nutrition 132-3
Transforming growth factor beta 14, 20-1
Trapezius rmuscle flap 10l, 115-17, 148-9
Yeates drain 48, 50
Trauma, evaluation 2-3
Triage 2
Tube drain 50, 51
Z plasty 63-4
Manual of Canine and Feline
Wound Management and
British
Small Animal
Reconstruction
Veterinary
Association
Over the past two decades, wound management and
reconstruction has become an increasingly exciting and
demanding area ofveterinary surgery.Ourknowledge of
thebiologyofwound healingandofthefactors that
contributeto abnormalwound healinghasexpanded
greatly.The application ofnew dressing products,and
novel surgical andmicrosurgical techniquesallowthe
veterinary surgeon tofacilitatemorerapid andfunctional
recoveries, with fewer wound-related complications.
Thisbookguidesthereader throughthebasicprinciples
of wound healing and surgical technique, providing an
excellent basis for decisionmaking
inpractice. Chapters on open wound
management and drainage are followed
bysectionsontensionrelieving
techniques skin grating,lap and
microvascularreconstruction.
Complications of wound healing
are dealt with in detail.
This is a truly transatlantic venture -
the Canadian and UKeditorshave
commissionedchaptersfrom
acknowledged expertsinthcirfields
fromboth theUKandNorthAmerica.
Thepractical problein-solving
approach of this book, conbined with
itsthoroughtreatmentofindividual
techniques,makes it an invaluable aid
to the practitioner faced with wounds
resultingfromtrauma orfrom
surgical intervention.
0-905214-38-2
UMOI
W3544
FOWLER
MANUAL OF CANINE&
1099 MANUAL0
FELINE WOUND MGT&
0905214382
RECONSTRUCTION C1E]
9780905214382
DEPT