Veterinary Laser Surgery
Veterinary
Veterinary
PRACT
 A PRACTICAL GUIDE
Surgical and therapeutic use of lasers began in human
I Berger, DVM, MS, Dip
medicine in the early 1960s. Technology and equipment
ABLS, Master Fellow VSLS,
Surgery
TIC
Boston Road Animal Clinic.
Laser
advanced rapidly. Over the last ten years veterinarians 
have been exploring the many potential advantages that
Massachusetts, is a respected
AL GUIDE
luminary in laser medicine and 
various lasers provide to their patients. Because laser
surgery. He is a published writer
applied directly to target tissue or
Laser :
light en
on the subject of laser surgery
administered to distant lesions at a remote site through
techniques in veterinary medicine
fiberoptic compone
and is Past President of the
invaluable and growing veterinary surgical resource.
Veterinary Surgical Laser Society
Unlik
and a practicing companion
Surgery
A PRACTICAL GUIDE
and portability of la
I so rapidly that
animal veterinarian
cally feasible
Peter H. Eeg. DVM, BSc
forthege
Master Fellow VSLS, Poolesville
Veterinary Clinic, LLC,Maryland.
has lectured nationally and 
nternationally on surgical laser
Writte
r Surgery:
writer on the subject of the use of
APraci
/eter
pue '1
practice. He is a Past President
of the Veteri
narySurgical Laser
Noel Berger, Peter H. Eeg 
and rational ways
Society and the current Executive
for both
cedures to further
Vice President of the Veterinary
ance their
Surgical Laser Society and a 
lityof life
 practicing companion animal
 PRACTICAL PICTORIAL GUIDE / ATLAS feature that
veterinarian.
includes 31 case studies of the most common laser
surgery procedures. Broad spectrum of specific
laseri
information, including chapters covering 
basic laser physics through specific laser surgery
techniques and pain management.
· Special sections on COz and Diode laser wavelengths.
· Provides veterinarians with skills and techniques to
 improve the comfort and quality of patients' lives 
 through appropriate laser use.
· User-friendly format makes referencing easy.
· A practical reference for specialty and
 general veterinarians.
Noel Berger, Peter H. Eeg
Blackwell
Blackwell
Publishing
 Publishing 
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Veterinary Laser Surgery
A Practical Guide
Veterinary Laser Surgery
A Practical Guide
Noel Berger
DVM, MS, DABLS
President, ex officio, Fellow
Veterinary Surgical Laser Society, LTD
 Boston Road Animal Clinic, Inc.
Sutton, Massachusetts
Peter H. Eeg
BS, DVM
Executive Vice President
Veterinary Surgical Laser Society, LTD
Director of Small Animal Services and Laser Medicine
Poolesville Veterinary Clinic
Poolesville, Maryland
Blackwell
Publishing
@ 2006 Blackwell Publishing
First edition, 2006
 All rights reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data available
Blackwell Publishing Professional
upon request.
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014, USA
The last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Orders:1-800-862-6657
Office:
1-515-292-0140
Fa x:
1-515-292-3348
Web site: www.blackwellprofessional.com
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Tel.: +44 (0)1865 776868
 Blackwell Publishing Asia
550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
Tel.: +61 (0)3 8359 1011
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use,
or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is granted by
Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee of $.10 per
 copy is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222
 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations
that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate
system of payments has been arranged. The fee codes for users
of the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-
0678-5; ISBN-10: 0-8138-0678-X/2006 $.10.
Original Graphic Art by Bob Feaster
 Portions of Chapter 3 originally appeared in Laser Surgery in 
Gynecology: A Clinical Guide, (c)1993 Elsevier Inc. Reprinted
with permission from Elsevier.
To our families and colleagues
We strive to improve quality of life every day
Contents
Foreword
ix
Preface
xi
Acknowledgments
xili
Part I
Theory of Laser Surgery
1
1
General Principles of Laser Energy and Biophysics
3
2
Power Density and the Basic Effects of Radiant
19
Energy on Tissue
3
Fundamentals of Laser-Tissue Interactions
29
4
Types of Laser-Tissue Interaction Related to the
43
Rate of Heat Transfer Through Soft Tissue
5
Laser Systems, Wavelengths, and Technology Selection
63
Part II
 Practical Laser Surgery
77
6
Safety Considerations
79
7
 Economic Considerations for Use of Laser Energy
91
 in Veterinary Medical Practice
8
 Pain Management Considerations for Laser Surgery
101
Procedures
 Part III Clinical Laser Technique and Procedures
109
9
 Diode Lasers in Small Animal Veterinary Medicine
111
10
Introduction to Clinical Applications of CO2 Laser
139
Energy in Veterinary Medical and Surgical Services
Case Studies
183
Suggested Reading
225
Index
227
vii
Foreword
Albert Einstein first described the concept of laser as an acronym for Light
Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation in 1917. It took more
than forty years to pass before Theodore Maiman created the first laser,
which was initially applied to surgical use. Since that time, lasers in medi-
cine and surgery have widely expanded our abilities to more effectively
fight disease and greatly improved our patient outcomes and comfort.
Laser techniques in oncologic surgery have become effective alterna-
ods.1 CO2 and Nd:YAG laser excision has been shown to provide almost
 a 50% improvement in the control of local disease in-vivo compared with
scalpel resection in rodent mammary gland tumors and human oral mu-
 cosal lesions.23 Lasers provide light with the necessary wavelength at the
intensity sufficient for photodynamic therapy (PDT) for treating cancer-
ous and non-cancerous lesions.4,5 Specific laser wavelengths can be cou-
pled to flexible fiber optics, which provides the possibility of improved
surgical access via endoscopy, allowing for minimally invasive procedures
and enhanced patient outcomes in the areas of upper respiratory, optic,
gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and neurological surgery.
Despite the incredible development and advances that lasers have un-
dergone in human surgical and therapeutic applications, lasers in veteri-
pense and cumbersome size which made them impractical for private
practice. In the past decade, however, technological breakthroughs have
resulted in compact, portable, and reliable lasers that are economically
feasible for both the general and specialty veterinary hospital. Laser use
in clinical veterinary practice has become the newest “tool" for improved
patient care and wider therapeutic options, but also poses additional
health and safety hazards for the veterinary staff.
An understanding of laser light properties and interaction with tissue
will result in optimal patient outcomes without increased risk to the sur-
 geon, staff, or pet. For veterinarians to fully appreciate the advantages of
and affects living tissues before recommending or attempting to apply this
technology to companion animals. The human literature has demon-
strated these beneficial effects in lab animal studies and human clinical tri-
als. These studies support the use of laser energy for the enhancement of
quality of life and control of disease in the veterinary patient. They also
provide a foundation for the commonly accepted laser surgical techniques
and procedures which are constantly being implemented and refined in
thousands of private veterinary practices around the world. Our pets can
finally benefit from the very technology for which many research animals
were used to perfect these laser surgical procedures on people. This book
Foreword
serves as a practical guide to the general and specialty veterinarian to un-
derstand and use laser energy in a safe and rational fashion to enhance
 our patients′ quality of life and our overall standard of care.
Barbara R. Gores, DVM
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Surgeons
Veterinary Specialty Center of Tucson
4909 N. La Canada Drive
Tucson, AZ 85704-1507
520-795-9955
brgdvm@aol.com
Notes
1. Paiva, M.B. et al. Nd:YAG Laser therapy for palliation of recurrent squamous cell
carcinomas in the 0ral cavity. Lasers Surg Med 2002;31:64-69.
2. White, JM., et al. Nd:YAG and CO2 laser therapy of oral mucosal lesions. J Clin
Laser Med Surg 1998;16:299-304.
3. Maker, VK.; Elseth, K.M.; and Radosevich, J.A. Reduced in-vivo local recurrence
with contact neodymium:ytrium-aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser scalpels. Lasers Surg
Med 1995;111:290-298.
4. McCaw, D. Photodynamic Therapy Can Successfully Treat Tumors. Vet Pract News
2001; 23.
 5. Lucroy, M.D. Photodynamic therapy for companion animals with cancer. Vet Clin
Small Anim 32 (2002) 693-702.
Preface
Laser light is a unique, extremely powerful, and very selective form of en-
 ergy with the unparalleled ability to do beneficial work on living tissue.
How it interacts with and changes living tissue is the central point to
which many specialties strive to understand laser energy. For any veteri-
narian to have a full appreciation of the power that laser energy can have
on their patients’ quality of life, they must first understand the many
physical and technical nuances that interrelate to provide this energy
form. Laser energy can be applied directly to target tissue or administered
to distant lesions at a remote site through fiber optic components. Each
wavelength of laser energy has its own specific interaction with target tis-
sues. Veterinary clinicians must fully appreciate the variation in tissue in-
teraction by specific laser energy wavelengths before attempting to apply
this technology to their patients.
Surgical and therapeutic use of lasers began in human medicine in the
early 1960s. Unlike many technologies, the size, reliability, and portabil-
ity of laser units has improved so rapidly that they are both economically
and practically feasible for the general and specialty veterinarian.
The growth of laser use in veterinary medicine has progressed in the op-
posite fashion to standard-held dogma of university implementation and
general acceptance first, followed by private practitioners’ usage and ac-
ceptance. The ease of implementation and laser company tutorial courses
have spawned a private general clinical usage and experimentation with-
 out great oversight from traditional educators. Only now are universities,
at the request of laser companies and practicing veterinarians, securing
and implementing lasers in their clinical protocols. It will still be some
years before extended study and research into specific uses of laser energy
already accepted by practicing veterinary clinicians will be verified in the
traditional university study fashion. Anecdotally accepted techniques and
procedures being refined and implemented in thousands of private veteri-
nary practices in the United States and around the world will support the
use of this type of energy system for enhancement of patient quality of life
 and relief of animal disease and suffering.
This book strives to help general and specialty veterinary practitioners
both understand and implement the use of laser energy in a safe and ra-
tional fashion for the improvement of patient quality of life.
Xi
Acknowledgments
My first professional responsibility is always to focus on the welfare of
my patients. When I first began experimenting with surgical lasers in
1996 I felt alone and in front of the pack with no one to guide me through
the process. Fortunately, in a very short period of time, I was able to suc-
Immediately, my excitement grew and I felt driven to share my knowledge
and experience with my colleagues. It was imperative that the veterinary
profession should know what worked and what didn't. Seemingly invin-
cible with lasers, I began using the tool for just about everything that I
could do with a surgical blade or scissors. It was good, very good. My sur-
gical cases were turning out better than ever before. I was able to ap-
proach surgical problems in an entirely different light! Now, I felt as
though more complicated surgical cases were well within my abilities, and
certainly after performing them successfully, my practice grew.
From an economic perspective, this has been one of the most exciting
additions to my career. Laser surgery has allowed me to add more serv-
ices that my practice can offer. My staff feels like they are special because
they are part of a laser surgical facility, and they got to play with a lot of
toys like video equipment and digital imagery as well as the laser and
safety devices. Referrals from other veterinarians are common, and my ca-
reer satisfaction has soared because I can help more patients, and I believe
that I help them better.
This book is the result of many years of good experiences with lasers in
p s  o dns po isan a si ono  ns
family. The desire I have is for every veterinary practitioner to be comfort-
able and competent in laser surgery. Hopefully this labor will help inspire
you. There has been much effort by many to produce this work, and I
wish to thank my lovely wife, Gayle, for giving me the freedom to learn
and to teach. Also my three children Grace-Ann, Benton, and Samantha
for never saying, “Daddy I miss you, please don't go,”" when I had to leave
town to lecture or lead a wet lab. Also, my staff of laser technicians, es-
s ni an int  rg do  pe soo s a
when we needed to take a picture during a surgical procedure. Good
Lord, thank you for giving me this life to share with others.
Noel Berger DVM, MS, DABLS
In preparing and compiling this book, I relied on my clinical experi
ences and independent research to gain an appropriate working laser pro-
gram for my patients, clients, and clinical practice. I greatly appreciate the
xii
Acknowledgments
support of our technical staff, especially Candace Eck for her enthusiasm
and common sense in supporting my clinical and surgical endeavors using
laser energy. I must also give high praise to my wife, Cindy, and daughter,
Jaime, for allowing their husband/father to spend great amounts of time
traveling to lecture and learn about the potential of laser energy to im-
prove patient quality of life. They also provided me with the luxury of pri-
- oi aded oo sinou a sund ao A u aoq ne a aa
plete this book. I know they did it for all the animals in the world that
they love as much as I do.
Finally, I hope my professional colleagues will use the information
within these pages to refine and further expand the use of laser energy for
 the betterment of the veterinary profession and the improvement of their
patients’ quality of life.
Peter H. Eeg DVM
xiv
Part 1
THEORY OF
LASER SURGERY
 General Principles of Laser
Energy and Biophysics
 Power Density and the
Basic Effects of Radiant
Energy on Tissue
19
Fundamentals of Laser-
Tissue Interactions
29
Types of Laser-Tissue
Interaction Related to the
Rate of Heat Transfer
Through Soft Tissue
43
Laser Systems, Wavelengths,
and Technology Selection
63
Chapter 1
General Principles of Laser Energy and
Biophysics
History
Light is one of the most interesting and mysterious elemental components
of our known universe. It is intangible, yet able to transfer energy due to
the mass effect of photons which enables light to do work and exert force
on other molecules. Earliest man was in awe of light and held it as a gift
from the gods. Great thinkers and scholars attempted to determine light's
true origins and consistency. Modern science seeks to unleash its true hid-
den potentials for improving the quality of life on our planet.
Since the beginning of recorded time, light and the production of light
has been used directly or indirectly to assist humans in their work. It has
also been widely used in medicine, for instance to alleviate diseases such
as rickets, reduce the painful effects of psoriasis, and more recently, aid in
surgical intervention.
 Photons, strictly speaking, are specific packets of electromagnetic en-
ergy that give light its mass and therefore allow it to do work. In 1905
Max Planck made this supposition in his equation E=bf, where E is the
photonic energy, f is the electromagnetic wave frequency, and b is a con-
stant (today known as Planck's constant). Equations were then developed
that correctly identified the absorption and emission of black body radi-
ation. Niels Bohr proposed a more closely related concept to that of
today's laser energy in that this was related to a specific atomic model
where electrons in specific atoms and molecules could alter their energy
state to a higher or lower level, depending on energy applied, without
being destroyed. In 1917 Albert Einstein recognized that a third emission
form, stimulated emission, must also be in effect. This allowed theorists
to reconcile differences between classical thermodynamic theorems and
Planck's equation. While Niels Bohr's observations more closely reconcile
true laser energy's potential, it was Einstein's consideration of the nature
of stimulated photons, his unifying theories, that caused him to be cred-
ited as the father of modern lasers. These theories launched the quest for
production of a coherent stimulated emission of radiation that would be-
come known as laser energy.
This alludes to the idea that photons can be produced, amplified, and
induced to cascade geometrically in a continuous positive feedback mech-
anism. It was technologically possible in the mid-twentieth century to
prove the utility of selected materials for energy transformation. Simply
applying electrical energy to a material caused the repeated release of
photons, thus providing a new form of energy to do work. The first ac-
tual physical model for coherent stimulated radiation emission was in so-
phisticated microwave equipment developed to produce radar. Charles
PARTI
Townes was credited as the creator of the MASER—microwave ampli-
Theoryof LaserSurgery
fication by stimulated emission of radiation—and A.L. Schawlow pro-
vided the idea of an “optical type maser" or LASER—light amplification
by stimulated emission of radiation—in 1958. It was Dr. Theodore
Maiman, under the direction of Dr. Henry Gould, who successfully
demonstrated consistent laser energy in 1960 with the production of a
ruby crystal laser. Hence, a laser was realized in true physical form, plac-
ing both Bohr's and Einstein's theories into reality. The laser received its
first use in veterinary medicine shortly thereafter, in 1964, in a laser-
assisted vocal cord nodectomy.
Laser Physics
Radiation is the transmission of energy from one point to another with or
without an intervening material medium. Electromagnetic radiation,
which is produced by lasers, requires no medium for its transmission be
cause it can travel through the vacuum of space. It can also travel through
 matter in the form of gases, liquids, or solids. The speed and direction of
the propagation of radiation will be changed upon the transition from one
medium to another in the form of heat.
Mechanical radiation is the transmission of vibrations through a mate-
rial medium, e.g., sound. Sound travels quickest through dense media,
and slower in more tenuous elements. The medium itself does not move
as it conducts mechanical radiation; however, its particles oscillate about
fixed positions, transmitting energy from one particle to the next in dis-
crete waveforms.
A steady stream of particles such as electrons, protons, neutrons, etc.,
is also referred to as atomic radiation. No material is required for its
transmission, but it can pass through various substances with some
change in energy and direction. Atomic radiation usually requires a change
in mass, and the energy transmitted is the kinetic energy or the moving
particles.
tromagnetic radiation: the wave theory and the photon theory. Maxwell
first described the wave theory in 1864. His theory describes the optical
phenomena of visible light such as reflection, refraction, diffraction, inter-
ference, and polarization. It also describes the behavior of high-energy
cosmic rays, X-rays, and other ultraviolet radiation as well as lower en-
ergy infrared, microwave, and radio waves. The wave theory does not ad-
equately describe all of the behaviors of electromagnetic radiation, espe-
cially when dealing with high-energy reactions of nuclear particles. Planck
modified the wave theory to describe the exciting discoveries of the pho-
toelectric effect, light emitting diodes, fluorescence, photochemistry, and
laser. His quantum theory, or photon theory, describes how materials can
be stimulated to produce laser energy.
Light is generally described in terms of wavelength and frequency and
travels at a speed, c:
c = 2.998 X 108 m/s
CHAPTER 1
Ceneral Principles
Figure 1-1 At the same speed, c, frequency
and wavelength are inversely related for these
two different colors of light. The wave
possessing a larger wavelength will have a
lower frequency and less energy while the
higher frequency wave will have a shorter
Time
Time
wavelength and higher energy.
Wavelength is the physical distance between successive crests of waves of
photonic radiation (Figure 1-1). The wavelength of light determines its
 physical characteristics. Visible light is perceived within a narrow band of
wavelengths between 400nm (violet) to 700nm (red). Wavelengths shorter
than 400nm are ultraviolet, and wavelengths greater than 700nm are in-
frared. Cosmic rays have the shortest wavelengths, on the order of
10-13 to 10-15 m, and radio waves have the longest wavelengths, up to one
meter (Figure 1-2). The frequency of light refers to the number of wave
crests passing a point during a defined length of time. The relationship be-
tween wavelength (入), speed (c), and frequency (f) of light is given by:
A=c / f
The wave theory of electromagnetic radiation describes each ray of
light as composed of a combination of traveling waves of electric
(E-wave) and magnetic (H-wave) fields. Each field is mutually perpendi-
cular to the other and to the direction of propagation at all times. Each
ray is composed of E-waves radiating outward in all possible planes, and
for each E-wave there would be a corresponding H-wave perpendicular to
it. The result is a ray of light composed of a waveform that resembles a
string of pearls; the junction of the waves at the axis of propagation de-
limits the shape of each “pearl."
Figure 1-2 A simplified de-
UV
IR
monstration of the entire elec-
 tromagnetic spectrum shows
that visible light occupies an
700
600
500
400
Wavelength (nm)
extremely narrow bandwidth.
Red light is visible at around 
700nm, and blue light is
Radio
Microwave
Infrared 
Visible
Ultraviolet
X-ray
[Gamma Ray]
visible at around 400nm.
104
102
10-2
10-
10-6
10-8
10-10
10-12
Wavelengths larger than
Wavelength in centimeters 
700nm are referred to as infra-
red because the frequency of 
 the radiant energy is lower
About the size o
than that of red light. Like-
wise, wavelengths shorter than
400nm are referred to as
ultraviolet because the fre-
Buildings
 Humans
Honey
Pinhead
Protozoans
 Molecules
Atoms
 Atomic Nuclei quency of the radiant energy is
Bees
higher than that of violet light.
PARTI
Electromagnetic Wave
Theory of Laser Surgery
Magnetic Field (B)
Electric
Field (E)
Figure 1-3 This is a simplified theoretical
Propagation
three-dimensional model of a photon of light.
Direction
It indicates both an electric field and a
Wavelength (.)
magnetic field oscillating mutually
perpendicular to each other and to the
direction of propagation at all times
Planck advanced the photon theory by postulating that the energy car-
ried by an electromagnetic wave cannot be endlessly subdivided into ever-
smaller increments, but that radiant energy consists of indivisible units re-
ferred to as a quantum. We now refer to this packet of energy as a pho-
ton. A photon is a massless particle of radiant energy that moves at the
speed of light in a straight line. It may be considered a wave train of finite
length, or a wavelet. Each wavelet is composed of a finite number of
 E-waves and corresponding H-waves bounded by a damped amplitude
envelope (Figure 1-3).
The quantum theory states that there is a precise value of energy asso-
ciated with each photon. The photonic energy (ep) is directly proportional
to the frequency (f) of the wavelet:
ep = hf
h = 6.626 x 10-34 Js (Planck's constant)
Since f = c / A, photonic energy increases inversely with wavelength, and
proportionally to frequency. Thus, ultraviolet radiation is inherently more
energetic than infrared radiation. Although a photon has no mass, it does
have the equivalent of momentum and can exert force on an object and
harnessed to perform work. He postulated that the basic substance of
matter and energy are interchangeable, and are related by:
u = 3
The quantum theory of atomic structure also allows only certain elec-
 tron orbital sizes, shapes, and distances from the atomic nucleus (Figure
1-4). It predicts that negatively charged electrons are found within shells,
as a cloud surrounding the positively charged nucleus. These permitted
orbits may be spherical, elliptical, conical, or a combination of these geo-
metrical shapes. Furthermore, there are discrete levels of energy that an
electron must possess to inhabit any particular orbit. Each atomic element
is characterized by a unique number of protons, neutrons, and electrons.
If the protons and electrons are unequal in number, the element is said to
CHAPTER 1
Ceneral Principles
Figure 1-4 The nucleus of an element is a
cluster of particles having a net positive
charge. Negatively charged electrons inhabit 
orbital shells of definite size, shape, and 
distance from the nucleus. Higher energy
electrons may inhabit higher energy shells at a
greater radius from the nucleus. Orbits located
closer to the nucleus may contain lower
energy electrons. In this representation, E is
the highest energy orbital, and Eg is the lowest.
be ionized. Isotopes of a given element have the same number of protons
and electrons, but have a different number of neutrons; hence they have
identical chemical properties. The atomic state of an atom is described by
four quantum numbers:
● The principal quantum number, characterizing the shell of the electron
(1 to 7), based on the radius of distance from the atomic nucleus
● The orbital quantum number, characterizing the orbital angular mo-
mentum of the electron (s, p, d, f); hence the shape of the electron cloud
(Figure 1-5)
● The orientation quantum number, describing the direction of the elec-
tron cloud vector relative to an electric field (x, y, z, z2, x2-y2, xz, yz,
xy); the orientation of f clouds is too complex to be described and is not
salient.
● The spin quantum number, characterizing the angular momentum vec-
tor of electron spin as parallel or opposite to the orientation of the elec-
tron cloud (up or down). Therefore, either zero, one or two electrons
may inhabit any given orbital at a given moment in time.
Electrons that orbit close to the nucleus have lower energies than those
orbiting within higher energy level shells farther away from the nucleus.
 i   si o  a sa a r a a
Figure 1-5 The number of posible
 orientations of atomic orbitals in space
depends on the shape and size of the orbital.
An s orbital is spherically symmetrical. There
are three sets of bilobed p orbitals, and the
P
axes along which the three orbitals lie are
mutually perpendicular to each other. The five
d orbitals are two sets of bilobed regions
arranged in space as shown. Finally, there are
seven f orbitals. Their shape and directional
characteristics are not understood well enough
to be shown.
PARTI
quantum theory requires that the energy level change only by discrete in-
Theory of Laser Surgery
crements of energy represented by the difference in energy levels of one
orbit compared to another. Any change in the energy level of an electron
within its orbit will cause it to instantly move to another orbit. This change
occurs in distinct steps, and a continuous transition is not possible.
The quantum theory fundamentally describes how differences in pho-
tonic energy are related to changes in the atomic energy level. All light in
the universe originates as a quantum-level energy change resulting in the
spontaneous emission of a photon. Photons are generated and absorbed
by molecules or compounds and have predictable energy levels. Each mol-
S  s  s    
sion of photonic energy. This emitted light is a characteristic wave of pho.
tons that can be collimated,
, or refined to transfer its energy to
do work on a host of materials and tissues. Furthermore, the atom, mol.
ecule, or compound is not destro
yed or used up in this process of photon
generation. A variety of compounds.
, when stimulated, are able to produce
differing wavelengths of laser energy. Each specific wavelength has a dif-
ferent effect on specific target material or tissue.
lustrate, let us compare it with the “white light" produced from an incan-
descent light bulb (Figure 1-6). The product of the laser is light, which is
composed of the previously described discrete energy packets known as
photons. Photonic energy is also released from heat generated through re-
sistance to a metal coil in a light bulb and indeed, a photon is a photon
whether it comes from a camp fire, a light bulb, or laser. Light from the
laser and the light bulb differs fundamentally in how its photons are gen-
erated, organized, confined, and transmitted. When you look at a glow-
ing light bulb, you see white light that is composed of various wavelengths
radiating in all directions at varying amplitudes and frequencies at all ori-
gins of time. As you walk away from the glowing glass bulb, its light ap-
pears dimmer until the light is no longer detectable. The various wave-
lengths produced from the light bulb cancel each other out over time and
Laser Light
White Light
Coherent
Non-coherent
Orisrr
Prism
Monochromatic
Broad Spectrum
Figure 1-6 Laser light is coherent, mono-
Collimated
Non-collimated
chromatic, collimated, and intense. Note the
differences between laser light and the white
light produced by an incandescent light bulb.
Intense
Not Intense
8
CHAPTER 1
General Principles
Ray1
?
Figure 1-7 Coherence is demonstrated using
Densit
Ray 2
these four photons. All of them have the same
wavelength and velocity. There is coincidence
Ray 3
in the peaks and troughs of the radiant energy.
and they all begin at the exact same moment
Ray4
in time. Note that as the number of photons
increase, the intensity, or power density, of the
Time
laser beam increases.
distance. In the laser beam, however, photons are emitted in parallel and
in phase with each other and collimated. Photons produced from a single
compound or atom producing consistent energy released at the same
wavelength, amplitude, frequency, and time are considered a laser beam.
This property is known as coherence (Figure 1-7). It allows the photons
to maintain a stable wave pattern that permits the light formed to main-
tain collimation over great distances, conserving its energy potential. It
also is able to maintain its ability to do work or impart its energy to a tar-
get material or tissue over an infinite distance. The intensity of a colli-
mated laser beam is not diminished over distance.
We can also see that a light bulb produces a “white" color. This is be
cause the white light contains all of the colors and wavelengths in the vi-
sual portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. Multiple photon emission
 sd ss e ind no  nod nis si au s jo
front of the light bulb, you will refract the different wavelengths and see
the rainbow effect spread out as a continuum of distinct color emissions.
Laser energy passed through the same glass prism will produce light of
only one wavelength and hence one
 color. A laser produces a beam of one
type of photon and is classified as monochromatic.
A third difference between the two light sources is their intensity. The
number of photons produced by a laser in a measured specific unit area is
a much greater source of energy than for any other light source. This con-
centrated energy delivered to a compact area gives lasers the potential to
do a huge amount of work.
Finally, it is important to note that although all photons obey the same
basic laws of physics within the universe, the preservation of matter
makes a laser quite distinct from a consumable light bulb. The concept of
a cascading, reusable, and consistent supply of photons that are coherent,
monochromatic, and intense requires an atom, molecule, or compound
that can repeatedly alter its electrons in the ground state to a highly ex-
cited state and back without losing any of its own mass.
Laser Generation
Three things are needed to produce a functional laser: (1) an optical res
onant cavity that contains (2) the lasing medium and (3) an external en-
ergy source. The type of lasing medium (gas, liquid, or solid) within the
optical resonator determines the wavelength of laser light produced. The
PARTI
Front Mirror:
Theory of Laser Surgery
(high reflective / partially transmissive)
Rear Mirror: 100% Reflective
INTENSE
Figure 1-8 The capability to generate laser
light is produced only by certain media
contained within a resonant cavity following
strong pumping by an external energy source.
Projected Laser Beam
Stimulated atoms emit photons in all directions
Laser medium
ENERGY SOURCE
LASER BEAM
at first, but when population inversion occurs,
Monochromatic
axially oriented photons amplify geometrically
Coherent
to produce an intense, monochromatic
Collimated
coherent, collimated beam of light. This
photon cascade event occurs within pico-
seconds, and is sustainable as long as energy
is applied to the system. Some laser media are
obligated tobe pulsed by energy to exist. Laser
energy is released from the resonant cavity
through a highly reflective/partially trans-
missive gate. The user may now harness laser
light to perform work.
resonant optical cavity is generally a tube or cylindrical structure, and its
length is much greater than its width. A highly reflective mirror caps one
end of the resonant cavity and a partially transmitting but highly reflec-
tive mirror is at the opposite end cap. This is required to allow the laser
light to emerge from the resonator for functional use. The energy source
can be another laser or, more commonly, electricity (either radio fre-
quency or direct current). The process of exciting the medium within the
resonator is called pumping (Fig
1-8)
In a laser system, atoms in the
state are excited by the input of
 The electrons jump to a higher energy
level called the singlet state,
very unstable. Very shortly afterward
a small amount of non-
is released, allowing the electron
to move down to a meta-si
An atom in the meta-stable state can
tat
be stimulated by a photon to
ric cascade effect of photon
heration. According to the basic principles
of quantum physics, since both
 come from identical energy levels,
they will be the same wavelel
(color) and move parallel to and in phase
with each other. The release of
this
additional energy allows the molecule
to return to a lower energy state.
At a lower level, the atom can be repeat-
 edly excited and stimulated to emit photons. When the process ceases, the
electron returns down to the ground state by a non-radiative transition.
Only certain types of atoms or molecules are capable of what is referred
to as repeated photon emission or the “lasing proces" that will be de-
scribed in greater detail in the following paragraphs. These atoms, mole-
cules, or compounds can be in the form of a solid, gas, liquid, crystal, or
plasma. Media suitable for laser generation are unique in that these atoms
can remain meta-stable for a relatively long time, upwards of a couple of
seconds or more. That is a lifetime in the physical world of the atom, com-
pound, or molecule, where most reactions occur in nanoseconds or pi-
coseconds (Figure 1-9).
10
 Absorption and Emission
CHAPTER 1
Absorption
Ceneral Principles
Figure 1-9 Most reactions at the atomic level
occur within a fraction of a picosecond. The
ue sasneo wone ue Aq Aahaua jo uodiosge
electron to jump to a higher energy level. This 
change in energy can be calculated using
modifications of Planck's law, △e=hf. Likewise,
when an electron moves to a lower energy
level it spontaneously emits energy in the form
 of a photon equivalent to that change in
Emissior
energy level.
The laser medium must be held in a sealed container. Within a fraction
of a second, there is an intense buildup of many photons in a limited space.
The generated photons are parallel and in phase with one another. This
rapid production of intense, coherent photons is called a photon cascade
event. It is repeatable and sustainable as long as the same energy input ex-
ists. Within the closed container, opposing highly reflective surfaces allow
the photons to continuously reverberate through the excited medium. This
allows for stimulating the emission of more photons, as was discussed ear-
lier. This is the final physical process known as photon amplification. By
causing the photons to continually re-enter the molecule mix, they enhance
the production of more photons of the same wavelength. Then, controlled
laser emission is produced by guiding the release of some of the photons
by means of one partially reflective surface at one end of the laser cavity
and passing them through an aperture. The result is the production of an
intense, monochromatic, coherent, collimated beam of laser light.
Quantum Theory
An atom will normally exist in the ground state, corresponding to its low-
est possible level of energy (Figure 1-10). It can rise to a higher level only
in discrete steps, by absorbing energy in quantum increments. After ab-
 sorbing energy, an atom exists in an excited state (Figure 1-11). The atom
will return to a lower level excited state after a short period of time, and
finally return to its ground state by emission of energy. This emission can
take the form of a series of wavelets, or a photon, and the process is re-
ferred to as spontaneous emission. The frequency of the photon is:
f=c/A=△e/h
where △e represents the change in energy between the excited level of the
atom and the lower level to which it returns by spontaneous emission
 assidxa Ans si so saa sin go ana a (hi aii)
joules or electron volts and they are related as follows:
One eV = 1.6022 × 10-19 J
11
PARTI
Theory of Laser Surgery
Electror
Figure 1-10 A representation of the possible
(First up)
atomic energy levels that can exist within a
E2— (high metastable)
single element of a laser medium. The ground 
Nucleus
Blue photon
state, or Eo. exists at rest. When this atom is
excited, an electron will jump up to the First 
(E2 - E1)
Up level, or Es, then almost immediately move
to a slightly lower energy level E (high meta-
(low metastable)
stable state). This energy state is not stable, and
if no further excitation occurs, the electron will
(E1 - Eo)
move down to a lower energy level (low meta-
Shells
Eo
Ground
stable state), E, and radiate a photon by
State
Electron
emission of energy equivalent to that change
in energy (E2—E) If no further excitation
exists, after a very short period of time the
electron will return to the ground state. Energy
changes associated with E3——E and E——Eo are
usually lost as heat. The fundamental charac-
teristic of any laser medium is the physical
property of possessing a meta-stable state
(E2—E,) that can be maintained for measurable
periods of time.
Stimulated emission is the basic process that produces the phenomenon
of all lasers (Figure 1-13). It occurs
xcited atom is irradiated by
a photon that was spontaneous
emitted
 another atom of the same el-
ement, relaxing from an identical excited state.
. This photon causes the ex
cited atom to emit an identical photon and r
The original spontaneously emitted photon
1 and the new photon emitted
by stimulated emission are identical. The
 have the same wavelength and
frequency, and are coherent in time and space. A
Amplification of light at
Photonic
Energy
A
Wavelet of
First-up Level
Light
E3
Upper Laser Level
(metastable)
E2
Laser Transition
Lower Laser Level
 Nucleus 
(short lifetime)
E1
Figure 1-11 The absorption of energy.
e.g., a wavelet of light or photon, causes
 an electron of this atom to move up to a
Ground Level
E0
higher energy level state.
12
CHAPTER 1
Photonic
Ceneral Principles
Energy
First-up Level
3
 Upper Laser Level
(metastable)
E2
Laser Transition
Nucleus
Lower Laser Level
(short lifetime)
E1
 Figure 1-12 Spontaneous emission of a
photon occurs when an excited electron
moves down to a lower energy orbital.
The wavelength of light emitted is 
Ground Level
inversely related to the change in energy
Q
between these two levels.
this frequency occurs as a geometric chain reaction within a resonant cav-
ity. As a result, laser occurs.
At the atomic or molecular level most media have at least three, but
more commonly four, distinct quantum levels of energy that are consid-
ered in the discussion of laser generation. The lowest level is the ground
state, in which the electrons are closest to the nuclei and have a low en-
ergy level. When the medium is pumped, an electron absorbs sufficient en-
 ergy to inhabit the first bigh level, or singlet state. Very shortly thereafter,
 Photonic
Energy
A
 First-up Level
Figure 1-13 An excited atom can be
E3
stimulated to emit radiation as illus-
trated. An incoming photon triggers a
Upper Laser Level
 second identical and coherent photon 
(metastable)
E2
to be emitted parallel and in phase to it
while simultaneously causing an
electron to move from the upper meta-
Laser Transition
stable laser level to the lower meta-
Lower Laser Level
 stable laser level. The photonic energy
Nucleus
(short lifetime)
of the trigering waveie is equal to the
三1
 energy change (△E = E2 — E1). The
atom in the low meta-stable laser level
may be excited again or it may return to
the ground state by a non-radiative
Ground Level
E0
transition if no further energy input 
occurs.
13
PARTI
the electron spontaneously falls to the upper laser level and the element or
Theory of Laser Surgery
molecule is considered in a meta-stable state. The wavelength of the emit-
ted radiation is determined by the change in energy between the upper
and lower energy levels of the meta-stable state. This change in energy is
known as the laser transition. Following emission of radiation, the elec-
tron falls to the ground state. The pumping cycle can begin again after the
electron falls back to the ground state by a non-radiative transition
(Figure 1-14).
When the concentration of a medium within the resonant cavity is high
enough, it is more likely to create an environment conducive to laser gen-
eration. The photons released as a result of stimulated emission will be
 generated in an infinite number of directions. These randomly oriented
photons will be absorbed by other atoms within it, creating stimulated
emission of photons. Only those photons that are oriented perfectly par-
allel to the axis of the resonant cavity will continue to be reflected back
and forth without a change in direction. If this axially oriented photon in-
teracts with an electron in the ground state it will be absorbed and the
laser effect diminished. In great contrast though, the true chain reaction
of laser light generation is intensified if this photon aligned with the axis
of the resonant cavity interacts 
 with an excited electron residing in the
meta-stable state. The result is that many photons will all simultaneously
reflect over and again between the end caps of the resonant cavity in per-
fect alignment of space and time, creating a cascade of photons contain-
ing the same wavelength, frequency, and direction of motion.
For a continuous laser effect to occur, it is essential that the external en-
ergy source for pumping provides a condition in which the majority of in-
dividual electrons are in an excited state. It is also vital to maintain the
meta-stable state for a reasonable period of time. Since excited electrons
very rapidly return to a lower level, it is desirable to choose a medium that
has a meta-stable state lifetime significantly longer than its ground state.
Only certain media have these physical properties. The accumulation of
molecules or elements that exist in the meta-stable state is necessary to
sustain conditions contributing to laser generation. This requirement is re-
ferred to as a population inversion or photon cascade. Only when a pop-
ulation inversion exists can a laser sustain its action. The end result of
laser is an intense beam of single wavelength (monochromatic) light that
Figure 1-14 Only media that can be sustained
in the meta-stable state for appreciable periods
energy of
of time are suitable for use in laser light gene-
atom
 lifetime ~ 10-7s
ration. While pumping is maintained by elec
excited
lifetime ~ 10-3s
tric current, triggering photons causes a geo-
state
00000
metrically increasing population of coherent
metastable
light waves. In these conditions, an electron
state
may repeatedly oscillate between the upper
and lower laser levels, releasing a stimulated
photon in each cycle. Amplification of
coherent, monochromatic, collimated light
ground
within a resonant cavity by the stimulated
state
DC/RFEnergy
emission of radiation is laser.
14
is in phase with respect to time (frequency) and space (coherent) and is
CHAPTER 1
confined within a determined boundary (collimated).
General Principles
Beam Geometry
Collimated beams of light are parallel to one another in all three dimen-
sions. The photon paths neither converge nor diverge at any time. When
a laser emits light, the beam is collimated. This beam of laser light is also
coherent, meaning all the crests and troughs of the waveform line up.
Spatial and temporal coherence of all photons of laser light implies that
at any point in the future, the position and intensity of that photon can
be predicted; likewise, it is possible to determine the exact previous loca
tion and intensity of a laser photon by knowing its present position. The
third fundamental characteristic of laser light is monochromaticity, or
being composed of one constant wavelength.
Laser light output is described in terms of energy (joules), power ( watts)
and their respective densities. Energy is the measure of excitement of a
substance that allows work to be performed and is expressed in joules.
xa i pe a jo poad uai e iao yom iei op o Aie aui si rmod
pressed in watts. Laser energy dosage delivered to an area is described in
terms of fluence, or energy density, and is expressed in joules/cm?. The
very important concept of “power density” refers to the amount of energy
delivered to a given area per unit of time and is expressed in watts/cm2.
Energy is expressed in Joules
Power = Energy / Time
Fluence = Energy / Area energy is applied
Power Density = Power / Area power is applied
The cross section of a laser beam is generally circular, but the power
density varies somewhat across its diameter, depending on the transmis-
sion device (Figure 1-15). This is largely due to the slightly curved shape
of the reflecting mirrors within the resonant cavity that concentrates pho-
tons into the center of the beam. It is generally therefore most powerful
at the center of the beam, and that power exponentially diminishes to-
ward zero away from the central axis. Thus, a plot of power density vs.
distance from the beam axis would be a Gaussian distribution pattern,
which is described by:
P = Pa e-2(r2/w2)
where P, is the power density of the beam at radius r away from the cen-
tral axis of that beam, Pa is the power density at the exact center of the
beam, e is the base of natural logarithms, and w is the radius equal to one
half of the effective diameter of the beam. The effective diameter of a laser
beam is the diameter of a concentric circle perpendicular to the axis of
15
PARTI
Laser Beam
Theory of Laser Surgery
M<
radlus
Figure 1-15 The geometry of a TEMoo laser
beam is Caussian and 3-dimensional. The
highest power density, Pe, is at the center of
the beam. Power diminishes logarithmically
(Gaussian curve) with distance from the central
axis. The effective diameter of the laser beam is
represented by a cross section at radius r = w
which defines an area equal to 86.5% of the
total spot. Here the power P, = P/e2. It follows
then, that at radius r < w, the fluence will be
much higher than at the edge of the laser
beam, and at radius r > w the fluence will be
very low.
travel of that beam, containing 86.5% of its total power. A simple calcu-
lation shows P, = 0.135 Pa when r equals w. Thus, 13.5% of the beam's
power lies beyond this radius that defines a circle containing 86.5% of the
power of the beam.
The distribution of power density across a laser beam is called the
transverse electromagnetic mode of the beam, or TEM. Many distribu-
tions of power density are physically possible and are designated as
TEMmn where m and n are positive integers representing the number of
troughs in the x-direction and y-direction of a three-dimensional plot of
the intensity profile of a beam traveling in the z-direction (axis). Thus, a
Gaussian beam has TEMoo, and a beam designated by TEMo1 would ap-
 pear to be a bell-shaped dome having a deep central crater at the apex,
appearing much like a typical volcano. Complicated TEMs are rarely de-
sirable in surgery, and the most common useful mode of any laser beam
is TEMoo,or the fundamental mode.
pue jeoa jo Kiaa e ia pnane aq ues indino uioud is
computer-assisted formats with modern lasers. If a laser delivers radiation
continuously, it is operating in continuous wave mode (CW) (Figure 1-16).
Figure 1-16 In continuous wave (CW) mode,
the laser output is steady and constant for the
entire duration of the time that it is used.
Duration of CW operation may be as short as
a few milliseconds, or indefinitely, and causes
 the greatest accumulation of heat within
tissues.
16
CHAPTER 1
Ceneral Principles
Higure 1-17 In pulsed-wave mode (PW), the
laser output is cyclically interrupted according
to mechanical settings chosen by the user. The
 frequency of pulse repetition, f, can be as few
as 1 Hz or as much as 50 Hz or greater. The
time period of the radiant output, Tp, is the
same during each pulse, and the rest period
when the power is shut off T, is also the same
There are also user-defined settings for a laser to be operated in a series of
during each pulse. Some laser media are
timed pulses or pmulsed-wave mode (PW) (Figure 1-17). This is also some-
obligated to function in pulsed mode since the
times called a chop wave mode. Some lasers are restricted to pulsed-wave
meta-stable state is not indefinitely maintain-
able. All lasers that function in CW mode can
operation due to the physical properties of the medium, which prevent
be used in PW mode. Using a laser in PW
continuous laser operation; e.g., excimer, Er:YAG, Ho:YAG, and ruby are
 mode allows for some tissue cooling between
all lasers restricted to PW operation. Lasers such as alexandrite (or any
pu lses.
other diode), argon, CO2, and Nd:YAG are capable of CW output, but can
be operated in a pulsed mode. Superpulse and ultrapulse are specific wave-
forms that can be used in CO2 laser systems either continuously or in a
pulsed pattern (Figure 1-18), and will be discussed in Chapter 4. Several
means of achieving a pulsed operation are known and used via a variety of
Figure 1-18 The superpulse mode (SP) of laser
programmed settings. They include tump-puising, mode-locking, Q-
delivery is created using extremely short Tp
switching, and cavity dumping, just to name a few.
and a corresponding longer T, per pulse. The
Pump-pulsing is achieved by intermittently interrupting the flow of
peak power is also much higher than a pulse 
 power from the pumping source into the laser resonator by a mechanical,
of energy delivered by CW. The total fluence
electric, or shutter switching device that is usually pre-programmed. This 
delivered by SP is generally lower than that of
is the most common way a CW laser operates in PW mode. Mode-
CW or PW. Ideal delivery and rest allow for
locking, Q-switching, and cavity dumping are all methods that create a
the longest possible thermal conduction within 
tissues while maximizing tissue penetration
large burst of laser energy extremely rapidly within the resonant cavity.
due to high power densities achieved during
The power is not long lasting, though, and the process is cyclically repeat-
Tp. Superpulse T, should be shorter than the
able. Lasers that operate only in PW usually require pumping in one of
thermal relaxation time of tissue. The T, of the
these three ways to function. Mode-locking generally produces laser out-
superpulse waveform is similarly optimized for
tissue cooling between pulses. Incisions are
best made with SP, because there are negli
per pulse may only be as small as a few millijoules, the power delivered
gible coagulative properties in tissue respond-
ing to this mode of laser energy delivery.
 The superpulse waveform can also be
pulsed. During each macropulse of the SP
waveform there are several micropulses of
laser energy output. A single superpulse T, is
 generally 200 to 300 μsec and repeats at 150
to 250 Hz depending on T,. A common use of
SP in PW mode is to create 25 msec macro-
pulses at 30 Hz of SP micropulses at 200 Hz.
This allows a T, between macropulses of about
 8.333 msec to permit a greater degree of tissue
cooling.
The top waveform illustrates a series of
continuous superpulses, or a macropulse of
superpulse micropulses. The lower waveform
illustrates a pulsed superpulse in which each
macropulse would feature a brief run of
constituent micropulses.
17
PARTI
may reach 107 to 109 watts! Q-switching is produced by cyclically dis-
Theory of Laser Surgery
turbing the standing wave created within the optical resonant cavity while
maintaining strong pumping. The result is a short burst of extremely high
 power at the instant the disturbance is released. Finally, cavity dumping
Occurs when a large population inversion (photon cascade) is created very
quickly and the strongly reinforced beam of laser light is trapped within
the resonant cavity. All of the coherent light is then released in a short
pulse of high power.
The power that a laser delivers can be controlled by changing the diam-
eter of the beam or the amount of time that the energy is delivered. The
circular pattern that laser light produces at its target is referred to as the
spot size. This is the diameter of the beam at its contact point with the tar-
get agent. Most lasers produce a circular spot unless the beam geometry
is altered. The spot size can be changed by using focusing tips or lensed
focusing hand pieces or by changing the distance between the focusing tip
and the target. In contrast, the intensity of a collimated beam is only al-
tered by managing its power. Successful surgical laser use requires an un-
derstanding of the relationship between power output and spot size of the
beam, distance to the target tissue, the angle of targeting, and length of
delivery time.
18
Chapter 2
Power Density and the Basic Effects of
Radiant Energy on Tissue
When discussing different kinds of laser-producing compounds, mole-
cules, or atoms, the type of material closed within the resonant chamber
defines the laser identification. The material that is used for the lasing
process without being expended is often related to the name of the laser
itself, e.g., the CO2 laser has CO2 gas as the lasing medium. There are liq-
uid, solid, and gas lasers. It is possible to obtain lasing action from many
of these materials, provided their atomic structure is appropriate, as pre-
viously discussed, with respect to the ability to repeatedly produce pho-
tons without being self-depleting.
All lasers, including medical lasers, are referred to in terms of their
wavelength in nanometers (nm), microns (um), or millimeters (mm).
Lasers occupy a relatively small portion of the entire electromagnetic
spectrum. Photons of this type can be produced from any region of the
light spectrum. In most cases the energy requirement costs far exceed the
 photon output for useable laser energy. But in certain cases the photon-
economical and reproducible production of laser energy that can do work
on target materials or tissues.
There are currently a significant number of wavelengths available for
veterinary clinical use. In fact, many newer devices can be finely dialed in
to emit photons at the exact wavelength, amplitude, and frequency that
match the particular target source in body tissues to bring about their se-
lective energy uptake with subsequent disruption and vaporization. This
intense, pure beam of coherent collimated light follows the basic laws of
photon-to-tissue interaction that is referred to as photobiology. Thus, a
consistent and reproducible effect can be predicted and induced to pro-
vide a variety of treatment options.
There are also ways to enhance, alter, or modify the wavelengths from
standard lasers. Certain crystal structure forms, called nonlinear asym-
metric crystals, can take the laser and, through an interaction of these
photons with the crystal lattice structure, generate laser light with twice
the frequency (half the wavelength) of the originating laser wavelength.
This is known as frequency doubling or harmonic generation. By using
these crystals in conjunction with lasers, it is possible to significantly alter
the wavelength by double, triple, or quadruple the wavelengths from the
primary laser source. It is also possible to use one laser to excite another
and, by using liquid dyes that can go into many different meta-stable
states, obtain a whole variety of different wavelengths from a single laser
device. This is very important when considering that varying wavelengths
of laser energy interact in specific and finite ways with target materials or
tissues based on target tissue component uptake of the laser energy.
19
PARTI
Power Density
Theory of Laser Surgery
The intensity of a laser beam is best described using the extremely impor-
tant concept of power density. Power density is measured as the radiant
power striking a target per unit area of cross-section of a laser light beam.
That power, P, is described as the amount of energy delivered per unit of
time. Power density, Po, is generally stated in units of W/cm?.
P=e/t
P。= P / A
Power density is directly proportional to the power (in watts) that a laser
can deliver, and inversely proportional to the surface area (in cm?) that the
beam strikes to do work.
The fundamental power density profile of a laser beam used in veteri-
nary surgery is the Gaussian, or TEMoo mode. This geometric pattern is
ideal because it can be focused to a very small effective diameter on a tar-
get. The smallest possible effective diameter at the focal point of a laser
beam is
dmin = 2fA/(r)
where r is the radius of the beam where it enters the lens or focusing tip
having focal length, f, through which laser light of wavelength 入 will con-
verge. The CO2 laser has a wavelength of 10.6 μm. When this invisible
light passes through a 1.5mm diameter aperture, the smallest effective di-
 e u d e q  q pd aq u in a
length of 3mm is 27 microns—just over two wavelengths. For practical
use, though, the smallest diameter laser beam that a focusing tip will pro-
duce is equal to the size of its opening, ie., O.3mm.
The effective diameter of a laser beam, d,, is conveniently described as
 the diameter of a concentric circle perpendicular to the axis of beam prop-
agation that contains 86.5% of the total power of the laser beam, as
noted in Chapter 1. Note that peak power exists only at the axis, and falls
exponentially toward zero away from the axis. The effective diameter of
a laser beam is a convenient value to use when discussing spot size or any
other parameter regarding the power density of a laser beam.
 Simply increasing or decreasing the power delivered through any given
constant effective diameter can influence power density, and that change
will be strictly linear. For example, if 8 watts (power) are delivered to a
1280 W/cm', from the following calculation:
P。 = P/πr = (8 W × 4)/ π(0.08 cm)2
The power density can be increased to 2,560 W/cm2 by increasing power
to 16 watts, and decreased to 640 W/cm2 by decreasing power to 4 watts.
Thus, doubling the power will double the power density if the effective di-
20
ameter remains constant. Likewise, reducing the power by a factor of one-
CHAPTER 2
third will also reduce the power density one-third. This is a strictly linear
Power Density and
relationship.
Basic Effects on Tissue
More dramatic effects in power density changes are observed by alter
ing the diameter of the delivery of that beam, and those changes obey an
inverse square law.
Assuming a circular spot size and constant power delivered, the change
in power density will change with the inverse square of the effective diam-
eter of the beam. For example, if 10W are applied through effective diam-
eters of 1.4mm, 0.8mm, 0.4mm, and 0.3mm, the corresponding power
densities would be 648 W/cm", 1,984 W/cm", 7,938 W/cm", 14,111
W/cm2. Note that by doubling the effective diameter from 0.4mm to
0.8mm the power density is diminished by one-fourth and that power
density quadruples by using an effective diameter that is comparatively
one-half as wide. Likewise, the difference in power density changes by a
factor of approximately 25 when comparing the effective diameters of
0.3mm and 1.4mm. (Figure 2-1)
The average power density, in W/cm2, of an unfocused collimated beam
of light, or light that has passed through a cylindrical quartz fiber, is given
by the total beam power divided by the cross sectional area of the beam:
P。 = P/πr2 = 127.3 P。/ (de in mm)2
This approximation does not apply for focused beams. Normally a fo-
cused beam will converge from the distal end of its delivery system to a fi-
  n nd p s    d p 
 This divergence can be used for the surgeon's benefit if it is understood
that changing the distance from the target will change the power density
 of the beam at the point of tissue contact. For collimated beams, chang-
ing the distance from the target has no influence on power density at the
tissue target. (Figure 2-2)
The focal distance, f, of a typical CO2 laser-focusing tip is 2 mm from
its aperture. This means the power density of the beam will be highest
near this point, and lower power densities will be found either proximal
or distal to this focal point. In actuality this system prevents a perfect
focal point, but there is a focal area in the range of 1 mm to 3 mm from
the opening, but for simplicity, we will describe the focal distance as 2
mm. A circular area at the focal point having diameter de will possess
Figure 2-1 The power density of a focused
laser beam is dramatically changed by altering
its effective diameter. For approximately
circular areas, changes in power density obey
an inverse square law according to changes in
spot size diameter. Reducing the diameter of
the spot by 50% increases the power density
fourfold; and likewise, doubling the diameter
1.4 mm
0.8 mm
0.4 mm
0.3 mm
of the spot diminishes power density to one.
PD = x
PD = 4x
PD = 16x PD =32x
fourth of the original.
21
PARTI
Theory of Laser Surgery
Figure 2-2 A focused laser beam has a focal
 area located 1 mm to 3 mm from the aperture
of a focusing tip. The laserbeam willdiverge
beyond that focal area. Observe that the spot
diameter will increase as the handpiece and
focusing tip are separated a greater distance
from the target. This increase in diameter will
reduce the delivered power density. Also note
that the angle of divergence willdifer among
focusing tips. Widely divergent angles will
cause a much greater and much faster reduc-
tion in power density with any changes in
distance to the target from the focal area. This
does not apply for collimated beams, in which
case the power density does not change at all 
 power density P。. The spot size on a plane perpendicular to the beam axis
with any change in distance from the aperture
at a focal distance from the focal point will have a diameter that varies
to the target.
with the angle of divergence, 0, from the focusing tip. Smaller size focus-
An experienced surgeon can use the ability
 ing tips will have higher divergent angles and larger size focusing tips will
to change power density with distance when it
 have smallr angles of divergence. The diameter of that spot is approxi-
is desirable to rapidly change surgical tech-
nique from ablation at high power density to
mately calculated from:
coagulation at lower power density. Simply
increasing the distance from the laser tip to
de= f sin θ
the target will achieve this goal. It is important
to not touch the tissue with a focusing tip
The power density at this point is similarly approximated by:
becausethe laser beam is converging from the
tip opening down to the focal area, and also to
avoid clogging the aperture.
Po = 4P/(πf2 sin2 0)
Note that power density is inversely related to the square of the focal
distance, f, and inversely related to the square of the sine of the angle of
divergence. For focusing tips having the same focal length, f, the change
in spot size produced at a given distance from the focal point will be
greater if the divergent angle, 0, is larger. Likewise, a tip having a smaller
divergent angle will have smaller changes in spot size at a given distance
from the focal area. Simply moving the focusing tip, or the end of the
fiber, toward or away from the target will produce significant alterations
in power density at the target tissue. Doubling the distance from the focal
point will reduce power density by more than one-fourth. Note that this
does not always apply when changing the target area to a location prox-
 imal to the focal area. Contacting the tissues with a focused tip, or using
a focusing tip as a surgical probe, will certainly produce disastrous results
due to defocusing effects on the tissue and from thermal injury through
alteration in tissue interaction, as will be discussed. Thus, smaller focus-
ing tips can produce higher power density, but moving away from the tar-
get causes precipitous drops in power density that may be harmful or in
effectual. Larger focusing tips produce lower power densities, but do not
focal area. Optically focused hand pieces can produce the same effect.
These often have a metal guide to provide approximate location to the
22
target tissue of average optimal focal distance for the converging beam to
CHAPTER 2
 be at its maximum focus.
Power Density and
Basic Effects on Tissue
To deliver the full benefit of the power to a surgical site, the laser beam
should be focused to its optimal focal diameter at the target tissue and
perpendicular to it (this concept is used repeatedly to produce optimal re-
sults, as seen in the Case Studies section). Any deviation from optimal po-
sition will cause a loss of power applied to the tissue and potentially un-
desirable effects, as will be discussed in Chapter 3. For a perfectly normal
beam, the incident power density, P, is equal to the power density deliv.
ered to the target, Pd. However, much power can be lost (Figure 2-3) if the
surgeon applies the laser beam at an angle 0 deviated from normal, such
that,
P。 = P; sin 0.
Other important aspects of power density changes to the target tissue
will occur, resulting from some light reflected at the surgical surface, and
some will be transmitted through the surface to exert its effect on tissue,
 as will be discussed in Chapters 3 and 4.
Basic Effects of Radiant Energy on Tissue
Ideally, a laser surgeon incises, vaporizes, or cuts tissue and uses adequate
 power density applied at the optimal focal area of the beam, and directs
 that beam perpendicular to the tissue to achieve the surgical precision that
a laser offers for that target tissue. Other effects are possible, i.e., defocus-
 ing the beam by moving farther away from the target and thus decreasing
power density by increasing the spot size, and/or directing the beam at an
ard piqosp se asup ramod ui aseaiap e asnes snue anss oi a
viously. The effect of using below-vaporization-threshold-power density
is, depending on how far below threshold the power density is, coagula-
tion, collagen contraction, protein denaturation, and heating of tissue,
which will be discussed. Ablation of tissue can be a useful application of
a surgical laser, but if not controlled properly, an inexperienced surgeon
may produce morbid consequences to the target tissue. It is important for
Figure 2-3 A laser beam directed
perpendicular (normal) to the target will 
produce the greatest degree of interaction. Any
deviation from normal by an angle will cause
lower power densities at the target due to
distortion of the spot geometry. Note that the
resulting power density is also non-uniform:
the proximal area has increased fluence, and
the distal area has decreased fluence.
23
PARTI
any laser surgeon to understand the surgical significance of power density
Theory of Laser Surgery
and how its diversity produces various tissue effects before beginning to
use a laser for therapeutic or surgical intervention.
As previously discussed, the varieties of surgical lasers presently avail
able produce different wavelengths of light depending, on their medium.
The target tissue composition and the laser wavelength determine how the
five different optical phenomena at the tissue/laser interface. It may be re-
flected, refracted, transmitted, absorbed, or scattered. Laser light is con-
verted to other forms of energy when absorbed within the target tissue. In
order of increasing magnitude of energy, these laser-tissue interactions are
classified as photochemical, photothermal, or photoplasmolytic, depend
ing on whether the absorbed laser energy is converted to chemical, ther-
mal, or mechanical-acoustic energy.
Photochemical reactions occur when laser light is absorbed and con-
verted into chemical energy. This energy directly breaks complex organic
biochemical bonds, resulting in tissue destruction or alteration. Excimer
lasers, or lasers whose wavelengths are very short in the ultraviolet
range, are generally used for photochemolysis. Photodynamic therapy, or
PDT, is achieved by photochemolysis using a photosensitizer, a light
reactive target drug that can be administered intravenously, orally, topi
cally, or intralesionally. The photosensitizer should optimally localize at
the target tissue site by concentrating within its blood supply or tissue
fluid component. When a laser wavelength of matching frequency uptake
interacts with the photosensitizer the laser-activated photosensitizer ini-
tiates the destruction of the chemically labeled tissue. This typically oc
curs by biochemical bond disruption or thermal effect, destabilizing the
cell membrane.
Photothermolysis occurs when the energy of laser light is converted to
heat at the target tissue interface, causing the temperature of the target tis-
sue to rise rapidly. Water, hemoglobin, melanin, and some proteins within
the target tissue absorb varying wavelengths of laser light, resulting in tis-
sue heating. These are the component agents for laser/tissue interaction.
As the temperature of tissue heats to of 42° to 60° C, hyperthermia may
 contract, constrict, or destroy blood vessels, resulting in tissue hypoxia
and cell death. As tissue temperatures increase to 60° to 100° C, coagula-
tion occurs, collagen contracts, proteins are denatured, and irreversible
tissue damage occurs concomitantly with dehydration and/or desiccation
at a cellular level. As the tissue is superheated above 100° C, vaporization
occurs via almost instantaneous boiling of intracellular water and solid
tissue is converted to gaseous vapor and a smoke plume. The superheat-
ing of tissue and vaporization leads to carbonization remnant formation
of non-fluid cellular components known as char. This black char readily
absorbs laser energy at any wavelength. Continued lasing of char such as
by repeated passes over a specific area without char removal furthers the
absorption of laser energy without the potential for vaporization, and
thermal energy continues to accumulate within the tissues in the form of
radiant heat. The thermal energy is conducted to the surrounding tissues
rapidly but below vaporization threshold, resulting in hyperthermia and
24
collateral tissue damage. The remaining carbon char also acts as a foreign
CHAPTER 2
substance, creating the potential for increased inflammation. Further-
Power Density and
Basic Effects on Tissue
more, char can act as an inert layer under which bacteria can multiply and
create incision site infection and an inflammatory response. The combina
tion of thermal injury and foreign material in a surgical site can cause co-
agulative necrosis and delayed wound healing with a strong potential for
infection and wound dehiscence.
Photopyrolytic laser-tissue interaction results in tissue coagulation.
This process occurs when tissues reach temperatures between 60° and
100° C as a result of the absorption of laser energy at the target tissue that
is transformed into heat. The classic coagulative laser uses Nd:YAG or a
diode as the lasing medium in contact mode. The laser energy is converted
to heat at the wave guide tip and applied to the target tissue. More com-
monly, though, if a surgeon desires to incise or cut tissue via vaporization,
the laser beam must have eno
 power density to cause the tissues to
reach 100° C very rapidly (Figure 2-4)
Photovaporolysis is the process wherein the histologic water is rapidly
flashed over to steam. This rapidly expands and ruptures the relatively
weak cell membranes and disrupts the normal tissue structure. A plume
of desiccated carbonaceous material and water vapor is ejected away from
the surgery site. Far less conduction of heat (less than O.1%) is distributed
to surrounding tissues as compared to photopyrolysis. The two most com-
monly used lasers in soft tissue surgery are either the Er:YAG or CO2 be-
mode can also produce a photovaporolytic effect to pigmented tissues, but
only if the power density is high.
Mechanical-acoustic disruption can be achieved by a phenomenon
called photoplasmolysis. This occurs when rapidly pulsed laser light is
wave at the leading edge of the tissue/laser interface. The laser beam needs
to be of exceedingly high power density such that the light waves are
 strong enough to ionize the atoms in the tissue and form a plasma. In this
physical case, a plasma is a confined area of an exceedingly hot gas
The Effects of
Thermal Energy Accumulation
Figure 2-4 The process of photothermolysis is
Denaturation 55 - 60 °C
irreversible. It is caused by the absorption of
light energy and its transformation to heat
energy that accumulates within tissue. Slow
Coagulation 60 - 80 °C
rates of thermal energy accumulation generally
cause coagulative necrosis and conduction of
Vacuolization 80 - 95 °C
heat by radiation through tissue. Extremely
high rates of thermal energy accumulation
Vaporization 100 °C
cause instantaneous vaporization and ablation
of tissue without themal conduction.
Caramelization 110 - 150 *C
The progressive heating of an egg until it is
cooked and then bumed shows this process on
Carbonization 165 °℃
a large scale. The actual events of photother-
molysis occur at the cellular/tissue level within
Incandescence 350 *C
μsec to msec.
25
PARTI
(>3,00o0? C) consisting of equal concentrations of free electrons and pos-
Theoryof LaserSurgery
itive ions. A plasma ball is a strong absorber of all wavelengths of light.
Once the plasma is formed at the tissue it absorbs all incoming laser light
and expands rapidly. This expanding, leading plasma wave front causes a
shock wave and mechanical disruption of tissue. Only ultra-short-pulsed
lasers are capable of photoplasmolysis due to the high power density
(> 1010 w/cm2) that is required for its production. A good example of this
 is canine lithotripsy, which is performed with a Ho:YAG laser.
For any wavelength that is absorbed by water there is a threshold of
power density below which the water in the target tissue cannot be vapor-
ized by a laser beam. This threshold is lower for wavelengths that are
strongly absorbed by water, e.g., 2,900 nm for Er:YAG or 10,600 nm for
CO2. This threshold is also highest for those wavelengths that are poorly
absorbed, e.g., visible light lasers 400 nm to 700 nm. When the rate of
heat dissipation from the tissues exceeds the rate of heat deposition within
the tissues, the water will either be warmed or heated and neither boiled
nor vaporized. At wavelengths that scatter significantly within tissue, the
net effect will be photopyrolysis, which can be used for controlled coagu-
lation but generally is not very efficient for incising or cutting. Wave-
lengths that are highly absorbed by water will generally be attenuated
rapidly at the surface of tissues, allowing for shallow penetration depths.
These lasers are highly efficient for cutting and incising yet do not cause
sufficient collateral heating to provide coagulation of vessels greater than
0.6 mm in diameter.
 If a surgeon desires to coagulate tissue without vaporizing it, the power
density of the beam must not exceed the threshold of vaporization at that
wavelength. The wavelength also should be poorly absorbed by histologic
water and be scattered within the tissue, causing the conversion of laser
energy to thermal energy and a slow increase in the temperature of the tis-
sue. On the other hand, if a surgeon desires to precisely incise or cut tis-
sue with minimal heating of surrounding tissues, the power density of the
beam should far exceed the threshold of vaporization at that wavelength.
The wavelength should be highly absorbed by water so that the light is at-
tenuated rapidly as well. This causes rapid vaporization of tissue with
minimal thermal conduction, but the ability to coagulate tissue is dramat-
ically limited. There are conditions whereby a wavelength that causes co-
agulation can be used to cut, and likewise, there are conditions whereby
 a wavelength that causes vaporization can be used to coagulate. To the ex-
tent that one wavelength can vaporize tissue, it loses the ability to coagu-
late. Alternatively, wavelengths that produce good coagulation are gener-
ally poorly ablative. (Figures 2-5 and 2-6)
26
10w
10 Joules / 1 sec
Figure 2-5 The units in this representation of
the ablation threshold have been simplified for
5w
10 Joules / 2 sec
Po
clarity. Ten watts of power can be produced by
delivering 10j in 1 second but this is
unrealistic. Assuming 10W are passed through
2.5w
10 Joules / 4 sec
a 0.4 mm diameter focusing tip, this is
sufficient power density to exceed the ablation
threshold, and power below this would cause
Time
 coagulation but not ablation.
Figure 2-6 Note that although fluence is equal
in each of these three examples, the ablation
threshold can be exceeded only when
sufficient fluence is delivered in a short period
Threshold
of time. Excess fluence beyond the ablation
 threshold is absorbed by tissue at greater
penetration depths. Subthreshold fluence
causes accumulation of heat and coagulative
15
2S
4 s
necrosis of tissue.
27
Chapter 3
Fundamentals of Laser-Tissue Interactions
Four basic interactions can take place when laser energy interacts with a
target material or tissue: reflection, scatter, or transmission, or absorption
(Figure 3-1). The desired interaction is straightforward (Chapter 2) yet
dynamic in its process. The positive thermal effects produced by the
absorption of laser energy can provide localized vaporization with a neg-
ligible degree of hyperthermia, coagulation, and necrosis. However, re-
flection, scatter, and transmission may cause uncontrolled effects on the
target tissue or adjacent tissue structures.
When laser energy interacts with tissue above the vaporization thresh-
old, the photothermal effect produces a vaporization impact site or laser
vaporization crater (Figure 3-2). The tissue that has been vaporized from
this region disperses in a plume composed of remnant particles of the tis-
sue and water vapor. Two distinct regions immediately surround the
mia, cellular coagulation, and necrosis. This zone is created by multiple,
variable, and alterable laser energy
 interactions from the point of laser en
ergy impact. This can be as small as 0.01 mm or as large as 2 to 3 mm.
Immediately adjacent to this zone is an area of cellular edema without ev-
idence of alteration in the cellular integrity or collagen denaturation.
Thermal relaxation in this region is rapid enough to avoid desiccation or
collagen contracture. This allows cellular function and cell membrane in-
tegrity to be spared. The milder thermal injury to the tissue in this region
may resolve immediately or up to 72 hours later.
The ultimate goal is for the target tissue to absorb the laser energy by
adequately controlling reflection, scatter, and transmission. When tissue
absorbs the energy of laser light it converts the light into other forms of
energy, empowering laser energy to do surgical work on the target tissue.
On the other hand, reflection of laser energy can occur when the energy
fails to be absorbed and is deflected in the direction from which it came
or at an acute angle to its origin. Laser energy can be reflected off of the
u, s  n ss sn   r  i
back." The light also transmits through target tissue to varying penetra-
tion depths, depending on the wavelength, and may also experience re-
  n      e  
The light can also be scattered within the tissue, because the particulate
nature of cytoplasmic contents makes histologic targets neither homoge-
neous nor isotropic.
This chapter explains these phenomena of laser-tissue interaction and
how the choice of wavelength, time of its use, and the physical character-
istics of the targeted tissue are interdependent for favorable surgical out-
comes. It shows that by knowing the physical characteristics of tissue-
a pp au aae on pd a nadod  r  asi ro
without morbid consequences.
29
REFLECTED
Figure 3-1  The four basic interactions of light
INCIDENTRAYS
at the surface it strikes. A reflective surface
does not allow the transmission of light. Light
that is transmitted through a medium may be
absorbed, and these two properties are
inversely related to each other. Particles within
SCATTERED
ABSORBED
a medium may also scatter light. The extent to
which these four interactions occur depends
upon the medium as well as the wavelength of
light.
TRANSMITTED
Figure 3-2 A representation of a crater
produced in tissue by a burst of laser energy
that exceeded ablation threshold. The crater's
3-D geometry is Caussian, essentially the same
shape as the power density profile of the laser
Laser
beam described in Figure 1-15. The zone of
beam
coagulation
vaporization
carbonization is the limit of vaporization.
carbonization
Slightly farther away from the center of the
hyperthermia
crater is the zone of coagulation and thermal
necrosis. This zone will eventually die. Farthest
from the center is the zone of hyperthermia.
Here the temperature of the tissue has slightly
increased, but will cool down quickly. Beyond
these zones there is no effect. Both the depth
of the crater and the diameter of these zones
are directly related to power density.
tissue
The chapter first examines the negative effects of laser energy—why the
effects occur, their potential results, and how to prevent them. Those dis-
cussions are followed by an in-depth look at the desirable laser-tissue in-
teraction, absorption.
Reflection
The reflection of light from a surface is a generally well-understood con-
cept. The path of a ray of light is altered by a reflective surface such that
the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Laser light will
reflect to varying degrees at biological surface interfaces depending on the
tissue and the wavelength. In biological systems, there may also be an ef-
fect from the backscattering of light as it strikes a particulate medium.
Notwithstanding basic optical physics, if the angle of incidence is 0°,
some light will be reflected back to its source; and if the angle of incidence
 is 90°, the light will not change its course. A basic parameter of reflective
surfaces is the reflectance or the ratio of the reflected light intensity to the
incident light intensity. In general, it is desirable for an optical mirror to
have a reflectance greater than 97%.
R = P, / P;
30
The reflectance of biological tissue is based upon the efficiency of power
CHAPTER 3
density conservation at the target surface, and is strongly dependent on
Fundamentals of
wavelength. There is a pronounced reflectance of wavelengths in the range
Laser-Tissue Interactions
of 400 nm to 1,500 nm. Laser light is also reflected away much more by
lightly colored (unpigmented) skin. Erythrocytes, brain tissue, cartilage,
muscle, and liver also reflect laser light more significantly at these wave-
lengths. Note that reflectance is absent below 300 nm and above 2,000nm.
Therefore, a CO2 laser will not reflect its light because the wavelength of
10.6 μm is well outside of this range. In strong contrast, the power deliv.
ered by a Nd:YAG laser at 1,064 nm is diminished in half at the target sur-
face due to target surface reflection, especially if the target is light skin or
a bloody field. The most profound effect of the loss of power density due
to reflection at the first surface is the reduction of the laser's ability to im
part surgical work due to loss of fluence below the target surface.
T = e-ebc
J0
A = εbc
where T is the percent transmission of light through tissue, A is the ab-
sorbance, e is the molar absorptivity with units of L mol1 cm-1, b is the
path length of the beam of light, and c is the concentration of the com-
pound in solution. The molar absorptivity is a unique constant for a given
substance and is different for each individual substance. The law says that
the fraction of light absorbed by equivalent layers of solution is constant.
This fundamental physical law of solutions is linear and works very well
at ordinary concentrations of solutes, but breaks down at exceedingly high
concentrations that are not applicable in biological systems. It also proves
that light will be absorbed more by solutions with higher concentrations,
and will transmit more through solutions with low concentrations. If all
the light passes through a solution without any absorption, then ab-
sorbance is zero, and transmittance is 100%. If all the light is absorbed,
then transmittance is zero, and absorption is infinite (Figure 3-3). There is
a mnemonic device to help you remember Beer's Law: The taller the glass,
the darker the brew, the less the amount of light transmits through! This
can also apply to tissue thickness and the volume of target-specific inter-
faces that laser energy must interact with as it contacts the target tissue.
Scatter and Transmission
Scatter and transmission are two additional problems that can occur dur-
ing laser-tissue interaction. These are usually less preferable than absorp
tion. The tissue itself can scatter the light, which literally bounces off par
ticles and structures within the tissue and scatters to places where it may
be absorbed, creating its own tissue interaction. This can adversely affec.
surrounding tissue. Furthermore, the light may be transmitted right
31
PARTI
100 41
Theory of Laser Surgery
80
60
1%
40-
20-
Q-
Q
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.6
1.4 -
1.2
1.0 
A
0.8
Figure 3-3 Graphical illustration of Beer's law.
0.6 -
This shows a direct relationship between
0.4
absorption of light and the length of the path
0.2
through which it travels. There also is a
logarithmic decrease in the transmission of 
0.2
0.40.60.8
1.0
light with increasing path length.
Pathlength / cm
through the tissue, maintaining its energy with only a minimal effect on
the target tissue. This occurs when the light wavelength is not interacted
 on by an appropriate pigment or absorption medium in the targeted tis-
sue. Since every tissue has reflective, scattering, and transmitting proper-
ties, understanding these tissue characteristics is a critical aspect of know-
 ing how the specific form of laser energy you are using will affect the tar-
 get tissue. Understanding this concept can provide the clinician with the
most favorable laser-tissue interaction.
Laser light transmits through tissue to the degree that it has not been
reflected, scattered, absorbed, or refracted. Refraction of a laser beam oc-
curs when it crosses the interface of two media having different indices of
refraction, changing its wavelength, direction, and speed. The speed of
light, c, is reduced according to the index of refraction of the medium, n,
such that:
Vm =c/ n
Since the light's frequency does not change, but its speed does, its wave-
length must be changed as well as its direction when transmitting between
two media of different indices of refraction:
入 =vm/ f
The ray's change in direction is calculated based on its deviation from
normal, or an imaginary line drawn perpendicular to the target surface:
sin 0 / sin 02 = n2 / n1
32
CHAPTER 3
Fundamentals of
Laser-Tissue Interactions
1
medium 1
Figure 3-4 A ray of light strikes a reflective/
medium 2
transmissive interface such as tissue. The angle
of incidence, 0, is equal to the angle of 
reflection. The media have two different
indices of refraction. In this example n > n1
and the penetrating beam of light is refracted
toward normal and 0, < 0,.
Note that the angle of deviation from normal will be higher in the
medium with a lower refractive index, and media with a higher refractive
index will create a smaller deviation. Also note that if n2 > n1, light trav-
els slower in the medium with a higher index of refraction, the direction
of the beam of laser light will be closer to normal and 02< 01, which
means the beam may not terminate where the surgeon desires but will fall
short of its intended target area (Figure 3-4).
When a light ray interacts with a particle it may change direction with-
out changing its wavelength, and thus is said to scatter. The type and de-
gree of scatter depends on both the incident wavelength and the size of the
particle. Scattering of light by particles much smaller than the wavelength
of incident light (< 1/10th 入) is known as Rayleigh scattering. Rayleigh
scattering is strongly dependent on wavelength and is omnidirectional:
8π4 Nαx2
PR= Po
(1+cos²0)
A4 R²
It is much easier and more practical to describe the effects of Rayleigh
scattering of light as strongly inversely proportional to the fourth power
of the wavelength being scattered by small particles. Thus, the effect is
much stronger for shorter wavelengths:
PR α 1/4
Such scattering of light is equally intense in the forward and backward di-
rection, and half as energetic perpendicular to the original ray. This type
of scatter is not important for laser-tissue interaction, but it is of interest
in answering the question, “Why is the sky blue"? At 400 nm, the scat-
a 'u 0o 1e nua 1au jo 1ei se 1ea se s t'6 si  a yo 
strong wavelength dependency of Rayleigh scattering ensures that an ob-
server on the ground will see predominantly blue light well after sunrise
or well before sunset, yet predominantly red light is seen during sunrise
and sunset since the blue light is strongly scattered away.
When scattering is caused by a particle whose diameter is comparable
to or greater than the wavelength of the light, it demonstrates a different
type of scattering, named after Mie, the scientist who described it. Mie
scattering of light by particles greater than or equal to its wavelength is
33
Figure 3-5 Rayleigh scattering of light by very
Rayleigh Scattering
Mie Scattering
small particles is strongly dependant on the
wavelength of incident light and is bilobed/
omnidirectional. Shorter wavelengths of light
are scattered to a much greater degree by
particles < 10% of wavelength. Mie scattering
of light occurs when an incident ray strikes a
particle greater than or equal to wavelength. It 
is predominantly forward scatter and not as
Direction of incident light
dependant on wavelength as Rayleigh scatter
more dependent on particle size than wavelength of light (Figures 3-5 and
 3-6). This predominantly forward-directed lobular scattering produces a
sharper, more intense pattern for larger particles. Mie scattering explains
why clouds appear bright white on a sunny day. Mie scattering of light
within a fog of water vapor also demonstrates randomly diffused radiant
flux, or the appearance of light being equally bright and coming from all
directions. Mie scattering is far less dependent on wavelength than
Rayleigh scattering, and varies inversely proportionally to the square root
of the wavelength:
PM α 1/X
 Because many histologic micro-architectural structures and cytologic
organelles are significantly larger than the wavelengths of laser light, es-
pecially lasers in the range between 600 nm and 2,200 nm, diode laser
surgeons must be very concerned about Mie scattering within tissues. At
higher wavelengths, such as 10.6 μm, scattering is less of a concern. For
the laser surgeon, the most important result of scattering is the spatial re-
distribution of radiant power density from what would otherwise be a
coherent collimated monochromatic beam of light into the surrounding
tissue. Once the light is dispersed throughout a volume of tissue, it is ab-
sorbed and attenuated.
Rayleigh
Scattering
Mie Scattering
Rayleigh
Figure 3-6 Clouds are brightly white when
observed in front of the sun due to Mie
scattering. Since blue light has a shorter
Mie
wavelength than red light, it is Rayleigh
scattered to a greater degree, which explains
J0 jasuns lane anq readde Aeu Ays ayn Aym
before sunrise.
34
Absorption
CHAPTER 3
Fundamentals of
The process of absorption of laser energy by a tissue is the key to effec-
Laser-Tissue Interactions
tive laser-to-tissue interaction. When photons enter the tissue, those that
are not reflected, scattered, or transmitted are absorbed. Maximizing the
absorption effect and minimizing other effects produces the most consis-
tent, reproducible lasing results for the clinician. The photonic energy is
transferred to other molecules or groups of atoms within the tissue that
then causes them to be altered or vaporized as previously discussed. Once
this photonic energy is absorbed, it transfers its energy potential to the
target tissue, thus inducing a change in that tissue. This is really the key
 to producing the different tissue changes needed during clinical or surgi-
cal treatment using laser energy.
From lowest level to highest level of absorption, these conversion
processes occur as follows: 1) elevating molecules to higher energy states,
 2) effecting stored chemical energy, 3) fluorescence, or the re-radiation of
 energy at a lower energy level with inherent energy loss, 4) transforma-
tion into kinetic energy as heat or vibrations, and 5) creation of plasma,
a superheated ionized gas.
For surgical purposes, only the conversion of radiant energy to kinetic
energy is useful. Excitation, chemical potential energy, and fluorescence
all have their place in science but may not be immediately practical to the
general veterinary surgeon. As discussed in Chapter 2, a surgical laser
 heats intracellular components very rapidly to produce the desired vapor-
ization effect. This occurs due to the tissue's rapid absorption of radiant
energy, or photothermolysis.
Photoplasmolysis occurs when extremely high power densities (>109
W/cm?) target tissues during extremely short periods of time (picoseconds
to nanoseconds). When tissues are heated to the point of incandescence,
the surrounding air becomes ionized and forms a small sphere of plasma.
This plasma is a strong absorber of all laser wavelengths and absorbs the
 energy of the laser beam. The energy absorption causes a rapid expansion
of the sphere and creates a shock wave that can disrupt tissue and shatter
hard substances, e.g, calculi. Many laser surgeons have reported that they
have seen this incandescence as a white spark at the tissue, and heard the
shockwave as a snapping sound at the surface.
As the tissue absorbs laser energy there will be exponentially less energy
from the initial beam as it travels deeper into the tissue. That is, a laser
beam loses a constant fraction of its intensity per equal unit of distance
traveled. This phenomenon is called attenuation and is extremely impor-
tant to relate to surgical tissue handling. The power density of a laser
beam is attenuated within tissue according to Bouger's law (which is very
similar to Beer's law):
Pz = Po e-Az
where Pz is the power density at depth z beyond the tissue surface (note:
also take into account the effects of reflection and non-normal incidence
of the light ray to calculate po), and A is the attenuation coefficient. Since
35
PARTI
both absorption, α, and scattering, 0, contribute to the attenuation of a
Theory of Laser Surgery
light ray traveling through tissue, the attenuation coefficient is defined as:
A=α+O
The absorption coefficient of a particular medium depends on the tar-
 geted tissue as well as the wavelength of laser light. The scattering coeffi-
cient, however, is primarily depends on wavelength. Scattering coefficients
 are higher at shorter wavelengths. Mie scattering is more important than
Rayleigh scattering within tissues, and this scatter is primarily forward
and caused by interaction of light with larger particles. Mie scattering of
light within tissues and r
light away from tissues is most sig-
retlectlon
nificant in the range betv
200 nm.
The absorption of lighi
1 the tissue's physical char
acteristics. The noteworth
living tissue that absorb light
are water, pigments, l
lipids.
oxyhemoglobin, and carbon.
Since the surgeon is keenly aware
the
constituents of target tissue be-
e of wavelength for a given pro-
cedure is dictated by that tissue's ab
ption component characteristics.
This is important because an imprope
 chosen wavelength produces un-
sen wavelength which has excellent absorption in the surgical tissue is a
useful surgical tool in the hands of a qualified surgeon.
There are significant differences between the amount of absorption of
photonic energy by water or pigments within tissue. The surgeon may be
 able to cause selective destruction of the target tissue simply by choosing
the appropriate laser wavelength for the operation, thereby sparing sur
rounding tissue or eliminating peripheral heat transfer. As will be discussed
later, the choice of laser for soft tissue surgery should be based on the pre-
dominant tissue component and the desired surgical effect (Figure 3-7).
Figure 3-7 The absorption coefficient, a,
of several laser wavelengths by various
components of living tissue. The absorp-
100.000
tion coefficient of a CO laser by water is
Erbium: YAG
770cm-l .The absorption coefficient of a
10.000
diode laser by water is 0.02 to 0.4cml
Velanl
and 2 to 4 cm-1 by hemoglobin. This
1,000
ND:YAG
ent
demonstrates that a CO laser is much
CO2
better suited for ablation of well-hydrated
ffici
ter)
100
tissue regardless of the presence of
Coe
timet
Diode
10
pigment. Although a diode or Nd:YAC
laser can vaporize tissue with hemoglobin
1.0
Oxyhemoglobin
in it, they are better suited foruse n
(per 
tissues containing melanin. This is true
0.1
since neither a diode laser nor the
Nd:YAC laser has an appreciable absorp-
0.01
tion coefficient in water. Also note the
0.001
negligible absorption coefficient of visible
light by water, which empowers us to see
0.0001-
light through it. Finally, note the highest 
0.2
1.0
3.0
10
20
absorption peak of the Er:YAC laser,
Visible
Wavelength (Microns)
(a=12,000cm-l), useful in dermabrasion.
Light Spectrum
36
Water is the most abundant substance within tissue and is a strong ab-
CHAPTER 3
sorber of light in the near-infrared and ultraviolet wavelengths, but has
Fundamentalsof
Laser-Tissue Interactions
highest absorption at mid-infrared wavelengths. There is negligible ab-
sorption of visible light by water. Water absorbs light maximally at 2,940
nm, the characteristic wavelength of the Erbium:YAG laser. There is also
extremely high absorption of light at 10,600 nm, the wavelength pro-
duced by a CO2 laser. Also note that visible light is negligibly absorbed by
water, and the near infrared light of the Nd:YAG laser at 1,064 nm is only
moderately absorbed by water. Diode laser light produced between 600
nm and 980 nm is poorly absorbed by water, and that absorption in-
creases slightly as the wavelength increases within that range. Adipose
tissue, fats, and lipids often make up a significant portion of a surgical
field and absorb light in a similar pattern to water absorption of photonic
energy.
Pigments in tissue are also important absorbers of light. They are more
highly absorbed in the visible and very-near infrared light wavelength
range. Melanin, hemoglobin, and oxyhemoglobin are the most important
histologic pigments with respect to this effect; however, other organic
molecules such as bilirubin and xanthophyll play a role as well. Melanin
is the strongest absorber of light in the visible and near infrared range.
Hemoglobin and oxyhemoglobin are also both good absorbers of light in
the visible range, but not as effective as melanin. The absorption of light
by pigments is highest and almost equal toward the blue and ultraviolet
end of the spectrum. These absorption coefficients tend to decrease and
show greater disparity as the wavelength increases toward red and near-
         
(Nd:YAG laser), the absorption coefficient very quickly becomes negligi-
ble. These factors can play an important role in laser wavelength selection
for specific therapeutic or surgical procedures.
Carbon or char (Chapter 2), which is the end-stage product of pro-
longed thermal change to tissue, is a strong absorber of light at all wave-
lengths. Irradiating char will cause its temperature to rise quickly like “a
kettle on a stove,” and thus cause heating of surrounding tissues. Char
d passs s eds, s o d e asu 
viously, when carbon is heated to temperatures near 3,0oo°C, the sur-
rounding air becomes an ionized gas, or plasma ball, approximately the
diameter of the laser spot size. This ball of plasma is also an extremely
 good absorber of all light wavelengths. When plasma absorbs incoming
aun ony deus, aqine ue saieano pue spuedxa kipiden 1 kaiaua iasei
shock wave it creates. This is generally considered undesirable in soft tis-
sue surgery It can significantly enlarge peripheral thermal tissue heating.
Yet in applications such as lithotripsy using a tunable dye laser or
Ho:YAG, this is the intentional effect because it produces a “shock wave"
of energy, disrupting the stones at intermolecular bonds.
As radiant energy is absorbed, there is exponentially less power from
the laser beam available to do work. This attenuation requires con-
sideration of the extinction depth and the penetration depth of the light
within tissue. The extinction depth is arbitrarily defined as the depth at
37
PARTI
which the power density is reduced to 1% of the power density at the tis
Theoryof LaserSurgery
sue surface:
P = 0.01 (P。)
and
Ze = 4.605/A
where ze is the depth for 99% attenuation. The penetration depth is the
distance from the tissue surface at which point the laser beam still pos-
sesses enough residual power density to produce thermal effects. The ex-
and tissue type, but most importantly, the total power density. That is, the
varies proportionally to initial power density. The required thermal effects
needed for laser tissue treatment will occur only when the initial power
density is high enough. These effects will continue to occur at depths pro-
portional to initial power density and will diminish exponentially by at-
tenuation until the penetration depth has been reached. Varying wave-
lengths of light penetrate tissue differently. Subthreshold power densities
will neither produce thermal effects nor achieve any significant penetra
tion. These differences in absorption of light within tissue help the sur-
 geon choose which wavelength to use for a given purpose.
The choice of a specific laser wavelength for coagulating, vaporizing, or
incising tissue then depends on the anticipated laser-tissue interaction. The
most important aspects of the behavior of the transmitted light for surgi-
cal use are its scatter, transmission, and absorption by the components of
the targeted tissue. The scattering and absorption of light by the tissue de-
pends on both the wavelength of light and the tissue itself. It is important
to reiterate that the scattering coefficient of tissue, o, is highest at short
wavelengths, and is generally strongest between 600 nm and 2,200 nm.
Absorption of light by water and fat in tissue is generally strongest at
wavelengths greater than 2,200 nm, and the absorption of light by histo-
logic pigments is predominant between 400 nm and 1,100 nm.
Laser Selection
Lasers that produce wavelengths that are predominantly absorbed by tis-
sue but experience little or no scatter make exceptional incisive tissue va-
porizers, but poor coagulators. These lasers generally produce wave-
lengths greater than 2,500 nm. Because this light is strongly absorbed by
tissue, the extinction depth is very shallow, typically less than 1 mm. This
is a great advantage for minimizing peripheral or deeper tissue interac-
tions. These lasers are most appropriate for precise surgery due to mini
mal thermal damage to tissue beyond the effective diameter of the laser
 beam at appropriate power densities. Classic examples of these “ what you
see is what you get" (WYSIWYG) lasers are the CO2 at 10,600 nm and
the Erbium:YAG at 2,940 nm. Remember, these are the two peak water
38
absorption coefficients. These ablative WYSIWYG lasers are poor tissue
CHAPTER 3
coagulators because their light does not scatter within the target tissue
Fundamentals of
Laser-Tissue Interactions
enough to contract blood vessel endothelial linings, but is strongly ab-
sorbed and attenuated to extinction within a shallow penetration depth of
the tissue surface. 99.2% of the heat that is created is generally ejected out
Only a small amount of residual thermal energy is available for inefficient
thermal conduction by surrounding living tissue. These laser wavelengths
have short thermal relaxation times. This is a great advantage for the gen-
eral veterinary surgeon in minimizing unwanted thermal tissue events.
lengths are scattered significantly more than they are absorbed by tissue,
Or are absorbed by multiple
 tissue components. The pattern of effect
within tissue is generally dictated by Mie scattering: predominantly for-
ward, but having concentric
: half-ovoid isothermal zones of effect sur-
rounding a deep central focus. Every point within this illuminated volume
thus acts as a source of heat and causes thermal damage. Increasing the
period of time that tissue is targeted will cause these zones of thermal co-
agulation to become larger, as well. Typically, lasers with wavelengths be-
tween 600 nm and 1,400 nm are good tissue coagulators because of the
increased tissue that become thermally damaged. Diode lasers (600 nm to
900 nm) and the Nd:YAG laser at 1,064 nm are the classic dissection, co-
agulative tool. Sometimes they are referred to as “what you don't see can
hurt you" (WYDSCHY) because the effects of tissue coagulation and pe-
ripheral thermal injury may not be immediately evident. The thermal
effects created at a distance from the targeted area may slowly become ev-
ident much later on. Furthermore, because of the high amount of scatter-
ing within tissue at these wavelengths, it may be difficult to predict both
the width and depth of the zone of necrosis or reformation due to ther-
mal coagulation. Depending on the power and time WYDSCHY laser en-
 ergy is applied, there can be an area affected 5 mm to 10 mm beyond the
intended site, and this may occur several hours or even several days fol-
lowing the procedure. This can be desirable when gross tissue ablation is
required, due to poorly defined malignant masses, but not when precise
delicate tissue handling is required.
There is no single wavelength produced by a laser that will optimally
perform every kind of surgical procedure. For precisely incising tissue
with minimal thermal necrosis, a WYSIWYG laser such as the CO2 is
ideal. However, if gross ablation of tissue is required, especially if it is pig-
mented or highly vascular, the experienced veterinary laser surgeon can
use a WYDSCHY laser. This is especially true with the diode or Nd:YAG
wavelength lasers. There will be some level of collateral thermal necrosis
with a CO2 laser, and conversely a diode or Nd:YAG laser will also incise
a pisiaun kadoid oi uons ase riaa au oi dn si ln ans
equipment-tissue interaction to achieve the desired effect.
As previously discussed, relating to the physics of power density, lasers
with more precise vaporization coefficients can be manipulated by defo-
cusing a beam of laser light of wavelength 10,600 nm, causing the spot
size to increase and diminish the power density. Lowering the power den
39
PARTI
sity in this way will cause more coagulative effects within the tissue solely
Theory of LaserSurgery
due to the accumulation of heat via increased scatter and its thermal ef-
fects. Because this wavelength does not scatter very well within tissue and
 is rapidly attenuated, the extent of tissue coagulation is limited. In an op-
posite example, a typically coagulative wavelength can be used to incise
tissue that has a high pigment component. When using the Nd:YAG laser
in melanin-rich tissue, or using a diode laser in a vascular field, the rapid
and intense absorption of energy by these pigments (and to a lesser extent,
water) can cause such rapidly elevated tissue temperatures that the vapor-
ization threshold is exceeded. Vaporization can thus occur with a WYD-
SCHY laser, making it behave like a WYSIWYG laser for cutting and ex-
cising. Still, peripheral thermal effects will be greater due to the increased
scatter of these wavelengths. Likewise, when a WYSIWYG laser is defo
cused or targeted onto char, it will behave like a WYDSCHY laser and
cause coagulation and thermal necrosis.
A veterinary laser surgeon must carefully plan the procedure to achieve
the desirable outcome of the patient's safety. The choice of laser must be
selected for the intended surgical purpose depending on the tissue charac
teristics. The surgeon must also decide if the procedure requires cutting,
ablation, or coagulation. Non-pigmented tissue will behave very differ-
ently than heavily pigmented tissue when a diode or Nd:YAG laser is
used. In the same way, fatty or hydrated tissue will behave very differently
than bone or desiccated tissue when a CO2 laser is used. Finally, the
choice of laser may also be dictated by the mode of delivery. Depending
 on the surgical area, diverse delivery systems will be employed to permit
using the laser as a surgical tool (Chapter 5).
Key for the clinician is an understanding of where and how this work
is produced and how its resultant byproducts are dissipated. Normally,
we think of lasers as producing heat. Many of the clinical procedures for
which lasers are used involve the production of some kind of local ther-
mal effect. This thermal energy transfer actually provides the effect on the
target tissue to alter it or cause its vaporization. The important aspect of
using laser energy to produce a tissue effect is to remember that when
photons are absorbed, the absorbing structure or tissue must get rid of
causes the different biological effects on tissue that have been previously
discussed.
 The key physical event is absorption. Consistent, reproducible absorp-
tion in tissue is important to provide for a consistent outcome during
medical therapy and surgical manipulation of tissues. Water is a major
component of every soft tissue in the body, making up between 87% and
92% of the target pigment that CO2 laser energy can be imparted to in
the tissue. Since water so efficiently absorbs CO2 lasers’ light, most soft
tissue is affected in an equal and reproducible way regardless of the type
of delivery system. This makes for a very reliable and consistent tissue in-
teraction for the clinician. It also allows for maximal expectation of re
producible clinical outcomes, especially between different clinicians using
various CO2 platforms.
Hemoglobin has a very high absorption rate in the violet and blue/green
40
portions of the visible spectrum. The absorption starts to decline in the
CHAPTER 3
red region of the spectrum. This is why hemoglobin is red (it does not ab-
Fundamentals of
sorb red light but instead reflects it away from its surface). For this rea-
Laser-Tissue Interactions
son using an argon laser that emits blue/green light as the primary treat-
ment for vascular lesions is ideal. Hemoglobin absorbs blue/green light
and converts it into thermal energy, which contracts the blood vessel by
denaturing its endothelial lining. This causes the local removal of the
blood vessel. It is important to restate that fact. This wavelength region
also has an increased possibility of beam scatter and transmission unless
the laser is very precisely controlled and confined to the target tissue area
 during the treatment. Laser energy and its subsequent heating event will
radiate in all directions and may destroy the overlying skin layers if not
well controlled.
Some lasers, like the Neodymium-YAG (Nd:YAG) and the Diode (600
nm to 980 nm) have light energy that is very poorly absorbed by hemo-
globin, water, and other body pigments. This type of laser energy relies on
Depending on the representative quantities of each pigment in a given tis-
sue, a much greater variation in tissue interaction and reduced expected
reproducible tissue events are more common. This is a key reason why the
Nd:YAG and Diode laser light will penetrate and scatter much more
deeply into tissue.
The selection of the correct laser for a particular clinical procedure re-
 quires an understanding of the absorptive as well as the reflective, scatter-
ing, and transmitting properties of the target tissue. It is therefore critical
that the clinician has a clear understanding of the photobiologic, photo-
chemical, and photothermal effects of the selected laser on the target pig-
ment and thus the target tissue and surrounding tissues.
41
Chapter 4
Types of Laser-Tissue Interaction Related to the
Rate of Heat Transfer Through Soft Tissue
"What power setting should I use for this procedure?" is the most com-
mon question a new laser surgeon may ask. The fact is, depending on the
type of procedure and type of laser energy to be used, there is no one cor-
rect answer. The laser-tissue interaction concepts advanced herein are a
guide to the surgical judgments that must be made to produce the desired
effect in tissue. There is clearly a range of produced effects that depend on
many factors: wavelength of energy used, power density applied, target
tissue composition, elapsed time of exposure to radiation, and hand speed
 of the surgeon. There is as much art to successful surgery as there is sci-
ence. The artistic aspects of veterinary soft tissue laser surgery are detailed
in Chapter 8 and the Case Studies. Here we focus on the basic physical
s a p ass os o iansn aa iau j as
laser-tissue interactions.
Power Density
for the veterinary laser surgeon to comprehend. Understanding this con-
cept fully will substantially increase the ability of the surgeon to achieve
consistent, reproducible, and reliable therapeutic outcomes for the patient.
As stated previously, laser-tissue interaction depends greatly on wave-
length. The laser's effect depends on the power placed into the system to
produce the photons and the power concentrated within the photons.
Power is usually expressed in watts on equipment settings. Any time
laser energy is applied to tissue to produce a desired effect and time is also
a factor, the term “joule” is used. A joule is defined as a watt-second; it is
the amount of time power is applied to a target tissue to produce a cumu-
lative effect. The aperture spot size, also known as the focal spot, results
in the concentration of energy within an area producing a power density,
expressed as watts/cm?. The advantage of a small focal spot size with ad-
equate power applied over a specific time is optimal vaporization of the
target tissue. This also produces less secondary collateral thermal damage
to tissue. Fewer cells are affected, damaged, or destroyed at the margins
of an incision made using higher power density. When a deep laser trough
is required, a small spot size is advantageous in that it concentrates a high
amount of energy into the tissue due to extremely high amounts of excess
fluence and rapid vaporization in that zone. When tissue heating or coag-
ulation rather than vaporization is to be the effect, a larger spot size in-
creases the area of the beam and thus reduces the total power density to
the tissue. The energy is dispersed over a larger area, thus reducing flu-
ence deposited to the target tissue. (Figure 4-1)
43
Figure 4-1 Note the contrast in the depicted
zones of photothermolytic activity in these two
laser beams, one with low power density and
the other with high power density. The beam
on the left has a lower power density and
produces a shallower crater with wide zones
of carbonization, thermal necrosis, and heat 
conduction. The beam on the right has a high
power density and produces a deeper crater
due to its greater penetration depth. This crater
will have minimal tissue damage from thermal
conduction and thin zones of carbonization
and themal necrosis. Lower power density is
desirable for coagulation, and higher power
density is desirable for ablation and incision.
It is clear, then, that the power density can be affected by three main
components under the clinician's control: power, time, and spot size.
Knowing intuitively how these components interact will maximize the po-
tential for a positive therapeutic outcome to the patient. The interplay of
spot size, distance from focal area, angle of incidence, hand speed, power,
and time are the critical variables all competent laser surgeons need to un
derstand. As the spot size decreases while the power remains constant, the
power density (power per unit area) must necessarily increase. Con-
versely, as spot size grows from small to large, either by changing aper-
mod aun nss  an  ais ai a o sdo a
density will diminish. The distance of the laser focusing tip or handpiece
from the target tissue has an inverse relationship to the amount of energy
imparted on the target tissue. Note that we are talking about a focused
laser beam. This is because a focused beam has an optimal focal distance
of maximal power density known as a focal area. Power density then de
creases as the beam converges or diverges away from this area in either
direction. Collimated beams that do not have focusing capabilities have a
consistent or flat-line effect on power density to the target tissue. In this
case, distance does not play a role in the power density transmitted to the
tissue. (Figure 4-2)
What does this mean to the target tissues, clinically speaking? If the
clinical objective is to make a rapid zone of vaporization, the laser sur-
geon should use a very small spot size with a high power density. This will
 provide adequate power density to produce vaporization and allow for
rapid laser troughing deep into the tissues. It will also allow most of the
-punons aui uou Aeme pue aud au u paaouai aq oi uoeiausa ieau
ing tissue. If the intent is to ablate more superficially or to cause heating,
denaturation, or coagulation of protein and collagen, then a larger spot
size that produces a lower power density should be used. Be aware that
an increase in char and the potential for peripheral thermal conduction
occurs in this scenario. The clinician can therefore control the kind of ef-
fect produced in the target tissue by manipulating the distance, spot size,
or power settings on the laser. It is very important to recognize this abil-
44
CHAPTER 4
 Axis of Propagation
Types of Laser-Tissue Interaction
Laser Beam
Midplane Profile of
Power Density
Effective
 Diameter
Intercepting 
 Plane
Figure 4-2 A collimated laser beam travels
unchanged along its path of propagation
indefinitely until it strikes another object.
P= P/C2
Changing the distance from the point of origin
to the intercepting plane does not change the 
power density of a collimated beam.
ity, so the clinician will be able to get the most out of the device and pro-
duce the best clinical results for the patient. Please note that in cases
where fixed crystal fibers are being used, e.g., Nd:YAG and diode lasers,
  s mod   i a mod  a 
contact mode or non-contact mode of these devices. This is because the
 laser-to-tissue distance is zero in contact mode, eliminating distance as a
variable. Therefore, only the level of power imparted on the system can
be altered to increase or decrease the power density.
Laser radiation must be converted into another form of energy to pro-
duce therapeutic effects when it interacts with the target tissue. Laser-
tissue interactions are categorized according to whether laser energy is
converted into heat (photothermal), chemical energy (photochemical), or
 acoustic mechanical effect (photodisruptive) energy. In the tissue, these
events are not mutually exclusive and may affect tissue in concert or in-
dependently.
Photothermolysis is the basic mechanism of laser-tissue interaction.
That is, the radiant energy delivered by a laser beam is absorbed by its tar-
get and transformed into heat energy that causes a rise in the tissue's tem-
perature. There are power density thresholds that must be reached before
effects of rising temperature take place in the tissue. Since other effects
may occur at higher and higher thresholds, the surgeon must apply the ap-
propriate power density to achieve the desired threshold without exceed-
ing the threshold for the next higher, undesired level. If a surgeon needs
to coagulate tissue, then the power density of the beam must be high
enough to exceed the threshold for irreversible thermal damage, but not
so high as to cause vaporization. Likewise, a surgeon who is vaporizing
tissue must avoid both char formation and coagulation. In this case, a
power density should be selected that exceeds both the thresholds of co-
45
PARTI
agulation and vaporization but not the threshold of carbonization. These
Theoryof LaserSurgery
thresholds depend strongly on wavelength, power density, and tissue com-
position. This subject is covered in great detail in Chapter 2.
For the purposes of simplicity and practicality, the CO2 laser-tissue in-
teraction will be used for the discussions in this chapter. The following are
the basic guidelines for laser energy properties within soft tissue that any
laser surgeon must understand. The 10,600 nm wavelength is strongly ab-
sorbed by water, which makes it an ideal laser for soft tissue surgical ap-
plications. As long as the laser surgeon has a complete working knowl-
edge of the wavelength applied and expected results, consistent results
should be attainable within the limits of any wavelength, but especially
with CO2 energy. The boiling point of water, 100°C, is reached rather
quickly when power densities above 1,500 W/cm2 (power density) are ap-
plied, and produces the transformation of liquid water to steam vapor.
Above 1,500 W/cm2, the laser will consistently cause boiling. Below 10
W/cm?, only warming of the water will occur. Between 100 W/cm? and
1,500 W/cm', a mixture of warming and vaporization will occur. Within
soft tissue, these thresholds are almost equivalent. Between 10 W/cm^
and 1,500 W/cm2, a mixture of photopyrolysis and photovaporolysis will
occur. Below 10 W/cm2, only warming of the tissues, or photopyrolysis,
will occur. Above 1,500 W/cm2, complete photovaporolysis occurs.
The mechanism of vaporization of soft tissue by a laser beam is the sud
den boiling of histologic water to form steam. This intra-cellular steam
expands rapidly and ruptures the relatively weak cell membranes that pre-
viously confined it. The solid residue of cells and connective tissue are de-
hydrated and ejected from the impact zone of the laser beam and may ac-
tually ignite or burn, forming a plume of smoke. The temperature of the
area not vaporized will be ≤ 100*C, and falls away exponentially with dis-
tance. As long as the steam vapor can escape from the boiling surface of
the tissue, the tissue near the vaporized area is minimally damaged by
thermal conduction through it. Fourier's law of thermal conduction, as
applied to soft tissue, can be used to calculate the rate of thermal power
density removal, and is given by:
Pth = - Ct (dT/dz)
where c, is the thermal conductivity of tissue ((6.92 x 10-3 W/cm-1 oC-1) x
% hydration), T is the temperature at the surface of the tissue, z is the
depth below this surface, and dT/dz is the temperature gradient at the tis-
sue surface. Calculations based on experiments with soft tissues give this
rate as 10 W/cm? to 30 W/cm?. Therefore, if the applied power density in
the beam is far above the rate of thermal power density removal, the va
porized tissue can be quickly removed before the flow of heat to adjacent
tissue can cause significant coagulation. The concept of tissue cooling and
thermal relaxation will be discussed later.
The ideal surgical use of a precise, incisional CO2 laser does not depend
on power density above the vaporization threshold of 100 W/cm2. A CO2
laser properly produces incisions with litle or no heating of surrounding
tissues due to the rapid vaporization of the target tissue and minimal ther-
46
mal conduction to surrounding tissue. Any heating of tissue requires a
CHAPTER 4
definite temperature transfer time. This temperature transfer time de-
Types of Laser-Tissue Interaction
pends on physical properties such as the specific heat of the target tissue,
its thermal conductivity, its coefficient of radiant energy absorption, and
its mass density or water content.
The specific heat of water, b, is the radiant energy absorbed per unit
 volume of tissue. One fundamental physical fact about pure water is that
it requires 253 J/cm3 to raise the temperature from 37°C to 100°C. The
latent heat of vaporization of pure water, h, is 2,163 J/cm?, which is the
to steam. The water content of tissues, a proportion referred to as w, is
generally 70% to 90%. Recalling that fluence, f, is the radiant energy de-
livered to tissue over a unit area, we can also express fluence as the time-
integral of power density during the time, Tp, of the laser pulse:
dt
(Figure 4-3)
Thus, the absorption coefficient, a, can be expressed as the ratio of the
specific heat of water, b, over the fluence at a given wavelength:
a=h/f
The absorption coefficient of histologic water targeted by a CO2 laser
 is 770 cm-1. The role of the absorption coefficient, a, in laser-tissue inter-
d e og quaanm jo auo adde aui in jeung si un
ticular surgical use.
For the purposes of understanding how radiant energy is absorbed by
tissue to causes a rise in temperature, we will assume that a hypothetical
perfect pulse of constant power density is delivered to tissue containing
100% water. We will assume a CO2 laser is used to produce the pulse of
a Gaussian beam, TEMoo. We will also assume that the radiant pulse
reaches peak power instantly, and that at the end of the pulse the radiant
power is instantly quenched to zero. Under these hypothetical conditions,
exaggerated for clarity, the fluence and absorption density both rise lin-
early with time from the start of the pulse. As the fluence increases, the
FLUENCE
P.
Figure 4-3 A graphical illustration of the time
F
integral of power density, or fluence. Assuming
Threshold
T
a steady rate of energy deposition, the shaded
Fluence
area represents total fluence. Steeper curves
 Time
are produced by higher power density, and
curves with low slope may represent sub-
10
ablation threshold power densities.
47
PARTI
temperature of the tissue will increase proportionally to the absorption
Theory of Laser Surgery
coefficient at that wavelength. The histologic water will boil at the instant
when the threshold of fluence has been delivered. From the previous equa-
tion, this threshold fluence is the sum of:
f = (253 J/cm²) / a = 328 mJ/cm2
or the energy density required to raise the temperature of pure water from
37°C to 100°C plus
fv = (2163 J/cm²)/ a = 2809 mJ/ cm2
is a total of 3,137 mJ/cm2
Note that the absorption density, b, and the absorption coefficient, a,
are both dependent on the same concentration of histologic water and are
adjusted proportionally to that constant, w. The threshold fluence, fc
however, is independent of the concentration of water within tissue:
hw =[w] h
aw=[w] a
f = hw I aw
If sufficient fluence is delivered to exceed this threshold and vaporization
 Occurs due to this excess fluence, Af, then a kerf will be created at the tis-
sue surface that has a 3-D Gaussian profile, much like a crater. This is
often referred to as the zone of vaporization and is often designated as a
laser trough (Figure 4-4). The diameter of this crater is referred to as the
Figure 4-4 Atissue kerf is produced by a
POWER DENSITY
Caussian laser beam that moves in a given
direction, x, in tissue. Its depth, z, is
dependant on excess deposited fluence. Its
de = Effective Diameter
width, y, is dependant on the effective
 diameter of the beam. The kerf length is a
1.5de
result of the time that the beam moves at
velocity, v. Intuitively, slower speeds create
greater penetration depth but deposit more
fluence to a given area. Faster speeds will not
X
allow excess fluence to be deposited at depth,
P
Tissue Spot
and will require higher power density to
Boiling Diameter
achieve the ablation threshold. To avoid excess 
char formation, a surgeon with rapid
Laser Beam
handspeed may require high power to make
incisions and a surgeon with slow handspeed
 should use lower power when creating
incisions.
48
boiling diameter of the beam, and its depth at the center, Ze, is directly re-
CHAPTER 4
lated to the excess fluence:
Types of Laser-Tissue Interaction
Zc = (f-f)/ hy = △f / hy
As a reminder, the boiling diameter is generally produced where the
power density greatly exceeds 100 W/cm2.
At the instant vaporization occurs due to the excess fluence, a plume of
desiccated material is ejected from the crater, taking much of the heat of va-
porization with it. Transfer of heat outside the zone of vaporization occurs
by thermal conduction through the tissue, and may be accentuated by sub-
threshold fluence deposited at the tissue. It is axiomatic that tissues farther
away from the boiling diameter will experience less temperature change
compared to tissues closer to the boiling diameter. This change in tempera
ture with distance from the crater
an be calculated from Fourier's law of
thermal conduction, or extrapolated from the graphical depiction of a curve
based on distance vs. temperature.
. The initial slope of the curve of temper-
 ature vs. ablation depth, ze, is such that the tangent to the curve intersects
the z-axis at a depth 1/a, and the tem
perature axis at 100°C (Figure 4-5).
The cumulative effects of radiant energy on tissue are time-dependent.
Ideally, as described previously, there i
is no conduction of heat to sur-
rounding tissues. No heat is conducted through tissue in this case because
all of the fluence is instantaneously above threshold. Any heat is abducted
via ejected steam and desiccated cellular residue. In contrast, when sub-
threshold fluence is delivered, the tissue only becomes warmed and does
not vaporize. Some of this heat may be high enough to cause coagulation;
this occurs within the zone of thermal necrosis. There is the potential for
regeneration and viability at all points distant from the center of the beam
where the tissue is warmed but not excessively. This is the zone of ther-
mal conduction and repair. Repeated doses of sub-threshold fluence will
 cause greater areas of thermal necrosis and contribute greatly to undesir-
able surgical outcomes unless the goal is tissue coagulation. Repeated
doses of supra-threshold fluence will create a greater depth of the zone of
37°C
Temperature
100℃
ter
ceni
Figure 4-5 The change in temperature with
distance from the center of a laser-induced
vaporization crater can be extrapolated from
一
this curve of temperature vs. distance. Note the
initial slope of the curve is such that the
tangent to it intersects the distance axis at a
depth 1/a, and the temperature axis at 100°℃
49
PARTI
vaporization and minimal thermal conduction, which is ideal for incisions
Theoryof LaserSurgery
and ablations but not for cauterization of larger vessels.
Photothermal Effect (Heat)
Photothermal effects occur when laser light is absorbed by tissue and con-
verted into heat energy within the target tissue. This results in a rise in the
target tissue temperature. As was discussed earlier, a variety of tissue ef-
fects can be seen, based on the temperature reached. CO2 wavelengths in
the far infrared range specifically affect the water component of the pig-
ment of the target tissue. As the effected pigment, water plays a predom-
inant role in the absorption of laser energy. It is heated directly with laser
energy and at the correct power density, boils almost instantaneously on
an intra-cellular level. This produces an explosive event to the target tis-
sue and vaporization is achieved. Other molecules may then be indirectly
heated via heat conduction from the point of the vaporization event.
Other tissue components (hemoglobin, melanin, proteins, and others), as
 discussed before, may also absorb energy at specific infrared wavelengths.
They can and do play an important role in the tissue heating process.
The absorption of laser energy in any tissue is the sum of the absorp-
tion of each of the tissue components coupled with the absorption coeffi-
cient of the amount of water in the tissue. A perfect example of this is the
effective absorption of CO2 laser light, which is heavily absorbed by
-  s i     a e  
sorbed by water, is about 1 mm to 3 mm.
The control of target tissue heating and limitations to peripheral ther-
comes when using laser energy. As the temperature in the target tissue
rises to 37°C to 60°C, the tissue starts to retract and conformational
changes occur. With a temperature between 60° and 90°C, there is pro-
tein denaturization and coagulation. From 90°C to 100°C, carbonization
and tissue burning occurs. Above 100°C, the tissue is vaporized and ab-
lated. Ideally, from a clinical point of view, the clinician should be able to
desired clinical result. Understanding the factors that control target-
tissue-to-laser effects is key to placing this knowledge into action. Expe-
rienced laser clinicians can visually determine the effect of the specific
laser energy on the target tissue. This allows the clinician to stop the heat-
ing at the desired point. It is therefore equally important for clinicians
who plan to use lasers to complete some hands-on course work so they
better understand the visual considerations. It is also important to under-
stand how to maximize the vaporization and ablative effects of laser en-
ergy while minimizing heating and denaturing events and vice versa.
Laser surgeons must also remember that heat radiates outward in all di
rections from the target area. Around the laser trough (the depression left
after tissue is vaporized from a specific area) produced by tissue vaporiza-
tion, there will be zones of carbonization, vacuolization, and edema as the
heat is dissipated. The tissue in the zones of vacuolization and edema may
50
be irreversibly affected and eventually necrose and slough out. This is espe-
CHAPTER 4
cially true if poor technique, inappropriate energy, or incorrect laser selec-
Types of Laser-Tissue Interaction
tion is implemented. The host tissue may repair the area of affected tissue.
This is only possible if minimal peripheral tissue injury is produced and the
thermal relaxation time of the target tissue is satisfied. The clinician's abil-
ity to optimally vaporize the tissue will maximize the removal of heat in the
plume. This effectively limits or eliminates peripheral heat transfer to the
surrounding tissue. Clinicians who do not clearly understand laser energy
will not necessarily produce a nice clean laser trough by vaporization, and
may leave peripheral tissue completely or minimally unaffected.
The objective of laser therapy must be to minimize as much as possible
the secondary zones of thermal necrosis and injury, while maximizing tis-
sue removal in the form of vaporization. For this reason it is important to
 n   n   n nn si a in 
vide a superior tissue interactive outcome.
Thermal Relaxation Time
of laser energy is the tissue thermal relaxation time. Thermal relaxation
time is the time necessary for target tissue to cool down by 50% through
transfer of heat to surrounding tissues via thermal diffusion or other heat
dissipation events discussed below. Optimally, the thermal relaxation time
 is instantaneous, leaving no peripheral thermal effect on the non-targeted
tissue. Very short thermal relaxation times are typically identified when
CO2 laser energy is used at an appropriate distance, spot size, energy
level, and energy release from the laser handpiece. This type of laser en-
ergy has the greatest application to most soft tissue procedures because of
its consistent and reproducible effect. Thermal relaxation optimization is
critical to avoiding secondary peripheral tissue effects. The clinician must
understand the physical effect of the wavelength of laser energy being
used on the target tissue and surrounding tissue structures. This will help
avoid unwanted peripheral tissue interactions and unfavorable surgical
and therapeutic outcomes.
To a much lesser extent, in most cases the removal or transfer of heat
can be affected by a number of other energy transferring events: photo-
chemistry, fluorescence, photoablation, ionization, and to an even more
miniscule extent, plasma formation and biostimulation, which play sec-
ondary roles in laser energy transfer or release.
When ablating tissue with a laser, surrounding tissues will experience a
change in temperature that occurs during a specified period of time. This
adjacent zone of thermal damage can be minimized by reducing the time
that tissues are exposed to a laser beam. This can be achieved by using a
high power density applied to the target in a series of very short pulses
with longer periods of rest (no energy input), allowing tissue to cool in be-
tween pulses. Pulsing a laser in this manner is an effective way to mini
mize thermal injury to tissues adjacent to the vaporized target. Remember
that pulsing laser energy will, by itself, be only one adjunct factor in a
whole series of steps to minimize peripheral thermal injury. Most com-
51
PARTI
mercially available CO2 lasers have at least one pulse mode setting. Pulse
Theory of Laser Surgery
mode settings are quantified by milliseconds; 1,000 msec = 1 second.
When the pulse of energy delivered from the laser beam has ended, the
tissue will dissipate any heat, or cool off, by thermal conduction to sur-
rounding tissue. How long does this take? It is useful to calculate the ther-
mal relaxation time of the volume of tissue that was irradiated. Thermal
relaxation time depends on the heated volume of tissue and its thermal
conductivity. It is defined as the time required for a unit volume of tissue
to cool down to one half of its maximum temperature during the irradia-
tion, and can be calculated from:
1 / t, = 4 8 a2
where t, is the calculated thermal relaxation time, a is the absorption co-
efficient of tissue at that wavelength, and & is a parameter named the ther-
mal diffusivity of tissue, equal to 1.3 × 10-3 cm2/s. For a CO2 laser used
 on typical soft tissue, the thermal relaxation time can be calculated to be
approximately 325 μs.
 It follows then, that if the duration of a laser pulse to tissue is made
shorter than the thermal relaxation time, a rise in temperature of non-
irradiated surrounding tissue can be precluded or held below the thresh-
old of fluence for thermal necrosis. Likewise, maximum vaporization with
minimal thermal conduction can be achieved if several successive pulses
are delivered to tissue and are restricted to a pulse time shorter than t, and
have an interval of time between pulses much greater than t.. This desir-
able process is called superpulsing, and it is characterized by repetitive
laser energy delivery and rest periods measured in microseconds.
Mechanically Altered Laser-Tissue lnteraction
Laser surgeons must understand the mechanical alterations to laser energy
delivery to explore its potential therapeutic benefits. Mechanical and
computer-assisted delivery of laser energy can provide more effective va-
porization, tissue/energy transfer, and optimal target tissue effect, with
minimal peripheral thermal effects. These mechanical and computer-
assisted effects are: continuous wave (CW), pulse wave (PW), and super-
pulse wave (SP).
Continuous Wave
When a laser, for example a CO2 laser, is operating in the continuous
wave mode (CW), laser energy is continually released through an open
shutter during activation. The faceplate power setting relates the actual
power release of the device in real time.
Pulsed Wave
The pulsed wave mode (PW) allows laser energy to be released in repeated
bursts of duration specified by computer manipulation of the shutter. The
52
peak pulses of the laser emission in this mode are substantially higher
CHAPTER 4
than the average power release over time. There are short periods during
Types of Laser-Tissue Interaction
the lasing process in which no beam is released. This repeated pulse dura-
tion is measured in milliseconds, with the pulsed rate provided in pulses
per second or Hz. This mode allows higher peak power into the target tis-
sue. The added benefit is cooling of the peripheral tissue between pulses,
which maximizes vaporization effects and minimizes thermal accumula-
tion, which reduces heat trauma over time.
Superpulse Wave
The superpulse mode (SP) provides bursts of laser energy at even higher
peaks (see Figure 1-18). This is accompanied by shorter pulse duration in
the microsecond range. Equivalent pauses in the energy release are also
supplied via computer-controlled release of the laser beam. The energy re-
lease pulses are well within the thermal relaxation time of the peripheral
tissue. This higher peak energy release, coupled with increased rate of
pulse repetition, effectively eliminates heat accumulation in the peripheral
tissue.
 Superpulse waveforms minimize thermal damage to normal tissue adja-
cent to CO2 laser surgical sites. Ideally, this mode delivers extremely high
fluence at an extremely rapid rate, thus instantaneously vaporizing tissue
without allowing time for thermal conduction through the tissue. The en-
tire pulse sequence, from initiation to termination, must occur in less time
than the thermal relaxation time of the tissue for that wavelength. The peak
power that is produced in superpulse mode is much greater than the aver-
age power the laser is capable of producing in continuous mode delivery.
This peak power delivery is followed by a rapidly declining curve of power
with respect to time. Because it is impossible for a mechanical shutter to
support this speed of energy pulsing, an alternate approach was invented.
AC-excited Superpulse Waveform
A CO2 laser resonant cavity is filled with a proprietary mixture of CO2,
N2, and He gas. Alternating electrical current can be efficiently managed
by solid state switching devises run by computer software to create
pumped pulses of excitation energy in the laser medium, releasing finite
 packages of photons. Rapid peak total increases in electrical energy are
followed by an equal period of zero excitation energy. This creates the
 pumping pattern that allows superpulsing to occur from the laser reso-
nant cavity. At the instant the cavity receives strong pumping, the laser
produces high power density radiation for the duration of the pulse, Tp:
When the RF electrical output is suddenly zero, the laser also immediately
discontinues power output as well, To, although there is a definite short
period of time during which fluence rapidly diminishes toward zero (Tp
to To). The superpulse waveform of power density with respect to time
appears rectangular in its output form, with a slightly decreasing angle to
"buzz" as these unique energy packets are released. When using a CO2
53
PARTI
laser in homogenous soft tissue, the thermal relaxation time is calculated
Theory of Laser Surgery
to be 325 μs. To satisfy the criteria for a superpulse waveform, a single
isolated superpulse wave must be generated in less than that period of
time to fall within the thermal relaxation time of the tissue. Peak energy
output is generally over 200 mJ and lasts less than 325 μs to achieve these
tissue/laser effects.
 Some lasers are equipped with ultrapulse mode of delivery, which re-
quires RF electrical current excitation of the medium. These lasers typically
produce a minimum of 500 mJ within 50 μs, and maintain fluence at that
level until the pumping ceases. The ultrapulse waveform of power density
vs. time also appears rectangular, with a slightly decreasing angle to its
peak power output level. The total amount of energy that an ultrapulsing
laser delivers is significantly greater than that of an RF-excited superpuls.
ing laser. There is an even greater excess of fluence above threshold that an
ultrapulsed laser delivers to tissue during vaporization. This means that
there is even less thermal necrosis to adjacent tissues caused by an ultra-
pulsed CO2 laser, compared to any superpulsed laser (Figure 4-6).
DC-excited Superpuise Waveform
Older CO2 lasers that produced a superpulse pattern used DC electricity
to excite the medium. Devices in these lasers caused rapid cyclical on-and-
off switching of current. The resulting superpulse waveform of power
density vs. time is multi-exponential when excited by switched DC cur-
rent. Notice that during DC pumping the power output reaches peak be-
fore the conclusion of the excitation period, Tp, at about 100 μs. The
power then declines exponentially until the end of the pump duration.
 Furthermore, power output continues for a short period of time follow-
ing pumping and also declines exponentially toward zero at a slower rate.
This area has been referred to as a power output tail and is characteristic
of the DC-excited superpulse waveform.
A sudden strong pumping of the resonant cavity causes the first sharp
100
90
80
POWER
Figure 4-6 A comparison of power output vs.
ULTRAPULSE
WAVEFORM
time of pulse delivery for both superpulse and
PERCENT
ultrapulse waveforms. The ultapulse waveform
is characterized by delivery of power above
SUPERPULSE
the ablation threshold for about 90% of its
WAVEFORM
pulse duration. The superpulse waveform is not
30
as efficient. Note, however, that the duration
20
of the superpulse waveform is within the
10
thermal relaxation time of tissue. Either of
 these patterns enables superior incisive power,
0.10.2 0.3 0.4 0.50.60.7 0.8 0.91.0
but the cost of ultrapulse lasers may be too
TIME FROM START OF PULSE,
high for most practitioners.
MILLISECONDS
54
peak of laser energy to be produced. Within a few microseconds, the con-
CHAPTER 4
tents of the resonant cavity that were in the singlet laser level are found
Types of Laser-Tissue Interaction
to be in the ground laser level state. This is a reflection of a profound pop-
ulation inversion that is rapidly reduced after the laser first produces a
beam. The waveform abruptly loses power as the majority of molecules
settle down to the ground state. Then, as the pumping suddenly stops,
brief continued electrical discharge and the depletion of excited molecules
causes exponentially reduced radiant output until it is zero. This process
is repeated over and again several times per second to produce the super-
pulse waveform from a switched DC electrical current. It is more difficult
to describe the important periods of time that characterize this waveform.
fs = 1/T, = frequency of superpulses
Tp = time that driving voltage is applied during pumping pulse
Note that we can arbitrarily define the radiant output period, Tp, as the
ratio of the total energy of the pulse over the peak power of the pulse in
the DC-excited superpulse waveform of power density vs. time. The fre-
quency of repetition of the pulses, f, is the same. At the end of Tp, fluence
continues to be deposited to the tissues. This energy is generally sub-
threshold for vaporization and instead causes the temperature of the tar-
 get tissues to rise. If a long enough period of time elapses between pulses,
the tissues can cool to a greater degree and thus experience less thermal
injury. However, if the frequency of the train of superpulses increases,
there will be less time for tissue cooling between superpulses and more
thermal necrosis will occur due to the accumulation of thermal energy
within the surrounding tissues. The ratio of the output time, Tp, over the
repetition period of the superpulse, Ts, is known as the duty factor; duty
factor = T, / T,
DutyFactor
Comparing duty factors demonstrates the need to keep this parameter
low. We will examine four superpulsed lasers at duty factors of 5%, 10%,
20%, and 40% (Figure 4-7). Assume that the temperature at a point near
the vaporization crater will increase as a result of tissue vaporization. This
heat depends on both sub-threshold fluence at that point and thermal
conduction through the tissue. It is clear that at a duty factor of 40%
there is a progressive increase in temperature and an accumulation of heat
that results from the inability of the tissue to cool between superpulses.
This increase in temperature is lower when a duty factor of 20% is used
and lower still with a duty factor of 10%. When a theoretical duty factor
of 5% is used, or Tp / T, = 1 / 20, it is clear that there should be no accu-
pulse of energy output, the tissue has already cooled down to its original
temperature. Thus, thermal necrosis is obviated and a better surgical out-
 a i s a prs  r ao
standard for incisions) is expected from the incision. Ideally, a super-
55
PARTI
pulsed laser should have a duty factor less than 5%, but this just is not so.
Theory of Laser Surgery
Many commercial lasers may have duty factors of 25% or more!
The principal concept is that superpulsing provides less accumulation
of heat to surrounding tissues compared to continuous laser delivery, but
not zero. So it is important to note that the gold standard for incisional
effect, the scalpel blade, can be approximated, but not fully realized with
current lasers. Newer diamond scalpel blades delivering CO2 or diode
 laser energy may provide the realization and tactile fee some clinicians
strive for with current lasers. The tradeoff is the improvement in hemo-
stasis, reduction in swelling, and reduction in nociceptor stimulation at
the surgical site that appropriate laser energy can provide.
Superpulsing is not the same as intermittently repeating a continuous
laser. Most lasers have the ability to deliver power in an interrupted fash-
ion, known as pulsing or wave chopping. The frequency of these pulses
ranges from 2 Hz to 200 Hz. Note that the period of time that a pulsed
laser delivers energy is at least 5 msec per pulse, which is at least ten times 
the thermal relaxation time of tissue. This means that a great deal of heat
is deposited in the target tissue for the period of time the tissue is exposed
to laser energy. This then results in the creation of char due to the com-
bustion of desiccated tissue residues. As previously described, char ab-
sorbs all wavelengths of laser energy very efficiently. The excess energy
absorbed by the char is transformed to heat, which further increases the
temperature of the surrounding tissues. If unchecked (via mechanical re-
moval of the accumulated char), it is more likely that continued thermal
Cooling
/ Line
TEMPERATURE
40%
Duty Factor
POWER
Heating
Line
ldeal
Pump
o=d
 Pulse
T = 37
TIME
Cooling
Line
ldeal
Pump
20%
Pulse
Duty Factor
Heating-
P=0
Line
T = 37°
TIME
Figure 4-7  A comparison of the accumulation
 of heat within tissue in response to laser
Cooling
Line
vaporization using three different duty factors.
 Note the general trend of increasing 
ldeal 
temperature with higher duty factors. A duty
10%
Pump
Heating
Duty Factor
factor of 5% or less produces negligible
Pulse
accumulation of heat and is not depicted in
P=0
Line
this figure.
T = 37"
TIME
56
injury will occur with each pass of the laser energy over the char. Mini-
CHAPTER 4
mizing the pulse time, maximizing the power, and optimizing the period
Types of Laser-Tissue Interaction
of time between continuous pulses will diminish these cumulative effects.
Again, superpulsing is more appropriate for incising tissues because the
time of the vaporizing pulse is less than the thermal relaxation time of
tissue.
The key feature of superpulse mode is the rapid generation of high
power density that can be used for photovaporolysis without conduction
of heat to surrounding tissues. This occurs because the time period of the
heat conduction to surrounding tissue is minimized because the tissue ab-
sorbs all radiant energy during the pulse, and there is no time during
which sub-threshold fluence is deposited to cause any significant thermal
conduction to occur Vaporizing parameters may be achieved by suitably
prolonging the period of time between superpulses near ideal tissue. A
CO2 laser with a superpulse mode and a small duty factor is an ideal
tissue-cutting tool, but a poor coagulation tool.
Photonic energy can also be absorbed and altered by other properties.
These must be considered when using lasers to do therapeutic work on tis-
sue. While these collective effects may be minimal at vaporization thresh-
olds, other photonic tissue effects can themselves bear great importance
for future diagnostic and therapeutic protocols and equipment.
Photochemistry
Photon energy may also be absorbed and thus dissipated by photochem-
istry effects on the target tissue. The basic concept of photochemistry is
that certain molecules, both natural and applied, that reside in the target
tissue can function as photosensitizers effecting energy uptake by the tar-
get tissue. The presence of these photosensitizers in certain cells causes
and intensity. The action of these photosensitizers allows absorption of
photons more specifically by these tissues than surrounding tissues. The
excited photosensitizer subsequently reacts with other molecular sub-
strates in the target tissue, in most cases oxygen, to produce singlet free
radical oxygen units, which cause irreversible free radical oxidation on
some of the essential cellular components. In most cases all of this occurs
without significant generation of heat in the target tissue. This has given
rise to photodynamic therapies that use specific photosensitizers react to
specific laser energy wavelengths. Visible light lasers make up the bulk of
this wavelength for use in photosensitization therapy.
The most specific example of this mechanism has been in the treatment
of cancer cells that have been tagged or sensitized with a photosensitizer
such as a hematoporphyrin derivative. The mechanism of hematopor-
phyrin derivatives? preference to locate in malignant cells is still not fully
understood but is likely related to specific protein receptor sites on the
surface of cancer cells that have a higher affinity for uptake of the sensi
tizer. This can explain why the total time that hematoporphyrin deriva
tives are retained in malignant tissue is much longer than in nonmalignant
57
PARTI
tissue surrounding them. The sensitizing agent generally clears from non-
Theory of Laser Surgery
-ads Aq sponad papuaixa ioy pauieiai st inq sinou z un anssn snoiaun
cific neoplastic cells. As a result, there is a window of time to cause the
selective photodegradation of malignant tissue without significant alter-
ation to adjacent normal tissue. It is also important to note that because
of the wait time for clearance of these types of compounds. The individ-
ual or animal being treated must also stay away from visible (white) light.
This is because, as discussed before, white light is made up of many wave-
lengths of light. Some of these also may be specific for uptake by the sen-
sitizing material.
Fluorescence
Photon energy may also be dissipated as the re-emission of light. If this
happens within 10-6 seconds after absorption, it is called fluorescence.
The fluorescent photon is emitted as the excited fluorescent-emitting atom
in the target tissue returns to the ground state. Because excess energy is
primarily dissipated as heat by collisions with other atoms in the excited
state the energy of the fluorescent photon is altered from that of the ab-
sorbed photon. This event can be adapted to make diagnoses. It is now
used to determine the extent of superficial skin tumors and to detect oc-
cult lung tumors. Tumors may also be able to be tagged with atoms that
can fluoresce, allowing clinicians to see the extent of a mass to a more spe-
cific and complete degree than ever before. In addition, devices that detect
these fluorescence photons are used for non-invasive cholesterol monitor-
ing and detection of certain vitamins and other body chemicals.
The only limit of detection is the ability to detect light, but with the ad-
vent of image intensifiers now under development becoming sensitive
enough, it would theoretically be possible to detect just a few photons of
light emitted from a single malignant cell. Laser-stimulated fluorescence
can also be used analytically to scan large populations of cells flowing
through a laser beam in a device known as a cytofluorometer. These are
now used in the most advanced hemocytometers available. They allow a
substance or tissue to move through it while continually applying to the
tissue a wavelength of laser energy specific to the tissue to create fluores-
tons emitted and identify the wavelength specific to the cell, tissue, or sub-
stance. This is being used to determine if malignant lymphocytes are pres-
ent in blood and then selectively remove them.
Photoablation
The photoablative process consists of the direct breaking of intra-
molecular bonds in polymeric chains caused by the absorption of high-
energy ultraviolet photons. This is also known as photo-dissociation. The
lasing materials of excimer lasers primarily produce this effect as they are
excited dimers of unstable gases, usually a halogen and some rare ele-
ment. The ultraviolet photons generated by these lasers possess so much
energy that they will literally break apart molecular bonds before their en-
58
ergy can be dissipated as heat, thus reducing the tissue to its atomic con-
CHAPTER 4
stituents. Since ultraviolet radiation from 200 nm to 360 nm is well ab-
Types of Laser-Tissue Interaction
sorbed by most biological molecules with penetration depths of only a
few microns, this feature is used to produce well defined, non-thermal
cuts of very small width by excimer lasers currently used in corneal resur-
facing procedures in human ophthalmology.
The treatment of a number of ocular disorders via the potential of
changing the eye's refractive power by precisely removing corneal tissue
without generating secondary heat effects is now well documented.
Ablation of the corneal stroma with 193 nm of radiation has been shown
to produce clean, non-thermal cuts. Thus, there is no peripheral heat to
be transferred and no chance of destroying or damaging surrounding oc-
ular tissue. This wavelength of energy also does not transmit or penetrate
deeply so injury to other ocular structures such as the retina is eliminated
The advent of precise topical tissue mapping devices will allow even
greater refinements in corneal resurfacing and stromal layer contouring.
This laser may also have some applications in dermatology, neurosurgery,
and orthopedics, where precise tissue removal without any thermal event
would be highly desirable. The drawback is the very small amount of tis-
sue that can be removed at one time with this process. As with the laser
eye procedures, it takes thousands of laser firings in extremely rapid fash
ion under the control of a computer linked to a topographical corneal
surface-mapping device to produce the desired effect.
lonization
Ionization is the ejection of an electron from an atom. This is best under-
stood in a thermonuclear energy release of ionizing radiation. It is gener-
ally felt that the individual photons generated from existing lasers do not
have enough energy to cause the absorbing molecule to lose an electron.
Investigation into X-ray lasers and free electron beam lasers (currently
under development by the military) has developed the photon energy that
would be sufficient, of course, to cause the ejection of an electron from a
 a s   a se  ia  
laser energy, there is currently limited therapeutic value in this form of en-
ergy transfer. If specific energy patterns can be produced that have selec.
tive interaction with only certain types of cells, such as cancer cells, then
a new way of selectively destroying only atypical neoplastic cells may be
possible.
Cavitation and Vacuolization
The energy generated by a Holmium laser at the point of energy/tissue
convergence can produce a physical effect that is not associated with va-
porization, but more likely cavitation and vacuolization due to a plasma
wave formation. When these lasers are precisely focused on a small spot
of tissue it is possible to generate a “plasma." Plasma is a gaseous-like
cloud rich in free electrons. An intense acoustical shockwave is generated
in the medium preceding the event location due to the sudden production
59
PARTI
of an electron field in 10-9 to 10-12 seconds. This acoustic wave carries
Theory of LaserSurgery
acoustical energy to surrounding tissue in the form of kinetic energy. It is
being considered for clinical use in the eye to remove secondary cataracts
in the posterior capsule and therapeutically to fracture recalcitrant uri-
nary calculi. Holmium lasers passed through a cystoscope are currently
being used to pulverize canine bladder stones so they may be flushed out
without surgical intervention. It is now thought that the events that dis-
rupt calculus and cataracts are more likely due to soundwave generation
 or expansive events associated with specific intense heat generation than
those associated with actual plasma formation, as was earlier thought.
Such treatment is currently seen with extracorporeal-shockwave-
generated energy produced by electromechanical, electromagnetic, or
piezoelectric soundwave propagation for the treatment of various ortho-
 pedic conditions in humans and animals.
Bio-stimulation of Tissue
Bio-stimulation induced by low-power lasers in the microwatt range of
power density application is being promoted as a potential laser effect on
tissue. It is speculated that the effect of low-level power laser energy on
tissue may provide pain relief, stimulate wound healing, or produce alter-
ation in other biological processes. The release of chemotactic factors or
increased blood flow via vasodilation or modifiers in the tissue may be the
result of this low-level energy stimulation. The evidence for this is anec-
dotal and clinical studies are required for confirmation. There is no heat-
altering effect on tissue structure as there supposedly is for the higher-
power lasers noted earlier. The entire concept is considered controversial
due partly to the fact that the physical, biochemical, and physiologic
mechanisms are either not understood or are very difficult to quantify.
Anecdotal information is promising but it is important to note that these
types of reported results are purely subjective in nature and hard to quan-
 tify with current analytical technology.
General Review of Laser Energy Tissue Effect
As we have noted, the direct laser/tissue effect is the photothermal reac
tion of tissue. This is the primary focus of this clinical laser guide and con
sists of local hyperthermia, coagulation, and vaporization control for
effective and therapeutic tissue interaction in our patients. Laser hyper-
 j od e rg (ot on a ie p an) 
(seconds to minutes), is thought to affect tissue through the activation of
collagenase, which is stimulated on a local basis. Its activation results in
the destruction of blood vessels and subsequent tissue anoxia. As the tem-
perature in the target tissue rises to 47°C to 60°C, the tissue collagen
starts to contract and conformational changes in the tissue occur. Coagu-
lation refers to the irreversible damage that occurs when tissue is heated
to temperatures of 60°C to 90°C, which is below vaporization threshold.
term coagulation implies that tissue is irreversibly damaged or killed.
60
Once tissue is coagulated, the body responds in a variety of ways during
CHAPTER 4
healing to remove the dead tissue. The primary tissue regeneration is
Types of Laser-Tissue Interaction
through absorption or sloughing. This effect is often considered an ad-
    sd  se s   
some extent and used therapeutically, but the healing process cannot be
 totally controlled. Sloughing of dead tissue during healing can actually re-
sult in perforation of a bowel wall or a ruptured blood vessel, resulting in
morbidity or mortality to the patient. Laser vaporization, which occurs
sd aui s oit u iea sadi in piea si ans u
of removing solid tissue by converting it into a gaseous vapor (plume).
The term “ vaporization" is used as a synonym for tissue ablation in chap-
ters 8 and 9. It is our concerted goal to provide the best information in
the clinical section of this book to allow the general laser practitioner a
real-world understanding of the variety of cases that can be advanta-
edde siaua sasi jo asn aui qnoi paiu Aisnoi
61
Chapter 5
Laser Systems, Wavelengths, and Technology
Selection
Until recently in veterinary medicine, the laser was considered a device that
held great potential but was in search of an application. Most medical
lasers were extremely cumbersome, expensive, and difficult to maintain
until 1996, when technology allowed smaller units to be manufactured.
They were designed for human therapeutics, not the veterinary patient.
However, the desire for minimally invasive surgical approaches, including
incisions and laproscopic, intestinal endoscopic, perivisceral endoscopic,
thoracoscopic, and intra-articular procedures, have sparked the use of
laser energy by the veterinary community. This renewed interest is driving
modifications in laser technology so it is better suited for the veterinary
profession. Because universities and private research have lagged behind,
general and specialty practitioners are currently driving the learning curve
for the profession.. The number of procedures currently documented by
the practicing veterinary community far exceeds university documentation
of laser/tissue interaction. More veterinary universities are now obtaining
lasers and beginning to use them in research clinics. This most likely will
 confirm the anecdotal results being obtained by thousands of practicing
veterinarians.
Lasing medium is one of two terms in which biomedical lasers are de-
scribed; the other is wavelength. The lasing medium may be gas, liquid,
solid crystal, or diode. The following are examples of each type:
· Gas lasers: CO2 with a wavelength of 10,600 nm
· Liquid lasers: Typically rhodamine dye, and tunable from 100 nm to
1,000 nm
● Solid crystal lasers: Neodymium:Yttridium-Aluminum-Garnet laser at
1,064 nm (Nd:YAG, 1,064 nm)
● Diode laser: Does not produce its light in a lasing chamber, but emits
light when an electrical current is Passed through a solid-state chip.
These diode lasers are available in various wavelengths ranging from
 590 nm to 980 nm or higher wavelengths.
Many types of biomedical lasers are used in veterinary medicine today.
Lasing medium, wavelength, and frequency determine each laser's absorp-
tion ability in differing biological tissues.
· CO2 (10,600 nm) and Ho:YAG (2,100 nm)lasers: These are highly ab-
sorbed by water, making them perfect for tissue cutting, vaporization,
CO2 lasers have lateral thermal injury of 0.05 mm to 0.1 mm, and
Ho:YAG lasers have lateral thermal injury of 0.1 mm to 1 mm. Because
63
PARTI
there is such minimal lateral thermal damage, injury to surrounding tis-
Theory of LaserSurgery
sues is limited to what you see during application of the laser energy.
Early CO2 lasers were limited to delivery by cumbersome articulated
arms, mirrors, and straight hollow wave-guide tubes. This significantly
limited their practical application. Today, technology has given us the
ability to send CO2 laser light through highly reflective flexible wave-
guides, leading to unlimited possibilities within the surgical arena. In
the near future, development of halide optical fibers and smaller hollow
wave-guides may make the CO2 lasers applicable to endoscopic use as
well.
The Ho:YAG laser can be delivered through flexible optical fibers,
making it very useful for endoscopic procedures. The Ho:YAG laser is
a pulsed laser, which creates much acoustical energy and makes it most
suitable for lithotripsy.
● Solid-state diode lasers and Nd:YAG laser: The solid-state diode lasers
in the 805 nm, 820 nm, and 970 nm range and the Nd:YAG laser at
1,064 nm are invisible wavelengths in the near infrared spectrum. These
smaller, compact units emit wavelengths that are easily transmitted
through small flexible optical fibers, allowing them to be used with
most flexible and rigid endoscopes. The small flexible transmission
fibers are made from glass silica or quartz. Vaporization of tissue can
be accomplished in a non-contact mode. These transmission fibers,
when trimmed or terminated in specialized tips, are used in a contact
mode to accomplish cutting as well as tissue vaporization.
The energy produced by diode lasers is not as easily absorbed by
water as that produced by the CO2 laser. This can result in a greater
depth of thermal injury, especially if used in the non-contact mode.
Minimal thermal damage occurs when the laser is used in the contact
mode, rather than the non-contact mode. The shorter wavelength is bet-
ter absorbed in hemoglobin, allowing efficient cutting and ablation of
vascular tissues. The diode laser has better hemostasis of larger vessels
than the CO2 laser, also due to the better absorption by hemoglobin.
● Argon laser at 524 nm, KTP, and frequency-doubled Nd:YAG at 532
nm: These lasers emit visible green light highly absorbed by hemoglo-
bin. Despite the absorption of light by hemoglobin, these wavelengths
will readily pass through water, gastric fluid, aqueous or vitreous
humor, and urine. These lasers are used both in contact and non-
contact modes to precisely cut, vaporize, and coagulate tissues that are
well perfused with blood. However, laser energy is severely attenuated
if working in a bloody surgical field.
· Dye and diode lasers: These lasers, in the visible red spectrum wave-
length of 635 nm to 675 nm, are used for photodynamic therapy. The
patient is injected with a photosensitizer that is absorbed and concen-
trated in tumor cells, thus localizing the photodynamic effect. When the
tumor is irradiated with laser light of the appropriate wavelength, a
photochemical reaction generates reactive oxygen free radicals that kill
the targeted tumor cells without seriously injuring the surrounding nor
mal tissue. However, the extent of chemical-stimulated damage to the
affected tissues often is not seen until 24 to 48 hours after treatment.
64
A number of wavelengths of laser energy currently are receiving consid-
CHAPTER 5
eration for use in the veterinary medical and surgical fields. The follow-
Laser Systems, Wavelengths, and
 ing is a list of those lasers and their respective wavelengths. The specific
Technology Selection
parameters of each of those lasers are also outlined.
Laser Delivery Systems
The following are a few comments and guidelines that can be considered
or followed when selecting a laser technology to use or purchase. We have
focused our practical use of lasers on the CO2 and, to a lesser extent,
diode wavelengths. A number of other wavelengths are being used at se-
lected universities and in human surgical and dental fields. The reader
should further investigate other laser wavelength applications only after
gaining a complete knowledge of that wavelength's physical and tissue in-
teractive properties through outside reading.
 Table 5-1 Basic physical properties of current surgical lasers
Laser Type
Wavelength
Active Medium
Excitation
Power
Operating Mode
Argon lon Laser
488 nm, 514 nm
Art Gas
DC electrical
<1 to >30 W
CW, PW
Hemoglobin
discharge
 Krypton Ion Laser
476 nm, 521 nm,
Krt Gas
568 nm, 647 nm
Ruby Laser
694 nm (Red)
Al2O3:Cr3+
Flash-lamp
Up to 109 w
Obligate pulsed
Melanin
(10 ps - ms)
Alexandrite Laser
710 nm, 755 nm
BeAl2O4:Cr3+
Flash-lamp
Up to 100 W
CW, PW
Melanin,
820 nm
(100 ps - ms)
hemoglobin
Dye Laser
308 -1,300 nm
 Liquid dye
Flash-lampf
Up to 106 W
 Obligate pulsed
 Photosensitizer,
(Rhodamine 6G)
Laser
ureteral
calculi
 Semiconductor
590 - 5300 nm
 Semiconductor
DC/AC
<1 to >30 W
CW, PW
Hemoglobin,
Diode Laser
(e.g. GaAlAs)
(ps - ms)
 melanin,
(water)
Nd:YAG Laser
1,064 nm
Nd3+ in Y3AlsO12
Krypton arc
<1 to >100 W
CW, PW
Hemoglobin,
KTP Laser
(KTP=532 nm)
lamp
(20 ps - 5 ms)
 melanin,
(frequency
(water)
doubled
Nd:YAG)
Ho803+in Y3AlsO12
Ho:YAG Laser
2,100 nm
Xenon flash-
Up to 104 w
 Obligate pulsed 
Water
lamp
Er:YAG Laser
2,936 nm
Er3+ in Y3AlsO12
Xenon flash-
Up to 105 w
Obligate pulsed
Water
lamp
CO2 Laser
10,600 nm
Mixture of CO2,
DC/AC
<1 to >100 W
CW, PW,
Water
N2, He
 Superpulse
{5 ms -1 s)
Excimer Laser
Dimer: Short-lived,
High power AC
ArF
193 nm
excited ionized
50 W
Obligate pulsed
Cornea, bone
KrCl
222 nm
halogen/noble
50 W
KrF
248 nm
gas
100 W
XeCl
308 nm
150 W
XeF
351 nm
30 W
65
PARTI
Types of Medical Lasers
Theory of LaserSurgery
Many different types of biomedical lasers are in use today. Each instru-
ment is usually acquired for a specific purpose, such as an incisional tool;
excisional device; ablative device; photodisruption applications; or der-
matological, endoscopic, otoscopic, or bronchoscopic applications.
Overall, the use of laser energy can be an extremely precise method for
tissue removal and a variety of laser wavelengths are in use today to a
greater of lesser extent. The CO2, diode, neodymium yttrium aluminum
garnet (Nd:YAG), argon, KTP, ruby, and holmium wavelength lasers are
some of the types used in veterinary and human medicine. The CO2, diode
and Nd:YAG lasers perform the majority of clinical practice duties, with
the CO2 holding the lion's share of current clinical applications.
Enhancements in laser application, wavelength specification, and deliv-
ery system are being made regularly, since they are closely aligned with
advances in today's technology. Continuing upgrades to software and
hardware applications also are advancing laser energy application. The
ultimate goal for any laser user is to improve the final surgical or medical
outcome for their patient's specific case. Having a working knowledge of
the variety of laser wavelengths and their potentials can give the general
spect to available therapeutic and surgical case management. The follow-
ing review of some of the currently used wavelengths of laser energy is
provided to stimulate the reader to expand his or her view of currently ac-
cepted case management.
Carbon Dioxide Laser (10,600 nm)
The carbon dioxide laser wavelength is ideal for cutting and vaporization
because, as previously stated, it is highly absorbed by water at the peak of
the 6 μm absorption band. It can cut tissue cleanly when the beam is fo-
cused and can debulk tissue, providing adequate hemostasis when the
beam is defocused. At the tissue interface, blood vessels less than 0.6 mm
in diameter can be coagulated and sealed, which provides for improved
surgical field visibility. Lymphatics are also sealed so postoperative edema
may be reduced and secondary chemotactic factors initiating inflamma-
tory responses are reduced.
Subjectively, there seems to be less pain associated with a laser incision
and dissection. This observation could be due to the fact that smaller pri-
mary nociceptors are sealed and secondary nociceptors are not stimu-
lated. The advent of superpulsed systems that typically can produce mul-
tiple packets of pulses—each one hundred microseconds in length—are
 able to provide significant energy to the tissue within that tissue's thermal
relaxation time.
In addition, mechanical scanners can be adapted to the CO2 to allow
for large areas of tissue vaporization or ablation. This can be very advan
tageous for diffuse dermal masses, debridment, or granulation bed abla-
tion. "What you see is what you get" when using carbon dioxide lasers.
They are generally reported to have a very short learning curve, in the
66
neighborhood of two to four weeks. As mentioned, energy delivery with
CHAPTER 5
a carbon dioxide laser can be provided through an articulated-arm with a
Laser Systems, Wavelengths, and
series of mirrors for focusing the laser beam, or other delivery modalities,
Technology Selection
including hollow wave guides and compatible low OH optical fibers.
These can offer energy delivery advantages in most clinical settings where
access to the surgical field is limited.
Semiconductor Diode Lasers (810 nm to 980nm)
 Recent engineering and commercial applications have allowed develop-
 ment of diode lasers with wavelengths varying from approximately 635
 a a a       on 
in the 810 nm to 980 nm range. Newer technologies also allow diode
lasers capable of emitting wavelengths in the mid-infrared range (2.1
um). Dual wavelength or dial-in diode lasers will become available in the
near future.
The compact size and high efficiency of diode lasers offer the potential
for economic advantages. Their relative small size is advantageous in fa-
cilities with limited space. Higher power diode lasers in the 25 watt to 50
watt range are available, and can provide significant cutting and coagula-
tion ability in contact mode. These lasers currently provide up to 50 watts
   d   e  ti  
types of soft tissue and provides superior hemostatic abilities to the CO2
laser. It must be noted that increased peripheral tissue heating is a side ef-
fect in most cases. The lasers can be used with a variety of delivery fiber
tips through an endoscope, otoscope, or bronchoscope. They can be used
in non-contact mode for nonfocused deep tissue coagulation and vascular
effect. Carbonization of the cleaved tip allows precise cutting or vaporiza-
tion in a tissue contact mode.
Surgical diode lasers offer considerable advantages compared to
Nd:YAG lasers with respect to reduced peripheral tissue interaction. They
have a shallower depth of penetration (although still much larger then a
CO2 laser). They are smaller, lighter, and require less maintenance. They
are considered extremely user-friendly once the learning curve (six to
twelve weeks, due to increased variable tissue energy uptake factors) is
completed, and can be more economical. This region of the near-infrared
wavelength absorbs into the target tissue via several pigments in the tar-
get tissue. Diode lasers are absorbed by hemoglobin, melanin, oxyhemo-
globin, and, to a lesser degree, water.
When using a near-infrared laser there are more variables related to
laser-tissue interaction, especially more undesired peripheral thermal
events. The zone of thermal necrosis can reach as high as 9 mm when the
tissues are inadequately cooled. Tissue sloughing has been noted in some
situations where an inexperienced user has applied excessive fluence.
These lasers are sometimes referred to as WYDSCHY, or “What you
don't see can hurt you." We consider the diode wavelength as an impor
tant next laser to add, once proficiency in using the CO2 laser wavelength
has been established. The diode laser can significantly complement CO2
laser use in veterinary practice.
67
PARTI
Nd:YAG Lasers (Neodymium Yttrium Aluminum Garnet; 1,064 nm)
Theory of Laser Surgery
S   e     ,   
the wavelength transmits though tissue, in addition to the observed sur
face tissue effect. Nd:YAG lasers can deliver high powers of up to 100
watts through silicon-based optical transmitting fibers that can easily be
inserted into working channels of standard Gl endoscopes, fiberoptic oto-
scopes, and bronchoscopes. Power source requirements are also much
greater, requiring a dedicated 220 AC line. Since the Nd:YAG laser has
less specific absorption by water and hemoglobin than the carbon diox
ide and argon lasers, the depth of thermal injury can exceed 3 mm in most
also very dangerous to the untrained user. Fairly rapid tissue vaporization
 in non-contact mode is possible with a bare fiber, but collateral thermal
injury may be substantial and produce unrewarding post-operative ef-
fects. Continuous wave or CW Nd:YAG lasers can be used with a contact
mode with surgical precision to provide incision and coagulation. In this
mode, little collateral thermal injury and good hemostasis can be
achieved. Use of contact tips for endoscopic application is widely ac-
We feel that this laser wavelength should only be used by very knowledge.
able, experienced laser practitioners, or in advanced university settings.
Frequency-Doubled-YAG Lasers ("KTP" or Potassium Titany]
Phosphate; 532 nm)
Frequency-doubled Nd:YAG lasers emit a visible green light and are basi-
cally equivalent to the argon lasers in many surgical and dermatological
applications. There is little or no absorption by water at the 532 nm
wavelength light. This gives an advantage when vascular tissue with ill-
defined borders requires resection or ablation. This type of laser is not a
very precise energy provider. Induced photothermolysis of tissue selec-
tively stained with an indocyanine green chromatophore has also shown
promise for selective coagulation and vaporization of tumors and contam-
inated wounds in recessed or surgically sensitive areas.
Visible Light-Emitting Lasers
There are currently no lasers in the visible light spectrum that are capable
of effectively cutting tissue without significant thermal damage to the pe-
ripheral tissue zone. These types of lasers should not be considered for in-
cisive work due to the delayed healing and scarring produced.
Argon Lasers (458 and 524 nm)
 ais iso i s  ue  p   a
sorbed by hemoglobin, its primary tissue target. This makes it useful for
specific removal of vascular lesions that are at a very shallow depth in the
dermis (1 mm to 2 mm). Argon laser energy is not “seen" by most other
tissues and thus transmits through water or other organic fluids. Bare
68
fibers can be used in contact or non-contact modes for cutting, vaporiza-
CHAPTER 5
Laser Systems, Wavelengths, and
tion, or coagulation.
Technology Selection
Ruby Lasers (694 nm)
This wavelength is primarily used as a device for removing tattoos and
darkly pigmented birthmarks. There is currently limited value for this
laser in general veterinary practice.
Holmium Lasers (2,100 nm)
Clinical holmium lasers are being used sparingly in veterinary medicine
for arthroscopic surgery, lithotripsy, and very limited general surgery.
Additional applications have been implemented for laser diskectomy by
Dr. Ken Bartels at Oklahoma State University in a research setting. While
this wavelength of laser interacts with water much like the CO2 laser, it
has a very shallow depth of penetration (0.3 mm). Small thermal necrosis
zones provide better surgical precision and adequate hemostasis in very
 sensitive anatomical regions. This wavelength of laser energy is provided
in slow pulse rates and therefore is inappropriate for general incisional
uses. The acoustical energy of the holmium laser can provide energy for
lithotripsy of gallstones or urologic calculi disruption via a photodisrup
tive effect. Up to three hours may be required to complete photodisrup-
tion of stones. The use of holmium lasers in this field for veterinary med-
icine is still investigational.
Excimer Lasers
The 193 nm excimer laser has the ability to incise tissue and leave a pe-
ripheral thermal event of less than 1 μm. The incision heals rapidly and
there is minimal inflammation. This type of wavelength can actually
break the C-C bonds within tissue without causing water vaporization.
This is a photodecomposition effect And it has rendered the excimer laser
superior for corneal refractive sculpting. This wavelength is currently in
high demand for use in radial keratotomy. However, it is ineffective in a
blood-filled field. Currently, cost, size, and safety considerations provide
too many disadvantages for inclusion in the average veterinary practice.
Evolution of Laser Technology Advancement
Because CO2 and diode laser energy are the primary types of wavelengths
currently in use by the general veterinary community, these units will be
considered more closely in this discussion.
Be aware that there are two types of CO2 lasers on the market today:
DC (direct current electrical) excited and RF (radio frequency) excited.
The purpose of the excitation is to drive the CO2 molecules into high
energy states from which laser light (photons) may be extracted. How the
electric current is delivered differentiates the newer RF excited gas slab
technology introduced in 1991 from the older glass tube DC excited tech-
69
PARTI
nology introduced in the early 1980s. Glass tube DC excited lasers were
Theory of LaserSurgery
of the gas mixture. This technology was updated in 1990 to a sealed tube
configuration that did not require re-charging. In a DC excited laser, an
electric DC current is passed through a gas-filled glass tube, producing
photon excitation. In a RF excited laser an electric current is passed
o qis s e q paies sid pi j jo raqnu ua e qnoi
 gas, producing ionized molecules and a laser beam. RF excited lasers are
often referred to as pulsed lasers while DC excited lasers are referred to
as continuous wave lasers. This is not to be confused with the continuous
wave mode of the laser in which the laser beam is on continuously when
the laser is activated. All CO2 lasers provide a pulsed mode. This is com-
monly referred to as superpulse, ultra pulse, nova pulse, sharp pulse or
surgi pulse, depending on the manufacturer. From a cost standpoint, RF
technology is more expensive than DC technology but RF technology
tends to have a longer life cycle and is capable of producing higher pulsed
energy output. The current active life cycle estimates are approximately
10,000 hours for DC excited lasers and 45,000 hours for RF excited
lasers.
Delivery Systems
 There are currently three primary methods of delivering laser energy from
 the laser chassis to the operative site: articulated arm; hollow wave-guide;
and various silicone, quartz, or low OH optical transmitting fibers. A
fourth delivery system incorporating a flexible enhanced transfer wave-
guide that can fit into endoscopic ports is receiving final FDA approval.
CO2 lasers employ either the articulated arm or the hollow wave guide,
whereas diode, Nd:YAG, argon, and holmium lasers are delivered by an
optical fiber which conducts the laser beam through reflection or refrac-
tion to the operative site. Optical fiber delivery is primarily used in endo.
scopic procedures in an aqueous environment where CO2 is not applica-
ble because it is absorbed by water.
The type of laser energy used will have a direct bearing on the guiding
medium. It is critical to understand which type of laser energy is being
demonstrated. Each type of laser energy interacts with the target tissues
differently. Quartz optical fibers are used by laser energy that can be
transferred by this medium. Diode laser energy is transferred by this type
fiber. Drawbacks to these fibers are that they can become cracked or dam-
aged and thus reduce the capacity to carry laser energy. The end also has
to be renewed (cleaved) each time the laser is reused. Sterilization of the
tip can also be an issue. Fibers are, however, the least expensive delivery
 media. Advantages to this type of delivery system come from the en-
hanced ability to transfer laser energy through fibroscopic devices for use
deep inside body structures.
Articulated arms deliver the laser beam by means of sets of mirrors
down the length of hollow composite tubes articulated and hinged to pro-
vide flexibility of movement. Hollow wave-guides transmit the laser beam
down the lumen of the flexible guide by reflection of its polished surface.
70
Articulated arms transmit the laser beam with minimal power loss and
CHAPTER 5
maintain beam coherence. They also can transmit high power levels of
Laser Systems, Wavelengths, and
CO2 energy to the target tissue. However, they can be cumbersome to use.
Technology Selection
The mirrors can also cloud or become misaligned over time. This can re-
quire off-site servicing and be costly and they are not always easy to
change out. Most articulated arms are less positional, especially when
working in the oral cavity or ear, and require more care when handling.
 Flexible wave-guides are more versatile in restricted areas. They allow
for easier maneuvering of the hand piece intra-operatively. They have a
 greater power loss from proximal to distal end that has to be made up by
increasing the joules of energy being emitted from the housing. Hollow-
wave guides are considered by many to be the latest technological ad-
vance and they afford a mirrored inner surface through a flexible trans-
 port device for the laser energy. These devices are very maneuverable and
positioning is often more natural. The greater advantage of this delivery
system is the ability to exchange a failed or damaged one for an operat-
ing one in the clinic without special technical support and a minimal time
requirement. The per unit cost of these delivery systems is also less than
 articulated arm transmission systems.
Each delivery system has benefits and drawbacks, which the user
should weigh before determining which will provide the best application
for its intended use. No one delivery system is optimal 100% of the time.
 The user must consider which one will provide the most consistent posi-
tive application effect. Until dual delivery systems are available, there will
likely be a need for both reflective transmission and optical fiber conduc-
tion of laser energy.
Age of Equipment
It is always preferable, in our opinion, to have the most advanced tech-
nology available. In selecting lasers, there is the potential that a new laser
A s 'iak pos uaaq nou snl s ien soon pio aq iy u Ae
 particularly be the case with foreign manufactured lasers. While they may
have never been fired, their component parts may not be state of the art
 and may in fact be outdated or have degraded with time in storage. A
 major point of consideration to help determine the technical age of a laser
is the type of device that contains the molecules that emit the photons,
 and the type of energy used to stimulate the molecules.
The most current technology uses an RF excited laser medium. A radio
-edas sinnd jeia nau jo aqnu ua e yano passed si unan
rated by a small slab of gas, producing ionized molecules and a laser
beam. The radio frequency wave allows for minimal creation of heat in
the chamber and tube, which in turn allows for use of simpler passive
cooling of the unit that does not require refilling, pumping, or repair. This
also reduces wear and tear on the internal hardware or failure in systems
that have no monitoring of cooling fluid levels.
Older technology uses steel or glass canisters to hold the laser-energy
producing medium and DC electrical energy to excite the molecules to
71
PARTI
process. This type of technology requires active cooling via a radiator and
Theoryof LaserSurgery
cooling fluid passed over the canister to dissipate heat. These older sys-
tems also have O-rings at the ends of the canisters that continually expand
and contract during the heating. These O-rings can eventually crack, per-
mitting the molecules inside the canister to leak out.
Newer laser devices use power calibration chambers that give accurate
readings of the actual energy output from the tip of the laser hand piece.
This better assures the user that the correct power density is being
achieved. The operator without technical support can also do this calibra-
tion. Sharing of techniques is also more accurate when this type of equip-
ment power calibration is available.
Laser Beam Directors (Focusing Hand Pieces or Spot Tips):
Articulated arm lasers use a device known as a focusing band piece to
control the delivery of the laser beam to the targeted tissue. There are two
types of hand pieces used with modern lasers, collimated and focusing. A
collimated hand piece provides the same power density whether one inch
from tissue or 100 feet from tissue, while a focusing hand piece has a lens-
or spot-size-limiting tip that is set to focus the beam at a given optimal
focal working distance. Unlike a collimated hand piece, the greater the
distance from the optimal focal target distance you move the focusing
hand piece, the more divergent the laser beam and thus the less the power
density becomes. As the laser beam divergence doubles, the power density
decreases four fold. This difference between collimated and focusing hand
pieces is critical when going from cutting to ablation or contracture to
heating of tissue without the necessity of changing hand pieces.
The one drawback of lens-type hand pieces is that the hand piece itself
can be sterilized only under gas. Their advantage is that a significantly
higher total energy can be focused through them to the target tissue.
Flexible wave guide delivery systems employ a hand piece to hold the
wave guide's distal end. These hand pieces act like a focusing hand piece,
but have no lens to contend with; instead special tips can be inserted into
the end of the hand piece. These tips allow for a variety of focal points
and focal diameters of the laser beam. This allows for a multitude of clin-
ical applications. These hand pieces and tips can be autoclaved or gas ster-
ilized repeatedly. They can also be easily interchanged intra-operatively
without loss of sterile field.
Chassis Consideration for the System Components:
Here again, there are a variety of styles of outer cases for lasers. They range
from large stationary cabinet chassis to tabletop models or roller based-
pedestal mobile units. Each clinician must consider which style will allow
power outputs in the 10 watt to 15 watt range can be housed in a tabletop
configuration or small stand-alone unit. Lasers in the 20 watt to 40 watt
range are free-standing in a housing that takes up approximately one
72
square foot of floor space and stands three feet tall. Higher-powered lasers
CHAPTER 5
upwards of 100 watts can take up as much as five square feet of floor space
Laser Systems, Wavelengths, and
and seven feet in height. Each user must determine what power and size
Technology Selection
best suits his or her practice. The advent of the CO2 laser, with its peak
lower power with exceptional vaporization and ablative potential.
The ease of transportation for use in different locations within the hos-
pital and at remote sites may also be a consideration. Older lasers usually
require more space to house their components’ internal or external cool-
ing systems. Due to the larger number of moving parts, mobility can be
 an issue and breakdown a greater risk. The least number of moving parts
usually allows for the greatest mobility and durability. The smaller foot-
print and weight in the smallest chassis optimizes technician handling in
a multiple-parameter usage. Diode chassis of the more current models are
very small and portable. The allsolid-state make-up of these laser devices,
along with their small size, provides for excellent use in ambulatory situ-
ations and small spaces. They are also easily paired with fibroscopic
equipment on the same table or platform.
User lnterface Panels
All lasers manufactured over the past ten years have incorporated menu
driven touch panels with digital readouts. Because these systems are con-
 trolled by computer software they are very user friendly and provide a
number of pre-programmed features permitting the user to customize pro-
tocols or access pre-set protocols from a database. This allows the user to
rapidly modify the laser energy output, power setting, and type of beam
output and geometry without significant recalculation or time spent re-
setting power parameters. These panels are also flat and without knobs or
switches that can be difficult to handle under sterile conditions. A sterile
transparent plastic cover can easily be placed over the flat pressure-
sensitive push plates for use in sterile fields. These panels can also be
changed out and upgraded as warranted. The most current computer
hardware and software usually support units with this type of user inter-
face. Older units may have dials or switches that require the assistance of
a surgical aid or technician, should laser parameters need to be altered
intra-operatively. Be sure that you and your staff are comfortable with the
laser interface before committing to a specific unit.
Service Contracts and Upgrading Equipment
It is important that the laser unit's manufacturer provide a long warranty
period (at least one year and optimally three years). This should cover the
entire base unit, energy transfer apparatus, and focusing device.
Warranties provided by dealers are less advantageous since a secondary
market dealer may go out of business, leaving you without recourse or
support. Rapid 24-hour turn-a-round of a defective unit should also be
expected so that valuable income-generating time is not lost. Available
24/7/365 tech support should also be included. Extended warranties after
73
PARTI
og suosod ui-pei pue sapeadn pue poad senaao mau jeu a
Theory of LaserSurgery
up-line devices are also advantageous when considering laser equipment.
Any used equipment that is being considered should have been re-
certified by the manufacturer or a certified repair organization. It should
have passed the same standards for use as a new unit. The purchaser
should be able to get an extended warranty and be allowed upgrade op-
portunities just as with a new unit. It is critical that the history of the unit
be available and certified before purchase. Without these guarantees there
is no way to know how many hours of active lasing time are still avail-
able from the unit or if the components are operating properly. Most
importantly, there is no way to know how much of the laser photon-
producing medium inside the machine is still present or how secure it is.
Whether new or used, the purchase of a laser is a big step for the vet-
erinary practitioner and should be considered if possible from more than
a cost perspective. A company that has an extended history in the laser in-
dustry and a proven reputation for quality and reliability should opti-
mally have manufactured the laser you are contemplating for purchase or
have a long-term agreement with the manufacturer. The seller/dealer
should have a track record for service and clinical support. The seller/
dealer should be part of a company that will stand behind the units it sells
or re-certifies, even if the person selling you the laser leaves their employ-
ment. Today there are several companies within the industry that have a
good track record on service or support. Whether you are basing your
 a ne go u e n 'ds d d uo s
rent users. Companies that sell on low price primarily may leave you with
little recourse should problems occur.
These factors also should apply when purchasing a used laser that does
not have a documented history and has not been re-certified by the origi-
nal manufacturer Used lasers may have been refurbished with other than
 OEM (original equipment manufacturer) parts. Some off-brand parts may
be of inferior quality, which may potentially fail long before the OEM
parts.
All individuals that you interact with during the purchase process of a
laser unit should have complete working knowledge of the equipment and
the company that made the equipment. They should be able to provide
 you with technical specifications and support material for the laser equip-
ment you are considering. Companies should provide opportunity for
 hands-on educational programs or be affiliated with organizations such as
the Veterinary Surgical Laser Society (VSLS) or the American Society for
Laser Medicine and Surgery (ASLMS) that can provide educational op-
 portunities. Set-up and staff training should be included in the purchase
price. Full documentation and usage and safety manuals should definitely
be provided. All areas of use and safety with OSHA specifications should
be provided or explained before purchase. All accessory items needed for
normal operations should also be provided at the time of in-servicing of
the laser equipment.
Clearly, there is a lot to consider when determining the right type of
B  s  sd   s o e  a
74
used or supposedly “new" equipment, there are varieties of pitfalls that
CHAPTER 5
Laser Systems, Wavelengths, and
Technology Selection
experience with laser energy could lead to unwanted negative therapeutic
or surgical outcomes resulting in complications for your patients and
yourself. To afford yourself the best medical and surgical outcomes when
using laser technology, it is critically important to know the equipment
you are purchasing. You must also have a full working knowledge of the
about any and all of the previously discussed criteria. Make a checklist of
your particular laser priorities and compare each laser for the best fit to
your practice style. If the dealer you are considering purchasing from does
not know the answer, make sure he or she knows how you can get the an-
swer before you sign on the dotted line. Ask to have the equipment
demonstrated in your hospital under real operational settings.
The VSLS highly recommends that any veterinarian considering the im-
i de p s  u  as j 
take a basic course on physics, safety, equipment operations, and tech-
nique. Advanced courses are offered by VSLS, ASLMS, and at major con-
ventions for veterinarians. These lectures can benefit practitioners who
have some current experience and would like to refine their technique as
well as new users.
The VSLS has just completed plans to implement a certification process
for its membership that will provide additional competency in a variety of
laser wavelength studies and practices.
Last, be sure that the laser equipment you are considering has a manu-
facturer's address, phone number, product number, and serial number.
The salesperson should provide you with a technical services hotline or di-
rect phone number. You should be able to find out everything there is to
know about that machine before you purchase it. Your enhanced profes-
sional image depends on understanding how to work with laser energy.
Your personal enjoyment of the laser device depends on having excellent
technology and reliable support.
75
Part II
PRACTICAL
LASER SURGERY
6  Safety Considerations
79
 Economic Considerations
for Use of Laser Energy in
Veterinary Medical Practice
91
 8 Pain Management
Considerations for Laser
Surgery Procedures
101
Chapter 6
Safety Considerations
Surgical lasers are powerful and potentially dangerous instruments that
should be used with safety and respect. Misuse can result in severe injury
to the patient, operator, and support staff. However, in the hands of a
trained veterinarian, the CO2 laser is as safe today as a scalpel blade.
Therefore, safety training on laser use should be mandatory.
A thorough understanding of the type of laser that you are using
(Chapter 5) is vital to any discussion of laser energy. For instance, there are
critical differences in spot size between the currently available hand-held
laser units, which leads to marked differences in power densities. The
lasers available today embody both older, well-established systems and
wavelengths, and newer, cutting-edge technologies. There is no reason for
clinicians to not gain the knowledge needed to handle and use laser energy.
Two of the definitive documents on the safe and effective use of laser
energy in medicine are the American National Standards Institutes (ANSI)
publications ANSI 136.3 and ANSI 136.1, which use standards agreed
upon by the industry. Both OSHA and the Canadian Ministry of Health
use very similar criteria for appropriate safety considerations. A growing
body of information is available from a host of other publications. Rec-
ommended readings are included in the back of this text and should be
consulted before a laser in your hands is ever applied to a patient for ther-
apeutic purposes.
Those who have questions about the proper safety requirements for
their specific lasers should refer to the owner's manual or consult the most
current version of the ANSI documents. Routine use of general common
sense by the clinician and staff yields the greatest positive outcomes when
using laser energy. Check your system each time before you begin any sur-
gical case.
"laser safety officer"(one person can do both jobs) to provide day-to-day
operational support for your particular laser. A fully informed and com-
 d  si s an a   si 
technicians should be versed in the day-to-day operations of the laser. At
a minimum, they should be introduced to the technology by the manufac-
ture's representative at time of installation. Consider offering your techni-
cians the opportunity to attend continuing education courses on lasers in
veterinary medicine. This will give you greater consistency in therapeutic
outcomes, reduce the likelihood for improper treatment outcomes due to
improper equipment preparation, and limit any down time due to system
s pe n  o sissns ado- s n a
due to equipment malfunction can lead to inappropriate surgical compro-
mise or worse. A knowledgeable and well-trained surgical laser assistant
is invaluable. Such assistance not only facilitates the surgical procedure
but enhances the safety level, as well.
79
PART II
Practical Laser Surgery
DANGER
VISIBLEANDINVISIBLE
LASERRADIATION
Tedrdeorkpatan
LASER SURGERY IN PROGRESS
SAFETY EYEWEAR REQUIRED
0CQLASERWattsContinuous
aDIDELASER2SJouleePslon
CLASSIVLASER
Figure 6-1 Laser identification placard 
showing wavelength(s) being used in the
surgical room.
The laser technician can, and in most cases should, also be the “laser
safety officer." This person is responsible for the administrative consider-
ations that OSHA requires nationally and that each state may impose in-
dividually. He or she should have a working knowledge of the location of
all OSHA-required support equipment and documentation prior to the
laser being turned on. Some states require a radiology safety division to
 oversee proper laser handling and monitoring. This is true in Maryland,
where one of the authors (Dr. Eeg) practices. Some states also require li-
censing of the laser wavelength being used. These regulations are more
administrative than educational. It is the veterinary surgeon's responsibil-
ity to be aware of the potentials for injury to the assistant as well as him-
or herself. (Figure 6-1) Such injury generally involves fingers holding and
retracting tissues and results from improper beam positioning or reflec
tion off of polished metallic instruments used in the procedure
Finally, by incorporating all that you have learned into a comprehen
sive “to do list" that is consulted each time laser energy is used, you will
avoid or greatly limit unwanted complications to the equipment, the staff,
 yourself, and most importantly the patient.
General Safety Guidelines
Everyone in the surgical or therapeutic room should have a working
knowledge of the potential interaction between laser energy and the ma-
terials and tissues that are present.
The surgeon should only operate one foot pedal, the laser switch, in an
on or off fashion. A technician should be responsible for the standby posi-
tion of the laser whenever it is not in active use. The surgeon and the tech-
nician should have a clear understanding of specific requests for laser-on
and laser-standby orders. In each case the laser energy components should
be preset by the clinician or relayed from the clinician to the technician.
80
Confusion with other pedals that may be on other equipment may
CHAPTER 6
Occur and lead to accidental firing of the laser beam and thus to inappro-
Safety Considerations
priate tissue, causing injury. It is critical that the veterinary surgeon be re-
sponsible for only the on/off laser foot switch. When multiple lasers are
being used along with videoscopic equipment or electrocautery, the tech-
nician should place the foot pedals in the same location for each proce-
dure or change foot pedals as requested by the surgeon during the proce-
dure. A superior plan would be to allow the technician to control all other
foot pedals, allowing the surgeon to focus on laser energy use. Multiple
foot activation pedals should never be taped or bolted together. The vet-
erinary surgeon must consciously seek out the pedal for initiation of laser
energy after verbally indicating that this is the intent (by requesting laser-
on status from the technician).
Plume Control
 Proper and thorough evacuation of the laser plume, a gaseous and partic
ulate byproduct of laser energy/tissue interaction, is critically important.
The plume must be evacuated using approved suction devices, and proto-
dard. It is critical that the technician be fully versed in the operation and
implementation of plume evacuation prior to any use of a surgical laser
(Figures 6-2A and 6-2B).
Although laser energy provides a high temperature environment at the
point of laser/tissue interaction, viable organic material exists in the
plume. The inhalation of this organic material or byproduct chemical ma-
terials left from surgical site preparation may lead to short-term or long-
Figure 6-2A Plume evacuator (S.A.F.E.
system IM, Edge Systems Inc.) positioned next to
20 watt CO, laser (NovapulseTM, Accuvet-
Lumenis Inc.).
81
PART II
Practical Laser Surgery
Figure 6-2B Plume evacuation handpiece
prepped for use in sterile surgery field.
term respiratory irritation, damage, or disease. Please note that this is true
for any component that produces smoke or a plume from its functional
interaction with tissue. Electrocautery devices should carry the same re-
quirement due to their production of smoke from the surgical site.
The laser plume creates a potential for a biohazard not only to the sur-
geon but also to personnel in the surgical operating room or area where
laser/tissue interaction takes place. Care must be taken when the laser is
used in the oral cavity or around the head so that the patient avoids in-
halation of the plume. The effective use of a plume evacuator by the tech-
nical staff will reduce or eliminate the potential for hazardous inhalation.
Specific plume-safe masks that have a smaller pore size (down to 0.1 um)
 to standard surgical face masks.
Safety Considerations Regarding the Laser Unit
Both the surgeon and technician should be thoroughly familiar with the
 operation and care of the laser hardware and software unit. Many differ-
ent laser units and wavelengths are available and the dials and scales may
differ, although the underlying physics are the same. Delivery of laser en-
anss e a q au u sia hae aaeu pe ia u aia
spot interaction. Surgeons and technicians must read and understand the
manual accompanying the specific wavelength and unit. Surgeons should
always use new equipment in routine, well-documented cases in which
they are familiar with and have great comfort with the procedure. This
gives the clinician an opportunity to determine if variance in the new
equipment must be factored into the tissue/laser interaction, specific safety
requirements not previously considered, or physical requirements of the
specific wavelength and unit.
Potential Laser Safety Hazards
The use of lasers in the clinical setting can present many hazards to the
82
into several classes, each of which is addressed below. This is by no means
CHAPTER 6
an exhaustive explanation of all potential safety issues. It is designed to
Safety Considerations
provide the clinician with a starting point from which to understand what
to consider when providing safety for themselves, their staff, the clients,
and the patients.
Fire Hazards
High-power lasers, particularly infrared lasers (e.g. CO2, diode, and
Nd:YAG), can produce combustion of tissue, surgical gowns, anesthetic
gases, tongue depressors, etc. Smoke arising from laser-induced combus-
tion can obscure vision, and may dangerously scatter the laser beam.
Therefore, preparation with wetted gauze and sterile water or saline is im-
portant to reduce the potential for injury. Attention to the surgical site
will reduce or eliminate the potential for adverse outcomes. Use of high
proof alcohol on the surgical or therapeutic site could cause a combustible
situation and endanger the clinician, staff, and patient. Remember that
OSHA requirements mandate that a fire extinguisher must be in the room
where laser energy is being used.
Potential Damage to the Eyes
Accidental or intentional irradiation of the exposed eye via direct, re-
flected, or scattered laser light can result in damage to the cornea, con-
junctiva, iris, and retina. Damage to the eyes can result in lost or im-
paired vision that may persist for days or longer, and can lead to perma-
nent vision loss. Direct and reflected laser beam exposure by wavelengths
between 400 nm and 1,400 nm may cause ocular transmission hazards.
Corneal and lens-focusing effects increase the power density at the level
of retina by five orders of magnitude. Chronic exposure may result in
cataract formation or degradation of the corneal surface, iris, lens, or
retina. Again, a good working knowledge of the laser/tissue interac-
tion and the specific wavelength of laser being used will forestall the
potential for ocular injury or unseen hazards from the laser energy.
(Figure 6-3)
Figure 6-3 Safety glasses for 10,600 nm
wavelength (L). Safety glasses for multi-
wavelength use (OD 5+ @ 190 nm to 375 nm,
OD 5+ @900 nm to 1,070 nm, OD 6+ @
1,064 nm, OD 6+ @ 10,600 nm (R).
83
PART II
Potential Damage to Exposed Skin
Practical Laser Surgery
Laser irradiation of exposed skin can result in severe burns when high-
power lasers are used. Long-term exposure to medium- and low-power
lasers can lead to sunburn-like symptoms. It is critical that the clinician
and technician understand the potential impact of a misdirected or re
YI ol An aun oi paonpoid aq ues kaiaua iaset 'uys uo ueaq paia
regions of the light spectrum, and each has its own potential for skin dam-
age. The best defense is to actively secure the laser beam away from ex-
posed skin surfaces not being targeted for treatment.
Electrical Hazards
ployees and laser operators. Only trained, certified mechanical techni-
cians should be consulted or allowed to evaluate and repair damaged in-
struments. Never consider opening the housing of a laser, even if the
Pnon pe ssad aq A aede ieaia ienpisa o pi si ramo
discharge, creating a shock hazard. Lasers are electrical devices and thus
must be respected for their potential to cause harm if used or handled in-
appropriately. Remember that 110 or 220 electrical current can pose a po-
tential life-threatening reaction if improperly handled. Never consider op-
erating a laser in a very wet environment where electrical conduction and
discharge could take place.
Chemical Hazards
 ia ii siaos sio  sixa a sez je so
or are altered by the laser energy. Coolant gases or liquids in older radia-
tor cooled units also present potential dangers. Laser cavity byproducts
(i.e., excimer lasers) are sometimes produced and can be toxic if inhaled.
Photochemical reactions may occur within laser-irradiated material that
escapes in the plume and is not contained in the plume evacuation unit.
High-proof alcohol (200 grain alcohol) used for cleaning or sterilization
 can potentially be volatilized without ignition. Conversely, pure grain al-
cohol can be a combustible agent causing burns to the patient, surgeon,
technical staff, or all three. Isopropyl alcohol can be combustible in a
vapor state with adequate oxygen. To avoid this adverse reaction, flush
the sterile field with sterile 0.9% NaCl prior to initiating a surgical laser
beam. Oxygen acts as a strong accelerant for fire. It is critical to observe
safe lasing procedures when near the endotracheal tube in the thorax.
Iodinated surgical preps can be forced into the vapor state following laser
exposure. Iodine vapor is extremely toxic and should not be inhaled
through a surgical mask. This potential danger can be mitigated by keep-
ing the field rinsed with sterile 0.9% NaCl and keeping it moist.
Biological Hazards
The laser plume can have components that are irritating or injurious to
the mucous membranes. The respiratory tract may also be at risk for in-
84
CHAPTER 6
Safety Considerations
3M1860
96N HSOIN
LOT#6C
EALTHCARE
Figure 6-4 High filtration particulate respirator
and surgical mask (3M Corp.).
fection, irritation, allergic reaction, or long-term debilitating effects of
small particulate inhalation. Some bacterial, viral, or fungal organisms
can survive in the plume. Components of the chemicals in and on the pa-
tient can be altered to become carcinogenic and potentially damaging.
These components can also be drawn up into the plume. Proper plume
potential for injurious long-term plume effects.
Patient Protection
A key consideration of patient protection is that anesthetized animals do
not have pain reflexes. They cannot respond or move away from noxious
 odors or painful stimuli. The laser-producing devices and the laser energy
itself use heat to work on the target tissue and produce heat as a by-
product. Therefore, it is imperative that the clinician and the staff be
aware of what is required to avoid the potential for injury to the patient
during procedures. It is also important to remember that varying wave-
lengths of laser energy interact differently with tissues depending on the
pigments present.
Protect eyes by using backstop titanium rods, quartz rods, saline
soaked tongue depressors, or saline-soaked gauze sponges. Ophthalmic
lube protection can also be considered if the wavelength that is being used
-oo aun iog nuioiond eoe ue se pue ianem Aq paqiosqe Kiuaiu si
 nea. Tooth enamel can also be protected in this way. Periosteal elevators
can serve as backstops for procedures performed in the oral cavity.
Anodized or florentined surgical instruments can reduce light reflection
by scattering an incident beam of laser light. (Figure 6-5A) The surgical
 instruments shown in Figure 6-5B are highly reflective and may pose a
laser beam reflection hazard to the patient, surgeon, or technical staff.
Moist packing such as sterile, fluid-soaked gauze or lap sponges sur-
rounding tissue structures can reduce or eliminate peripheral tissue injury
and decrease thermal relaxation time. Protect against ignition of intestinal
gases, bowel gases, anesthetic gases within endotracheal tubes, and vapors
from surgical preparation solutions by always being aware of your surgi
85
PART II
Practical Laser Surgery
Figure 6-5A Anodized mosquito forceps used
with laser surgical resection techniques.
Figure 6-5B Standard reflective stainless stee
surgical instruments common to most surgical
packs.
cal orientation and the direction of the laser energy. Plume evacuation
must always be considered, not only for the clinician and the staff but also
for the patient, especially when working in the oral cavity, abdominal cav-
ity, thoracic cavity, or in close quarters in the surgical operatory. Planned
emergency procedures should always be posted in the surgery or a com-
mon area for review by staff and veterinarians at any time. Trained per-
sonnel who understand the basic issues related to laser safety must be in
place before lasing commences. Safety monitoring should occur at all
times, with the staff permitted to make recommendations and comment
on any issues of safety that might occur.
Laser Classification
Lasers are divided into four classes according to the degree of hazard they
present to humans. Grocery store scanners are termed class I lasers; they
under any circumstances and are no more harmful than an electric light
 d  a  a is a  n ss 
viewing of these lasers is not considered dangerous. Class IlI lasers are
86
those used at laser light shows; they may be hazardous for direct viewing.
CHAPTER 6
 Class IV lasers include all lasers that exceed 0.5 watt average power over
Safety Considerations
0.25 seconds, or those that exceed 10 joules/cm?. These lasers can cause
serious eye and skin injuries and can set fire to many materials. Both the
direct and reflected beams are hazardous to the eye.
Class I: Exempt Lasers
These very-low-power lasers with an output of a few microwatts or less
in continuous wave mode have no known damage potential, even after
long-term intentional viewing of the direct beam. No warning labels are
required. Low-level lasers used for biostimulation do require some
warnings due to the wavelength of laser energy used (diode) and its po-
tential for eye injury.
Class II: Low-Power Lasers
Class II lasers can be hazardous to the eyes if intentionally viewed for
periods of several seconds or longer. The natural pain aversion reflex
will normally prevent accidental eye damage from these lasers, even
with direct eye exposure. Always remember that animals under anes-
thesia do not have the protective reflex reactions needed to avoid pain
or noxious odors. Power outputs are a few milliwatts or less in contin-
uous wave emission. Warning labels are required.
Class IIl: Medium-Power Lasers
Class II lasers have the potential to damage eye tissue faster than the
natural aversion reaction (less than 0.25 seconds). Diffusely scattered
beams are not usually hazardous to exposed skin, but over longer peri-
ods can create discomfort or actual lesions on the skin. Class IHI lasers
can be subdivided into two groups: class (IlI a) lasers, which are only
hazardous to the eye when focused by an optical device (such as binoc
ulars), and class (Ill b) lasers, which are hazardous even when not arti-
ficially focused. Class III lasers have output powers of 5 mw to 500 mw.
Warning labels are required.
Class IV: High-Power Lasers
Most of the lasers marketed to veterinarians are in this category. An
output power greater than 0.5 watts continuous wave is required for
this classification. Class IV lasers present potential serious hazards to
the eye and skin from accidental exposure with either direct or diffusely
reflected laser light. Class II and IV lasers pose serious hazards to
nearby personnel as well as to the laser surgeon. Warning signs (Figure
6-1), optical shielding, and built-in safety components to shut off the
laser in an emergency may be required. A laser safety officer must be
named and a log must be kept when this laser is being used clinically.
Although no mandatory training is required to use a surgical laser, there
are several federal agencies that regulate health care lasers. The Center for
Devices and Radiologic Health (CDRH), a branch of the Food and Drug
Administration, has standardized the manufacture of laser devices and is
responsible for built-in safety features such as manual and automatic
shutters, warning labels, time delay standby mode, and safety interlocks
(not required in veterinary medicine). OSHA has oversight authority in
87
PART II
the area of laser devices and worker safety. Some states and local munic-
Practical Laser Surgery
ipalities may require specific registration and licensing of operators and
institutions. Always check with state agencies as to proper licensing and
registration requirements.
Laser Safety Guidelines
Laser administrative controls are the best way to ensure that laser safety
is maintained to adequate standards. Establishing a laser safety officer is
the first step in ensuring that education, training, and safety standards are
maintained. The laser safety officer's duties, according to ANSI guide-
lines, should include (but are not limited to) the following responsibilities:
● Classify or verify classification of laser systems
· Evaluate hazards of laser treatment areas
   e  s    e  
mend or approve alternates when the primary measures are not feasible
· Approve operational procedures, including any procedural checklists
· Recommend or approve protective equipment, and assure that it is pe-
riodically inspected to ensure proper working order
 Approve wording on signs and equipment labels
+
 Approve installation and equipment prior to use, as well as modifica
tions to existing equipment and facilities
● Assure adequate safety education and training is provided for all per
sonnel
The laser safety officer often assumes the additional responsibility of
keeping laser use and maintenance logs which includes:
· Laser procedure and duration
·Anesthesia protocol
● Power settings
· Accessories used
● Problems and their resolutions
Controls should be in place to guarantee that only personnel with ade.
quate safety and usage training have access to the laser Traffic control in
the laser treatment area should be practiced during laser use. Eye protec-
tion must be available and worn in the laser treatment area, and adequate
warning signs must be posted at all entrances.
Windows in the laser treatment area may need to be covered if they are
within the nominal hazard zone for the laser in use. Light wavelengths be-
tween 300 nm and 4,000 nm will transmit through window glass. Win-
dow glass has an optical density of 10^5 (transmitting only 1/100,000th
the original intensity) for laser wavelengths less than 300 nm and also for
wavelengths greater than 4,000 nm. Window glass alone provides ade
quate protection against transmission of the laser energy at these wave-
lengths, so it need not be covered when using wavelengths within these
ranges. When using laser between 300 nm and 4,000 nm, however, ade-
88
quate glass coverings must be used to absorb any potential stray laser
CHAPTER 6
beams.
Safety Considerations
Hazards associated with laser use in veterinary medicine fall into the
following categories: beam hazards and non-beam hazards. Beam haz-
ards are associated with accidental direct and reflected eye and skin ex-
posures. Non-beam hazards center on the production of airborne con-
taminants, ignition of flammable substances, and electrical components
of laser systems.
Laser energy and its associated reflections represent a significant poten-
tial for serious injury to several structures of the eye. Light from some
lasers can cause severe corneal or retinal damage without any accompa-
nying pain if the laser is focused on an extremely small spot. CO2,
holmium, and erbium lasers, with their radiation in the far infrared por
tion of the light spectrum, affect the cornea. The light is absorbed by the
corneal epithelium, resulting in burning, scarring, or opacification. For
lasers in the visible and near-infrared region of 400 nm to 1,400 nm, such
as argon, fd Nd:YAG, tunable dye, diode, and Nd:YAG, the main poten-
ically for the laser wavelength in use. The eyewear should be labeled with
the optical density and wavelength to ensure optimal protection. Eyewear
should have adequate side protection, as well. Contact lenses and regular
glasses without side protection do not provide adequate coverage of the
eye. Eyewear must be inspected regularly for damage and replaced as
indicated.
Skin is the second most vulnerable area of the body to laser hazards.
The damage from direct and reflected laser light is thermal and appears
as an erythematous reaction. Wearing gloves and gowns and using moist
 drapes and sponges offers protection from reflected laser energy. Safe han-
dling procedures are vital to protect non-target tissue from exposure to di-
rect laser light.
Airborne contaminants are produced within a smoke plume when tis-
sue is vaporized. In early days, lasers were believed to have evaporated tis-
sue to the molecular level, giving off only water and CO2. Laser-tissue in-
teractions actually produce a plume of smoke that may contain bacterial
particles, viral particles, and chemical carcinogens. The bacteria and viral
particles are small, with diameters from 0.1 to 0.3 microns. The carcino-
gens produced are chemicals such as benzene, formaldehyde, phenol, and
toluene. Levels of these chemicals can exceed OSHA limits. A smoke evac-
 uator should be used to protect operators against the smoke plume haz-
ards. Special laser filter masks rated for laser use are also available. These
masks are designed to filter particles of 0.2 micron and larger. Standard
surgical masks do not offer protection against particles of this size.
Fire safety should be respected and practiced with lasers. Surgical
drapes should be made from flame-retardant material and protected with
moistened towels and sponges near the primary laser beam. Water or
saline and a fire extinguisher should be readily available. The laser should
 not be used in the presence of flammable anesthetics, prep solutions, dry-
ing agents, petroleum ointments, or flammable plastics. Methane gas pro-
duced in the gastro-intestinal tract can also represent a fire hazard. Ade-
89
PART II
quate bowel preps and the insertion of a moistened sponge in the anal
Practical LaserSurgery
opening reduce methane hazards when performing surgery in the perineal
area. Fire is always a hazard in the presence of an oxygen-rich environ-
 ment. Upper airway surgery should only be performed with endotracheal
tubes that limit penetration by the laser light. Special “laser safe" tubes
may include nonflammable metal tubes, specially wrapped red rubber
tubes, or 100% silicone tubes. The endotracheal tube cuff should be filled
with saline instead of air and the endotracheal tube protected with mois-
tened sponges. Special anesthetic protocols may need to be used to reduce
Oxygen in the airway to further reduce combustibility.
Electrical hazards associated with laser use are addressed at the manu-
facturing level. Interlocks limit access to high voltage components within
the laser, providing access only to trained personnel. Adequate amperage
and voltage should be available to the laser system. Avoid fluids around
the equipment and electrical cords to minimize possibilities of a short
circuit.
Reflection hazards are always a concern when using laser energy. Laser
energy is delivered to tissues by either collimated or focused laser hand-
pieces. Collimation guides channel and deliver laser energy at a constant
power density over distance. Focused laser guides condense the laser en-
ergy to a preset focal distance, resulting in an increase in power density at
the focal point. The focused laser energy rapidly declines beyond the focal
 point, resulting in a significant drop in power density over a short dis-
tance. Collimated laser energy has a higher potential of reflection than fo-
cused laser energy due to the maintenance of beam integrity and collima-
tion over time. Nevertheless, it is recommended that any instruments used
within the vicinity of a laser beam have a non-reflective finish. Backstops
should always be used when appropriate and available to protect under-
lying tissue from reflected laser energy.
It is essential that all personnel be trained and educated on laser
physics, safety, and operation to provide a laser-safe environment for both
the operators and the patient. A thorough understanding of laser wave-
length and tissue interaction, potential hazards associated with laser use,
and use of the recommended standards for safe operation will result in
safe and successful laser applications with minimal complications.
90
Chapter 7
Economic Considerations for Use of Laser Energy
in Veterinary Medical Practice
General and specialty veterinary practices must consider a number of im-
portant factors when considering the implementation of laser energy or
investing in additional types of laser energy. In addition to the reported
medical and therapeutic considerations, there are economic considera-
tions, positioning issues, staff questions, and marketing concerns. It is
not our goal to delve into whether or not individual veterinary practices
should implement laser energy. We strongly believe in both the thera-
peutic and economic impacts that appropriate laser use can have on a
veterinary practice. Previous chapters, which discussed the specifics of
laser technology and types, will hopefully allow the veterinarian to de-
termine which laser is best for their patients and practice. This chapter
seeks to support the veterinarian who has determined that laser energy
would be of medical and therapeutic value to the practice and who is
now looking for confirmation that it is economically viable, supportable,
and profitable.
 The following cost-to-benefit analysis (Figure 7-1) is a simplistic form
of more complicated formulas for determining roughly how a purchased
piece of laser technology will or will not support itself from an economic
   snn   sin as s 
rent cost structure or caseload implementation.
 an a or sod e annd oi o iase o
number should be at least zero, and more favorably, in the thousands of
dollars. However, this is only focusing on the equipment aspect. Remem-
ber that all cost factors related to a positive cash flow must also be
evaluated.
First and foremost, you must decide if laser surgery will be an option of-
It is essential that you make this decision before you invest time and money
On an invoicing system. We feel that it is in the best interest of the patient
to require laser use when the clinician deems it necessary. This does not
mean that you should not inform the client that a laser is being used and
charged for. It does mean that you are committed to doing what is best for
the patient and teaching the client about need and value. Ask for your
staff's input on this issue. Also consider surveying your best 50 to 100
clients on their feelings about your proposed new charges for laser surgery.
You may be surprised at how accepting they are of this type of new tech-
nology and the improvement in care it can provide for their pets.
Fee Structures
Be sure to create an invoicing structure that is consistent with the way you
charge for other technology. This is the easiest to implement with respect
91
PART II
Practical Laser Surgery
LaserEnergyEconomic Cost-BenefitAnalysis
Annual Cost for Laser Equipment
Final established cost of laser
(divided by)
Life expectancy or years leased
(equals)
Amount that equipment must generate/year
(plus)
Miscellaneous costs, disposable, etc
(plus)
Lease costs,
intereston loan
(equals)
Expected Annual Expense for Equipment
Estimateof Income Generated AnnuallybyLaserEquipment
Number of Proceduresper week
(multiplied by)
Average laser specific charge per case
(equals)
Income generated per week
(multiplied by)
Weeks of laser surgery per year
(equals)
Income generated by laser use per year
Profit-(Loss)on Laser Equipment
Income generated by laser use per year
(minus)
Expected Annual Expense for equipment
(equals)
Figure 7-1Profit/loss worksheet.
Net Profit or (Loss）on equipment per year
to the staff. There are a variety of fee generation structures that can be
considered. The four main types will be reviewed here.
No additional fee: A few laser surgeons charge no additional fees for the
use of a laser. They indicate that marketing and an increased number of
surgical procedures generate sufficient additional funds to support the
use of a laser and provide the benefits previously discussed.
 Laser usage level: Another option is to determine a price per unit time that
the laser is in operation. For this to be practical you must have a gen-
eral knowledge of how many procedures you do annually, the average
amount of time spent in surgery each year, and the total annual cost for
the laser. A 30% to 40% profit margin for the use of the laser should
also be added to the final number. Table 7-1 outlines such a laser usage
level option.
This is a simple method that allows the front office staff or the tech
 nician to enter the cost of the laser use without having to discuss the
relative value with you. Group specific procedures within each com-
puter code for tracking and trending analysis.
92
Table 7-1 Usage level fee structure
CHAPTER 7
Economic Considerations
Computer bar code
Laser on-time
Sample fee
Sample Sx
00001
5min
$45.00
skin mass
00002
15min
$75.00
OHE
00003
30min
$125.00
Abd. Sx.
00004
60min
$250.00
amputation
Table 7-2 Fee-simple structure
 Computer bar code
Laser level option
Fee for option
00001
level 1
$0.00
00002
level 2
$25.00
00003
level 3
$50.00
00004
level 4 
$75.00
00005
level 5
$125.00
00006
level 6
$200.00
Fee-simple laser options: This method removes the time consideration
from the equation by lumping a number of different procedures into
one of six option levels. Table 7-2 shows an example of such a laser fee
structure.
The level assigned to each procedure should represent the extent of
the laser equipment and supplies used.
Level 1 can be used for pro bono work so that the laser's use can be
tracked for these nonprofit procedures. Level 6 should be reserved for
extended procedures in which special additional laser components-
such as a mechanical scanner or extended on-time during granuloma
bed resection—are considered.
a si as     aad rs 
a  sie jis s  'ns in s a is
back side for accounting and management purposes. The set-up requires
 a separate computer bar code for each specific role the laser plays in the
procedure. This requires the surgeon or surgeons and the office manager
to outline the cost of the laser's use in each surgical procedure. The time
requirement, supplies, unit cost of the laser, and special support technol-
 Ogy components must be factored into a set fee. That fee is then charged
as a line item on the invoice, as seen in Table 7-3.
Table 7-3 shows that procedure has its own laser fee set up in a com-
puter bar code. The advantage lies in how specific management can be
in determining both the use of the laser per case and profitability of the
laser in different areas. This allows for more specific fine tuning of the
fee structure to maximize the laser's profitability. The down side is that
this method is more labor intensive.
Establishing an appropriate fee structure requires an understanding of
all the costs that go into owning a laser, and providing for a surgical sec.
tion in the practice. This can often be an excellent time to re-evaluate cur-
93
PART II
Table 7-3  Sample individual invoice
Practical Laser Surgery
 Invoice for "Sparky" Smith, skin mass resection
 Computer bar code
Number
 Supply/procedure
00120
1
Surgical room
$45.00
00201
1
Surgical supply
$35.00
00212
1
Laser fee/skin mass
$75.00
00243
20
$3.03/min Dr. 2
$60.60
00345
1
Anesthesia
$85.00
01222
1
Histopath
$125.00
12002
1
 Pre-surgical lab
$37.50
20020
10
Analgesic meds
$23.50
rent cost structures within the surgical section. Get input from the staff
 and office management related to the computer system, expectations, and
 potential pitfalls with the proposed fee structure.
These types of fee structures can help practitioners avoid subsidizing
ity removed from his or her purview, allowing for greater consistency and
better fee capture per case.
Fee structuring also permits more accurate estimates of surgical proce
dures for clients, which can greatly improve the acceptance rate of clients
 to recommended procedures. It also allows the doctor or technician to ex-
plain the value-added component the laser brings to the procedure.
Without question, this allows the hospital to provide the highest level of
care and be appropriately compensated for such an effort.
Indirect Benefits
How do you and your staff perceive the laser's value from a non-
monetary standpoint? Using this technology can give you an opportunity
to educate clients about the emotional and quality-of-life aspects of your
practice possibly increasing client loyalty. Will the implications of laser
energy prompt clients to seek more visits, accept additional procedures,
and recommend a laser-equipped practice to their friends and family? The
increased traffic and caseload may offset less-than-expected laser fees gen-
erated for the practice.
Most clinicians that we have spoken with who use laser energy to en-
 hance and augment their treatment options feel that laser energy increases
their visibility among both clients and potential clients. The enhanced
image, expansion of treatment options, and increased comfort to the pa-
tient are all non-specific economic factors that have shifted the standard
concept of cost-to-benefit ratio with respect to income generated specifi-
cally by laser equipment.
The staffs impression of laser use in your practice is critical to success-
ful use and profitability. “"Staff inertia" can be a significant hurdle to over-
come if the laser is not first positioned correctly to the staff. We made sure
to discuss and explain the value of laser energy for surgical and medical
therapeutics with our staffs. We then took the additional step of provid-
94
CHAPTER 7
Economic Considerations
Figure 7-2 Staf members holding their
personal pets following successful laser
procedures.
tine procedures. The staff members were empowered to evaluate their
pets’ recovery, level of post-operative discomfort, and healing. In the end
our staff members became cheerleaders for the laser, rather than detrac-
tors (Figure 7-2).
Positioning Laser Energy in Your Practice
Marketing
A number of factors affect the way people think of laser use in veterinary
 a i sns ra o aissd si i m 
public perception of laser veterinary surgery. From a professional perspec-
tive, veterinary practices must convey the up-to-date technical proficiency
of their staffs. The appropriate use of laser energy indicates a commitment
to continuing education and professional development.
In addition to staying abreast of technological advances, it may be use
ful to take marketing courses. This can help you think creatively about
improving client communication and elevate awareness about your ex-
 pertise with laser energy. Make sure your clients see the extra steps you
have taken to provide a value-added service by instituting laser use. A
“laser shrine”" in the front office is a good way to get the word out to your
clients about the value of lasers. (Figure 7-3)
Philosophy
Take a close look at the public's impressions about their animals. Al-
though there are regional factors that affect some of these impressions,
there is also a commonality in the United States about how animals are
considered within the family unit. The public is more sensitive to their
pet's quality of life than ever before. The public is more proactive in seek-
95
PART II
PracticalLaserSurgery
OLEV
Figure 7-3 "Laser shrine" wall marketing.
ing quality veterinary care, and easy access to information is making more
savvy pet owners. The expansion of the Internet is revealing itself to be a
huge source of information, some good and some not so good, with re-
spect to animals and their health needs. Chat rooms abound with individ-
uals providing their personal impressions and recommendations. Our
profession has to strive to be seen as the definitive source for any infor-
mation about preventative health care and treatment for the pet-owning
vances in medicine as good and important to their pets' health.
We as one of the top three caring professions in the United States, must
be always ready to understand and embrace good technology and medi-
cine. Some advances come and go but the truly profession-enhancing
ones, such as laser energy, grow and enhance our reputations as quality,
caring, healers for the animals we serve.
The Media's Role
The media are regarded by pet owners as a critical frontline source of in-
formation about new technology and medical advances. Although animal
96
care is not a primary topic of media coverage, there is some subtle and
CHAPTER 7
 some not so subtle evidences that the media are beginning to pay more at-
Economic Considerations
tention to what the animal-owning public wants to learn about. Routinely
now, you can find sections in the newspaper and general interest maga-
zines that discuss animal health issues. Many big and small papers have a
question-and-answer area for pet owners.
We would all go crazy trying to access and read all the real science and
home-brewed ideas that are being circulated. But we also must realize that
our clients are reading this information. We have to at least understand
where pet owners get their information outside of our office. We should
is good and level. If we fail to do this we will have to spend the majority
of our time putting out the small, “I read this or heard this so it must be
fact," bad information fires that clients bring to us. Veterinarians and
i oi sioen tuioid noqe aaoeoid pue aaisaiae aq isn seis a
clients and the pet-owning public.
Disseminating the Information
When we introduce our clients to the concept of laser energy, we should
provide the information in a building block fashion. We can begin a con
tinuing dialogue by packaging the information in units that can be handed
out or discussed during an office visit. (Figure 7-4) These materials also
can be used by the front office staff when a client requests information
about a laser procedure. A technician can then be called on to provide any
additional information to make the client as receptive as possible to the
idea of laser surgery. This can reduce any potential “sticker shock" over
the added fee structure.
Figure 7-4 Staff and veterinarian use building-
block information to discuss a potential laser
surgical procedure with a client.
97
PART II
Practical Laser Surgery
Figure 7-5 Staff member with client after a
minor surgical laser procedure.
A simple introduction to the idea of laser energy from you or a staff
member can set the groundwork for using a laser procedure when time
arises Figure 7-5.
Take a few moments and think about how you first learned about laser
 energy. Then consider what you needed to feel comfortable with the idea
of using lasers in your practice. Relay this to your clients in the form of a
letter or personal communication. Let them know that you spent time and
energy to provide them with a better way of treating their pets. Then you
can expand on a case-by-case basis the uses for laser energy that you have
in mind.
Additional elements of the building-block concept may include bro.
chures, interesting case presentations, written scripts for the front office
staff and technicians, and web sites. Interactive presentations are another
option. We find that open houses and trips to primary and secondary
 schools are great opportunities to open dialogues with clients.
When writing for publications or web sites, be sure the information
in general and factual. Have several of your non-veterinary friends read
the information and comment on what they perceive in the piece before
you run it. This can save you a lot of back peddling when misinforma-
tion is released, especially in long-running publications like the yellow
pages.
98
Final Economic Considerations
CHAPTER 7
Economic Considerations
Everyone knows that a positive income-to-expense ratio is key to the fi-
nancial health of your clinic, your staff, and yourself. We have a huge re-
sponsibility to evaluate and understand new therapeutics and technology.
We also have to look into our crystal balls and determine what the pet-
owning public in our locale will be intrigued by or discount as unimpor-
tant. Then we have to match what will work with what we can afford, all
the while realizing that other areas of revenue generation are going to de-
cline or be eliminated for a variety of reasons, all beyond our control.
 It becomes starkly evident that our professionalism, expertise, and clin-
ical skills are what we must focus on to generate the lion's share of a sta-
ble income for our practices. Many veterinary economists have said that
veterinarians who rely on product sales to generate more than 30% of
their net income will place a great hardship on their ability to maintain a
viable practice.
 Laser energy provides a critical ability for veterinarians to maintain the
professional and expertise skill level that clients require. Consider your
desire to increase your surgical skills. A laser, like a scalpel, is only a sur-
gical tool. If you are dangerous with a scalpel blade in surgery, you will
be dangerous with a laser. In other words, a laser does not immediately
improve the individual surgeon's skills. Superior surgical case manage-
 ment stems from making good, common-sense decisions and following
accepted surgical practice.
 Consider the impact of a positive client perception of new technology
 in your practice on your economic bottom line. Laser procedures can be
 s  q  a     d q s
get the services without coming to the practice.
Another factor to consider is whether you are using your other current
equipment in a profitable manner. A laser by itself will not automatically
be a profit center for the practice. You must have a profitability plan in
place similar to your other equipment such as radiology, ultrasound, fi-
broscopic, in-house laboratory, and monitoring/support equipment.
Before you purchase a laser, review these other professional service fee
centers for adequate profitability. Then you can more easily incorporate
lasers into your marketing and sales structure.
Once you recognize the need for a laser you must consider whether to
lease or buy the unit. The first individual you should discuss this with is
your accountant. Accountants differ in philosophy about leases, lease to
buy, and purchase. Make sure you do what your accountant says. Also
consider the tax ramifications when buying new equipment.
Leasing a laser avoids tying up large sums of capital at one time. There
are a number of lease options and leasing companies that would love to
have your account. Let your accountant and attorney review the docu-
ments before you sign your lease. Be sure you know your up-front and
back-end costs. Also be sure that the tax codes (which change like the
 tides) support your lease decision.
A straightforward purchase will always save on the total cost. If the
clinic or veterinary corporation has enough operating capital to purchase
99
PART II
and has not exceeded new equipment spending caps, then purchasing is
PracticalLaserSurgery
the best option. The money should come from asset re-allocation and not
from current operating budgets or emergency bank accounts that could
have hidden interest charges.
'ssn iasl jo uisudxa ue apuod no aaaua ias annaa non uau
 s sap an  an jo  an  ns n no
 your commitment to good medicine and the educational emphasis you
and your staff place on client communication. This way of thinking will
d s s  r    n  
sional services that maintain or increase the profitability of the practice.
100
Chapter 8
Pain Management Considerations for Laser
Surgery Procedures
One of the greatest advantages of laser surgery, specifically that which
uses CO2 laser energy, is less post-operative pain. Numerous anecdotal re-
ports in veterinary literature and studies on CO2 laser energy's effect on
human nerve segments have led to a general acceptance of this benefit
during and following surgery. It is important to note that from personal
experience (yes, we have inadvertently lased ourselves during procedures)
the initial effect on lased tissue is a significant and intense pain at the local
level. This discomfort resolves within seconds of discontinuation of the
beam on the tissue. No additional discomfort is noted in the near- or far-
term following tissue vaporization. We therefore have a steadfast belief in
the reduction of recurrent pain response when proper CO laser energy is
applied to a target tissue.
Clients are becoming increasingly savvy about their pets’ potential for
discomfort and want to be sure the pain is controlled or alleviated. Major
pharmaceutical companies spend significant marketing dollars to address
the public's perception of pain and pain management. These same compa-
nies also invest heavily in educating, informing, and positioning pain
management to the veterinary community.
 Today, veterinary medicine is still formulating a complete picture of
 both mediating and alleviating pain in our patients. The level of treatment
varies widely from veterinary hospital to hospital and from clinician to
clinician. It is clear that daily implementation of surgical pain manage-
ment benefits the patient and the veterinary-client relationship. The num
ber of practicing veterinarians consistently using some level of pain man
agement is growing and will continue to do so as veterinarians fully real-
ize the improvement in patient quality of life and economic veracity to the
practice.
Brief Overview of Pain Physiology
Pain is defined as an unpleasant sensory or emotional experience associ-
ated with actual or potential tissue damage, or described in terms of such
damage, by the International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP).
 The primary goal for clinicians, when managing pain, is to maximize the
absence of pain sensation or, in a single word, analgesia.
 no   o n q  d  s  
tinuing contact with potentially tissue-damaging stimuli It is produced by
stimulation of the primary nociceptors innervated by high threshold A-
delta and unmyelenated C fibers.
This type of pain teaches the body to avoid these types of noxious stim-
uli. This mechanism is managed by a complex interaction of nociceptors;
first-, second-, and third-order neurons ascending to the brain; and sen
101
PART II
sory and descending inhibitory neurons from the mid brain. They all com-
Practical LaserSurgery
 bine to initiate, identify and modify clinical pain response in our patients
and us.
The nociceptors have the important job of recognizing mechanical.
chemical, or thermal energy. The effected nociceptors then modify this
recognition to an electrical impulse that is carried up the primary afferent
fibers to the dorsal horn in the gray matter of the spinal tract, brainstem,
and ultimately through the thalamus to the cortex where realization, iden-
tification, and response is generated.
Pain can further be broken down into subsections of peripheral pain.
These include visceral pain and somatic pain. Visceral pain is a poorly lo-
calized pain often described in human medicine to be a dull or gnawing
dominal viscera. Somatic pain is a localized pain event, identified in
human medicine as a stabbing, aching, or throbbing feeling. Somatic pain
includes the response noted after soft tissue surgery. It can be cutaneous
and superficial or musculoskeletal and related to joint, muscle, perios-
teum and/or bone.
Neuropathic pain is often poorly responsive to treatment. This type of
 pain is a response to direct damage to peripheral nerves or the spinal cord.
For our discussion the most important pain consideration to be effec-
tively and appropriately dealt with pre-, intra-, and post-operatively is
clinical pain. Clinical pain is an ongoing activation of nociceptors due
 to peripheral tissue injury or deeper injury to the nervous system. Noci-
ception is the physiologic process that, when reaching a completed
pain.
The art of pain managementand the ultimate goal of the general
practitioner-is to modify, reduce, or eliminate the three distinct physio-
logic processes (transduction, transmission, and modulation) involved in
nociception by pharmacological, mechanical, and technical means. CO2
lasers, and to some extent, diode lasers, provide the technological ad-
vances for reducing tissue interaction and thus, pain.
ldentifying Pain Recognition in the Patient
Because animals are unable to talk, it is critical that the clinician have a
more complete understanding of potential physiologic and behavioral
signs of pain. Once the clinician understands these pain recognition mark-
ers, he or she can formulate pharmacological responses for the patient.
Physiologic alterations due to acute pain include increased blood pres
sure, heart rate, and peripheral vasoconstriction. Increased respiratory
rate and muscle switching or contraction also may often occur. A stress
leukogram is often noted in the presence of acute and intermediate pain.
Weight loss due to reduced water and food intake may also be noted.
 Behavioral changes are unique to each patient. It is usually the animal's
owner who notes these changes or lack of normal behavioral signals post
operatively.
Animals typically become less active during painful stimuli, but more
102
restless. The level of relaxation decreases significantly. They become vari-
CHAPTER 8
ably aggressive and submissive during pain recognition. Postural changes
Pain Management Considerations
are often seen in patients that have poor post-operative pain management.
Animals generally demonstrate guarding behaviors over surgically injured
tissue. This can manifest in a variety of ways such as biting, scratching.
licking, chewing, or pawing at the painful site. Cats' purrs may be mis-
taken for signs of comfort, when in actuality they are an indicated and be-
havioral response to pain.
Follow this “golden rule":
When there is a likelihood of experiencing pain from a surgical or
therapeutic procedure, analgesics must be used regardless of the ani-
mals’ outward behavior. It is incumbent upon us, as the patients ad
vocates, to use pain management and help the client understand that
the benefits of analgesic drug administration far exceed the risks as-
Pain Management Strategies for the Laser Surgery Patient
We feel that it is important to embrace both preemptive analgesid and
multimodal analgesia for maximum benefit to the patient. Preemptive
analgesia is the administration or application of analgesics prior to trau-
matic surgical intervention. The great advantages of this protocol are de-
creased duration and intensity of post-operative pain and elimination of a
recurrent pain state.
A partial list of preemptive analgesic techniques includes anesthetic
premedications like opioids, alpha2 agonists, NSAIDs, presurgical epi-
dural, and/or local anesthesia block to the skin or target tissue. Pre-
emptive analgesia has been shown to be an effective and less costly way
to provide for post-operative pain reduction, and return to normal fol-
lowing laser surgery.
Mutimodal analgesia simultaneously combines or administers in close
order two or more analgesic drug classes and analgesic techniques. This
maximizes the reduction in transduction, transmission, and modulation
of the afferent pain response at different points in the pain perception
pathway. Combining a number of drug classes (as stated above) and
techniques can produce an additive or synergistic analgesia to reduce or
eliminate pain perception. The main advantages are inhibition of sur-
 gery-induced peripheral nociceptor stimulation associated with inflam-
mation and transduction, stopping increased neuronal sensitivity within
the spinal cord known as “wind up," transmission, and prevention of
resistance to post-operatively administered analgesics due to tachy-
 phylaxis. The ultimate goal is better post-operative quality of life. This
can be measured by reduced short- and long-term recovery, improved
overall tissue healing, increased mobility, and return to normal family
interaction.
The combination of both preemptive and multimodal analgesia can be
applied easily and with little additional time or cost. The benefits to the
patient and client in the near- and mid-post-operative periods are great.
103
PART II
Brief Overview of Drug Classes
Practical Laser Surgery
The following five major analgesic classes are used on a daily basis in our
hospitals during anesthetic prep, general anesthesia, and post-operative
recovery:
· Opioids (morphine, fentanyl [injection and patch], hydromorphone,
codeine, butorphanol, and buprenorphine)
Action: Act primarily at the pre- and post-synaptic receptors in the pe-
ripheral and central nervous systems.
Side effects: May increase vagal tone. May cause vomiting. May pro-
duce dysphoria, especially in the feline patient.
Contraindications: Intracranial hypertension; may increase ocular, in
tracranial, intra-abdominal or esophageal pressure.
Multimodal effects: additive or synergistic analgesic effects with alpha2
agonists, NSAIDs, phonothiazines, benzodiazepines, and local anes-
thetics. Cardiac rate reduction can also occur and should be monitored.
· Alphaz adrenergic agonists (xylazine, medetomidine)
Action: Cause hyperpolarization of brain and peripheral nerve cells as-
sociated with excitatory input. Causes cells to become unresponsive
to stimuli-produced analgesic and/or sedative action, depending on
the location of the cell.
Side effects: Vomiting sometimes noted. Will increase vagal tone. Will
cause reduction in heart rate and may induce bradycardia. May cause
 transient hypertension.
Contraindications: Same as opioids. Arterial hemorrhage or blood clot-
ting disorders.
Multimodal effects: Have additive and/or synergistic effects with opi-
oids. Can prolong duration and intensity of effect. Also have additive
anesthetic effects when inhalants, ketamine, barbiturates, or propo.
fol are used to maintain anesthesia. Allow for reduced administration
of these anesthetic agents.
· NSAIDs (carprofen, aspirin, etodolac, meloxicam, ketoprofen, flunixin
meglumine, acetaminophen, coxib)
Action: Inhibit cyclo-oxygenase enzymes, reducing the production of
 inflammatory prostaglandins that sensitize peripheral nociceptors.
much less frequent doses. Chronic liver and kidney evaluation indi-
irritation, ulceration, or perforation.
Contraindications: Existing liver or kidney disease. Bleeding disorders.
Multimodal effects: Have been shown to have additive or synergistic
analgesic effects with opioid agonists and potentially with alpha2
agonists. May enhance corticosteroid toxicity. Are highly protein
bound and therefore compete with other highly protein bound drugs,
requiring increased levels of these drugs to reach therapeutic levels.
· Local anesthetics (lidocaine, bupivacaine, mepivacaine)
Action: Prevent conduction of nerve impulses by inactivated closed
state sodium permeability.
104
Side effects: High doses can cause central nervous system and cardio-
CHAPTER 8
vascular toxicity. Patient may experience complete loss of sensation
Pain Management Considerations
or limb function.
Contraindications: Bupivacaine will cause cardiovascular toxicity fol
lowing intravenous administration.
Multimodal effects: Can markedly reduce requirements for general anes-
 thetics. Opioids and alpha2 agonists can be used in cocktail for epidural
and intra-articular anesthesia, prolonging duration of hypoalgesia.
· Non-analgesic dissociative/sedative drugs (ketamine, acepromazine, di-
azepam)
Action: Have various action potentials for dissociative/sedative induc-
tion. Do not have a direct analgesic potential in the patient. Primarily
alter nerve conduction, signal generation, or signal transmission.
 Side effects: Each drug must be considered individually for the specific
case being managed.
Contraindications: Beta-adrenergic antagonists may cause airway con-
striction in cardiovascular-compromised patients or those with bron
chiolar disease.
Multimodal effects: Will potentially prolong effect of direct analgesic
 agents given concurrently.
Please note that the combination of one or more of the above non-
analgesic dissociative/sedative classes will produce sedation and immobi-
lization of the patient, but without any true analgesic potential. If your
viding true analgesic support for your patient.
Preemptive and Multimodal Combinations Used in Laser
Surgical Application
The following drug combinations have and are being used in both of our
general clinical practices with consistently good results for analgesic sup-
port in laser surgical patients. Multimodal combinations are grouped
under general surgical regions.
General Cutaneous Tissue Laser Therapy (Granuloma Resurfacing, Local
Tissue Vaporization)
Pre-operative:
NSAIDs orally 48 hours prior to surgery
Carprofen, 2-4mg/kg once daily or divided BID in dog
Carprofen, 2-4mg/kg Sub-Q 30 minutes before procedure in dog
Carprofen, 1mg/kg Sub-Q 30 minutes before procedure in cat
Sedation/analgesic:
· Dog: Medetomidine, 10mg/kg and Butorphanol, 0.2 to 0.4mg/kg and
Atropine, 0.04mg/kg. All can be mixed in the same syringe and given
IM. Allow 5-15 minutes for sedation/analgesic effect.
105
PART II
· Cat: Medetomidine,10-15mg/kg and Butorphanol, 0.2 to 0.4mg/kg and
Practical Laser Surgery
Atropine, 0.04mg/kg. All can be mixed in the same syringe and given
IM. Allow 5-15 minutes for sedation/analgesic effect.
· Regional analgesic/infiltrative block:
- Dog: Bupivacaine, up to 2mg/kg using a 25-28 gauge needle to infil-
trate surrounding dermis.
- Dog: Mepivacaine, up to 5mg/kg using a 25-28 gauge needle to infil-
trate surrounding dermis.
- Cat: Bupivacaine, up to 1mg/kg using a 25-28 gauge needle to infil-
trate surrounding dermis.
- Cat: Mepivacaine, up to 2.5mg/kg using a 25-28 gauge needle to in-
filtrate surrounding dermis.
● Induction: Propofol, Sevoflurane, Isoflurane
● Post-operative: None
Dispensed analgesics: Oral NSAID
· Dog: Carprofen, 2-4mg/kg, orally, BID for 5 days
· Cat: Carprofen, 1mg/kg, orally every 96 hours for 1 week.
Castration, Ovariohysterectomy, or General Abdominal Procedure
Pre-operative:
NSAIDs, orally 48 hours prior to surgery
Carprofen, 2-4mg/kg once daily or divided BID in dog
Carprofen, 2-4mg/kg Sub-Q 30 minutes before procedure in dog
Carprofen, 1mg/kg Sub-Q 30 minutes before procedure in cat
Sedation/analgesic:
· Dog: Medetomidine, 10 mg/kg and Butorphanol, 0.2 to 0.4mg/kg and
Atropine, 0.04mg/kg. All can be mixed in the same syringe and given
IM. Allow 5-15 minutes for sedation/analgesic effect.
● Cat: Medetomidine, 10-15mg/kg and Butorphanol, 0.2 to 0.4mg/kg
and Atropine, 0.04mg/kg. All can be mixed in the same syringe and
given IM. Allow 5-15 minutes for sedation/analgesic effect.
 Induction: Propofol, Sevoflurane, Isoflurane
Post-operative:
● Dog: Meditomidine, 1-2mg/kg and Butorphanol, 0.2mg/kg. Adminis
tered IV after extubation to prolong and enhance analgesia and
recovery sedation.
● Cat: Meditomidine, 1mg/kg and Butorphanol, 0.1mg/kg IM post extu-
bation.
Dispensed analgesics: Oral NSAID
· Dog: Carprofen, 2-4mg/kg, orally, BID for 5 days.
· Cat: Carprofen, 1mg/kg, orally every 96 hours for 1 week.
Meloxicam liquid, 0.1mg/kg SID orally for 3 days.
106
General Musculoskeletal Laser Surgical Procedures (Cruciate Ligament
CHAPTER8
Repair, Muscle Mass Resection, Amputation, etc.)
Pain Management Considerations
Pre-operative:
NSAIDs, orally 48 hours prior to surgery
Carprofen, 2-4mg/kg once daily or divided BID in dog
Carprofen, 2-4mg/kg Sub-Q 30 minutes before procedure in dog
Carprofen, 1mg/kg Sub-Q 30 minutes before procedure in cat
Sedation/analgesic:
· Dog: Medetomidine, 10mg/kg and Hydromorphone, 0.05-0.2mg/kg,
and Atropine, 0.04mg/kg. All can be mixed in the same syringe and
 given IM. Allow 5-15 minutes for sedation/analgesic effect.
· Cat: Medetomidine, 10-15mg/kg and Hydromorphone, 0.2mg/kg, and
Atropine, 0.04mg/kg. All can be mixed in the same syringe and given
IM. Allow 5-15 minutes for sedation/analgesic effect.
Induction: Propofol, Sevoflurane, Isoflurane
Post-operative:
· Dog: Meditomidine, 1-2mg/kg and Hydromorphone 0.05mg/kg. Admini-
stered IV after extubation to prolong and enhance analgesia and recovery
sedation.
● Cat: Meditomidine, 1mg/kg and Hydromorphone, 0.05mg/kg IM post
extubation.
Dispensed analgesics:
· Oral NSAID
- Dog: Carprofen, 2-4mg/kg, orally, BID for 5 days.
- Cat: Carprofen, 1mg/kg, orally every 96 hours for 1 week.
● Meloxicam liquid, 0.1mg/kg SID for 3 days
· Fentanyl Patch:
- Dog: 0.005mg/kg/hr
- Cat: 0.005mg/kg/hr
· Buprenorphine:
- Dog: 0.005-0.02mg/kg PO every 4-8 hours for 3 days
- Cat: 0.005-0.015mg/kg PO every 4-8 hours for 3 days
· Codeine:
- Dog: 1-2mg/kg PO every 8-12 hours for 3 days
- Cat: 0.1-0.2mg/kg PO every 12 hours.
Disarticulation Procedures (Feline Onychectomy, Canine Toe
Amputation)
Pre-operative:
NSAIDs, orally 48 hours prior to surgery
Carprofen, 2-4mg/kg once daily or divided BID in dog
107
PART II
Carprofen, 2-4mg/kg Sub-Q 30 minutes before procedure in dog
Practical LaserSurgery
Carprofen, 1mg/kg Sub-Q 30 minutes before procedure in cat
Sedation/analgesic:
· Dog: Medetomidine, 10mg/kg and Butorphanol, 0.2 to 0.4mg/kg, and
Atropine, 0.04mg/kg. All can be mixed in the same syringe and given
IM. Allow 5-15 minutes for sedation/analgesic effect.
· Cat: Medetomidine, 10-15mg/kg and Butorphanol, 0.2-0.4mg/kg, and
 Atropine, 0.04mg/kg. All can be mixed in the same syringe and given
IM. Allow 5-15 minutes for sedation/analgesic effect.
Induction: Propofol, Sevoflurane, Isoflurane
Post-operative:
· Dog: Meditomidine, 1-2mg/kg and Butorphanol, 0.2mg/kg. Admini
stered IV after extubation to prolong and enhance analgesia and recov-
ery sedation.
● Cat: Meditomidine, 1mg/kg and Butorphanol, 0.1mg/kg IM post ex-
tubation.
· Dog: Mepivicaine, 2-3 drops intra-incisional prior to closure.
· Cat: Mepivicaine, 1 drop intra-incisional prior to closure.
Dispensed analgesics:
· Oral NSAID
- Dog: Carprofen, 2-4mg/kg, orally, BID for 5 days.
- Cat: Carprofen, 1mg/kg, orally every 96 hours for 1 week.
- Meloxicam liquid 0.1mg/kg SID for 3 days.
· Fentanyl Patch:
- Dog: 0.005mg/kg/hr
- Cat: 0.005mg/kg/hr
· Buprenorphine:
- Dog: 0.005-0.02mg/kg PO every 4-8 hours for 3 days
- Cat: 0.005-0.015mg/kg PO every 4-8 hours for 3 days
· Codeine:
- Dog: 1-2mg/kg PO every 8-12 hours for 3 days
- Cat: 0.1-0.2mg/kg PO every 12 hours.
We have found these analgesic techniques to work synergistically with
the use of laser energy during surgery to enhance control of intra- and
  n  e  a d o n d n
multi-modal analgesic techniques that individual clinicians may favor out-
side of those presented here. It is important that veterinary medical pro-
fessionals arm themselves and their staffs with the best pain management
n d radns  annd o snn ns pn o
for their patients.
108
Part Il
CLINICALLASER
TECHNIQUEAND
PROCEDURES
 Diode Lasers in Small
Animal Veterinary Medicine 111
10
Introduction to Clinical
Applications of CO2 Laser
Energy in Veterinary Medical
and Surgical Services
139
Chapter 9
Diode Lasers in Small Animal Veterinary
Medicine
Jeffrey R. Moll, DVM*
Diode Lasers, Physics, and Biomechanics
Generation of Diode Laser Energy
Diode lasers that are used for surgery generate laser energy via a semicon-
ductor chip that emits energy as light (photons). The diode laser was first
operated on September 16, 1962. It was developed by a team of scientists
at the General Electric Research Development Center in Schenectady,
New York.1 The semiconductors used in veterinary surgical diode lasers
are most commonly composed of aluminum, gallium, and arsenide, or
GaAlAs. Voltage applied to the semiconductor causes an energy shift.
This energy is then released as photons or laser light. The exact wave-
length of the laser light depends on the operating temperature of the unit.
Other factors can also influence the exact wavelength, including the con-
centration of the doping elements, “the driving current, and the presence
of a magnetic field."2 A schematic representation of a diode laser semi-
conductor is shown in Figure 9-1.
 Diode lasers are the most efficient lasers in converting electrical energy
to optical energy. They have already gained popularity with large-animal
practitioners due to their portability and lower purchase price. The use of
diode lasers in equine endoscopic surgery has been well documented.3,4,5
Figure 9-2 illustrates three of these units, available from a number of
manufacturers.
 Small-animal practitioners have begun to use diode laser energy as a
complement to CO2 laser energy. With the increased use of endoscopic
equipment for minimally invasive procedures, diode lasers will find an
ever increasing role in small animal surgical and therapeutic practice.
Wavelength and Tissue Interactions of Diode Laser Energy
The most common surgical diode lasers used in veterinary medicine have
wavelengths of 810 nm or 980 nm and have power outputs from 10 watts
to 60 watts. These wavelengths are in the near infrared region of the elec-
tromagnetic spectrum. The interaction of these wavelengths is shown in
Figure 9-3, which also shows that these wavelengths are preferentially ab-
sorbed by hemoglobin, oxyhemoglobin, and melanin. Diode laser energy
in the 980 nm range is also absorbed by water. This may make the 980
nm a more effective excisional and dissectional tool compared to the 810
*President, ex officio, Fellow, Veterinary Surgical Laser Society, LTD
111
END VIEW
SIDE VIEW
Active region
Heavily doped n-region
(light emission)
Metal contacts
Oxide
Light emission
n-region
p-region
Figure 9-1 Diagram of a diode
 Sides are roughened
Ends are cleaned and polished
laser. From Module 3: Semi-
LASERDIODE
conductor lasers in LEOT laser
tutorial-applications in photonics 
and telecommunications.
 nm. Water absorption of 980 nm diode laser energy is significantly lower
than CO2 laser energy.
 Diode surgical lasers penetrate more deeply than CO2 lasers. The depth
 of penetration of the 980 nm diode is comparable to but slightly less than
of 50 microns to 100 microns. Diode lasers create zones of peripheral co-
agulation of between 450 microns and 600 microns.8 (Figure 9-4) There-
fore, the underlying structures at the surgical site must be considered dur-
 ing treatment planning. The actual depth of significant laser tissue inter-
action depends on the tissue treated (thermal relaxation time), the power
 applied (power), the spot size (fiber diameter), the exposure time (dura-
tion), and the exposure mode (pulsed versus continuous wave).
888
Figure 9-2 Diode lasers.
112
100,000
CHAPTER 9
Er:YAG
Diode Lasers
10,000
Melanin
1000
100
CO
Hemoglobin
10
810nm Diode
1.0
OxyHemoglobin
980nmDiode
001
.0001
0.2
1.0
3.0
10
20
Wavelength(microns)
Figure 9-3Laser wavelength absorption.
The photothermal effect of the 810 nm diode laser may be enhanced by
the injection of indocyanine green (ICG) dye. Intravenous injection of this
dye may allow for the more effective treatment (ablation) of skin lesions in
with ICG also may allow for the selective destruction of this tissue.11,12
Medical diode lasers are also available in wavelengths that range from
 630 nm to 730 nm. These are used primarily in photodynamic therapy
(PDT), which is currently being investigated in the treatment of certain
neoplastic processes and chronic ulcerative tissue diseases.
0.0
0.2
(ww)
0.4
0.6
0.8
AUAO
tissue
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
pulsed
cont.
pulsed
continuous wave
wave
Figure 9-4 Penetration depth of different
nonfiber delivered
fiber delivered
laser light in pigmented tissue.
113
PART III
Clinical Laser Technique
other conditions. I have no experience in this modality, but in the future this
and Procedures
"  a o nd  mo a rs a p-
Diode Laser Energy Delivery Systems
 Diode laser energy is delivered via a flexible silica fiber with plastic or sil-
icone cladding. These fibers are readily available in a variety of diameters
from 300 microns to 1,000 microns. These quartz fibers can be re-steril-
ized using gas or standard cold sterilization techniques. The tip of the
fiber can be sculpted into a variety of shapes, as shown in Figure 9-5.13
These shapes can enhance the delivery of energy to the target tissue.
Fibers can be reused multiple times. If the tip becomes damaged the fiber
must be replaced or reprocessed. Fibers can be reprocessed into a bare-
ended fiber by stripping the plastic or silicone jacket and cleaving the tip.
The tip must be cut with an instrument specifically designed for this pur-
pose. The cleaver is usually a diamond-edged device that scores the end of
the fiber, allowing it to be fractured along the score line. When reprocess-
ing the fiber it is imperative to obtain a clean and straight cleave. This can
be assessed by connecting the fiber to the laser and turning the aiming
beam to medium or high. The tip of the fiber is then held perpendicular
to a white background. The aiming beam should appear as a homoge
 neous round circle. Improper cleaving will result in this circle appearing
incomplete or uneven; if this occurs, the fiber should be re-cleaved and
retested. The sculpted or bare-ended tips are the most commonly used in
veterinary medicine.
The fiber delivery system delivers energy through various fiberoptic and
videoscopic devices. These include flexible endoscopes, otoendoscopes,
laparoscopes, rhinoscopes, and cystoscopes. The delivery of laser energy
through these devices has greatly enhanced the therapeutic options for the
veterinary surgeon. Due to the delivery system and the wavelength, laser
energy can be effectively delivered in a fluid environment. Irrigation dur-
Figure 9-5 Tip shapes for diode laser fibers
114
ing many of these procedures enhances visualization, controls heat, and
CHAPTER 9
removes treated (lased) tissue. When immersed in fluid, there is no laser
Diode Lasers
plume and smoke evacuation is not required.
Handpieces allow for the use of diode fibers in general surgery. They
are generally made of aluminum and can be steam sterilized in a routine
fashion. A sterilized fiber is then inserted into the handpiece. Specialty
 handpieces with an integrated fiber are available. These allow for delivery
of laser energy at various angles of up to 90 degrees (side firing) or of
fixed focal lengths with spot sizes of up to 7 mm. Special air or water
cooled fibers are also available; these are particularly useful in the free-
beam mode. Another fiber delivery system is available with a variety of
get tissue or whether coagulation or cutting is more desirable.
Because diode wavelengths are not in the visible spectrum, an aiming
beam is used (especially in free-beam mode) to allow the clinician to prop-
erly visualize and align the target area. This aiming beam allows for the
precise delivery of diode laser energy to the target tissue in the free-beam
mode.
Delivery Modes
As with any laser, sufficient energy must be delivered to the target tissue
-ans iasei apop eaq-aaig san ieiue ur iaa paisap aui aauoe oi
gery provides for ablation or coagulation of target tissues. There are
three variables that control the fluence (energy per cm2) delivered to the
tissue. They are (1) spot size, as controlled by the distance to the target
and the size of the fiber (the tip diameter is inversely proportional to
power density at the target tissue); (2) power, as controlled by the laser
setting (watts); and (3) exposure time, as controlled by the surgeon or the
laser. It is important to note that fibers rapidly begin to overheat in the
free-beam mode because there is no tissue or fluid to dissipate the heat
being generated at the tip. For this reason the laser exposure times must
be limited when not cooled under continuous irrigation to allow for
some cooling between pulses. This extends the life of the fiber tip and
fiber in general.
Contact Mode: The contact mode may be used in pigmented tissues to
directly deliver the laser energy to the tissue. In less pigmented tissues a
thin layer of char (Figure 9-6) should be created on the tip of the fiber to
enhance the delivery of thermal energy to the target. This layer of char ab-
-a au iua je on n sa pe aiaua ii ap ai sqio
mal energy is then directly transferred to the tissue, causing vaporization.
 In the contact mode, the diode laser can be used to incise, excise, or ab-
late abnormal tissue. Any carbonization that occurs during the treatment
process should be promptly removed by irrigation or with saline-soaked
gauze sponges. Failure to remove carbonized tissue will result in this tis-
sue absorbing the thermal energy and inadvertent collateral damage. The
contact mode provides excellent hemostasis with little peripheral damage
(300 μm to 600 μm).15,16 Sterile water or isotonic saline can be used to
115
PART III
Clinical Laser Technique
and Procedures
Figure 9-6 Photographs of a carbonized
(A) and untreated (B) 400-micron orb-tipped
laser fiber.
A
B
damage.
At powers lower than 10 watts, the contact diode laser mode allows for
excellent and precise coagulation of bleeding vessels up to 2 mm in diam-
eter. Typically 2 watts to 5 watts will provide excellent coagulation for ac-
tively bleeding vessels. The effect of the diode laser on actively bleeding
vessels is rapid and precise. The tissue interaction of the laser fiber is
shown in Figure 9-7.
Free-beam Mode: In my experience the free-beam mode is practical
only in highly pigmented or relatively vascular tissue. This is probably re-
lated to the power output of these lasers. Theoretically, the higher power
(60 watts or more) lasers would be more effective in this mode. Free-beam
ablation can provide excellent reduction in tissue that is well vascularized,
either natively or due to neoplasia. This mode can be used in the 1 watt
Vaporisation
Coagulation
Figure 9-7 Laser tissue interaction; contact
mode (Diomed Surgical Presentation, 1999).
116
to 4 watt range for photocoagulation of retinal or other ocular tissue.
CHAPTER 9
Diode Lasers
puts in the 10 watt to 60 watt continuous wave (CW) range or higher. The
power required depends on the spot size. As indicated by basic laser
vide the same power density to the tissue. The laser energy is absorbed by
melanin, hemoglobin, or oxyhemoglobin in the tissue to create the desired
affect. A coagulation effect on the underlying tissue of up to 3 mm can
result.17 To optimize the free-beam effect, a new fiber or a freshly cleaved
fiber or one with an orb tip should be used. This reduces the amount of
scatter and hence unintended peripheral damage. The maintenance of op-
timal power density depends on keeping the fiber tip clean and undam-
aged during the lasing process. The surface of the target tissue must also
be kept free of any carbonization. Any carbonized material on the surface
of the tissue or the tip of the fiber will absorb the diode laser energy and
convert it to thermal energy. If this occurs the fiber and any endoscopic
equipment may become damaged. More importantly, inadvertent periph-
eral thermal damage is infinitely more likely to occur. It is therefore im-
perative that any observed carbonized material be promptly removed.
Carbonization can be reduced by limiting exposure times and irrigating
between exposures. This allows both the fiber and the surface of the tis-
sue to cool. The laser-tissue interaction is shown in Figure 9-8.
The photothermal effect of the 810 nm diode laser may be enhanced by
phore (indocyanine green, ICG). This may offer the opportunity to more
selectively treat neoplastic processes in the future. ICG enhances the ab-
sorption of the diode laser energy and causes selective damage to tissues
containing ICG.18 The clinical use and application of this procedure is
still under development. In the future it may offer an enhanced ability to
use diode laser energy more selectively in a wider variety of applications.
It cannot be overemphasized that in either mode it is imperative to con-
trol any excess heat generated. Failure to adequately control the heating
Vaporisation
Coagulation
Figure 9-8 Laser tissue interaction; free-beam
mode (Diomed Surgical Presentation, 1999).
117
PART III
of the fiber will damage the fiber, any endoscopic equipment in use, and
Clinical Laser Technique
more importantly will result in inadvertent peripheral damage. Heating
and Procedures
q  a asxg  aa i  q  aq 
controlled by the surgeon in the continuous wave mode. In general, expo-
sure should be limited to less than three seconds. The laser may also be
used in a pulsed mode setting to allow for tissue and fiber cooling between
exposures. Exposure times can be greatly increased by irrigating the fiber
and the surgical site. Regardless of the cooling method, the fiber should
 never appear white hot and should remain cool to the touch between
exposures.
Protection of Operating Room Personnel
The standard precautions that are used with any laser are applicable and
safety glasses rated for use with the proper wavelength of the diode laser
are employed. This is particularly important when the laser is used with
fiberoptic endoscopic equipment of any type. This equipment optically
magnifies the image and transmits it to the eye of the user. Any direct or
indirect laser energy that is captured by the device will be directly trans-
mitted to the user's eye. This can have severe permanent adverse conse-
quences (retinal damage) that include loss of vision. The potential hazard
is markedly reduced when a video endoscopic system is used. The image
observed by the surgeon is indirect and laser light cannot cause damage
To protect the endoscopic equipment and operatory personnel, the laser
should always be placed in the standby mode during insertion and re-
 moval of the fiber. Appropriate protective eyewear should also be em-
ployed during these times. Federal regulations dictate the safe use of
lasers. These regulations are administered by OSHA.19 In addition to fed-
eral regulations, twenty-six states currently have regulations regarding the
safe use of lasers. Become aware of these regulations and comply with them.
The plume produced by diode laser tissue interaction can produce the
same long-term health hazards as any chronic small particulate matter
that is inhaled. Plume evacuation is critical. In areas where the diode laser
is being used through a fiberoptic device the plume can be removed via
suction from a suction tube or through the air port on the fiberoptic de
vice. Plume will not be generated when the laser is operated in a fluid en-
vironment and in these cases plume evacuation is generally not required.
There are federal regulations, and there may be state regulations, that
apply to this potential hazard.20 They should be observed to protect the
Common Uses of the Diode Laser Energy
Conventional Surgery
Skin Incisions
Diode lasers can be used in contact mode to make routine skin incisions.
 In general, a sculpted or bare-end 600-micron fiber is used in a continu-
118
ous wave setting with 7 watts to 9 watts of power. Because skin is a rela-
CHAPTER 9
tively avascular and non-pigmented tissue the tip of the laser fiber should
Diode Lasers
be carbonized by activating the laser while in contact with a sterile
wooden tongue depressor that has been marked with a black pen or in-
delible marker. Once this thin layer of carbon (char) has been created it is
this layer that transfers the thermal energy to the tissue. Manufactured
tips that have been treated to absorb diode laser energy are also avail-
n n aaia si i sd s azqio i essu iou i  irae
trol any excess thermal energy that may be generated in this mode. When
the laser is activated without contact to the target tissue or for prolonged
periods of time) the fiber will become extremely hot. This heat can dam-
age the plastic or silicone cladding on the fiber and cause unintentional
peripheral thermal damage. This can be adequately controlled by irriga
tion with sterile fluid or by limiting the exposure time. Generally, expo-
sures of less than three seconds will not result in excessive heating. This
exposure time depends on the fiber diameter and the power setting
(power density). It is also somewhat dependent on the thermal relaxation
time of the target tissue. Pigmented skin is more easily incised than lightly
 or non-pigmented skin.
While skin incisions can effectively be made with the diode laser, the
common diode wavelengths are not as well suited for this purpose as the
carbon dioxide laser. The majority of complications are due to uninten-
tional peripheral thermal damage by failure to adequately control the
heating of the fiber. This can be adequately controlled by limiting the ex-
posure time to less than three seconds, cooling the fiber tip in saline dur-
contact with the target tissue, and by removing any carbonized material
from the target tissue as it occurs.
Feline Onychectomy (Deciaw)
There has been much debate concerning the use of the diode laser for this
procedure. Much of this controversy arises from the adverse results ob-
tained by surgeons inexperienced with this laser. It has been my experi-
ence that the diode laser is safe and extremely effective for this procedure
when proper tissue handling and thermal-tissue interaction precautions
are used. The reported complications appear to stem from unintentional
thermal injury. The primary reported problems have been excessive tissue
swelling, tissue necrosis, and infection. In more than four years of clinical
use these complications have never been encountered at my facility. Pain
control, hemostasis, and post-operative healing time have been indistin-
guishable from the results that have been achieved with the CO2 laser.
When used in a contact mode the diode laser provides superior tactile
feedback and handles much like a scalpel blade. This allows for precise
dissection of the third phalanx and precise coagulation of the vascular
structures (Figures 9-9 and 9-10).
The procedure is similar to that outlined above for skin incisions.
Control of excess thermal energy is paramount due to the delicate nature
of the tissues. It is especially important to properly carbonize (char) the
119
PART III
Dorsal
Clinical Laser Technique
and Procedures
Diode fiber
inhandpiece
3rdphalanx
Figure 9-9 Intra-operative anterior view; feline
onychetomy.
Palmer
tip of the fiber. This will ensure effective and efficient transfer of thermal
energy to the tissue. For this procedure a 600-micron bare-ended or con-
ical tip fiber is used with 5 watts to 7 watts of power in the continuous
mode. It is important to limit the laser exposure time to less than three
seconds and to cool the fiber by immersion in sterile saline between expo-
sures. Active fluid irrigation over the fiber tip site can also limit or elimi-
Figure 9-10 Diodelaser-assisted onychectomy,
12 hours post-op.
120
nate excessive thermal injury and post-operative complications. The laser
CHAPTER 9
should not be activated unless the tip of the fiber is in direct contact with
Diode Lasers
the tissue. This device can be successfully used for the procedure if these
guidelines are followed.
Dissection and Removal of Internal and Subcutaneous Neoplasia
The diode laser is uniquely suited for the dissection and excision of sub-
cutaneous and internal masses. The tactile control and feedback of this
laser in the contact mode offers the ability to precisely approach and dis-
sect these masses. Meticulous and precise hemostasis can be achieved. The
effect of this laser is superior to that obtained with the carbon dioxide
laser. Adequate hemostasis allows for better visualization of the surgical
field and better identification of the abnormal tissue. Pancreatic, hepatic,
and renal masses can be removed without excessive blood loss and with a
reduced need for ligation and other hemostatic methods. Thyroidectomies
and adrenalectomies are more easily performed with this laser.
Hemostasis is more complete and surrounding tissues are not damaged.
(Figure 9-11)
When a thyroidectomy is performed with a diode laser the blood sup-
ply to the adjacent parathyroid is easily preserved. This markedly reduces
the risk of postoperative hypocalcemia. The surgical approach is per-
formed in a routine manner.22 The use of surgical loupes enhances the sur-
 geon's ability to identify and preserve critical structures. The external
 parathyroid glands are identified and gently dissected free with the tip of
the diode fiber. (Figure 9-11) The laser is activated only as required to
provide hemostasis. A 600-micron, carbonized fiber with a setting of 2 to
3 watts is usually sufficient. The added advantage is the superior hemo-
DiodeFiber
Thyroid Gland
Exte
Pa
Thyroid
Parathyroid
Figure 9-11Diode laser-assisted thyroidec-
Junction
tomy; dissection of the parathyroid gland
preserving its vasculature.
121
PART III
stasis. Again, adequate cooling of the surgical area is imperative to avoid
Clinical Laser Technique
delayed tissue swelling or necrosis. After excision of the thyroid gland has
and Procedures
been completed the internal parathyroid can be dissected free and trans-
planted into the cervical muscle. Care must be taken to only transplant
the parathyroid gland without any thyroid tissue.
Generally speaking, neoplastic tissues are more highly vascularized
than normal tissue. A tumor-free margin is required to completely excise
the abnormal tissue. The size of the margin should be based on the sus-
from the excision of normal tissue. The guidelines for the laser excision of
neoplastic tissue to provide adequate clean margins should be no differ-
ent from those used with conventional surgery.
A 600-micron fiber in the appropriate length handpiece is used in these
procedures. The general guidelines for use are similar to those listed
above. Power settings of between 3 watts and 14 watts are used, depend-
ing on the desired speed, precision, and vascularity of the target tissue. It
should be noted that the rate at which the fiber can overheat is directly
proportional to the power used and the exposure time. Higher powers
and longer exposure can more rapidly overheat the fiber. Failure to ade-
quately control the heat of the fiber will result in inadvertent peripheral
thermal damage. Depending on the location, this can have catastrophic
lower powers (2 watts to 4 watts) with longer exposure times. Incision or
excision is achieved at higher powers with shorter exposure times (6 watts
to 14 watts with less than three seconds duration).
In cases where complete excision is not possible and the mass is highly
pigmented or more vascular than the surrounding tissue, the diode laser
can be used in a free-beam mode. In these cases a larger diameter fiber at
higher powers is employed. Orb fibers are ideally suited for this proce-
dure. This is somewhat dependent on the size of the tumor. In most cases
a 600-micron or 1,000-micron fiber is used with power setting of 15
watts to 60 watts. The aiming beam should be used to precisely align the
laser energy to the target. It is imperative to cool the fiber to prevent dam-
age to the operator, the fiber, and the tissue. Any carbonization that forms
on the surface of the tissue should be promptly removed between expo-
sures. Absorption of the laser energy by the target tissue will cause vapor-
ization of the surface tissues and coagulation and subsequent necrosis of
the deeper tissue. This method is imprecise at best. Tissue as deep as 3 mm
may be effected. It is imperative to consider the underlying structures and
any related potential complications.
The diode laser can also be used to treat non-resectable solid tissue
masses. This includes metastatic hepatic lesions. The coagulation status of
q pous nud au rg siso sodistu an pe nd a
available prior to treatment. These lesions can be treated laparoscopically
(see below) or during laparotomy. Fibers of 600 microns to 1,000 microns
or special multi-fiber bundles can be used for this purpose. The fiber(s)
are introduced into the lesion and sufficient laser energy is applied for a
sufficient period of time to cause a blanched appearance in the target tis-
sue. A good starting point is 12 watts for six seconds. In these cases the
122
laser fiber will be cooled by thermal dilution in the tissue. This procedure
CHAPTER 9
is only palliative but when applied laprascopically has the potential to
Diode Lasers
prolong the patient's life with minimal debilitation. Recent advances in
monitoring the direct effect of laser energy on the tissue may expand the
usefulness of this therapeutic modality in the future. Systems that moni-
tor the temperature of the treated tissue and control the laser may prove
useful.23 Recently, a system has been developed to provide precise control
 and treatment planning using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Tissue
temperatures are monitored and the laser is controlled by software that
Oral Surgery
Diode lasers can play an important role in oral surgery. As previously
stated, the diode lasers most commonly used in veterinary surgery are
preferentially absorbed by tissues containing hemoglobin, oxyhemoglo-
bin, melanin, and to a much lesser extent, water. The oral mucosa con-
tains abundant amounts of these substances.
Diode lasers can be used to remove oral masses (Figure 9-12), perform
gingivectomies, create periodontal flaps, or treat periodontal disease.
Generally, the laser is used in a contact mode to incise or excise tissue. The
guidelines listed in the previous section apply. More efficient cutting is ob-
tained by carbonization of the fiber tip. For incision and excision a 600-
micron fiber in the appropriate handpiece is used. Power settings of 4
watts to 8 watts in the continuous wave mode are usually adequate for in-
cision or excision. Specialized dental handpieces with a highly malleable
tip are available. These handpieces allow for better access in smaller pa-
tients or tight locations. Standard surgical approaches and techniques
should be observed. Use of the diode laser offers enhanced intra-operative
hemostasis and improved post-operative patient comfort (Figure 9-13).
Oral Mass
ExtramedullaryPlasmacytoma
Figure 9-12 Oral mass, pre-treatment.
123
PART III
Clinical Laser Technique
and Procedures
Figure 9-13 Appearance of surgical site post-
operatively.
Lower power laser treatment has been shown to decrease the depth of
the periodontal pocket, reduces inflammation, and appears to markedly
decrease the amount of pathogenic bacteria. 26 I have no personal experi-
ence in treating periodontal pockets with the diode laser. This technique
 may prove safe and effective in the future.
Treatment of Canine and Feline Melanomas
The use of the diode laser in the treatment of oral melanoma in combina-
 tion with immunotherapy may offer a unique opportunity for improved
survival in this difficult and highly malignant process. The preferential ab-
sorption of diode laser energy by melanin allows the tumor cells to be
specifically targeted. Standard oncological surgical guidelines should still
be attempted in these cases.
Early and complete excision with evaluation of the draining lymph
nodes still offers the best prognosis. A more rostral tumor location of
smaller size and the absence of bone lysis have been shown to have in-
creased survival times.27 Complete resection with clean histologic mar-
gins, achieving local control with the first surgical attempt and no evi-
dence of metastasis, offers the best long-term prognosis.28 The diode
surgery (Figure 9-14). In the best scenario the tumor should be widely ex-
cised with the laser. Even in cases of wide excision it may be useful to ex-
 pose the tumor bed to diode laser energy in a free-beam mode. In theory,
 any stray malignant melanin-containing cells would be preferentially de-
stroyed by the laser energy. The areas are treated with a 1,000-micron
fiber at 15 watts to 25 watts in the continuous wave mode until the sur-
face of the tumor bed has a slightly blanched appearance. The fiber must
be kept cool during this process by irrigation with saline and any car-
bonized tissue that forms on the surface should be removed between laser
ticularly useful in this application. Care must be taken not to overexpose
124
CHAPTER 9
Diode Lasers
Tumor
Figure 9-14 Appearance of surgical site one
month post-malignant melanoma removal
these areas. Due to the depth of penetration into this application, the sub-
 sequent necrosis of devitalized tissues needs to be carefully considered.
 In those cases where the melanoma has recurred locally and/or com-
plete excision is not an option, this wavelength can offer palliation of clin-
ical signs and may improve the patient's quality and duration of life.
Treatment of these lesions can be accomplished by interstitial laser ther-
 apy (ILT) or in a free-beam mode. The choice of application depends on
the depth, size, and location of the lesion. Excisional debridement fol-
lowed by ILT or free-beam ablation, where possible, may offer the best
chance for local control. In these cases follow-up radiation and/or
 chemotherapy should be considered. In the future, immunotherapy may
offer substantially improved survival time for this disease.29,30
 Oral malignant melanomas are rare in cats. These tumors should be ap-
proached in a similar fashion as their canine counterparts.31 Complete ex-
cision on the first attempt with evaluation for metastasis to regional lymph
nodes and pulmonary metastasis should be performed. Complete excision
without evidence of metastasis probably offers the best prognosis.
 Dermal melanomas can occur in both dogs and cats, but are rare. Digital
 melanomas have an increased risk of malignancy and may behave agres-
sively.32 Because these tumors have a higher metastatic potential they should
be treated aggressively with digital amputation and evaluation for metas-
tasis to the draining lymph node and lungs. The diode laser can be used in
the digital amputation. In both cases the technique is similar to the feline
S s    o   
The combination of diode laser surgery and immunotherapy has led to the
survival of one patient with malignant melanoma of the digit for more
than five and one-half years. This patient had metastasis to the draining
popliteal lymph node at the time of diagnosis. This response is particularly
125
PART III
impressive when compared to the usual median survival time of twelve
Clinical Laser Technique
 months.33 As of this time, no investigations have been performed to eval-
and Procedures
uate the potential additional benefits of diode laser surgery over conven-
tional techniques with or without the addition of immunotherapy.
OphthalmologicSurgery
A complete discussion of the uses of the diode laser in ophthalmologic
surgery is beyond the scope of this chapter. The reader is referred to gen-
eral and specialty surgical texts for further information. Diode lasers have
been used in the treatment of iris cysts, melanomas, and detached retinas
(Figure 9-15). As an example, diode lasers can be used to control retinal
bleeding without damaging corneal structures.
Minimally Invasive Surgical Techniques
Diode lasers are ideally suited for use in minimally invasive surgery. The
fiber delivery system allows for the delivery of laser energy through vari-
ous endoscopic and videoscopic devices. Many of these techniques are en-
hanced or occur in a fluid environment. As previously discussed, the pref-
erential absorption by pigmented tissues allows for these systems to be
used while immersed during irrigation. It is beyond the scope of this chap-
ter to discuss the techniques and equipment involved in each minimally
 invasive procedure. Advanced training courses are available in these tech-
niques. They should only be used by practitioners who have had adequate
training and experience and have the proper endoscopic equipment.
 Diode lasers vastly expand the diagnostic and therapeutic abilities of min-
imally invasive surgery. Patient recovery time and discomfort are mini-
Retina
Tip of Laser Fiber
Figure 9-15 Retinal re-attachment (retinopexy)
with the diode laser.
126
mized with these techniques. As the general public becomes increasingly
CHAPTER 9
aware of minimally invasive surgery, the demand for these services will
Diode Lasers
increase.
The general principles of diode laser surgery as described in the previ-
ous sections still apply with any minimally invasive technique. It is imper-
ative to control the heat generated by these fibers during lasing. The ex-
 traneous heat generated by these fibers during exposure may not only
cause harm to the patient, but will result in damage to the endoscopic
equipment. The amount of heat that the fiber generates is a function of
the laser's power setting (power), the exposure time, the mode used (con-
tact versus free-beam), and the target tissue or lasing environment (ther-
modilution). The heat generated by the fiber may be controlled in three
ways: (1) by limiting the power utilized, (2) by controlling the exposure
time, and (3) by cooling the fiber. Power should be sufficient to accom-
plish the procedure in a timely manner without causing inadvertent pe-
     s    s  
cussed (power, target tissue, and operating environment). Cooling of the
fiber may be accomplished by either immersion with continuous irrigation
or pulse irrigation of the fiber.
In addition, the laser should never be activated unless the tip of the fiber
(active end) is outside of the operating channel of the endoscopic equip-
ment. The fiber should be evaluated in a darkened room for any breaks
along its length. The aiming beam should only be visible at the tip of the
fiber. Visualization of the aiming beam anywhere along the length of the
fiber indicates a fracture and laser energy will “leak" from these areas.
Fractures along the length of the fiber will markedly reduce the amount of
energy reaching the tip. The emanation of laser energy from these fractures
do oi prezey e sasod pue suadinba sidoosopua au seep Aianaaas Ae
eratory personnel. If the aiming beam is visualized anywhere along the
length of the fiber, the fiber should be cleaved to this level or discarded.
Fiber selection depends on the procedure and may be limited based on
the working channel of the endoscopic device. Fibers are readily available
between 200 microns and 1,000 microns. A majority of these fibers are
bare-ended. When used in the contact mode the tips of these fibers may
be carbonized as previously described. Carbonization of the fiber tip en-
hances the thermal effect on non- or lightly pigmented tissue. Jacketed
fibers are also available and are useful to provide adequate cooling for
procedures requiring a free-beam, un-immersed mode.
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
Pedunculated polyps within the colon can be resected with the diode laser.
A 600-micron fiber with 3 watts to 6 watts of power in a continuous
mode can generally be used. The fiber tip can be cooled with the endo-
os  a q  d  s i sids
suction. By alternating irrigation and suction, the target tissue can be kept
cool and any accumulated carbonization removed. The laser should only
be activated when the tip of the fiber is fully extended and visible.
127
PART III
Activation of the laser with the fiber in the biopsy channel may result in
Clinical Laser Technique
severe damage to the endoscope. It is also important to perform this pro-
and Procedures
cedure carefully and avoid the perforation of the colon at the time of
polypectomy. Caution must be taken to avoid excessive peripheral ther
mal damage to avoid colonic perforation at a later time. In most cases it
is preferred to remove a majority of the mass with a snare or a biopsy in-
strument first and then remove the remaining abnormal tissue with the
laser. This technique provides good hemostasis and decreases the risk of
inadvertent perforation. Caution should be exercised depending on the
depth of the abnormal tissue. Any excised tissue should be submitted for
histopathologic evaluation.
Hemorrhaging ulcers within the stomach or gastrointestinal tract may
also be controlled with the diode laser (Figure 9-16). A complete endo-
scopic evaluation within the gastrointestinal tract should be performed in
 these animals. Multiple biopsy specimens should be obtained from and di-
rectly adjacent to the ulcerated area. Additionally, biopsy samples should
be taken for the stomach (cardia, fundus, pyloric antrum), small intes-
tines, and colon. These samples should also be submitted for histopathol-
 Ogy. The ulcerated area can be treated with a 1,000-micron fiber directly
in contact with the bleeding area (3 watts to 8 watts) with one- to two-
second exposure times. Continuous irrigation will help identify the vessel
and control the heating of the fiber. In humans, these areas have also been
 treated in a free-beam mode with the laser fiber 0.5 to 1 cm from the tar
 get and 10 watts to 14 watts of power.34 Excessive use of power or expo-
sulting in perforation. Care must be taken not to mechanically perforate
the gastrointestinal tract with the laser fiber.
Laparoscopy
Diode lasers can be used laparoscopically to provide hemostasis, excise tis-
sue, and for interstitial therapy (ILT) of non-resectable neoplasia. Hemo
Figure 9-16 Endoscopic treatment of gastric
ulcer.
128
CHAPTER 9
Diode Lasers
Suction Irrigation
Controls
DiodeFiber
Figure 9-17 Laparoscopic suction, rrigation,
and laser fiber guide.
 aui rananond siosside aue jo ssns a on eo si sisis s
laser provides for excellent hemostasis. The principles of use are the same
as general surgery. Hemostasis is provided with lower power density for
longer exposures. Excision is accomplished with higher power densities
for shorter duration.
Generally fibers of 600 or 1,000 microns are used in this procedure. A
9-17). These fiber guides allow for precise placement of the fiber and can
also be used to provide suction and irrigation of the operative site.35 As
with any procedure, cooling of the fiber and removal of carbonized tissue
will help to minimize peripheral thermal damage. Control of fiber heating
is accomplished, as previously discussed, by limiting exposure times and
irrigating the fiber either during or between exposures.
Dissection of vascular structures (ovarian pedicles, testicular vascula-
ture) can be accomplished by a combination of coagulation and excision.
Blood vessels should be isolated by the appropriate use of blunt dissec-
tion. The isolated vessels are then coagulated in a contact or free-beam
mode (Figure 9-18). The proximal aspect of the vessel is then grasped and
the vessel is transected. The occlusion of the vessel is slowly released
under direct observation. If any hemorrhaging is observed the vessel is re-
grasped and additional laser energy is applied. If adequate hemostasis
cannot be achieved an endoscopic ligaclip or ligature is placed. Larger
vessels can be transected by placing two or three endoscopic ligaclips on
the vessel and then transecting the vessel with the diode laser. This proce-
dure provides an increased margin of safety for complete and adequate
hemostasis.
The diode laser can provide excellent hemostasis after laparoscopic
biopsy. The biopsy site can be treated in a contact or free-beam mode. In
the contact mode a 600- or 1,000-micron bare-ended fiber in a 5 mm fiber
 guide is activated in contact with the hemorrhaging areas in the biopsy.
The actively bleeding area is readily identified by the use of irrigation
through the fiber guide. Three to six watts of laser energy are applied for
three to six seconds. The fiber should be cooled during or between expo-
sures by irrigation.
In the free-beam mode the fiber is aligned with the aiming beam and is
129
PART III
Clinical Laser Technique
and Procedures
Testicle
Figure 9-18 Laparoscopic transection of the
spermatic cord of a cryptochid testicle with the
diode laser.
positioned approximately 0.5 to 1 centimeter from the target. The fiber
must be cooled by irrigation when used in this mode. Ten to fifteen watts
of energy is applied until hemostasis is achieved. This will usually occur
within three to five seconds. If the desired result does not occur in a rea-
sonable time the contact mode or alternative methods of hemostasis
should be considered.
Treatment of non-resectable hepatic malignancies can be attempted
with ILT. The beneficial effects of this treatment have not been well doc-
umented. It remains to be elucidated if patients treated in this manner
have decreased morbidity, mortality, and longer median survival times
than those receiving no treatment or chemotherapy. At this time this treat-
ment should be regarded as experimental in animal patients and the client
should be fully informed of the potential risks and benefits. In human pa-
tients ILT appears useful in the treatment of non-resectable hepatic metas-
tases from colorectal cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma. It appears to
 advances in real-time temperature monitoring and control with magnetic
resonance imaging may enhance the usefulness of this modality in the fu-
ture.39,40 The treatment of human benign prostatic hypertrophy with a
diode-laser-coupled computer-controlled temperature-sensing fiber has
been shown to be useful in the treatment of these lesions.41 This technique
and equipment might also prove useful in the treatment of non-resectable
lesions in companion animals.
In these cases a laser fiber is introduced into the approximate center of
the mass and 10 to 15 watts of laser energy is used. Exposure times vary
with the size of the mass. In MRI-regulated studies on experimentally in-
xa ueu aul oi d suuopuo, jsel e 'sao u sioni uenq paonp
 posure appeared to allow for higher treatment powers to be used for ILT.
The exposure used to pre-treat was 0.5 watts for one minute.42 This ap-
peared to be clinically useful in these cases. Well controlled studies and
130
comparisons of pretreated versus non-pretreated tissues are not available.
CHAPTER 9
The end point for treatment is the observation that normal tissue directly
Diode Lasers
adjacent to the mass just begins to lighten in color. The variability seen in
power and exposure times may be due to the size of the lesion and the de-
sn and oe  s as nss a j uad y an
in the palliative treatment of canine prostatic malignancies and other non-
-ed aeiado-isod poon pue ane uenuos Ml e aaeq on sieadde I
tient comfort. Whether or not this treatment increases median life ex-
pectancy in these cases remains to be seen.
The diode laser is especially useful in these procedures. It can treat disease
processes that would otherwise require more extensive, invasive, and de-
bilitating surgeries. These procedures are usually carried out in a fluid en-
vironment, which makes the diode laser ideal. As previously noted, irriga
tion provides for optimal fiber cooling, which allows higher laser energies
to be applied to the target tissue, for the result is more rapid and complete
treatment while still maintaining the advantages of laser surgery. Under
continuous or intermittent irrigation, sources of hemorrhage are rapidly
identifiable and usually easily coagulated. Immersion in a fluid environ-
ment also increases visualization of the treatment area. In this environ-
 ment tissue is removed as it is lased, and any carbonized tissue can be rap-
idly removed, helping to minimize peripheral thermal damage. Diode
lasers can be used in rigid endoscopy to incise or ablate tissue. They also
provide for excellent hemostasis. (Figures 9-19 and 9-20)
In almost all cases the laser energy is provided in a contact mode. Fibers
of any size can be used depending on the size of the lesion and the oper-
ating channel in the endoscope. The surgeon is again cautioned to be fa-
miliar with and adequately trained in these techniques and the use of the
laser prior to attempting to perform any procedure. It is imperative to be
DiodeFiber
Polyp
Figure 9-19 Diode ablation of a feline
hyperplastic nasal polyp during video
minoscopy.
131
PART III
Clinical Laser Technique
and Procedures
Vagina
Diode
Laser
Tip
Tissue Band
Urethral
Urethral
Figure 9-20 Urethral adhesion
Orifice
Orifice
with fibrous tissue band pre-
(a) and during (b) diode laser
a
b
treatment.
able to visualize the tip of the fiber during the application of laser energy.
Failure to do so may result in inadvertent peripheral damage to the endo-
scopic equipment.
Hemostasis can be rapidly accomplished with powers of 3 watts to 6
watts in a contact mode. Sufficient irrigation should be provided to allow
for visualization of the source of the bleeding and prevent overheating of
the fiber. Bubbles should never be seen forming at the tip of the fiber. If
present, these indicate that the irrigant has been heated to the boiling
point. If adequate irrigation is provided, exposure time is less critical.
Hemostasis is usually achieved within three seconds if the tip of the fiber
is properly positioned. The usefulness of the hemostatic effect of the diode
lasers in these procedures cannot be overstated. Visualization of abnormal
structures and their complete removal is greatly enhanced with this ther-
apeutic modality.
Laser excision of masses can be accomplished in two ways. The mass
can be removed with a biopsy instrument and the tumor bed then treated
with the laser. This controls any hemorrhaging and should remove any
abnormal tissue that remains. With this method post-operative patient
comfort seems to be equivalent to direct excision. Polypoid masses can
S     e      
Biopsy specimens should be obtained prior to any laser treatment, and
submitted for histopathology.
Masses that have been proven to be benign can be removed by laser ab-
lation or ILT. This involves introducing the fiber into the middle of the
mass and firing the diode laser at 10 watts to 25 watts until the tissue has
a blanched appearance. The devitalized tissue can then be removed with
biopsy forceps and the site evaluated for complete excision. After debride-
ment, hemostasis can be achieved as described above.
In combination with video otoscopy, diode lasers increase the surgeon's
ability to treat auricular disease. The ability to resect abnormal tissue is
greatly enhanced. Large auricular masses and hypertrophied tissue can be
successfully resected with little or no debilitation to the patient (Figures
132
CHAPTER 9
Diode Lasers
Figure 9-21 Canine ear polyp.
9-21 and 9-22). In addition, narrowing of the auricular canal can be cor-
rected, allowing for the reduction in future occurrences of otitis externa.
It is imperative to treat any underlying allergy or infection problems that
may contribute to the patient's condition. A complete text on the use of
lasers and video otoscopy is available and the practitioner is referred to
 this resource for further information.43
In addition to the ear canal, masses that arise from the middle ear can
be readily treated if a small enough video otoscope is available. In general,
a 2.7 mm, 30 degree rigid pediatric cystoscope (Figure 9-23) with an
ear. This device allows for simultaneous irrigation and suction during
these procedures. In my hands the diode laser is superior to the CO2 in
the treatment of ear diseases within the auricular canal and the osseous
bulla (Figure 9-24).
Diode
Fiber
Polyps
Figure 9-22 Ear polyp removal with diode
laser.
133
PART III
Clinical Laser Technique
and Procedures
Figure 9-23 Pediatric cystoscope with
operating channel.
ILT can also prove useful in the palliative treatment of malignant neo-
plastic processes, such as nasal osteosarcoma or nasal or aural adenocar-
 cinoma. This should be reserved for non-resectable neoplasia or cases in
cologic surgical procedures. In these cases, tumor mass can be temporar-
ily reduced with little or no debilitation to the patient. The procedure is
performed as indicated above. In one case of nasal osteosarcoma the pa-
tient survived for eighteen months and maintained an excellent quality of
life, jogging with the owner on an almost daily basis. This spayed female
golden retriever was 20 months old at the time of definitive diagnosis. She
had two rhinoscopic procedures for laser tumor debridement and ILT.
(Figure 9-25) The median survival time of dogs with axial osteosarcoma
treated with surgery alone was twenty-two weeks.44 The median survival
time in dogs treated with palliative radiation was 162 days.45 In another,
smaller study, large breed dogs treated with definitive radiation therapy
had a median survival of 265 days.46 The results of this one case far ex-
ceed those seen in these studies. Further study is warranted to determine
 if this outcome is reproducible in a larger patient sample. If this one result
 is representative, then laser treatment could offer a viable alternative to
current modalities. Post-operative comfort was excellent and no unto-
ward side effects were noted.
Figure 9-24 Middle ear after diode mass
JAN.12.200
removal.
134
CHAPTER 9
Diode Lasers
Diod
Fiber
Mas
Figure 9-25 ILT with diode laser for nasal
tumor.
Photodynamic Therapy
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is defined as “a form of cancer treatment
using a photosensitizing agent administered intravenously which concen-
trates selectively in tumor cells, followed by exposure of the tumor tissue
to a special red laser light, in order to destroy as much of the tumor as
possible."47 This form of therapy allows for the selective targeting of ab-
normal tissue. The photosensitizing agent is injected intravenously into
 the patient. The agent is then activated by exposure to the appropriate
wavelength of laser light. This produces a photochemical reaction that
causes cell death.
PDT has been used in veterinary and human oncology to treat a large
variety of neoplastic processes including prostatic carcinoma,48 canine
 transitional cell carcinoma,49 intranasal tumors,50 and skin tumors.51
aau snsn aea inq 'ses ieusi au u ls si Adui s
been promising. It may offer the ability to uniquely target and destroy ab
normal tissue. The usefulness of this treatment will depend on the devel-
opment and identification of selective photosensitizers and the availabil-
ity of cost-effective diode lasers.
Notes
1. The Diode Laser—The First Thirty Days Forty Years Ago. Dupuis, Russell D., IEEE
Leos Newsletter, Vol 17 Number 1, Feb. 2003 Piscataway, NJ. http://www.ieee.0org/organ-
izations/pubs/newsletters/leos/feb03/diode.html
2. CORD Laser/Electro-Optics Technology Series. Cord Communications, 324 Kelly
Drive, PO. Box 21206, Waco, Texas 76702-1206. http:/repairfaq.ece.drexel.edu/sam/
CORD/leot/course03_mod11/mod03-11.html
 3. Transendoscopic laser ablation of upper respiratory cysts in 12 horses, 1993-2003.
Tate Jr, Lloyd P., Proc. SPIE Vol. 5312, p. 354-358.
4. Endometrial Cysts in the Mare. Stanton, Mary Beth, DVM; John V. Steiner, DVM, Dipl
ACT; D.G. Pugh, DVM, MS, Dipl ACT, ACVN; J Equine Vet Sci 24[1]:14-19 Jan 2004.
5. Large Animal and Emerging Applications for Lasers. Bartels, Kenneth E., Western
Veterinary Conference 2002.
135
PART III
B           
Clinical Laser Technique
Guided Laser Systems. Janda, Philip, MD,1* Ronald Sroka, PhD, Boris Mundweil,
and Procedures
DMD,2 Christian S. Betz, MD, Reinhold Baumgartner, PhD, and Andreas Leunig, MD,:
Lasers in Surgery and Medicine 33:93-101 (2003).
7. Preliminary Report: Comparison of 980-nm, 808-nm diode laser enhanced with in-
 docyanine green to the Nd:YAG laser applied to equine respiratory tissue. Tate Jr., Lloyd
 P, Anthony T. Blikslager, and Nigel B. Campbell, Proc. SPIE Vol. 4244, 583-590 2001.
8. Comparison of Laser Induced Effects on Hyperplastic Inferior Nasal Turbinates by
Means of Scanning Electron Microscopy. Janda, Philip, MD,1* Ronald Sroka, PhD,2
Christian S. Betz, MD,1 Reinhold Baumgartner, PhD,2 and Andreas Leunig, MD: Lasers
in Surgery and Medicine 30:31±39 (2002).
9. Ibid.
10. Photochemotherapy of cutaneous AIDS-associated Kaposi sarcoma with indocya
nine green and laser light. Szeimies, RM, T. Lorenzen, S. Karrer, C. Abels, A. Plettenberg
Hautarzt, 2001 Apr, 52(4):322-6.
11. Selective Photothermolysis of the Sebaceous Glands for Acne Treatment. Lloyd,
 Jenifer R., DO and Mirko Mirkov, PhD, Lasers in Surgery and Medicine 31:115-120
(2002).
12. Use of a New ICG-Dye-Enhanced Diode Laser for Percutaneous Laser Disc
Decompression. Sato, Masato, MD; Miya Ishihara, MSc; Tsunenori Arai, PhD; Takashi
Asazuma, MD; Toshiyuki Kikuchi;Takuya Hayashi, MD; Takahiro Yamada, MD; Makoto
Kikuchi, PhD; and Kyosuke Fujikawa, MD. Lasers in Surgery and Medicine 29:282-287
(2001).
13. DIOMEDplus Diode Laser Platforms. Diomed, Inc., Andover, MA, 2001.
14. Surgical Laser Technologies, Inc., 147 Keystone Drive, Montgomeryville, PA 18936.
15. Soft Tissue Studies with 805nm Diode Laser Radiation. Millard, M Judy, Lasers in
Surgery and Medicine 13: 528-536 (1993),
16. Contact Laser-Assisted Neuroendoscopy Can Be Performed Safely by Using
Pretreated "Black" Fibre Tips: Experimental Data. Willems, Peter W.A.; MD, W. Peter
Vandertop, MD, PhD; Rudolf M. Verdaasdonk, MD; Christiaan FP van Swol, PhD; and
Gerard H. Jansen, MD: Lasers in Surgery and Medicine 28:324-329 (2001).
17. Liver photocoagulation with diode laser. Jacques, S.L., SPIE Proceedings, Vol 1646,
Los Angeles, 1992.
18. Preliminary Report, Ibid.
19. STD 01-05-001—PUB 8-1.7—Guidelines for Laser Safety and Hazard Assessment,
U.S. Dept. of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 1991.
20. OSHA Hazard Information Bulletins, Hazard of Laser Surgery Smoke, U.S. Dept of
Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 1988.
21. Surgical Laser Technologies, Inc., Ibid.
22. Textbook Of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd Edition. Slatter, Douglas, editor, Elsevier
Science, 2003.
23. In Vivo Laser-Induced Interstitial Thermotherapy of Pig Liver With a Temperature-
Controlled Diode Laser and MRI Correlation. Wohlgemuth, Walter A., Gunther Wamser,
MD; Thomas Reiss, MD; Theodor Wagner, MD; and Klaus Bohndorf, MD; Lasers in
Surgery and Medicine 29:374-378, 2001.
at 980 nm. McNichols, Roger J. PhD; Ashok Gowda, PhD; Marko Kangasniemi, MD,
PhD; James A. Bankson, PhD; Roger E. Price, DVM, PhD; and John D. Hazle, PhD; Lasers
in Surgery and Medicine 34:48-55. 2004.
25. Thermal Therapy of Canine Cerebral Tumors Using a 980 nm Diode Laser With
MR Temperature-Sensitive Imaging Feedback. Kangasniemi, Marko, MD; Roger J.
McNichols, PhD; James A. Bankson, PhD; Ashok Gowda, PhD; Roger E. Price, DVM;
and John D. Hazle, PhD; Lasers in Surgery and Medicine 35:41-50, 2004.
26. Treatment of Periodontal Pockets With A Diode Laser. Moritz, Andreas, MD, DDS;
Ulrich Schoop, MD; Kawe Goharkhay, MD; Petra Schauer, MD; Orhun Doertbudak, MD;
Johann Wernisch, DTSc; and Wolfgang Sperr, MD, DDS, PhD; Lasers in Surgery and
Medicine 22:302-311, 1998.
136
27. A retrospective analysis of 140 dogs with oral melanoma treated with external
CHAPTER 9
beam radiation. D.R. Proulx; D.M. Ruslander; R.K. Dodge; M.L. Hauck; L.E. Williams;
Diode Lasers
B. Horn; G.S. Price; D.E. Thrall; Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44[3]:352-9, 2003 May-Jun.
 28. Oral Tumors and Their Biology. Withrow, Stephen, World Small Animal Veterinary
Association World Congress Proceedings, 2001.
29. Adjuvant therapy for melanoma in dogs: results of randomized clinical trials using
surgery, liposome-encapsulated muramyl tripeptide, and granulocyte macrophage colony-
stimulating factor. MacEwen, E.G.; I.D. Kurzman; D.M. Vail; R.R. Dubielzig; K. Everlith;
B.R. Madewell; C.O. Rodriguez; B. Phillips; C.H. Zwahlen; J. Obradovich; R.C
Rosenthal; L.E. Fox; M. Rosenberg; C. Henry; J. Fidel; Clin Cancer Res, 1999, Dec;5( 12):
4249-58.
30. Long-term survival of dogs with advanced malignant melanoma after DNA vacci-
    d   asd g as y ox m uo
Novosad; S.Charney; J. Farrelly; D. Craft; M. Wulderk; Y. Jeffers; M. Sadelain; A.E.
Hohenhaus; N. Segal; P. Gregor; M. Engelhorn; I. Riviere; A.N. Houghton; J.D. Wolchok;
Clin Cancer Res. 2003. Apr;9(4):1284-90.
 31. Focus on Feline Oncology. Higginbotham, Mary Lynn, Western Veterinary Confer-
ence, 2003.
 32. Evaluation of Superficial Masses: Diagnostic and Treatment Considerations.
McEnte, Margaret C., DVM, DACVIM (oncology), DACVR (radiation oncology),
Atlantic Coast Veterinary Conference, 2001.
33. Evaluation of dogs with digit masses: 117 cases (1981-1991). Marino, D.J. ; D.T.
Matthiesen ; J.D. Stefanacci; S.D. Moroff, J Am Vet Med Assoc 207[6]:726-8, 1995.
34. Diomed Surgical Presentation on CD-ROM.
35. Auto Suture(tm) SURGIWAND(tm) II, United States Surgical, a division of Tyco
Healthcare Group LP, Norwalk, CT 06856.
 36. Interstitial laser thermotherapy for liver tumours. Nikfarjam, M., C. Christophi,
British Journal of Surgery, Volume 90, Issue 9, 1033 - 1047, 2003.
37. Treatment of recurrent colorectal liver metastases by interstitial laser photocoagu-
lation, Shankar, A.; W.R. Lees; A.R. Gillams, J.A. Lederman; I. Taylor; British Journal of
Surgery, Volume 87, Issue 3, 298-300, 2002.
 38. Interstitial laser thermotherapy for liver tumours. British Journal of Surgery Volume
90, Issue 9, 1033-47, 2003.
39. In Vivo Laser-Induced Interstitial Thermotherapy of Pig Liver With a Temperature-
Controlled Diode Laser and MRI Correlation. Wohlgemuth, Walter A., MD, Gunther
Wamser, MD; Thomas Reiss, MD; Theodor Wagner, MD; Lasers in Surgery and Medicine
29:374±378, 2001.
40. Thermal Therapy of Canine Cerebral Tumors Using a 980 nm Diode Laser With
MR Temperature-Sensitive Imaging Feedback. Kangasniemi, Marko, MD; Roger J.
McNichols, PhD; James A. Bankson, PhD; Ashok Gowda, PhD; Roger E. Price, DVM;
and John D. Hazle, PhD; Lasers in Surgery and Medicine 35:41-50, 2004.
41. Interstitial laser coagulation for benign prostatic hyperplasia: clinical results of the
indigo diode laser system. Matsuta, Y.; K. Ichioka; N. Terada; S. Maekawa; K. Okubo; K.
Yoshimura; A. Terai; Y. Arai, Hinyokika Kiyo, Volume 49 Issue 4, 195-200, 2003.
42. Thermal Therapy of Canine Cerebral Tumors Using a 980 nm Diode Laser With
MR Temperature-Sensitive Imaging Feedback, Kangasniemi, Marko, MD; Roger J.
McNichols, PhD; James A. Bankson, PhD; Ashok Gowda, PhD; Roger E. Price, DVM;
and John D. Hazle, PhD; Lasers in Surgery and Medicine 35:41-50, 2004.
 43. Laser Ear Surgery in Small Animal Ear Diseases, 2nd Edition, (Louis N Gotthelf).
Jeffrey R. Moll, Peter Eeg, Noel Berger, Elsevier, Philadelphia, PA, 2005.
44. Canine axial skeletal osteosarcoma. A retrospective study of 116 cases (1986 to
1989). Heyman, SJ; D.L.Diefenderfer; M.H. Goldschmidt; C.D. Newton; Vet Surg
21 [4]:304-10, 1992 Jul-Aug.
S   o         s
William M. Adams; and Lisa J. Forrest;, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38[5]:445-451 Sep-Oct 2002.
46. Retrospective Analysis of Axial Skeleton Osteosarcoma in 22 Large-Breed Dogs.
Dickerson, Margaret E.; Rodney L. Page; Tracy A. LaDue; Marlene L. Hauck; Donald E.
137
PART III
Thrall; Martha E. Stebbins; G. Sylvester Price; J Vet Intern Med Volume 15 Issue 2, 120-
Clinical Laser Technique
124,2001
and Procedures
47. Webster's New World Medical Dictionary 2nd Edition. Medicinenet.com, 2003,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ.
 48. Photodynamic Therapy for Prostatic Carcinoma in a Dog. Lucroy, Michael D.;
Mary H. Bowles; Russell G. Higbee; Margaret A. Blaik; Jerry W. Ritchey; Tisha D.
Ridgway; J Vet Intern Med Volume 17 Issue 2 235-237, 2003.
49. Preclinical Evaluation of S-Aminolevulinic Acid-Based Photodynamic Therapy for
Canine Transitional Cell Carcinoma, Lucroy, M.D.; TD. Ridgway; G.M. Peavy; TB.
Krasieva; R.G. Higbee; G.A. Campbell; M.A. Blaik; Vet Comp Oncol Volume 1, Issue 2
76-85,2003.
50. Photodynamic Therapy for the Treatment of Intranasal Tumors in 3 Dogs and 1
Cat. Lucroy, Michael D.; Kevin R. Long; Margaret A. Blaik; Russell G. Higbee; Tisha D.
Ridgway; J Vet Intern Med Volume 17 Issue 5, 727-729, 2003.
51. Fluorescence detection of a new photosensitizer, PAD-S31, in tumour tissues and its
use as a photodynamic treatment for skin tumours in dogs and a cat: a preliminary report.
Tanabe. S.; M. Yamaguchi; M. Iijima; S; Nakajima; I Sakata; S. Miyaki; T. Takemura; H.
Furuoka; Y. Kobayashi; T. Matsui; Y. Uzuka; T. Sarashina; Vet J 167[3]:286-93, 2004
May.
138
Chapter 10
Introduction to Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy in Veterinary Medical and
Surgical Services*
Veterinary medicine is rapidly accepting laser surgery as a surgical thera-
peutic modality due to the decreased postoperative pain, bleeding, and
swelling associated with its use. Presently, the most commonly used form
of laser for small animal soft tissue surgery applications uses CO2 gas as
a medium. When CO2 is stimulated by electricity within a resonant cav-
ity a coherent, collimated, monochromatic beam of light is produced at
an invisible wavelength of 10.6 μm. This wavelength is ideal in small an-
imal soft tissue surgery because it is highly absorbed by water ( which con-
stitutes 90% of the volume of most soft tissue cells) and does not scatter
within the tissue. The energy absorbed by the tissues is rapidly converted
to heat and causes instantaneous boiling of intracellular water. The rap-
idly expanding volume of steam causes lysis of the relatively weak cell
membranes. The resulting desiccated cellular solids are transformed into
a plume of smoke. This process is called vaporization.
CO2 laser energy offers several advantages over surgery with a scalpel.
CO2 laser light can incise and ablate tissue cleanly when the beam is fo-
cused on the tissue surface. Moving the focal area of the laser beam prox-
imally or distally relative to the tissue surface will cause the beam to be
defocused at that point and can produce cauterization of tissue. The CO2
laser provides moderate hemostasis, whereby small blood vessels that are
less than half the diameter of the laser beam (up to 0.5 mm to 0.6 mm di-
ameter) are coagulated and sealed. Lymphatics are similarly sealed follow-
ing laser vaporization, causing less post-surgical swelling. Most notably,
there is less pain following CO2 laser surgery since vaporized small nerve
jo sua aun e peunod uoe aneun nou op pue paas ane saua
pain sensors. Laboratory evidence of reduced uptake of horseradish per-
oxidase following transection by CO2 laser energy supports this theory.
Finally, bacteria, fungi, and viruses are also vaporized with CO2 laser en-
ergy, so tissues may be disinfected during surgery, making it useful for
wound debridement.
Semiconductor technology has also made its appearance in laser sur-
gery and is available for surgical use in several distinct near-infrared
            s
delivered to tissues via a quartz fiber. At the tissues, this energy is moder-
ately absorbed by pigments and is poorly absorbed by histologic water.
However, laser light at these wavelengths also scatters within the tissue
quite readily. Therefore, melanin-rich tissues and vascular lesions are ide-
ally suited for diode laser surgery procedures. These tissue pigments ab-
* Some sections adapted with permission from the author and VetMedPub.
139
PART III
sorb the laser energy of near-infrared wavelengths quite readily, where it
Clinical Laser Technique
is transformed into heat and rapidly conducted to surrounding tissues.
and Procedures
The resulting heat distribution causes prolonged coagulative necrosis and
thermal injury up to 10 mm away from the originally targeted area, mak
ing it a bit more difficult to predict the depth of thermal injury of a given
amount of laser application time. In contrast, CO2 laser energy rarely
causes thermal necrosis beyond 1 mm from the incised or ablated tissue.
Consequently, diode lasers and the Nd:YAG laser are ideally suited for
cauterization and coagulation of highly vascular tissue, whereas CO2
lasers are ideal for ablative applications where minimal collateral thermal
damage is desired, or for incisions in the absence of large vessels.
At present, diode surgical lasers have some notable advantages. Diode
laser energy may be transmitted by a quartz optical fiber; quartz transmits
 s g      e q s 
the light is unacceptably attenuated and not usable at the distal end. These
fibers are easily passed through flexible fiberoptic endoscopes and have
diode laser energy can be passed through an endoscope, a CO2 laser is
more appropriate for surgery in this area. Since laser light wavelength of
10.6 μm will not pass through optical quartz fibers, veterinary endoscopic
surgeons have had to use near infrared wavelengths. If a suitable transmit-
ter of far-infrared light were available, it would be more sensible to use it
in conjunction with a flexible endoscope to avoid surgical complications
associated with diode lasers.
 To deliver the light energy generated by a CO2 laser, a suitable reflec-
tive light pipe must be used to transmit the beam from its source to the
distal end where it is used. Usually a series of articulated arms are used to
allow such transmission by a combination of highly reflective mirrors per-
fectly aligned within the mechanical system. The mirrors may be fixed in
 position, or they may be mounted within jointed elbows having an excep-
tionally high flexibility. Generally, transmission systems using sequential
mirrors within articulated arms will produce a collimated laser beam at
the distal end. Collimated beams do not allow for changes in power den-
sity with distance from the target.
The major disadvantage of using articulated arms for transmitting laser
light is their fragility. They may also be much less flexible and more un-
wieldy compared to flexible optical quartz fibers. It is also extremely dif-
use. The great advantage of using an articulated arm, however, is that it
is the most efficient mode of radiant energy transmission, allowing preser-
vation of beam geometry and the ability to employ extremely high power
emitted from a laser.
Recently, hollow reflective light guides have been commercially pro-
duced for transmitting laser wavelengths not suited for fiberoptic trans-
mission. They are generally highly reflective, slender, hollow, cylindrical
tubes of 1 m or 1.5 m that are very flexible. They are frequently misnamed
"fibers,” and may actually lose a great deal of energy due to repeated in-
ternal reflections within the lumen of the hollow waveguide. Additionally,
these flexible waveguides do not produce a collimated beam at the distal
140
end. The end of the flexible hollow waveguide must have a convergent
CHAPTER 10
handpiece and focusing tips to be used properly.
Clinical Applications of
CO Laser Energy
Focusing tips for a CO2 laser are a necessity. They are placed within a
handpiece that attaches to the end of the flexible hollow waveguide. They
are named according to the diameter of the beam at its focal area, and
come in diameters of 1.4 mm, 0.8 mm, 0.4 mm and 0.3mm. The tips are
also straight, curved, or extremely curved and are cut to several different
lengths. The laser light focused by these tips can interact with tissue and
create a circular “spot" that is equivalent to the diameter of the focusing
tip when the handpiece is held at the focal distance, usually 1 mm to 3
mm away from the target tissue. Since the area of this circular spot is
related to the square of the diameter, the power density of the beam will
diminish exponentially by increasing the spot size using the same power
setting.
For example, the power density of 8 W focused by the 0.8 mm tip is the
same as the power density of 2 W focused by the 0.4 mm tip. Because the
focused beam becomes divergent distal to the focal area, it is possible to
reduce the power density of the spot by moving the handpiece farther
away from the tissue. Because coagulation is the predominant tissue effect
when using lower power densities, and vaporization is predominant with
higher power densities, it is possible to have great control over the desired
tissue effect with a focused laser beam. Neither collimated beams nor
 change in power density for surgical uses.
Ti   ss  a   ar 
 more practical for the veterinarian to own and operate this surgical tool.
One manufacturer of medical lasers is currently working to make laser
technology more accessible to private veterinarian practices. The veteri-
nary practitioner can quickly master medical lasers after first becoming
educated in laser physics and safety. Our experience has been favorable.
Using the following basic preparations, the surgical CO2 laser can be used
every day.
Equipment and Preparation
Standard surgical decorum is followed in the laser surgery suite, and only
specifically trained veterinarians should perform laser surgery. Veterinary
technicians should also be well trained to maintain the equipment and
 nary technicians are trained in laser hazards and safety, as well as the
technology.
A standard “laser in use" warning sign should be highly conspicuous
near the operating room as a warning to passers-by.
A smoke evacuation system must be used to remove the plume created
by laser interaction with tissue. A laser surgery mask should be worn over
the nose and mouth during any procedure. These masks have very fine
pores (<0.5μm) that filter out any suspended airborne particles missed by
the smoke evacuator and also protect the patient from the contaminated
gases exhaled by the surgeon. Veterinary technicians should monitor the
141
PART III
Clinical Laser Technique
and Procedures
LASERIN USE
EYE PROTECTION REQUIRED
DANGER
OIDEYEORSKINEXP
PESURETT
LUXAR
Figure 10-1 "Laser in Use" sign, provided by
Luxar Inc., now Lumenis, Inc.
time that the smoke evacuating systems have been used, and ensure that
this vital safety equipment is functioning properly.
a a in p ad aq   rs i o i
Everyone near the surgical suite should wear goggles or other eyewear that
will attenuate harmful laser wavelengths and intensities. (Figure 10-1)
These protective goggles are specific for the wavelength of laser light
they can filter, and are also rated by the diminished ten-fold factor of at-
tenuated light intensity they provide to the user, e.g., OD 6 goggles dimin-
ish the intensity by a factor of 106 (Figure 10-2).
Contact lenses alone are NOT adequate. The eyes of the patient should
also be shielded from potential stray laser beams. Observation windows
require a protective covering that provides an adequate margin of safety.
The straight handpiece and the angled handpiece are the most common
attachments to the hollow flexible fiber waveguide (Figure 10-3).
A few accessories will enhance the efficiency of any laser procedure. All
 of the required focusing tips will fit snugly into the end of the handpieces
 to focus the laser beam emerging from the fiber. Both handpieces and tips
are autoclavable, gas sterilizable, or can be soaked in disinfecting solu-
tion. Having several handpieces previously sterilized will help smooth the
preparation for sterile surgical procedures. Other techniques to keep the
handpiece sterile include tying a sterile latex glove around the handpiece,
placing a plastic sleeve over the handpiece, or using a handpiece shroud.
The scanner is an optional accessory that generates a pattern and pro.
vides an interesting benefit. It delivers an effective zone of vaporization of
3 mm diameter by using an instrument specific 0.8 mm tip that is eccen-
trically positioned around a rotating axial head. The scanner has an au-
P pue puey suoaans aui daay oi pasn aq ues ieui piatus aqeaeioon
sterile. It is most useful for large areas of tumor ablation, entropion re-
 pair, scar reduction, skin graft host site preparation, acral lick granuloma
treatment, and removal of multiple benign cutaneous masses. A CO2 laser
delivery system with enhanced capabilities is required to use the scanner.
The laser-assisted uvular palatoplasty (LAUP) kit is recommended if the
cephalic breeds. This kit also has a longer handpiece without a backstop
142
CHAPTER 10
Clinical Applications of
CO2Laser Energy
Figure 10-2 Protective eye wear is in place
prior to beginning surgery.
for use in areas that are deep. These handpieces are also autoclavable, gas
sterilizable, and can soak in disinfecting solution. They each have a spe-
cial port at the end for a smoke evacuator hose. This tool is most useful
in the oropharynx where there is limited room for maneuvering instru-
ments. The smoke evacuator port obviates the need for a technician to op-
erate the larger wand usually employed for plume removal.
A variety of disposable sterile tips are used with a surgical CO2 laser.
They are individually packaged in y-irradiated sterile wrappers. They are
opened using sterile technique, and may be either disposed after one use,
or reprocessed and used again. They can be gas or steam sterilized, and
they can also be soaked in disinfectant solution. Excess char buildup will
eventually end the life of the tip, its performance waning steadily until
that point. A solution of 1:10 bleach will disintegrate most char that
builds up on the ceramic tips, but may permanently damage metallic tips.
Detergent enzyme solutions are also available, which take longer to digest
the char but are gentle to the focusing tip. An ultrasonic scaler-bath is also
a useful way to dislodge any adherent char from the aperture of a focus-
ing tip. Spraying pressurized air through the tip after its use can also elim-
143
PART III
Clinical Laser Technique
and Procedures
Figure 10-3 Straight hand piece attached to
hollow waveguide and readied for aseptic use.
de ue i ssn amiq pzis po aq ue sdi e ss ie
disinfectant solution, but must be completely dry before use. The increas-
 ing supply of tips has lowered their cost, so it is wise to discard the tip after
 a few uses and incorporate that cost into the operating expense of the laser.
 It is contraindicated to use faulty tips that will cause excessive heating of
target tissues or damage to the hollow flexible waveguide. Finally, for the
purpose of convenience, it is practical to keep a tackle box nearby to neatly
organize the tips and other accessories in one compact area.
A sterile surgical pack including an additional handpiece, instruments,
 gauze, and sterile saline should always be available at the beginning of
every laser surgery procedure (Figure 10-4).
It is essential to have this ready to wipe away any char that forms at the
edges of the incision. Because char is a tissue irritant, leaving it within in-
cisions may lead to wound dehiscence. Moistened gauze also is used as a
barrier to absorb any stray beams of laser energy during a procedure. This
serves to protect nearby structures from inadvertent thermal injury.
It is also important to use an octylated cyanoacrylate following CO2 laser
surgery. It is most useful in feline declaw procedures and routine spay and
 neuter procedures. Octylated cyanoacrylate is a clear tissue adhesive which
functions differently than the regular blue, butylated cyanoacrylate. Because
 a laser incision that is made correctly will be clean and dry, this clear, un-
colored skin closure product allows the incision edges to remain in opposi-
tion. It will not be effective if the wound edges are oozing or bloody. Also,
it is not to be buried under the skin; therefore, when used in the feline de-
claw procedure it must only be applied to the dry and clean incision edges.
If the incision is not made correctly, or if there is remaining char at the
wound edges, there will be surgical complications, e.g., wound dehiscence.
144
CHAPTER 10
Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy
Figure 10-4 Standard surgical pack
preparation for use with CO laser energy.
In general, any incision is enhanced with the superpulse (SP) temporal
pattern, available with an appropriately equipped CO2 laser unit. Because
the superpulse temporal pattern creates sharp and rapid peaks of intensity
followed by intermittent rests, there is an optimal balance of vaporization
  i  a  'ss n n xn  
laser the surgeon should produce tension at the leading edge of the beam
that vaporizes tissues. This causes the characteristic clean and dry charred
separation of tissue at the zone of vaporization. The zones of thermal
necrosis and thermal conduction are thus greatly diminished and create a
There is some superficial char formation when superpulse mode is used;
however, it is almost completely removed by gentle wiping of wound
edges with sterile moistened gauze. Some surgeons may also prefer to re-
peat the superpulse mode (30 Hz, 25 msec pulse width = 75% power) to
add more control when making an incision in a delicate anatomical area
(e.g., for stenotic nare correction or ferret adrenalectomy).
In contrast, when continuous wave (CW) or repeated pulse temporal
patterns (PW) are used, there is greater carbonization of tissues and more
char remains. These settings also cause slightly larger zones of thermal
necrosis and thermal conduction for an equivalent zone of vaporization.
Therefore, a higher degree of incisional hemostasis should be expected
 compared to an incision made using superpulse mode. If superpulse is not
available, the surgeon may still wish to minimize char formation created
with incisions. Several repeat pulse settings are available on all CO2 laser
units. After experimenting with several settings, we have found that 40%
power repeat pulse (20 Hz, 20 msec pulse width) is the closest setting to
superpulse available at this time. A table of common settings is available
in the user's manual supplied by the manufacturer.
There are many surgical procedures not described herein that are per-
formed better with a surgical CO2 laser. We are continually impressed
145
PART III
with the efficiency of this surgical laser wavelength. Many areas of the
Clinical Laser Technique
body that are generally perceived as difficult by other means due to bleed-
and Procedures
ing tendencies are now manageable; the eye, ear, nose, and throat are the
most commonly cited. Skin fold-plasty, incisions for lipoma removal, and
treatment of furunculosis are all common cosmetic procedures easily per
formed with a laser. Besides skin incision for surgical sterilization, my fa-
vorite laser surgical procedures are cystotomy, thyroidectomy, elongated
soft palate correction, anal sacculectomy, perianal adenoma removal,
acral lick granuloma, and indolent ulcer treatment, because there is min-
imal or no hemorrhage during the procedure and visibility is unsurpassed.
The potential for important future innovative procedures is enormous.
We have observed that by using a CO2 laser the patient's post-surgical
comfort is dramatically improved over traditional techniques. More de
tailed studies are needed to organize and document these findings. A new
discipline of veterinary surgery is unfolding before us. At no other time in
history have pets been anthropomorphized as the present. It is every veteri-
narian's responsibility to minimize animal suffering in any way possible.
Therefore, if CO2 laser surgery is truly a superior technique in its appro
priate application, it should be used as an everyday tool for surgical proce.
dures such as skin tumor removal, sexual sterilization, and feline declaw.
Surgical Technique
Having a good understanding of the physical properties associated with
laser-tissue interaction is a must to achieve the most favorable surgical
 outcome possible. Once this has been accomplished the clinician can then
undertake the relatively short learning curve (two to four weeks) needed
to become technically proficient with a surgical laser.
Each laser has specific requirements for the appropriate distance be-
tween the handpiece and target tissue. Consult the manufacturers specifi-
cations for optimal focal point parameters. As previously discussed, the
position of the laser handpiece should be maintained in as perpendicular
a fashion as possible to maximize correct beam geometry. Severe angula-
tion of the laser beam will not only stress the armature, but also create a
focal distance disparity between the leading and trailing edges of the laser
beam. This could greatly impact the lasers’ vaporization potential to the
target tissue. An uneven power density distribution will result and poten-
tially create a leading edge of desiccation and contracture of tissue.
Remember that distance, power, and appeture diameter of the handpiece
all play a critical interactive role in power density.
A great advantage of laser energy is the ability of the clinician to mini
mize excessive tissue manipulation. For initial incisions, undermining tis-
tional benefit is a general reduction in char formation. Too much tension
could result in tissue tearing, rupturing small vessels and tearing nociecep
tors and lymphatic vessels. This can effectively negate the promoted pos-
itive laser tissue effects previously outlined.
Clinicians new to laser tissue interaction should become accomplished
146
at routine skin incisions, muscle and fat dissection, and tissue undermin-
CHAPTER 10
ing before attempting more complex uses of laser-tissue interaction.
Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy
Having a comfortable working knowledge of distance manipulation to
change from vaporization to collagen contracture, protein denaturation,
and coagulation before attempting surgery in highly vascular or recessed
areas will bode well for a positive surgical outcome.
As the laser energy vaporizes tissue, peripheral tissue-energy interaction
provides nocieceptor sealing, vessel contracture, and small lymphatic ves-
sel sealing. All these promote positive tissue handling interaction. Conver-
sely, excessive peripheral thermal tissue effect will delay or create failure
of proper wound healing, in some cases severely increasing potentials for
incisional dehiscence.
Some success can be achieved with nonspecific granulation tissue bleed-
ing by applying laser energy in the 500 to 1,500 power density range.
Again, learning to paint a vascular area with adequate laser energy to seal
small bleeding vessels can improve time management of a multitude of
surgical cases.
Standard protocols for use of CO2 laser energy in small animal clinical
practice has been validated by numerous individuals, all using similar spot
diameters, power setings, and power output modes to achieve positive
therapeutic outcomes. A currently accepted technique chart is provided.
Routine Procedure Considerations
Today's demanding pet owner desires the finest care available in medical
technology and surgery. The recent availability of more affordable, com-
pact CO2 surgical laser technology has provided practitioners with a new
and exciting way to satisfy their clients' desire for high-quality medicine.
Today's veterinary CO2 laser equipment is relatively easy to master as a
surgical tool, and its post-operative benefits engender a lasting impression
of compassionate care in the pet-owner's mind.
Here we introduce some suggested techniques for elective surgical pro
cedures that all veterinary practitioners can perform every day using a
CO2 laser. In general, the techniques vary little from standard protocol,
with the exception that a scalpel-like handpiece delivering focused laser
energy replaces the traditional steel scalpel.
Table 10-1 General parameters for CO, laser use
Routine incision:
Routine ablation/vaporization
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
Spot Diameter: 0.8 mm
Power Setting: 6 to 10 W
Power Setting: 10 to 20 W
Power Output: Continuous wa ve
Power Output: Continuous wave
+/_ superpulse
(Use pulsed wave in delicate areas)
Delicate location incision:
Routine excision:
Spot Diameter: 0.3 to 0.4 mm
Spot Diameter: 0.8 mm
Power Setting: 3 to 6 W
Power Setting: 8 to 15 W
Power Output: Pulse wave
 Power Output: Continuous wave
Superpulse
(non-superpulse enhances hemostasis)
147
PART III
We use a 20 W CO2 laser with superpulse capability. This produces an
Clinical Laser Technique
intense, monochromatic, coherent, collimated beam of infrared light at a
and Procedures
wavelength of 10.6 μm. The laser beam is delivered to the surgical site via
a hollow flexible waveguide that terminates at a scalpel-like handpiece
The laser energy exits the handpiece through exchangeable tube-shaped
tips (various diameters ranging from 0.3 mm to 1.4 mm). The various
suggested focusing tip sizes will be indicated so that proper power density
 a ar a a ie s rd a  aq 
 guidelines for use and not absolute values for the given procedure.
The mode of energy delivery is described as either CW (continuous
wave), meaning that the laser is delivering a continuous stream of laser
power, or as CW SP (continuous wave, superpulse), a stream of laser en-
ergy characterized by a pattern of sharp and rapid peaks and rests of laser
(peaks) and thermal relaxation (rests) of target tissues, thereby minimiz-
ing tissue charring and collateral thermal necrosis. If superpulse is not
available, then a continuous wave, pulsed wave (CW PW) can be deliv
ered, which also provides for a period of rest and cooling between pulses,
but is not as effective in reducing heat and char formation. See Chapter 4
for more detailed explanations of thermal accumulation and thermal
relaxation.
The CO2 laser wavelength has a high absorption coefficient in water
that makes it ideal for soft tissue incisions and ablations because it results
 in the least amount of collateral tissue damage and post-operative coagu-
lative necrosis due to heat. Because this particular wavelength does not
layer-by-layer, minimizing energy transmission to underlying cellular
structures.
On the other hand, wavelengths generated by diode or Nd:YAG (be-
tween 810 nm and 1,064 nm) lasers are poorly absorbed by cellular
water, and react more with the pigments present in tissues. Due to the
fact that cells are comprised more of water than pigments, these wave-
lengths more readily transmit through and scatter deeper within the tis-
sue. Coagulative necrosis and deeper, more prolonged thermal conduc-
tion characterize the effects to tissue following irradiation at these wave-
lengths. The ability to deliver these wavelengths via optical quartz fiber
makes them well suited to flexible endoscopic applications, and their
high absorption in pigmented tissue makes them more efficient coagula-
tors of larger blood vessels. However, the CO2 laser's more predictable,
controllable soft tissue effect, coagulative properties, broader range of
applications, and inherently shorter learning curve make it the ideal laser
for the general veterinary practitioner, and is the reason we prefer it over
other wavelengths.
As discussed before, an understanding of standard skin incisions, exci-
sions, and tissue undermining gives new users great confidence to expand
their surgical use of lasers.
CO2 laser use on the integumentary system is one of the most common
uses in general clinical veterinary practice. Skin has 87% to 92% water
 component and thus is an exceptional target tissue for CO2 laser energy.
148
Skin incisions should, whenever possible, be made with a spot diame-
CHAPTER 10
ter of less than 0.8 mm under slight tension. Adequate power density will
Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy
allow a smooth single pass full thickness dermal penetration with minimal
char. The non-contact aspect of CO2 laser energy also reduces tissue dis-
tortion, especially in delicate regions on the body surface. We prefer to use
a 0.4 mm spot size with superpulse continuous wave parameters when
producing a skin incision.
Excisional parameters use the skin incision technique just described
along with undermining of subcutaneous fat and connective tissue using
a 0.8 mm spot size at adequate power density to continue adequate va-
porization. Superpulse continuous wave mode is turned off at this point
to improve hemostasis and enhance coagulation of small blood vessels.
Continuing to provide light tension at a 45° to 90° angle with brown
Addison forceps will allow for clean, efficient vaporization and removal
of the tissue to be excised.
Tissue undermining provides for improved dermal release for wound
closure. The CO2 can provide excellent vaporization of connective tissue
deep to the dermis. A 0.4 mm to 0.8 mm spot size is optimal for this tech-
 nique. The laser beam should be parallel to the dermis and at the level of
the connective tissue interface. Adequate tissue tension on the skin in an
upward lifting motion will allow adequate visualization and access for va-
porization. Be sure not to travel the laser beam too close to the dermis be-
cause peripheral thermal energy release may damage dermal blood supply.
Specific Surgical Case Management
Urogenital
Ovariohysterectomy
A routine spay in any patient is improved by using a laser because it re-
duces the post-operative pain, bleeding, and swelling. Make a midline
skin incision using 0.4 mm tip, 6 W to 8 W CW SP. The surgeon may wish
to use 7 W to 9 W SP pulsed 30Hz, 25 msec pulse width (75% power)
to further reduce char formation, thermal conduction through tissue, and
creation of laser surgical plume. After wiping away any char, the subcu-
taneous tissues are dissected away to clearly expose the linea alba. The ab-
dominal muscles and peritoneum are tented up with forceps and a single
cranial stab incision is created with a scalpel blade. Alternately, the hand-
piece can be angled to be close to parallel with the linea leading up to the
tented region. Then a brief burst of 7 W to 9 W CW SP CO2 laser energy
        s s    
rector is introduced into the abdominal incision to serve as a backstop for
the CO2 laser-assisted continuation of the incision. All internal structures
must be protected from stray laser beams. Inadvertent lasing of the spleen,
bladder, or mesenteric blood vessels could prove disastrous and should be
avoided. The abdomen is incised using 0.4 mm tip 6 W to 8 W CW over
the backstop, which is lifted upward to tense the targeted muscles and
linea that are vaporized. Any char is wiped away from the clean and dry
muscle edges. The procedure is then routinely continued. A surgeon may
149
PART III
wish to vaporize tissues of the ovarian pedicle and/or cervical stump fol-
Clinical Laser Technique
lowing ligation, although it is not recommended due to the larger diame-
and Procedures
ter of the target vessels. Using the CO2 laser to bisect the broad ligament
can greatly reduce seepage from small blood vessels in the broad ligament.
Pain receptors can also be sealed, reducing post-operative discomfort.
 Following routine closure of the abdominal muscles and subcutis using
absorbable suture material, the skin can be opposed with sutures; how-
ever, no exterior sutures may be necessary if tissue adhesive is used as a
 protective bandage. This technique has two benefits: it gives the client an
added convenience because there is no need for a second visit to remove
sutures, and the appearance of the surgical site is more pleasing. Because
there is no swelling of the incision edges, incisions made with a surgical
laser oppose cosmetically. (See Case Studies 12, 24.)
Feline Castration
After the patient is anesthetized and the scrotum is surgically prepped a
single pass is made on the scrotal median raphe' using a 0.3 mm tip and
3 W to 4 W CW SP, or a 0.4 mm tip and 6 W to 8 W CW SP. Both testi-
cles can be manually extracted, one at a time, through the same scrotal in-
cision. Two separate incisions may be required in the scrotal subcuta
neous tissues to completely exteriorize each testicle and supporting struc-
tures. Tension is applied to the testicular vessels by gentle traction of the
testicle. Sterile moistened gauze is placed under the tensed scrotal cord to
 protect the surgeon. A single pass is made through the tunic to divide the
testicular artery and vein as well as the vas deferens and cremaster mus-
cle. The proximal remnant of the transected structures will retract
through the inguinal ring into the abdomen. The vessels and nerves will
be sealed immediately, causing hemostasis and diminished or absent pain.
Occasionally, a mature cat that has well-developed gonadal tissue and
broad vasculature will bleed from the vaporizing pass made with a laser
if the surgeon does not consider the diameter of the vessel. This occurs be-
cause the CO2 laser seals only vessels that are smaller than the diameter
of the laser tip being used for the incision. To vaporize the spermatic cord
the surgeon may wish to use a 0.8 mm tip; use a ligature to be safest.
Any char remaining on the skin incision is wiped away with sterile
moistened gauze. The edges are left in opposition and neither sutures nor
surgical adhesive is required. The predominant benefit of using a laser in
this technique is patient comfort and diminished bleeding. The surgeon
should choose the technique carefully in a mature cat, and consider ligat-
ing the testicular vessels if they are large. Either way, if the scrotal incision
is made using a laser, the patient will be more comfortable following the
procedure. (See Case Study 6.)
Canine Anterior Scrotal Open Castration
A routine neuter in any patient is improved using a CO2 laser because it
diminishes the usual post-operative pain, bleeding, and swelling. The fur
surrounding the entire scrotum is clipped and prepped atraumatically. We
150
have found that most irritation to the scrotum is associated with excessive
CHAPTER 10
scrubbing and harsh chemicals. A 0.9% NaCl wash is applied to clean off
Clinical Applications of
CO2Laser Energy
any remaining soap or alcohol. Excessive or close clipping will initiate a
cycle of irritation and self-mutilation in the patient, and should be
avoided. The scrotum and surrounding exposed area is surgically prepped
with a chlorhexidine scrub solution. One testicle is advanced to the ante-
rior scrotal median raphe and used to create tension on the thinned scro-
tum where the incision is planned. A midline anterior scrotal incision is
created with a 0.4mm tip using 6 W to 8 W CW SP. As the testicle tenses
the scrotal skin, the incision is continued until the testicle begins to exte-
riorize. This should be accomplished in a single pass incision. The testicle
is manually extracted through an incision in the scrotal subcutaneous tis-
sue. The entire testicle and contents of the tunic are exteriorized and the
connective tissue and any fat is wiped out and away with sterile gauze.
The vaginal tunic is opened to clearly visualize the pampiniform plexus,
vas deferens, and cremaster muscle. The cremaster muscle is ligated prox-
imally with absorbable suture material and transected; or in dogs with
light musculature, the cremaster can be cleanly divided using the laser
beam. The pampiniform plexus and vas deferens are ligated and tran-
sected proximally as well.
The open castration of the second testicle is then performed through the
same scrotal incision. A second incision is made in the scrotal subcuta-
neous tissue using the same surgical laser settings. The second testicle,
likewise, is then surgically removed by open technique. Before final clo-
sure, the scrotum is examined for any bleeding or remaining fatty connec-
tive tissue. Any char is wiped from the incision edges. A small bead of tis-
sue adhesive is placed over the incision to complete the procedure.
When performing laser-assisted castration on a mature dog, an experi
enced laser surgeon may consider using the same technique as in the
young dog. Alternately, a preputial incision to advance the testicles
through can be used, but this requires placement of a non-irritating sub-
cutaneous absorbable suture to keep the incision edges opposed during
healing. Proper use of the laser produces a clean and dry incision that
heals rapidly. However, some dogs insist on grooming, which must be pre-
vented to allow normal healing. An Elizabethan collar may be worn to
 prevent self-mutilation. (See Case Study 5.)
Canine Posterior Scrotal Open Castration
 In an attempt to minimize patient-induced tissue irritation to a scrotal
laser approach, we have found that this type of approach through the
scrotal tissue allows for less access for the patient, while allowing easier
visualization of the surgical incision by the owner. The fur surrounding
the entire scrotum is clipped and prepped atraumatically. We have found
that most irritation to the scrotum is associated with excessive scrubbing
and harsh chemicals. A 0.9% NaCl wash is applied to clean off any re-
maining soap or alcohol. Excessive or close clipping will initiate a cycle of
irritation and self-mutilation in the patient, and should be avoided. The
151
PART III
chlorhexidine scrub solution. One testicle is advanced to the posterior
Clinical Laser Technique
scrotal median raphe adjacent to the surrounding integument and used to
and Procedures
create tension on the thinned scrotum where the incision is planned. A
midline posterior scrotal incision is created with a 0.4 mm tip using 6 W
to 8 W CW SP. As the testicle tenses the scrotal skin, the incision is con-
tinued until the testicle begins to exteriorize. The total length of the inci-
sion can be as small as 1 centimeter due to the elasticity of the scrotal tis-
sue. This should be accomplished in a single pass incision. The testicle is
manually extracted through an incision in the scrotal subcutaneous tissue.
The entire testicle and contents of the tunic are exteriorized and the con-
nective tissue and any fat are wiped out and away with sterile gauze. The
vaginal tunic is opened to clearly visualize the pampiniform plexus, vas
deferens, and cremaster muscle. The cremaster muscle is ligated proxi
mally with absorbable suture material and transected; or in dogs with
light musculature the cremaster can be cleanly divided using the laser
beam. Our personal experience indicates that the use of the CO2 laser
beam without any crushing or ligation of the tissue allows for less post-
operative pain. The pampiniform plexus and vas deferens are ligated and
transected proximally as well.
The open castration of the second testicle is then performed through the
same scrotal incision. A second incision is made in the scrotal subcuta
neous tissue, through the original scrotal skin incision, using the same sur-
gical laser settings. The second testicle, likewise, is then surgically re-
moved by open technique. Before final closure, the scrotum is examined
for any bleeding or remaining fatty connective tissue. Any char is wiped
from the incision edges. A small bead of tissue adhesive is placed over the
incision to complete the procedure.
When performing laser-assisted castration on a mature dog, use the
same technique as in a young dog neuter. An experienced laser surgeon
may consider continuing to use the scrotal approach. If the surgeon is un-
comfortable with this incision style in a mature dog, a preputial incision
 to advance the testicles through can be used. This will require placement
of a non-irritating subcutaneous absorbable suture to keep the incision
edges opposed during healing. Proper use of the laser produces a clean
and dry incision that heals rapidly. However, some dogs insist on groom-
ing, which must be prevented to allow normal healing. An Elizabethan
collar may be worn to prevent self-mutilation. (Review Case Study 5 with
 modifications listed above.)
Cystotomy
Perhaps the single most overlooked surgical procedure that is spectacu-
larly enhanced with CO2 laser is the cystotomy. Typically patients have a
long history of hematuria during the diagnostic phase of care. By the time
the patient has been selected as a surgical candidate for cystotomy the uri-
nary bladder muscles are thickened from chronic muscle spasm, fibrosis.
and edema. The mucosa is also frequently infected. Typical diseases of the
d  so a a a e an r r
poid cystitis, apical diverticulum, transitional cell carcinoma, and ectopic
152
ureter(s). The classic post-surgical cystotomy patient continues to have
CHAPTER 10
significant hematuria for a few days. This is eliminated when the CO2
Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy
laser is used. Because the laser incision is clean and dry there is no source
of bleeding into the bladder following cystotomy. There is also reduced in-
flammation and contamination because the laser seals lymphatics and
blood vessels and sterilizes the incision edges as it cuts. Because nerve end-
ings are also sealed following laser incision, there is significantly less post-
operative discomfort. The procedure is certainly more eficient because
the laser surgeon does not spend time blotting out capillary bleeding.
Visibility is enhanced because the clean and dry wound edges are not dis-
torted. Pet owners are extremely satisfied following a curative procedure,
and because chronic hematuria is seemingly resolved instantly following
indicated laser cystotomy, this technique should be enthusiastically pro-
moted when surgery is required.
The surgical approach to the bladder is slightly different for male dogs
and female dogs. A routine caudal midline laparotomy is performed in the
female dog. In the male dog, however, the prepuce covers the surgical ex-
posure to the caudal midline. The caudal hypogastric vein also courses
below the skin adjacent to the prepuce, and can cause bleeding during a
procedure or bruising following a procedure because it has been ligated.
Once again, the CO2 laser provides a unique solution to this problem. The
midline incision is created with a 0.4 mm spot size, 6 W to 8 W, CW SP,
 and courses sigmoidally to avoid the prepuce. Once the caudal hypogas-
tric vein is identified it is ablated along with subcutaneous fat with a 0.8
mm spot size, 6 W to 8 W CW. The incision is now complete and dry.
There will be no post-operative bruising in this area, nor is ligating the
vessel required. This simple step hastens the entry into the abdomen,
makes the procedure more efficient, and provides a more appealing post-
surgical appearance.
Once the abdomen is opened, the urinary bladder is identified and iso-
lated with sterile moistened laparotomy sponges. A stay suture is placed
 to anchor the bladder in one fixed area. Creating a cystotomy incision
urine is emptied. A sterile assistant is prepared with suction to remove any
urine immediately before it contaminates the surgical field. Smoke evacu-
ation accompanies the laser incision as well. The bladder is incised in a
relatively avascular area near the apex on the ventral side if possible. A
0.8 mm spot size, 12 W to 15 W CW is used to vaporize a hole in the
bladder serosa and mucosa. The air forced through the hollow flexible
waveguide will slightly fill the bladder when the mucosa has been ablated.
At this exact moment the surgeon and assistant work together to extend
the incision and avoid urine contamination as the bladder empties. The
full thickness incision is continued to a length that will accommodate the
entry of a suction tip. The bladder is emptied of urine and the contents of
the bladder, e.g., cystic calculi, are removed and submitted for analysis. It
is also important to flush saline proximally and distally to ensure that
there are no remaining small urethral calculi. Post-operative radiographs
should be taken to document removal of all urinary calculi.
Tumor resection, polyp removal(s), or apical diverticulum reduction re-
153
PART III
quire the incision with appropriate tissue margins to be continued. These
Clinical Laser Technique
tissues should be submitted for histopathology. Increasing the power de-
and Procedures
livered will speed the removal of the thick transitional cell epithelium and
muscularis layers, but this also creates a great deal of plume to be evacu
ated. The surgeon's experience should guide the removal of tissue so that
the bladder can be closed properly following the procedure.
 Prior to closure the cystotomy incision is aggressively wiped free of
char. The edges are clean and dry. Standard closure using monofilament
absorbable suture material in an inverting pattern yields highly desirable
results. The abdomen is closed routinely and the patient should recover
with no post-surgical hematuria. (See Case Study 21.)
Canine Urethrostomy
Primary neoplastic disease of the urethra in dogs or cats is rare. More
commonly trauma, urethral prolapse, or calculi cause obstruction of urine
flow, requiring amelioration via urethrotomy. Although a common proce-
dure, it is generally very bloody and time is consumed blotting tissues dry
for better visualization. The feline perineal urethrostomy procedure was
commonly employed for recurrent urethral calculi, but since the advent of
low ash and urinary-acidifying diets, it is not as commonly needed. Many
male dogs are likewise susceptible to urethral calculi that lodge behind the
OS penis after being voided from the bladder. Female dogs generally re-
spond nicely to several months of a calculolytic diet and seldom require
urethrotomy, but may require cystotomy if the dissolution attempt fails.
 If urethral calculi are not removed quickly, post-renal azotemia will begin
its snowballing effect of diffuse metabolic derangements, eventually lead-
ing to death. The CO2 laser aids in the speed at which relief can be deliv.
ered in this life-saving procedure.
In obstructed patients that have been stabilized, a urinary catheter is
usually already in place to empty urine from the bladder. In dogs, scro-
 tal urethrotomy is ideal because the urethra is widest and most superfi-
cial in this location. Likewise, any calculi lodged at the pelvic brim or be-
hind the os penis are easily removed from this surgical approach. The
skin incision is made with 0.4 mm spot size, 6 W to 8 W, CW SP, and any
char is wiped away. The scrotum is removed, and if not already neutered.
orchiectomy is performed. The surgeon palpates the obstructed area and
plans the urethrotomy over the calculus. The subcutaneous tissues are
 gently dissected away. The retractor penis muscle is identified and dis-
placed to one side. The indwelling urinary catheter can now be appreci-
ated clearly through the thinned urethral mucosa. Urethrotomy is prefer-
ably performed with a 0.3 mm spot size, 2 W to 4 W, pulse mode A4-A5
(Lumenis/Accuvet, Novapulse 20 W CO2 laser?, 15% to 20% power),
superpulse repeat pulse pattern or mode P6 (20% power, repeat pulse)
over the calculus, but the laser incision can also be made over the urinary
catheter as long as it is not damaged. Using the repeating pulse pattern
allows control over the speed and depth of the incision. If the incision is
made with too much power, the catheter may be damaged or lost into the
bladder. This power setting allows urethrotomy without any bleeding
154
and also preserves the urinary catheter so it may be left in place for 24
CHAPTER 10
hours after the procedure.
Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy
If urethrotomy is performed, radiographs should be examined to ensure
removal of all calculi before final closure. The edges of the urethra should
be gently wiped using a moistened cotton-tipped applicator to remove any
char. The urethra edges are opposed using 4-0 monofilament absorbable
suture material to envelop the indwelling urinary catheter. A sterile assis-
tant can control any urethral bleeding from the suture placement by dab-
bing epinephrine (1:1,000) at the entry and exit points of the needle, using
a sterile cotton-tipped applicator. The subcutaneous tissues and skin are
closed in routine fashion after rinsing the surgical field with sterile saline
and wiping away any char.
A permanent urethrostomy may need to be performed for (1) calculi
that cannot be removed by flushing, (2) chronic stone formers that can-
not medically be kept free of calculi, (3) strictures of the urethra resulting
from one or more prior urethral surgery, or (4) severe penile trauma or
when penile amputation is required. The surgeon must also create a large
enough mucosal-to-skin closure to allow for some stricture of the open
ing in the future. The edges of the urethra should be gently wiped using a
moistened cotton-tipped applicator to remove any char. The urethral mu-
cosa edges are opposed to the skin with 3-0 or 4-0 monofilament ab-
sorbable suture material. A sterile assistant can control any urethral
bleeding from the suture placement by dabbing epinephrine (1:1,000) at
 the entry and exit points of the needle, using a sterile cotton-tipped appli-
cator. The laser seals capillary bleeding of the urethra when it incises, and
makes the procedure cleaner and faster.
Feline Urethrostomy
The technique of choice has been described in any current veterinary sur-
gery textbook. With a urinary catheter in place, the stabilized, anes-
thetized patient is in sternal recumbancy with the rectum packed off. The
procedure is accomplished with a few modifications for CO2 laser assis-
tance. Any incision of the skin can be made with the laser using a 0.4 mm
spot size, 6 W to 8 W CW SP. The fibrous attachments of the penis to the
ischium should be transected with scissors; yes scissors. Avoid vaporizing
the ischiocavernosus muscles or the crus of the penis with the laser since
inadvertent lasing of the rectum or pelvic nerves is highly likely and haz-
ardous. Generally, when these muscles are transected at the level of their
attachments, there is little hemorrhage anyway. The penile urethra is in-
cised over the urinary catheter on its ventral aspect to the level of the bul-
bourethral glands using 0.3 mm spot size, 2 W, mode A4-A5
(Lumenis/Accuvet Novapulse 20 W CO2 laser?, 15% to 20% power), su-
perpulse repeat pulse pattern or mode P6 (20% power, repeat pulse). Any
surgeon will appreciate the control of hemorrhage immediately, since
there will be no bleeding of the urethral incision. The surgeon should pro
ceed at a pace that vaporizes the urethra in one pass, yet does not dam-
 age the indwelling urinary catheter. The urethrostomy incision is com-
pleted once the widest portion of the urethra is opened, at the level of the
155
PART III
bulbourethral glands. The surgeon should allow enough room for even-
Clinical Laser Technique
tual stricture formation. Any char is wiped away with a moistened cotton
and Procedures
tipped applicator. The urethra is sutured to the perineal skin using 3-0
monofilament non-absorbable suture material. A sterile assistant can con-
a    s      
rine (1:1,000) at the entry and exit points of the needle, using a sterile
cotton-tipped applicator. The penis is amputated with a 0.4 mm spot size,
6 W to 8 W CW, and char is removed before completing the urethrostomy
skin closure.
 Using a CO2 laser in feline perineal urethrostomy provides many bene-
fits to the patient. There is certainly diminished or negligible pain follow-
ing the penile amputation. Likewise, there is no post-surgical hemorrhage
from incised erectile tissue (there may be hematuria from the bladder,
however). The incision is cleaner because the laser sterilizes the incision as
it cuts, and the faster surgery time means less anesthetic exposure.
We also had success with a urethroplasty procedure in three cats. Each
had a distal urethral obstruction. One cat had a sharp crystal lodged in
the tip of the penis. A second cat had been medically treated successfully
numerous times for FUS, and had severe deformities of the glans penis due
to numerous traumatic catheterizations. The third cat had a stricture of
the distal urethra and a fibrosed, flaccid, dysfunctional urinary bladder.
Each was presented for FUS treatment from different referring veterinar-
ians. The owners declined perineal urethrostomy. Permission was granted
to perform the experimental procedure, and no promises of a favorable
outcome were implied. A urinary catheter was placed prior to laser treat-
ment. The tip of the penis was excised using 0.3 mm spot size, 5 W CW
in an elliptical pattern to spatulate the urethra. This geometric shape is
chosen because it will cause the new distal urethra to be wider at the
 opening. If a circular incision is made perpendicular to the urethra, the re-
sulting distal urethra will have a slightly smaller diameter compared to the
oblique incision. At the time of this writing, none of the three cats has had
an episode of FUS for at least one year after the procedure. Further simi-
lar procedures should be performed and patients followed to ensure this
 procedure is safe.
Vulvoplasty
CO2 and 980 nm diode laser energy can work well in concert for resec-
tion and removal of redundant perineal skin. These types of lasers can be
a valuable tool for this type of surgery due to their ability to reduce bac-
terial load at the incision site based on culture-sensitivity test results that
we have seen. Most perineal tissue that is inflamed and hypertrophied is
also infected either superficially or in association with a deep furunculo-
sis. The perineal skin should be retracted and evaluated for proper inci-
sion outlines. Using a CO2 laser with a 0.4 mm spot size, 8W, PWSP 10
Hz/sec an outline is identified in two arcs around the vulva dorsally and
laterally. Then the skin is incised using CO2 laser energy with a 0.4 mm
spot size 10 W CWSP. A 980 nm diode laser is then used with a 600 um
fiber, 10 W CWCM (continuous wave contact mode) to excise and resect
156
aul ieui punoy aaeq aM 'anssn uoejnuena Aue pue iey snoaueinoqns au
CHAPTER 10
diode laser provides superior incising through granulation tissue with re-
Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy
duced fluid volume. Make sure that sterile saline is provided as a contin-
uous irrigation while resecting the tissue. All char is wiped clean and the
incisional edges are matched up to assure adequate stretching of the per-
ineal tissue immediately adjacent to the vulva. Then, begin skin closure by
placing simple inverted interrupted monofilament absorbable sutures into
the sub-Q and fascia to close the dead space. Skin closure is completed
with additional monofilament non-absorbable simple interrupted skin su-
topical collagen coating can be used, or cyanoacrylic applied to the sur-
face of the wound edges.
Our experience shows that the patient is very comfortable post
operatively when laser energy is used to expedite removal of the redun-
dant perineal tissue. Rarely is an Elizabethan collar required. Topical
anesthetic gel can be dispensed to further reduce any post-incisional itch-
ing or discomfort.
Vaginal Fiberoscopic Procedures
Numerous vaginal vault anomalies can be found with fiberoscopic equip-
ment. Often, connective tissue tags, or stenosis from vaginal mucosa
scarring due to some trauma, produce changes in urine flow that disrupt
normal evacuation or cause pooling of the urine. Chronic low-grade in-
fections, spotting, or dribbling of urine can often follow these tissue
anomalies. Both CO2 and diode lasers can be placed through the working
channel of fiberoscopic devices. Special extended semi-flexible waveguide
extensions are available to carry CO2 laser energy to the target tissue. The
vaginal vault region is typically not too moist to allow for appropriate
CO2 laser energy release to transect, bisect, or ablate redundant or ad-
hered tissue within the vaginal vault.
Some cases require that the vaginal vault be distended with fluid to ad-
equately see the offending tissues. Here, diode laser energy is superior be-
cause it can transect, bisect, or ablate in an aqueous environment.
Grasping endoscopic forceps also are very valuable for placing tension on
the tissue to be removed. This allows for more accurate, rapid, and com-
plete removal of redundant tissue. Sutures are typically not required when
resecting tissue in this area. Because of the delay in fibroblast migration
after laser energy, use of a significant reduction in contracture of the vagi-
nal tissue is noted in the immediate and mid-range post-operative period.
Follow-up fiberoscopic examination in three to six weeks is critical to as-
sure no recurrence.
Cutaneous Mass Removal
Small benign papillomas can be ablated using a 0.8 mm spot size, 6 W to
8 W CW. A local anesthetic alone can be used to remove one or two small
lesions in favorable anatomic areas of cooperative patients. Larger masses
require general anesthesia before removal is attempted.
157
PART III
Lasers provide the veterinary surgeon with unprecedented speed, accu-
Clinical Laser Technique
racy, and cleanliness when removing multiple cutaneous masses. With cu-
and Procedures
taneous masses less than 0.5 cm in diameter, the wound resulting from
growth removal can be left open without the need for sutures. This is ac-
complished by “caramelizing," or mildly charring the tissue using a defo-
cused beam of low power intensity (e.g., 0.8 mm spot size, 4 W to 6 W7
CW). The resultant caramelized tissue acts as a bandage. If a scanner is
available, many of these tumors can be rapidly ablated with 6 W to 10 W
 of power in SP mode. Scanner technology enhances laser ablation by
 generating a scanned laser pattern of up to 3 mm in diameter versus the
standard spot size of 0.3 mm to 1.4 mm, making quicker work of ablat-
ing larger surface areas. An antibiotic ointment applied twice daily for
one week will keep the healing tissues moist and encourage rapid re-
epithelialization.
Any wound created with a CO2 laser that is greater than 0.5 cm in di-
ameter should be wiped free of char with moistened gauze, and then su-
tured closed. To excise these larger masses, 0.4 mm spot size, 6 W to 8
W SP is used to make an elliptical incision around the mass. Appro
priately sized tissue margins are excised as well. Once the edges are
defined, a 0.8 mm spot size, 10 W to 12 W CW can be used to more rap-
idly excise and ablate tissue by cleanly dissecting it away. When submit
ting the specimen for histopathology, larger tissue margins should be sub
mitted because some shrinkage will occur due to desiccation.
The main advantage of using a CO2 laser in these procedures is dimin-
ished post-operative pain. The hemostatic action of the laser also en-
creasing bleeding and the time usually spent keeping the site free of blood.
Furthermore, when anesthesia is a concern due to the patient's age or
other factors, less invasive laser surgery under local anesthetic provides a
safer alternative. (See Case Studies 1, 3, 19.)
Lick Granuloma Therapy
Ablation of the hyperplastic granuloma complex tissue can be effectively
accomplished using CO2 laser energy. The objective is to ablate the gran-
uloma to or just slightly below the surrounding normal dermal margins.
Many of these types of granuloma lesions can be managed with local top-
ical or injectable anesthetic agents and mild opiate restraint. General anes-
 thesia is recommended for larger and more aggressive granuloma tissue.
To provide the most effective and rapid treatment, we use a 1.4 mm spot
size, 20 w CW for small granuloma lesions 1 cm or less. The laser energy
is applied in a tracking linear fashion over the entire surface of the gran-
uloma. Char is wiped away before the next pass is made. Each subsequent
pass should be evaluated for depth of ablation with respect to the sur-
rounding normal dermis. Larger granulomatous masses benefit from a
ameter under mechanical pattern repetition. This device uses a .8 mm spot
size that will allow greater power density application. A reduction of 5 W
to a power level of 15 W is dialed in and the same evaluation of ablation
158
depth observed. The addition of greater vaporization potential reduces
CHAPTER 10
char production. Once the granuloma is reduced, all char is removed, so
Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy
it cannot act as a foreign body or nidus for bacterial growth. Then a light
coating of an antibiotic cream is applied and the area wrapped with a
light, soft bandage for 24 to 48 hours. The owner or the clinician can re-
move the bandage. The area should be rechecked in one to two weeks.
Some cases require two to five treatments to completely resolve the gran-
uloma lesion.
 It is imperative to note that there are often one or more underlying eti-
ologies with respect to a lick granuloma. A complete history of behavioral
problems and complete examination for osteoarthritis and infectious or
metabolic disease should be completed to assure that proper support ther-
apy is instituted to prevent re-aggravation of the area. (See Case Studies
16a and 16b.)
Eyes
Laser-Assisted Third-Eyelid Gland (Cherry Eye) Repair
Morgan, et al. described a “pocket technique" for correcting inflamed
gland nictitans as 95% successful in all breeds. This is our preferred tech-
nique as simplified with a CO2 laser. The key advantage to using laser in
 this technique is hemostasis. There is an appreciable engorged conjuncti-
val vessel that supports the gland of the nictitans. When it is transected to
create the pocket that receives the tucked-in nictitans gland, a great deal
 of hemorrhage generally obscures the field. However, by first vaporizing
this vessel with 0.3 mm spot size, 4 W CW, the posterior bulbar conjunc-
tival incision is made clean and dry. The incision is then continued around
the inflamed gland with the SP setting to minimize char. After wiping
away any excessive char, the bulbar conjunctival pocket is developed by
 blunt dissection using iris scissors. The wound edges are opposed with 4-
 O or 5-0 monofilament absorbable suture material in a continuous pattern
in such a way as to tuck the gland into the developed pocket. The pocket
is sealed shut by a second layer of a continuous inverting absorbable su
ture pattern. The tails of the suture are tied in a knot on the palpebral sur-
face of the third eyelid. Tying the knots on the bulbar surface of the third
eyelid may cause corneal trauma and should be avoided. An ophthalmic
 i s    an  i si  s
Study 27.)
Entropion Correction
 Either upper or lower lid entropion can be managed quite nicely in most
breeds of dog or cat. The Chinese Char-Pei, German Shepherd, Labrador
Retriever, and Rottweiler have a breed predilection for this problem. If left
untreated, the eyelashes continually irritate the cornea, causing epiphora,
blepharospasm, corneal edema, ulceration, and in severe cases, blindness.
Early intervention can produce highly desirable lifelong improvement.
There are several laser surgical techniques for correcting entropion.
159
PART III
The ultimate goal of entropion correction is to evert the eyelids, thereby
Clinical Laser Technique
ceasing corneal irritation by the eyelashes. Laser treatment of the orbital
and Procedures
skin and adnexa has proved useful for entropion correction in our hands.
 Regardless of the technique employed by the surgeon, entropion correction
using CO2 laser is generally achieved without sutures, and the results are
excellent. We prefer to use a 0.4 mm tip, 2 W to 4 W CW in small dogs,
and 0.8 mm spot size, 6 W to 8 W CW for large dogs. Note that at these
settings the power density is below vaporization threshold. The objective
is contraction of the collagen and denaturing protein at the laser tissue
juncture. The beam should be held steady with the focal point on the tar-
get tissue. Only one pass is made, and it should NOT be full thickness. To
achieve this, use a relatively fast hand-speed. A full thickness incision will
allow relaxation of the skin covering the tarsal plate, thus defeating the
purpose of the laser use in this procedure. Half thickness passes will cause
 permanent denaturing of collagen and connective tissue of the dermis. This
desirable effect causes the skin to tighten and shorten along the longitudi-
nal axis of the laser beam pass. This effect is immediately visible to the sur-
uu jo 3aiaap aui se iey se cia nok 1eum si aas nok 1eum, pue uo
created. The pass should continue as long as the effect is noticed. When the
effect stops, the surgeon should stop lasing and move on to another area.
If unsatisfactory changes have occurred with one pass, it is NOT advis-
able to make a second pass over the first. Instead, another pass should be
made on an adjacent area, or a different technique should be employed
(see below). The majority of char is very gently wiped away using a mois-
ing that will cause irritation to the sensitive periocular tissues. The greater
the experience of the surgeon, the more favorable the outcomes. CO2
laser surgeons have used a variety of patterns, including:
· A series of “X"” marks made on the skin adjacent to the lid margin, in
either one or two parallel rows.
· Longitudinal streaks radiating from the lid margin and perpendicular
to it.
● Char-Pei dogs may require a single pass directly on the lid margin to
evert the lid in conjunction with other techniques. This breed is partic-
ularly over-represented with entropion cases, and is also particularly re
sistant to corrective techniques. This is due to the high mucin content
in their skin that allows for the highest amount of thermal relaxation
and return to a state of entropion after surgery. Full wedge resection to
achieve cosmetic return to normal eyelid margin position also can be
performed with the CO, laser.
● Scanner pulses of 100 msec to 500 msec at 4 W to 6 W CW in a pat-
tern parallel to the lid margin, similar to the “X" marks, can be used as
well, either in one or two parallel rows. This will leave a row of several
3 mm circular char deposits along the lid margin. Experienced laser sur-
geons may consider using continuous wave output to achieve a more
rapid evertion of the eyelid margin.
· Lateral canthotomy can be performed in extreme cases to loosen up a
flap of tissue. Because the laser will tighten the skin near the lid to evert
160
it, freeing up some tissue may enhance the appearance of the eye.
CHAPTER 10
Ablate the lateral canthus with 0.4 mm spot size, 2 W to 4 W CW or
Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy
0.8 mm spot size, 10 W to 12 W Cw.
● In the most severe cases, a crescent-shaped wedge of tissue must be ex-
cised, and the laser can be used to make that incision. Unfortunately in
these cases, fine monofilament cosmetic sutures must be placed to oppose
the skin edges after undermining tissue and removing the wedge of skin.
An Elizabethan collar should be worn for two weeks to prevent self-
mutilation. A recheck examination should be scheduled at that time, and
if any scabs are present they can then be gently wiped away with mois-
tened gauze. The CO2 laser entropion correction technique is easy to per-
form. Anesthetic episodes are brief, and there is reduced tissue trauma
from over-manipulating sensitive periocular skin and adnexa. The laser is
an ideal instrument to use to correct entropion of the upper or lower lid.
Nevertheless, if these procedures do not produce the desired effect and the
cornea is still compromised, the patient should be referred to a veterinary
ophthalmologist. (See Case Studies 14a and 14b.)
Meibomian Adenoma
The hyperplastic gland is identified at the bulbar conjunctiva of the lid.
Protect the cornea by packing it off with moistened gauze. The gland may
also be isolated using chelazion forceps. Vaporization of only the gland
can be achieved using 0.3 spot size, 4 W, CW SP. A wedge of eyelid skin
should not have to be excised to remove the entire gland. Alternately, the
laser surgeon can elect to dissect the gland away from the lid using 0.3 di-
ameter spot size, 5 W PWSP. We consider this a viable alternative because
ablating the tissue will cause some peripheral heating, swelling, and pos-
sibly retention of some hyperplastic tissue. An ophthalmic antibiotic oint-
ment is applied twice daily for five days. Sutures usually are not required
with this technique.
Distichiasis and Ectopic Cilia
These tiny atypically positioned hair follicles can cause great discomfort
and damage to vital external eye structures. CO2 laser energy provides a
superior alternative to more invasive scalpel incision resections.
Using a 0.3mm spot size, 5 W CW single pulse, 200 msec setting, the
hair follicle is threaded up into the lumen of the laser spot tip. In cases
where focusing handpieces are used, make sure the aiming beam is posi-
tioned exactly at the opening to the hair follicle. The foot pedal is then de-
pressed three to five times in quick succession until a small grayish liquid
and plume are in evidence. This indicates the bulb and associated seba-
ceous gland have been vaporized. The resulting laser trough will rapidly
fill in with collagen over the next three to five days. A triple antibiotic
ointment with or without steroids can be administered for two to three
days post-operatively to reduce any mild discomfort. Patients almost
never require any restrictive headgear to prevent self-mutilation.
161
PART III
Enucleation
Clinical Laser Technique
and Procedures
Standard technique for this procedure has been described in a number of
currently available surgical text books. A lateral canthotomy is performed
with 0.4 mm spot size, 4 W to 6 W CW SP. The bulbar conjunctiva is dis-
sected away from the globe using the same setting. The ocular rectus mus-
cles are transected, freeing up the globe progressively in this proces. The
retrobulbar fat is dissected away to expose the optic stalk. The optic ar-
tery vein and nerve are simultaneously clamped, ligated with absorbable
suture, and transected using a 0.8 mm spot size, 8 W to 10 W CW SP. For
greater ease in this constricted area, use 50 mm, 90° curving tips.
Following removal of the globe, the extraocular tissues are removed with
traction using 0.8 spot size, 8 W to 10 W CW. The nictitans is completely
removed with the same laser setting. The eyelids are removed near the
eyelid margin by making a periocular pass with a 0.3 mm spot size, 3 W
to 5 W CW SP or 0.4 mm spot size, 5 W to 7 W CW SP and traction. Any
char is aggressively wiped away. After flushing the enucleated orbit with
sterile saline, the lids are sutured closed. It is advisable to have the patient
wear an Elizabethan collar until the sutures are removed to minimize self
mutilation. The use of CO2 laser in this procedure dramatically improves
the patient's post-operative comfort. There is less or no bleeding, heat, or
swelling following this laser procedure. The surgeon also works much
more efficiently due to the minimal time spent blotting out the normally
vigorous capillary bleeding in this highly vascular area.
Laser Surgery of the Pinna and Ear Canal of the Dog and Cat
Genera!
Dogs have a moderately higher incidence of ear disease processes than
cats. Common ear ailments of dogs and cats can be seen in up to 50% of
 patients in areas of humid climates during some or all of the patient's life.
Any disease of the ear will cause pronounced inflammation. Frequently,
there is also a combination of bacterial and fungal infection in and around
the ear. Any surgical procedure of the ear is therefore contaminated,
painful, and hemorrhagic. Fortunately, CO2 laser is an efficient way to
manage many diseases of the ear, including proliferative otitis externa, ex-
cessive hair in the canals, aural hematoma, polyps, proliferative tumors,
squamous cell carcinoma, frostbite, and trauma. The primary advantage
of using laser for surgery of the inflamed ear is that hemorrhage is mini-
mized or can be controlled. There is also reduced post-operative pain,
making the use of this tool a necessity for the humane surgeon. In addi-
tion, the increased speed at which procedures can be performed benefits
the patient since there is reduced anesthetic exposure.
Treating the variety of inflammatory, infectious, neoplastic, and chronic
connective tissue changes that can be observed in small animal patients is
often very frustrating. This is due to the small area in which the clinician
has to work. It also is related to the lack of extra skin in this anatomical
region or excessive inflammation to the dermis and underlying connective
tissues. Recurrence or lack of complete resection of specific conditions
162
often leads to repeated treatments, extended duration of disease proc-
CHAPTER 10
esses, and increased client concern and dissatisfaction. Using laser energy
Clinical Applications of
CO2Laser Energy
can simplify the therapeutic protocol and hasten the patient's recovery.
Examination of the Far
Examination of the pinna, ear canals, and tympanic membranes must be
done in a thorough and repeatable fashion to determine the best course.
In many cases the patient is uncomfortable or in outright pain from the
otic condition. It is critical that the clinician take appropriate measures to
s a a aaa g in p n sd a a
Sedation using injectable medication or inhalant anesthetics is critical in
most cases to perform a thorough examination of the ear canal and make
the correct diagnosis. Afterward, the clinician can institute an appropri-
ate and effective therapeutic plan.
A variety of otoscopic and otoendoscopic equipment is currently avail-
able to the practitioner. Clinicians should invest in this technology to
achieve the best therapeutic outcome. Currently manufactured otoendo-
 scopic equipment allows working channels in the body of the handpieces
to transmit laser energy. Most CO2 handpieces that use tips can be
reach the target tissue. Silicon fibers (600 μ to 1,000 μ) are also small
enough to pass through the working channel and through it, so laser en-
ergy can be delivered to the target tissue. Because ear disease contributes 
so much to the demands on a small animal practitioner, it is important to
select equipment that effective transmits laser energy to the target tissue
through otoendoscopic equipment.
The initial examination should allow the clinician to remove all of the
ceruminous wax, sebaceous wax, hairs, epithelial debris, or other lumen
debris from the pinna and ear canal. Any pus should be suctioned and an-
alyzed to determine its constituents. Then this pus should also be com-
pletely removed and the ear canal thoroughly lavaged and sanitized. The
otoscopic exam may be limited in certain conditions when excessive in-
flammatory tissue has built up. The clinician must consider if ablation of
this tissue by use of laser energy will facilitate further examination. If this
is not possible, more invasive techniques should be used to completely ex-
pose the ear for complete evaluation.
The normal pinna should be soft and pliable. The hair should be
smooth and clean. The medial surface epithelium should be a light pink
and be clean, smooth, and moderately cool to the touch.
The normal ear canal epithelium should be a light pink color. The blood
vessels should be small and non-evident on casual examination. A small
amount of cerumen and wax are considered normal for the healthy ear.
Small amounts of hair along the vertical canal are considered normal. The
horizontal canal should be routinely found to be free of hair or have a
minimal number of hairs present. At the end of the horizontal ear canal,
the tympanic membrane in both the dog and cat should appear as a thin
translucent to transparent structure. It should be concave and have mild
reflective properties. The dorsal portion of the tympanic membrane, the
163
PART III
pars flaccida, is the opaque pink or white portion of the tympanum. It
Clinical Laser Technique
contains a network of small blood vessels. The malleus should be visible
and Procedures
through the ventral portion of the tympanic membrane, the pars tensa.
The footplate of the malleus contacts the pars tensa at the 5 o'clock posi
tion in the right ear, or the 7 o'clock position in the left ear. This is impor-
tant to consider when performing laser-assisted myringotomy, and will be
discussed shortly.
Initiating Causes of EarDisease
The vertical portion of the ear begins at the tip of the pinna and contin-
ues as the ear canal, which is an invagination of epidermis forming a hol-
low skin tube along the inside of the head on either side. The pinna and
this tube are formed by auricular cartilage, which ends in a tympanic
membrane (eardrum) to identify the boundary of the external ear canal.
The normal lumen is 0.5 cm to 1 cm in diameter and varies in length from
5 cm to 10 cm. Deep in the tympanic membrane lies the middle ear. This
region consists of the tympanic cavity and walls, medial wall of the tym-
panic membrane, auditory ossicles and associated ligaments, muscles and
nerves (chorda tympani and other smaller nerves), and auditory tube. The
middle ear is divided into three parts: the dorsal, middle, and ventral
areas. The ventral portion is the largest area. The dorsal section acts as a
reservoir to trap debris and toxins. This portion has the poorest access
and is difficult to adequately examine by otoscopy. Branches of the facial
nerve, vagus nerve, carotid artery, and lingual artery all run close to or
along channels of the middle ear.
Primary factors that initiate ear disease are those conditions of the skin
that also have a direct effect on the skin that lines the pinna and ear canal.
Allergic conditions, parasites, foreign bodies, keratinizing diseases, and
neoplasias all can play a role in ear disease.
Certain breeds are more predisposed to diseases of the ear. These in-
clude the Shar Pei (stenotic canal), Cocker Spaniel, Laborador Retriever,
Springer Spaniel (have more cerumen glands), and Poodles (excessive hair
growth in the canal). Excessive trauma induced by the patient can in-
crease ear disease. Pathological changes in the ear associated with exces-
sive fibrosis or tumors producing fissures and deep crevices will also aug-
ment the likelihood of secondary bacterial and fungal infections.
Specific Laser Therapy Goals
ea o uid e pai si asas ia Aue jo asn saapun au ao
ment, including surgical correction using laser energy, can be formulated.
Within the confined surgical space of the ear canal, the use of laser energy
aids the surgeon performing procedures. CO2 laser energy, and in some
  e P d a r aoe  s  s
sue. A laser can simplify a number of procedures, improve near-term re-
covery, and provide for more normal functional anatomy. Incorporating
laser surgery following thorough ear cleaning and medical therapy can
treat disease components that predispose or perpetuate disease.
164
- a on e a   a ao a i si ds i a
CHAPTER 10
get tissue. Standard laser techniques can typically be used on the pinna to
Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy
accomplish the desired goals. Laser surgery of the pinna is similar to tech-
niques used for other areas of the dermis. In the external ear canal an oto-
scopic or fiberoscopic otoscope can be used to facilitate visualization and
direction of the laser energy. This is usually accomplished by extending
through working channels in the otoscopic equipment. This allows the cli-
nician to visualize the area and provide treatment within the confined
space of the external ear canal.
Laser Surgery of the Pinna
The soft cartilage of the pinna generally vaporizes nicely with COz laser
energy, but higher power settings are required due to the tissue's inherent
low water content. When working with the pinna, use 0.8 mm spot size,
10 W to 15 W CW. If only the skin is the target, then 0.4 mm spot size,
6 W to 8 W SP is ideal. Over the ear canals, though, first vaporize the
skin, then change tips to vaporize the cartilage. Although at first a 0.4 mm
tip at high power settings may seem appropriate to use for the cartilage,
it will take a long time to achieve the sharp incision required to open an
ear canal. Any long period of incision time will generally induce thermal
conduction and thermal necrosis, and consequentially dehiscence of the
final sutures. Using the larger O.8 mm spot size will actually allow the sur-
i i in   a a j  an    
          s
formation. Any char should be aggressively wiped away with moistened
 gauze. The result should be a clean and dry incision that is less painful,
less hemorrhagic, and less contaminated. All of these factors contribute to
a successful outcome and minimize post-surgical complications.
   d a    s   
using CO2 laser energy. Standard technique for resection or ablation
should be used in this area with special emphasis on the conservation of
normal tissue to provide functional and cosmetic results. Ablation of
 masses should be accomplished using a 0.8 mm spot diameter or larger,
or a scanner attachment. The objective is to ablate the atypical tissue
without producing peripheral tissue trauma from thermal injury. The use
of power settings that provide for complete vaporization is critical in this
region. Where the mass is underlying dermis and not attached, the dermis
should first be incised using standard incision techniques along the pa-
rameters of a 0.4 mm spot diameter and using a power setting of at least
6W.
A specific area of the pinna can also be effectively amputated using CO2
laser energy. This technique should be used only when the mass or area of
abnormal tissue cannot be effectively ablated. We have found that a 0.4
mm spot size at a power setting of 10 W efficiently incises both the der
mis and the auricular cartilage. The tissue edges can then be sutured sim
ilar to ear cropping techniques or via application of surgical grade cyano-
acrylic tissue adhesive.
165
PART III
Ear cropping procedures have also been enhanced by the use of CO2
Clinical Laser Technique
laser energy. The pinna can be sculpted freehand or with a surgical guide.
and Procedures
In either case, the use of CO2 laser energy significantly reduces the pain,
swelling, and bleeding typically associated with standard scalpel tech-
nique. A spot diameter of 0.4 mm at a power setting of 10 W to 15 W
produces excellent results. We have reviewed both types of closure tech-
niques and find that tissue adhesive cyanoacrylics provided excellent clo-
sure and reduced maintenance.
Treatment of a pinna that will not stand correctly due to poor cropping
technique, or a pinna that has an exaggerated curve after ear crop, is in
some cases repairable using CO2 laser energy. In this type of reconstruc-
tion the laser energy is delivered to cause a similar effect as in entropion
repair. The objective is to contract the overlying dermis so that the pinna
either stands up more correctly or curves less severely. To accomplish this
procedure the hair should be shaved away completely over the area to be
treated. A spot size of 0.8 mm or larger or a scanning attachment should
be used to direct the laser energy. The power setting should be only high
enough to produce collagen contraction to the dermis. Full thickness in-
cisions should be avoided. This technique may also require rigid taping of
the pinna following the therapy to ensure the underlying auricular carti-
lage “learns" the new position.
 In cases where the pinna is badly damaged or neoplastic spread is too
great, complete amputation of the pinna can be accomplished more effec.
tively using CO2 laser energy. Here again, the laser energy allows for more
efficient removal of the pinna with less bleeding and post-operative dis-
comfort. We recommend that after the pinna has been removed, the au
ricular cartilage edge be resected an additional 5 mm to allow for more
complete cosmetic suturing of the skin edges.
Aural Hematoma Repair
Self-inflicted trauma is the most common cause of aural hematoma in the
dog and cat. It generally arises from injury to the concave auricular carti-
lage and the vasculature that supports it. The source of injury is usually
from vigorous and repeated head shaking or other blunt trauma. Chronic
bacterial/fungal otitis externa, foreign objects in or near the ear canal, or
Otodectes sp. infestation generally initiate intense irritation. Affected cats
typically traumatize the affected ear with their own ipsilateral hind legs.
Pendulous-eared dogs create the problem in the same way, or more com-
monly traumatize the ear against the neck and crown of the skull. One or
both ears can be affected in this painful and disfiguring condition. In ad-
dition to relieving the hematoma, the underlying cause of otic irritation
should be identified and resolved.
Surgeon's preference has commonly been employed in aural hematoma
repair. We suggest applying the following CO2 laser surgery concepts to
your successful, established technique. The pinna is surgically prepped
under general anesthesia. Using the scanner, apply 15 W CW to a single
point on the concave surface of the ear hematoma near its tip to allow for
drainage of fluid. Equally effective is the use of a 0.4 mm spot size, 6 W
166
to 8 W, CW SP to produce a circular to ovoid full thickness incision to
CHAPTER 10
allow effective evacuation of fluid. To vaporize enough tissue to lance the
Clinical Applications of
CO2Laser Energy
hematoma, it may be necessary to use several cycles of lasing then wiping
away char with a moistened cotton-tipped applicator. When most fluid
has been evacuated, repeat this step on several other locations. A mois-
tened cotton-tipped applicator can be placed through the initial incision
and used as a back stop on the placement of the additional holes. Some
clinicians find this to be all that is needed to produce adequate drainage
for the hematoma reduction. Other clinicians may want to perform an ad-
ditional step for further evacuation or in cases where excessive fibrous
connective tissue has been produced. This next step is to make an incision
along the length of the hematoma using the scanner setting at 10 W to 14
W CW or spot size previously discussed. The incision can be straight or
sigmoidal, depending on preference. The goal is to vaporize all the skin in
a 3 mm wide path, exposing the auricular cartilage but not vaporizing it.
If the first pass does not achieve this, wipe away any char with gauze, then
reduce the power setting and repeat the incisional pass under tension to
separate the tissues efficiently.
The entire contents of the hematoma cavity can be removed once this
elongated incision is made. Often fibrin clots, blood, pus, or foreign ob
jects can be flushed out by irrigation with warm sterile saline. Mattress
sutures are now placed through the ear parallel to the incision. Placing a
stent on the convex surface of the ear often provides additional support
protective bandage is applied for several days. The patient is sent home
taking anti-inflammatory and broad-spectrum antibiotic medication for
ten days. Sutures are removed in fourteen to twenty-one days. Weekly
rechecking is advisable to ensure that the original otitis is resolving and
that the hematoma repair is successful.
If a scanner is not available, this procedure may be attempted with a
standard 0.8 mm tip using the same settings previously described. In cats,
it may be wise to use a 0.4 mm tip 6 W to 8 W CW since feline hema-
tomas are generally smaller and their skin is thinner. The major advan-
tages of using laser in the treatment of this condition are clear. The pa-
tients seem to be less uncomfortable following surgery and shake their
head less. There is less bleeding during the procedure and during the im-
 mediate post-operative period. Using the scanner definitely enhances this
procedure since the incision that opens the hematoma cavity is actually a
3 mm skin defect. This facilitates proper drainage of the hematoma and
prevents recurrence of the hematoma during the healing phase. In the fe-
line patient we have noted considerable less pinna contracture. Using
some supporting pinna wraps to act as a template for collagen healing, the
feline patient does not have to end up with the marked contracture of the
pinna commonly seen with scalpel techniques.
mm to 15 mm) elliptical incisions through the medial skin surface of the
pinna using CO2 laser energy. A spot diameter of 0.4 mm with a power
setting of 6 W to 10 W provides excellent incisions and minimizes any
damage to the lateral auricular cartilage surface. CO2 laser energy has the
167
PART III
advantage in this case of slowing fibroblast migration across the incision
Clinical Laser Technique
area. This allows the incisions to remain open longer, facilitating better
and Procedures
have been advocated. Each individual clinician should use a technique
that produces consistently positive results. Sutures have been found to be
sue to close down the hematoma (see Case Study 15).
Pinna-External Ear Canal Interface
This region of the ear can be easily accessed for treatment, ablation, or re-
section purposes. The CO2 laser allows for efficient removal of redundant
tissue, excessive granulation tissue, infected tissue, or dead tissue. We
have had remarkable results in resection and ablation of excessive granu-
lation tissue obstructing normal access to the external canal. This tissue
can be ablated using a spot diameter of 0.8 mm or greater at a power set-
ting of 12 W to 20 w. If the tissue is relatively well pedunculated, a spot
diameter of 0.4 mm at a power setting of 8 W can be used to excise the
tissue. The CO2 laser has allowed for very large areas to be resected or
ablated without significant discomfort to the patient after the procedure.
Removal of this excessive tissue also provides for easier access to the ex
ternal ear canal for application of medications or to further remove exces-
sive granulation tissue within the canal.
External Ear Cana!
Both the vertical and horizontal regions of the external ear canal can be
accessed for CO2 laser energy delivery. Standard otoscopes can be used in
larger breed dogs and in areas where abnormal tissue or neoplastic tissue
is not too far down the vertical ear canal. An extension tip can be attached
to allow access to the atypical tissue through the otoscope-viewing chan
nel. It is preferable, however, to use an otoendoscope for vaporization
work in the external ear canal because it provides a greater range of ac-
cess and visibility. Using such a device in combination with CO2 laser en-
ergy application to targeted tissue can provide huge savings in time and
reduced need for more aggressive exposure techniques.
Flexible laser delivery tips allow for the CO2 laser energy to be directed
 at 10° to 90° angles to the scope. This helps to avoid unwanted damage
to normal tissue or the tympanic membrane. As a reminder, CO2 laser en-
ergy will not transmit through a fluid-filled environment, as is the case
many times when performing otoendoscopy. Here, a diode laser is supe-
also ablates larger sections of granulation tissue more rapidly when used
in contact mode. It is very important to remind diode laser users that in-
creased peripheral thermal tissue injury is very likely if adequate irrigation
 is not maintained during vaporization.
Lateral ear canal resection technique (Lacroix-Zepp) can also be greatly
enhanced with CO2 laser energy. (See Case Study 18.) CO2 laser energy
can replace standard cold steel when exposure to the horizontal canal or
168
vertical canal is required via a lateral ear canal resection technique. There
CHAPTER 10
are unique benefits in CO2 laser energy application for this technique.
Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy
Bleeding, post-operative swelling, and pain have been markedly reduced
for our patients. The need for extreme measures to bandage the area post-
operatively is also greatly reduced.
Standard surgical protocols and anatomical landmarks for this proce-
dure have been described. CO2 laser energy can be applied using a spot
 diameter of 0.4 mm at a power setting of 10 W to 12 W. The clinician
should check the rating of the tip for appropriate power setting levels. We
have found that for this technique a 0.4 mm ceramic tip provided supe-
Standard closure techniques can then be applied. Having CO2 laser en-
ergy available for this procedure also allows the clinician to ablate or ex-
cise excessive granulation tissue once adequate access has been gained to
the horizontal or vertical ear canal. Removal of this tissue assists in irri-
gation or easing application of topical medical therapy following the pro-
cedure. Aeration of the ear canal also inhibits both bacterial and fungal
growth.
Total ear ablation and bulla osteotomy is the recommended technique
when calcification of the external ear canal and excessive granulation tis-
sue has produced complete occlusion of the canal lumen. Here again,
standard surgical protocols and anatomical landmarks recommended in
various surgical textbooks should be reviewed. A spot diameter of 0.4
mm with a power setting of 8 W to 10 W is recommended to provide both
adequate incisional power density and dissectional power density. The
greatest advantage of CO2 laser energy during this surgical procedure is
the excellent surgical field visibility that it provides. This is due to signif-
icant reduction in bleeding during the procedure. The added visibility
helps the clinician avoid sensitive nerve structures present at the junction
between the external canal and the middle canal. Post-operative drainage
from the surgical site has also been much less in our experience.
Myringotomy
When otitis media is suspected, but the tympanic membrane is intact,
myringotomy can be done with CO2 laser energy. The spot size should be
0.8 mm using a power seting of 8 W to 10 W on a single 200 msec or re-
peated 5 Hz pulse setting (duty factor 10%). Myringotomy is performed
at the ventral portion of the pars tensa at the ventral most portion of
the attachment of the tympanic membrane-annulus interface near the 5
o'clock or 7 o'clock position in the left or right ear, respectively. Note that
performing myringotomy in these specific locations is designed to protect
against inadvertent damage to the germinal epithelium overlying the
manubrium of the malleus. The primary advantage to using CO2 laser en-
 a  j ann  si aq s an  si n
duction of a sterile 3.5 Fr tomcat catheter will not be contaminated when
it is passed through the myringotomy site for bulla content sampling. The
hole produced in the pars tensa using CO2 laser energy again has the
added bonus of taking longer to heal. This provides for a longer period of
169
PART III
time for fluid drainage from the middle ear. This is critical to the proper
Clinical Laser Technique
treatment of otitis media, which is generally a highly productive exuda-
and Procedures
tive disease process. (See Case Study 22.)
Oro-Nasopharynx
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Not uncommonly, white cats are affected with this erosive, disfiguring
bloody anaplasm/neoplasm that tends to be aggressive and locally inva-
sive, and may also metastasize to the regional lymph nodes and lungs. We
have seen clinical cases that have included the head, nasal planum, ear
tips, and/or eyelids. These are commonly affected areas because they are
 generally not covered by hair and are directly exposed to sunlight. If de-
sired, the entire nasal planum can be excised with CO2 laser. The results
are generally favorable. It is important for the client to see photos of what
the patient will likely appear like immediately following the procedure
and in 30 days. This will allow the client not to be excessively mortified
by the initial appearance of his or her pet. Using a 0.4 mm spot size, 6 W
to 8 W CwSP, the affected area is carved out, taking as generous tissue
margins as is practical. The nasal turbinates cannot be completely re-
moved, so the cosmetic and realistic goals of tumor removal must be bal-
anced to properly manage the surgical procedure. For smaller lesions,
only the affected area may be ablated, thus minimizing the potentially un-
 d qesu paao a e jo audde iepe aqens
char is gently wiped away with moistened gauze. Suturing of the sur-
rounding dermis to the exposed mucosal surface should be done carefully
to minimize dead space, while allowing the nasal openings created to be
 maintained. Some sneezing may occur following recovery. Topical lido-
caine gel can be applied following surgery to reduce local pain and irrita-
tion that may produce repeated sneezing. The owners are instructed to ad.
minister broad-spectrum antibiotics for one week, and to gently moisten
the area sterile 0.9% NaCl numerous times daily during that time.
Stenotic Nares Correction
Opening stenotic nares with a CO2 laser is a clean, easy, and highly effec-
tive procedure for allowing greater airflow through the nostrils and re-
ducing oronasopharyngeal negative pressure. Usually bilateral and con-
genital, stenotic nares frequently occur in brachycephalic breeds. Affected
dogs and cats produce a loud noise on inspiration, although their owners
usually do not recognize this. Many affected dogs (Lhasa Apso, Old
 ros rnsn a o n ne aos ose (d o y
to an elongated soft palate. Many cats (Himalayan, Persian) also have
multiple changes around the nose and eyes such as epiphora, conjunctivi-
tis, face-fold pyoderma, and entropion. The reduced airflow through the
nostrils causes the patient to require a greater inspiratory effort, which in
turn creates a greater negative pressure within the oropharynx, thus exac
erbating brachycephalic upper airway syndrome.
170
No preparation of the surgical area is required with the patient under
CHAPTER 10
general anesthesia. The surgeon envisions the final nasal opening as a cir-
Clinical Applications of
CO2Laser Energy
cular conduit for airflow. To do this, a conical-wedge shaped portion of
the stenotic nare is removed using a 0.3 mm spot size, 4 W to 5 W CW
SP or 0.4 mm spot size, 5 W to 7 W CW SP. Continue the incision of the
nostril from the philtrum to the alar fold to make the circular shape
complete. To excise the redundant tissue that causes the stenosis, apply
tension as the laser dissects deep into the nostril space. The anatomical
continuation of the nasal passage courses caudoventromedially. Any re-
maining tissue in this area may also be excised until the surgeon is satis-
fied sufficient tissue has been removed to ameliorate the stenosis. There
should be no bleeding in this highly vascular area; however, if minor hem-
orrhage occurs the surgeon should apply a defocused low power laser
beam for hemostasis. Sutures are neither required nor indicated unless the
surgeon desires to perform the standard vertical wedge resection or the
horizontal wedge resection. A pleasing cosmesis will result, and the pa-
tient will breathe easier upon anesthetic recovery. This in turn reduces car
diorespiratory stress and will prolong the life of the patient, especially if
performed at a young age. Antibiotics are usually not necessary, but the
owners should be instructed to keep the area clean and moist for several
days to prevent buildup of mucus or scabs. (See Case Study 28.)
Brachycephalic Breed Upper Airway Syndrome Correction
Old English Bulldogs commonly have many features of brachycephalic
upper airway syndrome. Other popular breeds of dogs, such as the French
Bulldog, Lhasa Apso, Pekingese, Pug, and Shi-Tzu, are similarly grouped.
Stenotic nares and tracheal hypoplasia also may be present in many of the
dogs that have this congenital complex. These dogs generally tire easily
during minor exercise and have a pronounced inspiratory stridor. The
negative pressures exerted upon the oropharynx during inspiration can
cause these tissues to swell and further occlude the normal flow of air to
the lungs. Chronically affected animals may develop secondary acquired
airway restriction from everted laryngeal saccules, and terminal laryngeal
collapse. To prevent a future respiratory crisis it is prudent to correct these
anatomic problems in symptomatic animals when they have reached sat-
isfactory size and age for a safe anesthetic episode.
Flongated Soft Palate Correction
This procedure requires a backstop on the laser delivery handpiece or wet
gauze placed behind the soft palate to prevent inadvertent lasing of tissues
 in the back of the oropharynx. In sternal recumbancy the pre-medicated
patient is pre-oxygenated with either propofol or pentothal prior to anes-
thetic induction. If ultra-short acting injectable anesthesia is not available,
then inhalant anesthetics are satisfactory; however, the surgeon will need
to repeatedly intubate and re-extubate to complete the procedure. A
single-stay suture is placed in the distal midline of the elongated soft
palate. With the tongue in a relaxed position, the surgeon makes a visual
171
PART III
estimation of the amount of tissue to remove, or can make a low power
Clinical Laser Technique
pass on the elongated palate to mark the area to be excised. The goal is
and Procedures
for the soft palate to conform to the shape of the epiglottis and just barely
make contact with it. Using a laser-assisted uvular palatoplasty kit, 10 W
to 15 W laser power is applied to the redundant tissue using the stay su-
ture for traction. Begin at the lateral margin of the palate and vaporize tis-
sue in a path heading to the contralateral side. It is extremely important
to keep the laser beam perpendicular to the target tissue. Tangential
beams are less efficient at vaporization and will cause thermal necrosis,
post-operative discomfort, and potentially disastrous bleeding into vital
supporting tissues (e.g., the palatine artery). After the desired tissue is ex-
cised, visual inspection confirms the soft palate rests just above the
epiglottis. Sutures are neither required nor recommended.
The dog is then intubated to enhance oxygenation during recovery from
the anesthetic. Perioperative broad-spectrum antibiotics and glucocorti-
coids are recommended. The patient should be able to eat and drink nor-
mally following complete anesthetic recovery. There should be a notice
able decrease in both respiratory effort and inspiratory stridor following
the procedure. (See Case Study 11.)
Tonsillectomy
 The pre-medicated patient is pre-oxygenated prior to anesthetic. An endo-
tracheal tube is lubricated and placed comfortably. The endotracheal tube
is then packed off with moistened gauze to protect it against perforation
by the laser beam, which can result in a fatal flame hazard. Forceps are
used to gently grasp the tonsil and slightly elevate it from its crypt. Both
tonsils are excised using 0.8 mm spot size, 10 W to 15 W CW (LAUP ex-
tension without the backstop). There should be no bleeding, and the air-
way should be much larger following removal of both tonsils. Some
minor bleeding may occur in giant breeds or when tonsils are grossly en
larged and inflamed. Direct pressure for a few minutes, cautery, a ligature,
or a defocused laser beam may then be used for hemostasis. (See Case
Study 4.)
Everted Laryngeal Saccule Ablation
The laryngeal saccules are usually very edematous clear to pale white
bulges of tissue cranial to the vocal folds. To access this area, the patient
 must be anesthetized with propofol following pre-oxygenation. This is a
most difficult area to reach. Smoke evacuation is tricky, and the surgeon
must coordinate every move with the technician operating the plume
evacuator. Fortunately, this portion of the procedure is rapid and not
much smoke will be created unless the membranes are enormous. Depress
the epiglottis with Allis tissue forceps and then carefully introduce the tips
into the larynx. Dilate the larynx by opening the jaws to visualize the la-
ryngeal saccules laterally. It is more effective to permanently vaporize the
laryngeal saccules. It is not practical to try excising them because the
working area is very deep and tight. Ablating the laryngeal saccules with
172
a curved 120 mm long, 0.8 mm spot size tip is much more effective than
CHAPTER 10
trying to excise the tissues. Ablate the laryngeal saccules with 4 W to 6 W
Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy
CW power during an expiration to avoid allowing the patient to inhale its
own smoke. Carefully wipe away any char with a moist, cotton-tipped
applicator. This technique can be difficult to accomplish for the untrained
laser surgeon. It is recommended to have a complete understanding of the
anatomical considerations in this area before applying laser energy.
Perineum
Anal Sacculectomy
Clinical signs of anal sac disease usually are related to scooting, bleeding,
continued discomfort, and pain. Surgical intervention is needed when
standard antibiotic and anti-inflammatory treatments do not resolve the
condition. Anal gland material trapped under the skin causes necrosis and
irritation, which leads to the perianal area becoming infected and ulcer-
ated. A variety of surgical techniques can be used to remove the affected
anal sac. We believe a modification of the open anal sacculectomy using
CO2 laser energy provides the best exposure with the least trauma to the
external anal sphincter muscles.
Mosquito forceps or a grooved director is introduced through the anal
gland opening into the duct of the anal sac to identify the location of the
gland. It is not necessary to infuse any material to fill the gland for en-
hanced visualization. An incision is made in the skin overlying the in-
serted instrument director using 0.4 mm spot size, 6 W to 8 W CW SP.
The incision is made starting from the duct opening. With the hemostat
providing mild pressure to tense the skin and anal sac and the instrument
used as a backstop, the incision is extended to the apex of the anal gland.
Once the skin incision is complete the process is repeated to incise the
overlying muscle and open the anal sac.
Once opened, the sac can be examined and evaluated for appearance
and evidence of atypical tissue or texture. The margins can then be iden-
tified and grasped using a second set of sterile hemostats. The laser energy
is then applied using the same settings as stated above to separate the anal
sac from the attached muscle. This minimizes muscle trauma and keeps all
 cutting superficially directed and away from the nerve and vascular sup-
ply to the external and internal anal sphincter muscles. The anal gland is
identified as a gray saccule in between the internal and external anal
sphincter muscles at about 4 o'clock and 8 o'clock. They are located
alongside the rectum, running 0.5 cm to 1.5 cm deep into the tissues. An
 Allis forceps can be used to grasp the gland and apply outward tension.
A 0.8 mm spot size, using 6 W to 10 W CW is used to dissect the subcu-
taneous tissues away from the gland.
 Caution should be used to avoid the following potential surgical errors:
● Avoid leaving any glandular material within the perineum. Remaining
anal glandular epithelial cells continually produce their highly irritating
secretions and cause recurrent local dermatitis.
173
PART III
· Avoid inadvertent lasing of the rectum to prevent infection, inconti-
Clinical Laser Technique
nence, and ignition of flammable colonic gases.
and Procedures
● Avoid aggressive dissection in areas you are not familiar with, because
incontinence may occur following transection of either the caudal rec-
tal nerve or branches of the internal pudendal nerve. Bleeding arising
from many small perineal branches of the caudal rectal artery and vein
also may occur. Ligation with absorbable suture material is required if
the defocused low power laser, i.e., 0.8 mm spot size using 3 W to 5 W
CW, cannot seal the blood vessel.
The anal sac body, neck, and duct should be removed and submitted for
histopathology. The area is examined for any bleeding or remnants of
anal sac tissue. The area is then lavaged using sterile 0.9% NaCl. The
muscle fibers are then carefully apposed with simple interrupted ab-
sorbable monofilament sutures. A layer of subcutaneous simple inter-
rupted absorbable monofilament suture is then applied to close the skin
edges. Simple interrupted non-absorbable monofilament suture is then
used to complete the closure. The patient should wear an Elizabethan col-
lar to prevent self-mutilation, and if the patient seems very uncomfort-
able, ice packs will feel soothing and keep the area clean. Stool softeners
may be used in patients with dyschezia or a history of firm or hard scy.
balae. Broad-spectrum oral antibiotics are dispensed for a period of seven
to ten days. Pain relief using NSAIDS is advisable, while the use of opi-
oids for pain relief may be contraindicated due to their propensity to
cause constipation. (See Case Study 31.)
Tail Amputation
  s m  a s s  o    
tant appendage for touch, balance, and communication. There is an acute
awareness of sensorimotor status of this area, and, when stimulated, can
cause hyperexcitability. Therefore, all serious diseases of the tail should be
considered extremely painful. When required because of trauma, unre-
solved deformation, or tumors and their consequential diphtheritic sup-
puration, amputation of the tail is a humane procedure that relieves pain
and eliminates sepsis. The entire tail is shaved and surgically prepped. A
 si s s p e n s  'aba  si nnnon
using a 0.4 mm spot size, 6 W to 8 W CW SP. The incisions are made in
the shape of a “V" so that the posterior edge of the incision is pointed,
and the proximal edges of the incision meet at the level of the intended
separation of caudal vertebrae. Any char is aggressively wiped away with
moistened sterile gauze. The surgeon must clearly identify the joint to be
dissected. We use a sterile 25 gauge needle to demonstrate the interverte-
bral space. Under tension, vaporize connective tissue, ligaments, artery
vein, and nerve at the level of the joint using 0.8 mm spot size, 6 W to 10
W CW. Avoid charring the distal edge of the remaining vertebra. The in
cision is lavaged with sterile saline prior to closure. Leave a small amount
of skin for cushioning and closure using absorbable suture material. Do
not leave an excessive remnant of redundant skin, because this may lead
174
to seroma formation. Any excess tissue can be trimmed away prior to clo-
CHAPTER 10
sure. Antibiotics are dispensed for ten days. Sutures are not required, and
Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy
Nexaband S/C? may be used on the skin edges. (See Case Study 26.)
Perianal Adenoma
These lesions are common in the mature dog and should not be over-
looked. Although the majority of these growths are benign, the occasional
adenocarcinoma can be identified and removed early. The anus and rec-
potentially flammable gases. A single lesion can be ablated using 0.8 mm
spot size, 8 W to 10 W CW. Larger lesions require a 0.4 mm spot size, 6
W to 8 W CW SP to define the margins of the skin incision followed by
vaporization of the underlying subcutaneous tissues. The lesions are then
ablated using traction and a 0.8 mm spot size, with 8 W to 10 W CW
power. The lesion is always submitted for histopathology. The skin edges
are aggressively wiped free of char with moistened gauze, and the skin is
closed routinely. With larger mass removals it may be desirable to have
the patient wear an Elizabethan collar to prevent self-mutilation. Broad-
spectrum antibiotics are dispensed since this anatomical area is generally
contaminated
Digits
Toenail Lasing
This value-added service can be employed when dogs are anesthetized for
grown toenail lengths, and the “quick" or blood vessel within the nail has
grown out to the distal tip of the nail as well. This is common in the
Doberman Pinscher, Rottweiler, Poodle, German Shepherd, German
Shorthaired Pointer, Labrador Retriever, Golden Retriever, and Char-Pei
dogs, for example. Typically these patients stressfully object to having
their feet touched and may not receive the proper care they require.
Lengthy toenails may split and become painfully infected or tear off or
cause injury to others. It is often a concern to trim these nails back far
 o  jo d q  e ro los s  s os o
rant exposure to sedation or anesthesia. Trimming the toenails back far
enough to cause them to bleed quickly also requires the use of a styptic
medication to speed the rate of coagulation within the nail. Unfortunately,
this predisposes the patient to septic onychitis.
Using the laser in this situation is a unique solution to many of these
problems. With a patient under general anesthesia or deep sedation, the
toenail is trimmed back to the desired length. Using a 0.8 mm spot size at
6 W to 8 W CW or a 1.4 mm spot size at 10 W CW, the laser beam is di-
rected toward the bleeding toenail vessel and held approximately 1 cm
  d  e    s   
outside toward the center to slowly cauterize the vessels and achieve he
mostasis. It is important to be slightly defocused to prevent recurrent
175
PART III
transection of the blood vessel while making these passes with the laser
Clinical Laser Technique
beam. Do not attempt to wipe away any of the protective char. Polishing
and Procedures
with a hand-held rotary tool finishes off this technique nicely. The end re-
sult is a sterile field that is dry and smooth.
Alternately, we have found that a 0.4 mm spot diameter can be used
with 10 W to 15 W CW SP at a 90° angle to the nail at the desired resec-
tion level. The nail is first moistened with sterile 0.9% NaCl for one to
two minutes to increase its water component. The CO2 laser energy is
then applied in a steady single pass with some tension on the tip of the
nail. This facilitates opening of the incision for subsequent passes if nec-
essary. The newer ceramic tips allow for the higher wattage settings,
which provides clean nail bisection with little or no bleeding. If small
bleeding is noted from the digital vessel the CO2 laser beam can be defo
cused and applied in single pulses on the bleeding vessel as mentioned in
the previous example. The nail can then be polished with a rotary tool to
smooth the cut edges.
Digital Amputation
Tumors of skin, bone, or connective tissue frequently affect the digit. A
thorough pre-operative examination of the patient should include at min-
imum a biochemical profile and radiographs of the affected digit and the
chest. Begin the amputation with a skin incision made with a 0.4 mm spot
size, 6 W to 8 W CW SP without a tourniquet. Any char on the skin is ag-
gressively wiped away. The incision must extend proximal to and include
 the associated digital pad. Switching to a 0.8 mm spot size facilitates the
amputation. Using 12 W to 15 W CW, the supporting ligaments and ten-
dons of the digit are transected at the level of the joint proximal to the dis-
eased bone. The digital arteries, veins, and nerves are sealed as the ampu-
tation continues very similar to feline declaw procedure. Note that these
vessels are somewhat larger than in the feline patient. Vessels greater than
0.6 mm may require separate ligation, the use of 980 nm diode energy in
contact mode, or electrocautery to stop bleeding. After a rinse with ster-
ile saline and removal of any excessive char, the wound is sutured closed
according to the surgeon's preference. A light bandage is applied over the
should be administered for one week following the procedure to prevent
infection of the surgical site. The patient will feel immediate relief and the
end result is cosmetically pleasing. (See Case Study 8.)
Feline Onychectomy
Feline onychectomy has been taught in veterinary colleges for many years.
The first technique was the use of surgical scalpel blades, which were used
to provide a more exact anatomical disarticulation of P3 while producing
less tissue trauma. A variety of toenail trimmers to disarticulate P3 from
the digit also have been used; disadvantages include crushing trauma tc
the soft tissue and failure in some cases to completely remove all of P3.
Either technique was done through a dorsal approach and required a
176
tourniquet and bandaging of the forepaws for twenty-four to forty-eight
CHAPTER 10
hours post-operatively. The patients were in many cases very stressed and
Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy
uncomfortable for several days to weeks following this procedure.
When elective feline declaw must be done for the owner's benefit, the
CO2 laser is a superior disarticulation tool. We fully believe that CO2
laser use for this procedure is the most humane technique. It significantly
reduces post-operative bleeding, pain, and swelling, providing a quicker
return to normal activities. No tourniquets or bandaging are needed, fur-
ther reducing the physical and mental stress to the feline patient. Many
clinicians over the past ten years have reported this technique with a va-
riety of slight variations.1,2
After careful client counseling, the cat is induced with general anes-
thetic agents that include an opioid as well as a sedative. This provides for
 a very quiet and uneventful recovery from maintenance inhalant anesthe
skill level of the laser surgeon. One preference is to trim the pointed toe-
nails before pre-surgical cleansing. All toes are cleansed with a dilute
chlorhexidine solution, and then rinsed with sterile saline. A tourniquet is
not required and may be contraindicated because it causes anoxia and
reperfusion injury to the tissues of the antebrachium and digits. Oschner
(rat-toothed) hemostats are used to clamp P3 just proximal to the ungual
crest. To dissect P3 cleanly from P2, the technique is as follows: a single
laser pass with rapid hand speed using a 0.4 mm spot size, 5 W to 6 W
CW is performed on the lateral surface of the ungual crest from dorsal to
 ventral. A similar single laser pass immediately follows on the medial sur-
face of the ungual crest so that the two incisions meet at its dorsal-most
point. If necessary, a small burst of laser energy can be used to connect the
two incisions dorsally or ventrally. All laser bisections are done through a
window produced by an incision through the skin overlying the annular
ligament and dorsal aspect of the joint capsule. Be cautious not to over-
use the laser during this procedure because the resulting excessive char
formation will impair healing and cause irritation that defeats the bene.
fits of laser declaw procedure. The thin skin covering P3 can now be ad-
vanced proximally (pushed back) to better expose the distal inter-
phalangeal joint.
To continue the procedure, the Oschner forceps holding P3 is rotated to
-an piae oi zd o aeme pd dn nasei au u ut au xa
tent charring of the remaining phalanx, the laser makes a single pass over
the dorsal elastic ligament and extensor tendon and transects it using 0.4
mm spot size, 6 W to 8 W CW. It is important to continually flex P3 while
Aind s h  d jo ds a n  rs d
noted. Some surgeons have found it is easier to perform this technique
with the angled handpiece used so frequently in the oral cavity. It is also
advisable to make clean passes with the laser and avoid going back and
forth over the same area.
Excessive lasing of charred tissue will cause undesirable heating of tis-
sues and result in post-operative pain and swelling. While continuing to
laser cut the lateral collateral, then medial collateral distal inter-
phalangeal ligaments, the surgeon should continually flex the joint to en-
177
PART III
d sn r 'td  ed anedas on pandde si uisn qnoua ieun ans
Clinical Laser Technique
and Procedures
aggressive flexing maneuver, the laser is directed distally toward the back-
side of P3 to vaporize the deep digital flexor tendon attachment from the
flexor process of P3. Note that the superficial flexor tendon bifurcates be-
 neaq ias aui d jo iadse pis an uo sinas pue ane sn ai
now be directed onto P3, which is being removed with tension, and
should help in completely avoiding P2. The digital pad should also remain
completely intact due to the aggressive flexing action during the amputa-
tion. A hole that is clean and dry will measure 2 mm to 3 mm in diame-
ter if this procedure is followed correctly. Defocusing the beam and apply-
ing a short burst of laser energy onto any culprit vessel can control any
minor bleeding.
It is essential that all of P3 be removed and that P2 not be charred dur-
ing the laser declaw procedure. Any char on the skin incision is wiped
away with sterile moistened gauze, and then dried with sterile gauze. Last,
a small amount of tissue adhesive is applied to the skin edges only, and
then sealed closed. Avoid using excessive amounts of this bonding agent,
which can lead to postoperative inflammation, granulation tissue, and
discomfort. It is preferable to shape the toes to a natural and pleasing ap-
pearance. Following five to ten seconds of gentle pressure, the surgical site
is examined for any problems before moving on to the next toe. An in-
jectable broad-spectrum antibiotic may be administered, and the patient
Jo uaepueg au xoqi se asn in iaded pappaus ym au suss s!
the feet is not required. The patient should recover normally and walk
comfortably. It is wise to allow the cat several days to adjust to its “new
shoes," and although not painful, the cat will need to learn to walk and
support weight slightly differently.
Buprenorphine or Meloxicam can be supplied in separate syringes for
  i s  n n  a r e p
critical that the clinician impress upon the owner the need to maintain
 good confinement of the cat for the first three to five days. This is partic-
ularly important because the significant reduction in pain will allow the
cat to feel that it can return to its normal habits immediately. (See Case
Studies 7a and 7b.)
Orthopedic/Musculoskeletal
Repair of Anterior Cruciate Ligament Insufficiency
Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO) has enjoyed recent fame as a su-
perior technique compared to placement of a lateral imbricating suture.
The CO2 laser cannot cut bone as required in TPLO, but may be used to
 diminish any pain stimuli originating from a skin incision over the stifle
in any dog that requires this technique. When the lateral imbricating su-
ture technique is elected to repair an ACL rupture, our technique is as fol-
lows: Skin and subcutaneous tissue of the left stifle is incised using a 0.4
mm spot size, with 8 W to 10 W CW SP. The medial or lateral joint cap-
sule is identified and a small window is created in it with 0.3mm spot
178
size, 5 W CW. Adson forceps are introduced into the joint and tent the
CHAPTER 10
 capsule up. The laser is used to incise the capsule over the forceps using
Clinical Applications of
CO2 Laser Energy
the same power setting. Any char is aggressively wiped away as synovial
fluid escapes the joint. Avoid introducing any char or other foreign mate-
rial into the stifle. The trochlea and patella should be examined for osteo-
phytes. The menisci should be examined for any tears, and released if
present. The remnants of the anterior cruciate ligament are ablated with
a 0.8 mm EC tip (Lumenis/Accuvet), 12 W to 15 W CW. Any extremely
 irritating char is aggressively wiped back with a sterile moistened cotton-
tipped applicator.
The capsule is then closed with 3-0 monofilament absorbable suture
material. A small hole is then drilled through the tibial tuberosity to later
receive the imbricating suture. The lateral fabella is clearly palpated fol-
lowing dissection of the overlying subcutaneous tissues with 0.8 mm spot
size, 12 W to 15 W CW. A lateral imbricating suture (#2 gauge) is passed
behind the lateral fabella within the femorofabellar ligament, then under
neath the patellar tendon, through the tibial tuberosity, and a knot is then
tied. There should be free range of motion, no crepitation, and good joint
stability following the procedure. Routine skin closure is applied, fol-
lowed by a support bandage.
Anesthetic recovery may include administration of opioid analgesics,
although it may not be necessary due to the diminished post-operative
pain experienced by patients undergoing laser-assisted ACL repair. The
owner should be instructed several times to REsT his or her dog, keep the
bandage clean and perfectly dry, and return in ten to fourteen days for su-
ture removal. Carprofen may be dispensed if necessary. Antibiotics should
not be necessary unless body temperature rises above 103°F. The patient
should recover fully if confined for ten days, strictly rested for one month,
and has limited activity for three months. The use of CO2 laser in this pro-
cedure dramatically improves the patient's post-operative comfort.
Although all phases of surgical involvement cause pain due to stimulation
of nociceptors, these stimuli are diminished when CO2 laser energy seals
nerve endings, blood vessels, and lymphatics during surgical incisions.
Less or no bleeding, heat, or swelling all mean less pain following laser
surgery. Patients can be fully ambulatory and comfortable following laser-
assisted orthopedic surgery.
Pelvic and Thoracic Limb Amputations
The CO2 laser improves visualization of anatomical dissection during am-
putation by improved hemostatis at the surgical site. The CO2 laser can
be used for all aspects of incisional work during amputations, including
skin incision, fascial plane dissection, muscle belly transection, and nerve/
vessel transectioning. The CO2 laser is not appropriate for bisection of the
bone. It is highly effective in joint disarticulations. We use both 0.4 mm
Energy input is usually in the 10 W to 15 W range when using the 0.4 mm
spot diameter and 15 W to 20 W range when using the 0.8 mm spot size.
Tension on the muscle bellies being transected improves separation. Our
179
PART III
experience with post-operative recovery subjectively appears to show
Clinical Laser Technique
more comfortable patients with decreased pain, swelling, and bleeding
and Procedures
from the incisional stump.
 Endocrine
Thyroidectomy
Treatment options for the hyperthyroid cat include radioiodine therapy.
daily oral anti-thyroid medicines, and surgical removal of the gland.
 of radioactive iodine. Other cats cannot tolerate daily medications re-
quired to suppress production of thyroid hormone. Surgical excision is a
relatively easy procedure to perform and can be curative.
A ventral midline skin incision is made just caudal to the larynx using
 isse si e  d   s o  t azis nods  Co
away. The sternocephalicus muscle is incised along its midline and re
tracted to expose the sternohyoideus muscle. Caution should be employed
in this area due to numerous vital structures in the vicinity. The sternohy-
oideus is incised along its midline, exposing the trachea. Gentle traction
allows identification of the enlarged thyroid lobe(s) located adjacent to
the trachea, just caudal to the larynx, and medial to either vagosympa
thetic trunk. The caudal thyroid vein is located and isolated using forceps
 and a moistened sterile cotton-tipped applicator. Once the underlying
structures are identified and protected, the vessel is transected and sealed
with the laser using 0.3 mm spot size, 4 W CW. The surgeon must clearly
identify and protect the parathyroid gland before removing the thyroid
lobe.
Based on the location of the parathyroid, and the size and shape of the
thyroid lobe, the surgeon must decide on performing an extracapsular or
an intracapsular thyroidectomy. Either technique is acceptable, with the
goal of complete thyroid lobe removal with minimal disturbance of the
 parathyroid gland. Care must also be taken to avoid excessive disturbance
 of the cranial thyroid artery because vasospasm willcause the parathyroid
thyroidectomy is required. Sterile moistened cotton-tipped applicators are
used to very gently tease the thyroid lobe free from its connective tissue
attachments. The thyroid lobe is completely removed with 0.3 mm spot
size, 4 W CW; gentle traction will facilitate separation of the thyroid from
the parathyroid gland.
 The specimen(s) should be submitted for histopathology. The surgeon
  p ind an  pa oi e aid Aa a i
juring the cranial thyroid artery. Alternatively, one parathyroid gland can
be planted within a pocket created in the sternohyoideus muscle. The
muscle layers are closed with 4-0 monofilament absorbable suture mate
rial, and the skin is closed with Nexaband S/C?. If bilateral thyroidec
tomy is performed it is advisable to stage the procedures thirty days apart
 to minimize the potential for hypoparathyroidism. This technique is per-
formed faster with a CO2 laser because there is little or no bleeding at all
180
CHAPTER 10
to ligate vessels, making the surgeon's time efficient, and minimizes the
Clinical Applications of
CO Laser Energy
anesthetic exposure time to a geriatric cat. Because there is less swelling
and less bleeding using the laser, the surgical site is cleaner. Therefore, the
laser-assisted thyroidectomy procedure is much safer because the en-
hanced visibility prevents inadvertent disruption of vital structures. (See
Case Study 25.)
Gastrointestinal Tract Applications
We have used CO2 laser energy very effectively in various gastrointestinal
tract procedures, including enterotomy, gastrotomy, pyloroplasty, tumor
resection, lymph node biopsy, intestinal biopsy, and resection. The CO2
laser can be used for the primary abdominal skin incision and abdominal
linea alba, then in place of the scalpel for incisive and biopsy work on the
GI tract. The mucosal surface of the intestinal tract is highly vascular and
seals over rapidly upon closure. As always, appropriate power density is
needed to reduce any potential for peripheral tissue thermal injury.
There is reduced bleeding and reduced need for electrocautery application
when the CO2 is used. It is important to milk any fluid or gas out of the
surgical site to avoid the potential for combustion. This has never been a
 complicating factor for us, but it must always be considered when using
CO2 laser energy in this region of the body, just as when working around
the rectum.
Conclusion
Veterinary CO2 laser surgery equipment provides a general practitioner
with the instrumentation for dramatically improved post-operative out-
comes. This equipment is now more affordable, easier to use, and is in
 great demand by clients. The techniques described here are our preference
for elective procedures. The settings that have been discussed are only
examples of the typical power settings required to accomplish the surgi-
cal task. To achieve excellent post-surgical outcomes it is important to
possess a mastery of anatomy, surgical experience, and advanced training.
The application of a surgical laser does not guarantee success, but its ju-
dicious use will certainly improve surgical results.
After considering the different types of laser delivery systems available
to veterinary medical care providers, it is clear that the CO2 laser is the
most sensible choice for small animal practice. Furthermore, surgeons
should promote more compassionate post-surgical care by diminishing the
pain, swelling, and bleeding associated with most procedures. The CO2
laser is the ideal surgical tool to expand a veterinary practice's capabilities,
and it is easy to acquire the proper skills to master its use. Incorporating a
laser into a practice provides additional opportunities for surgical services
that can be offered to clients. The general public definitely perceives this as
the highest level of quality care and they demand it.
s    q     
181
PART III
gical cases in their own practices without the need to outsource the labor.
Clinical Laser Technique
and Procedures
nearly effortless solutions that a CO2 laser offers to problems that previ-
          
now performed with a CO2 laser result in improved surgical outcomes un-
equalled by any other single surgical technology available to the veteri-
nary profession. The result is happier pets and clients, improved job sat-
isfaction to all employees of a veterinary practice, and increased practice
revenue. Laser surgery is certainly here to stay, and prudent practitioners
will avail themselves of its benefits.
Notes
1. Cavanaugh, Medco Forum, 1998, Vol 5, Number 1, pp 1-4.
 2. Young, Vet Clinics Small Animal, 2002, pp 602-610.
182
Case Studies
Case Study 1
Case Studies
Sebaceous Adenoma of Eyelid Margin
8-year-old male neutered Retriever, presented for surgical removal
of small lower right eyelid margin sebaceous adenoma.
PROCEDURE: Ablation of mass and underlying sebaceous tissue
from eyelid margin (Figure CS1-1).
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.8 mm ceramic tip.
LASER SETTINGS:
Figure CS1-1
Spot Diameter: 0.8 mm
Power Output: 10 to 15 W
Beam Output: CW and SP
TECHNIQUE: Using the 0.8 mm tip, directed perpendicular to the
mass, CO, laser energy is directed into the mass, ablating it
 s a  as st e %e'o as ao
trough and all char removed. The resulting tissue defect (Figure
CS1-2) granulates in by secondary intention.
COMMENTS: Frequent lavage and removal of carbonized debris
provides good visualization of any sebaceous tissue remnants. This
technique also reduces peripheral tissue heating and minimizes
scarring.
CLOSURE: None. A water-based ophthalmic antibiotic ointment is
Figure CS1.2
applied to the site twice daily to encourage clean re-
epithelialization.
POST-OP EVALUATION: Resolution of the laser trough should be
complete within fourteen to twenty-one days of procedure (Figure
CS1-3). Little or no scarring is noted.
 FOLLOw-UP: Eyelid margin should be evaluated after seven days
for evidence of proper healing, and again at six weeks to determine
if complete resolution of mass has been achieved.
Figure CS1-3
185
Case Studies
Case Study 2
Ulcerated Sebaceous Adenoma
12-year-old female Beagle, presented for removal of an ulcerated
mass on the right upper eyelid margin (Figure CS2-1).
PROCEDURE: Resection of mass, minimizing loss of eyelid margin
and maximizing clean tissue margins.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO2 NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.3 mm metal tip.
Figure CS2-1
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.3 mm
 Power Output: 4 to 6 W
Beam Output: SP
TECHNIQUE: Using the 0.3 mm tip directed perpendicular to the
tissue, an elliptical incision is made around the mass with care
taken to minimize eyelid margin loss (Figure CS2-2). The surgical
margins are lavaged with sterile 0.9% NaCl and sterile gauze
sponges to remove any char. Surgical margins are evaluated for any
gross evidence of any remaining atypical tissue. Surgical margins
are then apposed to assure adequate tissue for primary closure.
COMMENTS: Care should be taken to protect the cornea. When
the eyelid margin is involved in surgical procedures like these,
minimization or elimination of peripheral tissue interaction is
Figure CS2-2
imperative. Adequate power density must be maintained to assure
viable tissue is protected from peripheral heating. No char should
be left along the incision margins prior to closure. The neoplasm
should be submitted for histopathology.
CLOsURE: Two-layer closure is recommended in this case.
 Underlying conjunctival tissue is closed using 4-0 absorbable
monofilament (Figure CS2-3). Skin is closed using a 4-0 non-
absorbable monofilament. Care should be taken to avoid exposure
of the cornea to suture material.
POST-OP EVALUATION: Closed incision should be evaluated at
forty-eight hours and client informed to monitor patient for any
signs of irritation to the incision or cornea.
 FOLLOW-UP: Sutures should be removed in ten to fourteen days,
Figure CS2-3
 providing adequate incisional healing has taken place. Conjunctival
surface should also be monitored for evidence of normal healing.
186
Case Study 3
Case Studies
Canine Sebaceous Gland Adenoma
Removal
10-year-old male neutered Retriever, presented for open, draining
 mass in dorsal cervical region.
PROCEDURE: Removal of mass
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.4 mm metal tip.
Figure CS3-1
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
Power Output: 8 to 10 W
Beam Output: SP incision, CW excision
TECHNIQUE: Using the 0.4 mm tip directed perpendicular to the
tissue, an elliptical incision is made in SP mode with a single pass
around the mass (Figure CS3-1). Once the skin has been incised the
beam output is altered to CW to increase coagulation of tiny blood
vessels during the rest of the procedure. The mass is elevated and
excised by ablating the surrounding subcutaneous tissue (Figure
CS3-2). Once the mass is removed, the incision and tissue defect is
lavaged with sterile 0.9% NaCl and char is removed with sterile
asse oi pasodde uaul are sunre peuoisioun 'satuods azneg
 primary intention healing.
Figure CS3-2
COMMENTS: Care should be taken to provide adequate tissue
margins free of tumor. Adequate power density should be
maintained at all times to minimize peripheral thermal tissue
damage. No char should be left in the wound after tumor excision.
The mass should be submitted for histopathologic evaluation.
CLOsURE: Two-layer closure is recommended in this case. Under-
lying subcutaneous tissue and dead space should be closed using
2-0 absorbable monofilament suture material. Skin is closed using
2-0 non-absorbable monofilament suture material (Figure CS3-3).
POST-OP EVALUATION: Closed incision should be monitored by
the client, and any swelling, redness, or fluid leakage at the incision
site reported.
 FOLLOW-UP: Incision should be reevaluated at ten to fourteen
Figure CS3-3
days. The sutures should be removed at this time as long as ade-
quate healing has taken place and the tensile strength of the suture
line is adequate. No further follow-up care should be required.
187
Case Studies
Case Study 4
Tonsilar Carcinoma Canine
8-year-old male neutered Norwegian Elkhound, presented for
chronic halitosis and mild bleeding from the oral cavity. Oral exam
revealed an everted and ulcerated right tonsil (Figure CS4-1 and
Figure CS4-2).
PROCEDURE: Tonsillectomy for evaluation of potential neoplasia.
 Emphasis on wide tissue margin is critical for histopathology.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 50 mm, 0.8 mm diameter metal tip.
LASER SETTINGS:
 Spot Diameter: 0.8 mm
Power Output: 10 to 12 W
 Beam Output: CWNSP
TECHNIQUE: The tonsil is grasped using Allis tissue forceps and
completely everted from its crypt. The surgical area is packed off
with sterile 0.9% NaCl-soaked gauze sponges to protect both
adjacent tissues and the endotracheal tube. The base of the tonsil is
then clamped as far from the glandular tissue as possible (Figure
CS4-3). The 0.8 mm tip is directed perpendicular to the tissue on
the medial aspect of the forceps. The beam is directed parallel to
the edge of the forceps. The tonsil is excised (Figure CS4-4) and
submitted for histopathologic evaluation (Figure CS4-5). The
stump is allowed to slip back into the crypt. It is evaluated for any
bleeding. The area is then wiped down with a sterile 0.9% NaCl-
Figure CS4-1
soaked gauze sponge to remove any char. The area is examined for
two to four minutes for any sign of bleeding from the stump.
COMMENTS: Care should be taken to provide adequate tissue
margins of representative normal tissue. The larger spot diameter
and lower PD provides for adequate vaporization with superior
cauterization at the stump. Post-operative bleeding is not seen.
CLOsURE: The tonsillar fold can be sutured over using 3-0
absorbable monofilament or left open to granulate in by secondary
intent (Figure CS4-6).
POST-OP EVALUATION: The surgical area should be monitored
for swelling or airflow obstruction upon extubation. Owner should
be informed to observe for normal eating and drinking within
twelve hours of procedure. Any bleeding or other oral discharge
Figure CS4-2
should be communicated to the clinician.
FOLLOW-UP: Histopathology revealed a squamous cell carcinoma
infiltrate in the tissue submitted. Tissue margins were free of tumor.
Case was referred to veterinary oncologist for chemotherapy.
Surgical site healed uneventfully
188
Case Studies
Figure CS4.3
Figure CS4-4
Figure CS4-5
Figure CS4-6
189
Case Studies
Case Study 5
Canine Scrotal Castration
10-week-old male Argentine Dogo, presented for scrotal castration.
PROCEDURE: Single midline scrotal incision, exteriorization of
both testicles, and ligation of spermatic cord, artery, and vein
through this incision.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
Figure CS5-1
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.4 mm diameter metal tip.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
Power Output: 6 to 8 W
Beam Output: CWSP scrotal incision, CWNSP bisection
TECHNIQUE: A scrotal skin incision is made along median rafé
(Figure CS5-1). The testes are pushed upward, causing the scrotum
to be tense. The 0.4 mm tip is directed perpendicular to the
targeted surgical site. The testes are pushed up and through a
single incision. An incision is made into the subcutaneous tissue
and spermatic fascia over each testicle using the CO, laser in CW
Figure CS5-2
mode. The tunics and associated cremaster muscle are also
separated from the rest of the spermatic cord using the CO2 laser
in CW mode (Figure CS5-2). The spermatic cord, artery, and vein
 are transfixed using a 0 to 2-0 absorbable suture.
COMMENTS: The CO, laser should be used to incise, divide, and
transect all tissues. This minimizes tissue handling and trauma to
the tissue. There is also a significant reduction in bleeding from the
skin and pain from transected nerves.
CLOSURE: The subcutis is closed using 3-0 absorbable suture
material (Figure CS5-3). Clear cyanoacrylic tissue adhesive is
applied to the skin edges to complete the technique (Figure CS5-4).
Figure CS5-3
POST-OP EVALUATION: The patient should not lick or chew at
the area.
FOLLOW-UP: The patient is re-evaluated at seven to ten days to
ensure adequate healing of the skin incision and no swelling of the
scrotum.
Figure CS5-4
190
Case Study 6
Case Studies
Feline Scrotal Castration
16-weekold male Domestic Shorthair, presented for scrotal
castration.
PROCEDURE: Single midline scrotal incision, exteriorization of
both testicles through single scrotal incision with ligation of
spermatic cord, artery, and vein.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
Figure CS6-1
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.4 mm diameter metal tip.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
Power Output: 6 W
 Beam Output: CWSP scrotal incision, CWNSP bisection
TECHNIQUE: A scrotal skin incision is made along or
perpendicular to (Figure CS6-1) the median rafe' of the scrotum.
The testes are pushed upward, causing the scrotum to be tense.
a aen upa au oi reniuadad pana s dn  t'o a
testes are pushed up to the skin incision. An incision is made into
Figure CS6-2
the subcutaneous tissue and spermatic fascia and tunic of the testes
using the CO laser in CW mode. The testes are exposed in an
open tunic approach (Figure CS6-2). The tunics and associated
cremaster muscle are separated from the rest of the spermatic
structure using the CO2 laser in CW mode with the tissue under
tension. No clamping is required. The ductus deferens and
spermatic vessels are used to tie two square knots in the spermatic
cord (Figure CS6-3). The spermatic cord is transected distal to the
square using the CO, laser in CW mode.
COMMENTs: The CO, laser should be used to incise, separate,
and transect all tissues. No crushing of tissue is needed. This 
minimizes tissue handling and trauma. Significant reduction in
Figure CS6-3
bleeding from the skin and tunic are also appreciated.
CLOSURE: The skin is closed using a clear cyanoacrylic surgical
 adhesive (Figure CS6-4). No external sutures are required or
recommended.
POST-OP EVALUATION: The patient should not lick or chew at
the area.
FOLLOW-UP: The patient is re-evaluated at seven to ten days to
assure adequate healing of the skin incision and that there is no
swelling of the scrotum or discomfort.
Figure CS6-4
191
Case Studies
Case Study 7a
Feline Onychectomy
6-month-old male Domestic Shorthair, presented for laser
 onychectomy.
PROCEDURE: Dorsal approach to P2-P3 inter-phalangeal space,
minimizing incision diameter to 4 mm to 5 mm and maximizing
CO, laser's vaporization and cauterization abilities in the intra-
articular space.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
Figure CS7a-1
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.4 mm diameter metal or gold tip.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
 Power Output: 4 W
Beam Output: CWSP or CWNSP, depending on comfort level
and personal preference
TECHNIQUE: All fore toes are aseptically prepared with a chlo
rhexidine solution, and a 0.9% NaCl flush is applied as a final
wetting agent to push back hair and allow good visualization of the
dorsal interdigital space. No tourniquet is required or recommended.
Each nail is individually grasped using 10 inch Mayo-Hegar needle
Figure CS7a-2
holder just proximal to the ungual crest. A dorsal incision is made
using the CO, laser in CW mode over the distal interphalangeal.
space (Figure CS7a-1). Avoid making a complete circumferential
 incision. Working through this dorsal incision, transect the dorsal
annular ligament (Figure CS7a-2) and medial and lateral collateral
distal interphalangeal ligaments. Next, identify and incise the dorsal
 aspect of the interphalangeal joint capsule (Figure CS7a-3). Once this
is completed, apply light downward tension on the nail to expose the
using the CO, laser in CW mode. Once incised, the deep digital
flexor tendon should become apparent at its insertion on the flexor
process of P3. Direct the CO, laser energy toward the flexor process
of P3 as you transect the deep digital flexor tendon (Figure CS7a-4).
aq ueo huai siei anss s ae panaldo si sun au
Figure CS7a-3
 transected and P3 with the nail removed. The incision should be no
larger than 4 mm to 5mm in diameter.
COMMENTS: Patient recovery should be uneventful. It is
important to avoid dissociative drugs because they can lead to
excitability, rough anesthetic recovery, hyperesthesia, and self-
induced trauma to the incision sites. Patient may be discharged the
same day of the procedure and sent home with shredded
 newspaper or wheat husk litter. Activity must be strictly reduced.
CLOSURE: Clear cyanoacrylic tissue adhesive on incision edges.
No bandages are needed or recommended.
POST-OP EVALUATION: Patient should be able to bear weight
 before release from hospital.
Figure CS7a-4
FOLLOw UP: Recheck incisions and feet in ten to fourteen days
192
Case Study 7b
Case Studies
Feline Onychectomy
6-month-old Domestic Shorthair cat, presented for laser
onychectomy.
 PROCEDURE: CO2 laser-assisted onychectomy
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with buprenorphine, acepromazine,
and atropine. Mask induction with sevoflurane in oxygen.
Figure CS7b.1
 Maintenance of general anesthesia using isoflurane in oxygen via
endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece. Oschner-type forceps.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm (small patients) or 0.8 mm (large
patients)
Power Output: 6 to 12 W
 Beam Output: CW
Figure CS7b-2
TECHNIQUE: All toes are cleansed, then rinsed with water, and a
 tourniquet may be placed above the elbow. Oschner forceps are
used to clamp P3 just proximal to the ungual crest, and a single
laser pass is made over the skin to free it from the joint capsule.
(Figure CS7b-1). The laser transects the dorsal elastic ligament and
the lateral (Figure CS7b-2) and medial (Figure CS7b-3) collateral
distal interphalangeal ligaments, then finally the deep digital flexor
tendon from their attachments on P3 (Figure CS7b-4). Any char on
 the skin incision is gently wiped away with sterile moistened gauze,
then dried with sterile gauze. Finally, a small amount of surgical
Figure CS7b-3
adhesive is applied to the skin edges only, then sealed closed. It is
 preferable to shape the toe to a natural and pleasing appearance
(Figure CS7b-5).
COMMENTS: The patient should recover slowly and gradually
from anesthesia. Rapid recovery may cause traumatic hemorrhage
at the surgical site. An injectable broad-spectrum antibiotic is
administered, and the patient is sent home with shredded
newspaper to use as litterbox filler.
CLOSURE: 4-0 monofilament absorbable suture or surgical
Figure CS7b-4
adhesive may be used to keep the socket closed during healing.
POST-OP EVALUATION: The patient should be walking
comfortably immediately following anesthetic recovery.
FOLLOW-UP: None.
Figure CS7b-5
193
Case Studies
Case Study 8
Canine Digit Amputation
8-year-old male neutered Great Dane, presented for chronic
infection and osteomyelitis of P3 of right forelimb digit 2.
PROCEDURE: Amputation of P3 of right forelimb digit 2.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
 and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO2 NovapulseTM laser with straight
Figure CS8-1
handpiece and 0.4 mm diameter ceramic or gold tip.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
 Power Output: 10 W
Beam Output: CWSP skin incision, CWNSP dissection/dis-
articulation
TECHNIQUE: A tourniquet is placed just prior to incising the
skin. The digital pad should be preserved during this distal
amputation. A transverse skin incision is made at the base of the
nail and completely encircles the toe (Figure CS8-1). The articular
surface of the distal second phalanx is maintained and charring
Figure CS8-2
should be avoided (Figure Cs8-2). Incising the extensor and flexor
tendons and the collateral ligaments disarticulates the joint as P3 is
removed (Figure CS8-3). Defocusing the CO2 laser beam to cause
coagulation of the culprit vessel controls any small capillary
 bleeding. Alternatively, the identified vessel may be ligated using
absorbable monofilament suture material.
COMMENTS: A bandage should be applied in this case due to the
size of the incision and potential need for some pressure on the
wound for the first twenty-four to forty-eight hours. The patient's
recovery should be uneventful. It is important to avoid dissociative
drugs because they can lead to excitability, rough anesthetic
recovery, hyperesthesia, and self-induced trauma to the incision
Figure CS8-3
site. The patient is discharged the same day of the procedure.
Restricted activity is recommended for one to two weeks.
CLOsURE: Simple interrupted monofilament absorbable suture
material is used to reduce dead space. Skin is closed using non-
absorbable monofilament in a simple interrupted pattern (Figure
CS8-4). A pressure bandage is recommended but not required.
POST-OP EVALUATION: Patient should be able to bear weight
 pain and provide appropriate pain medication. Broad-spectrum
antibiotics should be administered until the sutures are removed.
FOLLOw-UP: Bandage removal and recheck of incision should be
Figure CS8-4
done at forty-eight hours. Suture removal at seven to ten days.
194
Case Study 9
Case Studies
Canine Dewclaw Amputation
1-year-old female spayed Labrador Retriever, presented for removal
of forelimb dewclaws.
PROCEDURE: Amputation of first digit of both forelimbs
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO2 NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.4 mm diameter ceramic or gold tip.
Figure CS9-1
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
Power Output: 8 to 10 W
 Beam Output: CWSP skin incision, CWNSP dissection/dis-
articulation
TECHNIQUE: A tourniquet is placed just prior to incising the
skin. The digital pad should be included in the incision, because
this will be removed to improve cosmetic appearance. A transverse
elliptical skin incision is made around the nail base and includes
the digital pad (Figure CS9-1). The dewclaw is then dissected free
from underlying fascia and P3 and P2 are identified. The distal
Figure CS9-2
interphalangeal joint is identified and the joint disarticulated by
incising the extensor and flexor tendons and the collateral
ligaments (Figure CS9-2). The digit is removed (Figure CS9-3). The
digital arteries and veins are ligated or cauterized depending on
their respective sizes. The remainder of the joint capsule is
identified and closed (Figure CS9-4).
COMMENTS: It is important to achieve a smooth surface for cosme-
tic effect. In some cases the metacarpal-phalangeal joint must be
incised to provide adequate cosmetic effect. The CO, laser is pre-
ferred due to the small scar that remains after healing has taken place.
CLOSURE: Using simple interrupted monofilament absorbable
Figure CS9.3
suture to appose the subcutaneous tissues reduces dead space. Skin
sutures are placed using simple interrupted monofilament non-
absorbable material. A clear cyanoacrylic tissue adhesive is applied
to the incision edges to further reduce post-operative scar
formation. A light bandage wrap is applied for twenty-four to
forty-eight hours.
 POST-OP EVALUATION: Patient should be able to bear weight
upon recovery and release from hospital. Owner should be
instructed to not allow any licking or chewing of the surgical site.
 FOLLOW UP: Bandage removal and recheck of incision should be
done at forty-eight hours. Suture removal may be done at seven to
ten days.
Figure CS9.4
195
Case Studies
Case Study 10
Distichia/Ectopic Cilia Ablation
2-year-old male neutered Weimerainer, presented for corneal edema
associated with distichiasis/ectopic cilia.
PROCEDURE: Vaporization of cilia and its associated tarsal gland
duct (Figure CS10-1).
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube. Prior to
recovery, the cornea and lid margin of the eye should be treated
Figure CS10-1
with 1% proparacaine to further reduce discomfort.
EQUIPMENT: Magnifying scope, 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser
with straight handpiece and 0.3 mm metal tip.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.3 mm
Power Output: 3-5 W
Beam Output: Single pulse 200-500 msec, superpulse
LID
TECHNIQUE: The atypical cilia are identified using a magnifying
 a  ai o  si dn  o e jo  a aos
should be 0.25mm to 0.5 mm from the surface of conjunctiva or
Figure CS10-2
eyelid margin and directed over the associated tarsal gland (Figure
 CS10-2). CO2 laser energy is delivered in a single pulse output
setting for 200 msec SP for small ectopic cilia and for 500 msec SP
or larger distichia. Two to four pulses will be needed to vaporize
the cilia and the associated tarsal gland (Figure CS10-3). Upon
vaporization of the tarsal gland a small amount of gray debris will
be noted at the laser trough site. This indicates that the tarsal gland
has been vaporized and the cilia will most likely not grow back.
COMMENTS: If char is noted during the pulsing process, it
should be lavaged away using sterile 0.9% NaCl. Care must be
EYE LID LASE
taken not to touch the laser tip to the corneal surface. Pulse until
 you are confident that the tarsal gland has been effectively
vaporized. Some tissue contracture immediately adjacent to the
Figure CS10-3
laser trough will be noted if the power density is too low.
CLOsURE: No sutures or other form of closure is needed. The
laser troughs will granulate within four to five days without
PLAY
scarring or disfigurement (Figure CS10-4).
POST-OP EVALUATION: Treated area and the cornea should be
evaluated to ensure proper healing and resolution of clinical
symptoms, e.g., corneal edema, epiphora.
FOLLOW-UP: Treated area should be re-evaluated in twelve weeks
to ensure that cilia has not regrown.
Figure CS10-4
196
Case Study 11
Case Studies
Elongated Soft Palate Resection
5-year-old male American Bulldog, presented for surgical
sterilization and history of snoring.
PROCEDURE: Excision of redundant and excessive uvular tissue
 obstructing the laryngeal airway.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicate with buprenorphine, acepromazine,
glycopyrrolate, and oxygen mask. Induce anesthesia with
intravenous propofol. An endotracheal tube may be placed for
highest safety, but may interfere with the procedure in some cases.
Anesthesia may be maintained with slow propofol infusion to
effect, or inhalant anesthetic.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser, backstopped
handpiece, forceps or stay suture for traction.
Figure CS11-1
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.8 mm
Power Output: 10 to 15 W
Beam Output: CW
TECHNIQUE: Traction is placed upon the distal midline of the
elongated soft palate (Figure CS11-1). The surgeon makes a visual
estimation of the amount of tissue to remove. Begin at the lateral
 margin of the palate and vaporize tissue in a straight path heading
to the opposite side (Figure CS11-2).
COMMENTs: The goal is for the new soft palate to conform to
the shape of the epiglottis and just barely make contact with it
(Figure CS11-3). Most dogs will enjoy free breathing immediately
with reduced stridor. Some dogs may have increased breath sounds
due to the increased flow of air through the oropharynx, which is
the most desirable outcome of this procedure.
Figure CS11-2
CLOsURE: None required. It is contraindicated to wipe char since
this may cause oropharyngeal bleeding. A single dose of a broad-
spectrum antibiotic is administered.
POST-OP EVALUATION: There should be a noticeable decrease in
respiratory effort and stridor following the procedure.
FOLLOW-UP: None
Figure CS11-3
197
Case Studies
Case Study 12
Feline Ovariohysterectomy
6-month-old female Domestic Shorthair, presented for COz laser-
 assisted ovariohysterectomy.
PROCEDURE: Incision, laparotomy, hemostasis, and removal of
reproductive tract.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.4 mm ceramic, metal, or gold tip
Figure CS12-1
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
 Power Output: 8 to 10 W
Beam Output: SP skin/abdominal incision,
 CW transection of uterine horns, body, and broad ligament
TECHNIQUE: Laser handpiece is held perpendicular to the skin at
a position halfway between the umbilicus and the pubis along the
ventral midline (Figure CS12-1). The skin is tensed and a single-
pass, full-thickness laser trough is produced using SP. Fatty tissue is
undermined using straight Metzenbaum scissors. The linea alba is
identified and Adson tissue forceps are used to tent it up. The laser
handpiece is directed at a 45-degree angle to the linea and a laser
stab incision is made into the linea using SP. Metzenbaum scissors
are then advanced into the stab incision and the linea lifted slightly
to provide tension and backstop protection. The laser handpiece is
Figure CS12-2
'ape si ssed auss e pue ea aui oi rniuadiad paoanp uae
CW, to produce an abdominal incision (Figure CS12-2). All char is
wiped away before proceeding to remove the reproductive tract.
The right or left uterine horn is located and exteriorized by the
use of an ovariohysterectomy hook. The ovary is identified and
lifted out of the incision. The suspensory ligament is stretched and
transected using the CO, laser CW. The ovarian pedicle is double-
clamped. Absorbable monofilament sutures are used as ligatures. A
wetted 0.9% NaCl gauze is placed as a backstop under the pedicle
The laser handpiece is directed perpendicular, and targeted between
the edges of the clamps. The uterine horn is transected proximal to
the ovarian pedicle (Figure CS12-3). The pedicle is observed for
any bleeding, then allowed to slide back into the abdominal cavity.
The procedure is repeated on the opposite side.
 The broad ligament is identified from both uterine horns and
Figure CS12.3
placed over a wetted 0.9% NaCl gauze. The laser handpiece is
directed perpendicular to the ligament (Figure CS12-4). The broad
ligament is then divided using CW, then observed for any bleeding
or leakage from vessels running through it. The uterine body is
exteriorized and its vessels identified. Two clamps are placed on
the uterine body cranial to the cervix. The uterine arteries are
198
individually ligated proximal to the most proximal clamp. The
Case Studies
laser handpiece is again directed perpendicular between the two
clamps. The body is transected (Figure CS12-5) between the two
clamps. The uterine horn is mass ligated proximal to the most
proximal clamp. The clamp is removed and the pedicle is inspected
for bleeding. The pedicle is allowed to fall back into the abdomen.
The abdomen is examined for evidence of any bleeding.
COMMENTS: The use of a CO, laser for transection of various
 the most common cause of death after ovariohysterectomy.
CLOSURE: Routine closure of the linea alba, subcuticular tissues,
skin incision edges before suturing. A gel to enhance healing
(FacilitatorTM) may be applied to the incision to protect the incision 
 and speed the healing rate.
POST-OP EVALUATION: Patient should be comfortable and fully
mobile at time of discharge. Owners should be instructed to reduce
Figure CS12-4
pet's activity for five to seven days. Patients often have significantly
reduced pain following anesthetic recovery, therefore they return to
normal activity much more rapidly than those undergoing
conventional surgery.
FOLLOW-UP: A recheck and suture removal in ten to fourteen
days is recommended. If used, skin sutures should be removed at
this time.
Figure CS12-5
199
Case Studies
Case Study 13
Umbilical Hernia Repair
6-month-old female spayed Golden Retriever, presented for
ovariohysterectomy and umbilical herniorrhapy.
PROCEDURE: Repair and closure of uncomplicated congenital
umbilical hernia.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
Figure CS13-1
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO2 NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.4 mm metal or gold tip.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
Power Output: 8 to 10 W
Beam Output: SP skin incision, abdominal muscle incision,
CW resection of herniated omentum or falciform ligament
TECHNIQUE: When an umbilical hernia is corrected at the time
of ovariohysterectomy, the incision can be extended to the hernia,
or an elliptical incision is made around the base of the large sac to
remove redundant skin tissue (Figure CS13-1). The herniated sac is
Figure CS13-2
identified and dissected free from associated fat and fascia. The sac
is then lifted up and an elliptical incision is made through the
abdominal musculature in CW. Immediately adjacent to the sac,
the sac is lifted up from the surrounding tissue and turned over to
s paddua jo suis Aue ron eai paneuaq aun aena
intestines or other organs. The omental tissue or falciform tissue is
resected off of the muscle/ring pedicle. The pedicle is removed and
the abdominal tissue allowed to slide back into the abdomen
(Figure CS13-2).
COMMENTS: Removal of char is important from both the
muscular incision and the skin incision. This technique allows for
more rapid access to the hernia for evaluation of potential
entrapped tissue. Muscle incised with a CO, laser bleeds less and
Figure CS13-3
 produces less post-operative pain.
CLOSURE: Simple interrupted monofilament absorbable suture is
used to close the fresh muscle edges (Figure CS13-3). Skin is closed
in a routine simple interrupted pattern using non-absorbable
monofilament suture material (Figure CS13-4).
POST-OP EVALUATION: Resolution of hernia should be
complete. Wound edges should be well apposed with no evidence
 of tension on the incision site.
FOLLOW-UP: Abdominal incision should be re-evaluated in ten to
fourteen days. Suture removal is generally done at this time.
Figure CS13-4
200
Case Study 14a
Case Studies
Canine Lower Eyelid Entropion Repair
10-year-old male neutered Cocker Spaniel, presented for surgical
 repair of bilateral lower eyelid entropion: 180 degree roll-in of lid
margins from normal position (Figure CS14a-1).
PROCEDURE: Contracture of collagen within the deep tissues of
the lower eyelid margins. This facilitates roll-out of lid margins to
a normal anatomical position.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
Figure CS14a-1
handpiece and 0.8 mm ceramic tip.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.8 mm
Power Output: 3 to 4 W
Beam Output: CW
TECHNIQUE: After aseptic surgical preparation of the lower
eyelid margin, including removal of overlying hair, the handpiece is
placed perpendicular to the eyelid margin. Laser energy is
introduced to the eyelid margin tissue in the form of “X" striations
in a linear pattern. Each "X" is approximately 3 mm to 4 mm and
1 mm to 2 mm apart (Figure CS14a-2). The laser tip should be
placed at such a distance above the skin that maximal contracture
is noted upon laser/tissue interaction. The "X" pattern will create a
Figure CS14a-2
circular contraction zone, everting the eyelid margin corresponding
to each "X." It is important not to create full-thickness incisions
with the “X" pattern, because this will cause release of the tissue
and relaxation of the contracted area. If a single row of "X"s does
not provide complete resolution of the affected eyelid margin, a
second row of "X"s can be produced below the first row and in
the same fashion (Figure CS14a-3). In the majority of cases this
should be sufficient to provide for return to normal anatomic
position of the eyelid margin (Figure CS14a-4).
COMMENTS: If the surgeon has access to a mechanical pattern
scanner, a single line of laser energy can be scanned over the same
area as would be under the "X"s. The same power output and
beam output can be used. A second scanned line can be applied to
Figure CS14a-3
the area of the second row of "X"s. The advantage we have noted
is a more uniform contracture of tissue and improved roll-out of
the affected eyelid margin. A second treatment, performed at a
later date, is sometimes required in young dogs or severe cases.
CLOSURE: The treated area is gently cleaned with sterile 0.9%
NaCl-soaked gauze sponges to remove char. A topical antibiotic
cream can be applied to the area for seven to ten days.
POST-OP EVALUATION: The area should have minimal swelling.
Normal anatomical position of the eyelid margin should be present
upon anesthetic recovery.
FOLLOW-UP: Patient should be rechecked in seven to fourteen
days and any mild scabs lifted off the site. Normal hair re-growth
Figure CS14a-4
should begin to be noted.
201
Case Studies
Case Study 14b
Canine Lower Eyelid Entropion Repair
6-year-old female spayed Old English Bulldog presented for
surgical repair of bilateral lower eyelid entropion: 180 degree roll-
in of lid margins from normal position (Figure CS14b-1).
PROCEDURE: Contracture of collagen deep within the dermis of
the lower eyelids to facilitate roll-out of lid margins to normal
anatomical position.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
 Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
Figure CS14b-1
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.8 mm ceramic tip.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.8 mm
Power Output: 8 to 10 W
Beam Output: SP
TECHNIQUE: The cornea of each eye is protected with water-
soluble medical lubricating jelly (K-Y JellyrM). A single well-placed
pass with a hair clipper is used to prepare the skin. After this, the
lower eyelid is cleansed very gently, using sterile saline, to remove
lateral eyelid margin (Figure CS14b-2). The laser tip should
produce a focused beam at a distance above the skin that causes
Figure CS14b-2
tissue in the form of radiating streaks in a linear pattern away from
the margin. Working lateral to medial, each subsequent pass is
approximately 1 mm to 2 mm apart and as lengthy as needed to
cause eversion of the lower lid. In the majority of cases this should
be sufficient to provide for return to normal anatomic position of
the eyelid margin (Figure CS14b-3).
COMMENTS: This desirable effect causes the skin to tighten and
shorten along the longitudinal axis of the laser beam pass. This
effect is immediately visible to the surgeon and "what you see is
what you get" as far the degree of change created. The pass should
continue as long as the effect is noticed. When the effect stops, the
surgeon should stop lasing and move on to another area. If
unsatisfactory changes have occurred with one pass, it is NOT
advisable to make a second pass over the first. A second treatment
Figure CS14b-3
 is sometimes required in young dogs or severe cases.
CLOsURE: The surgical area is gently cleaned with sterile 0.9%
  a a i ss ae p
aggressive wiping because this effect may stretch the tissues and
nullify any produced surgical contracture. We recommend a gentle
cool compress for three days following the procedure, and an
Elizabethan collar.
POST-OP EVALUATION: The area should have minimal swelling.
Normal anatomical position of the eyelid margin should be present
upon anesthetic recovery.
FOLLOW-UP: Patient should be rechecked at both seven and
twenty-one days. Normal hair re-growth should begin to be noted
Mild scarring may occur. Any blepharospasm, epiphora, or corneal
Figure CS14b-4
edema should all be resolved (Figure CS14b-4).
202
Case Study 15a
Canine Aural Hematoma
5-year-old male neutered Golden Retriever, presented for surgical
repair of an aural hematoma of the right pinna (Figure CS15a-1).
PROCEDURE: Creation of incisional drainage holes on the medial
surface of the pinna. Stay sutures are placed to eliminate dead
Figure CS15a-1
space and facilitate re-adherence of auricular cartilage to skin.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.4 mm metal or gold tip.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
Power Output: 8 to 10 W
Figure CS15a-2
 Beam Output: SP
TECHNIQUE: The ear is prepared for sterile surgery. All hair is 
clipped away from the medial surface of the pinna. The laser
handpiece is directed perpendicular to the skin surface at the
 appropriate focal distance (Figure CS15a-2). Drainage holes are
created equidistant from each other sufficient to allow for adequate
drainage of the hematoma. Clotted blood and fibrin are removed
using tissue forceps (Figure CS15a-3). Stay sutures are then placed
through the pinna, incorporating both medial and lateral layers of
cartillage and skin, thus securing a reduction in dead space (Figure
CS15a-4).
Figure CS15a-3
COMMENTS: The number of drainage holes and stay sutures
must be sufficient to eliminate any dead space and allow for
adequate continuous drainage during healing.
CLOSURE: We use a light pressure wrap that is sutured in place at
the base of the pinna and allowed to remain in place for three to
seven days. The individual surgeon must decide on the appropriate
amount of bandaging material that is needed to absorb the
drainage.
POST-OP EVALUATION: The pinna wrap is removed in three to
Figure CS15a-4
seven days and the client is given written discharge instructions
 pertaining to home maintenance and care.
FOLLOW-UP: Sutures should be re-evaluated in fourteen days and
the drainage holes checked for patency. If no drainage is noted
and/or drainage holes have healed, the sutures can be removed.
The pinna should return to normal anatomical position and
thickness. Scars should be minimal and hair re-growth uneventful
(Figure CS15a-5).
Figure CS15a-5
203
Case Studies
Case Study 15b
Feline Aural Hematoma
7-year-old male neutered Domestic Shorthair, presented for surgical
repair of an aural hematoma (Figure CS15b-1).
PROCEDURE: Creation of incisional drainage holes on the medial
surface of the pinna. Stay sutures are placed to eliminate dead
space and facilitate re-adherence of auricular cartilage to skin.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
 and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
Figure CS15b-1
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.4 mm metal or gold tip.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
Power Output: 6 to 8 W
 Beam Output: CW
TECHNIQUE: The ear is prepared for sterile surgery. All hair is
clipped away from the medial surface. The laser handpiece is
placed perpendicular to the skin surface at appropriate focal
distance. Drainage holes are created equidistant from each other
Figure CS15b-2
sufficient to allow for adequate drainage of the hematoma. Clotted
blood and fibrin are removed using tissue forceps (Figure CS15b-
 2). Stay sutures are then placed through the pinna, incorporating
both medial and lateral layers of cartilage and skin, thus securing a
reduction in dead space (Figure CS15b-3).
COMMENTS: The number of drainage holes and stay sutures
must be sufficient to eliminate any dead space and allow for
 adequate continuous drainage during healing.
CLOsURE: We use a light pressure wrap that is sutured in place at
the base of the pinna and allowed to remain in place for three to
 seven days. The individual surgeon must decide on the appropriate
amount of bandaging material needed to absorb the drainage
Figure CS15b-3
(Figure CS15b-4).
POST-OP EVALUATION: The pinna wrap is removed in three to
seven days and the client is given written discharge instructions
 pertaining to home maintenance and care.
FOLLOW-UP: Sutures should be re-evaluated in fourteen days and
 si ap o  d r  sa a a
and/or drainage holes have healed, the sutures can be removed.
The pinna should return to normal anatomical position and
thickness. Scars should be minimal and hair re-growth uneventful.
Figure CS15b-4
204
Case Study 16a
Case Studies
Uncomplicated Acral Lick Granuloma
7-year-old male neutered Bichon-Frise, presented for evaluation of
chronic acral lick granuloma of the right foreleg (Figure CS16a-1).
 Treatment options include using CO2 laser energy.
PROCEDURE: Ablation/vaporization of granulation tissue
 Overlying normal dermis.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with hydromorphone
sedative/analgesic. Local ring block using 2% mepivicaine infusion.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 1.4 mm metal tip.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 1.4 mm
Power Output: 15 to 20 W
Figure CS16a-1
Beam Output: 20 Hz at 50 msec SP
TECHNIQUE: The area to be treated is cleaned of debris and
crusted material. The CO, laser is applied to remove the overlying
granulation tissue at the affected area. The granulation tissue
should be removed down to or slightly below the adjoining normal
epidermal and dermal layers. The treated area should be flushed to
remove any char buildup after each pass with the laser. Upon
completion, any remaining char (Figure CS16a-2) should be 
aggressively cleaned from the surface.
COMMENTS: In our experience, a significant number of these
cases have underlying metabolic, orthopedic, or behavioral issues
that have led to this condition. It is always advisable for the
clinician to do a complete diagnostic evaluation of the patient,
including laboratory blood values, T4, TSH, Cortisol values,
Figure CS16a-2
radiographs of the affected limb, culture/sensitivity of the affected
area, and biopsy of a section of abnormal tissue with adjoining
normal dermis.
CLOSURE: The treated area can be covered with a wound-
management dressing for twenty-four to forty-eight hours. Re-
evaluation at that time is recommended. A topical antibiotic cream
can then be dispensed for application at home. If treated
aggressively, resolution of the abnormal tissue can be completed in
one treatment. A relatively cosmetic appearance should be the
expected therapeutic outcome with some hair re-growth considered
optimal (Figure CS16a-3).
POST-OP EVALUATION: The area should be evaluated every two
weeks for a six-week period to ensure complete healing. If there is
evidence of recurrence the diagnostic work-up should be re-
evaluated for other possible origins of the acral lick granuloma.
Re-treatment of the area can be completed as before.
 FOLLOw-UP: Annual follow-up should be conducted during any
physical examination.
Figure CS16a-3
205
Case Studies
Case Study 16b
Multi-Factoral Acral Lick Granuloma
3-year-old male neutered English Mastiff, presented for surgical
removal of a severe acral lick granuloma overlying the third digit
of the right forelimb (Figure CS16b-1).
PROCEDURE: Resection and de-bulking of excessive granulation
tissue using COz laser energy. This is followed by
ablation/vaporization of remaining granulation tissue overlying the
 normal dermis.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
 and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUMPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
Figure CS16b-1
handpiece and 0.4 mm ceramic tip for resection. Mechanical
scanner with 3 mm pattern scans for ablation/vaporization of
remaining granulation tissue.
LASER SETTINGS:
Resection work
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
Power Output: 10 to 15 W
Beam Output: SP
Ablative/Vaporization work
 Spot Diameter: 3 mm pattern scan using a 0.8 mm daisywheel
spot
 Power Output: 10 W
Beam Output: SP
Figure CS16b-2
TECHNIQUE: The region with the acral lick granuloma is
evaluated and aseptically prepared. The bulk of the overlying
granulation tissue is resected in a wedge or broad surface resection.
It is important not to produce a fullthickness resection down to
the underlying fascia, ligament, tendon, or muscle structures. Once
the majority of granulation tissue is removed, the area is flushed
and the char removed. The scanner attachment is then set up for
the ablation/vaporization of any remaining granulation tissue down
to or slightly below the level of the surrounding normal dermis.
For severe cases, multiple resurfacing may be needed for complete
and cosmetic resolution.
COMMENTS: In our experience, a significant number of these
cases have underlying metabolic, orthopedic, or behavioral issues
that have led to this condition. It is always advisable for the
clinician to do a complete diagnostic evaluation of the patient,
Figure CS16b-3
including laboratory blood values, T4, TSH, cortisol values,
radiographs of the affected limb, culture/sensitivity of the affected
area, and biopsy of a section of abnormal tissue with adjoining
normal dermis. In this case un-united anconeal processes were
identified in the elbow joint.
206
CLOSURE: The treated area can be covered with a wound
CaseStudies
management dressing for twenty-four to forty-eight hours. Re-
evaluation at that time is recommended. A topical antibiotic cream
can then be dispensed for application at home. If treated
 aggressively, significant resolution of this abnormal tissue can be
completed in one treatment (Figure CS16b-2). Multiple re-
 treatments using ablation/vaporization is sometimes required, such
 as in this case (Figure CS16b-3). A relatively cosmetic appearance
should be the expected therapeutic outcome (Figure CS16b-4) with
some hair re-growth considered optimal.
POST-OP EVALUATION: The area should be evaluated every two
weeks for a six-week period to ensure complete healing. If there is
evidence of recurrence the diagnostic work-up should be re-
evaluated for other possible origins of the acral lick granuloma.
Re-treatment of the area can be completed as before.
 FOLLOW-UP: Annual follow-up should be conducted during any
physical examination.
Figure CS16b-4
207
Case Studies
Case Study 17
Feline Fibrosarcoma Removal
7-year-old female spayed Domestic Shorthair presented for
treatment of a vaccine-associated fibrosarcoma located in the
subcutaneous layer and musculature of the right dorsal midline.
PROCEDURE: Use of CO, laser energy for wide margin incision
and removal of neoplasm and surrounding tissue for
histopathology to determine extent of soft tissue invasion.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Figure CS17-1
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.4 mm metal or gold tip, mechanical scanner with
 3 mm pattern scans.
LASER SETTINGS:
Skin incision and resection of tissue
 Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
 Power Output: 8 to 10 W
Beam Output: SP
Tumor bed ablation/vaporization
Spot Diameter: 3 mm pattern scan using a 0.8 mm daisywheel
spot
Power Output: 10 W
Beam Output: SP
Figure CS17-2
Figure CS17-3
TECHNIQUE: Surgical removal of the overlying dermis and
primary mass (Figures CS17-1 and CS17-2) should be
accomplished to allow for at least 2 cm of apparently normal tissue
(Figure CS17-3). The fibrosarcoma mass should also be resected at
least one additional muscle group deep to its origin. Excellent
division of both skin and muscle tissue can be achieved with CO2
laser energy. Good visualization is provided and wound margins
can be more accurately inspected for any signs of gross tumor
remaining. Once the surgeon is satisfied with the margin widths
and excision of the tumor, a mechanical pattern scanner (Figure
CS17-4) can be used to cause resurfacing by ablation/vaporization
over the entire surgical region. We theorize that this can improve
the potential for removal of any seed cells or fibroblast tendrils
that may remain undetected. The area is then flushed and wiped
 aggressively to remove any char.
COMMENTS: After the initial excision has been completed, all
drapes, instruments, and surgical supplies that have been in contact
Figure CS17-4
with the neoplastic tissue should be removed from the surgeon and
patient. A new sterile surgical set up should be available and
provided by the surgical technician. This also can minimize re-
seeding the area with neoplastic cells from the original tumor.
208
CLOsURE: Standard reconstruction closure is recommended to
CaseStudies
reduce dead space and tension. Healing should provide for a
cosmetic appearance in the future.
POST-OP EVALUATION: Suspected fibrosarcomas and all tumors
of the skin should be submitted for histopathology. Once the
diagnosis has been made, consultation with a veterinary oncologist
 is recommended for current treatment options.
 FOLLOw-UP: The treated area should be re-examined once every
four to six weeks for evidence of tumor recurrence. If re-identified
early, repeated surgical treatments may be considered to increase
the lifespan and quality of life of the patient.
209
Case Studies
Case Study 18
Canine Lateral Ear Canal Resection
7-year-old male neutered Scottish Terrier, presented for lateral ear
canal resection for management of chronic proliferative otitis externa.
PROCEDURE: Lacroix-Zepp technique of lateral external ear canal
resection, using incisional and excisional CO, laser surgical profi-
  ass i a   
ablated/vaporized using a mechanical scanner.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
 and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
Figure CS18-1
handpiece and 0.4 mm metal or gold tip, mechanical scanner with
 3 mm pattern scans.
LASER SETTINGS:
Skin incision and resection of lateral ear canal
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
Power Output: 8 to 10 W
Beam Output: SP
Granulation tissue bed ablation/vaporization
Spot Diameter: 3 mm pattern scan using a 0.8 mm daisywheel spot
 Power Output: 10 W
 Beam Output: SP
TECHNIQUE: A standard Lacroix-Zepp technique is employed
using the advantages of CO laser energy for incision and excision.
Figure CS18-2
 The ear canal is lavaged and the pinna and overlying skin prepared
for surgery. Directing the handpiece perpendicular to the skin, a
rostral and caudal margin skin incision is made over the vertical
canal using 0.4 mm tip 8 to 10 W SP. The incisions are joined
ventrally (Figure CS18-1). The skin flap is lifted up and used as a
handle to apply tension to the subcutaneous tissue and vertical ear
canal cartilage. The handpiece is then directed perpendicular to the
lateral wall of the ear canal. Both a rostral and caudal margin
incision is made through the lateral auricular cartilage to a ventral
 point just below the end of the vertical ear canal. A non-traumatic
e se pasn aq oi ae re a oi pade aq ueo d as
guide for laser energy delivery (Figure CS18-2). The proximal two-
thirds of the auricular cartilage flap is excised. The remaining one-
third is reflected downward and sutured ventrally to the edge of the
Figure CS18-3
ventral skin incision (Figure CS18-3). This creates a “drain board" of
cartilage that can be sutured to the skin margins using monofilament
non-absorba ble suture. Once this is accomplished the scanner
   on    
tissue down to the level of normal auricular cartilage on the medial
wall of the vertical ear canal (Figure CS18-4). The area is flushed to
remove char and irrigate the horizontal external ear canal.
COMMENTS: Typically, no bandaging is needed, because the
drainage is minimal (Figure CS18-5).
Figure CS18-4
Figure CS18-5
POST-OP EVALUATION: The ear should be re-evaluated at both
seven and fourteen days. Sutures can be removed at this time.
FOLLOW-UP: Topical and systemic antibiotics are indicated for
fourteen days postoperatively.
210
Case Study 19
Case Studies
Ablation of Small Skin Mass
9-year-old female spayed Retriever, presented for removal of a
small dermal adenoma on the right flank.
 PROCEDURE: Outpatient ablation of surface mass using CO2
laser energy.
ANESTHESIA: Local infusion of 2% lidocaine and 2%
 mepivicaine (50:50 mixture) ring block.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.8 mm ceramic tip.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.8 mm
Power Output: 12 to 15 W
Figure CS19.1
 Beam Output: CW
TECHNIQUE: The area is aseptically prepared and shaved (Figure
CS19-1). The area is then blocked locally with an infusion block.
The surface of the mass is removed via surface excision by placing
the tip parallel to the dermis and removing the mass. This is
prepared in formalin for histopathology. Placing the tip
 perpendicular to the dermis and focusing the laser energy into the
area of the mass ablates the remainder of the mass deep to the
surface. After each pass the char should be removed to evaluate
underlying tissue. The laser trough should be deepened until no 
evidence of atypical tissue is noted. Once the surgeon is satisfied
with the mass ablation, the laser tip can be defocused and the
wound edges lased. This will produce a contractile effect to the
surface collagen of the surrounding dermis and contract the wound
Figure CS19-2
(Figure CS19-2). The effect is to reduce the total surface area of the
defect by up to 50%.
COMMENTS: Masses that are less than 0.5 cm in diameter
typically can be easily removed during regular examination visits.
The temperament of both the patient and the client should be
taken into account before considering doing this procedure during
an office appointment.
CLOSURE: All char is cleaned away and the trough is treated with
a wound management agent or topical antibiotic
POST-OP EVALUATION: The area should be evaluated for
patient comfort and hemostasis before release. A topical antibiotic
should be dispensed. Mild analgesics may also be prescribed.
FOLLOw-UP: No follow-up is typically needed for this procedure.
The wound will typically resolve to a small stelate scar in about
two to three weeks.
211
Case Studies
Case Study 20
Removal of Canine Mast Cell Tumor
6-year-old male neutered Labrador Retriever, presented for excision
and ablation of mast cell tumor from the left rostral maxillary lip
region.
 PROCEDURE: This mast cell tumor was removed using a
 combination of excision and vaporization with CO, laser energy,
providing good surgical margins and adequate retention of nerve and
vascular supply to the rostral region of the lip in this patient.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with diphenhydramine, medetome-
dine, butorphanol, and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflu-
 rane in oxygen. Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal
tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight hand-
piece and 0.4 mm metal or gold tip, mechanical scanner with 3 mm
Figure CS20-1
pattern scans.
LASER SETTINGS:
 Resection of mass providing good margins
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm gold tip
Power Output: 10 W
Beam Output: SP
Vaporization of margins deep to surface
Spot Diameter: 3 mm pattern scan using a 0.8 mm daisywheel spot
Power Output: 10 W
Beam Output: SP
TECHNIQUE: The surgical area is aseptically prepared. Margins at
least 2 cm beyond the limit of the mass are identified and outlined
using the CO, laser in pulse mode (Figure CS20-1). Directing the
handpiece perpendicular to the skin, laser energy is applied at the
correct focal distance for vaporization to make an incision. Once
Figure CS20-2
 good edges are produced, the surgeon should retract the mass and
undermine it, directing the handpiece parallel to the dermis. After
saving the specimen for histopathology, the laser is prepared to use
the scanner. The scanner is directed perpendicular to the surgical area
and alltissue with atypical appearance is ablated. Care should be
taken to attempt to leave the nerve and vessels in this region (Figure
CS20-2). After each pass any char should be wiped away and the area
re-e valuate d for residual atypical tissue.
COMMENTS: This technique can be used when the client refuses
more radical excision due to unfavorable post-operative cosmetic
appearance.
CLOSURE: Standard two-layer simple interrupted pattern closure using
2-0 absorbable monofilament material to appose the subcutis and 2-0
non-absorbable monofilament for skin closure (Figure CS20-3).
POST-OP EVALUATION: Histopathology is best indicator of tumor-
Figure CS20-3
free margins. Evaluate buffy coat for circulating mast cells. Consider
ultrasonogram study of liver and spleen. Internist may recommend
bone marrow biopsy. Consultation with a veterinary oncologist is
indicated.
FOLLOW-UP: The patient is evaluated fourteen days later and
sutures are removed at this time. Six-month re-checks are
recommended.
212
Case Study 21
Case Studies
Canine Cystotomy
 4-year-old male neutered Lhasa-Apso, presented for multiple
urinary calculi.
 PROCEDURE: CO2 laser-assisted cystotomy.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
 Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 12-Watt or 20-Watt CO2 NovapulseTM laser,
suction, and irrigation.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.8 mm
Power Output: 10 to 12 W
Beam Output: CW
Figure CS21.1
TECHNIQUE: Once the abdomen is opened, the urinary bladder
 is identified and isolated with sterile moistened laparotomy
sponges. A stay suture is placed to anchor the bladder in one fixed
area. Creating a cystotomy incision also will cause the urinary
bladder to contract and become smaller after the urine is emptied
(Figure CS21-1). A sterile assistant is prepared with suction to
remove any urine immediately before it contaminates the surgical
field. Smoke evacuation accompanies the laser incision as well. The
bladder is incised in a relatively avascular area near the apex on
the ventral side, if possible. The CO, laser is used to vaporize a
hole in the bladder serosa and mucosa. The air forced through a
hollow, flexible waveguide will slightly fill the bladder when the
 mucosa has been ablated. At this exact moment the surgeon and
assistant work together to extend the incision and avoid urine
contamination as the bladder empties. The full thickness incision is
continued to a length that will accommodate the entry of a suction
Figure CS21-2
tip (Figure CS21-2). The bladder is emptied of urine and the
procedure continues as indicated. A sterile rigid endoscope may be
introduced within the cystotomy incision to aid in the detection
and removal of all cystic calculi.
COMMENTS: Using a CO, laser for this procedure greatly
reduces post-operative discomfort and minimizes post-operative
hematuria.
CLOsURE: Standard double-row inverting pattern using
absorbable monofilament suture material (Figure CS21-3).
POST-OP EVALUATION: Assess normal bladder function, renal
function, sepsis, hydration, and patient comfort.
FOLLOW-UP: Two weeks later, following a course of antibiotic
Figure CS21.3
therapy and appropriate dietary modification
213
Case Studies
Case Study 22
Feline Myringotomy
5-year-old male neutered Himalayan cat, presented for a history of
chronic otitis.
 PROCEDURE: Otoendoscopic CO, laser-assisted myringotomy.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 12-Watt or 20-Watt CO2 NovapulseTM laser, video
otoendoscope, flexible laser tip, 3.5 Fr tomcat catheter, suction and
flushing device.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.8 mm
Power Output: 4 to 6 W
Figure CS22-1
Beam Output: 100 msec to 500 msec CW
TECHNIQUE: A clean ear is first achieved (Figure CS22-1). The
flexible laser tip is advanced through the working channel of a
video otoendoscope. A single burst of energy is targeted at the
tympanum to create a window through which internal pressures
are relieved. It is directed at the 5 o'clock position in the left ear,
 and at the 7 o'clock position in the right ear. In some cases,
u ei a ad oi papau aq ae ssq a
 precise and controlled fashion (Figure CS22-2).
COMMENTS: Immediately following myringotomy, it is not
unusual for pus to emerge from the bulla. This may be sampled for
bacterial culture and sensitivity (Figure CS22-3). The bulla is
repeatedly flushed with warm sterile saline passed through a 3.5 Fr
tomcat catheter. When the middle ear is clean and dry, a small
volume of a fluroquinolone antibiotic and steroidal anti-
Figure CS22-2
inflammatory mixture is infused within the bulla using a new 3.5
Fr tomcat catheter (we use three-fourths cc BaytrilrM and one-
fourth c SynoticTM).
 This procedure may also be performed very nicely with a 980
 nm diode laser using a 600μm diameter fiber to deliver laser energy
in contact mode to the pars tensa of the tympanum. We generally
use three to eight pulses of 5 W to 8 W(for 0.1 s at a duty factor of
50%) in a fluid medium. In cases where stenosis or swelling
prevents the use of a COz laser, the diode laser is a superior
alternative. The pressure of the fluid within the horizontal ear
canal both dilates the canal and provides for greater magnification
through the video-otoendoscope.
CLOsURE: None. Avoid any more fluid in ear canal for five more
days.
 POST-OP EVALUATION: Observe for vestibular signs, recurrent 
Figure CS22-3
otitis, or pain. These pre-operative symptoms are generally relieved
by the myringotomy procedure.
FOLLOw-UP: In one week, only the infusion procedure should be
repeated; however, the myringotomy should not need to be re-
done. Longer period of time for follow-up may require a myringot-
omy to be re-performed if the fenestration has healed and sealed.
214
Case Study 23
Case Studies
Canine Skin Incision
7-year-old female spayed Collie, presented for surgical removal of a
lipoma.
PROCEDURE: Skin incision.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO2 NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.4 mm metal or gold tip.
LASER SETTINGS
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
Figure CS23-1
Power Output: 6 to 8 W
Beam Output: Pulsed pattern C-3, SP
TECHNIQUE: Tension is applied across the planned incision site
using digital manipulation (Figure CS23-1). The focused tip is held
so that the laser energy is delivered at the focal distance from the
target. The handpiece is held perpendicular to the target, and the
edas anss ro aee paads p ym a si usi
under tension. Using a pulsed pattern allows the tissue to cool
between laser energy bursts, thus minimizing char. Once
completed, the edges are wiped free of excessive char using sterile,
saline-soaked gauze (Figure CS23-2).
COMMENTS: The incision is clean, dry, and not painful to the
patient upon anesthetic recovery. The superpulse temporal pattern
is an ideal setting for skin incisions. If available, the superpulse
Figure CS23-2
setting also can be pulsed for a greater reduction in char formation
(Figure CS23-3).
CLOSURE: Adequate subcuticular sutures are required. Outer
layer closure may be accomplished with simple interrupted non-
absorbable suture, or with a surgical tissue adhesive.
POST-OP EVALUATION: The patient should not be interested in
 grooming the area. The suture line requires fourten days to heal.
FOLLOW-UP: If sutures are required to be removed after fourteen
days, the tensile strength of the healed incision should be evaluated
prior to removal.
Figure CS23-3
215
Case Studies
Case Study 24
Canine Ovariohysterectomy
 6-month-old female Golden Retriever, presented for spay.
PROCEDURE: Abdominal approach for canine
ovariohysterectomy.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 12-Watt or 20-Watt CO2 NovapulseTM laser, non-
reflective backstop.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
Power Output: 6 to 8 W
Figure CS24-1
Beam Output: Pulsed pattern for skin incision, CW to continue
 the abdominal incision
TECHNIQUE: A skin incision is made and the subcutaneous
tissues are cleanly dissected from the linea alba. The abdominal
muscles and peritoneum are tented up with forceps and a single
cranial stab incision is created with a scalpel blade (Figure CS24-
1). A linear non-reflective metallic object (grooved director) is
introduced into the abdominal incision to serve as a backstop for
the CO, laser-assisted continuation of the incision. All internal
structures must be protected from stray laser beams. Inadvertent
lasing of the spleen, bladder, or mesenteric blood vessels could
prove disastrous and should be avoided. The abdomen is incised
using 0.4 mm tip, 6 W to 8 W CW over the backstop, which is
lifted upward to tense the targeted muscles that are vaporized
(Figure CS24-2). Any char is wiped away from the clean and dry
muscle edges (Figure CS24-3). The procedure is then continued as
Figure CS24-2
aot aunn ss an Aq pad snd
COMMENTs: The use of a CO, laser for the skin incision and
abdominal incision greatly reduces the pain and discomfort
 associated with recovery from major abdominal surgery.
CLOSURE: Three-layer closure. Surgical adhesive may be used if
desired to minimize use of external sutures.
POST-OP EVALUATION: Incision should be clean, dry, and
intact. Subcuticular sutures and tissue adhesive may be used
instead of outer-layer sutures
FOLLOW-UP: Recheck and suture removal in seven to ten days.
Figure CS24.3
216
Case Study 25
Case Studies
Feline Thyroidectomy
11-year-old female spayed hyperthyroid Domestic Shorthair, 
presented for bilateral thyroid lobe excision.
PROCEDURE: Laser-assisted hemostasis of supporting blood
vessels during bilateral thyroidectomy.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 12-Watt or 20-Watt CO2 NovapulseTM laser, sterile
cotton-tipped applicators.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.3 mm
Power Output: 2 to 5 W
Figure CS25-1
Beam Output: Pulsed pattern for skin incision, CW for vessel
vaporization
TECHNIQUE: A ventral incision is made through the skin
overlying the caudal larynx. The sternohyoideus and
sternothyroideus muscles are longitudinally separated and the
trachea is exposed (Figure CS25-1). The caudal thyroid vein is
located and isolated using forceps and a moistened, sterile, cotton-
tipped applicator. Once the underlying structures are identified and
protected, the vessel is transected and sealed with the laser using a
defocused beam (Figure CS25-2). Sterile, moistened, cotton-tipped
applicators are used to very gently tease the thyroid gland free
from its connective tissue attachments. Care must also be taken to
avoid excessive disturbance of the cranial thyroid artery, especially
when bilateral thyroidectomy is required. Vaporizing the cranial
thyroid artery completes the thyroid lobectomy. Gentle traction
Figure CS25-2
facilitates separation of the thyroid from the parathyroid gland
(Figure CS2.5-3).
COMMENTS: When bilateral thyroidectomy is performed, it is
advisable to stage the procedures thirty days apart, or use
dihydrotachysterol to minimize the potential for
hypoparathyroidism. An autogenous parathyroid graft may be
 planted within the sternohyoid muscle to preserve normal calcium
metabolism.
CLOSURE: The muscle layers are closed with 4-0 monofilament
absorbable suture material, and the skin is closed with surgical
adhesive.
POST-OP EVALUATION: Assess serum calcium levels forty-eight
hours following recovery.
Figure CS25-3
FOLLOW-UP: Patient should be euthyroid within two to four
weeks.
217
Case Studies
Case Study 26
Feline Tail Amputation
4-year-old male neutered Domestic Shorthair, presented for
necrotizing and gangrenous tail injury.
PROCEDURE: Disarticulation of caudal vertebrae proximal to
injury site using CO2 laser.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO2 NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece.
LASER SETTINGS:
 Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm for skin incision, 0.8 mm for
disarticulation
Figure CS26-1
 Power Output: 6 to 8 W skin incision, 8 to 12 W disarticulation
Beam Output: Pulsed pattern skin incision, CW disarticulation
TECHNIQUE: A dorsal and a ventral skin incision is made using a
0.4 mm tip, 6 W to 8W CW SP. The incisions are made in the
shape of a "V" so that the posterior edge of the incision is pointed,
and the proximal edges of the incision meet at the level of the
intended separation of caudal vertebrae (Figure CS26-1). Any char
is aggressively wiped away with moistened sterile gauze. The
surgeon should identify the intervertebral space using a sterile 25
 gauge needle to demonstrate the joint (Figure CS26-2). Under
tension, vaporize connective tissue, ligaments, artery vein, and
nerve at the level of the joint using 0.8 mm tip, 8 W to 12 W CW
in short bursts of 100 to 500 msec duration. Avoid charring the
distal edge of the remaining caudal vertebra. The incision is
lavaged with sterile saline prior to closure.
Figure CS26-2
COMMENTS: When required because of trauma, unresolved
 deformation, or tumors and their consequential diphtheritic
suppuration, amputation of the tail is a humane procedure that
relieves pain and eliminates sepsis. Antibiotics are dispensed for ten
days following the procedure.
CLOSURE: Simple interrupted steel or monofilament suture
material. Closure should approximate a conical shape (Figure
CS26-3). An Elizabethan collar should be worn to prevent self-
mutilation and/or early suture removal by the patient.
POST-OP EVALUATION: Incision should be clean and dry and
not swollen. When the patient sits, the tail should not drive directly
downward.
 FOLLOw-UP: Suture removal in ten to fourteen days
Figure CS26-3
218
Case Study 27
Case Studies
Canine Cherry-Eye Repair
6-month-old male Lhasa Apso, presented for neuter and correction
 of inflamed nictitans gland.
PROCEDURE: CO2 laser hemostasis of supporting blood vessel as
a modification of Morgan's pocket technique.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO2 NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece, iris scissors.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.3 mm
Figure CS27-1
Power Output: 2 to 4 W
Beam Output: CW
TECHNIQUE: There is an appreciable engorged conjunctival
vessel that supports the gland of the nictitans (Figure CS27-1).
There is generally a great deal of hemorrhage that obscures the
field when it is transected to create the pocket that receives the
tucked-in nictitans gland. Prior to using the laser, ensure the
exposed structures of the globe are protected from stray laser
beams. Vaporize this vessel with CO, laser energy through a
0.3mm tip using 2 W to 4 W CW (Figure CS27-2). The incision is
then continued around the inflamed gland (with the SP setting, if
available) to minimize char. After wiping away any char, the bulbar
conjunctival pocket is developed by blunt dissection using iris
scissors.
Figure CS27-2
COMMENTS: Morgan, et al. (1993) described this “pocket
technique" for correction of inflamed gland of nictitans as 95%
successful in all breeds. This is our preferred technique as
simplified with a CO, laser. The key advantage to using a laser in
this technique is hemostasis (Figure CS27-3).
CLOSURE: Monofilament 4-0 or 5-0 absorbable material. Knots
should be tied on palpebral surface of third eyelid. Two lines of
continuous inverting suture hold the inflamed gland within a
pocket created within the bulbar conjunctiva. Ophthalmic
antibiotic ointment is applied twice daily for five days following
recovery.
POST-OP EVALUATION: Sutures should not irritate cornea, and
patient should be comfortable and have pleasant appearance one
week later at final recheck.
Figure CS27-3
FOLLOW-UP: None
219
Case Studies
Case Study 28
Canine Stenotic Nares Repair
6-year-old male neutered Bulldog, presented for breathing
problems associated with brachycephalic breed upper airway
syndrome, requiring correction of elongated soft palate,
tonsillectomy, and opening stenotic nares.
PROCEDURE: Vertical nare resection using COz laser as the
incising instrument.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece, protective patient eye shields.
Figure CS28-1
LASER SETTINGS:
 Spot Diameter: 0.3 mm in small patients, 0.4 mm in larger
patients
 Power Output: 2 to 4 W with a 0.3 mm tip, 5 to 7 W with a 0.4
mm tip
Beam Output: Pulsed pattern for initial marking, CW for nare
resection
TECHNIQUE: The surgeon envisions the final nasal opening as a
circular conduit for airflow. To do this, a conical, wedge-shaped
portion of the stenotic nare is removed using a 0.3 mm tip, 2 W to
4 W or 0.4 mm tip, 5 W to 7 W. Pulsing the laser allows the
surgeon to precisely indicate the desired amount of tissue planned
for excision. Continue the incision of the nostril from the philtrum
Figure CS28-2
 toward the alar fold to make the circular shape complete. To excise
the redundant tissue that causes the stenosis, apply tension as the
laser dissects deep into the nostril space using CW setting (Figure
CS28-1). Any remaining tissue in this area may also be excised
until the surgeon is satisfied sufficient tissue has been removed to
ameliorate the stenosis. There should be no bleeding in this highly
vascular area; however, if minor hemorrhage occurs, the surgeon
should apply a defocused low-power laser beam for hemostasis.
COMMENTS: Owners should be instructed to keep the area clean
and moist for several days to prevent buildup of mucus or scabs.
CLOsURE: The nasal mucosa is sutured to the keratinized
epithelium using 3-0 or 4-0 monofilament absorbable suture
material (Figure CS28-2)
Figure CS28.3
POST-OP EVALUATION: The new nares should be symmetrical
and open and have a pleasing appearance (Figure CS28-3).
FOLLOW-UP: If there is a need to remove the sutures, it should be
postponed until complete healing occurs, after 21-day post-op.
220
Case Study 29
Case Studies
Feline Hypergingival Odontoclastic
Lesion
7-year-old female Domestic Shorthair, presented for hyperplastic
 dn sa so a-a o d 
CS29-1).
 PROCEDURE: Excision of hyperplastic gingival tissue. Exposure
of odontoclastic lesion and glass ionomer filling.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
 and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
 Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO, NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece and 0.4 mm metal or gold tip.
Figure CS29-1
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm
Power Output: 6 W
Beam Output: CW
TECHNIQUE: The affected tooth and gingival tissue are cleaned
of any calculi or debris. The hyperplastic gingival tissue is elevated
away from the tooth. A periosteal elevator is used to elevate the
gingival tissue and act as a backstop to protect the underlying
tooth anatomy. The laser tip is directed perpendicular to the
hyperplastic gingival tissue and the tissue excised at the level of the
adjoining gingival surface (Figure CS29-2). If bleeding is noted, the
laser tip is defocused and a single pulse of energy is directed near
the vessel. Any char is gently wiped away and the odontoclastic
Figure CS29-2
lesion is evaluated and prepared for filling with a glass ionomer-
curing compound (Figure CS29-3). The tooth is then polished.
COMMENTS: The great advantage of CO2 laser energy use in the
oral cavity is the reduction in bleeding and increased ability to
provide a clean and dry environment in which to work. Care must
be taken to protect the endotracheal tube from direct exposure to
laser energy.
CLOSURE: None is typically required. If any gingival tissue needs
to be closed, 3-0 or 4-0 chromic gut is recommended.
 POST-OP EVALUATION: Recheck tooth and gingival tissue post-
recovery.
FOLLOW-UP: Recheck tooth and gingival tissue in fourteen days.
Figure CS29-3
221
Case Studies
Case Study 30
Feline Faucitis Stomatitis Treatment
5-year-old male Domestic Shorthair, presented for ablation of
severe purulent faucitis-stomatitis (Figure CS30-1).
 PROCEDURE: Ablation of inflamed gingival tissue using pattern
scanner.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO2 NovapulseTM laser, mechanical
scanner with 3 mm pattern scans.
LASER SETTINGS:
Spot Diameter: 3 mm pattern scan using a 0.8 mm daisywheel
spot
Power Output: 10 W
Figure CS30-1
Beam Output: SP or CW
TECHNIQUE: The oral cavity is flushed and the affected area
cleaned with an antiseptic gel or cleaning solution. The
au Xlraua rasel oi ainsodxa o paioaioid si aqnt payoenopua
scanning tip is directed perpendicular to the affected tissue and
laser energy delivered to ablate abnormal gingival tissue. In areas 
where the tooth is present a periosteal elevator protects the
 A  a o n si i la  
formed after each pass with the scanner (Figure CS30-2). Wiping
with a 0.9% NaCl-soaked gauze also serves the additional purpose
of identifying any remaining friable bleeding gingival tissue. The
area affected is re-treated until there is no bleeding back from the
gingival surface. At this point any remaining char is wiped away
and the area liberally flushed with sterile 0.9% NaCl.
COMMENTS: Faucitis-stomatitis can be manifested from immune-
related disorders (hyper-responsive) or primary bacterial infection 
Figure CS30-2
(hypo-responsive). Treatment of the former with laser energy
provides palliative relief from pain and swelling. Recurrence at the
surgical site is likely. Treatment of the latter is usually curative
 provided a proper culture and sensitivity has been done and
 appropriate antibiotic therapy instituted. We like a fluroquinolone
 and metronidazole (15 mg/kg/day) combination therapy.
CLOsURE: None. Topical coating of 2% lidocaine is
recommended upon completion of the procedure.
POST-OP EVALUATION: Normal gingival tissue and or some
fbrocartilagenous scar tissue should be noted in place of the
inflamed gingival tissue within seven to ten days of treatment
(Figure CS30-3). Significant reduction in pain and odor should be
noted almost immediately upon recovery.
FOLLOW-UP: These cases should be closely monitored for
Figure CS30-3
recurrence.
222
Case Study 31
Case Studies
Anal Gland Removal
7-year-old female spayed Cocker Spaniel, presented with a healed
left anal gland fistula.
PROCEDURE: Open bilateral anal sacculectomy.
ANESTHESIA: Pre-medicated with medetomedine, butorphanol,
and glycopyrrolate. Mask induction with isoflurane in oxygen.
Maintenance of general anesthesia via endotracheal tube.
EQUIPMENT: 20-Watt CO2 NovapulseTM laser with straight
handpiece.
LASER SETTINGS:
 Spot Diameter: 0.4 mm for skin incision, 0.4 mm or 0.8 mm for
gland removal
Power Output: 6 to 8 W for skin incision, 8 to 12 W for gland
Figure CS31-1
removal
Beam Output: CW
TECHNIQUE: A grooved director is introduced through the anal
gland opening into the duct of the anal sac to identify the location
of the gland. The skin is incised over the neck of the anal gland
using the grooved director as a backstop to protect the underlying
tissues from laser energy (Figure CS31-1). Several cycles of laser
passes and char wiping may be required to complete the incision.
Allis forceps may be used to grasp the gland and apply upward and
 8'0 10 M M 8 01 M 9 Susn dn u t'0 V 'uoisua1 p1em1o
tip using 8 W to 12 W CW is used to dissect the subcutaneous
tissues away from the gland during its removal from the patient
(Figure CS31-2).
COMMENTS: Avoid leaving any glandular material within the
Figure CS31-2
 perineum and avoid inadvertent lasing of the rectum. Incontinence
may occur following transection of either the caudal rectal nerve or
branches of the internal pudendal nerve. Also, bleeding may occur
from many small perineal branches of the caudal rectal artery and
vein. Ligation with absorbable suture material is required if the
defocused low power laser, i.e., 0.8 mm tip using 3 W to 5 W CW,
cannot provide hemostasis.
CLOSURE: Following lavage (Figure CS31-3), the incision is
closed with both absorbable subcutaneous sutures and external
skin sutures that are removed in two weeks. The patient should
wear an Elizabethan collar to prevent self-mutilation, and if the
patient seems very uncomfortable, ice packs will feel soothing and
keep the area clean. Stool softeners should be used, and broad-
spectrum oral antibiotics are dispensed for ten days.
Figure CS31.3
POST-OP EVALUATION: There should be anal tone, although
diminished, at the time of recovery. Ensure that the patient does
 not groom itself during the healing process.
FOLLOW-UP: Suture removal at two weeks following recovery.
Patient should be able to retain stool and defecate normally.
223
Suggested Reading
American National Standards Institute. Safe Use of Lasers, ANSI Standard Z136.1,
Z136.3.
Anderson DM, White RA. Ischemic Bandage Injuries: A Case Series and Review of the
Literature. Vet Surg 2000 Nov-Dec; 29(6):488-98.
Apfelberg DB. Evaluation and Installation of Surgical Laser Systems. Springer-Verlag,
New York, 1987.
Arndt KA, Dover JS, Olbricht SM. Lasers in Cutaneous and Aesthetic Surgery. Lippincott-
 Ra ven, Philadelphia, Pa.
Baggish MS, Elbakry M. The Effects of Laser Smoke on the Lungs of Rats. Am J Obstet
Gynecol. 1987 May; 156(5):1260-5.
Ball KA. Lasers: The Perioperative Challenge. Mosby-Year Book, Inc. St. Louis, Mo.
Bartels KE. Laser Surgery, Current Techniques in Small Animal Surgery Il, pp. 45-52.
Williams and Wilkins. Baltimore, Md. 1998.
Bartels KE. Laser surgery for selected small animal soft tissue conditions. Progress in bio-
medical optics. Proceedings of lasers in orthopedic, dental, and veterinary medicine.
SPIE Volume 1424, pp. 164-170, 1991.
Bartels KE, Ed. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice. May 2002,
Vol. 32 (3).
Bartels KE, et al. Use of Diode Laser Energy (80s nm) for Selective Thermolysis of
Contaminated Wounds. Lasers Surg. Med., Supplement 9, No. 235, p. 52. 1997.
Bartels KE, et al. Transendoscopic Soft Tissue Ablation in the Equine Upper Respiratory
Tract. Progress in Biomedical Optics, Vol. 2970, pp. 208-214. 1997.
Cambridge AJ, et al. Subjective and Objective Measurements of Postoperative Pain in
Cats, JAVMA 2000 Sep1; 217(S):685-90.
Carroll GL, et al. Evaluation of Analgesia Provided by Postoperative Administration of
Butorphanol to Cats Undergoing Onychectomy. JAVMA 1998 Jul 15;213(2):246-50.
Carruth JA, McKenzie S. Medical Lasers: Science and Clinical Practice. Adam Hilger,
Bristol, 1986.
 Chen WR, et al. Chromophore-Enhanced Laser-Tumor Photothermal Interaction Using
 808 nm Diode Laser. Cancer Letters, 88:1s-19, 1995.
 Dickey DT, et al. Percutaneous Thoracolumbar Intervertebral Disc Ablation in the Dog 
Using the Holmium Laser. JAVMA, 208, No. 8, pp. 1263-1267, April 15, 1996.
Durante EJ. Breaking Strength of CO, Laser and Scalpel Blade Incisions in the Dog.
JSAVA, 1992 Dec; 63(4):141-3.
Durante EJ, Kriek NP. Clinical and Histological Comparison of Tissue Damage and
Healing Following Incisions with the CO, Laser and Stainless Steel Surgical Blade in
Dogs. JSAVA, 1993 Sep; 64{3):116-20.
Fisher JC. Basic Laser Physics and Interaction of Laser Light with Soft Tissue. In: Shapshay
SM, ed. Endoscopic Laser Surgery Handbook, New York, Marce Dekker, 1987.
Fligny I, et al. Comparative Study of CO2 Laser and Scalpel Nerve Transections. Lasers
Surg Med 1992;12(1):43-50.
Fossum TW. Small Animal Surgery, 2nd edition. Mosby, 2002.
Franks JN, et al. Evaluation of Transdermal Fentanyl Patches for Analgesia in Cats
Undergoing Onychectomy, JAVMA 2000 Oct 1; 217(7):1013-20.
Hardie EM, et al. Subtotal canine prostatectomy with the neodymium:yttrium aluminum
 garnet laser. Vet Surg, Volume 19, Number 5, pp. 348-3S5, 1990.
Hendrick DA, Meyers A. Wound Healing After CO2 Laser Surgery, Otolaryngology Clin
North Am, 1995; Oct 28(5):969-86.
Kirn DS, et al. Skin Contraction with a Pulsed CO, and Erbium: YAG Laser, Plast Reconstr
Surg 1999 Dec; 104(7)2255-60.
225
Suggested Reading
 Kokosa JM, Eugene J. Chemical Composition of Laser-Tissue Interaction Smoke Plume, J
Laser Appl, 1989; (9):59-63
Kunachak S, Sobhon P. The Potential Alveolar Hazard of Carbon Dioxide Laser-Induced
Smoke. J Med Assoc Thai. 1998 Apr; 81(4):278-82.
Lanzafame RF, et al. Comparison of Continuous-Wave, Chop- Wave and Super Pulse Laser
Wounds. Lasers in Surgery and Medicine 8:119-124, 1988.
 Lucroy MD, Bartels KE. Using Biomedical Lasers in Veterinary Practice. Veterinary
Medicine Special Supplement. Oct. 2000, pp. 4-9.
Mison MB, et al. Use of the Carbon Dioxide Laser for Onychectomy in Cats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2002; 221: 651-653.
Mison MB, et al. Comparison of the Effects of the CO2 Surgical Laser and Conventional
Surgical Techniques on Healing and Wound Tensile Strength of Skin Flaps in the Dog.
Vet Surg 2003, 32:153-160.
 Moll JR, Eeg PH, Berger NA. Laser Ear Surgery. ch 19 in Small Animal Ear Diseases, an
Illustrated Guide, 2nd edition. Gotthelf, LN, ed. Elsevier, 2005.
Nezhat C, et al. Smoke From Laser Surgery: Is There a Health Hazard? Lasers Surg Med.
1987; 7(4):376-82.
Niemz MH. Laser-Tissue Interactions Fundamentals and Applications. Springer-Verlag,
1996.
Peavy GM, et al. The use of chlor-aluminum sulfonated phthalocyanine as a photosensi-
tizer in the treatment of malignant tumors in dogs and cats. Progress in biomedical op-
tics. Proceedings of lasers in orthopedic, dental, and veterinary medicine; SPIE Volume
1424, pp. 171-178; 1991.
Shelley BA, et al. Use of the neodymium:yttrium aluminum garnet laser for treatment of
squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal planum in a cat. JAVMA, Volume 201, Number
5, pp. 756-758, 1992.
Sliney DH, Wolbarsh ML. Safety with Lasers and Other Optical Sources. Plenum Pub.
Corp. New York, 1980.
Sliney DH, Trokel SK. Medical Lasers and Their Safe Use. Springer-Verlag, New York,
1992.
Smith JP, et al. Evaluation of a Smoke Evacuator Used for Laser Surgery. Lasers Surg Med.
1989; 9:276-281.
 Starr JC, et al. Analysis of the Carbon Dioxide Laser Plume for Simian Immunodeficiency
Virus. J Derm Surg Oncol. 1992 Apr:1 8(4):297-300.
Tate LP, et al. Transendoscopic Nd:YAG Laser Surgery for Treatment of Epiglottal
Entrapment and Dorsal Displacement of the Soft Palate in the Horse. Vet Surg. 1990
Sep-Oct; 19(5):356-63.
Tate LP. Application of Lasers in Equine Upper Respiratory Surgery. Vet Clin North Am
Equine Pract. 1991 Apr; 7(1):165-95.
Tulleners E. Instrumentation and Techniques in Transendoscopic Upper Respiratory Tract
Laser Surgery. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract. 1996 Aug; 12(2):373-95.
Verschueren RJ, Oldhoff J. The Carbon Dioxide Laser. A New Surgical Tool. Arch Chir
Neerl 197S; 27(3):199-207
Venugopalan V, et al. The Effect of CO2 Laser Pulse Repetition Rate on Tissue Ablation
Rate and Thermal Damage. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 1991 Oct;38{10):1049-52.
Walsh JT, et al. Pulsed CO2 Laser Tissue Ablation: Effect of Tissue Type and Pulse
Duration on Thermal Damage. Lasers in Surgery and Medicine. 1988; 8:108-118.
Woods JP, et al. Laser-induced shock-wave lithotripsy of canine urocystoliths and
nephroliths. Progress in Biomedical Optics, Vol. 2970, pp. 227-231; 1997.
Wright VC. Laser Surgery: Using the Carbon Dioxide Laser. Can Med Assoc J. 1982 May
1; 126(9):1035-9.
226
Index
Abdominal surgery, 86
Area
Ablation, 27, 30, 36, 39,40, 44,48
focal, 3.5
Absorbance, 31
spot, 1.5
Absorption
thermal effect, 29
coefficient, 36
Argon/Krypton, 65, 68
density, 48
Articulated-arm, 67
electron energy, 11
ASLMS, 74
laser energy, 24, 25
Assistant, 79, 153
 Acepromazine, 105
Atoms, 10
Acetaminophen, 105
Atropine, 105-108
Acral lick granuloma, 142
Attenuation
Activation
eyewear, 142
footpedal, 52
tissue, 35
pain,102
Aural hematoma, 162, 166
A-delta, 101
Axis
Adenocarcinoma
beam, 15-22
nasal, 134
temperature, 49
perianal, 175
Aiming beam, 114-130
Backscatter, 30
Airflow, 170-171
Backstop, 85
Airway
 Bandage, see Name of surgical
surgery, 170-173
procedure
surgical safety, 90
Barbiturates, 104
Alcohol, 83
Beam, 9
Alexandrite, 17, 65
aiming, 127
Align, 115, 140
delivery, 70
Aluminum, 111
geometry, 15
Amplification, 11
TEM, 16
Amplitude, 6-18
 Benzodiazepines, 104
Amputation
Beta-adrenergic, 105
digit, 176
 Biostimulation, see Low-level laser 
limb, 179
therapy
penis, 155-156
Bladder, 152-156
pinna, 166
 Blanched, 122
tail, 174
 Bleeding control, 116
Anesthesia, 103
Blue, 33,34
Angle
 Blue/green, 40-41
divergence, 22
Bohr, 3-4
handpiece, 191
 Boiling
incidence, 29, 30, 33,44
Diameter, 49
reflection, 44
Intracellular, 24
refraction, 47
Bone, 179
target, 18
Bouger's Law, 35
ANSI, 79, 88
Bowel
Anterior cruciate ligament, 178
gases, 8.5
Anus, 175
 perforation, 61
Aperture
 preparation, 90
focusing tip, 21
 Brachycephalic breed
hollow waveguide, 20
upper airway syndrome,
laser, 11
170-171
Aqueous
Bulla, 169, 214
environment, 157
Bupivacaine, 104-106
humor, 64, 70
Buprenorphine, 104
227
Index
Butorphanol, 104
histologic water, 48
laser medium, 14
Calculus disruption, 60, 69
photon, 15
Calibration, 72
 photosensitizer, 24
Caramelized, 158
 power, see Power density
Carbon, 24, 25, 37
solute, 31
Carbonization, 24
Conduction
Fiber tip, 67
electrical, 84
Threshold, 46
nerve, 104-105
Zone, 44
 optical fiber, 71
Carcinogenicity, 85
thermal, 25-49
Carprofen, 104
zone, 49
Cartilage, 165
Conical
Cascade, see Photon cascade
orbit, 6
Castration
tip fiber, 120
canine, 151
wedge, 170
feline, 150
Contact mode, 115
Cauterization, 50, 139
Continuous wave, 16
Cell, 24, 25,46, 135, 139
Contract
Char, see Carbon
collagen, 23
Charge
service, 73
atomic, 6
vessel, 24
economic, 91-93
Control
Chassis, 70-73
administrative, 88
Cherry eye, 159
computer, 53
Chop, 17, 56
foot pedal, 81
Class, 86, 87
laser delivery, 72
Cleave, 114
pain, 108
COz, see Text
plume, 81
Coagulate, 26
surgical, 44
Coagulation, 23-30, 39-50
Convergence
Codeine, 104
beam, 21
Coefficient
 power density, 44
 absorption, 36
Cornea, 59, 69
attenuation, 35
damage, 83
scattering, 36
protection, 8.5
vaporization, 39
safety, 83
Coherence, 9
Crater
Collagen
TEM00, 16
coating, 157
vaporization, 29
contraction, 23
Cumulative effect of heat, 49
denaturation, 29
Current
Collateral
alternating, 53
heating, 26
direct, 10
ligament, 177
electrical, 53-55
tissue damage, 25
surgical lasers, 65
Collimated
Curve
beam, 8-22
Gaussian, 16
handpiece, 72
learning, 66
non-,140
reflecting mirror, 15
Colon, 127-128
Cystotomy, 152-154
Color, 9, 10
Combustion, 56, 83, 181
Damage
Communication, 95-100
to endoscope, 127, 128
Concentration
eye, 83
energy, 9
fiber, 70
free electron, 26
irreversible, 60
228
minimal, 64
Electromagnetic, 3-9
Index
skin, 84
Electron, 3-14
sensation, 101
beam laser, 59
thermal, 38,39
cloud, 7
tip, 114
shell, 7
tissue, 24, 25
spin, 7
Declaw
volts, 11
CO2 laser, 176-178
 Elongated soft palate, see Soft 
diode laser 119-121
palate
 Deep digital flexor tendon, 178
Emission
Defocused, 22-23, 39-40, 66
spontaneous, 11
Dehiscence, 25, 144
stimulated, 12
Delivery, 64-67, 70-72
Enamel, 85
diode laser 114-116
 Endoscope, 64-68
flexible endoscopic, 126-130
damage, 128
rigid endoscopic, 131-135
irrigation cooling, 127
Denaturation, 23, 29, 44, 60
laser delivery, 114
Desiccation, 24, 29
Endotracheal tube
Diameter
laser safe, 90
airborne contaminants, 89
preparation, 172
beam, 15-16
safety, 84-8.5
boiling, 49
Energy
CO2 laser tip, 21
acoustic, 25
diode laser fiber, 114
atomic, 7, 10-14
effective, 20
change, 8
vessel hemostasis
chemical, 24
CO2 laser, 26,66
density, 48
diode laser, 116
ECSW generated, 60
Diamond
electrical, 3
fiber cleaver, 114
electromagnetic, 3
scalpel, 56
kinetic, 4
Diazepam, 105
level, 8
Diffraction, 4
output, 53-55
Digit, 175-178
photonic, 3,6, 8
Dimer, 58
radiant, 6
Diode laser, 25, 36-41, 64-67
source, 9, 10
Delivery, 70-73, 111-138
state, 3,10
Disruption, 69
thermal, 24
Dissipation of heat, 26, 51
thermonuclear, 59
Dissociative/sedative, 105
transformation, 3
Divergence, 22
 transition, 4
Duration of pulse, 52-54
Entropion, 159-161
Duty factor, 55-57
Enucleation, 162
Epidural, 103, 105
Ear surgery
Epiglottis, 172
CO2 laser, 162-170
Epinephrine, 155
diode laser, 133
Er:YAG, 65
Economics, 91-100
Etodolac, 104
Ejection
E-waves, 5,6
electron, 59
Excimer, 58, 65,69
heat, 39
Excitation
plume, 25, 49
 see also pumping
Electrical
AC, 53
current, 10, 14, 17, 53-55
DC, 54
field, 6-7
dimers, 58
hazards, 84
fluorescent, 58
wave, 3-5
medium, 10
229
Index
Excitation (continued)
Formaldehyde, 89
photosensitizer, 57
Fourier's law, 46, 49
state, 9-14
Free beam mode, see Non-contact
 Exponential
apous
 attenuation of power density,
Frequency
35-38
light, 5
decrease in temperature, 46
 pulse repetition, 17
diminishing power density, 15
 radio, see Radio frequency
Extinction depth, 37-39
superpulse, 55
Eye
Frequency-Doubled-YAG, 64, 68
H=hazards, 83
Furunculosis, 146, 156
safety, 8.5
FUS, 156
surgery, 159-162
Eyewear, 89, 142
GaAlAs, 65, 111
Gas
Fees, 91-94
CO2 mixture, 53
Feet, 178
flammable GI, 174, 175
Fentanyl, 104
lasing media, 9, 10
Fiber
methane, 89
handling, 114-118
sterilization, 114
laser delivery, 64-71
 superheated ionized, 25
nerve, 101-102
unstable, 58
Fire
vapor, 61
extinguisher, 83
Gastro-intestinal
hazards, 83
applications, 181
safety, 89
surgery, 127,128
Flammable, 89
Gaussian, 15, 16
non-,90
Goggles, 142
Flap
Granuloma treatment, 158, 159
periodontal, 123
Guidelines
tissue,160
ANSI, 88
Flash-lamp, 65
basic LTI, 46
Flexible
safety, 80, 88
delivery tips, 168
endoscope, 140
Handpiece
fiber, 64, 114
angled,123
waveguide, 64
convergent, 141, 142
 Flexor process of P3, 178
diode laser, 115
Fluence, 15, 47, 115
tt '1a1e1 0t aoueis
excess,27,48
sterile, 142
subthreshold, 27, 49
Handspeed, 43, 44, 48
Flunixin, 104
Hazards
Fluorescence, 58
electrical, 84
Focal
eye, 86-90
area, 21
fire, 89
distance, 21, 22
inhalation, 81-8.5
length, 20
reduced, 118
optimal area, 44
reflection, 85
zone, 21
Healing
Focusing
delayed, 25, 68
beam, 21
process, 61
comparison, 21, 141
stimulate, 60
handpiece, 18, 72
Heat, 24, 25
lens, 67,72
accumulation, 40, 55
maximum, 23
back, 29
tips, 18
damage to fiber, 122
 Foot pedal, 80, 81
dissipation, 26, 52
230
specific, 47
Krypton, 65
Index
transfer, 46
KTP, 64-68
vaporization, 47
Helium, 53, 65
Laparoscopy, 114, 128-130
Hemoglobin, 36, 37, 67
Laryngeal, 171-173
Hemostasis, 64-69
 LASER, acronym, 4, see specific
High-energy, 4
reference
High-voltage, 84, 90
Laser Safety Officer, 79, 80, 87, 88
Ho:YAG, 26, 65
Laser-tissue interaction, 24
Horseradish peroxidase, 139
LAUP, 142
H-wave, 5
Lens
Hydration, 46-48
Eye, 83
 Hydromorphone, 104
Focusing, 20, 72
Hyperpolarization, 104
Lidocaine, 104
Hypoalgesia, 105
Lithotripsy, 26, 37, 69
Hypocalcemia, 121, 180
Liver reflectance, 31
Hypoparathyroidism, 180
Low-level laser therapy, 60, 87
Lymphatics, 66, 139
Ignition, 84, 89, 174
Lysis, 139
Incandescent, 8
Incidence, 30, 33, 34 see Angle
Magnetic field, 5, 6
Income, 94, 99
Maiman, ix, 4
 Inflammation, 25, 178
Maintenance
 Infrared, 4-6
beam integrity, 90
far, 50
diode laser, 67
mid, 67
log, 88
near, 37
 optimal power density, 117
Inhalation, 81-85 see hazards
Malleus, 164, 169
Injury
Marketing, 91, 92, 95, 99
eye, 87
MASER, 4
hazards, 79-85
Mask, surgical, 84, 85, 141
reperfusion, 177
Maxwell, 4
thermal, 22,25,29,39
Mechanical-acoustic energy, 24, 25
tissue, 50, 51
Medetomidine, 104
Instruments
Meibomian adenoma, 161
anodized, 85
Melanin, 24, 36-40
non-reflective, 85
diode laser absorption, 67, 139
reflective, 80
Melanoma, 124-125
 Interstitial laser therapy, 125-135
Meloxicam, 104
lodine
Mepivicaine, 108
radioactive, 180
Metastable atomic state, 12, 13
vapor, 84
Methane, 89, 90
Iris, 83, 126
Mie, 33-36, 39
Irrigation
Mirror, 10
CO2 laser surgery, 157,
Mode-locking, 17
167-169
Monochromatic, 8-14
diode laser surgery, 114-133
Myringotomy, 164, 169
Isoflurane, 106
 Isothermal zones, 39
Nasal planum, 170
Isotopes, 7
Nd:YAG, 25, 31, 36-41
delivery, 70
Jacketed fibers, 124, 127
extinction depth, 50
Joule, 43
physical properties, 65
Near-infrared
Kerf, 48
lasers, 67
Ketamine, 104
pigments absorbing. 139, 140
Ketoprofen, 104
wavelengths, 37
231
Index
Necrosis, 29, 30, 39, 40
Pedal, 80, 81, see Foot pedal
Nerve
Penetration depth, 38, 113
endings sealed, 139
Perianal, 173-175
impulse, 104
Periocular, 160-162
transection, 179
 Peripheral
Neutrons, 4-7
heat transfer, 36
 Nictitans gland, 159
nerves, 104
Nociception, 102
pain,102
Non-contact mode, 45, 64-69, 149
Phalanx, 119, 177
NSAIDs, 103
Photoablation, 58
 Photochemolysis, 24
Onychectomy
Photocoagulation, 117
CO laser, 176-178
Photodegradation, 58
diode laser 119, 120
 Photodisruption, 66, 69
Orbit
Photodynamic therapy, 24, 64, 135
quantum, 6-8
Photoelectric effect, 4
surgery of, 162
Photon, 6
Oschner forceps, 177
amplification, 11
OSHA, 79, 83, 87, 89
emission, 10
Otitis
generation, 8
externa, 162-167
theory, 4
media, 169, 170
Photon cascade, 10, 11, 14, 18
 Otoendoscope, 168
Photoplasmolysis, 25, 26, 35
Ovariohysterectomy, 149
Photopyrolysis, 25, 26, 46
Overheating, 132
Photothermal, 24, 29, 41, 45, 50
Oxyhemoglobin, 36, 37, 111, 117
Photothermolysis, 24, 35, 45
Photovaporolysis, 25, 46, 57
Pain
Piezoelectric, 60
abdominal, 102
Pigment, 40, 41, 50
acute,102
Pinna, 164-169
clinical, 101
Planck, 3, 4, 6
diminshed with CO, laser, 66
Plasma, 25,35-37,59,60
 management, 101
Plume, 24, 2
neuropathic, 101
see smoke
perception, 101
evacuation, 81
 peripheral, 101
hazards, 82-84
physiologic, 101
Polarization, 4
post-operative, 103
 Polychromatic, 9
relief, 174
 Population inversion, 14
somatic, 101
see Photon cacade
visceral, 101
Power, 15, 20
Palatoplasty, 142, 172
Power density, 15, 20
Parallel, 10-15
Precautions, 118
Parathyroid, 121-122, 180
Prism, 9
Pars flaccida, 164
Professionalism, 99
Pars tensa, 164, 169
 Proficiency, 67, 95
Particle
Profit, 92, 99
light interaction, 33
Propofol, 104
massless, 6
Protection
size, 34
eye, 8.5-89
Pattern
inhalant, 82
entropion correction, 160
patient, 85
light scatter, 39
staff, 118
pumping, 53
 Protons, 4-7
scanner, 142
Pulsed
spot size, 18
lasers, 25-26
superpulse, 54
obligate, 65, 70
PDT, see Photodynamic therapy
Pulsed-wave, 17
232
Pump-pulsing, 17
Spin, 7
Index
Purchase, 74-75, 99, 111
Spot size, 18, 20,23
Spontaneous, see Emission
Q-switching, 17-18
Staff, 73
Quantum
Stenotic nares, 170-171
number, 7
Stimulated, see Emission
theory, 4-6, 11-13
Suction
Quartz, 21, 64
endoscopic, 130-133
fiber, 70, 114, 139, 140, 148
smoke, 81
urine, 153
Radiation, 4
 Superficial digital flexor tendon,
Radio frequency, 10, 69
Ray, 5, 30, 33
178
Rayleigh, 33-36
Superpulse, 17, 53-57
Red, 5,33,37,41
Reflectance, 30, 31
Tachyphylaxis, 103
Refraction, 4, 29-33
Tail, 174
Refurbished, 74
Technician, 79-84, 92-97
Resonant cavity, 9-18
TEM, 16
Respiratory
Temperature
see Duty Factor, 55
crisis, 171
effort, 172
char, 37
hazards, 82-84
 gradient, 46
rate,102
tissue, 24-30
stridor, 170
transfer time, 47
surgery, 140
Tension, 145
Resurfacing
Testicular, see Castration
Thermal, see Heat
corneal, 59
granuloma, 158-159
Thermal relaxation time, 51
Thyroidectomy
Revenue, 99, 182
 RF-excited, see Radio frequency
CO2 laser, 180-181
diode laser, 121
Ruby, 17, 65-69
Tip
Safety, 79-90
Care,143
Scalpel, 55, 99
cleaved, 67
Scanner, 142
curved, 179
Scatter, 29-38
 diameter, see Power Density, 115
see also Rayleigh, Mie
flexible, 168
Sedation, 105
focusing, 18
Semiconductor, 65, 67, 111, 112
sterile, 70
Sensitizer, 57
Toe, 178
Sevoflurane, 106
 Tonsillectomy, 172
Shock
Tourniquet, 174-177
electrical, 84
Trachea, 180
sticker, 97
Transmission, 4, 29, 31
Shockwave, 25,26,35,37
Transmittance, 31
Shroud, 142
Tunable dye, 37, 89
Shutter, 17, 52, 53
Tympanum, 164
Silica, 64
Silicone jacket, 114, 119
Ulcers, 128,
Singlet, 10, 13, 55
Ultrapulse, 17, 54
Smoke evacuator, see Plume
 Ultra-short-pulsed, 26
Soft palate, 171, 172
Ultraviolet, 4-6, 24, 37
Spark, 3.5
Ungual crest, 177
 Specifications, 74
Unstable
Spectrum, 5,9
gas, 58
Speed
state,10
hand, 43, 44
Ureter, 153
Light, 4
Urethra, 154-156
233
Index
Urethrostomy, 154-156
Warnings, 87
Uvula, see LAUP, 142
Warranties, 73
Watt, 15, 20
Vacuolization, 50, 59
Wave, 4-8
Vacuum, 4
Waveguide, 70, 140-144
Vaporization, 24-26, 139
Wavelength, 5-15, 65
coefficient, 39
wavelet,6
crater, 29
WYDSCHY, 39, 40, 67
threshold, 29
WYSIWYG, 38-40
zone, 44
Violet, 5, 40
Xenon, 65
Visceral pain, 102
X-ray, 59
Visible light, 4, 5
Xylazine, 104
Vision, 83, 118
VSLS, 74,75
Zones, 30, 44, 50
234