Self-Assessment
Color Review
LEARN·REVISE·REINFORCE
Feline
Infectious
Diseases
KatrinHartmann
JulieKLevy
Clinicalcases
Problembased
Fullyillustrated
MANSON
PUBLISHING
Self-Assessment Color Review
Feline Infectious
Diseases
Katrin Hartmann
Dr med vet, Dr habil, Diplomate ECVIM-CA (Internal Medicine)
College of Veterinary Medicine
LMU University of Munich, Germany
Julie K. Levy
DVM, PhD, Diplomate ACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Director, Maddie's Shelter Medicine Program
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida, USA
MANSON PUBLISHING/THE VETERINARY PRESS
Copyright @ 2011 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN: 978-1-84076-099-6
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
under the terrms of any licence permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing
Agency, 33-34 Alfred Place, London WC1E 7DP, UK.
crirminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
For full details of all Manson Publishing Ltd titles please write to:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 73 Corringham Road, London NW11 7DL, UK.
Tel: +44(0)20 8905 5150
Fax: +44(0)20 8201 9233
Website: www.manson publishing.com
Commissioning editor: Jill Northcott
Project manager: Paul Bennett
Copy editor: Ruth Maxwell/Clare Chilcott
Design and layout: Cathy Martin
Color reproduction: Tenon & Polert Colour Scanning Ltd, Hong Kong
Printed by: New Era Printing Company Ltd, Hong Kong
Contents
Preface
4
Editor and contributor profiles
5
Classification of cases
13
Abbreviations
15
Questions
17
Table of reference ranges
215
Index
218
Preface
As a species, the cat is host to some of the oldest infectious diseases known to
veterinary medicine as well as being involved at the forefront of emerging and
newly discovered infections. Cats are victim to rapidly spreading pathogens and
  q   n a r m a   o
zoonoses and the spread of infections to and from wildlife. As cats become
increasingly important human companions around the world, the veterinarians
enchanted by this species have developed reliable diagnostic approaches and
exceptionally effective prevention and treatment strategies for many infections.
Despite this, infectious diseases remain an important part of daily feline practice,
either because the solutions do not yet exist or because some cats still remain
outside the reach of veterinary care.
With this book, we provide an overview of feline infectious diseases in a case-
based manner, the way clinicians encounter them in daily practice. We hope this
practice-oriented approach motivates the reader to contemplate the cases and to
reflect on how they might have managed each case.
The book was created for veterinary practitioners and veterinary students
infectious diseases. At the end of every case, questions for self-assessment by the
presentations.
We are very grateful for the expertise and hard work of all our co-authors.
We would also like to thank Jill Northcott and the team at Manson Publishing
for their patience and encouragement. Most of all we would like to thank our
partners, friends, and colleagues in our teaching institutions for all their support
and encouragement to turn this book into reality. We invite the readers to
approach this book the way we approach each of our feline patients, as a series
of mysteries awaiting our careful detective work in search of a happy outcome
for our patients and the families that care for them. We hope that this book will
inspire veterinarians to embrace the topic of feline infectious diseases and to
contribute to the health and welfare of cats everywhere.
Katrin Hartmann & Julie Levy
4
Editor and contributor profiles
Editors
Katrin Hartmann
Dr med vet, Dr habil, Diplomate ECVIM-CA
(Internal Medicine)
College of Veterinary Medicine,
LMU University of Munich, Germany
Dr Hartmann graduated from the College of
Veterinary Medicine at the LMU University of
Munich in 1987, completed her doctoral thesis
in 1990 and her habilitation thesis on the
antiviral treatment of FIV infection in 1995.
She stayed on as a Resident in small animal
internal medicine, Clinical Instructor, and
Assistant Professor at the Clinic of Small
Animal Medicine at the University of Munich
until 2001. From 2001 to 2003, she worked as an Associate Professor in the
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, USA. Since 2003, she has
been Professor and Head of the Clinic of Small Animal Medicine at the LMU
University of Munich, Germany. Her research is concentrated on infectious diseases
in cats and dogs, with a special focus on virus infections in cats.
Julie Levy
DVM, PhD, Diplomate ACVIM (Small
Animal Internal Medicine)
Director, Maddie's Shelter Medicine
Program
 College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida, USA
 Dr Levy graduated from the School of
Veterinary Medicine at the University of
California, Davis, USA, in 1989. She
completed an internship at Angell
Memorial Animal Hospital in 1990 followed by a residency in small animal internal
medicine in 1993 and a PhD in 1997 at North Carolina State University. Her
dissertation research focused on the immunopathogenesis of FIV infection. She is
Director of Maddie's Shelter Medicine Program at the University of Florida. Dr Levy's
research and clinical interests center on feline infectious diseases, neonatal kitten health,
humane alternatives for cat population control, and immunocontraceptive vaccines
for cats. She is the founder of Operation Catnip, with two university-based feral cat
spay/neuter programs that have sterilized more than 45,000 cats since 1994.
5
Contributors
Vanessa Barrs
BVSc (Hons), MVetClinStud FACVSc (Feline
Medicine)
Valentine Charlton Cat Centre, Faculty of
Veterinary Sciences, University of Sydney,
Australia
Dr Barrs graduated from the University of
Sydney in 1990 and returned in 1993 t0
complete a residency in infectious diseases and
small animal medicine. She attained a Master's
degree in infectious diseases in 1997 and
achieved Fellowship of the Australian College of
Veterinary Scientists in Feline Medicine in 2000.
Dr Barrs is currently Co-director of the busy
feline referral service at the Valentine Charlton
Cat Centre and is Associate Professor and Head of the Small Animal Medicine Unit
at the University of Sydney, Australia. She enjoys undergraduate and postgraduate
teaching. Her research interests include feline infectious and genetic diseases and
alimentary lymphoma.
Jeanne Barsanti
DVM, PhD, Diplomate ACVIM (Small Animal
Internal Medicine)
College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Georgia, USA
Dr Barsanti graduated from the New York State
College of Veterinary Medicine at Cornell
 University in 1974. She completed an internship
at Auburn University in 1975 followed by a
Master's degree in 1976. She completed her
internal medicine residency at the University of
Georgia in 1977 and joined the faculty. Her
dissertation research focused on the interaction
between canine heartworm disease and the
kidney. Dr Barsanti is currently Josiah Meigs
Distinguished Teaching Professor, Emerita in the
Department of Small Animal Medicine and
Surgery at the University of Georgia, USA. Her
interests focus on urinary tract diseases of dogs
and cats and prostatic diseases in dogs.
6
Stefano Bo
DVM
Ambulatorio Veterinario Associato Bo Ferro
Nardi, Torino, Italy
Dr Bo graduated from the College of Veterinary
Medicine of Turin, Italy. From 1992 to 1994 he
received a fellowship from the National Health
Institute on the ^Evaluation of cats with FAIDS
and its therapy'. In 1999, he completed his
doctoral thesis in veterinary internal medicine.
Currently he is a Lecturer at the College of
Veterinary Medicine of Turin, Italy, sees patients
in his private practice, and is President of the
Italian Society of Feline Medicine.
Ursula Dietrich
Dr med vet, MRCVS, Diplomate ACVO,
Diplomate ECVO
College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Georgia, USA
Dr Dietrich graduated from the College of
Veterinary Medicine at the LMU University of
Munich, followed by a doctoral thesis in ocular
ultrasound at the University of Munich in 1996.
She then completed a residency in veterinary
ophthalmology at the University of Zurich,
Switzerland in 200o. Dr Dietrich was a faculty
 member in the Department of Small Animal
Medicine and Surgery at the University of Georgia, Athens, USA from 2001-2009.
Her research interests focussed on feline and equine ophthalmology, glaucoma, and
ocular ultrasound. Dr Dietrch is currently affiliated with the New York City
Veterinary Specialists and lives in New York City.
7
Andrea Fischer
Dr med vet, Dr habil, Diplomate ECVN,
Diplomate ACVIM (Neurology)
College of Veterinary Medicine,
LMU University of Munich, Germany
Dr Fischer graduated from the College of
Veterinary Medicine at the LMU University of
Munich in 1987. She completed her doctoral
thesis in 1990 and a residency in neurology at
University of Georgia, Athens, USA, in 1994. She
completed her habilitation thesis on electro-
diagnostic techniques in small animal neurology
in 2000. Dr Fischer is currently Chief of the
Neurology Service at the Clinic of Small Animal
Medicine of the LMU University of Munich,
Germany. Her main research interests focus on epilepsy, electrodiagnostic
techniques, neuromuscular diseases, and hearing disorders.
Bente Flatland
DVM, MS, Diplomate ACVIM (Small Animal
Internal Medicine), Diplomate ACVP (Clinical
Pathology
College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Tennessee, USA
Dr Flatland graduated from the College of
Veterinary Medicine at the University of Georgia
in 1993. She then completed an internship at
Colorado State University in 1994 and a small
animal medicine residency and Master's degree
at the College of Veterinary Medicine at
Virginia-Maryland Regional University in 1997.
 Dr Flatland is currently an Associate Professor of
Clinical Pathology at the University of Tennessee, Collge of Veterinary Medicine,
USA, after working as an internist in both private practice and academia. Her
interests include quality management, point-of-care testing, method validation/
comparison, diagnostic cytology, and pedagogy.
8
Patrick Hensel
Dr med vet, Diplomate ACVD
College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Georgia, USA
Dr Hensel
lgraduated from the School of
Veterinary Medicine at the University of Bern,
Switzerland, in 1996. He completed a doctoral
thesis in 2000 and an internship at the School of
Veterinary Medicine at the University of Zurich.
Switzerland, in 2001. He then did a residency in
dermatology with board certification in 2004 at
the University of Georgia, where he is currently
a faculty member in the Department of Small
Animal Medicine and Surgery in Athens, USA.
His main areas of interest are canine atopic dermatitis, allergy testing, and infectious
diseases.
Kate Hurley
DVM, MPVM
School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of California, USA
Dr Hurley began her career as an animal control
officer in 1989. After graduation from the School
of Veterinary Medicine at the University of
California in 1999, Dr Hurley worked as a
shelter veterinarian in California and Wisconsin.
In 2001, she returned to Davis to complete a
residency in Shelter Medicine. Dr Hurley is
currently the director of the Koret Shelter
Medicine Program in Davis, USA. She loves
shelter work because it has the potential to improve the lives of so many animals.
Her interests include population health and infectious disease, with a particular
emphasis on feline upper respiratory tract infections.
9
Richard Malik
DVSc, PhD, MVetClinStud, FACVSc (Feline
Medicine), FASM
Centre for Veterinary Education,
University of Sydney, Australia
Dr Malik graduated from the University of
Sydney in 1981. He completed a PhD in neuro-
pharmacology at the Australia National
University, then returned to the University Of
Sydney for a residency in internal medicine. He
remained there for 16 years in a variety of posi-
tions, including the Valentine Charlton Senior
Lecturer position in Feline Medicine (1995 t0
2002). Dr Malik is currently an Adjunct Pro-
fessor in Veterinary Infectious Diseases at the
University of Sydney, Australia, and a Senior
Consultant and Veterinary Specialist in the Post Graduate Foundation in Veterinary
Science. His primary interests focus on infectious and genetic diseases, diseases of
cats in general, and most recently diseases of koalas.
Ralf Mueller
Dr med vet, Dr habil, Diplomate ACVD,
Diplomate ECVD, FACVSc (Dermatology)
College of Veterinary Medicine,
LMU University of Munich, Germany
Dr Mueller graduated from the College of
Veterinary Medicine at the LMU University of
Munich in 1985, and worked in private practice
before completing a residency in dermatology at
the School of Veterinary Medicine at the
University of California, Davis, USA, in 1992.
He worked in a private dermatology referral
 practice in Melbourne before joining the faculty
at the College of Veterinary 丨
Medicineat
Colorado State University in 1999. He completed
his habilitation thesis at the University of Zurich, Switzerland, in 2003. He is
currently Chief of the Dermatology Service at the Clinic of Small Animal Medicine
of the LMU University of Munich, Germany.
10
Catherine Mullin
VMD, MS
School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of California, USA
Dr Mullin received her MS at the University of
Manitoba, Canada in 1988 and her VMD from
the University of Pennsylvania in 1995. After an
internship at the Animal Medical Center in New
York City, Dr Mullin worked for the Humane
Society of New York in both their shelter and
low-cost clinic. Dr Mullin is currently completing
a residency program in shelter medicine at the
University of California, Davis, USA. She is
all aspects of animal sheltering with an emphasis
On feline infectious diseases.
Margie Scherk
DVM, Diplomate ABVP (Feline)
CatsINK, Vancouver, Canada
Dr Scherk graduated from the Ontario
Veterinary College in Guelph, Canada,
in 1982. In 1995 she became board-
certified in Feline Practice by the Ameri
can Board of Veterinary Practitioners
(ABVP). She practiced at Cat's Only
Veterinary Clinic in Vancouver, Canada
from 1986 to 2008. She is the North
American editor for the Journal of
Feline Medicine and Surgery and was the President of the American Association of
 Feline Practitioners (AAFP) for 2007. Her interests include analgesia, ethology, and
geriatric internal medicine.
11
Bianka Schulz
Dr med vet, Diplomate ECVIM-CA (Internal
Medicine)
College of Veterinary Medicine,
LMU University of Munich, Germany
Dr Schulz
Z graduated from the College of
Veterinary Medicine at the LMU University of
Munich in 1997. She completed her doctoral
thesis on feline respiratory tract infections
followed by a residency at the University of
Munich and at the College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia,
USA, from 2001 to 2003. Dr Schulz is currently
a faculty member at the Small Animal Internal
Medicine Service of the Clinic of Small Animal
Medicine at the LMU University of Munich, Germany. Her primary research interests
focus on feline and canine respiratory tract disease, especially infectious diseases and
feline asthma.
12
Classification of cases
Note: references are to case numbers.
ORGAN SYSTEMS
Respiratory 4, 9-11, 17-19, 25, 26, 39,40, 42-44, 48, 52-54, 59, 79-81, 86-88,
92, 108, 109, 121, 122, 132-134, 136-138,142-144, 149, 152,174,183, 184,
194-196
Dermatological 5,13-15,22-24,30,31,35,36,46,47,49,59, 70,71,75,82,83,
90, 91,97, 102, 108, 109,115, 124, 125,129-131, 153-155, 160-163, 180, 181,
197-199
Cardiovascular 60-62, 110, 111, 116, 177, 180, 181
Urological 16,20,66, 100, 101, 106, 126, 127, 129,130, 157-159
Neurological 1,6,7,32-34, 38, 42-44,76,77, 85, 98, 99, 120, 123, 128, 135,145,
156,160,161, 166,167,187, 190
Orthopaedic 107, 109
Ophthalmological 28, 29, 37,69,72,78,104,105, 114, 162-164, 197-199
Oral/gastrointestinal 2,3,21,41, 56-58,63, 64,67,68,84, 103,117-119,165,
178,179,186, 188, 189, 191, 193
Systemic 8,9,12-15,17,27,45,50,51,55, 73,74,86-89,94-96,112,113,
139-141, 146-148, 150, 151, 168-173, 175-177, 182, 185, 191, 192
INFECTIONS
VIRUSES
FIV 25,26,46,47,63,64,67,68,157,158,166,167,171,183,185,186,191
FeLV 16, 33, 34, 69, 150, 151, 159, 168-170
FCoV12 32,50,51,73,74,76-78,94-96,135,148,172,173
FPV 2,3, 38, 56-58, 84,117-119
FHV 37, 184
FCV 17,93, 184
Influenza 86-88
Rabies 190
BACTERIA
Respiratory Mycoplasma spp. 18, 19, 132
Haemotrophic Mycoplasma spp. 8
Bartonella spp. 147
Bordetella bronchiceptica 52-54,136,137
Mycobacteria spp. 30, 31,46,47,49, 97, 140, 141, 154, 155, 174
Leptospira spp.45
Botulism 120
Borrelia burgdorferi 107
Tetanus 1,85,128,145,187
Helicobacter spp. 21,41,165
Nocardia spp./Actinomyces spp. 22, 23, 79, 80, 92, 138
13
Chlamydophila felis 28,29,164
Other bacteria 4,6,7,13-15,66,75,89,98-101,107,112,113,126,127,167
178, 179, 192, 193
PARASITES
Leishmania spp. 129-131, 197-199
Babesia spp. 27
Cytauxoon felis 182
Toxoplasma gondii 72, 81, 104, 105, 139, 146, 152, 166, 167, 194-196
Giardia lambia 103
Tritrichomonas foetus 188, 189
Lumgworm 121, 122, 133, 134, 142-144, 183
Heartworm 60-62, 110, 111, 116, 177, 180, 181
Otodectes cynotis 5,35,36
Other parasites 24, 114, 115
FUNGI
Cryptoc0ccus spp. 25, 26, 42-44, 48, 108, 109, 160-163
Aspergillus spp. 39,40
Histoplasmosis capsulatum 10, 11
Sporothrix schenkii 82,83,124,125
Microsporum canis 70,71,90,91,102
Other fungi 36, 153
14
ACE
angiotensin-converting
GMS
Gomori methenamine silver
enzyme
HARD
heartworm-associated
AIHA
 autoimmune hemol ytic
respiratory disease
anemia
H&E
hematoxylin and eosin
ALP
 alkaline phosphatase
HIV
human immunodeficiency
ALT
alanine aminotransaminase
virus
ANA
antinuclear antibody
IBD
inflammatory bowel disease
AST
aspartate transaminase
ID
intra dermal
AZT
3'-azido-2',3'-
IFA
immunofluorescent antibody
IM
intramuscular
(zidovudine)
IN
intranasal
BAL
bronchoalveolar lavage
IOP
intraocular pressure
BCG
Bacille Calmette-Guérin
ITP
immune-mediated
BCS
body condition score
thrombocytopenia
wdq
beats/breaths per minute
IV
intra venous
CD
cluster determination
LDH
lactate dehydrogenase
CK
creatine kinase
LPS
lipopolysaccharide
CNS
central nervous system
MCV
mean cell volume
CPV
canine parvovirus
MLV
modified live virus
CSD
cat-scratch disease
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
CSF
 cerebrospinal fluid
PAS
periodic acid-Schiff
CT
computed tomography
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
DIC
disseminated intravascular
PLR
pupil light reflex
coagulation
PO
oral
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
PT
prothrombin time
DTM
dermatophyte transport
PTT
partial thromboplastin time
medium
RBC
red blood cell
ELISA
enzyme-linked
(r)RNA
(ribosomal) ribonucleic acid
 immunofluorescent assay
RT-PCR
reverse transcription
EPO
erythropoietin
polymerase chain reaction
FCV
feline calicivirus
SC
subcutaneous
FCoV
feline corona virus
SLE
systemic lupus erythematosus
FDP
fibrin degradation product
SPA
Staphylococcus protein A
FeLV
feline leukemia virus
TNR
(weaord) una-ranau-de.1
FeSV
feline sarcoma virus
TPN
total parenteral nutrition
FHV
feline herpesvirus
UMN
upper motor neuron
FIP
feline infectious peritonitis
UPC
urine protein to creatinine
FIV
feli ne immunodeficiency virus
ratio
FPV
feline panleukopenia
UTI
urinary tract infection
virus/feline parvovirus
VS-FCV
virulent strain feline
FUO
fever of unknown origin
calicivirus
G-CSF
human recombinant
WBC
white blood cell
 gra nulocyte colony-
stimulation factor
15
Thispageintentionally left blank
1, 2:Questions
1 A 4-year-old castrated male domestic
shorthair cat was seen because of a
7-day history of rigidity of the left
thoracic limb (1). Sometimes, episodes of
severe muscle spasm were superimposed.
Forelimb rigidity had developed over a
72-hour period, but was subsequently
nonprogressive. Otherwise, the cat had
seermed quite well. It was eating and
drinking normally, and could move
around the house. Apart from the affected limb, the general physical and neurologic
examinations were unremarkable. There was a small scab below the left elbow. The
limb had markedly increased muscle tone and an increased triceps reflex, and there
was normal sensation in the left front paw.
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. What additional evaluation is indicated?
ifi. Are radiographs of the spine and a myelogram likely to be helpful in this situation?
iv. Are electrodiagnostic studies likely to be useful?
2 A 2-year-old castrated male domestic
shorthaired cat (2) was seen because of
acute vomiting for 3 days. The cat had
been obtained from a shelter 1 month
previously and lived both indoors and
outdoors. At presentation, the only
preventative care the cat had received
was one vaccination against rabies.
Physical examination revealed depres-
sion, lethargy, hypersalivation, about
7% dehydration and pain on abdominal
palpation. The body temperature was
40.9℃.
Blood profile
Results
RBC
10.4 × 1012/1
Platelets
156 x 109/1
WBC
0.40 x 109/1
Mature neutrophils
0.12 × 10°/1
Lymphocytes
0.12 x 10*/1
i. What is the most likely diagnosis in this cat?
ii. What tests should be done next?
17
1,2:Answers
1 i. The only likely diagnosis in a cat with this presentation is localized (or local)
tetanus.
ii. Local tetanus is a clinical diagnosis, and tetanus is the only infectious disease
that is usually diagnosed just based on the clinical findings. In most cases, there is
insufficient tetanus toxin present in the circulation for mouse inoculation studies.
In early cases it may be possible to culture Clostridium tetani from the wound using
meticulous anerobic culture techniques. The presence of a wound also lends strong
support to a diagnosis of local tetanus, but not all affected animals have a detectable
wound. Localized tetanus occurs in cases of minimal toxin elaboration, such that
when the toxin is transported retrograde up the peripheral nerves, there is only
enough to interfere with inhibitory neurotransmitter release in the motor neuron
pools of the affected limb.
ini. Radiographs of the spine and myelography are unlikely to provide any useful
diagnostic information in this cat.
iv. Electromyography shows persistent motor unit discharges even under deep
anesthesia, confirming the clinical observation of increased activity in motor nerve
axons subserving the affected limb, but is usually not necessary to confirm the
diagnosis.
 2 i. In young animals with inadequate vaccination and worming histories, the most
common causes of gastrointestinal disease are: (1} infectious, (2) parasitic, and
(3) dietary (food intolerance, ingestion of noxious substances and gastrointestinal
foreign bodies).
In this young cat with fever and severe leukopenia, feline panleukopenia virus (FPV)
infection is the most likely differential diagnosis. The presence of a fever and
 leukopenia make inflammatory bowel disease unlikely. A foreign body and peritonitis
should also be considered, but peritonitis seems less likely in the absence of an
inflammatory leukogram. Extra-gastrointestinal disorders are less likely in a young
previously healthy animal and could be ruled out with a serum biochemical panel.
ii. Further tests should include: (1) testing for FPV (fecal antigen test), and (2) fecal
examination (flotation, direct smear).
If the FPV antigen test is negative, abdominal imaging studies could be performed.
A serum biochemical profile is indicated to rule out metabolic causes of vomiting
and to guide fluid therapy. Fecal antigen testing for giardiasis and culture for
salmonellosis should be considered. An upper gastrointestinal radiographic contrast
study should be considered only if foreign body or mechanical obstruction is
strongly suspected. However this carries a risk of vomiting and aspiration. Biopsy
(via upper gastrointestinal endoscopy or exploratory laparotomy) should only be
considered if the cat does not respond to medical care.
18
3, 4: Questions
3 Case 3 is the same cat as case 2. A fecal antigen test for parvovirus is negative (3)
i. Does this rule out FPV infection?
ii. What causes feline parvovirosis and how else may it be diagnosed?
4 A 7-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat was seen because of a 3-month
history of chronic mucopurulent nasal discharge (4). The cat had received two
10-day courses of antibiotics (amoxicillin and enrofloxacin). During antibiotic
treatment nasal discharge became less severe, but it relapsed afterwards. A sample
of the nasal discharge had been submitted for bacterialculture and sensitivity testing,
and heavy growth of Pasteurella multocida was found. Sensitivity testing indicated
resistance to amoxicillin and cephalexin. The cat lived indoors, and vaccines were
 Physical examination revealed purulent nasal discharge from both nares, a slight
 inspiratory nasal stridor, and slightly enlarged mandibular lymph nodes.
i. What is the most likely reason for nasal discharge?
ii. How useful is a bacterial culture of nasal discharge?
ii. What further tests could be performed?
iv. What are the possible treatment options?
19
3,4:Answers
3 i. A negative fecal antigen test result does not rule out FPV infection. Viral
shedding is brief and intermittent, and negative results may occur if the test is
performed after more than 5-7 days of ilness. Viremia occurs before fecal shedding.
but negative results are also possible if fecal antigen tests are performed early during
clinical illness (e.g. before the onset of diarrhea). Also, positive results are possible
following MLV vaccination in healthy animals.
i. Cats may be infected by FPV or canine parvoviruses (CPV-2a and CPV-2b). Both
may cause clinical signs of panleukopenia. Kits that test for fecal canine parvovirus
antigen may detect both wild and vaccine strains of both viruses. PCR testing of blood
or bone marrow during early infection (viremic phase) may be positive for FPV prior
microscopy, virus isolation, or immunofluorescence staining. Histopathologic exami-
nation and immunofluorescence testing are usually carried out in animals that have
died. Intestinal biopsies are rarely obtained in acute parvoviral gastroenteritis, as cats
are not stable enough to undergo biopsy initially, and later recover with supportive
care. Antibody tests are usually negative when the animals are presented, due to the
short incubation period. In this case, parvovirus infection was diagnosed by electron
microscopy. The cat was treated symptomatically and recovered within a week.
4 i. Diseases that have to be considered are: (1) neoplasia, (2) lymphoplasmacytic
rhinitis, (3) trauma, (4) foreign body, (5) dental problems, (6) nasopharyngeal
polyps, (7) infectious diseases (e.g. FHV, FCV, cryptococcosis, aspergillosis), and
(8) secondary bacterial infections.
i. Bacterial culrures of nasal discharge are not helpful in establishing a diagnosis.
Multiple bacterial organisms can be cultured from the nose of healthy cats; these usu-
ally cause secondary infection in chronic nasal diseases. To treat the problem success-
fully, diagnosis and treatment of the underlying primary disease should be attempted.
ii. The oral cavity should be examined for signs of dental disease, masses deviating
the hard or soft palate, or polyps protruding into the nasopharynx. A complete
blood count, biochemistry profile, and urinalysis should be performed to detect
could be obtained. To localize the disease process, involvement of the lower airways
and sinuses should be investigated. CT or radiographs of the nasal cavity and
paranasal sinuses should be followed by rhinoscopy to visualize the disease process
and to obtain biopsy samples for histopathology and fungal culture.
iv. Firstly, the underlying disease process should be addressed. If this problem can be
treated, secondary bacterial infection should resolve with a broad-spectrum antibiotic
given for 2-3 weeks. If the underlying problem cannot be treated successfully,
antibiotic pulse therapy or long-term treatment with an antibiotic may be helpful.
20
5, 6:Questions
5 A 3-year-old spayed female
5a
5b
domestic shorthair cat was
seen because of scratching
her ears and shaking her
head. On physical examina-
tion, brown crusty debris
was seen in both ears (5a).
There were excoriations of
the skin behind one ear and
miliary dermatitis in the
dorsal lumbosacral area, as
well as extensive excoriation on the ventral aspect of the neck. An organism was
seen on microscopic examination (5b).
i. What is the organism shown in the image?
ii. How is it transmitted?
ili. Is this organism specific to cats?
iv. How should the cat be treated?
v. Is the miliary dermatitis related to this organism?
6 A 7-year-old spayed female domestic
shorthair cat was seen because of an
acute onset of left-sided head tilt and
Horner's syndrome (6) 5 days ago. The
cat lived indoors and outdoors. It had
been vaccinated against FPV, FHV and
FCV. It had a lifelong history of chronic
nasal discharge and was treated inter-
mittently with antibiotics; the last treat-
ment was 6 months previously. On
examination, there was mucopurulent
nasal discharge, and the cat showed open-mouth breathing. The external ear canals
and the tympanic membranes were normal. The neurologic examination showed
head tilt to the left and intermittent falling to the right side on turns and when
shaking the head. There was horizontal nystagmus with the fast phase to the right
which did not change direction with different positions of the head. Postural
reactions, spinal reflexes, and cranial nerves were all normal except for Horner's
syndrome of the left eye.
i. What is the neuroanatomic localization?
i. What are the most likely differential diagnoses?
ii. What further diagnostic steps are suggested?
21
5,6:Answers
5 i. The organism is Otodectes cynotis, the most common mite to infest the cat.
ii. It is transmitted by direct contact between animals, especially during the neonatal
period of the cat. High morbidity is expected in a multiple-cat setting.
ini. Host specificity is not exclusive. This organism can also cause otitis externa in
dogs, foxes, and ferrets, and, in people, a pruritic rash on the arms and thorax.
iv. Successful treatment requires treating ears as well as the coat and tail to eliminate
a source of reinfestation. The ears should be thoroughly cleaned by removing all of
the debris, before treating with a topical miticidal preparation. Topical selemectin,
  e s  a     r  
with a flea spray labeled for use on cats. All other cats and possible carriers in the
household should also be treated as they may be inapparent carriers. Secondary
bacterial infection or inflammation related to a hypersensitivity response may need
treatment with a topical antibiotic-corticosteroid combination.
v. Most infestations are limited to the head and neck. Occasionally, generalized
infestation may occur. Differential diagnoses for the concurrent miliary skin
condition include allergic skin diseases (flea, inhalant, food), other ectoparasites,
dermatophytosis, demodicosis, and pyoderma.
6 i. Head tilt is a sign of vestibular disease. Vestibular disease can be either of
peripheral or of central origin. Decreased postural reactions, vertical nystagmus or
nystagmus which changes direction with different positions of the head or cranial
nerve deficits other than facial paresis or Horner's syndrome are indicative of central
vestibular disease. Head tilt and falling are usually ipsilateral to the lesion, and the fast
phase of the nystagmus usually points away from it. Paradoxical vestibular disease
with head tilt and fast phase of the nystagmus towards the side of the lesion may
Occur with some types of central vestibular disease. In this cat, the neurologic
examination indicated peripheral vestibular disease (inner ear CN VI). Horner's
syndrome can result from a variety of lesions in the sympathetic pathway
(diencephalon, brainstem, spinal cord, T1-T3 nerve roots, thorax, vagosympathetic
trunk, middle ear or orbit). Middle ear disease is the most likely cause of Horner's
syndrome in this cat.
i. Inflammatory, idiopathic, and neoplastic diseases are the most frequent causes of
peripheral vestibular disease in cats. Toxic and vascular causes, anomaly, and trauma
cats. Normal findings on otoscopic examination cannot exclude otitis media. Horner's
syndrome is a frequent sign of otitis media in cats.
ii. Imaging of the tympanic bullae with MRI or CT should be performed. Alterna-
tively, radiographic assessment of the tympanic bulla can be done. Myringotomy may
be ried to obtain a specimen for cytology and bacterial culture.
22
7, 8: Questions
7 Case 7 is the same cat as case 6. Transverse MR images (T2) showed that both
bullae were filled with tissue and fluid. Additional views showed complete loss of
nasal turbinates (7 [courtesy of Prof. U. Matis, LMU University of Munich]).
i. What treatment options can be suggested?
ii. What are the risks involved with the treatment?
8 A 4-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat was seen because of a 3-day
history of being less energetic than normal. On physical examination, the cat was
alert but less assertive than expected. Its oral mucous membranes were pale and
slightly icteric. Abdominal palpation revealed splenomegaly, which was confirmed
radiographically. The complete blood count revealed a macrocytic, hypochromic
anemia (hematocrit 0.16 1/l) with only few reticulocytes (5 x 109/l) present. A blood
smear was examined (8).
i. What are the clinically significant abnormalities seen in the blood smear?
ii. What are the clinically relevant differences between these organisms?
ii. How do cats become infected with these organisms?
iv. How is this disease treated?
v. What is the prognosis?
23
7,8:Answers
7 i. Chronic otitis media/interna is often managed surgically with ventral bulla
 Osteotomy. Ventral osteotomy is also needed for removal of inflammatory polyps.
Otitis media/interna may also be treated conservatively with antibiotics or
antifungals as indicated by culture and cytology results. Amoxicillin/clavulanate
(22 mg/kg bid) combined with clindamycin or metronidazole can be used until
culture results are available. Topical treatment alone is insufficient and long-term
(>8 weeks) parenteral treatment is required. Myringotomy should be considered if
the tympanic membrane appears bulged or chronically inflamed. Saline flushing of
the middle ear for treatment of exudative otitis media in cats is considered less
effective than in dogs because of the two compartments of the tympanic cavity in
this species.
ii. Horner's syndrome, facial paresis, inner ear and hypoglossal nerve damage can
- a  q       
junctivitis sicca because of loss of parasympathetic innervation of the lacrimal
glands. Vestibular signs may also be slightly more pronounced following anesthesia
due to loss of central compensatory mechanisms.
8 i. Mycoplasma organisms are seen on the surface of the red cells. Mycoplasma
baemofelis and M. baemominutum are the two most common hemotrophic
Mycoplasma spp. of cats. An additional species has been identified recently in
Switzerland (candidatus M. turicensis). Hemotrophic Mycoplasma spp. attach t0
red blood cells, causing alteration of the cell membrane. Parasitized erythrocytes are
cleared from circulation by the spleen leaving normal, nonparasitized red blood
cells in circulation. Thus, depending on when the blood sample is collected, infected
cells may or may not be apparent.
ii. M. baemofelis is more likely to cause clinical disease (anemia); M. baemominutum
between them; PCR is required for specific identification.
ii. Fleas and possibly other blood-sucking arthropods are the primary means of
transmission; neonatal kittens may be infected.
iv. Doxycycline and enrofloxacin are the drugs of choice. Several cautions must be
observed: because doxycycline can cause esophageal strictures, suspensions should be
used, or water should be administered after using a tablet or capsule. Cats with severe
anemia may benefit from glucocorticoids (prednisolone 1-2 mg/kg PO q 12 hrs)
concurrently to reduce splenic erythrophagocytosis and suppress secondary immune-
mediated autoimmune hermolytic anemia. This dose may be tapered as the hematocrit
increases. In life-threatening anemia, blood transfusions should be administered.
v. Despite successful clinical remission following antimicrobial therapy, most cats
remain inapparent carriers.
24
9, I0:Questions
9 A 4-year-old castra-
9a
9b
ted  male domestic
longhair cat was seen
because of a swollen
tongue, making
unable to close its
mouth (9a). It lived in
an animal shelter. On
physical examination,
it was febrile and had
an extensive horseshoe-shaped lingual ulcer (9b). There were 56 other cats in the
ward, all housed individually. Cages were cleaned daily with a quaternary
ammonium disinfectant, diluted with an unmeasured amount of water. All were
vaccinated on intake with SC and intranasal vaccines against FPV, FHV, and FCV;
all were examined now. Six additional affected cats were discovered; all were adults.
The affected cats were isolated. The following day, another six cats were showing
similar signs.
i. What are the most likely causes of this outbreak?
 ii. What steps should be taken to control the problem and protect the shelter cats
while awaiting a definitive diagnosis?
10 A 2-year-old intact female dom-
10
estic shorthair cat was seen because of
rapidly progressive dyspnea over the
previous 3 days. The cat had been
imported from Spain to Florida a year
earlier. It was kept primarily indoors
with limited outside access. Vaccin-
ations against FPV, FHV, FCV, and
rabies were current. On physical
examination, the cat was overtly
dyspneic with open-mouth breathing. Body temperature (40.2°C), heart rate
(220 bpm), and respiratory rate (65 bpm) were all increased. Harsh lung sounds
were auscultated in all lung fields. Mild cranial abdominal organomegaly was
palpated. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable. Thoracic
radiographs were obtained when the cat was stabilized (10).
i. What is the first priority for treatment of this cat?
ii. What is the radiographic interpretation?
iii. What are the differential diagnoses?
iv. What should be done to make a diagnosis?
25
9,10:Answers
9 i. The two most likely causes are FCV infection and disinfectant toxicity.
Quaternary ammonium compounds do not reliably inactivate FCV. The frequency
of oral ulceration, and the fact that long-term residents were more frequently
affected than newer residents, suggests disinfectant toxicity may be more likely than
FCV infection. Staff should be closely questioned and observed regarding
disinfectant use, and samples of all disinfectants in use collected. Oropharyngeal
swabs should be obtained from all cats; however false positive FCV results may
occur because of recent vaccination with an MLV vaccine. If most or all cats are
negative for FCV, this can be ruled out.
ii. All affected cats should be moved into an isolation area and handled carefully
until FCV has been ruled out. They should be treated with analgesics and broad-
spectrum antibiotics to control secondary bacterial infections. Chlorhexidine mouth
rinses may also be helpful. If disinfectant toxicity is strongly suspected, exposed cats
should be bathed in warm water and mild detergent. Movement of cats should be
halted until a diagnosis is reached. Cages should be cleaned with mild detergent
followed by disinfection with a product with action against FCV. Shelter and
veterinary staff should be taught about using disinfectants at the correct dilution. In
this case, an open spray bottle of disinfectant, missing its top, was seen on a counter.
10 i. The first priority is to stabilize the cat's condition. It was immediately placed
due to congestive heart failure, and a heart murmur is not always present. Acute
bronchial asthma or an airway foreign body can also cause life-threatening
respiratory distress. However, none of these conditions are typically associated with
fever. The ability to auscultate lung sounds in all fields argued against pleural
effusion or pneumothorax. Bronchodilator therapy was initiated with terbutaline,
and the cat was rested in oxygen.
ii. Thoracic radiographs revealed a severe diffuse multifocal nodular interstitial
infiltrate obscuring the cardiac silhouette. Some of the nodules appeared to be
mineralized.
ili. The primary differential diagnoses for this radiographic pattern in a febrile cat
include fungal, mycobacterial, protozoal, and neoplastic conditions. Because the
cat is very young, infectious causes are thought to be more likely than a neoplasm.
iv. A complete blood count, biochemisty panel, urinalysis, and feline leukemia virus
(FeLV) and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) tests should be performed to evaluate
conditions. Since the disease is diffuse, a fine-needle aspirate of the lung could be
performed with minimal stress and without the risk of anesthesia. The primary risks
of such a procedure would be creation of a pneumothorax or pulmonary hemorrhage.
26
II, 12:Questions
11 Case 11 is the same cat as case 10.
Blood profile/
biochemistry panel
Results
Hematocrit - mild
nonregenerative anemia
0.26 1/1
Neutrophilia
23.5 x 10%/1
Left shift band
neutrophils
2.3 × 10%/1
ALT - mild increase
198 IU/1
Hypoalbuminemia
22 g/l
Hyperglobulinemia
68 g/l
FeLV and FIV tests were negative. A fine-
 needle aspirate of the caudodorsal lung field was performed for cytologic diagnosis
(11).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. Was the disease likely acquired in Spain or in Florida?
i. What is the treatment?
iv. What is the prognosis?
12 A 9-year-old intact female Norwegian
2
Forest Cat (12) was seen for an annual
routine examination and consultation.
The cat came from a household with
12 adult cats. Two months ago, one adult
cat in the household developed feline
infectious peritonitis (FIP) and was
euthanized."All of the cats were kept
strictly indoors in a 120 m? apartment,
and all cats had contact with each other.
This cat had been used for breeding
several years ago but had not had a litter
 in the last 3 years. The cat had been healthy since the last annual visit, and physical
examination was unremarkable.
i. How high is the risk that this cat will also develop FIP?
ii. What can be done to reduce the risk of FIP in this household?
ifi. Does early weaning help?
iv. What are the recommendations for a breeding facility?
27
II, I2:Answers
11 i. Four yeast-like organisms are contained within the cytoplasm of a macrophage
with Histoplasma capsulatum. The radiographic findings of diffuse miliary to
nodular interstitial infiltrates with mineralization are classic findings in feline
histoplasmosis.
 ii. The infection was most likely acquired in Florida as it has not been diagnosed in
Europe.
i. Treatment was initiated with itraconazole (10 mg/kg PO q 12 h) and intravenous
fluids at a maintenance rate. The cat was maintained in the oxygen cage, but its
condition deteriorated. Dexamethasone (0.2 mg/kg SC q 12 h) was administered for
3 days to combat suspected increased pulmonary inflammation secondary to
improved to the point that oxygen supplementation was withdrawn on day 7. By
day 14, the cat was maintaining hydration and eating. It was discharged with
itraconazole.
iv. For cats that survive the initial crisis, the prognosis for recovery is good. Like
many months and should be continued until there has been no evidence of infection
by clinicopathological tests or radiography for at least 1-2 months. This cat made
a complete recovery, and itraconazole was discontinued after 9 months of therapy.
12 i. The risk to develop FIP in a multi-cat household in which FCoV is endemic is
5-10%. It is higher if the cat is less than 6 months old, or immunosuppressed; it also
depends on the virulence of the FCoV strain.
ii. Households of less than five cats can spontaneously become FCoV-free, but
probably not those with more than ten cats. Reducing the number of cats (especially
those <12 months old) and frequent cleaning of the litter boxes and surfaces can
minimize loads. Antibody testing and segregation can reduce exposure.
multiple-cat environments, 40-60% of cats shed virus in their feces at any given
time. If cats remain PCR-positive for more than 6 weeks, they should be removed.
ii. Kittens of FCoV-shedding queens are protected from infection by maternally-
derived antibodies until they are 5-6 weeks old. An early-weaning protocol to
prevent FCoV infection in kittens has been proposed. If early weaning is done
correctly and combined with strict hygiene, it might help to prevent FCoV infection
in these kittens.
iv. It may be possible to maximize heritable resistance to FIP in breeding catteries.
Genetically susceptible cats are approximately twice as likely to develop FIP than
other cats. If a cat has two or more litters in which kittens develop FIP, she should
not be bred from again.
28
13, 14: Questions
13 An adult (age unknown) female
13a
(neutering history unknown) domestic
shorthair cat in an animal shelter was
found dead in its cage with edematous
ulcerated feet (13a). This shelter was a
large municipal shelter. Trapped feral cats
are housed in a room separate from the
rest of the feline shelter population. The
cages were standard steel but had slatted
floors. Throughout the day, several cats
died with the same changes. Further
13b
inspection also found live cats with similar
lesions of varying severity and others with
swollen, distorted faces (13b). Staff
reported that this had been an ongoing
problem for the last 4 months
i. What are the primary rule-outs for this
problem?
ii. What further information is needed to
investigate this outbreak?
14 Case 14 is the same cat as in case 13.
14a
Necropsies of several of the dead cats
revealed suppurative and  necrotizing
rhinitis and frontal sinusitis in several cats.
There was also evidence of suppurative
meningitis, with extensive regions of
submeningeal pus overlying the cerebral
cortices.'
The“distal limbs and paws
showed regions of ulceration with edema
(14a), hemorrhage, and necrosis (14b).
Microbiological culture was performed on
14b
samples from several pathological lesions.
Gram-positive nonmotile
facultatively
anerobic b-hemolytic cocci were isolated.
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What are predisposing factors that may
lead to this disease?
ii. What advice should be given to this
shelter to handle this outbreak?
29
I3, I4:Answers
13 i. An infectious etiology is likely considering the history, number of affected cats,
location, and population of animals involved. Primary rule-outs include viral or
bacterialcauses.
ii. A thorough visual inspection of the facility is needed as these cats have
unknown histories and they are not amenable to routine physical examinations
 Or tests. This includes examining intake protocols, the cages, cage supplies (e.g.
litter boxes, bowls, towels), and the room in general. It is also important [0
determine how the staff clean and what types of cleaners and disinfectants are
used. It is often best to observe staff as they perform their routine with these
animals. Most importantly, necropsy is invaluable when investigating outbreaks
in shelters.
14 i. The history, clinical signs and microbiology indicate infection with
Streptococcus canis possessing the Lancefield group G antigen. These are
commensal microflora of cats; however, severe infections can occur, usually in
kittens but also in older cats in shelter-type conditions.
ii. Neonatal kittens can succumb to generalized S. canis septicemia and older
juveniles to cervical lymphadenitis. In outbreaks, disease can also be seen in adult
surgical procedures, viral infections, and/or immunosuppressive conditions. Feral
cats in shelters are very stressed due to their captivity and confinement. The cats
here also have potentially paw-damaging cage floors.
ii. In shelter medicine, it is pararmount to consider the well-being of the entire
shelter's cat population. Therefore, all affected cats were euthanized to prevent
further suffering and disease transmission. In addition, there is a low zoonotic
potential from S. canis to humans. Unaffected cats should be moved to another
room into new cages with solid floors. All empty cages that are to be reused must
be completely cleaned and then disinfected with bleach. Steam cleaning,
mechanical brushing, proper contact time with an adequate disinfectant, and
complete drying are mandatory. It is possible to treat Streptococcus spp. infections
with various penicillins if isolation facilities are available for the treatment period.
30
15, 16: Questions
15 Case 15 is the same as cases 13 and 14. The shelter proceeded to
15a
follow the above recommendations and reported no new cases for
several weeks when the outbreak began to repeat itself. On interviewing
the staff, it was found out that feral cats were initially removed from
traps and placed into cages with the use of a rabies pole (15a).
i. What should be investigated this time?
ii. What should the shelter staff be asked?
16 A 4-year-old spayed
16a
16c
female domestic shorthair
cat (16a) was seen because
of weight loss despite a
good appetite until 2 weeks
prior to presentation when
it stopped eating well. The
cat lived primarily out-
doors, and was last vacci-
nated against FPV, FHV,
FCV, and rabies at 1 year
16b
old. It was the owners’ only
cat; it weighed only 3 kg.
On abdominal palpation,
both kidneys were very
irregular (16b) and were
enlarged. The abdominal
radiograph (16e) confirmed
bilateral renomegaly. A CBC showed that the cat had a mild nonregenerative anemia;
 a biochemisry panel revealed elevations of creatinine (230 mmoll) and urea
(15 mmol/l); and a urinalysis was normal, with an SG of 1.046. The cat was treated
with lactated Ringer's initially. After this, the urea and creatinine concentrations were
still elevated, and the urine specific gravity was 1.022.
i. What are the cat's problems?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
i. What is an appropriate further diagnostic plan?
31
15, I6:Answers
15 i. All focus had been on the cats in the cages. The re-
15b
emergence of disease now requires looking at other sources
of infection or trauma.
ii. Discussions with staff revealed that the pole used to
remove feral cats from traps and place them into cages was
the same pole that was also used to remove cats from cages
for transport and euthanasia. The pole was examined and
found to be covered in hair and had evidence of copious bite
marks along the sponge-covered handle (1sb). It was
and that the pole could not be appropriately cleaned. The
pole was removed and the cats were subsequently transferred
from cage to carrier and vice versa by juxtaposing the doors
and allowing the cats to move on their own. The
Streptococcus canis outbreaks were thus stopped.
16 i. The presenting problem is weight loss associated with a poor appetite.
Renomegaly is the predominant physical abnormality, and there is mild azotemia.
i. Azotemia can be prerenal, renal, or postrenal.
The cat is only mildly azotemic, so this does not explain the partial anorexia and
weight loss. There is no evidence for prerenal or postrenal azotemia. Concentrated
urine does not necessarily exclude renal disease as the cause of azotemia in cats.
Here, the renomegaly suggests this. Diseases that can result in bilateral renomegaly
in cats include lymphoma, polycystic renal disease, granulomatous nephritis (e.g.
with FIP), renal amyloidosis, and hydronephrosis.
ii. The diagnostic plan should include testing for FeLV (and FIV).F
Renal
ultrasonography should be performed; ultrasonic imaging of the kidneys is useful
to diagnose polycystic disease and hydronephrosis. If the kidneys are solid, a renal
aspirate should be performed; this may diagnose renal lymphoma. If this is
nondiagnostic, a renal biopsy is indicated; this is necessary to diagnose
granulomatous nephritis and amyloidosis. Infection with FeLV is associated with
renal lymphoma in some cats, and so an FeLV (and FIV) test is indicated in the
predominately outdoor cat. Infection with FeLV can also result in a nonregenerative
anemia with a mildly increased MCV. The cat was diagnosed with renal lymphoma
based on the aspirate cytology (16d),
and tested positive for FeLV.
16d
32
17, 18:Questions
17 Five 8-week-old kittens from a local
17a
rescue group were admitted for routine
ovariohysterectomy/castration.
They
were boarded in an isolation area at the
clinic. All areas were routinely cleaned
with a quaternary ammonium disinfec-
tant. Within 3 days of surgery, all
members of the litter became febrile
(body temperatures 39.0-40.5°C) and
developed oral ulceration, serous nasal
and ocular discharge and sneezing. Four
adult blood-donor cats were kept in an
adjacent ward. They had been vaccinated
17b
18 months previously against FPV, FHV,
and FCV. Within 3 days of the kittens
showing clinical signs, three of them
developed multiple lingual and palatal
ulcers (17a), alopecia, skin ulceration,
0ozing of many skin areas (17b), edema,
and mild increases of body temperature.
i. What are the most likely differential
diagnoses?
i. What diagnostic tests could be used to determine the cause?
ii. What steps should be taken to protect clients' pets while awaiting a diagnosis?
18 A 7-year-old castrated male Burmese
18
cat was seen because of a history of
chronic coughing that had responded in
the past to treatment with corti-
costeroids. It was presented in acute
respiratory distress with bilateral puru-
lent nasal discharge. Thoracic radio-
graphs showed a marked bronchial
pattern, flattening of the diaphragm,
and consolidation of the caudal part of
the left cranial lung lobe. Air broncho-
grams were visible within the consolidated lung lobe. A cytologic preparation of
i. What are the differential diagnoses based on the radiographic findings?
ii. What does the cytology show?
33
17,18:Answers
17 i. FCV infection is the most likely cause.
17c
This may occur in vaccinated cats. Virulent
systemic FCV strains (VS-FCV) associated
with edema  (17c),  widespread alopecia,
ulceration, and death have been reported.
This case had many features of VS-FCV.
Disinfectant toxicity (quaternary ammonium
or phenol) should also be considered; this can
cause oral and skin ulceration, fever, upper
and lower respiratory disease, and death in
cats.
ii. Oropharyngeal swabs and serum from affected cats should be submitted for viral
culture or PCR for FCV. Subclinical carriage is common; therefore, positive results
 from oropharyngeal swabs do not prove disease. A positive result from blood is
more suggestive, as circulating virus is only present during acute disease. However.
blood is commonly negative, even in acutely infected cats. Definitive diagnosis of
VS-FCV can only be made via necropsy and demonstration of characteristic lesions
and presence of virus in tissues. A diagnosis of disinfectant toxicity is made by
ruling out other causes, coupled with resolution of disease following its removal.
ii. All affected cats should be isolated. Access should be restricted to limited staff
members, and full protective clothing worn. Separate equipment should be used
for cleaning and care. All asymptomatic but exposed cats should also be strictly
isolated: they may be carriers. Use of the quaternary ammonium disinfectant should
be discontinued until toxicity has been ruled out.
18 i. The radiographic findings are suggestive of chronic inflammatory airway
disease (e.g. asthma). Consolidation of the right middle-lung lobe and flattening of
the diaphragm are common radiographic signs of chronic inflammatory airway
disease. In this case consolidation of the left cranial lung lobe and purulent nasal
discharge most likely indicate a secondary bronchopneumonia. Concurrent viral
upper respiratory disease or Mycoplasma spp. infection could cause nasal discharge.
Mycoplasma spp. may cause upper and lower respiratory tract infections in cats.
respiratory parasitism, heartworm infection, or neoplasia.
ii. There is a thick background of mucus and lysed cells on the BAL preparation.
Large numbers of intact inflammatory cells are present. These are neutrophils
predominantly, with lower numbers of lymphocytes, macrophages, and dark-
staining ciliated epithelial cells. No bacteria can be seen. This does not rule out the
presence of Mycoplasma spp. which, due to their lack of a rigid cell wall, are not
detected on routine stains.
34
19, 20: Questions
19 Case 19 is the same cat as case 18.
19
Culture of the BAL yielded a pure
growth of a Mycoplasma spp. (19).
i. What is the significance of isolating a
pure growth of a Mycoplasma spp. from
a BAL in a cat?
ii. How should this cat be treated?
20 A 3-year-old spayed female domestic longhair cat was seen because of poor
appetite and weight loss. It was vaccinated against FPV, FHV, FCV, FeLV, and
rabies, and was on heartworm preventive. It was the only cat in the household. The
distal left front leg was mildly swollen (20a), but the swelling was not hot. A
complete blood count, biochemistry panel, and urinalysis were performed. The
abnormal results were:
Blood profile/biochermistry panel
Results
Mature neutrophils
12.25 x10*/1
Lymphocytes
1.0 ×10*/1
 Total protein
50 g/l
Albumin
11 g/l
Calcium
1.9 mmol/l
Urinalysis
Protein
++++
Specific gravity
1.024
i. What are the cat's problems?
20a
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. What is an appropriate further
diagnostic plan?
iv. Should any therapy be considered
pending further diagnostic testing?
35
19,20:Answers
19 i. Mycoplasma spp. are not present in the lower airways of healthy cats.
However, they have been isolated from BAL of up to 25% of cats with lower airway
disease. Mycoplasma spp. may cause significant structural damage to airway
epithelium. In people, M. pneumoniae infection causes airway hyper-reactivity and
is known to trigger or exacerbate asthma attacks. In this cat, it is likely that its
chronic inflammatory airway disease resulted in compromise of respiratory defense
mechanisms and secondary mycoplasmal pneumonia.
i. Antibiotic susceptibility testing is not routinely available for feline mycoplasmal
isolates. Mycoplasma spp. are usually susceptible to macrolides, azalides, tetra-
cyclines, chloramphenicol, fluoroquinolones, clindamycin, and aminoglycosides.
Therapy should be given for a minimum of 4 weeks. The cat's chronic airway
disease should be freated with an inhaled corticosteroid, such as fluticasone and a
bronchodilator such as salbutamol in addition. These may be administered to the
cat using a metered-dose inhaler.
 20 i. There is a marked hypoalbuminemia associated with a marked proteinuria.
Although the cat is not azotemic, the urine specific gravity is low in comparison t0
 the highly concentrated urine typical of young cats. Protein-losing nephropathy can
explain the findings.
i. Protein-losing nephropathies in cats are due to glomerulopathy, caused by renal
amyloidosis or glomerulonephritis. Glomerulonephritis is the most common cause
in cats; renal amyloidosis is rare. Glomerulonephritis has many causes, but usually
no cause is determined.
ili. The diagnostic plan should include testing for FeLV and FIV and measurement
of the urine protein to creatinine ratio. The systolic blood pressure should also be
measured to rule out hypertension. If tests for infectious diseases are negative,
thoracic and abdominal radiographs and abdominal ultrasound are indicated to
evaluate for an underlying inflammatory or neoplastic disease. If these tests are
negative, a renal biopsy is indicated. Biopsy confirmed glomerulonephritis in this cat
(20b), but no infectious cause could be identified.
iv. Pending test results, symptomatic therapy should be instituted. This consists of
the gradual introduction of a diet designed for feline renal failure. However,
overzealous protein restriction should be avoided. In addition, the administration
of an ACE inhibitor (e.g. benazepril) may reduce the severity of the proteinuria and
may improve the prognosis.
20b
36
21, 22: Questions
21 A 10-year-old castrated male domestic
21
shorthair cat was seen because of chronic
vomiting, inappetence and weight loss of
6 months’ duration. Metronidazole had
been given, but wasn't helpful. The cat lived
indoors and outdoors, received heartworm
preventative, and was current on vaccina-
tions against FPV, FHV, FCV, FeLV, FCoV,
and rabies. Physical examination showed a very thin body condition and an unkempt
haircoat (21). A complete blood count, biochemical panel, T4 test, and urinalysis
  s        
negative for parasitic ova and Giardia spp. Tests for FeLV and FIV, and abdominal
imaging studies, were normal. Endoscopic examination revealed gastritis with
prominent lymphoid follicles, pinpoint mucosal hemorrhages, and duodenitis.
Intestinal biopsies revealed moderate to severe lymphocytic-plasmacytic inflam-
i. How should this cat be treated?
ii. How should this cat be monitored?
22 A 7-year-old castrated male domestic
22a
shorthair cat was seen because it had
developed a small subcutaneous mass on
the left flank 8 months earlier. After initial
unsuccessful antibiotic therapy, the mass
had been surgically removed. A few
months later, the lesion had returned and
started to spread. The cat was an
indoor/outdoor cat living in a multi-cat
22b
household. On physical examination, the
cat was bright and alert. The skin lesions
consisted of alopecia with multiple circular
deep and draining skin ulcers of variable
size 0n the left flank (22a) extending to the
caudodorsal area (22b). Two soft sub-
cutaneous masses were also palpated in the
inguinal area.
 i. List the three most likely differential diagnoses for this type of skin lesion.
ii. What dermatologic tests should be performed?
ii. Which of the differential diagnoses produce tissue granules?
iv. If an acid-fast stained tissue section shows partially acid-fast filamentous
Organisms, what is the tentative diagnosis?
37
21,22:Answers
21 i. The question is whether this cat's gastrointestinal lesions are due to
Helicobacter spp. infection, or whether other underlying gastrointestinal disease
(e.g. inflammatory bowel disease [IBD], food sensitivity) is present. It would be
prudent to change the cat's food to a hypoallergenic diet to minimize mucosal
inflammation. Treatment for Helicobacter spp. consists of combination drug
therapy (antibiotics with an antisecretory drug) for 24 weeks. Optimal drug
combinations and durations of treatment are unknown for cats. If clinical signs do
not improve, or if they relapse following cessation, further treatment for IBD may
be indicated.
i. As noninvasive tests for Helicobacter spp. in cats are not currently available,
repeat gastroduodenoscopy should ideally be performed at the conclusion of
treatment to determine whether Helicobacter spp. has been eradicated and to
eradication of the organism, and gross and histologic resolution of gastrointestinal
inflammation would suggest the cat's disease was indeed due to the presence of
Helicobacter spp. If repeat gastroduodenoscopy is not an option, the cat should be
monitored by following clinical signs, body weight, body condition, and serum
albumin concentration. PCR testing for Helicobacter spp. in fecal samples may be
 available in the future, allowing less invasive testing.
22 i. The three most likely differential diagnoses are nocardiosis, mycobacteriosis,
and actinomycosis. These three conditions are clinically indistinguishable and are
characterized by nodular to diffuse cellulitis, draining tracts, ulcerated nodules, and
abscesses with fistulation most commonly located on limbs, feet, or ventral
abdomen. Respiratory signs, fever anorexia, depression, and lymphadenopathy
may be present as well.
i. Cytology, bacterial culture, and histopathology should be performed. Cytology
from exudates or fine-needle aspirates shows pyogranulomatous inflammation in
these cases. Gram-positive filamentous, beaded to rod-shaped organisms can
Si        
(nocardiosis), or non-acid-fast (actinomycosis). Histopathology is consistent with
a nodular to diffuse pyogranulomatous dermatitis and panniculitis with intra-
lesional tissue granules. In bacterial cultures (aerobic and anerobic), Actinomyces
spp. require anerobic conditions, whereas Nocardia spp. and opportunistic
Mycobacteria spp. prefer aerobic conditions.
ii. Tissue granules are produced by Nocardia spp. and Actinomyces spp.
staining within the tissue granules, whereas mycobacterial organisms are acid-fast
positive but do not produce tissue granules. Despite these differences, the diagnosis
should be confirmed by culture of the organism.
38
23, 24: Questions
23
23 Case 23 is the same cat as case 22. Histopathology showed a nodular to diffuse
pyogranulomatous dermatitis and panniculitis with intralesional tissue granules
(23, arrow) (hematoxylin and eosin [H&E] stain), and Nocardia spp. were cultured.
i. Why is isolation of this organism important?
ii. What is the medical management plan?
24
24 A 12-year-old spayed female Persian cat was seen for its annual routine
examination. Physical exarmination revealed a generally sparse coat with crusts and
white flakes (24). The cat was noted to scratch itself in the examination room.
i. What are the differential diagnoses for the coat condition?
i. What diagnostic tests are appropriate to confirm the diagnosis?
ii. Could there be a zoonotic issue?
iv. What is the appropriate treatment?
39
23, 24:Answers
23 i. Isolation and antimicrobial susceptibility testing of clinical isolates of Nocardia
spp. are important, because individual strains show differences in their susceptibility
Nocardia otitidiscaviarum. Nocardia nova is usually sensitive to erythromycin, but
Nocardia farcinia is not.
i. A combination of surgical excision or drainage of infected tissue and long-term
antibiotic therapy is the treatment of choice. If susceptibility test results are not
available, sulfonamides are considered the first-line drug for the treatment of
nocardiosis. Clinical improvement should be observed within 10 days after starting
treatment, and therapy should be continued for 1 month beyond complete clinical
resolution. However, due to the potential risk of side-effects such as myelosup-
pression during prolonged sulfonamide application, or in the case of lack of
response to therapy, alternative treatment options should be considered.
Erythromycin
Trimethoprim/sulfonamide
(10-15 mg/kg PO q 8 h)
(15 mg/kg PO q 12 h)
or
or
alone
Clarithromycin
Amoxicillin/clavulanate
or in
(7.5 mg/kg PO q 12 h)
(10-20 mg/kg P0 q 12 h)
combination
or
IO
with
Tetracycline
Ampicillin
(20 mg/kg PO q 8 h)
(20-40 mg/kg PO q 12 h)
or
Clindamycin
(11-24 mg/kg PO q 24 h)
24 i. Cheyletiellosis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis, dry environment, chronic
allergic skin disease, and malnutrition are the main differential diagnoses.
i. Microscopic examination of coat brushings (scale, debris, hair) collected on a piece
 of paper has a higher diagnostic yield than the ‘sticky tape’ test alone. A magnifying
lens may be adequate for evaluating this. The tape test is performed by applying clear
tape to the hair coat of the cat and then placing the tape onto a microscope slide to
on fecal examination of cats who have groomed the mites from their coat.
ii. Cheyletiellosis was diagnosed in this case. This is a zoonotic disease and causes
a pruritic rash on the arms and trunk in about 20-30% of human cases.
iv. Topical fipronil should be applied twice, three weeks apart. Selemectin and
ivermectin are also effective. As the mites are able to live away from their host for
at least 1 month, thorough cleansing of the environment is important. The environ-
ment may be a significant reservoir for reinfestation in catteries or uncared-for
environments.
40
25, 26: Questions
25a
25 A 2-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat was seen in Turin, Italy
because of a 2-week history of sneezing, mucopurulent bilateral nasal discharge,
and nasal swelling. On physical examination, stridor, inspiratory dyspnea,
exophthalmus, and oculonasal discharge were present (25a). The cat had been
tested FIV-positive previously.
i. What are the main differential diagnoses for the problems?
i. What diagnostic procedures should be performed?
26
26 Case 26 is the same cat as case 25. A fine-needle aspirate was obtained from the
lesion (26) (May-Gruenwald-Giemsa stain).
i. What cell types and noncellular features are present in the smear?
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis in the cat?
ii. What ancillary tests should be used to confirm the diagnosis?
iv. What predisposing factors should be considered?
41
25, 26:Answers
25 i. The main differential diagnoses are naso-
25b
pharyngeal polyps, foreign bodies, neoplasia, and
infections. However neoplasia occurs primarily in
old cats, with the exception of lymphoma, which
may occur in young, especially FeLV positive, cats.
Polyps, foreign bodies, and bacterial and fungal
infections all commonly cause nasal discharge.
Bacteria and fungi may also produce nasal swelling
across the bridge of the nose.
ii. A thorough oral examination, complete blood count, biochemistry panel, urin-
alysis, and FeLV and FIV tests should all be done. Imaging of the skull is useful to
detect bony lysis and increased density in the nasal cavity (25b). Cross-sectional
imaging such as CT or MRI , if available, is more sensitive, but conventional radio-
graphy may be sufficient. After the site and extent of the lesion are identified, a
fine-needle aspirate should be performed for culture and cytology. When lesions
originate in the caudal portion of the nasal cavity, clinical signs may be subtle. In
this case, intraoral radiographs showed a fluid-filled opacity in the left nasal cavity,
without nasal septum destruction.
26 i. The sample from the lesion contains many neutrophils, few erythrocytes,
numerous epithelial cells, and numerous encapsulated yeast organisms consistent
with Cryptococcus spp.
i. Cryptococcosis is caused by Cryptococcus spp., ubiquitous yeasts commonly
isolated from soil, dust, insects, feces of pigeons, and other avian droppings. In cats,
Cryptococcus neoformans is more common than C. gatti, and the most frequently
observed problems are rhinitis or sinusitis with unilateral or bilateral nasal
discharge, CNS manifestations, and cutaneous lesions. Nasal discharge is not
always present. Other clinical findings may include lymphadenopathy, cough and
Occasionally dyspnea, chorioretinitis, and other ocular lesions.
ii. Cytologic examination is a quick method to demonstrate the agent from tissue
aspirates, impression smears, CSF, and aqueous humor. The agent cannot be visua-
lized in approximately 25% of cases; thus, a negative result in the cytologic examina-
tion does not rule out the diagnosis of cryptococcosis. The serum cryptococcal antigen
s pe as si pe ass e   pnise se sin 
 Diagnosis can also by confirmed by histopathologic examination of tissue biopsies or
culture of the organism.
iv. The predisposing factors for feline cryptococcosis are uncertain. Although FeLV
and FIV infections can cause immunosuppression, they are not specifically
associated with cryptococcosis. Some reports, however, suggest that cats infected
with FeLV or FIV have a higher likelihood of treatment failure than uninfected cats.
42
27,28:Questions
27 A 2-year-old castrated male domestic
longhair cat was seen because of
lethargy of 1 week duration. The cat
originally came from Sweden. The
owner had moved to Germany 2 months
ago and had brought the cat with her
?
from Sweden. On the blood smear,
structures were found in the red blood
cells (27).
i. What are the structures seen in the red
blood cells?
ii. What are the clinical signs of this disease in cats?
ii. What is the treatment for this disease in cats?
28 A 1-year-old spayed female Siamese
28a
cat was seen because of sneezing, nasal
discharge, bilateral blepharospasm, and
ocular discharge. The cat lived indoors
and outdoors in a multiple-cat house-
hold, and had a complete vaccination
history. On physical examination, the
 only abnormal finding was that the right
eye was very red and swollen. Ophthal-
mic examination revealed that a serous-
mucoid ocular discharge, conjunctival
hyperemia, and severe chemosis were
28b
present in both eyes (28a), with the right
eye being more severely affected (28b).
The slit lamp examination and the
fundic examination were normal in both
eyes. Schirmer tear test results were
>25 mm/min for the right eye and
16 mm/min for the left eye. Fluorescein
 staining was negative in both eyes.
i. What was the problem in this cat?
ii. What was the most likely cause of the problem?
43
27,28:Answers
27i. The parasites in the red blood cells are Babesia spp. In domestic cats, Babesia
felis (South Africa, Sudan), Babesia cati (India), and Babesia canis subspecies
presenti (Israel) have been described. Also, Babesia spp. have been identified in
wild Felidae in Africa, including Babesia herpailuri, Babesia leo, and Babesia
pantherae. Vectors of Babesia spp. in cats are unknown. No cases from Northern
Europe have been reported, and it remained unclear how this cat was infected in
Sweden or Germany.
i. Reports of clinical signs in cats with babesiosis come predominantly from South
Africa. Usually, cats with naturally occurring babesiosis are younger than 3 years.
Clinical signs include lethargy, anorexia, weakness, rough hair coat, diarrhea,
anemia, and icterus. Icterus is mainly prehepatic and caused by hemolysis. Anemia
can be severe and is probably the reason for lethargy, anorexia, weakness, and the
rough hair coat. The disease is usually chronic in cats, and signs may not be
apparent for weeks to months.
ii. Treatment of feline babesiosis is not clearly established. Most babesiacidal drugs
are ineffective. Primaquine phosphate, an antimalarial compound, seems to be
effective and is the drug of choice. However, the effective dose, 0.5 mg/kg PO or
intramuscularly (IM), is very close to the lethal dose of 1 mg/kg, so it has to be
administered carefully, and only after a definite diagnosis has been made.
28 i. The cat had conjunctivitis, which is a very common problem in cats.
i. The most important etiologic agents include FHV, Chlamydophila felis, and
Mycoplasma spp.The clinical signs caused by those organisms are usually very
similar: blepharospasm, conjunctival hyperemia, chemosis, prolapse of the third
eyelid, pain, and ocular discharge, but the following may be useful in their
 s        
catteries have an increased risk for infection. In severe cases of herpes conjunctivitis,
the risk of symblepharon formation is very high, especially in young cats. Once
infected, cats become latent carriers of the virus and recurrent episodes of
conjunctivitis and keratitis may be observed. Cats up to 1 year of age have a
significantly higher risk of infection with Chlamydophila felis than do older cats.
Unilateral conjunctivitis is usually seen, with the second eye being involved a few
days later. Conjunctival hyperemia, severe chemosis, and serous to mucopurulent
discharge are the most common ocular findings. Younger cats housed in large
groups are particularly sensitive to infection with Mycoplasma spp. Very often,
infection with FHV or other stressors increase the risk of infection. Conjunctivitis
 e iq oe     i   a 
Mycoplasmal conjunctivitis is characterized by chemosis, thick mucoid, sticky
discharge, and the formation of pseudomembranes on the conjunctival surface.
44
29, 30: Questions
29
29 Case 29 is the same cat as case 28. A conjunctival scraping and cytology were
performed on the right eye (29).
i. Based on cytology, what is the etiologic diagnosis?
ii. What is the treatment of choice for this cat?
30
30 A 5-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat was seen because of nodular
dermatitis that was first noticed 12 months ago. Initially, small nonpruritic nodules
had been present. With time they increased in size, and some ulcerated and
discharged purulent material. 3 months ago, the cat was treated with antibiotics,
with no response. The cat was current on vaccinations and regularly wormed. It had
         s   
examination showed no other abnormalities. Papules, nodules, and plaques were
palpable in the skin of the inguinal area and the inner thighs; a number of them
could be obtained by applying pressure to the lesions (30).
i. What are the cat's main differential diagnoses?
ii. What are the first tests that should be done?
ii. What is an appropriate further diagnostic plan?
45
29, 30:Answers
29 i. Within the conjunctival epithelial cells on this slide are multiple intracyto-
plasmic and basophilic (purple) staining inclusion bodies, typical of an infection
with Chlamydophila felis. The elementary bodies (infectious form) within the cell
can be observed for up to 50 days, but are especially frequent in the first 2 weeks
post-infection. Conjunctival cytology is a very easy and helpful diagnostic technique
and should be routinely performed in cats with conjunctivitis. A microbrush is
swiped across the inferior cul-de-sac and then gently smeared on a glass slide. The
slides are dried and fixed in acetone, and then stained with a Romanowsky-type 0r
Giemsa stain.
ii. Treatment of choice for conjunctivitis caused by C. felis is topical tetracycline
applied to both eyes three to four times daily until resolution of clinical symptoms,
and then for an additional week. Alternatively oral doxycyline (10 mg/kg q 24 h)
for 34 weeks may be administered, which has been shown to clear the infection.
This also puts the likely systemic nature of C. felis infection into consideration.
Enrofloxacin is as effective as doxycycline against C. felis but can be associated
aae ou y pasn aq Auo pius pue (sesp raiu u aa) aiixn peuan um
options are available.
30 i. With any nodular disease in cats the three major groups of disorders to
consider are: (1) infectious diseases, (2) sterile inflammation, and (3) neoplastic
disease. In the first group, organisms such as Stapbylococcus intermedius,
Curvularia geniculata, Pseudoallescheria boydi, and, occasionally, Nocardia spp.
and Actinomyces spp., may be found. Also, atypical mycobacteria such as
Mycobacterium fortuitum or M. smegmatis may be seen. Sterile panniculitis and
sterile pyogranulomatous dermatitis may be seen and can only be diagnosed by
negative culture, failure to respond to trial therapy with antibiotics, and compatible
histopathologic changes. This cat is fairly young for neoplastic disease, and neither
the site nor the presence of draining tracts are typical of common feline cutaneous
neoplasms.
ii. Cytologic evaluation of the purulent discharge is the first step. If neutrophils,
 macrophages, and organisms are found, an infectious etiology is likely. A finding of
pyogranulomatous inflammation without evidence of organisms suggests the need
for special stains (acid-fast and fungal stains). Also, bacterial and fungal cultures
should be submitted. If neoplastic disease is suspected, histopathologic evaluation
of skin biopsies should be performed.
ii. A skin biopsy is the next diagnostic step, and multiple specimens from a variety
of lesion must be obtained. Biopsy punches are not the best tool as they fail to
 provide deep material; excisional biopsies down to the panniculus are better.
46
3 1, 32:Questions
3la
31b
31 Case 31 is the same cat as case 30.
Biopsy revealed  a pyogranulomatous
dermatitis and panniculitis. Bacterial
 organisms were identified on acid-fast stains in low (31a) and high magnification
(31b), and the bacterial culture revealed Mycobacterium fortuitum sensitive to
doxycycline, enrofloxacin, and a few other antibiotics.
i. What is the prognosis for this cat?
ii. What are the treatment options in this patient?
i. Which of these options has the highest chance of cure?
32 A 14-month-old intact female Siamese cat was
32
seen because of a 3-week history of diarrhea. It
had been acquired from an animal shelter, and
had been vaccinated against FPV, FHV, and FCV.
It was kept completely indoors. There was a
history of an elevated body temperature (39.9°C)
 once prior to presentation. Physical examination
was normal with the exception of bilateral pelvic
limb ataxia. Therefore, a complete neurologic
examination was performed, which showed
decreased proprioceptive positioning, hopping,
and extensor postural thrust in both pelvic limbs.
Patellar and flexor reflexes were normal. The
anus appeared dilated, and there was no anal
reflex. CSF was obtained via cisternal puncture
under general anesthesia (32). Analysis revealed an increased leukocyte count
(340 cells/μl) and increased CSF protein (1.8 g/l),
i. What are the problems?
ii. What are possible differential diagnoses?
ii. What further test is indicated?
47
31,32:Answers
31 i. The prognosis for atypical mycobacterial infections is often considered to be
poor, as organisms are not easily eliminated by antimicrobial therapy. Surgical
excision of affected tissue frequently leads to wound dehiscence and relapse.
However, with prolonged antimicrobial therapy, the prognosis is fair.
i. One option is antimicrobial therapy. Rifampin, fluoroquinolones, macrolides,
tetracyclines, and clofazimine are commonly used drugs; a combination of
antibiotics is best. Clinical improvement should be expected within the first 4
weeks; typically, the first change is a decrease in drainage. If there is a positive
clinical response to antibiotics, therapy should be continued long-term (6-12
months) and for at least 1-2 months after clinical cure. Unfortunately, bacterial
survival in the center of the scar tissue may lead to recurrence.
Alternatively, surgery may be employed. Wide margins are essential, as bacteria
may be found beyond the outer edges of the lesion, and flaps or grafts are often
Recurrence of draining tracts is common if adjuvant antibiotic therapy is not used.
ii. The best approach is a combination of the rwo. Typically, antimicrobial therapy
is administered for 4-8 weeks before surgery. The affected tissue is then aggressively
excised so that most of the remaining organisms are eliminated. Antimicrobial
therapy is continued for at least 2-4 months after wound healing.
32 i. There are three major problems: (1) Diarrhea. (2) Neurologic disease of the
pelvic limbs and anus. The neurologic examination suggests there are multifocal
lesions involving the T3-L3 and S1-S3 spinal cord segments or nerve roots.
(3) There is a history of an elevated body temperature once.
i. Possible differentials include: (1) Diarrhea in young cats can have a multitude of
causes. Here, reduced anal reflex indicates neurolgic disease. Alternatively, multi-
systemic disease like FIP, lymphoma, or toxoplasmosis could be affecting the spinal
cord/cauda equina and the gastrointestinal tract simultaneously. (2) Multifocal
spinal cord disease in a young cat could be due to myelitis or meningomyelitis,
discospondylitis, intervertebral disk disease, trauma, malformation or hereditary
neurodegenerative disease. (3) Elevated body temperature could be either hyper-
thermia or fever.
ii. The CSF had a marked pleocytosis which was accompanied by increased CSF
protein. Thus, the cat was suffering from meningomyelitis. Further information about
possible underlying causes of CNS inflammation is commonly obtained from cytologic
evaluation of CSF. In the present case, there was a mixed cell population with about
 80% neutrophils with a few macrophages, rmonocytes, and lymphocytes. A mixed cell
pattern with high leukocyte count and protein is most indicative of FIP. Rare differen-
tials would be chronic bacterial meningomyelitis or malacia. In this cat, neurologic
48
33,34:Questions
33 A 7-year-old castrated male domestic
shorthair cat was seen because of pelvic
limb paresis (33). This had started
6 months ago and progressed consider-
ably. The cat had repeatedly tested
positive for FeLV antigen previously.
The physical examination  was un-
remarkable apart from the neurologic
signs. The hind limbs were extended
when the cat was in lateral recumbency. There was pelvic limb ataxia and paresis.
Intermittently, both pelvic limbs would be dragged behind the body. There was
decreased proprioception, hopping, and extensor postural thrust of both pelvic
limbs. Proprioceptive positioning and initiation of hopping were also slightly
delayed in the right thoracic limb. There was mild anisocoria, with the left pupil
   i  sa e   in a i 
pupillary light reflexes were diminished in both eyes.
i. What is the neuroanatomical localization of the disease process in this patient?
ii. What are possible differential diagnoses?
34 Case 34 is the same cat as case 33. It tested positive
34
for FeLV antigen again (34).
i. What diagnostic procedures should be performed?
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis if all diagnostic
procedures are unhelpful?
49
33,34:Answers
33 i. Abnormal gait in the pelvic limbs with normal pelvic limb spinal reflexes
suggests a T3-L3 spinal cord lesion. Additional subtle postural deficits in the right
thoracic limb suggest a right-sided cervical spinal cord or brainstem lesion, or a left
forebrain lesion. Diminished pupillary light reflexes with normal vision suggests
additional involvement of the midbrain, oculomotor nerve, ciliary ganglia, 0r
postganglionic ciliary nerves. Thus, a multifocal or diffuse lesion in the central
nervous system (CNS) involving the thoracolumbar spinal cord and midbrain
appears most likely. The cat may also have two separate conditions: T3-L3 disease
accounting for the pelvic limb paresis, and a second intracranial disease. However
multifocal disease would explain all the neurologic deficits.
i. Chronic progressive multifocal spinal cord and brainstem disease can be
caused by chronic inflammatory disease (e.g. FIP, polioencephalomyelitis,
[oxoplasmosis, Borna disease, spongiform encephalopathy), multifocal neo-
plasia, or degenerative conditions. Storage diseases, or other hereditary disorders,
anatomic anomalies, and FIP are less likely in cats of this age. Degenerative
myelopathy with chronic progressive pelvic limb paresis, ataxia, and abnormal
pupillary light reflexes has been described in cats persistently infected with FeLV.
Spinal lymphoma and secondary immunosuppressive infection may also be
considered in FeLV-infected cats.
34 i. (1) Complete blood count, biochemical profile, and urinalysis should be
performed to screen for evidence of inflammation, atypical lymphocytes, Or
cytopenias due to bone marrow involvement. (2) Spinal radiographs are indicated
t0 screen for disk disease, previous fractures, or neoplasms involving the vertebrae
and causing compressive spinal cord disease. (3) Abdominal ultrasound can show
evidence of extraneural lymphoma. (4) MRI of the brain and spinal cord may show
evidence of thoracolumbar S
 spinal cord compression associated with disk
protrusions or neoplasia. This is preferable to myelography because it may also
detect intramedullary neoplasms and syringomyelia. (5) Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
analysis is routinely performed following MRI to diagnose CNS inflammation.
ii. Degenerative myelopathy. This has been reported to occur in cats, usually more
than 4 years old, that are persistently infected with FeLV. The clinical signs consist
predominately of ataxia, hyperesthesia, and paresis, progressing to paralysis. Some
cats also show weakness, lethargy, abnormal behavior, anisocoria with a diminished
pupillary light reflex, and urinary incontinence. This disease has a chronic progressive
course. In the present case, degenerative myelopathy was suspected because of chronic
neurologic signs. Further support was given by negative results on laboratory, MRI,
and CSF examination. Neither immunosuppressive nor immunomodulating therapy
appeared to influence the disease course, and the cat was euthanized.
50
35, 36: Questions
35 A 1-year-old castrated male domestic
35
shorthair cat was seen because of
alopecia, crusting, and focal ulceration
in the preauricular area due to self
trauma (35). The cat had been obtained
from a shelter 2 months earlier, at which
time it had been  vaccinated and
wormed. The cat now lived strictly
indoors, and was fed dry cat food. It
began to scratch its ears severely soon
after moving. The other cat in the
household, an 8-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat, had no reported
problems. Physical examination showed no abnormalities other than bilateral skin
lesions in the preauricular areas and the cheeks. Bilateral otitis externa was also
present, characterized by brownish debris in the ear canals.
i. What are the most likely causes of otitis externa in this cat?
ii. What is the best diagnostic approach?
36
36 Case 36 is the same cat as 35. The otoscopic examination is difficult and neither
tympanum can be visualized due to the huge amounts of debris (36). All diagnostic
tests are normal or negative.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis if all tests are negative?
ii. What are the treatment options if all tests are negative?
51
35,36:Answers
35 i. Preauricular pruritus is frequently associated with otitis externa, which is most
frequently caused by ectoparasites or allergies. Notoedres cati and Otodectes
cynotis are the most likely ectoparasites. As these lesions are bilateral and occurred
while the cat was living indoors, foreign bodies are less likely, although cat litter
granules may cause chronic otitis externa.
ii. Firstly, a smear of the debris in the ear canal should be examined for the presence
of N. cati or O. cynotis. Secondly, another slide from the ear canal debris should
be stained and examined for signs of inflammation, and the presence of bacteria or
yeasts. Thirdly, impression smears should be obtained from ulcerated skin foci and
examined for bacteria and yeasts. However, bacterial infections are typically
secondary to another disease and thus, a search for the underlying cause is
indicated. Finally, a skin scraping of the affected preauricular skin should be
performed, to look for mites. Superficial skin scrapings are performed by applying
paraffin oil to the skin and gently scraping it off onto a slide. Deep skin scrapings
for Demodex spp. mites (although an uncommon cause of aural pruritus in the cat)
  s a d  s ars s a re r a
prior to sampling and then scraping until capillary bleeding is seen.
36 i. The clinical presence of otitis externa with excessive debris in the external
canal supports a diagnosis of Otodectes cynotis infestation, even if debris analysis
and skin scrapings are negative. The cat may have been infected in the shelter and
only developed clinical signs later or may have been infected by the other cat in the
household, in which case it would be an asymptomatic carrier.
i. Both cats should be treated with ectoparasiticidal drugs. Topical selemectin and
moxidectin are safe and user-friendly treatment options registered in many countries
is preferred in suspected or diagnosed O. cynotis infestations as these mites are not
necessarily confined to the ear canal and local therapy may miss those mites and/or
eggs which are currently residing elsewhere on the body. Alternatively, topical
fipronil could be used; with this treatment, one drop should be applied in each ear
and the rest of the tube between the shoulder blades to optimize treatment results.
In addition to this treatment, an ear flush under anesthesia may be suggested to
remove the debris and evaluate the tympanic membranes. That would also allow
cytologic sampling of the horizontal canal, which may harbor an infection even if
the vertical canal is normal.
52
37, 38: Questions
37a
37b
37 A 5-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat was seen because of
blepharospasm and excessive tearing in the left eye for several days (37a). The cat
had had a dental operation approximately 1 week before the onset of ocular symp-
toms. It lived in a multiple-cat household, had outdoor access, and was current on
all vaccinations. There had been no previous ocular problems, but the cat had had
a severe upper respiratory tract infection as a kitten. Ocular examination revealed
the following in the left eye: blepharospasm and tearing; all ocular reflexes were
normal; the Schirmer tear test result was >25 mm/min; and the IOP was 10 mmHg.
The anterior chamber, lens, and fundus were normal. The eye was stained with
fluorescein (37b).
i. What is the appearance with fluorescein?
ii. What is the most likely etiology?
ii. What tests could be performed to confirm the diagnosis?
iv. What is the treatment?
38 Two 12-week-old female domestic
38
shorthair kittens were seen because of a
history of generalized ataxia, stumbling,
and falling since the cats started walk-
ing. The cats were from a litter of six
with three kittens affected. Both kittens
had a broad-based stance, symmetric
hypermetria of all four limbs (38), and
generalized ataxia, none of which had
worsened. There was a coarse tremor of the head and truncal sway, with
intermittent falling to either side. The head tremor was most pronounced when the
cats were offered food. Neurologic examination was otherwise normal except for
absent menace responses in both eyes.
i. What is the neuroanatomical localization of the neurologic signs?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. What is the pathogenesis of cerebellar hypoplasia in cats?
53
37,38:Answers
37 i. Fluorescein staining reveals a large superficial corneal ulcer in the left eye. The
cornea is mildly edematous with very fine vessels approaching from the dorsal
limbus.
i. Infection with FHV-1 is most likely. This is the most important corneal pathogen
in cats. In adults, FHV infection is frequently caused by reactivation of latent virus,
which can be triggered by several stress factors, including anesthesia. Primary
infection. The virus persists lifelong within neural ganglia.
ii. Diagnostic tests for FHV include virus isolation, PCR, or immunofluorescence;
PCR is probably the most reliable test here. There may also be infection with FeLV
 Or FIV, and testing for those viruses is indicated if the status is unknown. Corneal or
conjunctival cytology may also be helpful to identify any concurrent ocular diseases.
iv. Topical antiviral drugs should be used. Idoxuridine, trifluridine, and vidarabine
are the most effective in cats. Topical antibiotics should also be used to prevent
secondary bacterial infection. Ocular inflammation and pain can be successfully
treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Topical corticosteroids are
absolutely contraindicated. Also, corneal ulcers with loose epithelial edges should
be carefully debrided with a dry cotton tip to encourage healing.
38 i. The neurologic examination findings indicate cerebellar disease. This is charac-
terized by normal mental status and symmetric ataxia with hypermetric movements
of the limbs, trunk, and head. “Intention tremor is often a feature: tremor which
typically is exaggerated by goal-oriented movements. Absent menace responses may
also be a feature, but these may be normal in kittens up to 12 weeks of age.
ii. Cerebellar disease in more than one kitten from the same litter suggests a
congenital disorder. Two types of congenital cerebellar disease are possible; they
can be distinguished by the course of the disease: (1) Nonprogressive cerebellar
ataxia; this is caused by malformations such as cerebellar hypoplasia and is first
evident when the kittens start to walk. The ataxia persists throughout life.
(2) Chronic progressive cerebellar ataxia. Causes include inherited neurodegener-
ative disorders like cerebellar abiotrophy, neuroaxonal dystrophy, or storage
disorders (GM1 and GM2 gangliosidosis, sphingomyelinosis, and mannosidosis).
Neurologic signs are first seen in kittens or young adult cats less than 12 months
of age and gradually progress. Inflammatory CNS disease, often caused by the FIP
virus, can also cause progressive cerebellar disease and should be excluded in cats
with progressive cerebellar signs. In the present case, the history and clinical signs
pointed towards cerebellar hypoplasia as the most likely cause.
ii. In kittens, this is most commonly caused by in utero exposure to FPV. Often,
only some kittens in a litter are affected.
54
39, 40: Questions
39A 3-year-old spayed female
39
domestic shorthair cat was seen
because of signs of purulent nasal
discharge that had been present since
the owner adopted the cat from an
animal shelter 2 weeks earlier. This
had not improved with a 10-day
course of amoxicillin/clavulanate. The
vaccination status was unknown. The
owner
reported
1 the cat
had
a
decreased appetite and activity level,
and open-mouth breathing when stressed. Physical examination revealed bilateral
purulent nasal discharge (39), marked inspiratory nasal stridor and inspiratory
dyspnea when the patient was manipulated. Otherwise, the physical exarmination was
normal. A CT scan of the nose revealed almost total loss of intranasal turbinates and
thickening of the nasal mucosa. Retrograde rhinoscopic imaging of the nasopharynx
demonstrated white irregularly-shaped masses adherent to the mucosal surface.
Biopsy samples were obtained for histopathology and microbiological testing.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis in this patient?
ii. Which diagnostic tests are helpful?
40
40 Case 40 is the same cat as case 39. Aspergillosis was diagnosed in this cat.
i. Discuss treatment options including the procedure shown (40).
ii. What are potential risk factors associated with these treatment modalities?
55
39,40:Answers
39 i. Aspergillosis is most likely - infection with the fungus Aspergillus spp., which
Aspergillus spp. are present in the mucous membranes of healthy animals. The lack
of clinical response to antibiotic reatment suggests a fungal cause. The CT and
rhinoscopic findings are also highly suggestive of aspergillosis.
ii. Confirmation of this often requires multiple tests. Because Aspergillus spp. can
be found in the normal nasal cavity, a positive fungal culture from a nasal swab is
not sufficient to diagnose the disease. Clinical signs and results obtained from CT
and rhinoscopy can be suspicious, but further tests are indicated to establish a
definite diagnosis. No information is available about the diagnostic usefulness of
Aspergillus spp. antibody tests in cats, although these can be helpful in dogs with
nasal aspergillosis. Here, antibody tests are often negative at the start of the disease,
but they can aid in establishing a diagnosis when positive. To confirm the diagnosis,
biopsy specimens from abnormal nasal tissue, ideally obtained endoscopically under
direct visualization, should be submitted for histopathology, imprint cytology, and
fungal culture. If one of these diagnostic methods is positive for Aspergillus spp, in
on endoscopy and CT, sinonasal aspergillosis is very likely.
40 i. Not much information is available about treatment modalities for nasal
aspergillosis in cats. A combination of local and systemic therapy is recommended.
Before local intranasal therapy is started, intranasal fungal plaques should be
removed endoscopically or surgically. Then, clotrimazole (1 % in propylene glycol)
should be infused intranasally. This has been performed extensively in dogs, but
has only been utilized in a few cats. The cat is anesthetized and intubated, and foley
catheters are placed to occlude the nasopharynx and nares (40). The nasopharynx
and paranasal sinuses are then slowly infused by syringe for an hour. The pharynx
must be fully removed from the pharynx and larynx at the end of the procedure,
before the tube is removed. In addition to intranasal infusion, systemic antifungal
therapy should be administered for at least 4 months; itraconazole is the drug of
choice. The starting dose (10 mg/kg q 24 h) should be reduced if side-effects 0ccur.
ii. Potential side-effects of itraconazole treatment can be hepatotoxicity, increased
ALT activity, weight loss, and anorexia. If side-effects occur, the dose should be
reduced. Intranasal instillation of clorimazole can lead to slight irritation and nasal
discharge for several days after the procedure. Cases of pulmonary edema have also
been reported in cats following the procedure; these might have been caused by
leakage and aspiration of clotrimazole.
56
41, 42:Questions
41 A 6-year-old castrated male
domestic shorthair cat was seen
because of a history of chronic vomit-
ing of 6 months’ duration. The cat
lived indoors only. Physical examin-
ation, hematology,
biochemistry,
abdominal radiographs and ultra-
sound examination were unremark-
able. Endoscopic biopsies
were
obtained from the gastric mucosa
(41).
i. Which organism can be identified?
ii. How else can this organism be diagnosed in cats?
ii. Which species of this organism are most commonly seen in cats?
iv. Is this organism a pathogen?
42 A 3-year-old spayed female domestic
42
shorthair cat was referred for a sus-
pected upper respiratory tract infection.
It had been initially seen for bilateral
nasal discharge and had been treated
with amoxicillin/clavulanate (20 mg/kg
PO q 12 h), but this failed to produce a
favorable clinical response. The cat
subsequently was treated with cortico-
steroids, but deteriorated markedly. It
developed bilaterally dilated pupils,
which failed to respond to bright light (42), blindness, signs of vestibular disease
(e.g. loss of balance, falling, positional nystagmus), and seizures.
i. What neuroanatomical lesions can result in blindness associated with bilaterally
dilated pupils that fail to respond to light?
ii. What diagnostic tests can help differentiate the possible causes of this type of
blindness?
i. What inferences can be drawn from concurrent vestibular signs, seizures, and
bilaterally dilated pupils, with respect to the cat's underlying neurologic disease?
iv. What are the cat's two main problems, and can both problems be explained by
a common etiology?
v. What are the differential diagnoses?
57
41,42:Answers
41 i. This is a Warthin-Starry-stained slide demonstrating Helicobacter spp.
organisms in the gastric glands.
i. At present, diagnosis of Helicobacter spp. in veterinary patients requires invasive
specimens. Although not commonly available, PCR testing of gastric biopsies and
fecal samples from cats (and dogs) has been reported experimentally. Only culture
and PCR testing allow identification of the particular Helicobacter species present.
Also, a positive clinical response to antibiotic therapy supports the belief that
bacteria are a cause of the clinical signs.
ili. H. felis, H. beilmannii, H. bizzozeronii, H. pametensis, and H. pylori have all
been reported in cats; infections with multiple species are possible.
iv. At the moment, it is unknown whether all veterinary Helicobacter species are
pathogens, and whether there is a difference in virulence between different
pathogenic species. Therefore, the role of Helicobacter spp. in the development of
 gastrointestinal disease in cats is unknown; further research is needed.
42 i. Blindness associated with bilaterally dilated pupils that fail to respond to light
is, by definition, peripheral blindness, and therefore, the result of disease of the
retinas, optic nerves, optic chiasm, or optic tracts.
ii. The best way to sort out these various possibilities is by direct or indirect
ophthalmoscopy (preferably the latter). In this cat, there was retinitis, with hemorrhage
around the optic disc resulting in focal retinal detachments. Increased prominence of
the optic disc suggested that optic neuritis was present also. In cases in which the retina
and optic disc are unremarkable, electroretinography and CT or MRI can be useful.
ili. Vestibular signs indicate disease of the peripheral or central vestibular area; how-
ever, positional nystagmus is strongly suggestive of disease of the central vestibular
area, i.e. the brainstem in the caudal fossa (under the cerebellum). Seizures usually
signify disease of telencephalic structures, typically the cerebral cortex. These findings
indicate that the cat most likely had multifocal intracranial and intraocular disease.
iv. The cat had two main problems: (1) multifocal intracranial and intraocular
a ie aissod si il 'ies sin un 'aseasp ioen Arndsar raddn (z) pue 'aseas
disease was initially restricted to the nasal cavity and then spread to involve the
eyes and CNS following administration of corticosteroids.
v. Fungal and neoplastic diseases are both capable of behaving in this way, but in a
young adult cat, cryptococcosis, pheohyphomycosis, Neosartorya infection, and
lymphoma would be the most likely differential diagnoses. Infections involving
Neosartorya spp. tend to cause signs of retrobulbar mass unilaterally or bilaterally.
58
43,44:Questions
43 Case 43 is the same cat as case 42.
43
An MRI scan was performed (43).
i. What additional diagnostic tests are
indicated?
ii. Were the collection of CSF and a scan
of the cat's brain using cross-sectional
imaging indicated?
ii. Apart from cost, are there any
negative aspects to performing these
procedures?
44 Case 44 is the same cat as cases 42 and 43. Cryptococcus
gatti was cultured on Sabouraud’s glucose agar, and the cat
was diagnosed with multiple cerebral cryptococcomas (44;
fixed brain of another cat which died of cryptococcosis).
i. What is the prognosis in this cat?
ii. How should this cat be treated?
59
43,44:Answers
43 i. The simplest, cheapest, and most efficient way to investigate this cat further
is to obtain material from the nasal cavity for cytology or histopathology. This is
easily performed by obtaining nasal swabs or nasal washings. In this case, cytology
 from nasal swabs demonstrated large numbers of capsulated, budding yeasts, and
Cryptococcus gattii was subsequently cultured on Sabouraud's glucose agar. The
diagnosis is, therefore, cryptococcal rhinitis with dissemination to the retinas, optic
nerves, and CNS.
i. Not only are nasal swabs or washing a cheaper and easier way to establish a
diagnosis in cases such as this, but this approach avoids the need for general
anesthesia and CSF collection from a patient with possible increased intracranial
results in marked neurologic deterioration in these patients, so making the diagnosis
via the nasal cavity has significant advantages. MRI provides useful information
concerning whether CNS disease is predominantly meningeal or involves crypto-
coccal granulomas (cryptococcomas) in the substance of the brain. MRI was
performed in this cat and showed multiple cerebral cryptococcomas.
ii. Although CSF collction and CT or MRI scanning provides useful information,
the risk of anesthesia may outweigh the benefits of this additional information in
many situations.
44 i. The prognosis is guarded. Cryptococcosis is hard to cure, and cases in which
the infection has spread to the CNS are particularly challenging.
i. Five drugs are useful here: amphotericin B, flucytosine, fluconazole, itraconazole,
and terbinafine. Many cases improve with fluconazole or itraconazole, although
 only fluconazole penetrates the normal blood-brain barrier. Combination therapy
q   e i   e   si
fluconazole (to treat residual foci of infection). Amphotericin B is used SC as a
dilute infusion, to delay its absorption into the systemic circulation, thereby
avoiding high peak blood levels and sparing the kidneys as a result of maintaining
renal perfusion. It is, therefore, possible to administer larger and thus more effective
quantities using this protocol than have been administered previously. It is
important, however, to monitor plasma urea and creatinine concentrations during
therapy. At the completion of this, oral antifungal medication (fluconazole or
itraconazole, terbinafine with or without flucytosine) is continued for several
months continuing until the antigen titers drop to zero. Some cats may require
lifelong treatment with fluconazole to prevent recurrence. This cat achieved a full
remission, as reflected by a fall in its antigen titer to zero. Vestibular signs and
some pupillary dilatation persisted.
60
45, 46: Questions
15
45 A 4-year-old spayed female domestic longhair cat (45) was seen for a consul-
tation. The cat lives in close contact with a 4-year-old neutered male Husky; both
cat and dog go outside. The Husky had been diagnosed with leptospirosis caused
by the serovar Grippotyphosa and had been in the intensive care unit of the
veterinary hospital for the last 2 days. Now, the owner was very concerned about
potential infection of the cat.
i. Can cats get leptospirosis?
ii. How are cats usually infected?
ii. Are infected cats a risk for humans or dogs?
6
46 A 12-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat was seen because of a non-
healing wound on its left hock, which had not responded to drainage and 4 weeks?
treatment with oral cephalexin then amoxicillin/clavulanate. The cat lived
 predominantly outdoors, and was known to be FIV-positive. A fine-needle aspirate
of the exudate from the wound was obtained and stained with modified Wrights-
Giemsa (46).
i. What are the features of the cytology?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. How should a definitive diagnosis be obtained?
iv. How should this cat be treated?
61
45,46:Answers
45 i. Leptospirosis is caused by infection with antigenically different serovars of the
bacterium Leptospira interrogans. Although cats can be infected by Leptospira spp.,
clinical illness is very rare. Cats can be exposed to Leptospira spp. excreted by wild-
life, and Leptospira spp. antibodies are present in up to 10% of the feline population.
Outdoor cats have a higher likelihood of having antibodies than indoor ones. Serovars
canicola, grippotyphosa, and pomona have all been isolated from cats. Although cats
develop antibodies after exposure, they appear to be less susceptible than dogs to
infections, and clinical signs of feline leptospirosis are usually inapparent or mild.
ii. Unlike dogs, that are usually infected when swimming in Leptospira-
contaminated water, cats usually become infected through transmission from
ii. Although cats can be infected experimentally, they do not seem to remain
chronic carriers. Thus, an antibody-positive cat does not seem to be a major
zoonotic risk when compared with dogs, that may shed organisms for a long time.
Furthermore, the majority of leptospiral infections in humans and dogs are
contracted while engaging in water-related activities. As most cats dislike water,
they pose little risk of causing disease transmission.
46 i. There are large macrophages present, with masses of negatively-staining bacilli
in their cytoplasm.
ii. Infection with Mycobacterium spp. is most likely. Negative staining of bacteria
         
mycobacterial infection. Abundant intracellular bacteria are characteristic of the
lepromatous form of feline leprosy, caused by Mycobacterium lepraemurium and
Other species of mycobacteria, e.g. M. visibile. Cutaneous tuberculosis (M. bovis, 0r
rarely M. avium or M. microti) and atypical mycobacteriosis are less likely
differential diagnoses. Disseminated disease is common in the former. Infection with
Nocardia spp. is possible, but these usually stain positively and branch.
ii. Culture of the causative organism. Although this can be difficult, mycobacterial
culture should always be attempted, since it is not possible to distinguish between
species on clinical criteria alone. PCR and direct sequencing (if available) is the most
reliable and rapid means of identifying mycobacterial species from clinical cases.
iv. Since antimicrobial resistance may occur with single-agent therapy, the best
treatment regime is multi-agent antimicrobial therapy using a combination of
clofazimine or rifampicin with clarithromycin and a fluoroquinolone (e.g.
ciprofloxacin). Successful treatment may take 3-6 months and surgical debriding
or debulking of lesions is usually necessary. Antibiotic treatment should continue
for at least 1-2 months after clinical resolution of lesions.
62
47, 48: Questions
47a
47b
47 Case 47 is the same cat as case 46. Two months after the cat's feline leprosy had
been cured, it became anorectic and polydipsic. On physical examination, a cranial
abdominal mass was palpated and both kidneys were enlarged, firm, and irregular.
The owners declined further investigation and the cat was euthanized. At necropsy,
changes in the kidneys (47a), stomach, and spleen (47b) were found.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. Could another treatment have been recommended in this case?
48 A 7-year-old castrated male domestic
48a
shorthair cat was seen because of a loss of voice
and reluctance to eat over 2-3 weeks, during
which time the cat had lost 0.5 kg in body
weight. Immediately prior to this, the cat had
been ‘a bit snuffly'. The owners had noticed that
an abnormal respiratory noise was present on
inspiration. The cat would lap and swallow
liquids, but refused any solid food. On physical
examination, the cat had mild inspiratory
dyspnea, with flaring of the nostrils and an exag-
gerated respiratory effort. During examination
of the oral cavity, a mass lesion was detected on
the right hand side of the nasopharynx, resulting
 in bulging and ventral displacement of the soft
palate (48a).
i. How should the cat be evaluated further, and
what would be the most cost-effective way of
making a diagnosis?
ii. What treatment is indicated?
63
47, 48:Answers
47 i. Tumors are shown in the renal cortex and greater curvature of the stomach.
Since this cat was FIV-positive, the most likely diagnosis is lymphoma. FIV-positive
cats are five to six times as likely to develop lymphoma as uninfected cats. FIV-
associated lymphomas are predominantly extranodal, often in unusual sites such as
brain, heart, eyes, and spinal cord and often classified as the 'miscellaneous’ forms
of lymphoma; they are typically high-grade. Usually, FIV has an indirect role in
lymphomagenesis, with
1  tumors developing secondary to decreased immune
infectious cofactors. In this case, the omental fat was stained orange from chronic
administration of clofazimine for treatment of M. lepraemurium infection.
ii. Median remission and survival times for FIV-positive cats with lymphoma are
similar to those of FIV-negative cats. In contrast, FeLV infection is a negative
indicated in the treatment of lymphoma in FIV-positive cats. However complications
    d        
peripheral cytopenias or concurrent secondary infections. This cat, first seen because
of M. lepraemurium infection, may have had a late-stage FIV infection then. If
chemotherapy had been selected for this cat, it should have also been monitored for
recurrence of the mycobacterial infection.
48 i. The cat had a disease of the soft palate, or more likely, the posterior portion
of the nasal cavity,
, and adjacent nasopharynx. The disease appeared to be
progressive. The simplest and most cost-effective way of proceeding with this case
would be to perform a fine-needle aspirate of the nasopharyngeal mass under
general anesthesia. Cytologic evaluation of the smears made from aspirates showed
granulomatous inflammation and large numbers of capsulated, budding yeasts in
ii. Using diathermy, the soft palate was incised on the midline, and the granuloma
dorsal to it was debulked as much as possible (48b). The base of the granuloma was
curetted, and the wound was closed in two layers using absorbable sutures. The
cat was given fluconazole IV intraoperatively, and subsequently treated with
itraconazole. The cat immediately improved following surgery, as this operation
had relieved the upper airway obstruction and the structural basis for its dysphagia.
Two weeks later, the cat was doing well, but
there was still some swelling evident at the site
48b
of surgery. The cat continued to do well on this
medication, and was treated until the crypto-
coccal antigen titer had declined to zero. Disease
did not recur.
64
49, 50: Questions
49 A 14-month-old intact male domestic shorthair
493
cat was seen because of a history of multiple skin
lumps developing during the past 3 weeks. The cat
Jo dnoig e uoij oe suiuou 7 padope uaaq peu
farm cats. The skin changes had started as nodules,
become alopecic, and then ulcerated. The first
lesions had been seen on the left antebrachium (49a)
and subsequently appeared on the head (49b), neck,
toes, ventral abdomen, and prepuce. The physical
examination was normal with the exception of the
cutaneous lesions, which did not appear to bother
the cat.
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
i. How should the diagnosis be obtained?
49b
ii. How is this disease treated?
iv. What is the prognosis?
v. Are there differences in the epidemiology of the
different species causing this disease?
50A12-week-old intact female
50
domestic shorthair kitten was seen
because of weight loss despite having a
normal appetite. The client owned four
adult neutered cats, and also fostered
cats and kittens from a local shelter,
including the kitten that was presented
(50), its littermates, and an unrelated cat
and her kittens. All of the fostered cats
and kittens had contact with each other, but not with the client's own adult cats.
The fostered cats and kittens all tested negative for FeLV antigen and FIV antibody,
had been treated for parasites, and had been vaccinated against FPV, FHV, and
FCV. The kitten seen was lethargic and had a body temperature of 39.4°C. It
developed a distended abdomen, declined further despite antibiotic therapy, and
was euthanized. Post-mortem examination showed there was viscous straw-colored
fluid in the abdomen.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
 a d n    o in d n r '
diagnosis?
65
49,50:Answers
49 i. Feline leprosy, cutaneous tuberculosis,
49c
atypical
1 mycobacteriosis,
actinomycosis,
nocardiosis, fungal infections, neoplasia, and
eosinophilic granulomas are the main dif-
ferential diagnoses in this case.
i. Cytology, histopathology, and culture of the
causative organism should be performed.
Cytologic analysis of fine-needle aspirates
revealed degenerate neutrophils and macro-
phages. A Ziehl-Neelsen stain identified slender rod-
shaped
acid-fast
organisms
located
within
49d
revealed pyogranulomatous inflammation containing
clumps of acid-fast staining
organisms. Myco-
bacterial cultures were negative. However Myco-
bacteriumlepraemurium was diagnosedby PCR
resulting in a presumptive diagnosis of feline leprosy.
ii.A combination of:
 surgery and drug admini-
stration is required. Focal lesions should be removed
using a wide surgical excision, and the cat should
also be given adjunctive multi-drug antibiotic therapy: clofazamine plus one or both
of clarithromycin and rifampicin. Treatment should be continued for 1-2 months
after the disappearance of lesions to reduce the risk of recurrence.
iv. M. lepraemurium spreads aggressively and often recurs postoperatively if long-
term antibiotics are not used. In this cat, lesions on the head became ulcerated (49d)
during the course of the disease. All lesions eventually resolved with therapy.
v. Feline leprosy may be caused by M. haemophilum or M. lepraemurium. The
former stains with H&E, but the latter does not. M. lepraemurium occurs in
younger cats, more often in males, and is contracted via the bites of infected rodents;
M. haemophilum occurs in older and immunosuppressed cats.
50 i. This is a high-density feline “herd’ situation with many kittens that originated
from an even more dense shelter situation. The history and physical signs indicate
that this kitten most likely succumbed to FIP. Infections with other feline viruses
(e.g. FPV, FHV, FCV) should also be considered in a multi-cat situation.
i. The ascites provided a convenient sample of fluid for testing. A simple and
inexpensive test for diagnosing FIP in cats with effusion is the Rivalta test. This test
has a positive predictive value of 86% and a negative predictive value of 97%. In
shelters, it is often necessary to diagnose based on history, clinical signs, and one or
two simple tests, thus, this test should be recommended.
66
51, 52:Questions
51 Case 51 is the same cat as case 50.
5
The foster parent did not know what to
do about the remaining litermates or
the fostered queen and her three kittens
(51). She was also very concerned about
her own resident adult cats. Losing
foster homes may mean that more
kittens will need to be euthanized and
widespread panic about FIP can result in
decreased feline adoptions from the
shelter.
i. What should this foster parent be advised regarding risk of the disease in the
littermates?
i. What should this foster parent be advised regarding risk of the disease in the
unrelated foster kittens in the same household?
ii. What should this foster parent be advised regarding risk to the other adult cats
in the house?
iv. Can this foster parent safely foster more kittens?
52 A 9-year-old spayed female domestic
52
shorthair cat was seen because of a 4-5-year
history of intermittent cough (52). Shortly
before presentation, it had shown exacer-
bation of cough and episodes of open-mouth
breathing. Previously, it had been managed
with prednisolone when the clinical signs
worsened. This time, they had not resolved
with prednisolone. The cat lived indoors
with another indoor cat and was fully
vaccinated. On physical examination, the
body temperature was 40.2°C; the respir-
atory rate was 60 bpm, with a prolonged
expiratory phase. Heart and respiratory
sounds were normal, but when the cat was stressed there was a sudden onset of
dyspnea (BS6). A complete blood count was performed; the abnormal results were:
white blood cells 25.2 × 10*/, mature neutrophils 21.5 x 109/, band neutrophils
0.8 x 10%/l, eosinophils 1.2 x 10*/1.
i. What are likely explanations for chronic cough in this cat?
ii. Which further diagnostic testing is recommended?
67
51, 52:Answers
51 i. Heritability of developing FIP is about 50% so full sibling littermates are twice
  s             
factors, age, the strain of FCoV that is circulating, and the immune system and
genetics of the individual cat.
ii. The risk for these kittens is lower. Studies have shown that unrelated kittens in
households in which FIP has been diagnosed do not have a higher likelihood of
developing the disease than kittens in FIP-free households. However, factors that
increase FCoV replication and mutation include having multiple cats housed closely
together, especially kittens under 1 year of age, and having a more virulent or
mutagenic strain of FCoV.
ii. It is likely that all the cats in this household have been exposed to FCoV. The
unrelated adult cats are not at higher risk than before of developing FIP due to the
reasons mentioned above and, importantly, their age-related resistance.
iv. The foster parent should not foster more kittens after these for at least 3 months.
It is always best to foster only one litter at a time to lessen the chance of disease
transmission.
52 i. The history, in combination with a positive response to anti-inflammatory
treatment, is consistent with a diagnosis of feline asthma. In the present exacerba-
tion of symptoms, eosinophilia could indicate a hypersensitivity reaction. However
the cat also shows fever, and leukocytosis with left shift, indicating bacterial
 infection. In this case, chronic bronchial disease and immunosuppressive reatment
with corticosteroids could have caused structural changes of the airways. If this has
 Occurred, infection can be generated by the normal bacterial microflora of the upper
bronchiseptica or Mycoplasma spp.
i. (1) Thoracic radiographs should be taken. Feline asthma typically shows a
predominantly bronchiolar pattern with alveolar involvement in more severe cases,
overinflation of the lungs, and sometimes a collapsed right middle lung lobe. (2) A
BAL should be performed to gain material for cytology and bacterial culture. BAL
the lower airways are suspected. Neutrophilic inflammation and intracellular
bacteria indicate bacterial infection; eosinophilic inflammation in the absence of
bacteria would indicate feline asthma. (3) If radiographs show signs of localized
changes within the airways, bronchoscopy is indicated to visualize abnormal areas
and obtain sample material from these areas. (4) The cat should also be tested for
FeLV and FIV, since these infections can lead to immunosuppression.
68
53, 54: Questions
53
53 Case 53 is the same cat as case 52. Thoracic radiographs of the cat were
 performed and they showed a bronchial lung pattern. The patient was anesthetized
for a BAL performed through a sterile endotracheal tube. Cytologic smears of the
sample were prepared (53) and cultures for aerobic bacteria and Mycoplasma spp.
were performed.
i. What information does cytology provide in this case?
ii. If a bacterial culture of the BAL of this patient is sent to a laboratory and returns
negative does this result rule out bacterial infection?
ii. Should antibiotic treatment be started before the results from culture and
sensitivity testing are available?
iv. Which antibiotics should be used?
54 Case 54 is the same cat as cases 52
54
and 53. Three days later, the bacterial
culture of the BAL fluid showed heavy
growth of Bordetella bronchiseptica
(54). Mycoplasma spp. culture was
negative. Antibiotic sensitivity testing
indicated that the B. bronchiseptica was
resistant to all drugs except enrofloxacin
and gentamicin.
i. Which of the two antibiotics is
preferable in this cat?
ii. Is it recommended to vaccinate the
other cat in the household against B.
bronchiseptica?
69
53,54:Answers
53 i. BAL cytology revealed neutrophilic inflammation with intra- and extracellular
rod-shaped bacteria. This fits with a diagnosis of bacterial infection of the lower
airways.
ii. Even if the bacterial culture is negative, bacterial infection cannot be ruled out
completely. There are multiple causes of a false-negative test result, including: (1)
inadequate handling and shipping of the sample, and (2) use of inappropriate culture
medium; this is very important if bordetellosis is suspected. Also, since Mycoplasma
spp. require selective medium for growth, the laboratory should be informed about
suspicion of mycoplasmal infection, and samples should be delivered promptly in
special transport medium. If cytology of the BAL suggests bacterial infection despite
negative bacterial culture, appropriate antibiotic therapy is warranted. If a positive
response to antibiotic therapy is observed, this could also indicate bacterial infection.
ii. Antimicrobial treatment should be initiated immediately, because the patient
shows severe clinical signs. Empiric antibiotic therapy is indicated to prevent further
aggravation of infection. When information is obtained from bacterial culture and
sensitivity testing, antibiotic therapy can be modified, if necessary.
iv. Most rod-shaped organisms cultured from the respiratory tract are Gram-negative
bacteria, e.g. Pasteurella spp., Escherichia coli, or Bordetella bronchiseptica. Since
rod-shaped bacteria were detected on cytology, the chosen antibiotic should have
good efficacy against these. Possible choices are fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides,
or third-generation cephalosporins. Also useful in cases of respiratory disease are
doxycycline and azithromycin
54 i. Both drugs can be administered intravenously, which is advantageous in
critically ill cats. Enrofloxacin reaches much higher concentrations within the
tracheobronchial tree than gentamicin. Fluoroquinolones also have the advantage
of accumulation within the neutrophils. However, both drugs can display side-
effects. Enrofloxacin may cause acute retinal degeneration in some cats leading to
irreversible blindness, and gentamicin can cause nephrotoxicity. Possible alternatives
t0 enrofloxacin are other fluoroquinolones which are less likely to cause retinal
damage. If gentamicin is used, renal function should be evaluated before treatment
and regularly during treatment. Alternatively, gentamicin could be administered by
nebulization, thus reaching a high local concentration within the tracheobronchial
tree while reducing the risk of systemic side-effects.
i. B. bronchiseptica is a primary pathogen of the respiratory tract in cats and can
cause both upper and lower respiratory tract infections. It is easily transmitted by con-
tact, sneezing, and contaminated equipment. Therefore, infection of the second cat in
 the household is possible. An intranasal live B. bronchiseptica vaccine is available; if
used, clinical signs are reduced from 3 days after vaccination. Thus, vaccination of the
second cat in the household with an intranasal B. bronchiseptica vaccine several days
before contact with the infected cat when it returns from the hospital may be beneficial.
70
55, 56: Questions
55 A 16-month-old neutered female domestic
55
shorthair cat was seen for its annual health
check-up in the USA (55). The cat lived primarily
indoors, but was allowed to go outside. There
were no other cats in the household, but there
were several cats in the neighborhood. The cat
had received a series of three vaccinations against
FPV, FHV, and FCV at 8, 12, and 16 weeks of
age; two vaccinations against FeLV at 12 and
16 weeks of age, and one vaccination against
rabies at 16 weeks of age. It had negative FeLV
and FIV tests at 16 weeks of age. It received
selemectin for parasite control, and had been
healthy since it was obtained by the owner at 8
weeks of age. Physical examination was
unremarkable.
i. Should the cat be vaccinated at this visit?
ii. If so, what vaccines should be administered,
and when would booster vaccines be due?
56 A young adult (age unknown) female
56
(sterilization history unknown) domestic
shorthair cat in an animal shelter was
found severely
 depressed  and dehy-
drated with green vomit in the cage at
the time of morning cleaning (56). It had
been in the shelter for 9 days. An adult
(age unknown) male (neutering history
unknown) domestic shorthair
cat
housed in the same ward was also
vomiting and depressed. It had been in
the shelter for 11 days. Both had been
vaccinated on intake with an inactivated virus vaccine against FPV, FHV, and FCV
SC. According to cleaning staff, no abnormalities were noticed in either cat the
previous afternoon, and both had been described as apparently healthy on intake.
i. What are the most likely differential diagnoses for this condition?
ii. What diagnostic tests could be performed in-house to provide additional
information?
ii. How could a definitive diagnosis be made?
71
55,56:Answers
55 i. As a kitten, the cat received an appropriate series of core vaccines (FPV, FHV,
FCV, rabies) administered over a time period likely to be sufficient to avoid
interference from passively acquired maternal antibodies. Core booster vaccines
should be administered 1 year following the primary immunization series.
  e s       a s
lifestyle of each cat should be individually assessed to select a vaccination protocol
tailored to its needs using the minimum number of vaccines possible. In this cat,
d   e     ) s  r
against these common and highly infectious diseases. These vaccines induce very
durable immunity lasting a minimum of 3 years, and probably longer. Concerning
rabies vaccination, the regulations of each individual jurisdiction have to be
considered. Since this cat roams outdoors and may have contact with other cats of
unknown FeLV infection status, FeLV vaccination is advisable in most countries in
which FeLV infection is endemic. The duration of immunity induced by FeLV
vaccines is less clear than for the other antigens. A reasonable approach in this cat
(living in the USA) would be to vaccinate against FPV, FHV, FCV, FeLV, and rabies 
at this visit, and recommend a 3-year interval before the next vaccines are
administered.
56 i. In a shelter cat, the most likely infectious cause is FPV infection. Also,
Salmonella spp.-infected cats can present similarly.
i. A patient-side test for parvovirus antigen can be used to detect FPV in feces.
However, this can give false-positive results in recently vaccinated cats. Occasional
false-negatives can also occur (e.g. if the feces are very watery), so this should not be
ruled out on the basis of a fecal test alone. A blood smear to estimate white blood cell
count can also be done in-house. Both FPV infection and salmonellosis can cause
depressed white cell counts, so this would not differentiate between them. However
if the white blood cell count appears normal or elevated, other diagnoses may be
more likely. If a cat dies or is euthanized, an in-house necropsy should be performed.
Segmental enteritis suggests feline parvovirosis, but an absence of gross lesions does
not rule out either condition.
ini. Feline parvovirosis is usually diagnosed in shelter cats based on a combination
of history (incomplete vaccination), clinical signs, results of fecal parvovirus antigen
testing, and white blood cell count. Bacterial culture for Salmonella spp. may be
performed, although demonstration of the bacterium in feces does not prove it is
the cause; subclinical carriage is possible. If a cat dies or is euthanized, histo-
pathology and immunohistochemistry provide a definitive diagnosis.
72
57, 58: Questions
57
57 Case 57 is the same cat as case 56. Concurrently, two other adult cats (57) in the
same ward of the shelter became ill. Feces from both cats tested strongly positive
 on fecal tests for parvovirus antigen, and a blood smear showed few white blood
cells in one of the cats. Feline parvovirosis was diagnosed. Both cats were
euthanized, as adequate isolation and treatment facilities were not available. There
were 25 other cats in the ward, ranging from 8 weeks of age to adult. All had
received inactivated FPV, FHV, and FCV vaccines on intake and had been in the
shelter for between 1 and 35 days. The cages were cleaned daily with a quaternary
ammonium disinfectant.
i. How should the cages in which the rwo sick cats were be decontarminated?
ii. What should be recommended regarding the 25 exposed cats to prevent
continued spread of this infection?
58
58 Case 58 is the same cat as cases 56 and 57. Four of the adult cats in the shelter
entered with a history of complete vaccination. They were clinically normal (58).
i. How high is the risk in these four cats of getting the disease?
ii. What vaccination protocol should be recommended in the future to reduce the
risk of feline parvoviral outbreaks in this shelter?
73
57, 58:Answers
57 i. Quaternary ammonium disinfectants do not inactivate FPV. The cages should
be cleaned with detergent and water then disinfected with a proven parvocide.
 Disinfectant should be left for a minimum of 10 minutes, and the cages allowed to
months.
ii. Exposed cats should be separated. If possible, they should be quarantined for
14 days. If not, the outbreak may continue unless they are euthanized. In shelters
where a parvocidal disinfectant is used routinely and there is minimal fomite
transmission, exposure may not occur. However here, there is evidence that spread
has already occurred; therefore, all cats in the ward should be considered exposed.
This may occur up to 3 days before clinical signs are recognized. The risk of disease
can be assessed as follows: {1} Very fow risk: cats older than 4 months that have
been given either a MLV vaccine or a series of two inactivated vaccines completed
at least 1 week before exposure, and clinically normal cats with documented
protective titers against FPV. (2) Moderate risk: kittens less than 4 months, even if
appropriately vaccinated. (3) High risk: cats vaccinated only once with a MLV
vaccine less than 1 week before exposure, cats vaccinated with a single inactivated
   ()           
unvaccinated cats.
 58 i. These four adult cats are not at significant risk. No special precautions need
to be taken.
i. Correct use of vaccines greatly reduces the risk of FPV spread in a shelter or
other multiple-cat environment. Due to its rapid onset of protection, MLV vaccine
is strongly recommended. Cats should be vaccinated immediately on intake to
the shelter. Kittens should be vaccinated at 4-6 weeks of age; this should be
repeated every 2-3 weeks as long as the kitten is in the shelter, until 16 weeks of
age. Adult cats should be vaccinated once immediately on intake, and may be
revaccinated after 2 weeks, particularly if there is any concern that the cat was ill
at the time of the first vaccination. However, for pregnant cats, the risk of fetal
damage from the vaccine should be weighed against the risk to queen and
offspring of infection. Cats that cannot be vaccinated with a MLV vaccine for
legal or medical reasons should be housed in a clean, isolated area, preferably
outside the shelter.
74
59, 60: Questions
59 A 7-year-old castrated male domestic
59a
shorthair cat was seen because of nasal
discharge, sneezing, and a subcutaneous
swelling on the forehead of 4 months'
duration. The cat lived near Sydney,
Australia. The disease had been un-
responsive to treatment with antibiotics
and corticosteroids. On examination,
there was stertorous and frequently
open-mouth breathing, absence of air
movement through the right nostril and a hard, prominent swelling of the nasal
bridge. Slight bilateral nasal discharge was evident, and the mandibular lymph
nodes were enlarged. Multiple pinch biopsies were obtained from the right side of
the nasal cavity. Also, abnormal subcutaneous tissue was obtained from the swollen
nasal bridge for histology (59a) and culture.This consisted of ^veins’ of brown
marbled tissue interspersed with off-white fibrous tissue.
i. What can be seen on the histologic sections?
ii. What is the diagnosis?
ii. How should this cat be treated?
60 An approximately 2-year-old spayed
60
female “domestic shorthair cat was
evaluated for acute collapse and
respiratory distress (60). The cat was a
stray in Florida, USA, rescued 2 months
previously; it had been kept exclusively
indoors since then. The cat appeared to
be healthy at the time of rescue, was
negative on FeLV and FIV tests, and was
vaccinated against FPV, FHV, FCV,
FeLV and rabies. On physical examination, the cat was vocalizing and appeared
disoriented, was in severe respiratory distress, and was passing copious amounts of
urine and bloody feces. There were increased bronchial sounds, so the heart sounds
could not be heard. The mucous membranes were pale and cyanotic, the body
temperature was decreased (37.2°C), the respiratory rate (65 bpm) was increased,
and the pulse was not palpable.
i. What is the current condition of the cat?
ii. What immediate treatment and diagnostic procedures are indicated?
75
59,60:Answers
59 i. Biopsies from the nasal bridge mass
59b
were composed of masses of inflam-
matory cells, including plasma cells,
eosinophils, and macrophages; and
abundant necrotic material in which
there were many fungal hyphae. The
nasal pinch biopsies showed chronic
inflammation, some epithelial and
glandular hyperplasia, and a small
number of fungal elements. Squash
preparations of the excised brown material demonstrated necrotic tissue containing
masses of hyphae (59b).
ii. Material from these sources was cultured on Sabouraud's glucose agar plates
containing chloramphenicol and gentamicin. A filamentous fungus was isolated
after 3 days’ incubation at 28°C and identified as Metarhizium anisopliae. The cat
was subsequently tested for FeLV and FIV, but it was negative for both. The
diagnosis was, therefore, invasive rhinitis due to Metarhizium anisopliae.
ii. The cat was treated with itraconazole initially. After 2 weeks, the cat's breathing
had improved, with better air movement through the right nostril. There was also
reduction of sneezing and nasal discharge. After about 2 months, therapy was
altered to ketoconazole for 80 days for financial reasons. Clinical signs of invasive
mycotic rhinitis recurred 6 months after discontinuation of treatment, at which
time the cat's owners were unprepared to pursue further therapy. Such a case would
now be recommended posaconazole therapy (5 mg/kg once daily with food) as this
largely devoid of hepatic toxicity.
60 i. The cat is in acute hypotensive shock of unknown cause. Severe involvement
of both the respiratory tract and the gastrointestinal tract suggests a systemic
reaction such as anaphylaxis or electrocution, or a primary catastrophic gastro-
Organ. Trauma was considered to be unlikely in an indoor cat.
i. Immediate treatment should include emergency supportive care and initial
treatment for the most likely causes. Oxygen therapy and minimal handling were
immediately employed to reduce stress. Furosemide and prednisolone were
administered, and IV colloids were given to restore the circulating volume and
blood pressure. Ampicillin/sublactam was administered IV due to the apparent
disruption of the gastrointestinal mucosal barrier. Preparations were made for
intubation and mechanical ventilation in case of deterioration. Specific diagnostic
procedures were delayed pending stabilization of the patient.
76
61, 62:Questions
61 Case 61 is the same cat as case 60. After 3 hours of
6la
emergency treatment, the cat was stable enough to begin
diagnostic procedures.
Blood profile/biochermistry panel
Results
Hematocrit - nonregenerative anemia
0.26 1/1
Neutrophilia
20.05 × 109/1
Left shift band neutrophils
5.9 × 109/1
Metamyelocytes
0.6 x 10%/
Eosinophilia
2.3 ×10°/1
Basophilia
0.5 ×10%/
Panhypoproteinemia
45 g/l
ALT - mild increase
203 IU/1
Lateral (61a} and ventrodorsal (61b} thoracic radio-
graphs were taken.
61b
i. What is the assessment of the laboratory
changes?
ii. What is the appearance of the thoracic
radiographs?
ii. What diagnostic procedures should be
performed next?
62 Case 62 is the same cat as cases 60 and 61.
62a
Abdominal radiographs and ultrasound exam
ination were normal with the exception of a
fluid-filled intestinal tract. The history of acute
collapse with respiratory distress and the
finding of eosinophilia were compatible with
feline heartworm disease. A test for heart-
worm antibodies was negative, but a positive
62b
reaction was observed on a canine heartworm
antigen test (62a). Several short segments of
 parallel lines were visualized in the area of the
right ventricle on echocardiography (62b).
i. Are these results consistent with heartworm
disease?
ii. Do these findings explain the clinical
presentation of this cat?
in. What treatment should be recommended?
77
61,62:Answers
61 i. These findings are consistent with a marked inflammatory reaction and the
acute intestinal blood loss observed in this cat. The eosinophilia suggests possible
parasitism or hypersensitivity reaction.
i. The thoracic radiographs showed a patchy interstitial-alveolar pattern with
enlargement of the caudal lobar pulmonary arteries.
i. A complete blood count, biochemistry panel, urinalysis, clotting profile, fecal
flotation, and repeat FeLV and FIV tests are indicated. Besides the thoracic
radiographs, abdominal radiographs and abdominal ultrasound should also be
performed.
62 i. The findings are diagnostic for feline heartworm disease (dirofilariasis). It is
not uncommon for cats with heartworms to have negative heartworm antibody or
in dogs may also be used in cats, but they are less sensitive in cats than in dogs due
t0 the very low worm burden in cats. They are, however, highly specific, and a
positive result indicates the presence of at least one adult female hearrworm, or one
heartworms; however they can also be false-negative in the cat.
i. Although uncommon, anaphylaxis has been reported in heartworm-infected cats.
Sudden death may occur, and is believed to be related to pulmonary reactions
associated with a dying heartworm.
adulticide therapy is contraindicated in cats. Clinical signs can often be managed
medically with anti-inflammatory doses of corticosteroids and bronchodilators.
Surgical treatment is indicated if medical therapy alone is inadequate. In this patient.
a single heartworm was extracted via the jugular vein, and the cat was treated with
doxycycline for 4 weeks.
One year later, radiographs revealed the persistence of moderate broncho-
interstitial disease, but the cat was clinically normal.
78
63, 64: Questions
63
3An 8-year-old spayed female
Burmese cat was seen because of a 4-day
history of vomiting and inappetence. On
physical examination the cat was 10%
dehydrated, had icteric mucous mem-
branes, and a high body temperature
(40.1°C). Ultrasonography (63), com-
plete blood count, biochemistry panel,
and urinalysis were performed (1 - gall
bladder; 2 - sludge). The significant results were:
Blood profile/biochemistry panel
Results
White blood cells
3.7 × 109%/1
Mature neutrophils
0.10 x 10%/1
Band neutrophils
1.90 x10*/1
Lymphocytes
0.90 x 10%/1
ALT
428 IU/1
ALP
9 IU/
Total protein
82 g/1
Albumin
26 g/1
Globulins
56 g/l
Bilirubin
33 μmol/l
Creatinine
260 μmoll
Urea
25 mmol/l
Urinalysis
Specific gravity
1.052; all normal
i. How can the laboratory results be interpreted?
ii. What does the ultrasonography show?
ii. What should be done next?
64a
646
64 Case 64 is the same cat as in case 63. An
aspirate from the gall bladder (64a) was
collected, and a cytologic preparation of the
aspirate (64b) (modified Wrights-Giemsa)
was prepared.
i. What are the findings in the aspirate cytology?
ii. What is the etiopathogenesis of acute cholangitis in cats?
79
63,64:Answers
63 i. There is a neutropenia with a very low number of segmented neutrophils and
a high number of band neutrophils (left shift) and a lymphopenia. This may reflect
marked inflammatory demand. A less likely explanation is immune-mediated
destruction of mature neutrophils. Lymphopenia may be due to endogenous
corticosteroid production in acute inflammatory disease, viral infections (e.g. FeLV,
FIV) or from increased loss (e.g. intestinal disease). The cat was tested for FeLV
antigen and FIV antibody and was FIV-positive. Hyperbilirubinemia indicates
cholestasis. Hemolysis as a prehepatic cause of hyperbilirubinemia can be ruled out
because the cat is not anemic. Therefore, the mechanisms of cholestasis are hepatic
 Or posthepatic. There is evidence of hepatocellular necrosis (elevated ALT activity).
It is not unusual to see normal activities of ALP in icteric cats since the half-life of
ALP in cats is less than 6 hours. Dehydration is reflected by prerenal azotemia.
ii. On ultrasonography the gall-bladder wall appears thickened and hyperechoic,
suggesting inflammation or edema. The bile within the gall bladder is hyperechoic.
While this can be a normal finding in cats, it may indicate inspissation or
suppuration of the bile.
ii. A bile aspirate is indicated. The most expedient method is by percutaneous,
ultrasound-guided cholecystocentesis. The sample should be submitted for cytologic
examination and culture.
64 i. The gall bladder contents are yellow in contrast to the normal dark green color
 Of bile, suggestive of suppurative infection. Bile from healthy cats is sterile. The
modified Wrights-Giemsa stain reveals the presence of bacterial bacilli among a
background of degenerate cells. On Gram stain the bacilli found in this cat were
Gram-negative and a pure culture of Salmonela enterica serovar typhimurium was
isolated from bile
ii. The anatomy of the feline biliary tract is unique. The common bile duct and
Compared to dogs and humans, cats have very high numbers of bacteria in their
proximal small intestine including obligate and facultative anerobes. Abnormalities
in intestinal motility may allow reflux of intestinal contents into the common bile
duct and secondary bacterial colonization. In pancreatitis, reflux of pancreatic ductal
contents into the common bile duct may cause transient cholestasis and also enable
bacterial colonization and infection. Thus triaditis, the combination of cholangitis,
pancreatitis, and IBD, may be seen in some cats. Most cases of acute cholangitis are
associated with mixed infections of anerobes and aerobes, such as Escherichia coli,
Clostridia spp., Fusobacterium spp., Actinomyces spp.,_ Streptococcus spp., and
 Bacteroides spp., all members of normal intestinal flora. Salmonella spp. have been
isolated with a frequency of 1-18% from the feces of healthy cats.
80
65, 66: Questions
65 A 9-year-old spayed female Burmese cat from
65a
the USA died suddenly in front of the owners.
The cat had a history of asthma that was
periodically treated with prednisolone. There
were two related Burmese cats in the home that
appeared to be healthy. All cats were current on
vaccinations and were kept inside. The body was
presented for necropsy, which was unremark-
able with the exception of congested lungs (65a)
(H&E stain).
i. What does this histologic section reveal?
ii. Are the other cats in the household at risk from the same disease?
66 A 3-year-old spayed female domestic
56a
shorthair cat (66a) was referred for chronic
hematuria and dysuria unresponsive to antibio-
tics. The cat, which was otherwise healthy, was
kept indoors with one other healthy cat. It was
fed dry food for cats with urinary disease.
Physical examination was normal. Abdominal
radiographs showed that both kidneys were
normal and showed no uroliths in the bladder,
and a small bladder with a thickened wall was
seen on ultrasonography (66b). Urinalysis and
66b
urine culture were performed; urine culture was
negative. Urinalysis of a cystocentesis sample
bladde
showed the following abnormalities:
Urinalysis
Results
Color, appearance
yellow, cloudy
Protein
(+)
Blood
++++
RBC
10-50 cells/hpf
WBC
5-10 cells/hpf
i. How is this cat's problem defined?
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
i. What further tests should be performed?
iv. How should the cat be treated?
81
65,66:Answers
65 i. The most prominent finding is the markedly
65b
hypertrophied wall of the pulmonary arteriole.
There is inflammation of the interstitial tissues and
a thrombus in the lumen of the arteriole. This
pulmonary arteriolar occlusive hypertrophy with
interstitial inflammation is a classic manifestation of
feline heartworm-associated respiratory disease
(HARD), which can develop in the presence of either
larval or adult heartworm life stages. The pul-
monary changes and associated ‘asthma-like’ clinical
signs of coughing and respiratory distress may persist even after the parasites are
eliminated. An additional lung section revealed a dead heartworm cut in cross-
section in a pulmonary arteriole (65b). In this case, the arteriolar wall was
deteriorating, and there was marked adjacent inflammation obliterating the alveoli.
Sudden death is one of the most common signs of heartworm infection in cats.
ii. Heartworm-infected cats are rarely microfilaremic, so they are considered to be
dead-end hosts for Dirofilaria immitis.Even though the infected cat does not pose
a threat of transmission to the other cats, all the cats in the household share similar
risks for exposure to mosquitoes bearing infectious Dirofilaria immitis L3 larvae.
regions where dirofilariasis is endemic in dogs. Indoor lifestyle does not protect
cats against heartworm infection.
66 i. The presenting problem is inappropriate urination with hematuria and dysuria.
The urinalysis indicates microscopic hematuria with mild pyuria. These findings
are compatible with lower urinary tract disease.
ii. The major causes of lower urinary tract signs without urethral obstruction in
young adult cats are: (1) idiopathic cystitis, and (2) bladder uroliths.
Bladder uroliths are unlikely in this case, as most uroliths in the bladder of cats
are radio-opaque and are evident only on good quality abdominal radiographs.
ili. Cystoscopy with biopsy could also be performed. Cystitis in the cat is usually
sterile; the causes remain unknown. Therefore, antibiotics should not be used in
young cats. Bacterial cystitis is more common in cats older than 10 years of age.
Voided samples should not be used for diagnosis, since these samples can be
contaminated by normal flora bacteria. Instead, a cystocentesis sample should be
obtained. Administration of a diuretic, sedative, or analgesic may be needed.
Ultrasound guidance can also help.
iv. The diet should be changed to canned foods; these are beneficial due to their
higher water content. Should this prove ineffective, other therapies, such as pain
control or amitriptyline, could be considered.
82
67, 68: Questions
67
67 A 12-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat was seen because of slight
lethargy and a rough hair coat (67). It had tested FIV-positive 2 years ago, but had
remained healthy. It was an indoor-only cat in a single-cat household. Physical
examination revealed a rough hair coat, slightly enlarged mandibular and popliteal
lymph nodes, and severe stomatitis. Complete blood count showed leukopenia
(3.5 x 10*/l) due t0 a marked neutropenia (mature neutrophils 0.8 x 10*/) without a
left shift (band neutrophils 0 x 1o*/l). Otherwise, the complete blood count,
biochemical panel, and urinalysis were normal.
i. How should the neutropenia be treated in an FIV-infected cat?
i. Should a neutropenic FIV-infected cat be treated with antibiotics?
i. Should immune stimulators be used in this cat?
68
68 Case 68 is the same cat as case 67. Besides the rough hair coat, the cat had
slightly enlarged mandibular and popliteal lymph nodes, and a severe stomatitis
(68).
i. Which antiviral drug could be used in this cat?
ii. Are interferons useful in FIV-infected cats?
i. What can be done to treat the stomatitis in this cat?
83
67,68:Answers
67 i. Some researchers have used cytokines to treat the neutropenia, but filgastrim
is contraindicated in FIV-infected cats. Although it increases neutrophil counts in
            
Erythropoietin (human recombinant) is used in cats with nonregenerative anemia
secondary to chronic renal failure. In contrast to treatment with filgastrim, no
increased virus loads were observed in one study, and a gradual increase in white
blood cell counts was also seen. Thus, erythropoietin can be used safely in FIV-
infected cats.
ii. The answer to this question is controversial. It is likely that the FIV infection is
responsible for the neutropenia in this cat, and cats with severe neutropenia are
more susceptible to secondary bacterial infections. If no antibiotics are given, this
cat should be monitored very closely; if the body temperature rises, a secondary
bacterial infection could be present, and should be treated as soon as possible.
ii. “Immune stimulators’ or ‘immune modulators’ are widely used medications in
FIV-infected cats. These restore compromised immune function; there is, however
no evidence that they have any beneficial effects on the health or survival of either
asymptomatic or symptomatic FIV-infected cats. Nonspecific stimulation of the
immune system might even be contraindicated, because it may cause increased virus
replication. Thus, nonspecific immunomodulators with unknown effects should
not be used in FIV-infected cats.
68 i. Some human antivirals can be used to treat FIV infection. AZT (zidovudine)
has some effect in FIV-infected cats, especially in cats with stomatitis or neurologic
signs. It improves quality of life and prolongs life expectancy. During treatment,
complete blood counts should be performed regularly because nonregenerative
anemia is a common side-effect. Thus, cats with bone marrow suppression should not
be treated. Unfortunately, AZT-resistant mutants of FIV can arise as early as after 6
 months of treatment.
ii. Human interferon-α is used commonly in cats. When given SC, it becomes
ineffective after 3-7 weeks due to the development of neutralizing antibodies. If
given PO, it is not absorbed but destroyed in the gastrointestinal tract, and it has
only immunomodulatory effects by stimulating the lymphoid tissue in the oral
cavity. Feline interferon-o was recently licensed in some European countries and
Japan. It can be used long-term without antibody development. No side-effects have
been reported in cats, and it is active against FIV in vitro. So far only one study has
been performed with feline interferon-w, in which it did not show significant
changes in survival rate.
ii. In this cat, full-mouth dental extraction was performed, and the stomatitis
improved significantly.
84
69, 70: Questions
69 A 3-year-old spayed female domestic
69
shorthair cat was seen because of a solid
pinkish-white mass in the left eye (69).
The pupil was misshapen and did not
dilate or constrict normally. The cat was
otherwise healthy. It was kept indoors
only, and was current on all vaccina-
tions. Slit lamp examination of the left
anterior chamber revealed a small
amount of flare. The solid pinkish mass
arose from the iris and bulged into the anterior chamber. There were fine vessels on
the surface of the iris, which was diffusely swollen. The lens was normal, as were
the vitreous and retina in both eyes. A full ophthalmic examination was performed;
the significant results were:
Ophthalmic examination
Right eye (OD)
Left eye (OS)
PLR
+
slow and incomplete
(direct and indirect)
IOP
17 mmHg
10 mmHg
i. What is the ocular diagnosis and what are the differential diagnoses?
i. What diagnostic tests are indicated?
iii. Is the misshapen pupil significant?
70 A 3-year-old castrated male domestic
70
shorthair cat was seen because of
multifocal alopecia (70) that was first
noticed 2 months ago. Initially, the
alopecic areas were barely noticeable,
but they increased in size with time, and
moderate scaling of the affected skin
was also noticed. No crusts or papules
were observed. The cat was vaccinated
and regularly wormed, and had free access to outdoors. There were no other pets
in the household. Physical examination showed no abnormalities other than
dermatologic changes. Multifocal alopecia with mild to moderate fine scaling was
noted on the hocks.
i. What are the differential diagnoses for this cat?
ii. What should the diagnostic approach be?
85
69,70:Answers
69 i. There is a mass and flare in the anterior chamber of the left eye, and a low IOP.
These symptoms indicate anterior uveitis, probably due to a neoplasm. Possible
etiologies of uveitis in the cat include infectious diseases, neoplasia (e.g. lymphoma),
and immune-mediated diseases.
ii. The lesion in the anterior chamber is associated with the anterior uveal tract. An
ocular ultrasound examination is indicated to evaluate the size and dimensions of
the mass, which could extend posteriorly into the vitreous. Because ocular neoplasia
is strongly suspected, further diagnostic tests should include a complete blood
count, biochemistry panel, urinalysis, and FIP, FeLV, and FIV tests. Additional tests
should include thoracic and abdominal radiographs, abdominal ultrasound, and
lymph node and/or bone marrow aspirates. Complete blood count revealed mild
nonregenerative anemia. Antigen testing for FeLV was positive. Cytologic examin-
ation of bone marrow aspirates confirmed the diagnosis of lymphoma, which is the
most frequent intraocular tumor in cats.
ii. Changes of the contour of the iris may indicate uveal and irideal infiltration with
neoplastic lesions or posterior synechiae in chronic cases of uveitis. In cats, a “D-
a oi sp Aq pasns si s uas aq e nd pades- asaar, ro pads
ciliary innervation and results in functional deficits of the pupil. A D-shaped pupil
may be observed in FeLV-infected cats without any other clinical symptoms.
70 i. Multifocal alopecia in the cat may be due to: (1) Self-trauma. (2) Inflammation
of the hair follicle (e.g. with dermatophytosis, demodicosis, and bacterial
pyoderma). (3) Damage to the hair shaft with subsequent breakage (e.g. with
dermatophytosis). (4) Destruction of the hair follicle (e.g. with immune-mediated
alopecia areata). (5) Lack of regrowth (e.g. with very rare hormonal diseases).
ii. Firstly, it should be established whether the skin is pruritic or non-pruritic.
However, this may be hard to ascertain, as some cats do not lick in front of their
owner. If pruritic, allergic diseases (e.g. fleas, food, or environmental allergens} or
psychogenic causes are most likely. If nonpruritic, the hairs in the affected area
should be examined to see whether the hair tips are broken off, or are tapered, as
in hormonal disease. If broken off, examination under a Wood's lamp for
fluorescence of hair shafts infected with dermatophytes is indicated. However, false
positive and false-negative results are common - many dermatophytes (including
50% of M. canis) do not fluoresce. If this test is negative, a dermatophyte culture
is indicated, using hair and scales from the edges of the lesions. A deep skin scraping
is also needed to rule out the rare feline demodicosis. If all these tests are negative,
allergic disease should be considered. Also, taking a biopsy is helpful to rule out
unusual causes of multifocal alopecia.
86
71, 72:Questions
7la
71b
71 Case 71 is the same cat as case 70. Trichograms showed broken hair tips (71a)
in comparison to normal hair (71b), Wood's lamp examination was negative, and
fungal culture revealed Microsporum canis.
i. What are the treatment options for dermatophytosis?
ii. For how long should the cat be treated?
72
72 A 4-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat was seen because of an ocular
abnormality first noticed by the client 2 days previously. On physical examination,
the left eye had white keratic precipitates in the anterior chamber and aqueous flare
(72). The IOP of the affected eye was subnormal at 12 mmHg compared to that of
the right eye at 18 mmHg. No abnormalities were seen on fundic examination.
i. What are the differential diagnoses for anterior uveitis?
i. How is a diagnosis of Toxoplasma gondi-induced uveitis made?
i. What are the risks to the cat if untreated?
87
71,72:Answers
71 i. Treatment options include topical therapy, systemic therapy, or a combination
thereof. Failure to use sporicidal topical therapy allows further environmental
contamination with spore- laden hair shafts. Because fungal spores have been
cultured up to 2-3 inches (1-1.5 cm) away from lesions, whole-body treatments
such as rinses with enilconazole or lyme sulfur are required. Owners need to be
educated about the zoonotic potential of M. canis (especially in immunosuppressed
people and small children). If there is increased concern about transmission of the
infection to humans or in severe cases, additional systemic antifungal therapy may
be considered. Griseofulvin, itraconazole, or terbinafine may all be useful.
Griseofulvin may cause bone marrow suppression in some cats, particularly those
infected with FIV, and weekly blood counts for the first month should be
recommended. Griseofulvin is also teratogenic and should not be used in pregnant
cats. Itraconazole may occasionally be hepatotoxic, although increased liver enzyme
activity is usually not an indication to stop therapy unless clinical signs also occur.
ii. Treatment should be extended for at least 1-2 months beyond clinical remission
and negative fungal cultures.
72 i. FIP, bartonellosis, toxoplasmosis, systemic mycoses, and infection with FeLV,
FIV, or FHV are the main infectious differential diagnoses.
ii. Demonstration of increasing T. gondii IgM antibody titers in paired samples is
indicative of acute or reactivated infection. As T. gondi cysts remain lifelong, long-
term antibody titers are expected, and do not necessarily represent active infection.
Antibody concentrations in aqueous humor fluid may also be measured. To ensure
that the aqueous humor antibodies have not diffused across damaged vascular
barriers, a comparison of serum and aqueous antibody levels for T. gondi and a
nonocular infectious agent, such as calicivirus, is used. In this case, the ratio of T.
gondi antibodies to calicivirus antibodies was higher in the aqueous humor than
in the blood. Furthermore, no antibodies to other infections were found in the
aqueous humor, making the diagnosis of toxoplasmosis very likely.
ii. If anterior uveitis is not treated, the resultant inflammation may lead to lens
luxation, glaucoma, retinal detachment, and blindness. The recommended
therapeutic protocol for toxoplasmal uveitis consists of clindamycin given orally
for 4 weeks, and a short course of topical ophthalmic glucocorticoids. In this cat,
after 3 weeks of treatment, the left anterior chamber precipitates were nearly
resolved and the IOP returned to 18 mmHg in both eyes. Therapy was continued
for 3 more weeks, at which time the eyes and IOP appeared normal.
88
73, 74: Questions
73An8-month-oldintact female
73
domestic shorthair cat was seen for
elective ovariohysterectomy. The owner
had obtained the cat and its male
littermate at the age of 8 weeks from a
neighbor. Both kittens grew normally
and had received two vaccinations
against FPV, FHV, and FCV. FeLV and
FIV tests were negative. Physical exam-
ination was unremarkable. At the begin-
ning of the surgery, the left uterine horn
was elevated through a 2-cm midline abdominal incision. It was noted that the
broad ligament, which is usually transparent in cats, was opacified by an off-white
nodular infilrate. Similar 2-4 mm nodules were present on the uterine horn and
ovary. There was a slightly icteric hue to the tissues (73).
i. What are the differential diagnoses for the condition?
ii. What is the best immediate course of action?
74 Case 74 is the same cat as case 73. Following the
14
finding of an abnormal uterus and ovary during
routine
ovariohysterectomy,
the incision was
extended to permit thorough exploration of the
abdomen. Muitifocal serosal nodules were present on
 all serosal surfaces, including the organs, diaphragm,
and body wall. The omentum had formed a tight
clump and was stained yellow. A moderate amount
of clear yellow peritoneal effusion was present.
Cytologic evaluation of the fluid revealed a high-
protein modified transudate containing nondegener-
ate neutrophils and macrophages, and the Rivalta test
was positive. No organisms were seen on cytology.
The owner was contacted and elected euthanasia
without recovering the cat from anesthesia.
A
necropsy was performed and revealed effusions of the
perintoneal, pleural, and pericardial cavities (74).
Histologic evaluation revealed pyogranulomatous
inflammation and neutrophilic vasculitis.
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What is the prognosis for the littermate of this cat?
89
73,74:Answers
73 i. Infiltrative conditions in the abdomen of cats include inflammatory diseases
(e.g. FIP, other granulomatous diseases, steatitis, peritonitis, pancreatitis), mineral-
ization, and abnormal adipose accumulation. In most cases, clinical signs would
be expected to accompany these conditions.
i. At the time of surgery, the most appropriate action would be to extend the
incision to examine the abdomen more thoroughly. The owner should be contacted
to be appraised of the findings and for permission to perform any additional
invasive procedures such as biopsies.
74 i. The clinical findings and histopathologic results are most consistent with FIP.
Although the cat had no apparent clinical signs, the disease process was well-
Once clinical signs develop, deterioration and death usually occur in weeks t0
months.
i. Minimally pathogenic enteric FCoV are widespread. For reasons that are not
fully understood, they sometimes mutate, making them capable of systemic
circulation. FIP is believed to arise as an immune-mediated response to systemic
infection with FCoV. The genetic background of individual cats plays a role here.
Also, kittens and young adults appear to be more susceptible to disease development
than older cats. It is likely that the littermate was also exposed to and infected with
FCoV, and since it shares some genetic similarities with the affected cat, there may
be an increased risk that it, too, will develop FIP. However, most cats that are
exposed to coronavirus do not develop FIP. The littermate should receive good
preventive health care and diet to promote a healthy immune system. Elective
surgeries and stressful events should be avoided at this time as these have been
associated with exacerbations of FIP
90
75, 76: Questions
5
75b
75 A 3-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat was seen because of bumps
and scabs on its chin. The cat lived with four other cats, two of which also had
similar lesions. On physical examination, the entire chin and perioral regions were
affected (75a). Comedones and pustules were present along with black casts in the
fur. The lesions did not appear to bother the cat. Cytologic examination of pustular
contents was performed (75b).
i. What are the differential diagnoses for this condition?
ii. How is the diagnosis made?
ii. How is this disease treated?
76 A 1-year-old neutered male domestic
76
shorthair cat was seen because of a 10-
day history of ataxia (76). The cat was
allowed access to both indoors and
outdoors. It had been vaccinated twice
against FPV, FHV, and FCV. Recently,
the cat had been lethargic and had
developed a head tilt and progressive
bilateral pelvic limb ataxia. The body
temperature was 40.4°C, the heart rate
was 200 bpm, and the respiratory rate was 30 bpm. Mucous membranes were pale,
and the mandibular lymph nodes were slightly enlarged. Neurologic examination
showed reduced mental status, mild head tilt to the left, and severe pelvic limb
ataxia. Postural reactions were reduced in both pelvic limbs and the left thoracic
limb. Spinal reflexes and cranial nerve examinations were normal, except for the
presence of positional vertical nystagmus.
i. What is the neuroanatomical localization of the neurologic signs?
ii. What are the likely differential diagnoses?
91
75,76:Answers
75 i. Acne, demodicosis, Malassezia spp. dermatitis, plastic contact hypersensitivity,
and dermatophytosis are the major differential diagnoses.
ii. Cytologic examination of pustular contents shows intracellular and extracellular
bacteria, degenerating neutrophils, and macrophages. Histopathologic evaluation
of skin biopsies detected dilated, keratin-filled follicles, folliculitis, furunculosis,
and fibrosis in this case, which is consistent with a diagnosis of feline acne.
ii. Cleansing with a 2% benzoyl peroxide shampoo or an antimicrobial cleanser
(rinsing the skin well after use in both cases) is a critical part of the treatment of
feline acne. A 2% mupirocin gel applied twice daily for 3-6 weeks may also be
considered. Clindamycin may be effective as part of the therapeutic regime and
should be continued for 1 week beyond clinical resolution. Retinoids can be used
cautiously, monitoring for potential side-effects, including elevation in liver enzyme
activities, irritation, pruritus, dry mucous membranes, and conjunctivitis.
76 i. Head tilt indicates vestibular disease, which can be either peripheral (inner
ear, vestibulocochlear nerve) or central (brainstem, vestibulocerebellum). On
neurologic examination, central vestibular disease is indicated by postural reaction
deficits, vertical nystagmus, nystagmus with obvious changes in direction, or cranial
nerve deficits other than facial paresis (VII) or Horner's syndrome. The facial nerve
and sympathetic innervation of the eye can be affected by middle ear disease, but
brainstem disease is also a possible cause. Proprioceptive positioning is considered
the best test to distinguish peripheral from central vestibular disease, because
ascending proprioceptive pathways are commonly disrupted with brainstem lesions,
causing delayed postural reactions. Contrary to dogs, hopping or wheelbarrowing
may be more sensitive for the recognition of postural reaction deficits in cats than
conscious proprioceptive positioning. In the present case, central vestibular
(brainstem) disease was diagnosed because of vertical nystagmus and decreased
posturalreactions.
i. The main differentials for acute progressive brainstem disease in a cat of less
than 1 year of age are inflammatory CNS disease (e.g. FIP, toxoplasmosis, bacterial
encephalitis of hematogenous or otic origin, cryptococcosis, migrating Cuterebra
larvae, polioencephalomyelitis, viral encephalitis); nutritional causes (e.g. thiamine
deficiency); toxic causes
s (e.g. metronidazole, chlorinated hydrocarbons); or
hereditary neurodegenerative disorders. Also, lymphoma always remains
a
possibility in cats that test positive for FeLV.
92
77, 78: Questions
77 Case 77 is the same cat as case 76. In
77
addition to the neurologic signs, there
was gross hemorrhage and cloudiness
within the anterior chamber of the left
eye (77).
i. What are the likely differential diag-
noses for the ophthalmic findings?
ii. What diagnostic procedures should be
performed?
ii. Can the probable diagnosis be
confirmed?
8a
786
78 A 1-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat was seen because of redness,
squinting, tearing, and speckling of the cornea in the right eye for a few days. The
cat had recently been obtained from a shelter. It had outdoor access, was current
 On all vaccinations, and was regularly wormed. Recent FeLV and FIV testing was
negative. The cat appeared normal apart from the right eye. There were multiple
keratic precipitates attached to the inside of the cornea (78a), and there was mild
to moderate flare in the anterior chamber (78b). The iris was hyperemic, and the
vitreous had moderate cellular infilration. A complete blood count, biochemistry
panel, and urinalysis were performed. These showed anemia, neutrophilia with a
left shift, lymphopenia, hyperbilirubinemia, and elevated total proteins with a
decreased A:G ratio in the blood tests.
i. What are keratic precipitates, and what is their significance?
i. What is the probable etiology of the ocular lesions?
i. What additional diagnostic tests should be performed?
iv. What treatment is recommended for the right eye?
93
77,78:Answers
77 i. The ophthalmic findings are indicative of anterior uveitis. FIP is commonly
associated with anterior uveitis and hemorrhagic exudates in the anterior chamber.
However other causes include fungal diseases, toxoplasmosis, FeLV infection,
bartonellosis, and, less commonly, bacterial sepsis and coagulation disorders. FIP
is often associated with fever and is a frequent cause of progressive neurologic
disease in young cats.
ii. CSF analysis is the method of choice to diagnose the cause of CNS inflammation.
Cytology is useful; increased leukocyte numbers are indicative of inflammation. In
this case, a small amount of CsF with a high fibrin content and yellow color was
collected. This had high leukocyte (mainly neutrophil) and protein counts. No
should have ruled out ear disease. A complete blood count, biochemical profile,
and urinalysis should also be evaluated. Ultrasonography of the abdomen should
be performed to look for effusions or granulomatous infiltrates.
ili. FIP meningoencephalitis is very hard to diagnose. Currently, PCR tests do not
distintinguish between “harmless’ enteric FCoV and FIP-causing viruses. Thus, a
positive PCR result cannot provide proof for the diagnosis of CNS FIP. Extraneural
FIP can be diagnosed by biopsy of affected tissues. Positive immunohistochemical
staining of biopsy specimens or cytologic preparations from effusions provides
definitive proof for the diagnosis of FIP.
78 i. Keratic precipitates are accumulations of cellular debris (e.g. macrophages,
mononuclear cells) on the endothelium of the cornea. They can be very finely granular
 p s s      mi   r d 
uveitis and are considered pathognomonic for granulomatous-type inflammation.
ii. The ocular findings, together with the laboratory results, are highly suggestive of
an infectious cause of the ocular lesions, particularly FIP. Ocular lesions are seen
with all forms of systemic FIP or may be present in an otherwise asymptomatic cat.
However, they are not diagnostic for FIP; similar lesions may be seen with FeLV or
FIV infection.
ii. Thoracic and abdominal radiographs, abdominal ultrasound, liver biopsy, and
aqueous centesis can be performed for final diagnosis of FIP infection. Also, FIP
staining shows FCoV-antigen in macrophages in a body cavity effusion or biopsies
from organs.
 a g nn a p n s e  s s '
anterior uveitis in cats is topical prednisolone acetate. If a corneal ulcer is detected,
 topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as flurbiprofen or diclofenac, are
suitable alternatives. In addition, topical atropine ointment should be applied for
pupillary dilation, stabilization of the blood-aqueous barrier and control of pain.
94
79, 80: Questions
79b
79 A 7-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat was seen because of a 3-day
history of lethargy and anorexia. The owner had noted labored breathing for several
days. The cat was current on vaccinations and was an indoor/outdoor cat with two
other cats living in the same household. On physical examination, the patient had
a high respiratory rate and dull heart and lung sounds. The patient was febrile and
slightly dehydrated. Thoracic radiographs (79a) showed effusion in both pleural
cavities. The complete blood count demonstrated neutrophilia with a left shift;
serum biochemistry panel and urinalysis were unremarkable. Thoracocentesis, fluid
significant findings of the fluid analysis were specific gravity 1.038, white blood
cells 237 × 109/l, total protein 66 g/l, LDH 3005 IU/l, α-Amylase 1658 IU/l,
triglycerides 0.4 mmol/l.
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What can cause this disease?
80 Case 80 is the same cat as case 79. In
80
the bacterial culture, growth
of
Nocardia asteroides was identified (80).
i. What other diagnostic tests should be
performed?
ii. How should the cat be treated?
95
79,80:Answers
79 i. The diagnosis in this cat is pyothorax. Pyothorax is a septic inflammation of
the pleural cavity. Typical for this type of effusion is the high leukocyte count
(>5 x 109 cells/l), the high protein content (>33 g/l), the high specific gravity
(>1.030), and a significant number of neutrophils, often characterized by extensive
degranulation on cytology. Intracellular bacteria can be observed on cytology.
i. Possible etiologies of pyothorax are migrating foreign bodies, bite wounds,
penetrating thoracic wounds, extension from pneumonia, esophageal perforation,
extensions of cervical, lumbar or mediastinal infections, or hematogenous spread
leading to bacterial contamination and infection of the pleural cavity. In this patient
from a multi-cat household and with access to the outdoors, a penetrating bite
wound or a migrating foreign body could be likely explanations, although spread
of infection from other locations in the body can certainly not be excluded. Bacteria
isolated most frequently from cats with pyothorax are Pasteurella multocida and
anerobic bacterial species. Less frequently isolated organisms include Nocardia
asteroides, Actimomyces spp., and many other aerobic Gram-positive and Gram-
negative bacteria. Rarely, fungal organisms, such as Aspergillus spp. and
Cryptococcus neoformans, have been cultured from cases of feline pyothorax.
80 i. Ultrasonography of the pleural cavity should be performed to look for possible
encapsulated areas, abscesses, or masses in the lungs or mediastinum. Intrathoracic
structures can be evaluated better while fluid is still present. If masses are found,
pleural cavity should be drained, and new thoracic radiographs should be taken.
Also, culture and sensitivity testing of the pleural fluid should be performed.
  a  's  s oq  os xa jo r '
significant amount of septic pleural fluid, drainage is indicated. This can be
continuous with a closed suction system, or intermittent, by syringe several times
not possible. In addition, pleural lavage may be performed. The chest tubes can be
removed when the thoracic effusion has significantly decreased and serial cytology
of the effusion shows only low leukocyte counts and no bacteria.
  s  r  si i e  s o  
until clinical and radiological abnormalities have resolved. Broad-spectrum anti-
biotics are administered IV while results from culture and sensitivity testing are
pending. In addition, fluid therapy and pain management are required. Sulfonamides
are the initial treatment of choice for nocardiosis. However not all isolates are
sensitive to sulfonamides.
9%6
81, 82: Questions
 81 A 6-year-old spayed female Siamese
cat was seen for respiratory distress.
It had been treated with cyclosporin
(6 mg/kg q 12 h PO for 8 weeks) for
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
On physical examination, the cat had a
high body temperature (40.5°C) and
was tachypneic (60 bpm) with increased
inspiratory effort. Thoracic radiographs
reveal bilateral pleural effusion.
cytologic preparation of a pleural fluid
aspirate was made (81) (modified
Wrights-Giemsa). Tests for FIV and FeLV were negative.
i. What are the findings in the cytology of the pleural fluid aspirate?
ii. What are the shortcomings of antibody tests in this disease?
82 A 1-year-old intact male domestic
82a
shorthair cat was seen because of a
6-month history of ulcerated and nodular
lesions. The cat lived mainly outdoors.
Initial treatment had consisted of one
glucocorticoid injection followed by oral
 prednisone and amoxicillin; there had been
no response. On physical examination, the
cat was bright and alert. Multiple nodular
and crusted lesions with occasional draining
tracts and ulcerations of varying size were
found on the bridge of the nose (82a),
eyelids, ear margins, and front legs. A direct 
82b
imprint from the bridge of the nose was
examined microscopically after staining
with modified Wright's stain. It showed
 degenerated neutrophils, few macrophages,
and numerous round to oval yeast-like
organisms (82b, arrow).
i. What are the differential diagnoses, and
what is the tentative diagnosis?
ii. What is known about the etiology and
pathogenesis?
i. What other clinical signs may be present?
iv. What further tests will confirm the diagnosis?
97
81,82:Answers
 81 i. In the cytologic preparation, there are many nondegenerate neutrophils, few
 p  p  a  ss  p so  
neutrophils are protozoal tachyzoites with morphology suggestive of Toxoplasma
in reactivated toxoplasmosis
ii. Detection of antibodies against T. gondii does not equate to clinical disease and
cannot differentiate latent from active infections. Approximately 20% of cats fail
to develop IgM titers, and positive IgM titers can persist months to years after
infection. In reactivated toxoplasmosis no IgM response may occur. In FIV-positive
cats, an IgM response may not occur or the class shift to IgG may be delayed. High
IgG titers may persist for more than 6 years postinfection.
82 i. The tentative diagnosis is cutaneous sporotrichosis (infection with Sporothrix
schenkii). Other differential diagnoses are deep bacterial infections (nocardiosis,
atypical mycobacterial infection, actinomycosis, feline leprosy) or other fungal
infections (histoplasmosis, cryptococcosis, blastomycosis, coccidiodomycosis,
phaeohyphomycosis).
ii. Sporothrix schenkii is a worldwide, ubiquitous, saprophytic and dimorphic
fungus. Most commonly, the infection occurs in outdoor cats due to puncture
wounds from claws and bites and, sometimes, plants. In this cat, autoinoculation
due to grooming and rubbing of the lesions probably contributed to the spreading
of the skin lesions. Previous therapy with glucocorticoids may have contributed as
well to the progression of the skin lesions.
ii. Other signs are lethargy, depression, anorexia, fever, and respiratory tract signs.
A complete blood count and biochemistry profile often show anemia, leukocytosis
with neutrophilia, hypoalbuminemia, and hyperglobulinemia.
iv. Cytologic and histopathologic examinations are effective in detecting the
fungus, but to specify the organism, fungal cultures from exudates or skin tissue
         
stains (periodic acidSchiff [PAS] and Gomori methenamine silver [GMS]} are
fungal elements. If the organisms are not detectable on histopathology and fungal
culture is negative, Sporothrix-specific immunofluorescence testing should be
performed. A blood culture should be submitted if hematogenous dissemination
is suspected.
98
83, 84: Questions
83
83 Case 83 is the same cat as in case 82. Histologically, diffuse pyogranulomatous
dermatitis and intralesional yeast-like organisms were found (83) (PAS stain).
i. Which oral antifungal drug is recommended and how should the cat be reated?
ii. What are the public health risks and how can transmission be prevented?
84
 84 A 9-month-old intact female domestic shorthair cat was seen because of sudden
onset of weakness, anorexia, and vomiting of 3 days' duration. On physical
examination, the cat was subdued, severely dehydrated (84), and febrile (body
temperature 41°C). The intestinal loops were thickened and rubbery, and mesenteric
lymphadenopathy was apparent. Further questioning revealed that this cat had
never been vaccinated. Because of clinical signs and the history, feline parvovirosis
was suspected.
i. What are the clinical presentations of feline parvovirosis at different stages in a
cat's life?
ii. How is feline parvovirosis diagnosed?
iii. How should this patient be treated?
iv. How is FPV transmitted?
99
83,84:Answers
83 i. The treatment of choice for cats is itraconazole (5-10 mg/kg PO sid) due t0
lower risk of side-effects compared to other commonly used oral antifungal drugs.
complete clinical resolution. In cases with a lack of response to therapy or
unacceptable side-effects, terbinafine (10-30 mg/kg PO sid) can be used as an
alternative.
ii. Due to the high number of fungal organisms in the lesions of cats,
sporotrichosis is considered an emerging zoonosis. Infection in people occurs most
      s a m   
infected cats. Other possibilities are scratches or bites from infected cats or even
contact with clinically healthy cats having had contact with an infected cat.
Infected people often suffer from a cutaneolymphatic form characterized by
pustular to nodular lesions on the face and extremities with secondary lesions
ascending the lymphatic vessels. People handling cats with suspected sporo-
trichosis should wear disposable gloves, discard them after each use, and wash
hands and forearms with disinfecting soap.
 84 i. If a queen is vaccinated with a MLV FPV vaccine or is infected with FPV during
pregnancy in early to mid-gestation, the kittens may be resorbed or aborted. In late
gestation, the kittens may develop ophthalmic lesions, cerebral disease, or cerebellar
hypoplasia. Within a litter, there may be varying degrees of neurologic effects. If a
neonate becomes infected, it may similarly develop cerebellar hypoplasia and
reversible lymphoid and bone marrow hypoplasia. Older kittens and unvaccinated
adults develop lymphoid necrosis, intestinal necrosis, and bone marrow suppres-
sion. Exposed cats with adequate antibody titers against FPV (from maternal
antibodies or vaccination) usually remain free of clinical signs.
typical changes in the complete blood count (i.e. severe panleucopenia). In cats that
recover, leukopoiesis is commonly evidenced. The diagnosis is confirmed by
demonstrating the parvovirus in fecal samples using in-house tests that detect
parvovirus antigens, electron microscopy, or PCR.
ii. IV fluid therapy is critical for recovery. Antiemetics should be administered as
needed in addition to IV broad-spectrum bacteriocidal antimicrobials to treat
bacteremia associated with profound leukopenia and loss of the normal intestinal
barrier. Plasma or whole blood transfusions may be required.
iv. FPV is excreted in the feces and is spread by fecal-oral or fomite transrmission.
It is highly contagious and resistant to inactivation.
100
85, 86: Questions
85
 85 A 6-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat was seen because of localized
tetanus with cervical musculature involvement (85). The cat was allowed to roam
outside. The owner had first noted clinical signs, starting with stiffness, 5 days ago.
i. How should the cat be treated?
ii. What management options would have been indicated during the first 3 days of
illness when the rigidity was developing?
86
86 An 8-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat (86) was seen for a
consultation. The cat came from a single-pet household in Germany. It was allowed
to roam freely outside and to catch mice and birds. One day before presentation,
the owner saw the cat eating a dead bird in the garden. The owner was very
concerned because, 1 week before presentation, the district had been classified as
a high risk district for H5N1 avian influenza A virus. Some dead waterbirds found
in a village about 5 km away were diagnosed with H5N1 avian influenza A.
Subsequently, cat owners were told to keep their cats inside. In this case, however
the owner had not followed the advice.
i. Can cats become infected with avian influenza?
ii. How is the infection transmitted?
101
85,86:Answers
85 i. The following treatment is recommended: (1) The wound should be identified,
cleansed, debrided of all necrotic tissue, and left open to inhibit anerobic growth of
any remaining Clostridium tetani. (2) The cat should be treated with antibiotics
(e.g. penicillin G and metronidazole). Ideally, antibiotics should be given
intravenously (IV) or intramuscularly for the first few days. (3) If the spasms in the
affected thoracic limb are of concern, centrally acting muscle relaxants such as
diazepam (0.5 mg/kg PO q 8-12 h) can produce symptomatic relief. Metho-
carbamol can also be used for this purpose. (4) The prognosis in cases such as this
is very good if only localized tetanus is present. Almost all animals make a complete
recovery although it may require several months for normal limb function to return.
ii. In the initial stages of tetanus development, the possibility exists that localized
tetanus may proceed to generalized tetanus, including involvement of the muscles
innervated by the cranial nerves, as the toxin spreads throughout the neuraxis. It is
 therefore important to be much more aggressive when dealing with a developing
case. In addition to antibiotics and extensive wound debridement, it would be
prudent to administer tetanus antitoxin in the early stages of disease. As antitoxin
is an equine immunoglobulin associated with a high rate of anaphylaxis, the toxin
 e  n   r   sn   s
administered slowly IV.
86 i. Avian influenza is caused by infection with the H5N1 avian influenza A virus.
Cats and other felids are naturally and experimentally susceptible to H5N1 avian
influenza A virus infection. The highly pathogenic virus emerged in Hong Kong in
1997 and was transmitted from poultry to humans. After several years during
S    n r s   sa  
outbreaks in poultry and humans. Also, there were at least two outbreaks of fatal
outbreaks 0ccurred in cats in 2006 in Germany and Austria. Experimental infection
with H5N1 avian influenza A virus of cats is possible; they develop a highly lethal
disease.
ii. The transmission of H5N1 avian influenza A virus to mammals has occurred
only sporadically. Cats can be directly infected by eating infected birds; cat infection
and death rates as well as potential zoonotic risk. Also, in experimental studies, it
has been shown that horizontal transmission between cats in contact can occur and
depends on the amount of virus present. However no cat-human transmission has
been documented so far.
102
87, 88: Questions
87
87 Case 87 is the same cat as case 86. On physical examination, the cat appeared
to be completely healthy (87).
i. What clinical signs do cats with H5N1 avian influenza A virus infection show?
ii. How can H5N1 avian influenza A virus infection be diagnosed in cats?
88
88 Case 88 is the same cat as cases 86 and 87. The owner really loved the cat. It
lived in very close contact with her, and usually slept in her bed, right next to her
face (88).
i. Are cats a potential risk to humans?
ii. Can the disease be treated in cats?
iii. How can the infection be controlled in cats?
103
87,88:Answers
87 i. The incubation period is short: in experimentally infected cats, it was as short
as 2 days, and in naturally infected large felids, it was reported to be 3 days. In
infected cats, major clinical signs include fever, lethargy, protrusion of the nictitating
membrane, conjunctivitis, nasal discharge, and labored breathing due to
pneumonia. Generalized clotting disorders, icterus, and neurologic signs, including
convulsions and ataxia, have also been reported. In severely affected cats, sudden
death may occur as early as 2 days after the onset of clinical signs. Subclinical infec-
tions have also been observed.
ii. H5N1 avian influenza A virus infection should be suspected in the case of fever
which H5N1 avian influenza A virus infection has affected either poultry or aquatic
wild birds. The clinical signs are not pathognomonic for the disease, and it may be
difficult to differentiate from infections with FHV or FCV. Virologic diagnosis can
be made on oropharyngeal, nasal, or rectal swabs, or fecal samples. At necropsy,
affected organs, intestinal contents, and pleural fluid should be collected, and PCR
should be performed. Viral antigens can also be identified by immunohistochemical
techniques applied to sections of affected organs. Antibody detection can be
performed (using hemagglutination inhibition tests), but these are likely to still be
negative when clinical signs appear.
88 i. Potentially, cats could play a role in H5N1 avian influenza A virus trans-
mission to other cats and humans. It is conceivable that the virus could adapt to
cats, become less virulent, cause subclinical infections, and be propagated silently,
with a potential risk of transmission to humans.
ii. At present, it is unknown whether antiviral chemotherapy is effective in cats.
ii. Control of H5N1 avian influenza A virus infection in cats and other susceptible
pets (e.g. ferrets) can be achieved by avoiding contact with affected poultry or
infected wild birds. Therefore, it is recommended to keep cats indoors in areas
where avian cases of avian influenza have been reported. If a cat suspected of being
infected is taken to the veterinary clinic, the veterinarian must take several measures
to minimize the risk of transmission, including wearing gloves, mask, and goggles,
isolating the cat, cleaning surfaces with a household detergent or a standard medical
disinfectant, and reporting the case to public health officials. Recommendations
for protection of the owner include minimizing contact with the cat and cleaning
and disinfecting objects such as litter trays and bowls. At present, there are no
   s  e  s    
by PCR and the cat remained healthy. The owner promised to keep the cat strictly
indoors for the time being.
104
89, 90: Questions
68
89 A 4-week-old intact male domestic shorthair kitten was seen because of a 2-day
history of anorexia, diarrhea, and depression. All three littermates had died in the
previous 5 days. On physical examination the kitten was approximately 10%
dehydrated, mildly icteric, and minimally responsive. The kitten died before
 treatment could be instituted, and a necropsy was performed which revealed light-
colored 1-2 mm scattered foci on the serosal and cut surfaces of the liver and on the
ileocecocolic area of the intestine. Histopathologic sections of different organs,
including intestines (89) (Warthin-Starry stain) were performed.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. How is the diagnosis usually made?
90a
90 A 5-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat was seen because of suspected
dermatophytosis. The cat showed pruritic circular alopecia in its face (90a).
i. What is dermatophytosis?
ii. What are the commonly used tests for the diagnostic evaluation of dermato-
phytosis?
ili. What are the pitfalls of a Wood's lamp examination?
105
89, 90:Answers
89 i. The most likely diagnosis is Tyzzer's disease (Clostridium piliforme). Disease
outbreaks usually occur within litters of kittens, are infrequent, and the source of
the infection is usually unknown. There is often a preceding history of immune
deficiency or stress. The disease takes a rapid course, with death often occurring
within 48 hours of the first clinical signs.
i. As the disease progresses so rapidly, most diagnoses are made at necropsy, and
little is known about premortem diagnosis or treatment options. The organism
stains poorly with H&E but is readily visualized with special stains.
90 i. Dermatophytosis caused by Microsporum canis is a common disease in cats
fransmitted by contact with infected hairs, scales, and fungal elements. Clinical
signs vary and may include circular alopecia, crusting, diffuse mild hypotrichosis,
cutaneous hyperpigmentation, seborrhea, and generalized alopecia (90b). Pruritus
(dermatophytic pseudomycetoma) can be found.
i. Due to this variation a diagnosis cannot be made by clinical signs alone. Wood's
lamp examination, microscopic examinations of affected hairs, and fungal culture
are indicated. Another test (e.g. skin biopsy) is sometimes necessary if the nodular
form of dermatophytosis is suspected. However in all other forms of the disease
histopathology is considered less sensitive than fungal culture.
ii. The Wood's lamp should be used only as an initial screening test. Sensitivity of the
Wood's lamp test is low because only 30-80% of Microsporum canis infections and
virtually none of the other occasionally found dermatophytes (e.g. Trichopbyton
mentagrophytes, Microsporum gypseum) fluoresce. Typically a positive Wood's lamp
test is characterized by bright green fluorescence along hair shafts (90c). False-positive
reactions,
caused
bycrusts
(keratin),
presence of Pseudomonas spp., lint, soap,
90b
petroleum or other topical drugs, do occur
but usually are weak, vary in color, and
affect structures other than hairs. Because of
 these pitfalls, suspicious hairs should always
be cultured. The fluorescence is wavelength
dependent and so it is recommended
to
warm upt
the Wood's lamp for about 5
instead of battery-operated models.
90c
106
91, 92: Questions
91a
91b
91 Case 91 is the same cat as case 90. Wood's lamp examination was negative. The
hair was examined in mineral oil under the microscope (91a, arrow, arthroconidia;
1, fungal hyphae). In the culture (dermatophyte transport medium [DTM]), a change
of color was seen (91b). Cytologic examination of the culture was performed.
i. How effective is a microscopic examination of hairs?
ii. When is a dermatophyte culture considered positive for dermatophytosis?
ii. What is the diagnosis based on the cytologic examination of the culture?
iv. How should samples be collected from a cat suspected of dermatophyte infection
but with no obvious skin lesions?
92 A 2-year-old spayed female domestic
92
shorthair cat was seen because of a 2-day
history of dyspnea, coughing, anorexia, and
dehydration.It was an indoor/outdoor cat.
Findings on physical examination included
abnormal lung sounds and muffled cardiac
sounds. Thoracic radiographs demon-
strated a large amount of pleural effusion.
Thoracocentesis revealed a purulent red-
brown fluid containing small gray granules
(92} with a high
1protein concentration
(62 g/l) and a high leukocyte count (89 x
109/), mainly consisting of degenerating
 neutrophils and macrophages.
i. What is this type of effusion called and what is the significance of the gray
granules?
ii. What is the best method to confirm the diagnosis?
ii. What microbiological procedures should be performed?
107
91, 92:Answers
91 i. If Wood's lamp-positive hairs are present,
91c
examination of such hairs is very helpful for
making a preliminary diagnosis and to start
therapy. Lack of fluorescing hairs, however,
makes detection difficult and time-consuming.
The typical microscopic findings are irregularly
thickened hair shafts with loss of structure and
fungal hyphae within the hairs. The surface of
affected hairs is covered with small, clear and
round fungal spores called arthroconidia (91a).
ii. Culture plates should be monitored daily for 21 days. A color change to red and
the simultaneous development of a white-colored colony is suspicious for
dermatophytes. However, to confirm the diagnosis a cytologic examination of the
colony is necessary.
ii. Spindle-shaped, thick-walled macroconidia with six or more cells are seen (91c)
(methylene blue stain). These features are diagnostic for Microsporum canis.
Macroconidia can only be found on fungal cultures, but similar structures can
Occasionally be found on the skin surface representing saprophytic fungi.
iv. The best way to collect sample is the toothbrush (MacKenzie) method. With this
method a sterile toothbrush is used to brush through the animal's coat collecting
hair and keratin, which are subsequently inoculated onto the culture medium.
92 i. The fluid is considered an exudate. The presence of 'sulfur granules’ suggests
disease that may occur in a localized or disseminated form in cats (and dogs).
Immunocompromised animals are at greater risk of infection. Clinical manifesta-
tions include abscesses in facial and cervical areas, abdominal abscesses, pyothorax,
cutaneous granulomas, osteomyelitis or, rarely, disseminated disease. The route of
infection is often by penetrating trauma.
ii. Diagnosis is made by cytology, histology, and culture of the organisms. Cytologic
examination of exudates usually reveals pyogranulomatous inflammation and
mixed bacterial populations. The presence of 'sulfur granules’ is the best indicator
of actinomycosis or nocardiosis. The granules consist of colonies of organisms;
Actinomyces spp. appear individually or in dense mats (granules), as Gram-positive,
nonacid-fast, branching, filamentous rods. Nocardia spp. aggregates contain Gram-
positive, partially acid-fast, infrequently branching, filamentous rods with beading.
ii. Definitive diagnosis can be obtained by culturing the exudates for at least 4 weeks.
It is not unusual to have negative cultures in some cases of actinomycosis or nocar-
diosis. The samples should be obtained anerobically and an appropriate anerobic
transport culture medium should be used. In this case, Nocardia spp. were cultured.
108
93, 94: Questions
93 A 5-month-old intact male domestic
93
shorthair kitten was seen with a 3-day
history of shifting-leg lameness and
reluctance to walk. On physical exam-
ination the kitten was approximately
8% dehydrated, febrile (body tem-
perature 40.4°C), and had swollen
appendicular joints that were painful to
palpation. Joint fluid collected from a
stifle was turbid and thin. Cytology of
the fluid was evaluated (93) (Wrights-Giemsa stain).
i. What are the cytologic findings of the joint fluid?
ii. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Bacterial synovitis.
D. Immune-mediated polyarthritis.
B. Calicivirus polyarthritis.
E. Mycoplasmal polyarthritis.
C. Rickettsial infection.
F. Degenerative joint disease.
94a
94 An 8-month-old intact female domestic shorthair cat was seen because of a
sudden increase in abdominal size. The cat lived mainly indoors but was allowed
t0 go outside in the garden. It was the only animal in the household. The cat had
 received its primary vaccination series. The owners had not noticed any sign yet of
the cat being in estrus. It had not been spayed yet because, at the tine of the surgical
appointment, the cat had developed diarrhea, which later resolved without any
treatment. Otherwise, the cat had been healthy. Massive abdominal distension was
the only abnormality on physical examination (94a).
i. What are the rule-outs for abdominal distension?
ii. What are the diagnostic procedures that should be performed?
ili. What are the differentials for fluid in the abdominal cavity?
iv. If effusion is present, what would be the next diagnostic steps?
109
93, 94:Answers
93 i. The joint fluid cytology shows a mononuclear infilrate with a high-protein
background. Bacterial, mycoplasmal, rickettsial, and immune-mediated arthritis
produce neutrophilic inflammation with high cell counts. Degenerative joint disease
does not generally affect multiple joints simultaneously in young animals, and cell
counts are usually low with mixed inflammation.
i. B, calicivirus polyarthritis. This is a classical presentation of feline limping kitten
respiratory tract signs may or may not be present. Treatment is supportive care and
analgesia, and full recovery without residual joint damage is expected to occur
within 1 week. FCV was cultured from the stifle of this cat.
94 i. Potential rule-outs are effusion, pregnancy, pyometra, increase in organ size, or
increased air content. The severe distension makes effusion and pregnancy the most
likely causes in this cat.
i. The next step is radiography and/or ultrasonography.
ini. The two major differentials for abdominal effusion are: (1) Leakage of normal
body fluids into the abdominal cavity. This may include blood, bile, urine, or chyle.
The fluid may be characterized by comparing laboratory values of the fluid to those
of blood. (2) Presence of nonphysiologic fluids, including transudates, modified
transudates, and exudates. Transudates, modified transudates, and exudates can
be differentiated according to their cell content, protein content, and specific gravity.
These are low in transudates, medium or mixed in modified transudates, and high
in exudates.
iv. If there is effusion, a fluid sample should be evaluated; tests on effusions are
much more useful, especially for diagnosing FIP, than tests on blood. Fluid
collection can be performed either under ultrasonographic guidance (94b) or
blindly. In the latter case, the cat should
be suspended horizontally, holding the
94b
shoulders and the lumbar region. The
abdominocentesis is then performed at
the lowest point of the abdomen near
the umbilicus about 1 cm to the side of
the midline (94c). Abdominocentesis
should be avoided if a generalized clot-
ting disorder is suspected; a clotting
 profile should be conducted first.
94c
110
95, 96:Questions
95 Case 95 is the same cat as case 94.
95a
A radiograph was taken and revealed
effusion (95a). An abdominocentesis
was performed. The effusion was
yellow (95b) and of sticky con-
sistency.
i. What is the prevalence of FIP
 among cats with abdominal effusion?
ii. What are the next diagnostic steps?
ii. How could FIP be confirmed in
this case?
95b
96a
96b
96 Case 96 is the same cat as cases 94 and 95. A Rivalta test (96a) and an immuno-
fluorescence staining of FCoV antigen in macrophages of the effusion (96b) were
performed.
i. What is the Rivalta test, and how should the result in this cat be interpreted?
ii. What is the interpretation of the FCoV immunofluorescence staining in this cat?
111
95, 96:Answers
95 i. Only about half of cats with effusions have FIP. Thus, although effusions of
clear yellow color and sticky consistency are often called ‘typical, the presence of
this type of fluid in body cavities is not diagnostic of FIP. In FIP, effusion is typically
clear straw colored, viscous, and may froth on shaking because of the high protein
content. It may also clot when refrigerated. If the sample is bloody, purulent, foul
smelling, or chylous, then FIP is less likely, although effusions in FIP can be very
variable.
i. Cell content, protein content, and specific gravity of the effusion should be
examined. FIP effusions are usually classified as a modified transudate or exudate.
The protein content is usually very high (>35 g/l), because of the high concentration
of Y-globulins, whereas the leukocyte count is low (<5 × 109/1). Typically, LDH and
C-amylase activities are high. Other diseases causing similar effusions include
lymphoma, heart failure, cholangiohepatitis, pancreatitis, and bacterial peritonitis
Or pyothorax. FIP effusions typically show a pyogranulomatous character
cytologically, whereas effusions associated with bacterial serositis or lymphoma
often contain bacteria or malignant cells, respectively.
ii. The two tests that should be performed to confirm the diagnosis of FIP are the
Rivalta test and detection of FCoV antigen in macrophages of the effusion using
immunofluorescence staining.
96 i. The Rivalta test is very useful in cats to differentiate effusions due to FIP
from effusions caused by other diseases. Three-quarters of a reagent tube are filled
with distilled water, to which one drop of acetic acid is added, and mixed
thoroughly. One drop of the effusion fluid is carefully layered onto the surface of
the drop retains its shape, stays attached to the surface or slowly floats down to
the bottom, the test is positive. In cats, this test has a positive predictive value of
86% and a negative predictive value of 97%. There are some false-positive results
in cats with bacterial peritonitis and lymphoma, but these can usually be
differentiated cytologically. Overall, the Rivalta test is very practical and
inexpensive, and does not require special laboratory equipment; it can easily be
performed in private practice.
i. Other methods to detect the virus itself include evaluation for the presence of
FCoV antigen. Immunofluorescence staining of intracellular FCoV antigen in
macrophages of the effusion is 100% accurate if this test is positive: it confirms the
diagnosis of FIP. Unfortunately, there are some cases that stain negative although
the cats have FIP; they can be explained by a low number of macrophages in the
effusion of these cats.
112
97, 98: Questions
97a
97b
97 A 2-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat was seen because it was
inappetant. The cat lived in the center of a big city. It had brought a dead rat home
4 weeks previously. On physical examination, the right mandibular lymph node
was enlarged (2 × 1 x 1 cm) and several small nodules were observed in the gingival
mucosa (97a). The cat had an elevated body temperature (39.9°C). A fine-needle
aspirate was taken from the right mandibular lymph node (97b) (modified Ziehl-
Neelsen stain).
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
i. How should the cat be treated?
i. What are the potential complications of treatment?
98 A 7-year-old intact female domestic
98
shorthair cat  was seen because  of
neurologic complications of a bite
wound and scratches on the head. It had
been treated with long-acting penicillin,
and the wound had been flushed with
saline. The mental status of the cat
deteriorated, however, and it experi-
enced two short generalized seizures. On
physical examination, there was some
swelling over the left frontal and
araduan Apoq a (oa) srss pnsa-pooa es omi pe saoq lerodan
was 37.9°C. The cat was stuporous and unable to stand. Postural reactions were
absent in the right limbs and decreased in the left limbs. Menace responses were
absent in both eyes. The pupils were small, but the pupillary light reflexes were
present. Normal physiologic nystagmus was absent in both eyes.
i. What is the neuroanatomical localization of the lesion and the most likely
differential diagnoses?
ii. What are possible risks associated with anesthesia?
113
97, 98:Answers
97 i. In the aspirate, masses of acid-fast bacilli within the cytoplasm of macrophages
in dense parallel accumulations are seen. The most likely diagnosis is feline leprosy,
caused by Mycobacterium lepraemurium, the agent of murine leprosy, and other
mycobacterial species, e.g. M visibile. Cats infected with M. lepraemurium are
thought to acquire infection from the bite of an infected rodent. They develop
multiple cutaneous and/or subcutaneous nodules, most commonly on the head and
forelimbs. Nodules are firm, H
haired
d or alopecic, and frequently ulcerate.
Occasionally, as in this case, lesions occur in oral and/or nasal mucosa. Regional
lymph node involvement is common. The disease is most prevalent in temperate
climates and tends to mostly occur in young cats, especially during winter.
i. The best approach to treatment is a combination of surgical resection of localized
lesions combined with adjunctive antimicrobial therapy for 1-2 months beyond
resolution of lesions. Disease recurrence is common after surgical excision alone.
Combination  antimicrobial  therapy  using  clofazimine  or rifampicin  with
clarithromycin and ciprofloxacin is usually curative. Spontaneous remission may
Occur occasionally, especially during the summer months.
ini. Potential complications of therapy include recurrence of lesions if therapy is not
given for long enough, and drug toxicities. Clofazimine, an iminophenazine dye, and
rifampicin, a macrocyclic antibiotic, may both cause reversible hepatotoxicity. Clari-
thromcyin, a new-generation macrolide, may cause generalized or pinnal erythema.
98 i. Abnormal mentation and seizures may be caused by intracranial disease, meta-
bolic, or toxic causes. Here, cranial nerve deficits (absent menace response and
oculocephalic reflexes), and
 UMN tetraparesis (worse on the right) indicate
intracranial disease. Taken together the neurologic tests suggest bilateral forebrain
(seizures, absent menace response) and brainstem (UMN tetraparesis, no physiologic
nystagmus) disease. This could be a diffuse or multifocal intracranial lesion or a large
forebrain lesion with herniation and subsequent brainstem compression. Postural
reaction deficits were more pronounced on the right limbs suggesting a lateralized
lesion. Considering the history, both inflammation and trauma were considered.
ii. As there is probably increased intracranial pressure and imminent brain
herniation, adequate ventilation and oxygenation must be ensured during general
anesthesia for neuroimaging and surgery. The cat should be intubated and ventilated
t0 avoid hypercapnia, and pCO, should be consistently monitored. Compression of
the jugular veins should be strictly avoided because this may decrease venous return
from the head and subsequently cause a fatal increase in intracranial pressure. MRI
parenchyma such as abscesses, inflammation, hemorrhage and edema. However,
its main disadvantage is the longer anesthetic time required, and the difficulty of
patient monitoring during anesthesia.
114
99, I00: Questions
99 Case 99 is the same cat as case 98. Treatment was switched to cefotaxime and
metronidazole, and fluid was supplied at maintenance rates. However, the cat died
the following day.
i. What could have been done differently?
ii. What other drugs, besides antibiotics, should have been used?
100  A 10-year-old  spayed female
100
domestic shorthair cat was seen because
 of weight loss and decreased appetite of
1 month duration (100). The cat resided
in an indoor/outdoor multi-cat house-
hold. About 2 months ago, the owner
had noticed blood in the urine and
straining. This was treated for 2 weeks,
sucessfully for a while, with an anti-
biotic. Physical examination was incom-
plete because the cat was aggressive. Radiographs showed the left kidney was very
small, and there was gastric mineralization. On ultrasonography, the right kidney
was hyperechoic and the right renal pelvis and proximal ureter were dilated. The
left kidney was only 2 cm long and had no normal architecture. A complete blood
count, biochemistry panel, and urinalysis were performed; the notable findings
were:
Blood profile/biochemistry panel
Results
 Band neutrophils
0.48 x 10%/1
Creatinine
301 μmol/l
Urea
25 mmol/l
Urinalysis (cystocentesis)
Color/appearance
yellow, hazy
Specific gravity
1.026
Blood
++++
RBC
Numerous
WBC
5-10 cells/hpf
Casts
 0-1 coarse granular casts/hpf
i. What are the two major problems in this cat?
ii. How should each problem be assessed?
115
99, 100:Answers
99 i. Treatment of bacterial encephalitis or brain abscess is usually started empirically
with broad-spectrum antibiotics which cross the blood-brain barrier. Parenteral use
of bactericidal drugs is preferred. Antibiotics effective against anerobic infections
should be given for brain abscesses. The combination of cefotaxime and metronida-
zole fulfills these requirements. Alternatives would be chloramphenicol or sulfona-
mide-trimethoprim. Both are broad-spectrum and cross the blood-brain barrier
within leukocytes beyond measurable CSF levels. Aminoglycosides and first-generation
cephalosporins are not recommended for treatment of bacterial CNS infections.
ii. Brain edema and imminent brain herniation are usually addressed with immediate
diuretic therapy with furosemide (1-2 mg/kg IV q 6-8 h) and mannitol (1-2 g/kg IV
over 15-30 minutes). Anti-inflammatory dosages of dexamethasone (0.1-0.2 mg/kg)
twice daily may be given during the first 2 days of treatment to decrease the
proinflammatory action of cytokines. Higher dosages of dexamethasone may be
required if there is sudden deterioration and brain herniation. Fluid therapy should
be carefully planned. The goal is to maintain hydration, but overhydration should be
strictly avoided because this may cause worsening of the neurologic status. Thus,
rehydration may be best achieved using synthetic colloids (hetastarch) or hypertonic
saline solutions. Because the cat had two generalized seizures, phenobarbital
(1.5-2 mg/kg PO or IV q 12 h) should be started.
100 i. There are two major problems, (1) decreased appetite (combined with weight
loss) and (2) azotemia.
i. Problem 1 is decreased appetite and weight loss. One is probably the cause of the
other. The pyuria on the urinalysis suggests inflammation in the urinary tract
possibly causing the increased band neutrophil count. Problem 2, azotemia, explains
the clinical findings. However other possibilities should also be considered in this
geriatric cat. Dental problems are possible; mild sedation is indicated to examine the
mouth. Prerenal, renal, and postrenal causes of azotemia should be considered:
(1) With a purely prerenal cause, the specific gravity should be >1.030. (2) With a
postrenal cause, there should be evidence of rupture or obstruction of the urinary
ract. (3) The urine specific gravity of 1.026, azotemia, and abnormal kidneys
strongly suggest that this azotemia is renal in origin.
The next question with renal azotemia is whether the renal failure is acute Or
chronic. In this case, the finding of gastric mineralization and the small left kidney
along with the vagueness and duration of clinical signs support chronic renal failure.
The dilated renal pelvis and proximal ureter in the right kidney could be due to
bacterial infection (pyelonephritis) or to partial proximal ureteral obstruction. The
urinalysis suggests that there is hemorrhage and inflammation in the urinary tract.
This could be from the upper or lower urinary tract.
116
101, I02: Questions
101
101 Case 101 is the same cat as case 100. Pyelonephritis is suspected in this cat.
Partial ureteral obstruction is another diagnostic possibility. The right renal pelvis
and the proximal right ureter were dilated on ultrasonography (101).
i. What further diagnostic testing should be done?
ii. What treatment should be provided at this point?
102
102 A 10-year-old intact female domestic shorthair cat was seen because of
dermatophytosis. The cat lived in a cattery with a group of 23 cats. Eight of these
cats showed skin lesions suspicious for dermatophytosis (102).
i. What are the three main goals for getting this problem under control?
ii. How should affected cats be identified and how should they be treated?
ii. Does the environment need to be decontaminated?
iv. How should the response to therapy be monitored and what should be
recommended regarding prevention?
v. What are the concerns regarding public health?
117
101,102:Answers
101 i. Further diagnostics should include a urine culture. An excretory urogram
could be performed, but is often unrewarding in azotemic animals due to reduced
excretion of contrast. The only test that could determine whether infection is from
 the upper tract is direct sampling of urine from the renal pelvis under ultrasound
guidance for cytology and culture, which would be ideal here. Contrast agent could
also be injected into the renal pelvis to evaluate for ureteral obstruction.
i. Symptomatic therapy for the moderate azotemia should include IV administra-
tion of a balanced electrolyte solution. The amount should equal 3% dehydration
plus maintenance. An alkalinizing balanced electrolyte solution such as lactated
Ringer's (administered at 18 ml/h IV for 24 hours) would be appropriate.
Additional fluids should be administered if excessive losses occur. The level of
azotemia (and hyperphosphatemia, if present) should be reassessed in 24 hours. If
the azotemia improves, but the appetite continues to be reduced, the cat should be
sedated for a thorough oral examination. Medical management for chronic renal
failure should be instituted. Antibiotic therapy should be delayed until the urine
culture is returned, as no bacteria were seen on urinalysis, and the cat was treated
with antibiotics in the recent past.
102 i. There should be separation ofcarriers from noncarriers, aggressive treatment
of infected animals, and measures to prevent reinfection.
ii. Samples for fungal culturing should be obtained from all of the cats. If the strain
is Wood's lamp positive, this is useful for finding infected cats and to monitor
response to therapy. Cats with obvious or suspected infection must be quarantined,
as must the whole cattery. Topical therapy should be started in all cats immediately.
Once fungal culure results are available, all cats with positive results should also be
itraconazole (5-10 mg/kg PO sid) for 3 weeks or alternating weeks, and microsize
griseofulvin.
ii. Decontamination of the environment is very important. The most effective and
most commonly used disinfectants are household bleach (2%} and enilconazole.
iv. The response to therapy should be monitored by fungal culture. Samples should
be collected every 2 weeks until two consecutive tests are negative. Cats not
responding to treatment should be removed. Eradication in a cattery can take up
t0 6 months. To prevent introduction of dermatophytosis, all cats entering a cattery
should have a fungal culture performed, followed by an antifungal dip (e.g. lime
sulfur), and then quarantined until two consecutive fungal cultures are negative.
v. Dermatophytosis is a zoonotic disease and a risk factor for children, cancer
patients, and people with other immunocompromising diseases.
118
103, 104: Questions
103 A 7-month-old intact male domestic
103
shorthair cat was seen because of
progressive small bowel diarrhea of
1 week's duration. It had been found
3 weeks previously, and had tested
 negative for FeLV and FIV at that time.
It had received one dose of pyrantel
pamoate and two vaccinations against
FPV, FHV, FCV, and FeLV and one
vaccination against rabies. It was fed a
commercially available kitten chow and resided both indoors and outdoors. There
were wo other adult cats in the household, both healthy. On physical examination,
the kitten was depressed, very thin, and had a poor hair coat. Dehydration was
estimated at 6%. Vital signs were within normal limits. Abdominal palpation was
unremarkable. A direct fecal smear (103) and fecal flotation were performed.
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What treatment is recommended?
ii. Is environmental management indicated?
iv. If so, what recommendations should be made to the owner?
104a
104b
104 A 7-year old castrated male Siamese cat was seen because of a pinkish mass-
like object in the right eye (104a) and a subtle color change of the iris from a blue
t0 a yellow-blue (104b). The owner reported that the eye had been cloudy, red, and
 e  -aas e  p   ss d e o p
    1        5 r
vaccinations, and a recent test for FIV antibodies and FCoV antibodies was
negative. An ophthalmic examination was performed; significant results were: PLR
(direct and indirect) L + R + (very brisk); IOP L 19 mmHg R 10 mmHg.
i. What is the ocular diagnosis for the right eye based on the initial findings and
ophthalmoscopic examination?
ii. How can the color change of the right iris be explained?
119
103,104:Answers
103 i. The diagnosis is giardiasis. The fecal smear shows Giardia spp. trophozoites.
i. Fenbendazole is effective in dogs, but has not been critically evaluated in cats. Fura-
zolidine is also effective in cats, but may cause vomiting and diarrhea. Meronidazole
may be used, but metronidazole-resistant strains of Giardia spp. exist. The efficacy of
the Giardia vaccine is controversial. Vaccination should only be used therapeutically
in cats with giardiasis in addition to drug therapy. Fluid therapy is indicated in this
case, and a bland, highly digestible diet should be used until the diarrhea resolves
ii. Giardia spp. cysts persist in the environment for several months if conditions are
wet and cold. Environmental decontamination is essential for the successful
treatment of giardiasis.
iv. Environmental management should consist of the following: (1) Treat all animals
with drug therapy as above and move out of the environment to a holding area.
(2) Disinfect the environment using a quaternary ammonium compound. (3) Bathe
all animals with a general pet shampoo. (4) Then bathe animals again with a
quaternary ammonium compound (particularly the perineum); ammonium
 thoroughly. (5) Return animals to the disinfected environment after bathing.
104 i. The pinkish mass within the anterior chamber is a blood-tinted fibrin clot,
attached to the iris. The anterior chamber is otherwise clear. The IOP in the right
eye is much lower than in the left eye. Low IOP (hypotony) and fibrin accumulation
 in the anterior chamber are signs of anterior uveitis. This cat probably had a more
severe bout of inflammation previously (as the owner reported a cloudy, red, and
painful eye). Uveitis refers to inflammation of parts of, or the entire uveal tract.
The clinical signs vary, but aqueous flare, fibrin accumulation, hyphema, and iris
color change are most consistently observed in cats. Clinical signs are caused by
breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier located in the ciliary body. In this cat, the
ophthalmoscopic examination also revealed multiple inactive scars in the tapetum
indicative of a previous bout of chorioretinitis. Similar to the blood-aqueous barrier
the blood-retina barrier normally prevents leakage of fluid from the choroid into
 the subretinal space. This barrier is compromised during inflammatory processes,
usually an infection.
ii. Color change of the iris is a commonly observed clinical sign in uveitis and is
especially dramatic in light-colored (blue) irides. A blue iris may become reddish-
brown, and a brown iris may become darker or depigmented. The iris color change
 n         
inflamed eyes.
120
105, 106: Questions
105a
105b
105 Case 105 is the same cat as case 104. Both eyes were dilated with 0.5%
tropicamide for further examination. The ophthalmoscopic examination revealed
         s   
i. What are possible etiologies, given the ophthalmologic findings?
ii. What diagnostic tests should be performed?
ii. How should the cat be treated?
106a
106b
106 A 14-year-old spayed female domestic
shorthair cat was seen because of inap-
petence and vomiting for 3 days. On
physical examination, the cat had a high
body temperature (39.7°C), and the right
kidney appeared painful. An abdominal
ulrasound examination showed a normal left kidney, right pyelectasia, and right
hydroureter. An IV urogram was performed. Lateral (106a) and ventrodorsal
(106b) radiographs were taken 3 minutes postcontrast injection.
i. What are the findings in the IV urogram?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. How should this case be further investigated?
121
105,106:Answers
105 i. In cats, the most common causes of uveitis are infectious diseases. Among
those toxoplasmosis, systemic mycoses, FIP, bartonellosis, mycobacteriosis, and
infections with FHV, FeLV, and FIV are differentials.
i. In all cats with uveitis, a thorough physical examination and a complete blood
count, biochemistry panel, and urinalysis are recommended; these were all normal
here. Infectious disease testing is also indicated. The results in this cat were all
negative for the following: FeLV antigen and PCR, FCoV antibody, FIV antibody,
systemic fungal infection serology (cryptococcosis antigen, histoplasmosis antibody,
blastomycosis antibody, coccidiomycosis antibody), Bartonella benselae antibody.
However, tests for Toxoplasma gondii IgM and IgG antibody titers measured twice,
1 week apart, showed a rising IgM antibody concentration. This shows active
T. gondii infection, and that this is the cause of the ocular lesions. A thoracic
radiograph was normal. T. gondi is frequently the cause of anterior uveitis in cats,
although usually there are no concurrent systemic signs.
ili. Treatment in this cat consisted of topical prednisolone acetate and flurbiprofen.
The cat also received oral clindamycin (10-12.5 mg/kg bid) for 4 weeks. The fibrin
in the anterior chamber disappeared, and the IOP in the right eye normalized. It is
prudent to regularly recheck cats with previously diagnosed T. gondii uveitis, as
the formation of immune complexes of T. gondii and other antigen-driven immune
processes may perpetuate a chronic low-grade uveitis.
106 i. The right kidney is larger than the left. There is opacification of the renal
parenchyma bilaterally. There is a normal pyelogram and ureterogram on the left
side with no evidence of contrast accumulation or excretion in the right kidney.
Together with ultrasound, these findings are consistent with right hydronephrosis
and hydroureter secondary to a right ureteral obstruction.
ii. The differential diagnoses are ureteral obstruction with inflammatory debris or
blood secondary to pyelonephritis or ureteritis, ureteral urolith, or ureteral tumor.
ifi. A percutaneous, ultrasound-guided, right renal pelvic aspirate and cystocentesis
should be performed for urinalysis and culture. If infection is present, the cat may be
treated conservatively with antimicrobial therapy. The intravenous urogram could
be repeated in 24-48 hours to determine right ureteral patency. Other options include
CT urography or exploratory laparotomy and cannulation of the right ureter, plus
insertion of a nephrostomy tube for temporary urine diversion if patency cannot be
established immediately. In this case, the renal pelvis aspirate contained masses of
inflammatory cells and bacteria. A pure growth of Escherichia coli was found in the
culture. Concurrent ureteritis was suspected. An IV urogram repeated 24 hours after
starting antibiotic therapy showed no relief of ureteral obstruction. The cat was given
a single dose of prednisolone sodium succinate (4 mg/kg IV). A third IV urogram
48 hours later demonstrated ureteral patency. The cat made a complete recovery.
122
107, 108: Questions
107 A7-year-old
castratedmale
107
domestic shorthair cat (107) was seen
because of pyrexia (body temperature
40.7°C) and lameness of its right hind
leg. The cat was allowed to roam freely
outside and commonly spent the nights
outside. It was routinely vaccinated and
wormed. Besides the high body tempera-
ture, physical examination was unre-
markable, and orthopedic examination
was not able to localize the hind leg
 sm r a  m si p q  so 
about Lyme disease as the owner's father had had Lyme disease and the cat was
from an endemic area and sometimes had ticks.
i. Can cats develop Lyme disease?
ii. Can Borrelia spp.-infected cats be a risk to humans?
108a
108b
108 A 7-year-old neutered male Siamese cat was seen because of a large
subcutaneous swelling on its forehead over the frontal sinus region. This
subcutaneous swelling had been present for several weeks and was growing in size.
Upon close questioning, the owner indicated that the cat had also had some
inspiratory stertor and nasal discharge over the same period. The cat was otherwise
well. Physical examination was unremarkable, apart from mild mandibular lymph
 node enlargement, swelling of the bridge of the nose (108a), and some crusty nasal
discharge (108b).
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. What are the prognoses for these possibilities?
ii. What is the most cost-effective way of making a diagnosis?
123
107,108:Answers
107 i. Lyme borreliosis is overdiagnosed in veterinary medicine because it has
become a ‘trendy’ disease. The presence of antibodies to Borrelia spp. signifies
exposure to a spirochete but does not prove that current clinical illness is caused
by the organism. In endemic areas, many animals, including cats, in the
population have antibodies without ever developing clinical signs. Cats can be
antibody-positive, and experimental infection has been produced, but naturally
acquired disease has rarely been documented. This cat developed an abscess over
the pelvis on the right side that most likely resulted from a bite of another cat. The
abscess was drained, and the cat was treated with antibiotics. Fever and lameness
resolved after 2 days.
ii. There is no evidence that human infections have occurred after contact with
infected cats (or dogs). Infected cats could only, potentially, pose a risk to humans
by introducing unfed tick stages into a household. Direct horizontal spread from
cats to people is unlikely. Although Lyme disease is classified as a zoonosis, cats,
dogs, and people are incidental hosts for a sylvan cycle that exists in nature. Lyme
borreliosis in humans is usually associated with outdoor activities that result in
exposure to tick vectors.
108 i. The cat has nasal cavity disease, which would appear to be progressive and
invasive. The disease process had penetrated through the bones overlying the nasal
cavity to involve the subcutaneous tissues over the nasal bridge. The differential
diagnoses include: (1) Nasal cavity neoplasia, including adenocarcinoma, squamous
rhinitis, including cryptococcosis, aspergillosis, Neosartorya infections, and
      q    s
completeness, but unlikely to be associated with such invasive disease)
i. The prognosis for the fungal diseases and foreign bodies is favorable, although
treatment can be expensive and protracted. The prognosis for intranasal neoplasia
is generally poor, although many cases of nasal lymphoma respond favorably to
multi-agent chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy.
ifi. Although there are various ways of investigating this case, the most cost-effective
way would be to obtain a sample of the abnormal tissue causing the subcutaneous
swelling over the bridge of the nose. This tissue is likely to be representative of
whatever disease process is occurring in the nasal cavity, and is easier to access.
Two or three fine-needle aspirates should be obtained for cytologic evaluation. It is
usually possible to do this under light sedation. If cytology is inconclusive, a larger
portion of tissue should be obtained using a core biopsy device or via surgical
excision of the abnormal tissues under general anesthesia.
124
109, 1 10: Questions
109
   -      s     
numbers of capsulated yeasts demonstrating narrow-necked budding (109).
i. What is the organism in the fine-needle aspirate?
i. Are nasal swabs (taken for cytologic examination and culture) likely to be useful
in such a case?
i. Are radiographs of the nasal cavity likely to provide useful diagnostic or
prognostic information?
iv. How should the cat be treated?
110A3-year-old
castrated male
110
domestic shorthair cat was seen in Italy
because of an intermittent cough.
Thoracic radiographs showed a diffuse
pulmonary interstitial pattern and
enlargement of the right caudal lobar
and peripheral pulmonary arteries. The
cardiac silhouette was unremarkable
(110).
i. What is the most likely differential
diagnosis for the radiographic findings
in this cat?
ii. What clinical signs are expected in
this disease in cats?
ii. What further tests should be per-
formed?
125
109,1l0:Answers
needle aspirate was plated onto Sabouraud's dextrose agar and bird-seed agar, and
Cryptococcus neoformans was isolated subsequently.
numbers of yeasts were present in smears made from nasal swabs. However as a
general rule, material in the subcutaneous tissues over the nasal bridge (if present)
is likely to provide a better sample than nasal exudate.
ini. Usually, nasal radiographs and CT provide little or no extra useful information
concerning diagnosis or treatment in these cases. CT demonstrates the extent of
bony invasion and destruction, and whether the cribriform plate has been breached.
iv. Treatment should consist of a combination of surgery and antifungal drug
therapy. As much fungus-impregnated tissue as possible should be removed surgically
nasal bridge was debulked in this case, and the cat was treated with fluconazole for
6 months. To reduce drug costs, ketoconazole was administered for an additional 8
months. There was a very satisfactory response to treatment. It is important to
monitor therapy using sequential antigen tests. Ideally, the cat should be treated for
at least 2 months after the antigen titer declines to zero. In this cat, disease recurred
after 14 months of 'maintenance? ketoconazole therapy.
110 i. There is enlargement of the lobar and peripheral pulmonary arteries with
characteristic of heartworm disease (dirofilariasis) in cats. However, radiographic
features suggestive of feline heartworm disease are found in only 53% of cases.
ii. Cats with feline heartworm infection may be asymptomatic or have chronic
respiratory signs such as intermittent cough, increased respiratory effort, and dyspnea.
Rarely, a systolic heart murmur may be present in cats with heartworms in the right
atrium and ventricle. In acute exacerbation, signs may include salivation, tachycardia,
tachypnea, hemoptysis, vomiting, and diarrhea. Serous and chylous pleural effusion,
ataxia, blindness, vestibular signs, and syncope may occur but are uncommon. Some
cats can die suddenly. Acute death has been widely reported in asymptomatic cats
infected with heartworms, due to an acute pulmonary arterial infarction, specifically
acute pulmonary thromboembolism, after spontaneous death of adult heartworms.
The bronchial signs are frequently a consequence of immature adult hearrworms
which never become fully adult, and cause heartworm-associated respiratory disease
(HARD). The clinical signs of this
s syndrome are nonspecific and, on initial
presentation, it may be impossible to distinguish them from asthma, pulmonary
parasitism, diffuse bacterial pneumonia, or fungal disease.
(to rule out other diseases) are useful additional tests.
126
Il1, 112:Questions
111 Case 111 is the same cat as case
110. A complete blood count revealed
mild e0sinophilia (1.9 x 10*/). BAL
fluid cytology showed a large number of
eosinophils.
The antibody test for
Dirofilaria immitis was positive and the
antigen test was negative. The owner
decided to euthanize the cat due to
financial concerns, and a necropsy was
performed. Histology of lung tissue
confirmed inflammation and presence of
D. immitis (111).
i. What laboratory changes are expected in a cat with heartworm disease?
ii. How can the results of the heartworm tests be interpreted?
112a
112b
112 A litter of four 9-day-old domestic shorthair kittens
was seen because of fading kitten syndrome. The kittens
were active and had nursed vigorously at birth. A fifth
dyspnea, cessation of suckling, crying, and progressive
abdominal distention. At presentation, one of the four
surviving kittens was hypothermic (body temperature
34.8°C), dyspneic, and exhibited abdominal distention
and weakness. It had a body weight of only 125 g
(expected weight for this age: 150-200 g). The three
 () r    r
ventrodorsal (112b) radiographs were taken of the
dyspneic kitten.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What are the appropriate diagnostic procedures?
127
Il1, 112:Answers
111 i. In cases of feline heartworm disease, hematologic and biochemical
abnormalities are nonspecific. A mild nonregenerative anemia is present in about one-
third of infected cats. Some cats have hyperproteinemia due to hyperglobulinemia,
   s  n    s
rulonephritis-associated changes (e.g. proteinuria). BAL cytology may reveal a large
number of eosinophils 4-7 months postinfection. However eosinophilia is a non-
specific and inconsistent finding and its absence does not exclude heartworm disease.
ii. Interpretation of antibody and antigen test results is complicated. The negative
antigen test indicates that there are no adult female worms present. The antibody test
of either sex. However, positive antibody tests only document exposure and not
current infection or clinical illness. Results of both tests should be considered carefully.
112 i. The most likely diagnosis is fading kiten syndrome due to bacterial sepsis and
bronchial pneumonia. The ventrodorsal radiograph demonstrates extensive con-
solidation of the lungs, aerophagia, and gastrointestinal ileus. This is especially
obvious when compared to lateral (112c) and ventrodorsal (112d) radiographs of one
of the healthy littermates. Fading
kitten syndrome is the most common
112c
cause of death in kittens 1-6 weeks of
age. The route of infection may be via
the respiratory tract, gastrointestinal
tract, umbilicus, or by undetermined
routes,
and
infection
frequently
spreads to multiple organs. Frequently,
low total IgG concentrations are documented. Neonatal sepsis
typically affects entire litters.
112d
ii. The collection of large volumes of blood for extensive
testing is impossible, but a small amount of blood can be
collected by jugular venipuncture for selected tests or a blood
smear evaluation. Whole body radiographs can be per-
formed. The queen should receive a thorough evaluation:
physical examination, complete blood count, serum bio-
chemical panel, urinalysis, and tests for FeLV and FIV. If she
is to be used in a breeding program, vaginal cultures for
Streptococcus canis should be performed. Milk should be
expressed from each gland and evaluated for evidence of
 mastitis visually and by cytology if necessary. A necropsy
including microbiological cultures should be performed on
the dead kitten and any others that die.
128
113, 114: Questions
113 Case 113 is from the same litter as
113
case 112. The sick kitten was euthanized
due to its current suffering and the poor
prognosis for recovery once clinical
signs of neonatal sepsis develop. Both
dead kittens were  submitted f
for
necropsy, which revealed omphalophle-
bitis (umbilical infection) and abscessa-
tion of multiple organs. Escherichia coli
and Streptococcus canis were isolated
from the tissues. This kitten stopped
nursing so a nasogastric tube was placed
for nutritional support and hydration
(113).
i. How should the surviving kittens be
treated?
ii. What is their prognosis?
114A
6-year-old
neutered
male
domestic shorthair cat was seen because
 of blepharospasm and epiphora of the
right eye. The ophthalmic examination
revealed a corneal opacity in the nasal
quadrant of the eye and mild bilateral
conjunctivitis. After one drop of corneal
anesthetic (topical proparacaine), a
white tubular worm, about 10 mm long,
was observed moving on the outer
surface of the cornea (114).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What are the clinical signs of this
infection?
ii. What diagnostic procedures should be performed?
iv. What treatment is indicated?
129
I13,114:Answers
113 i. Treatment of litters experiencing neonatal sepsis should be aggressive and
involve the entire litter, regardless of each kitten's current status. Once signs of
sepsis develop, survival is unlikely. Broad-spectrum parenteral antibiotics should
be administered SC to all kittens for a minimum of 10 days. Critically ill neonates
should receive antibiotics by IV or IO routes. Oral absorption of antibiotics in
neonates is not reliable. In general, kittens should receive antibiotic dosages
normally used in adults unless specific information is available to guide dose
alterations. Fluid balance and nutrition can be maintained by nasogastric intubation
if required. If necessary, a needle can be inserted into the humerus or femur for
vascular access. Passive immunity can be provided to supply antibacterial
antibodies. A total of 15 ml of serum collected from a healthy cat and administered
in divided doses (5 ml SC q 12 h) at birth results in normal serum IgG content in
colostrum-deprived kittens.
i. The prognosis for kittens already exhibiting signs of sepsis is poor In contrast,
aggressive therapeutic intervention for kittens not yet showing signs of disease is
likely to be successful in a majority of cases. Kittens surviving to weaning are
expected to grow normally without lasting consequences of early infection. All three
kittens in this litter survived with aggressive supportive care.
114 i. The cat was infested with an eyeworm. The most common eyeworms are
Thelazia callipaeda and T. californiensis. They are spiruroid roundworms which
are approximately 10-19 mm long, live on the conjunctiva of the eye, and produce
irritation and lacrimation.
ii. Clinical signs are due to L3 and L4 larvae and adult worms in the conjunctival
sac; they can irritate the conjunctiva and damage the cornea, resulting in
conjunctivitis, mild corneal opacification, corneal scarring, and profuse lacrimation.
Other parasitic diseases that may be associated with similar ocular signs are ocular
acanthamebosis and onchocercosis.
ini. The primary diagnostic procedure is thorough ophthalmic examination of the
eye after topical anesthetic administration (proparacaine drops). In cats, one to two
Thelazia spp. adult worms may be found under the nictitating membrane and
eyelids, while in dogs five or more worms may be observed.
iv. Usually no treatment other than mechanical removal is required. Administration
of topical or systemic ivermectin, levamisole, or moxidectin prior to parasite
removal may be useful. In dogs, moxidectin as ocular drops or SC may be useful in
preventing disease.
130
115, 116:Questions
115 An approximately 16-week-old intact
115
female domestic shorthair kitten was seen
because of a nonhealing wound on the ventral
cervical area (115). The kitten had been found
as a stray 2 weeks previously and appeared to
be otherwise healthy. Physical examination was
normal with the exception of a 2-mm hole in
the skin over the trachea. There was minimal
inflammation and drainage.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What is the appropriate reatment?
ii. What is the prognosis?
116 A 9-year-old castrated male Siamese cat
1l6a
was seen because of collapsing episodes that
were becoming more frequent; the cat had
experienced five episodes during the preceding
2 weeks. The cat reportedly became stiff
immediately before collapsing, and these
episodes were preceded by periods of labored
respiration. The cat had experienced two
similar episodes 6 months earlier. Each episode
lasted only a few seconds. The cat was also
reported to have vomited two to three times a
week over the preceding few months. Vomiting
was unrelated to eating. On physical examin-
ation, a mild systolic murmur was auscultated
over the cat's sternum. Its heart rate was
regular (150 bpm) and breath sounds were
harsh. Lateral and ventrodorsal(116a} thoracic
radiographs were taken.
i. What is the interpretation of the thoracic
radiographs?
ii. What differential diagnoses could account for the historical, physical, and
radiographic findings?
ii. How should the cat be treated?
131
115,1l6:Answers
115 i. The physical findings are classic for Cuterebra myiasis.
i. Treatment involves enlarging the cutaneous breathing hole and gently extracting
the living parasite larva with forceps. Care is taken to avoid damaging the parasite
in situ as hypersensitivity reactions can result. Antibiotics are indicated postsurgery
if there is evidence of inflammation.
ii. The prognosis for a full recovery following removal of the parasite is excellent. In
most cases, only a single parasite is present. Occasionally, larvae are found in the
respiratory tract or other tissues where more significant clinical signs can develop. The
kitten should be started on a preventive health program, including core vaccinations
appropriate to its environment, internal and external parasite control, and testing for
FeLV and FIV. The first vaccine was administered at the time of Cuterebra removal.
The wound had healed completely by the following visit 3 weeks later
116 i. The thoracic radiographs demonstrate enlargement of the left and right
caudal lobar pulmonary arteries and a generalized bronchointerstitial pattern. Also,
i. The presence of significant cardiopulmonary disease suggests the events described
by the owners were syncopal episodes. The findings of enlargement and pruning of
pulmonary lobar arteries, in concert with a bronchointerstitial pattern and a history
of vomiting strongly suggest hearrworm disease (dirofilariasis). On echocardiography,
One or more heartworms (Dirofilaria immitis) are seen in the right ventricular outflow
tract straddling the pulmonary valve. A portion of a heartworm is viewed as
hyperechoic parallel linear bands (116b), and three pairs of hyperechoic dots are
evident (116c), representing a heartworm in transverse section. Vomiting is also
probably caused by heartworm disease, although why this happens is unclear.
ii. The cat was treated with prednisolone and exercise restriction. This reduces
cardiopulmonary manifestations of hyper-
sensitivity to filarial antigens. In this case, no
116b
further episodes of syncope occurred. The
dose of prednisolone was maintained for 3
months, and then gradually tapered. Adulti-
cide therapy using t
thiacetarsamide
O1
melarsomine is generally considered too
dangerous as primary therapy for feline
heartworm infection. Surgical retrieval of
heartworms represents
6 another option,
especially if the
wormsarevisualized
116c
echocardiographically in an accessible posi-
tion, such as the right atrium or vena cava.
132
117, 118: Questions
117 An 8-year-old neutered female domestic
117
shorthair cat was seen because of lethargy
and anorexia for 3 days (117). The cat lived
strictly indoors, there were no other pets in
the household, and the cat did not have
contact with any other animals. It had been
vaccinated twice, at the ages of 6 and
10 weeks. On physical examination, the cat
was very lethargic and slightly dehydrated.
Blood profile
Results
Platelets
89 × 10%/1
WBC
0.4 x 109/1
Mature neutrophils
0.02 x 109/1
 Band neutrophils
0
Lymphocytes
0.25 x 109/1
Monocytes
0.01 x 10*/1
i. What is the pathophysiology of the leukopenia?
i. Can a strictly indoor-living cat develop feline panleukopenia?
ii. Can a cat be infected from a dog?
iv. Can a dog be infected from a cat?
v. Does the vaccine protect cats from infection with a canine parvovirus?
18
 e   1s  '  5 1      8
reated intensively (118).
i. What symptomatic reatment is appropriate in a cat with panleukopenia?
ii. Which antibiotics should be used?
133
I17,1l8:Answers
117 i. The leukopenia in this cat is caused by both a neutropenia and a lympho-
penia. The neutropenia is severe and is due to insufficient production or destruction
of neutrophilic precursors, as no band neutrophils are present, thus there is no sign
of regeneration.
ii. Parvoviruses are extremely stable and can remain infectious for more than a year.
Thus, the owner could have carried the parvovirus into the house and exposed the cat.
ii. The canine parvoviruses now circulating in the dog populations worldwide
(CPV-2a, CPV-2b, CPV-2c) are able to infect cats and to cause disease that is
indistinguishable from parvovirosis caused by FPV. In this case, the cat was infected
with a canine parvovirus that the owner had brought into the apartment by stepping
in dog feces that was contaminated with virus. The leucopenia in this cat can be
explained by replication of the parvovirus in neutrophils and lymphocytes. The
thrombocytopenia is likely caused by DIC commonly present in panleukopenia.
iv. Dogs cannot be infected with FPV. However as a cat with panleukopenia may
be infected with a canine parvovirus, the cat with panleukopenia should be
considered to be a potential risk to dogs.
v. The feline vaccine also protects cats from infection with canine parvoviruses.
However this cat was last vaccinated against FPV at 10 weeks of age. Maternal
antibodies were probably still present at this age and interfered with effective
immunization. It is recommended that the final kitten vaccine should not be given
until at least 16 weeks of age.
118 i. A cat with panleukopenia should be kept in isolation and receive intensive
care. (1) IV fluid therapy is the most important treatment. This should be continued
for as long as vomiting and diarrhea persist. (2) Metabolic acidosis and hypokalemia
are common and should be corrected through additions to the IV fluids. (3) Oral
intake of water and food should only be restricted if vomiting persists and should be
restarted as early as possible. (4) If persistent vomiting occurs, antiemetics should be
considered. (5) If hypoproteinemia develops, plasma or whole blood may be
required. Serum albumin concentration should be maintained at 20 g/l or higher. If
edema is present it should be corrected by a plasma transfusion or synthetic colloids,
such as hetastarch. In severe cases, partial or total parenteral nutrition (TPN) may
be required. (6) Cats with panleukopenia can, rarely, develop thiamine deficiency.
Vitamin supplements can be given to prevent this
i. The gut barrier is often destroyed, so intestinal bacteria may easily enter the
blood stream. Sepsis may ensue in these immunocompromised patients. Thus,
antibiotics should be administered parenterally, ideally IV. As bacteria derive from
the gut, an antibiotic with good efficacy against Gram-negative and anerobic
bacteria is recommended (e.g. third-generation cephalosporins).
134
119, 120: Questions
119
119 Case 119 is the same cat as cases 117 and 118. Although treated intensively,
 the cat was not improving and additional treatment options were considered (119).
i. Are drugs available that increase the neutrophil count?
ii. Is interferon treatment useful?
ii. Is administration of specific antibodies useful?
120 A 15-year-old  spayed female
120
domestic shorthair cat was seen at the
emergency service. The cat was an
indoor only cat, and was obese (BCS
4.5/5). The cat ate everything it could
find and was usually alone in the
apartment throughout the day. The
owner was concerned because when she
came home from work 2 hours before
presentation she found that the cat had
eaten the contents of a can of beef that
the owner had opened the day before
but then discarded because the can had
ballooned and was 1 year over the
expiry date. On the radiographs (120),
food was seen in the cat's stomach.
i. What disease can occur if spoiled
canned food is ingested?
i. Can cats get the disease?
135
119, 120:Answers
119 i. Filgastrim (G-CSF) has been used in both cats and dogs with parvovirus-
associated neutropenia, but is ineffective. Also, in cats it may lead to an increase in
FPV replication; thus, it is not recommended.
ii. Feline interferon-w has recently been licensed in many European countries and in
Japan for the treatment of cats (and dogs). There are no clear data on the treatment
of cats with panleukopenia; however, there is proven efficacy of feline interferon-o in
dogs with parvovirosis. Thus, a beneficial effect might be expected in cats as well.
parvovirus infection. Commercial products containing highly concentrated
immunoglobulins (multi-valent hyperimmune immunoglobulin preparations) are
available in some European countries for cats as heterologous preparations
produced in horses, containing a combination of antibodies against FPV, FHV, and
FCV. The protective effect of these antibodies lasts about 3 weeks. If used
prophylactically, active immunization (vaccination) is not recommended for 3
weeks. Repeated treatment (with an interval of more than 1 week) is not
recommended in cats because it may cause anaphylactic reactions due to antibody
production against equine antigens in the preparation. In addition to these
commercial products, SC administration of immune serum or hyperimmune serum
is possible. Serum can be stored for 1 year if frozen promptly after collection.
120 i. The owner is concerned about botulism. Clostridium botulinum is a Gram-
positive, spore-forming, saprophytic, anerobic rod that is distributed in soil
causes neuromuscular paralysis. In order to cause disease, either the organism or its
spores must contaminate a food source. Most cases in animals are caused by
ingestion of the preformed toxin in food. Naturally-occurring botulism in dogs has
been mainly attributed to eating carrion or raw meat.
i. Although botulism has been experimentally produced in cats, no natural cases of
botulism have been reported. A cat that ate contaminated yogurt did not become
ill even though two humans eating the same yogurt did. Produced under
experimental conditions, the disease in cats is similar to that occurring in dogs
because botulinal neurotoxins cause similar signs in all species. Although there are
no reports of natural disease in cats, cats can be the source of outbreaks in cattle.
Recently, 427 Holstein cattle died from botulism; they had been fed a rotten bale
of oat hay containing a dead cat, and botulinum toxin C was identified. The cat in
this report was kept in hospital for observation. No clinical signs occurred and the
cat remained healthy. However, it was admitted for a weight-reduction program.
136
121, I22: Questions
2la
121b
121 A 1-year-old intact male domestic shorthair
cat was seen because of a 2-day history of
nonproductive cough and dyspnea. The cat was
an indoors/outdoor cat regularly vaccinated
against FCV and dewormed with pyrantel at 3
months of age. Lateral (121a) and ventrodorsal
(121b) radiographs were taken.
i. What are the radiographic findings?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses for the problems of this cat?
ili. What is the diagnostic plan?
1223
122 Case 122 is the same cat as case 121. BAL was obtained from the cat (122a).
i. What diagnosis do the BAL findings support?
i. What are the typical findings in this disease?
ifi. What secondary problems may complicate the disease?
iv. What treatment should be performed?
137
121,122:Answers
121 i. The radiographs show a diffuse mixed interstitial and alveolar pattern with
air bronchograms that could be caused by various lung tissue diseases, including
bronchopneumonia, severe edema, or hemorrhage.
ii. Differential diagnoses include systemic diseases such as fungal infection (e.g.
cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis), FIP, toxoplasmosis, neoplasia (e.g. lymphoma,
tumor metastases), lungworm infection, hemorrhage, and edema.
ii. A complete blood count, biochemistry panel, urinalysis, fecal examinations, FIV
and FeLV test, Toxoplasma gondii IgG and IgM antibody titers, and BAL should be
performed. Tests for FeLV antigen, FIV antibodies, T. gondii antibodies, and fecal
sedimentation as well as flotation were negative in this cat. The complete blood
  i   t x  o  s io
within normal limits.
122 i. A large number of lungworm larvae, identified as Aelurostrongylus abstrusus,
      n   s  
areas and should be considered in the diagnostic workup of coughing cats. A.
abstrusus infects the cat when it eats the intermediate hosts (e.g. snails, slugs) or
paratenic hosts (e.g. rodents, amphibians, birds). After the eggs hatch, the larvae
migrate into the bronchi and trachea where they are coughed up and swallowed.
i. Eosinophilia (>1.0 × 109/1) is commonly present. L1 larvae (370 μm in length)
may be found in fecal samples using the Baermann flotation test. Microscopic
diagnosis is not useful before the fifth to sixth week of infestation and after the
fourth month after infestation. In BAL, a high number of eosinophils may be
 observed, and L1 larvae (122b) may be present in the exudates.
ifi. Secondary bacterial or fungal infections can occur as a result of chronic lesions
in the lung, complicating the clinical course. Therefore, the tracheal or bronchial
wash fluid should also be submitted to bacterial culture.
iv. Fenbendazole is the drug of choice to treat lungworm infection. Corticosteroids
can be used for acute clinical manifestations due to the antigen release from larval
death in the lung. Inhalant albuterol and corticosteroids may also be useful.
122b
138
123, I24: Questions
123 A 3-year-old  spayed  female
123
domestic shorthair cat was seen because
of a mild head tilt to the left, inter-
mittent falling on turns and when
shaking the head, and anisocoria. It was
an indoor-only cat. Neurologic examin-
ation showed Horner's syndrome of the
left eye characterized by miosis, ptosis,
and enophthalmos (123) but was other-
wise unremarkable
i. What is the neuroanatomical location
of the lesion?
ii. What are the likely differential
diagnoses?
ili.
.What diagnostic procedures are
warranted?
124
124 A 10-year-old spayed female Siamese cat was seen because of an abnormal
looking ear. According to the owners, the problem had started as a single lesion of
q  e rar sd mn is s d  a  d a
ulcerated. Three additional lesions of varying size but similar appearance developed
subsequently in different parts of the pinna (124). The cat did not appear to be
distressed by the lesions, and remained systemically well. Apart from the affected
ear the general physical and dermatologic examinations were unremarkable. The
other ear was completely normal.
i. What disease processes could cause ear lesions such as this affecting only one ear?
ii. How can a definitive diagnosis be made?
139
123,124:Answers
123 i. Head tilt to the left and falling are evidence of vestibular disease. This may be
of peripheral or central origin. There was no evidence on neurologic examination to
suggest central vestibular disease; thus, the anatomic diagnosis is peripheral vestibular
disease. Horner's syndrome is frequently seen with middle ear disease in cats.
ii. Rhinitis and pharyngitis can lead to otitis media via the Eustachian tube. Other
causes of middle/inner ear disease are nasopharyngeal polyps (invading up the
Eustachian tube), previous ear cleansing, and neoplasia.
ii. Further diagnostic evaluation should include imaging of the tympanic cavity.
This is best achieved with CT or MRI. If advanced neuroimaging techniques are
not available, radiography could be performed. In this cat, otoscopic examination
revealed otitis externa and a defect in the tympanic membrane. Thus, the clinical
signs were probably caused by middle and inner ear disease. Cytology revealed
bacterial infection and the cat was treated systemically with antibiotics. After
2 weeks, the cat was re-examined and the clinical signs had improved markedly.
124 i. The differential diagnoses for multiple fleshy, ulcerated cutaneous lesions of
an extremity would include: (1) Neoplasia, including squamous cell carcinoma and
lymphoma. (2) Granulomatous or pyogranulomatous inflammation, including
cryptococcosis, sporotrichosis, nocardiosis, mycobacteriosis, and foreign body
reaction. (3) Allrgic or traumatic cutaneous disease (unlikely).
ii. In this cat, the lesions are suggestive of an infectious or neoplastic etiology.
However, considering the neoplastic conditions that commonly affect the skin and
subcutis of the pinna, squamous cell carcinoma would seem unlikely as the cat had
darkly pigmented ears, only one ear was affected, and the lesions looked fleshy
rather than ulcerated. Multiple enlarging lesions are suggestive of an infection. To
make a definitive diagnosis, it is necessary to take a biopsy for cytology, micro-
biology, histopathology, and in some instances PCR assay. Alternatively, a less
tive lesion for cytologic assessment. It would be dangerous to remove the ear
without at least obtaining material for histopathology, in case the disease process
spreads to other sites later, or recurs at the site of surgical excision. In this case,
Wrights-Giemsa-stained impression smears from the cut surface of an excised lesion
demonstrated pyogranulomatous inflammation (neutrophils and macrophages) and
strongly suggestive of sporotrichosis.
140
125, 126:Questions
125 Case 125 is the same cat as case
25
124. Sporothrix schenkii was isolated on
Sabouraud's dextrose agar, and stained
positive with PAS on histologic sections
(125).
i. How did the cat become infected?
ii. What treatment options are available?
ii. Is amputation of the ear always
indicated?
126A5-year-old
castrated
male
126a
domestic shorthair cat was seen because
of hematuria and frequent urination
(126a) for the past few days. It was kept
completely indoors and was regularly
vaccinated. When it was 2 years old, it
had had several bouts of urethral
 obstruction and a perineal urethrostomy
had been performed. The cat was fed an
acidifying commercial dry diet. On
abdominal palpation, the bladder felt
small and the wall felt thickened.
Abdominal radiographs showed radio-
opaque uroliths in the urinary bladder
126b
(126b).
Urinalysis
Results
pH
8.0
Blood
++
Protein
++++
RBC
Numerous
WBC
10-50 cells/hpf
Casts
0
Squamous cells,
fat globules
Many
Because of the presence of uroliths, pyuria, and hematuria, urine was obtained by
cystocentesis for culture. This detected Proteus spp.
i. What are the cat's problems?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
141
125,126:Answers
125 i. Sporotrichosis results from inoculation of an organism, normally present in
the soil, into cutaneous and subcutaneous tissues of the patient; infection may
spread by local extension and via the lymphatics. The infection can potentially
affect humans.
i. The disease should be treated with surgery, followed by treatment with
itraconazole or fluconazole (antifungal drugs). In this cat, surgical excision of the
pinna was performed. The cat should be subsequently treated with itraconazole or
fluconazole for a minimum of4 weeks following surgery, to minimize the possibility
of diseaserecurrence.
i. In this case, if the owners had not been prepared to have the ear removed, it
would have been acceptable to treat the cat initially with itraconazole. Itraconazole
has good activity against S. schenki, and it is likely that a long course of therapy
could eliminate infection. However if a prompt clinical improvement is not evident
soon after starting therapy, amputation of the ear would be strongly recommended.
Unfortunately, this is less acceptable in cases which involve more important
structures, such as limbs. However, itraconazole can be hepatotoxic, but keto-
conazole is much less likely to be effective for sporotrichosis and is not recom-
mended. Also, the cat's owners should be made aware of the zoonotic potential of
S.schenkii.
126 i. The presenting problems are hematuria and dysuria. The urinalysis indicates
microscopic hematuria with pyuria. The urine pH is alkaline. Radio-opaque
uroliths are evident on radiographs. The urine culture confirms a UTI. Both the
cystoliths and a lower tract UTI can cause the presenting clinical signs.
i. The cat had UTI due to Proteus spp. Proteus spp. may be urea splitters, leading
t0 urine alkalinization. UTI is unusual in young cats, especially males. However
perineal urethrostomy predisposes to UTI. Persistently alkaline urine associated
with infection with urea splitting organisms occurs despite feeding an acidifying
diet. The alkaline urine causes the magnesium, ammonium, and phosphate normally
present in feline urine to be less soluble, leading to magnesium ammonium
phosphate (struvite) uroliths. Struvite uroliths associated with infection and
markedly alkaline urine are typically large and radio-opaque as in this case. Struvite
uroliths that form in sterile, acidic urine in cats are usually small and less radio-
opaque, as less struvite precipitates when the urine is acidic. Calcium oxalate
uroliths are also radio-opaque. They more commonly form in acidic urine.
However, the only way to confirm that these cystoliths are struvite is to perform a
mineral analysis of the uroliths.
142
127, 128: Questions
127 Case 127 is the same cat as case 126. A UTI with Proteus spp. was diagnosed
in this cat.
i. What is an appropriate further diagnostic plan?
ii. What therapy is indicated?
128a
128b
128
A6
6-year-old
dspayed
female
domestic shorthair cat was referred
because of a 5-day history of right pelvic
limb
0 paresis. It was allowed to go
outside and was current on vaccinations
(FPV, FHV, FCV, rabies). The cat was
 a m  an re  p  asosn pe e 'i
limb extended caudally (128a). The right popliteal lymph node was enlarged. The
  p  a  a  q d 
neurologic examination were restricted to this limb, and included absent postural
reactions, normal patellar and cranial tibial reflexes, and no withdrawal reflex.
However, intermittently, the toes were placed correctly without knuckling (128b).
 Painful stimuli applied to the toes provoked an attempt at withdrawal, yet the limb
remained extended. Radiographic examination was normal.
i. What is the neuroanatomic localization of the lesion?
ii. Which infectious agent could be a likely cause?
ii. How should this be treated?
143
127,128:Answers
127 i. This should include a complete blood count to see if there is a systemic
inflammatory response. This is unusual with purely lower urinary tract disease. If an
inflammatory leukogram is present, pyelonephritis should be considered. A
biochemical panel should be performed to assess further the cat's renal function.
Evaluation of calcium for hypercalcermia is important. The presence of hypercalcemia
with radio-opaque uroliths makes calcium oxalate uroliths more likely.
i. The UTI requires antibiotic therapy. The drug of choice is ampicillin or
amoxicillin, since the organism is sensitive to these, they are reasonable in price,
reach high concentrations in the urine, and have few side-effects. There are two
therapeutic options for the uroliths. One is to remove the uroliths by cystotomy;
another is to assume the uroliths are struvite and attempt medical dissolution with
a calculolytic diet and antibiotics. Struvite uroliths treated in this way can dissolve
 s  sn  a rn sn e n nq s  n
4 weeks beyond radiographic dissolution of the uroliths. Radiographs should be
re-evaluated at monthly intervals. Regardless of which approach is chosen, the cat
should be monitored for resolution and recurrence of UTI to prevent urolith re-
formation. This should be done initially by re-evaluating a urine culture and
urinalysis at 1 and 2 months post-therapy and 3-6 months thereafter
128 i. There was severe monoparesis of the right pelvic limb and no limb flexion,
even when pressure was applied in this cat (128c). Postural reactions were
 decreased, and the patellar reflex was normal. Thus, there was upper motor neuron
monoparesis due to an ipsilateral T3-L3 spinal cord lesion, or severe muscle
stiffness (from contracture or fibrosis).
ii. The most likely infectious cause is localized tetanus, caused by Clostridium tetani.
This was suspected in this case because close inspection disclosed a small wound on
the paw. A characteristic feature of tetanus is the simultaneous contraction of flexor
and extensor muscles, although, clinically, there is extension of the limb, due to the
greater strength of the extensor muscles. In dogs and cats, both localized and
generalized tetanus may occur. Localized tetanus starts with stiffness of one muscle
or one limb closest to the wound; it may progress to generalized tetanus, or the
disease may be self-limiting.
ii. In the present case, treatment consisted of surgical wound debridement,
antitoxin, and metronidazole. Tetanus antitoxin is equine in origin, so there is a
high risk of anaphylaxis on injection. To avoid this, a small test dose should be
given subcutaneously 30 minutes earlier. Alternative antibiotics include penicillin G,
clindamycin, and tetracycline. The cat
recovered completely within 4 weeks.
128c
144
129, 130: Questions
129 A 5-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat was seen in Italy because of
small disserminated cutaneous nodules and a crusting dermatitis around the eyes,
head, neck, and pinnae (129). Physical examination revealed a thin cat (BCS 2/5),
Blood profile/biochemistry panel
Results
Hematocrit - mild nonregenerative anemia
0.28 1/1
Reticulocytes
0
Hyperproteinemia
97 g/l
Hypoalbuminemia
22 g/
Hyperglobulinemia
75 g/l
Polyclonal gammopathy - by serum electrophoresis
Urea
52 mmol/l
Creatine
245 μmoll
Urinalysis
Specific gravity
1.027
i. What are the most likely differential
29
diagnoses in this cat?
ii. What are the next diagnostic steps?
130 Case 130 is the same cat as case
130
129. FeLV antigen, FIV antibody, and
Toxoplasma gondii antibody tests
were negative. Fine-needle aspirates
of skin nodules, eyelid lesions, and
lymph nodes were obtained (130).
i. What are the main cytologic find-
ings in this lymph node aspirate?
ii. What other tests could be per-
formed?
ii. How common is this disease in
cats and what is the prognosis for the
cat?
145
129,130:Answers
129 i. In adult cats, the most common form of anemia is a nonregenerative anemia
due to inflammatory diseases. Elevated total protein is most commonly associatec
with chronic antigenic stimulation and resulting hypergammaglobulinemia. Taking
all this into consideration, the differential diagnoses include chronic inflammatory
diseases with dermatologic involvement such as parasitic infection (e.g. leish-
neoplasia (e.g. mast cell tumor lymphoma), systemic bacterial infections (e.g.
mycobacteriosis), or autoimmune diseases.
ii. Further diagnostic tests include antinuclear antibody (ANA) tests (which are less
reliable in cats than in dogs), fine-needle aspirates of cutaneous lesions and lymph
nodes, and FeLV and FIV tests. The nonregenerative anemia associated with
hyperproteinemia and polyclonal gammopathy is suggestive of systemic infection or
inflammation. A bone marrow examination should be performed. Skin biopsies
should be obtained if the skin aspirates are nondiagnostic. Ultrasonic imaging of the
abdomen would help to characterize the azotemia.
130 i. Cytology shows small lymphocytes, some lymphoblasts, and macrophages
with protozoon amastigotes containing a round basophilic nucleus resembling
Leishmaniaspp.
i. If cytology was nondiagnostic, further testing for Leishmania spp. antibodies,
PCR of blood and bone marrow samples, and histopathology of cutaneous, eyelid,
and lymph node lesions could be perfomed.
ifi. Leishmaniasis is rare in the cat, but there has been a recent increase in cases of
feline leishmaniasis in Spain, France, and Italy. In a series of eight cats with
leishmaniasis in Italy in 2004, the main laboratory findings included mild non-
regenerative anemia, thrombocytopenia, and hyperproteinemia with polyclonal
hypergammaglobulinemia. Three of the cats had mild chronic renal insufficiency at
the time of diagnosis. Severe pancytopenia with erythrocyte autoagglutination was
in ALT were statistically associated with seroreactivity to L. infantum. Most of the
cats examined, with or without treatment for leishmaniasis, developed severe renal
failure with marked proteinuria. Thus, the prognosis in feline leishmaniasis is poor.
146
131, 132:Questions
131 Case 131 is the same cat
13la
131b
as cases 129 and 130.A
Leishmania spp.  antibody
titer was 1:64
(moderate
titer). Bone marrow aspirates
and PCR were positive for
leishmaniasis. Using mole-
cular techniques, the etiologi
cal agent was identified as L.
infantum. Histopathology of
cutaneous lesions showed a
cellular infiltrate of aggre-
gates of macrophages, lym-
phocytes, and a few plasma cells. Numerous protozoan amastigotes were observed
in macrophages in subcutaneous tissue at low (131a) and high (131b) magnification.
i. What are the main clinical features of the disease?
ii. What are the therapeutic options?
132a
132b
132 A 7-month-old spayed female Australian Mist cat
was seen because of a 3-month history of paroxysmal
coughing. During these episodes, the cat was seen to
crouch, extend its neck, cough repeatedly, and then
breathe rapidly and shallowly. The cat had been
vaccinated against FPV, FHV, FCV, and FeLV and had no
other history of being ill in the past. Abnormal physical
findings included increased body temperature (39.3°C),
mild mandibular lymphadenomegaly, and wheezes on thoracic auscultation. Gentle
 tracheal palpation induced severe coughing accompanied by respiratory distress.
Complete blood count and biochemical profile were unremarkable. Lateral (132a)
and ventrodorsal (132b) thoracic radiographs were taken.
i. What is the interpretation of the radiographs?
ii. What diagnostic procedure should be performed next?
i. How should the cat be treated?
147
131, 132:Answers
131 i. The main dermatologic signs include crusty ulcers, symmetric alopecia, and
small nodules on the lips, nose, eyelids, and edge of the ear pinna. Lymphadenopathy
ii. Treatment of feline leishmaniasis has not been established due to the small
number of reported cases. Allopurinol seems to be a good therapeutic option. One
cat with a nonhealing, ulcerated nodule on a hind leg, however was unresponsive
t0 treatment with allopurinol for 3 months, but was treated successfully by
removing the lesion surgically. Some cats have been treated with meglumine
antimoniate combined with ketoconazole with some success.
132 i. Thoracic radiographs demonstrate a diffuse bronchoalveolar pattern and
consolidation of the left cranial lung lobe.
ii. Unguided or guided BAL or deep bronchial washing should be done next. In this
case, unguided BAL was performed under general anesthesia. Stained smears of the
lavage specimen showed large numbers of neutrophils and smaller numbers of
eosinophils, alveolar macrophages, and lymphocytes. However, no bacteria were seen,
so a portion of the BAL specimen was inoculated onto sheep blood agar plates and
incubated aerobically and anerobically (at 37°C). After 96 hours, a heavy growth of
a monomorphic colony type
2 was observed. Gram-staining of colonial material
showed no bacteria. The colony morphology and lack of visible bacterial cells on
Gram-staining were considered typical of a
 Mycoplasma spp. and no further identification
132c
procedures were undertaken. Mycoplasma
spp.-induced bronchopneumonia was diag-
nosed on the basis of these findings.
ii. The cat was discharged with doxycycline
for 6 weeks. The cough resolved during the
first week of therapy and the cat's general
condition also improved. Radiographs taken
after 6 weeks of treatment showed significant
132d
improvement on the lateral (132c) and
ventrodorsal (132d) views.Antimicrobial
susceptibility tests for Mycoplasma spp. have
not been standardized and are not widely
available. Mycoplasma spp. are reported to
be sensitive to macrolides, azalides, lincosa-
mides, tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, and
fluoroquinolones.
148
133, 134: Questions
133A13-week-oldintact female
133
domestic shorthair kitten was seen
because of an acute onset of severe
respiratory distress. It had been cough-
ing harshly for 2 weeks previously. It
lived in a rural area. The kitten had been 
treated by a veterinarian at 6 weeks of
age when it had been seen because of
diarrhea, vomiting, and a high body
temperature (40.1°C) with amoxicillin/
clavulanate PO for 7 days, and the
clinical signs resolved. On physical
examination, the kitten had a high
respiratory rate (100 bpm) and a high
body temperature (39.7°C). Thoracic
radiographs were taken (133).
i.What are the abnormalities in the
radiographs?
ii. How should the kitten's problems be
investigated further?
iii. What are the differential diagnoses?
134
134 Case 134 is the same cat as case 133. A pure growth of Salmonella enterica
serovar typhimurium was isolated from the bronchial wash fluid, and a structure
was found in the bronchial wash fluid (134) (wet preparation).
i. What is this structure?
 ii. What is the likely pathogenesis of concurrent salmonellosis and infection with the
parasite in this kitten?
149
133,134:Answers
133 i. There is a bilateral pneumothorax, worse on the left, with an alveolar pattern
in all lung lobes, patchy radiolucent foci, and irregular lung margins.
i. The pneumothorax should be drained and an indwelling thoracostomy tube
should be placed if the pneumothorax persists. A BAL shouid be performed with
cytologic examination and culture of the sample collected. Alternatively, cytology
of an ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspirate from consolidated lung could be
performed. The kitten should be tested for FeLV and FIV. Feces should be collected
for fecal sedimentation and flotation for the detection of lungworm larvae or ova,
respectively.
iii. The differential diagnoses include parasitic (e.g. Aelurostrongylus abstrusus,
Eucoleus aerophila, Paragonimus kellicotti), bacterial (e.g. Escherichia coli,
Pasteurella multocida, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Bordetella bronchiseptica,
Mycoplasma spp., Streptococcus spp.), protozoal (e.g. Toxoplasma gondi), or
mycotic (e.g. Cryptococcus spp., Histoplasma capsulatum, Blastomyces
dermatitidis)pneumonia.
134 i. The structure shown is the L1 larvae of Aelurostrongylus abstrusus. Larvae
shed into alveoli, then hatch into first-stage larvae, ascend the airways and are
swallowed and shed in the feces 5-6 weeks postinfection. Development to infective
 third-stage larvae occurs in intermediate hosts such as snails or slugs. Cats become
infected by ingestion of the intermediate host or by ingesting paratenic hosts such
as birds, rodents, amphibians, and reptiles. Third-stage larvae reach the lungs from
the gastrointestinal tract via the circulatory system within 24 hours of ingestion.
ii. The previous history of vomiting, diarrhea, and pyrexia is suggestive of
salmonellosis. Saimonella gastroenteritis is characterized by high fever (body
temperature 40.0-41.0°C), malaise, and anorexia followed shortly by vomiting.
abdominal pain, and diarrhea. Fecal shedding of Salmonella spp. in cats occurs for
likely occurred as a result of migration of A. abstrusus larvae contaminated with
Salmonella spp. during intestinal passage. Alternatively, Salmonella spp. broncho-
pneumonia may have occurred secondary to bacteremia during the acute gastro-
enteritis. A. abstrusus larvae may have liberated bacteria from walled-off
granulomas during pulmonary migration.
150
135, 136:Questions
135A 3-year-old spayed
 female
135
domestic shorthair cat was seen because
of
acute-onset hind-end
 weakness,
inappetence, and lethargy of 2 days?
duration (135). On physical examina-
tion, the cat was depressed and febrile
(body temperature 41.5°C). It had pelvic
limb ataxia, hyperesthesia over the back,
renomegaly, and cloudy eyes. Blood tests
showed the total protein count was
97.7 g/l, albumin was 27.7 g/l and
globulins were 70 g/l, resulting in an
A:G ratio of 0.39.Serum coronavirus
antibody titer was 1:400. CSF was
collected, and analysis revealed pleo-
cytosis (63 leukocytes/μl) with mono-
nuclear cells and neutrophils as the predominant cell type and an elevated protein
concentration (1.5 g/l).
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. What condition is likely to be causing the CSF findings?
ili. What therapeutic considerations should be discussed with the client?
136 A 6-month-old intact female domestic shorthair
136
cat was presented because of coughing and tachypnea
progressing over the past 24 hours. The cat lived in a
colony of 15 specific pathogen-free cats. The colony
was isolated from other cats, but there were other
species, including pigs and dogs, in the same building.
No  vaccinations had
d been given. On physical
examination, the cat had increased inspiratory effort
and a crouched posture with its neck extended. There
was  fever
(40.6°C),
tachypnea (52 bpm), and
decreased lung sounds over the left cranial lung field.
Later in the day, six more cats were sneezing, including
[Wo with fevers and one which was coughing, but the
      
graphs were taken of the cat presented (136).
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
i. What is the diagnostic plan?
ii. Are there any precautions necessary when managing this cat in the clinic?
151
135,136:Answers
135 i. FIP, infections with FeLV or FIV, systemic mycoses, and toxoplasmosis may
meningitis and myelitis are caused by immune-complex vasculitis and a
pyogranulomatous reaction.
ii. CSF findings such as these are commonly found with neurologic manifestations
      a      s   o
  sd  s i  SN   g s  '
suppression of the immune response with corticosteroids. Concurrent therapy with
pentoxifylline (15 mg/kg PO q 12 h) may be considered. Its potential effects include
improvement of blood flow and microcirculation, reducing neutrophil adhesion
and activation, and free radical scavenging. Nutritional and fluid requirements must
be addressed. This cat was euthanized as no improvement was seen with treatment,
and FIP was confirmed at necropsy.
136 i. The thoracic radiographs are most consistent with bronchopneumonia.
Although this unvaccinated colony is maintained in isolation, husbandry staff could
bring in pathogens from outside. Since the cats are unvaccinated, they would be
especially susceptible to viruses, such as FHV and FCV. However viral infections
are more likely to cause upper respiratory tract signs, although they sometimes
cause pneumonia (especially in kittens), or secondary bacterial pneumonia can
Occur uncommonly. Another common cause of acute respiratory disease outbreaks
in cats is the bacterium Bordetella bronchiseptica. Although the involvement of
quaternary ammonium disinfectants, can cause similar signs.
ii. At a minimum, the diagnostic plan should include a complete blood count and
thoracic radiographs. Oropharyngeal swabs should be collected for identification
of FHV and FCV by PCR or viral isolation. Although the colony was previously
 l p arh r ai rdar e r jo  aq i 
respiratory tract, a biochemistry panel and urinalysis may not be essential.
ii. Since this cat had not been vaccinated, it should be housed separately in the
clinic, so that it neither disseminates nor acquires infectious diseases. Of the primary
differential diagnoses, FCV is the most difficult to inactivate. FCV is resistant to
quaternary ammonium disinfectants, but is sensitive to dilute bleach (1:32) and
potassium peroxymonosulfate.
152
137, 138: Questions
137 Case 137 is the same cat as case
137
136. Neutrophilia (mature neutrophils
32.8 x 10*/l) with a left shift (band
neutrophils 2.4 x 10*/l) was identified
on the complete blood count; FeLV and
FIV tests were negative. Oropharyngeal
swabs were collected for FHV and FCV
isolation. Based on the clinical and
radiographic findings, a BAL was per-
formed for cytology (137) (Wrights-
Giemsa stain} and culture.
i. What is the interpretation of the BAL
cytology?
i. What is the appropriate treatment plan?
ii. How should the problem in the colony be addressed?
138 A 10-month-old
138a
138b
intact male domestic
shorthair cat was seen
because of tachypnea
and dyspnea, which
had started suddenly
2 days previously. The
cat was allowed to
roam outside. Physical
examination was un-
remarkable apart from
muffling of the heart
and lung sounds on
thoracic auscultation.
Dorsoventral
and
lateral radiographs were taken and showed a bilateral pleural effusion. Thora-
cocentesis was performed in order to remove the fluid and to make a diagnosis. A
large amount of a purulent, malodorous fluid, containing small grey sulfur granules,
n e a   sa  i   d   sa
was also a high leucocyte count (63 x 10*/l). A smear was examined cytologically
at low (138a) and high magnification (138b).
i. What cell types and materials are present in the smear?
ii. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What are the recommended therapeutic procedures?
153
137,138:Answers
137 i. The BAL fluid is foamy and cloudy with strands of mucus. The cytospin
plasmic bacterial rods. The tentative diagnosis is bronchopneumonia caused by the
Gram-negative rod Bordetella bronchiseptica. BAL fluid should also be submitted
for aerobic, anerobic, and selective medium cultures for Bordetella spp. and
Mycoplasmaspp.
i. In this case, treatment was initiated with enrofloxacin, intravenous fluids, and
0xygen therapy. Within 36 hours, the cat was eupneic and eating well. Micro-
biological evaluations revealed heavy growth of a pure culture of B. bronchiseptica,
resistant to penicillins and cephalosporins and susceptible to fluoroquinolones. The
cat was returned to the colony that day. Enrofloxacin was continued PO for a total
0f 3 weeks. FHV and FCV isolation were negative.
ii. By the week following the index case, 12 more cats had developed various
clinical signs of fever, sneezing, nasal discharge, or coughing. Oropharyngeal swabs
were collected from the entire colony, and all were positive for B. bronchiseptica.
All cats were treated with enrofloxacin for 3 weeks. Enrofloxacin was selected for
many reasons, including its long dosing interval that allowed handling of the cats
only once daily, thereby reducing the risk of transmission. Other animals in the
building, including dogs, pigs, and cats tested negative for B. bronchiseptica, and
the source of the outbreak was never determined.
138 i. Cytologic examination reveals degenerating neutrophils, lymphocytes,
macrophages, and some eosinophils. A population of extracellular bacteria is also
seen. Moreover, the examination reveals the presence of branching, filamentous
rods with beaded appearance that at high magnification appear in dense aggregates.
The organisms are positive on Gram stain.
ii. The cytologic findings, in association with sulfur granules, suggest pyothorax
caused by Actinomyces spp. or Nocardia spp. In doubtful cases when anerobic and
aerobic cultures are negative, acid-fast stains may help to differentiate Nocardia
spp. (acid-fast) from Actinomyces spp. (not acid-fast). In this case, Actinomyces
spp. was identified by culture.
ili. Chest drains should be placed bilaterally under general anesthesia. The tubes are
sutured to the skin with nonabsorbable suture, and the pleural effusion removed by
continuous or intermittent suction. Lavage of the pleural space may be performed
(40 ml warmed saline q 12-24 h). Antibiotic therapy should be started pending
results of microbial culture and sensitivity. This cat received chest tubes, and lavage
was performed every 12 h. After 1 week, the treatment was halted because the
owners decided to go no further and to euthanize the cat.
154
139, 140:Questions
139a
139b
139 A 14-month-old intact female Abyssinian cat was seen after it gave birth to six
healthy kittens. All kittens had been suckling shortly after birth and were observed
to be healthy by the owner. However, the kittens stopped suckling and became
dehydrated, icteric, and dyspneic. Three kittens died between 5 and 8 days after
birth and were submited for necropsy. Predominant changes were found in the
liver (139a), and a cytologic squash was prepared from liver tissue (139b) (modified
Wrights-Giemsa). Nine days after birth, the three remaining kittens were examined,
and showed similar clinical signs.
i. What are the differential diagnoses for fading kitten syndrome in this litter of
kittens?
i. What diagnostic tests should be performed on the surviving kittens?
ii. What are the findings in the liver section and in the cytologic preparation?
140 A 4-year-old castrated male domestic
140
shorthair cat was seen because  of
anorexia progressing over a 3-week
period (140). The cat lived exclusively
indoors
swithtwo other cats that
appeared healthy. On physical examina-
tion the cat had an unkempt haircoat,
was slightly underweight (BCS 4/9), anc
had mildly increased body temperature
(39.3°C). Abdominal palpation revealed
slightly enlarged kidneys. Complete
blood count, biochemistry panel, and urinalysis were performed. These showed
pancytopenia, azotemia, hyperglobulinemia, mildly increased ALT activity, and
inflammatory urine sediment.
i. What do the laboratory results suggest?
i. What additional diagnostic steps are indicated?
155
139,140:Answers
139 i. Fading kitten syndrome has both noninfectious and infectious causes.
Noninfectious causes include low birth weight, prematurity, congenital disorders,
malnutrition, hypoxia/anoxia during parturition, hypothermia, maternal neglect,
FeLV infection, FPV infection, FIP, ascending umbilical bacterial infections
(omphalophlebitis), sepsis, and neonatal toxoplasmosis. In these kitens, the most
likely diagnoses are neonatal isoerythrolysis, neonatal toxoplasmosis, bacterial
infection, or FIP since all may cause icterus.
ii. The queen and kittens should be blood-typed immediately and be tested for FeLV.
The kittens’ hematocrits should be determined to distinguish prehepatic from
hepatic or posthepatic icterus. Kittens with neonatal isoerythrolysis characteristic-
ally have dark red-brown urine. Tail tip necrosis from cold-reacting IgM antibodies
or thrombosis may be present. Thoracic radiographs are warranted to investigate
further the kittens’ dyspnea. Antibody tests for Toxoplasma gondii should be
performed. Liver enzyme activities (e.g. ALT, ALP) are usually elevated in neonatal
toxoplasmosis. However, ALP elevations in kittens are nonspecific because cats
 possess a bone isoenzyme of ALP. Fine-needle aspiration cytology of the liver may
be useful in detecting bacterial or protozoal hepatitis
ii. The appearance of the liver is typical of kittens infected transplacentally with T.
gondi. There are numerous foci of white discoloration due to necrosis produced by
tachyzoites. In the cytologic preparation, there is a clump of eight extracellular,
banana-shaped tachyzoites amongst scattered erythrocytes. The kittens had
neonatal toxoplasmosis.
140 i. These indicate that multiple organs are involved in the disease process
or neoplastic (e.g. lymphoma) condition.
ii. Thoracic and abdominal radiographs, abdominal ultrasonography, including
ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspirates of the liver, kidney, and any lesions, and a
bone marrow aspirate are indicated. Tests for FeLV and FIV infection should be
performed.
156
141, 142:Questions
141 Case 141 is the same cat as case
141
140. Imaging revealed a mild diffuse
pulmonary interstitial pattern and
mild enlargement of the kidneys,
liver, spleen, and mesenteric lymph
nodes. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle
aspirates were collected from the
abnormal organs. Bone marrow was
also collected for cytologic evalu-
ation. A cytology of the kidney (141)
(Wrights-Giemsa   stain)  revealed
similar findings to the cytologic preparations of other organs.
i. What is the interpretation of the kidney cytology?
i. What additional diagnostic steps are indicated?
ili. What treatment should be initiated?
iv. Are there any public health concerns?
142
142 A 7-year-old castrated male Siamese cat was seen because of an intermittent
soft cough noted for the past 6 months. The client said that the cat appeared
 s   ne  q  i r pe    rs
allowed outside, and had traveled extensively with its owners, including in South
America. On physical examination, the respiratory rate was 48 bpm and expiratory
wheezes were heard when the cat was distressed. Thoracic radiographs were taken
(142).
i. How should the radiographic findings be described?
i. What are the differential diagnoses suggested by these changes?
ii. What other diagnostic tests should be performed in order to achieve a definitive
diagnosis?
157
141,142:Answers
141 i. The kidney aspirate shows macrophages containing numerous nonstaining
filamentous bacteria. Similar findings were present in the liver, spleen, lymph nodes,
and bone marrow. This is most consistent with disseminated mycobacteriosis.
ii. An acid-fast stain should be applied to confirm the diagnosis of mycobacteriosis.
Also, a sample should be submitted for culture and sensitivity. Disseminated
mycobacteriosis is usually diagnosed where there is decreased immune function.
Further tests could include tests to confirm the FeLV- and FIV-free status of the cat,
lymphocyte subset analysis, serum immunoglobulin concentrations, and phagocyte
function tests. In this case, flow cytometric analysis showed a severe decrease in
CD4+ lymphocytes, implying there was a significant decrease in cell-mediated
immunity. Mycobacterium xenopi was diagnosed by culture of the bone marrow;
this is a saprophytic opportunistic organism infrequently associated with dis-
seminated mycobacteriosis.
ii. Initial therapy should include IV fluid therapy for diuresis and nutritional
support. Treatment of disseminated mycobacteriosis in immunodeficient patients
requires the long-term (possibly life-long) administration of multiple antibiotics. In
this case, pending culture results, treatment was initiated with clarithromycin,
enrofloxacin, and clofazamine. Sensitivity testing confirmed these were appropriate
selections. The cat was still alive 4 years after the original diagnosis.
iv. Because saprophytic opportunistic mycobacterial organisms a
arewidely
distributed in soil and water and are not readily transmited among individuals,
infected patients are not considered to pose a zoonotic threat.
142 i. The most prominent changes on the radiographs are the patchy interstitial
infiltrates.
hypersensitivity, asthma). When nodules or a regional difference in density is seen,
chronic lungworm or fluke infection, fungal granulomas, or neoplasia may be added
as considerations. Heart failure leading to pulmonary edema is considered less
likely, as cardiac silhouette and vessel size are normal.
ii. Fecal examination should be performed in an attempt to detect lungworm ova
or larvae or fluke ova. If negative, then tracheal wash or bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid should be collected for fluid cytology evaluation in the absence of cardiac
disease. In this case, a mixture of inflammatory cells (neutrophils and eosinophils
predominating) on cytologic assessment suggested allergic or parasitic small
airway disease. Less commonly, neoplastic and fungal conditions are associated
with increased numbers of eosinophils. Eggs or larvae may be seen on cytology.
158
143, 144: Questions
43
143 Case 143 is the same cat as case 142. A parasite was recovered on tracheal
washing (143).
i. What is this organism?
ii. How do cats become infected with these parasites?
i. What is the recommended treatment?
144
144 A young adult intact male stray domestic shorthair cat recently adopted by a
new owner was seen because of cough and dyspnea. Since it was found 3 weeks
earlier it had had a reduced appetite and had not gained weight. On physical
examination, the body temperature was normal. The cat was slightly dyspneic with
inspiratory and expiratory crackles over all of the lung fields on auscultation. No
nasal discharge or sneezing was observed. A complete blood count was performed
and showed moderate eosinophilia. Thoracic radiographs were taken (144).
i. What is the most likely explanation for the clinical, hematologic, and radiographic
changes in this cat?
i. What further diagnostic tests should be recommended?
ii. How should the cat be treated?
transmission of the disease?
159
143,144:Answers
143 i. This organism is the lungworm Aelurostrongylus abstrusus.
i. Cats are the terminal host for three different types of lung parasite: (1) A.
abstrusus infections are often subclinical and self-limiting. The intermediate host is
a terrestrial snail or slug. Eggs are deposited in alveoli where they hatch and release
larvae, which are swallowed and shed in feces. These larvae may best be
demonstrated using Baermann fecal filtration. Because eggs are shed intermittently,
multiple fecal samples may need to be examined. (2) Paragonimus kellicotti is a
lung fluke with two sequential intermediary hosts: an amphibious snail and a
crayfish. Immature flukes form cystic cavities within the lungs. Thus, cats with P
tion techniques are the best way to demonstrate fluke ova in feces. (3) Eucoleus
aerophila (previously Capillaria aerophila) has a direct life cycle;_however,
earthworms and rodents may be a source of infective ova for cats. The white,
thread-like adult worms live in the trachea and bronchi. Although most cases are
asymptomatic, a persistent dry cough may occur and may be elicited by tracheal
palpation. Radiographic signs are less likely than with the other two parasites
because of the agent's localization.
ii. The most commonly recommended treatment for lungworm infection is
fenbendazole (50 mg/kg PO q 24 h for 12-20 days).
144 i. This cat may have a lungworm infestation. The commonest lungworm in
cats is Aelurostrongylus abstrusus, which can be detected in up to 39% of stray
cats. The adult nematode lives in alveoli and terminal bronchioles, causing
bronchopneumonia. Clinical signs develop if the worm burden is high; many cats
with mild infection do not show them. Thoracic radiographs typically demonstrate
bronchointerstitial and patchy alveolar infiltrates, as in this case. Many cats have
peripheral eosinophilia.
Other differential diagnoses are bronchial asthma and dirofilariasis.
ii. Fecal testing should be performed, using either Baermann fecal examination or
zinc sulfate flotation, to look for A. abstrusus eggs. Another option is to demonstrate
the larvae in a BAL sample. This is especially helpful if a Baermann filtration is
negative in a cat with suspected infestation, since larvae are shed only intermittently.
The patient should also be tested for FeLV and FIV.
ii. In cats with mild infection, the disease is usually self-limiting. If clinical signs are
present, as in this case, cats should be treated once the diagnosis has been
established. One treatment option with few side-effects is fenbendazole.
iv. Cats can become infested if they ingest the intermediate host directly (snails and
slugs), or if they eat animals that have been feeding on them. Thus, direct trans-
mission of the disease to other pets is impossible.
160
145, 146:Questions
145 A 7-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat was seen because of a
gradually developing stiffness in the left front limb. The cat was an indoor/outdoor
cat. It was otherwise healthy. No pain was apparent, and the cat did not withdraw
the limb in response to pinch. Radiographs of the limb were normal. The initial
recommendation was to observe the cat at home. However on physical examin-
ation 1 week later, the contralateral limb was affected, and the facial expression
was abnormal. The ears were erect, the lips were drawn back, the forehead was
creased, jaw tone was increased, and there was ptylism
i. What infectious agent is suggested by these findings?
ii. How is the diagnosis made?
i. What treatment is recommended, and what prognosis should be given?
146
            
consultation. The cat lived in a single-cat household in a rural area and was allowed
t0 go outside. It was healthy and had received its primary vaccination series (FPV,
FHV, FCV, FeLV, rabies). The owner had had a kidney transplant 2 weeks earlier
and was now on high-dose immunosuppressive therapy. She had brought her cat so
that it could be checked for any potential zoonotic infections (e.g. toxoplasmosis)
it was carrying that might pose a threat to her. Physical examination was
unremarkable; however, some flea feces were found on the hair coat. The cat had
a Toxoplasma gondi IgG antibody titer of 1:1024 (high titer) and an IgM antibody
titer of 1:512 (moderate titer).
i. How should the T. gondii antibody titer be interpreted?
ii. Is the cat a risk for the immunosuppressed owner?
ii. For which other infection should tests be performed?
161
145,146:Answers
145 i. The clinical signs are consistent with tetanus, caused by the Gram-positive
anerobic bacterium Clostridium tetani. Rabies is also a consideration, but the week-
long slowly progressive and localized course makes rabies less likely.
ii. Cats with tetanus may or may not have a history of a noticeable wound in the
area of the original clinical signs. Clinical signs of increased muscle tone and altered
facial expression are characteristic of tetanus. Other than muscle spasm-induced
elevations in the muscle enzymes, e.g. creatine kinase (CK), aspartate transaminase
(AST) and wound-related leukocytosis, there are no abnormalities in the complete
blood count, biochemistry profile, and urinalysis. The presence of antibodies to
tetanus toxin in the blood, when compared to a control animal, substantiates the
diagnosis. Muscle biopsy results are generally unremarkable other than showing
evidence of muscle trauma. Isolation of the organism is difficult.
ii. Because cats are relatively resistant to C. tetani, they usually only develop
localized tetanus. Thus, treatment with antitoxin may not be used. Besides the use
of antibiotics (e.g. penicillin G), given both IV and IM close to the wound site,
sedatives may be helpful in reducing spasms. Combinations of chlorpromazine and
phenobarbital have been used; alternatively, diazepam or midazolam may control
spasms and excitability. Most cats have reversible disease. Cats with localized
tetanus have a more favorable prognosis than those with rapidly progressive
generalized disease.
146 i. As demonstrated by the high IgG titer the cat had been infected with
Toxoplasma gondii at least 3 weeks previously (as IgG antibodies take at least
3 weeks to rise), but probably much longer ago. This has resulted in a latent
infestation that may be reactivated later in life, usually after immunosuppression.
Only newly-infested cats shed T. gondii in their feces for about 10 days. Thus, a
healthy cat that has T. gondii IgG antibodies is not a risk for the owner and will
never be a risk.
ii. Given the statements above, it is clear that this cat is not a risk for its
immunosuppressed owner. Epidemiologic tests suggest that eating undercooked or
raw meat (in which T. gondi cysts may persist) plays a greater role in the risk of
human infection than contact with cats.
ifi. As the cat has fleas, tests for Bartonela spp. infection should be performed. It
is prudent to discuss the advantages and disadvantages of Bartonella spp. testing
with each individual cat owner and document the outcome of the discussion in the
medical record.
162
147, 148: Questions
147
147 Case 147 is the same cat as case 146 (147). Antibody tests for Bartonella
henselae and B. clarridgeiae were performed and the cat had a B. henselae titer of
1:1024 (high titer).
i. How should the positive B. henselae test be interpreted?
ii. What diseases can be caused by B. henselae and B. clarridgeiae in people and in
cats?
ii. How are Bartonella spp. transmitted?
iv. Should the cat's infection be treated?
148
148 A 5-month-old neutered male domestic shorthair cat was seen because of
ascites, icterus (148), and fever. The cat came from a shelter that housed 127 cats
at that time. Cats were kept in groups of 10-20. The cat was in very poor condition
and was euthanized. Necropsy examination confirmed the diagnosis of FIP.
i. If FIP is a problem in a shelter, what should be recommended?
ii. Is FIP vaccination useful in this situation?
i. Under what other circumstances should vaccination be recommended?
163
147,148:Answers
147 i. The cat has antibodies against B. benselae; this is consistent with B. benselae
infection. As the cat is infected, there is a zoonotic concern for an immuno-
suppressed owner.
ii. Both B. benselae and B. clarridgeiae can cause cat-scratch disease (CSD) in
people, a relatively harmless disease. However immunosuppressed people may
develop more serious diseases when infected, including parenchymal peliosis,
bacillary angiomatosis, endocarditis, neuroretinitis, and oculoglandular syndrome.
Most cats infected naturally with Bartonella spp. have no clinical signs.
ii. Transmission from cat to cat usually occurs via fleas. Bartonella spp. live inside
red blood cells (without causing anemia). Fleas ingest these while sucking blood,
and transmit the infection to another cat in the same way. Fleas digest the the blood
The cat will get the flea feces under its claws while scratching itself. If they scratch
someone and the claws penetrate the skin, Bartonella spp. may be transmitted. It
has been shown that bacteremia is much more likely in cats <1 year old than in
older ones thus, young cats are more likely to transmit the infection.
iv. As the cat is young and has fleas, and the owner is severely immunosuppressed,
the cat should be treated with doxycycline for 3 weeks. Doxycycline will not
eliminate infection, but it will significantly reduce the bacterial load. In addition,
 good fla control and keeping the cat indoors are essential. Declawing has not been
shown to prevent transmission and is not recommended.
148 i. Prevention of FIP in a shelter situation is virtually impossible unless cats are
strictly kept in separate cages and handled only with barrier precautions
(comparable to isolation units). Isolation is often not effective because of the ease
with which FCoV is transported on clothes, shoes, dust, and cats. Adopters should
understand that FCoV is unavoidable in multiple-cat environments, and that FIP is
an unavoidable consequence of endemic FCoV. Shelters should ensure facilities can
be cleaned easily to minimize virus spread.
i. A MLV intranasal FIP vaccine is available in many countries. However the true
efficacy of this vaccine is controversial; vaccination in an FCoV-endemic environ-
ment or in households with known cases of FIP is not expected to be effective.
ini. Vaccination might be of some benefit in cats that live in households with a small
number of cats without previous FCoV exposure. As the vaccine is ineffective when
cats have already been exposed to FCoV, antibody testing may be beneficial before
vaccination. The vaccine is at least safe and does not induce antibody-dependent
enhancement of FIP but its efficacy is debated.
164
149, 150:Questions
149b
149 A 5-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat was seen because of a 7-day
history of anorexia, dyspnea, and lethargy. On physical examination, the cat had
marked inspiratory dyspnea, an increased respiratory rate (50 bpm), and a high
body temperature (39.7°C). The heart sounds were muffled. Thoracic radiographs
were taken (149a). A sample of pleural fluid was aspirated (149b) (modified
Wrights-Giemsa).
i. What are the three most likely diagnoses based on the radiograph?
ii. What does the cytology of the pleural fluid show, and is it typical for this disease?
ili. By what mechanisms can this disease occur in cats?
150
150 A five-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat was seen because of
lethargy of 2 days? duration. The cat was kept both indoors and outdoors and was
current on vaccinations. On physical examination, the cat had pale mucous
membranes, tachycardia (220 bpm), and bilateral scleral hemorrhages (150).
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. What is the diagnostic plan?
165
149, 150:Answers
149 i. There is a large volume of pleural fluid within the thorax, elevating the
trachea dorsally and displacing the carina caudally. It is not possible to rule out the
presence of a cranial mediastinal mass on the lateral view. Pyothorax, FIP, or cranial
mediastinal lymphoma is the most likely cause in this cat.
ii. The pleural fluid shows many degenerate neutrophils and masses of pleomorphic
bacteria, including long filamentous bacteria and bacilli. Therefore, the cat had
pyothorax. Most cases of feline pyothorax are polymicrobial infections of obligate
anerobic and facultative bacteria, similar in composition to the bacterial flora of the
healthy feline oropharynx. These bacteria include Bacteroides spp., Fusobacterium
Propionibacterium spp.,Pasteurella multocida,Prevotella spp.,Porphyromonas spp,
Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., and Mycoplasma spp.
Occasionally, fungi may cause pyothorax (e.g. Candida spp., Cryptococcus spp.,
Blastomyces spp.).
ii. Infection of the pleural space may occur via hematogenous (e.g. systemic sepsis)
or lymphatic spread, extension from an adjacent structure (e.g. bronchopneumonia,
parapneumonic spread, esophageal rupture, mediastinitis, subphrenic infection), or
thoracic surgery). However, the mechanism of pleural space infection is often not
identified.
 150 i. Scleral hemorrhage is the most significant finding. The most likely causes are
head trauma or a clotting disorder.
ii. The initial evaluation should include a complete blood count, biochemical panel.
urinalysis, platelet count, prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time
(PTT), fibrin degradation products (FDPs), and tests for FeLV and FIV. A
cystocentesis or other invasive procedures should not be performed until the clotting
parameters have been assessed.
166
151, 152: Questions
151
151 Case 151 is the same cat as case 150. The cat was positive for FeLV antigen
and negative for FIV antibodies (151). The PT (7 sec), PTT (13 sec), and FDPs
(20 μg/ml) were within the reference interval.
Blood profile/biochermistry panel
Results
Hematocrit
0.21 1/1
RBC
4.0 × 1012/1
Platelets
18 × 10%/1
Hemoglobin
4.2 mmol/l
Total protein
45 g/1
Albumin
21 g/l
Globulins
24 g/1
Urinalysis (voided sample)
Protein
i. What is the interpretation of the laboratory values?
i. Are any other diagnostic procedures indicated?
152 A 2-year-old spayed female Abys-
152
sinian cat from Vancouver Canada, was
seen because of concern over a 3-day
history of cough, progressive lethargy,
and inappetence (152). On physical
examination, weight loss was evident.
The cat was tachypneic (respiratory rate
56 bpm), had diffuse harsh broncho-
vesicular sounds on thoracic ausculta-
tion, and had a moist cough during
examination. Body temperature was
elevated at 40.3°C. Blood pressure was 150 mmHg systolic.
i. What diagnostic tests are appropriate?
ii. Is there a zoonotic risk?
167
151,152:Answers
151 i. There is anemia and panhypoproteinemia, which are suggestive of blood
loss. Severe thrombocytopenia with normal coagulation parameters suggests a
clotting disorder due to platelet deficiency. The cat is positive for FeLV antigen.
FeLV infection is the most common cause of thrombocytopenia in cats.
i. A thorough evaluation with imaging and bone marrow cytology should be
performed to rule out any complicating conditions such as lymphoma or bone
marrow failure. In this case, bone marrow evaluation revealed a hypercellular
marrow with increased megakaryocytes suggestive of abnormal thrombopoiesis or
immune destruction of platelets. Melena was observed the following day, suggesting
that a major site of blood loss was the gastrointestinal tract. Some cats with FeLV-
prednisolone. The cat was discharged with prednisolone (2 mg/kg PO q 24 h). At
re-evaluation 2 weeks later the platelets had increased to 78,000/ul and the
hematocrit had increased to 0.27 1/l.
152 i. The following tests should be performed: (1) radiographs, (2) a complete
    h )  n d   
(4) fecal sedimentation and flotation.
These should also be considered: (1) tests for Toxoplasma gondii, (2) tests for
heartworm infection, and (3) a bronchial wash for cytology and culture (if the cat
is stable enough).
 In this case, radiographs showed a diffuse interstitial to alveolar pattern and a
small pleural effusion. The cat had a T. gondii IgM antibody titer of 1:1024 (high)
and a T. gondii IgG antibody titer of 1:1024 (high). Both high IgM and IgG titers
can be present in toxoplasma asymptomatic cats; thus, further diagnostic tests are
indicated. Treatment with clindamycin or trimethoprim/sulfonamide should
nevertheless be initiated. Clinical signs may worsen early in therapy, as dying
organisms stimulate additional inflammation. Sometimes, treatment with anti-
inflammatory doses of corticosteroids is necessary. There should be a response
within a few days.
i. Infection with T. gondi during pregnancy in women occurs from infection with
0ocysts from cats’ feces, which must be in the environment for 24 hours or more
before they are infective. Hence, scooping the litter box twice a day prevents the risk
of oocyte infectivity. Veterinary staff who handle cats do not have a higher
prevalence of serum IgG reactivity. Also, once a cat has mounted an immune
response and has T. gondii IgG antibodies it does not shed T. gondi and is not a risk
to people.
168
153, 154: Questions
153A 9-year-old neutered male
153a
domestic shorthair cat from Florida,
USA, was seen because of chronic nasal
congestion unresponsive to antibiotics
for 6 months. On physical examination,
there was inspiratory stertor and
bilateral mucopurulent nasal discharge.
A 3 mm hairless nodule was present on
the bridge of the nose (153a), and a
similar lesion was present on the right
metacarpal pad. The left globe was
deviated slightly laterally.
What is an appropriate diagnostic
plan to address the chronic nasal dis-
charge and the skin lesions?
154
154 A 5-year-old neutered male domestic shorthair cat was seen because of chronic,
nonhealing lesions on the ventral abdomen. It was allowed to roam outside. A
veterinarian had performed punch biopsies in which pyogranulomatous inflamma-
tion was found. However, no microorganisms were seen. The cat had been treated
with amoxicillin/clavulanate, but there had been no response. On presentation, the
cat was bright, alert, and responsive. Multiple deep cutaneous and subcutaneous
nonpainful nodules of variable size and ulceration were found on the ventral
abdomen and inguinal area (154).
i. What are the potential reasons why the biopsy was not conclusive?
i. What are the most likely differential diagnoses?
169
153,154:Answers
153 A complete blood count, bio-
153b
chemical panel, urinalysis, tests for FeLV
and FIV, and thoracic radiography
should be performed. They were all
unremarkable. A CT scan showed a
 mass in the left nasal cavity invading the
left retro-orbital space, crossing the
septum to the right nasal cavity, and
impinging on the cribriform plate. Fine-
needle aspirates and biopsies  were
collected from the cutaneous lesions, the
left nasal mass, and the retro-orbital mass.
Aspirates of the cutaneous lesions suggested protothecosis, whereas aspirates
from the left nasal and retro-orbital masses showed large-cell lymphoma. Biopsies
confirmed the cytologic findings, and culture of tissues from the cutaneous lesions
produced a pure culture of Prototheca wickerhammii sensitive to itraconazole and
clotrimazole. Imaging of the abdomen is indicated to evaluate for systemic
involvement of either disease.
Feline protothecosis is limited to cutaneous forms. In this cat, treatment was
initiated with oral itraconazole and topical clotrimazole. Nasal lymphosarcoma is
highly responsive to radiotherapy, which was recommended to avoid immuno-
suppression from chemotherapy. The owner elected chemotherapy, however, and
the cat was treated with prednisolone, vincristine, and cyclophosphamide. Clinical
remission was complete, with restoration of normal facial structure, within 7 days.
The protothecosis lesions, however did not respond to treatment and gradually
enlarged (153b), but did not bother the cat. It was euthanized 8 months later,
however when the lymphoma came out of remission.
154 i. The main lesion is located in the subcutaneous fat tissue within granulation
tissue. This is usually too deep for sampling specimens through punch biopsies. An
excisional or at least, deep wedge biopsy of such lesions is strongly recommended.
Special stains such as Giemsa, PAS, GMS, and acid-fast stains are always indicated
in pyogranulomatous lesions because the microorganisms can be easily overlooked
with a routine H&E stain.
i. The major differential diagnoses are: (1) Deep bacterial infections, including
opportunistic mycobacteriosis, nocardiosis, actinomycosis, and bacterial pseudo-
mycetoma. (2) Deep fungal infections, including phaeohyphomycosis, crypto-
coccosis, histoplasmosis, and blastomycosis. (3) Algae, including pythiosis.
(4) Noninfectious diseases, including idiopathic panniculitis or foreign-body
reaction.
170
155, 156:Questions
155
155 Case 155 is the same cat as case 154. It was decided to repeat taking skin
biopsies and to request an acid-fast stain. Histopathology showed a pyogranulo-
matous dermatitis and panniculitis with central clear zones containing acid-fast
positive filamentous organisms (155, arrow) (acid-fast stain).
i. What is the tentative diagnosis?
 ii. Which additional tests could be performed to identity the organisms?
ii. What are the treatment recommendations and the prognosis for this disease?
156 A 4-year-old
1  castrated  male
156a
domestic shorthair cat (156a) was seen
after being in a fight and developing a
small draining abscess on the dorsum of
its head. The cat became lethargic and
obtunded 5 days later and was observed
to be head pressing. The cat lived mainly
outdoors in Sydney, Australia. On
physical examination, the cat had a high
body temperature (39.8°C). The menace
response was absent in the right eye and
postural reactions were diminished in
the right forelimb and right hind limb.
Spinal reflexes were normal, and no cranial nerve deficits were detected.
i. What is the neuroanatomical localization of the lesion?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. How should this case be further investigated?
171
155,156:Answers
155 i. The diagnosis is mycobacteriosis. Nocardia spp. stain partially with acid-fast
stain as well, and can sometimes be difficult to differentiate from Mycobacteria spp.
ii. Mycobacterial culture and sensitivity and PCR assay are the most effective tests
for the identification of the organism. However, culture and sensitivity testing is
essential for determining appropriate antimicrobial treatment.
ii. Treatment is often complicated by chronicity, variable severity, poor response to
therapy, and lack of early diagnosis. If cultures are still pending, treatment should
be started with one or preferably, two to three different oral antibiotics. Currently,
clarithromycin is the antibiotic of choice. Once the susceptibility test results are
available, an alternative may be needed. Other antibiotics that are effective are
doxycycline, enrofloxacin, ciprofloxacin, and clofazimine. It is recommended to
use high doses of these for 3-12 months, and antibiotics should be given for 1-2
months after complete clinical cure. Wide surgical excision, in conjunction with
systemic antimicrobial therapy, is often necessary. It is recommended, however t0
start systemic antibiotic therapy at least 1 month before surgery, thereby enabling
the lesion to regress first. The prognosis is good if the cat is managed properly. Side-
effects of long-term therapy may occur and are specific to the drugs selected.
156 i. The cat has a left forebrain lesion as indicated by contralateral postural re-
action and menace deficits, decreased mentation, and head pressing.
ii. An epidural, subdural, or subarachnoid abscess causing pressure on cerebral
parenchyma or an abscess of the cerebrum itself secondary to a penetrating cat-bite
wound is the most likely diagnosis. Differential diagnoses include neoplasia (e.g.
mycotic granuloma, toxoplasmosis, or aberrant parasitic migration.
ii. The cat should be tested for FeLV and FIV since both viruses are associated with
lymphomagenesis. A complete blood count should be performed to evaluate for
  e        
supporting a cat-bite abscess. Radiographs may localize a deficit in the skull where
penetrating trauma from a cat bite occurred. Ideally, advanced imaging (MRI)
should be performed to delineate the area of the abscess. If this is not available
immediately, the area of the penetrating cat bite should be surgically explored to
establish drainage of the abscess. Unfor-
tunately, the owner elected euthanasia in
156b
this case. The abscess was subdural
(156b, arrow).
172
157, 158: Questions
157
157 A 10-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat (157) was seen for its
annual wellness visit. The cat had tested FIV-positive at 5 years of age when it was
seen because of a bite wound. Since that time, the cat had been kept indoors only.
The annual wellness visit included a complete blood count, biochemistry panel
(both unremarkable), and urinalysis.
Urinalysis (cystocentesis)
Results
Color/appearance
yellow, clear
Specific gravity
1.035
pH
6.0
Protein
++++
Glucose
Ketone
Bilirubin
Blood
+
RBC
5-10 cells/hpf
WBC
<3 cells/hpf
Casts
0 cells/hpf
i. What is the interpretation of the urinalysis?
ii. What are the rule-outs for this problem and the underlying pathophysiologic
mechanisms?
158 Case 158 is the same cat as case
158
157. The cat had glomerulonephritis
secondary to FIV infection. A repeat
FIV test confirmed the infection
(158).
i. What is the next diagnostic step?
ii. What are the major consequences of this problerm?
ii. How should the cat be treated?
173
157,158:Answers
157 i. The cat has proteinuria.
i. The differentials for proteinuria are preglomerular, glomerular and postglomerular
proteinuria. Most commonly, the urine is contaminated with protein ‘after’ the
glomerulus (postglomerular). Preglomerular proteinuria is rare and is caused by
excessive production of small molecular weight proteins (e.g. Bence Jones proteins),
by neoplastic plasma cells (e.g. multiple myeloma, plasmocytoma) or, rarely, excessive
release of hemoglobin and myoglobin from damaged red blood cells and muscle
tissue. Glomeruiar proteinuria can be either transient ('physiologic proteinuria’),
detectable morphologic changes. Physiologic proteinuria', also called ‘pseudo-
morphologic changes', is transient, and abates when the underlying cause is corrected.
Strenuous exercise, seizures, pyrexia, exposure to extreme heat or cold, and stress
are examples of conditions that may cause physiologic proteinuria. In cats, the most
common reasons for transient proteinuria are stress and pyrexia. Pathologic
glomeruiar proteinuria is nonreversible and is associated with morphologic changes
in the kidneys. It is caused by glomerulonephritis or, rarely, amyloidosis. In this cat,
the sediment was free of inflammation. There was a small amount of blood, but not
enough to explain the 4+ protein. Thus, this cat has glomerular proteinuria, most
likely due to glomerulonephritis as a consequence of its FIV infection.
158 i. The urine protein excretion should be quantified, to evaluate the severity of
Today, the most commonly used method is the urine protein to creatinine ratio
concentration.A UPC of <0.5 is considered normal in cats.
ii. Glomerular disease associated with protein loss has three major consequences.
First, the significant loss of albumin causes a decrease in plasma oncotic pressure,
leading to formation of edema and/or ascites, and muscle wasting. The second serious
consquence is the loss of antithrombin III. This leads to hypercoagulability and an
increased risk of thromboembolic disease. The third major consequence is the
development of secondary renal tubular damage. Persistent proteinuria leads to
damage of the tubular epithelium, resulting in renal failure. If one of these three
consequences occurs, the prognosis becomes guarded.
ili. Symptomatic treatment should be instituted. An ACE inhibitor (e.g. benazepril)
should be given to reduce the amount of protein in the urine, thus reducing the
severity of the tubular damage. Also, w3-fatty acids may be beneficial in preventing
further glomerular damage. In addition, the cat should be started on a slightly
protein-reduced diet to slow the progression of renal disease.
174
159, 160:Questions
159 A 10-year-old spayed female
159a
domestic shorthair cat was seen
because of renomegaly that had been
diagnosed by a referring veterinarian.
Both
kidneys
were
extremely
enlarged; this could be seen on
physical examination (159a) as well
as on the radiographs (159b). Values
of
complete
blood
count, bio-
chemistry panel, and urinalysis were
all within the reference intervals.
Cytology of the kidneys was diag-
159b
nostic of lymphoma, and the cat was
positive in a FeLV antigen test. The
owner did not want to use antitumor
An m m  s 
alternative treatment or immuno-
modulatory drugs against the FeLV
infection.
 i. How do immunomodulatory drugs
work?
ii. Do they have any effect in FeLV-infected cats?
160 A 4-year-old intact male domestic
160
longhair cat was seen with a 4-week
history of lethargy, anorexia, general-
ized seizures, hindleg weakness, and
circular raised lesions on the face and
back. The cat lived indoors/outdoors
in a rural area. It had been vaccinated
against FPV, FHV, FCV, FeLV, and rabies, and was negative for FIV and FeLV. Recent
testing showed mild hyperglycemia, hypercalcemia, and urinary leukocytosis. On
presentation, it was lethargic and recumbent (160). Red, firm skin nodules were noted
 on the head and flank. There was generalized lymph node enlargement. Neurologic
examination showed a stuporous cat with nonambulatory upper motor neuron
tetraparesis and normal to hyperactive spinal reflexes. Postural reactions were
decreased on the right and absent on the left side. Cranial nerve examination showed
absent menace response of the left eye, waxing and waning constriction and dilation
 of the pupils, and decreased response to sensory stimuli on the right nostril.
i. What is the neuroanatomical localization of the neurologic findings?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
175
159,160:Answers
159 i. It has been suggested that immunomodulators may benefit infected animals
by restoring compromised immune function, thereby allowing them to control viral
burden and recover. Most of the reports are difficult to interpret due to lack of
placebo control groups, small numbers of cats used, and additional supportive
treatments given.
ii. Controlled studies including large numbers of naturally FeLV-infected cats are
lacking and, if performed, they mostly failed to show a beneficial effect. Studies
have been published using a number of “immunomodulators', including ‘para-
munity’ inducers pind-avi (Parapoxvirus avis} and pind-orf (Parapoxvirus ovis)
acemannan, a carbohydrate polymer from the aloe vera plant, Stapbylococcus
protein A (SPA), Propionibacterium acnes (formerly Corynebacterium parvum),
Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG), Serratia marcescens, levamisole, and diethyl-
carbamazine. Scientific data do not support the use of immunomodulatory therapy
in FeLV-infected cats. This cat was treated with SPA, but had to be euthanized 4
weeks later due to progression to renal failure associated with the renal lymphoma.
160 i. Stupor can be due to metabolic, toxic, or intracranial causes. Taken together
the neurologic signs are best explained by multifocal intracranial disease (forebrain
decreased menace response suggest forebrain disease. Cats with forebrain disease will
usually still be ambulatory. Nonambulatory upper motor neuron tetraparesis suggests
brainstem or cervical spinal cord (C1-C5) disease. The pupillary abnormalities are
most suggestive of retinal, optic nerve, or chiasm disease, and an ophthalmic
examination should, therefore, be performed to exclude intraocular disease.
i. Inflammatory disease is the most likely differential for progressive multifocal
intracranial disease in a young adult cat. This suspicion is further supported by results
of ophthalmic examination demonstrating exudative granulomatous retinitis.
Hypercalcemia can be associated with granulomatous disease as well. The mild
hyperglycemia in the absence of glucosuria is suggestive of a stress response. Normal
body temperature and normal blood leukocytes do not exclude the possibility of
meningoencephalitis. Here, a few leukocytes in the urine, skin lesions, and enlarged
peripheral lymph nodes were the only extraneural signs of inflammation. Frequent
causes of meningoencephalitis in the cat are FIP, non-FIP viral encephalitis, toxo-
plasmosis, bacterial encephalitis arising from the sinuses, chronic otitis media/ interna,
or bites, Cuterebra larva migrans, and cryptococcosis. Cryptococcosis frequently
causes cutaneous nodules, nasal disease, retinitis, optic neuritis, and meningo-
encephalitis in the cat. Other differentials besides inflammatory disease would be
hydrocephalus, metabolic, toxic, or nutritional encephalopathy (hepatic encepha-
lopathy, thiamine deficiency, lead poisoning), and neoplasia.
176
161, 162: Questions
161
161 Case 161 is the same cat as case 160. A cytologic impression was prepared
with Romanowsky stain from the red, firm skin nodules (161). These demonstrated
capsulated yeasts (arrow).
The histopathologic report of the skin biopsy (from the same area) described a
well-circumscribed accumulation of round thickly encapsulated yeasts forming a
nodule within the derrmis and extending to the subcutaneous fat. Few lymphocytes,
plasma cells, and neutrophils were seen.
i. What other diagnostic procedure should be performed to identify the yeasts?
ii. What are the treatment options?
162
2A 6-year-old spayed female
162
domestic shorthair cat was seen because
of anorexia, and it had a large number
of small disseminated cutaneous nodules
and an ulcerated swelling on the left
forelimb (162). There were also two
conjunctival lesions in the left eye. The
cat lived mainly outdoors in Turin, Italy.
On physical examination, the cat had a
high body temperature (40.5°C), and
was depressed. The ocular examination
revealed bilateral chorioretinitis.
i. What are the differential diagnoses for
this cat's problems?
ii. How should the diagnosis be con-
firmed?
177
161,162:Answers
161 i. The yeast-like organisms seen were suggestive of cryptococcosis.
Cryptococcosis may be confirmed with cryptococcal antigen testing by latex
agglutination, which is highly sensitive and specific and can be performed with
serum and CSF. The cryptococcal latex antigen titer in this case was 1:65536
(extremely high). If CSF analysis is considered as a means of diagnosing
cryptococcal meningoencephalitis, precautions should be taken to avoid inadvertent
brain herniation and respiratory arrest due to raised intracranial pressure.
Intubation, hyperventilation and pretreatment with mannitol are recommended,
and only a minimal amount of CSF should be removed. Most cats with crypto-
coccosis have detectable antigen in serum and, thus, CSF puncture can usually be
avoided.
ii. Treatment options include fluconazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole, and
amphotericin B. Fluconazole and itraconazole are the most widely-used treatments
for cryptococcosis in cats due to their lower cost, ease of application, and fewer
side-effects like anorexia, vomiting, and hepatic disease. For CNS infections,
fluconazole may be the drug of choice because of its beter penetration into the
CNS. Amphotericin B requires frequent hospital visits because it must be given
parenterally and can be nephrotoxic. Antifungal treatment should be continued for
at least 1-2 months after clinical resolution.
162 i. The problems are fever, disseminated cutaneous nodules, nodular
conjunctival lesions, bilateral chorioretinitis, and forelimb swelling. The differential
diagnoses include various systemic, mainly infectious diseases based on the region
where the cat lives. This is particularly true for fungal diseases or atypical infections
(e.g. leishmaniasis, babesiosis). Common causes of feline chorioretinitis include
FeLV infection, FIV infection, FIP, Toxoplasma gondi infection, and fungal
infection and Bartonella spp. infection have also been implicated as possible causes
 Of posterior uveitis. The skin lesions could be associated with feline leishmaniasis,
fungal infection, atypical mycobacteriosis, algal infection, and neoplasia (e.g.
lymphoma).
i. A complete blood count, biochemical profile, urinalysis, and FeLV and FIV tests
are indicated, as are radiographs of the thorax and affected forelimb and fine-needle
aspirates of cutaneous and forelimb lesions. Bilateral chorioretinitis suggests fungal
diseases, FIP, or toxoplasmosis. Analysis of aqueous humor may be helpful in
achieving a diagnosis.
178
163, I64: Questions
163
163 Case 163 is the same cat as case 162. Radiographs of the left forelimb affected
by the ulcerated swelling showed an osteolytic lesion of the radius. A fine-needle
aspirate was taken from the radial lesion (163) (May-Gruenwald-Giemsa stain).
i. What diagnosis does the cytology support?
ii. What tests can be used to confirm the diagnosis?
ii. What is the diagnostic value of antigen testing?
iv. What treatment should be performed?
164
164 A 4-year-old castrated male Persian cat was seen because of a runny eye. On
physical examination, there was marked chemosis and blepharospasm of the
affected eye (164). A clear, reddish brown discharge was seen below that eye, and
there was a dried crust in the medial canthus.
i. What could be the cause of this problem?
ii. What further preliminary diagnostic steps should be taken?
179
163,164:Answers
163 i. The sample from the radial lesion contains numerous round to oval, narrow-
based budding encapsulated yeast organisms, consistent with Cryptococcus
neoformans. Cryptococcosis should be suspected in case of rhinitis, sinusitis, CNS
commonly it can involve bones, eyes, lungs, and other organs. Cutaneous involve-
ment reflects hematogenous dissemination from the primary site of infection.
Localized cutaneous cryptococcosis can develop following penetrating injury of the
skin. In some cats, the infection spreads to the mandibular lymph nodes from the
nasal cavity or through the cribriform plate into the olfactory bulbs and olfactory
i. A serum cryptococcal capsular antigen test and culture are the most widely
utilized confirmatory tests.
ii. Tests for cryptococcal antigen in serum are highly sensitive (90-100%) and specific
(97-100% ). However, false-negative results can occur, especially in cases of localized
lesions. When performed properly, antigen testing is also useful to document the
a good prognosis, whereas a persistent titer during reatment suggests resistance.
iv. The drugs of choice are itraconazole and fluconazole; the latter is recommended
particularly if ocular or CNS disease is present. In refractory cases, amphotericin B
may be administered SC, in infusion, two to three times per week and continued
until there has been demonstrable clinical improvement and corresponding decline
in the serum antigen titer. The cumulative dose of 10-20 mg/kg appears to be
important, rather than the period over which the drug is administered (see 44).
Treatment with a triazole antifungal is administered until the antigen test has been
negative for at least 1-2 months. Relapses following cessation of drug are common.
164 i. Differential diagnoses include corneal laceration from trauma or foreign
body, entropion, Chlamydophila felis infection, corneal laceration, and severe
anterior uveitis due to numerous causes. FHV infection is less likely due to the
unilateral presentation and the lack of concurrent respiratory signs.
ii. Topical anesthesia for a thorough examination of the globe and adnexa is
warranted. With analgesia, evaluation of the anterior chamber, iris, pupil, posterior
chamber and retina may be possible. IOPs should be assessed. The unaffected eye
should be checked first to minimize the possibility of transmission of infectious agents.
Fluorescein stain uptake should be performed to identify any superficial erosions.
Conjunctival scrapings can be made for cytologic evaluation looking for inclusion
bodies characteristic of C. felis infection. C. felis inclusion bodies were found in this
cat. Treatiment with oral doxycycline 10 mg/kg/day for 28 days eliminated the
infection. Because doxycycline can cause esophageal stricture formation, each dose
must be chased with a 3-6 ml water bolus.
180
165, 166: Questions
165 A 9-year-old spayed female
165
Persian cat was seen because of a
history of chronic vomiting. Com-
plete blood count, serum biochemical
panel, urinalysis, blood pressure, and
abdominal radiographs were normal.
Gastric and intestinal biopsies were
collected. On histopathology, there
was a tangle of spiral-shaped bacteria
within the gastric gland with modest
edema and hyperplasia of the gastric
mucosa (165). Scattered lymphocytes, plasma cells, and lymphoid aggregates were
seen in the submucosa and lamina propria.
i. What therapy should be recommended?
ii. Is this condition of zoonotic significance?
166A
10-year-old
castrated
1male
166
domestic shorthair cat was seen because
 of a sudden change in mentation. It was
an indoor-only cat. An FIV antibody test
at the age of 5 months had been posi-
tive. On presentation, the cat appeared
irritable and depressed and the left side
of the face was twitching continuously.
On clinical examination, the cat reacted
painfully when the cervical spine was
palpated. It was otherwise unremark-
able apart from the neurologic signs.
There was continuous twitching of the facial muscles on the left side and salivation
(166). The neurologic examination demonstrated decreased menace response of the
right eye with normal pupil size and pupillary light reflexes, and delayed hopping
of the right pelvic limb. Hematologic and biochemical evaluation showed mild
leukopenia, lymphopenia, and hyperproteinemia, with normal albumin but marked
hyperglobulimemia.
i. What is the neuroanatomical localization?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
181
165,166:Answers
165 i. The organisms resemble Helicobacter spp. These can be present in gastric
biopsies from clinically healthy cats as well as cats with gastrointestinal disease,
opportunists that participate in illness in predisposed individuals, or causative
agents themselves in some individuals.
i. Therapy for Helicobacter spp. infections is controversial in cats because of its
questionable role in disease. Treatment regimes are adapted from those used in
people and include drugs that increase pH (e.g. omeprazole, famotidine) with two
or three antimicrobial agents (e.g. metronidazole, amoxicillin, clarithromycin,
doxycycline). The role of the pH-increasing drugs is to make the gastric environ-
ment less hospitable for these bacteria.
ii. Most epidemiologic studies do not support an association between cat contact
and human H. pylori infection. Most cats that have spiral-shaped organisms in their
stomachs, healthy or with clinical signs of gastritis, have not had their Helicobacter
gastric helicobacteriosis should not be a significant public health concern In humans,
H. pylori is associated not only with peptic ulcers, but also with neoplasia. In cats,
any association between Helicobacter spp. and neoplasia is not clearly established.
166 i. The observed episode of unilateral facial muscle twitching, salivation, and
abnormal mental status represents a focal seizure. In this case, the onset of lateralized
focal seizures in an older cat suggests structural brain disease. This was also suggested
by the visual abnormalities: unilateral menace deficit with a normal pupillary light
reflex indicates central blindness (left occipital lobe) or cerebellar disease. Thus, the
neurologic presentation is more suggestive of multifocal than focal intracranial
disease, because seizures and neurologic deficits appear to arise from different sides
of the forebrain
ii. The primary differential for recent-onset multifocal intracranial disease is CNS in-
flammation (encephalitis, meningoencephalitis). Neoplasia (lymphoma, meningioma,
and other types of neoplasia) must also be considered because of the advanced age of
the cat, as well as cerebrovascular accidents (infarcts), because of the sudden onset of
neurologic signs. Metabolic or toxic causes are unlikely with lateralized seizures and
lateralized neurologic deficits. CNS inflammation is routinely diagnosed by CSF
analysis or combined MRI/CSF analysis. Prior to anesthesia for MRICSF collection,
a complete blood count and biochemistry panel should be performed to detect
metabolic or inflammatory diseases. Metastatic neoplasia may be ruled out with
thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasonography. Neuroimaging, preferably with
MRI is usually done prior to CSF analysis within the same anesthetic episode to assess
increased intracranial pressure from hydrocephalus or neoplasia.
182
167, 168: Questions
167 Case 167 is the same cat as case 166.
167
CT imaging of the brain showed patchy
contrast enhancement throughout the
left cerebral cortex with some mass effect
and additional periventricular contrast
enhancement.
CSF
collected under
general anesthesia was found to contain
an increased leukocyte count (8 cells/μl)
but normal protein (0.14 g/l). Dif-
ferential cell count revealed a mixed
pleocytosis with neutrophils, monocytes,
and lymphocytes (167). The serum Toxoplasma gondi IgM antibody titer was
1:1024 (high), and IgG antibody titer was 1:512 (moderate). Although the cat had
A rog aau mou sem il 'si s jo aae a 1e aaisd-ai paisi u
antibodies and FeLV antigen.
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. How should the cat be treated?
ili. What is the assessment of the different FIV antibody test results?
168
168 A 5-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat had been living as an
indoor-only cat in a single-cat household for 3 years. The cat was seen because of
bleeding in the anterior chamber of the eye (168). The bleeding was caused by a
  r d s r  e x   
i. Can FeLV infection cause the clinical signs in this cat?
ii. Is antiviral chemotherapy useful in FeLV-infected cats?
183
167,168:Answers
167 i. The CSF analysis indicates the presence of CNS inflammation. A mixed cell
resorptive lesions. CT is usually poorly suited to evaluation of the neuroparenchyma,
and, therefore, is not very helpful here. Nevertheless, patchy contrast uptake is
infection with T. gondii but does not necessarily imply active disease. Moderate and
high IgM antibody titers are also seen in chronic asymptomatic infections.
Toxoplasmosis should never be diagnosed with a single elevated IgG or IgM antibody
titer. Instead, retesting after 34 weeks with demonstration of a fourfold rise or fall
in the IgM antibody titer is recommended or demonstration of the organism by PCR.
Nevertheless, toxoplasmosis seems to be the most likely diagnosis here.
i. In this cat, anticonvulsive treatment with phenobarbital was given, along with
clindamycin for the treatment of systemic and CNS toxoplasmosis. Alternatively,
toxoplasmosis could be treated with sulfonamide/trimethoprim or sulphonamide/
pyrimethamine to avoid the side-effects of clindamycin. The cat was healthy and
seizure-free 2 years after the initial presentation.
ii. Since FIV causes lifelong infection, it is likely that the positive FIV antibody test
at 5 months of age was not caused by infection but by maternal antibodies from a
queen that was infected with or vaccinated against FIV. Vaccine is available in the
USA, where this cat was born.
168 i. FeLV can cause thrombocytopenia. It can cause either decreased production
or immune-mediated destruction of the platelets.
ii. Most antiviral drugs are specifically intended for treatment of human
h rn  s q   i   s o
infection. All the drugs mentioned below inhibit FeLV replication in vitro, but
efficacy in vivo is limited in most of them. (1) AZT (zidovudine) should only be
used at low dosage (5 mg/kg PO or SC q 12 h) in FeLV-infected cats due to its bone
marrow-suppressive effects, and cats with pre-existing FeLV-associated bone
 marrow suppression should not be treated. (2) Zalcitabine, didanosine, ribavirin,
foscarnet, and suramin all cause side-effects in cats and are not clinically useful.
{3} Human interferon-α has been tried, but it did not result in any statistically
significant differences in FeLV status, survival time, clinical or hematologic
interferon-vo was recently licensed for use in veterinary medicine in some European
countries and Japan. In one study, a statistically significant difference was noted in
the survival time of treated vs. untreated cats. No virologic parameters, however
were measured throughout the study to support the hypothesis that interferon
actually had an anti-FeLV effect rather than inhibited secondary infections, and
further studies are needed.
184
169, 170: Questions
169 A 2-year-old spayed female domestic
169
shorthair cat was seen for its annual health care
visit (169). The cat was an indoor/outdoor cat
and lived together with nine other healthy cats.
It had received its primary vaccination series
(FPV, FHV, FCV) at the age of 8 weeks and
12 weeks and rabies vaccine at 12 weeks, and
all vaccines had been given again 1 year later.
On physical examination, there was nothing
remarkable except a slightly reduced BCS (2/5)
and a rough hair coat. However the cat tested
 positive on a FeLV antigen test (FIV antibody-
negative).
i. What does a positive FeLV antigen test mean?
ii. What is the course of FeLV infection?
170 Case 170 is the same cat as case 169
170
(170). The cat lived together with nine
other cats in the same household.
i. What should be done with the other
cats?
ii. How high is the risk of transmission
to the other cats?
i. Should the other cats in that house-
hold be vaccinated against FeLV?
185
169,170:Answers
169 i. This may be a false-positive result or the cat may truly be infected. This blood
sample was retested with a different test and was positive again. Thus, a false-
positive result is very unlikely.
ii. The outcome of FeLV infection varies; it depends on the immune status, the cat's
age, the pathogenicity of the virus strain, and the virus concentration. After initial
infection, usually via the oronasal route, virus replicates in the lymphoid tissue. In
immunity. If the immune response is inadequate, FeLV spreads within lymphocytes
and monocytes, free FeLV p27 antigen is detectable, and cats become positive
On plasma antigen tests. These cats may shed virus. Often, viremia ends within
3-6 weeks. After about 3 weeks, hematopoietic precursor cells in the bone marrow
become infected, releasing infected granulocytes and platelets. After this,
virus even if they do not remain viremic, as its DNA is integrated into the bone
   e        o 
infection can be reactivated spontaneously or after immunosuppression, and cats
can become viremic again. If initial viremia persists for longer than 16 weeks, the
associated diseases; most of these die within 3 years.
170 i. All cats should be tested to determine their FeLV status. If one or more
positive cats are identified, the owner must be informed that the best method of
preventing spread to others is to isolate the infected individuals. In this case, all
nine other cats tested negative for FeLV.
ii. The risk of transmission is not very high in such a situation. If one FeLV-infected
cat has been living in an otherwise negative household, the other cats will have been
 m m q a eqord are pe is sae ai Aq a
previously immune cat may become viremic, due either to new infection or to
reactivation of a long-persisting latent infection. If an owner elects to keep them all,
the risk of infection is approximately 10-15% for an adult cat if it lives with a
viremic cat for months or years.
ifi. If owners refuse to separate housemates, the uninfected cats should be vaccinated
t0 enhance their natural level of immunity. However, owners should realize that
   s   p s     
situation. No new FeLV-negative cats should be introduced into the household, as
vaccination will not protect them sufficiently. If the household is closed to new cats,
the FeLV-negative cats tend to outlive the progressively infected cats, so that after
some time all remaining cats will be immune.
186
171, 172: Questions
171 An apparently healthy stray young adult
了
intact male domestic shorthair cat was rescued
and seen for its first preventive care exam-
ination (171). Physical examination was
       
 formed, and the FIV antibody test was positive.
A PCR submitted for confirmation of FIV
infection was, however, negative.
i. What is the interpretation of these test
results?
ii. What is the recommendation for this cat
based on the FIV test findings?
172
172 A 9-month-old castrated male British Shorthair cat (172) was seen because of
fever and thoracic effusion. FIP was diagnosed on the basis of immunofluorescence
staining of FCoV antigen in macrophages of the effusion. The cat had lived indoors
since it was obtained by the owners. It was born in a multi-cat household (18 cats)
in northern Germany and was purchased by the owners at the age of 10 weeks.
i. What is the pathogenesis of FIP?
ii. What are risk factors for the development of FIP?
ii. How did the cat become infected?
187
171,172:Answers
171 i. An FIV vaccine is available in the USA. Thus, a positive FIV antibody test is
consistent with FIV infection, vaccination (or both), or the presence of maternal
antibodies (in a cat of less than 6 months of age). In some cats, antibodies induced
by FIV vaccination have been observed to persist for at least 5 years after the last
vaccine was administered. Currently available tests are unable to distinguish
between antibodies induced by infection or vaccination. A negative PCR test
indicates the cat either is free of infection or is infected with a strain of FIV having
sufficient genetic sequence divergence that the PCR test yields a false-negative result.
False-negative results have been reported to occur in 25-50% of cats naturally
infected with FIV. Because the cat's vaccination history is unknown, it is not possible
to know the cat's true FIV infection status.
i. Since the cat may be infected, it is recommended that it be neutered and kept in
a single-cat indoor home. FIV-infected cats generally have a long (many years)
period of good health. Twice annual physical examinations and annual blood count,
biochemistry panel, and urinalysis are recommended for early detection and
treatment of any abnormalities.
172 i. FIP is caused by a virus FCoV variant that develops within a cat infected
with harmless FCoV. FIP develops when there is a spontaneous mutation in the
FCoV genome. This leads to changes in the surface structures of the virus, allowing
virus binding to ribosomes in macrophages.This mutated virus, in contrast to its
harmless relative, becomes able to replicate within macrophages; this is the key
event in the pathogenesis of FIP. The disease itself is caused by an immune-mediated
reaction to the systemic infection. Within 2 weeks, mutated pathogenic FCoV have
been distributed to the cecum, colon, intestinal lymph nodes, spleen, liver, and CNS.
 FIP occurs as a result of the development of vasculitis and granulomatous changes.
The vasculitis leads to DIC
i Immunosuppression may allow for increased intestinal virus replication, making
probability of the mutation occurring, including young age, breed predisposition,
immunosuppression, infection with FeLV or FIV, stress, glucocorticoid treatment,
and surgery. Dosage, virulence of the virus strain, and reinfection rate also affect the
rate of replication.
ii. Cats are usually infected via the oronasal route through contaminated feces shed
by cats with harmless FCoV enteric infections. Indirect transmission is also possible,
e.g. through clothes, toys, and grooming tools. In this cat, transmission probably
occurred before the cat came into the new household.
188
173, 174: Questions
173 Case 173 is the same cat as case 172. The
7
0wner wanted to treat the cat (173). There was a
second cat in the household, a 3-year-old neutered
female British shorthair cat.
i. What is the prognosis for a cat with FIP?
ii. What are the treatment options?
ii. How high is the risk that FIP will be
transmitted to the second cat in the household?
174 An adult (unknown age) female
174a
(unknown neutering status) domestic
shorthair cat was seen because of fever
and dyspnea. It had been found 7 days
earlier in the middle of a city. On physical
examination, the cat showed fever (body
temperature 40.5°C), lethargy, emacia-
tion, dehydration, tachypnea, dyspnea,
and had increased bronchiallung sounds.
Thoracic radiographs revealed an inter-
174b
stitial and alveolar pattern with partial
consolidation and emphysema
(174a)
The cat was euthanized due to rapid
deterioration. Necropsy findings con-
sisted of disseminated nodular infiltra-
tions of the lungs and mediastinal lymph
nodes. Histopathology of these organs
revealed a granulomatous inflammation
with a large number of acid-fast bacteria (174b). Molecular biology tests demon-
strated the presence of nucleic acid sequences consistent with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis.
i. How common is M. tuberculosis in cats?
ii. What are the typical clinical signs?
ili. Should infected cats be treated?
189
173,174:Answers
173 i. After a definitive diagnosis of FIP, the prognosis is very poor. In a recent
study, the median survival time after definitive diagnosis was 8 days. However there
is much individual variation; survival times of 6 months and longer have been
reported.
ii. As FIP is an immune-mediated disease, treatment is aimed at controlling
the immune response to FcoV. Immunosuppressive drugs such as prednisolone
(24 mg/kg PO q 24 h) or cyclophosphamide (2 mg/kg PO q 48 h) may slow disease
progression but will not cure FIP. Feline interferon-vo has been used, but was not
effective in a placebo-controlled study. This cat was treated with prednisolone and
feline interferon-o. The effusion resolved, and the cat was clinically healthy for 6
months. Then it developed upper respiratory tract disease and uveitis. During the
next 3 weeks, its general condition deteriorated, and the cat was euthanized 200
days after treatment initiation. At necropsy, FIP was reconfirmed.
ii. Transmission of the mutated FIP-causing FCoV is very unlikely under natural
circumstances. Therefore, there is no increased risk for the second cat in the
household, which is probably already infected with the harmless FCoV.
174 i. M. tuberculosis infection is extremely rare in cats (much rarer than in dogs).
Tuberculosis is caused by M. tuberculosis and M. bovis, which both require
infection of reservoir mammalian hosts, because environmental survival is limited
t0 a maximum of 2 weeks. Humans are the only reservoir hosts of M. tuberculosis;
if cats are infected, it is through contact with infected humans. M. bovis is closely
related to M. tuberculosis and is difficult to distinguish from it, except by
biochemical tests and nucleic acid probes. M. bovis, too, does not exist long in the
environment, and reservoir hosts are essential.
ii. Infection with M. tuberculosis in cats (and dogs) is often asymptomatic or
insidious. M. tuberculosis has an affinity for tissues with high oxygen content, and
this explains its common localization in the lungs. In pulmonary manifestations,
bronchopneumonia, pulmonary nodule formation, and hilar lymphadenopathy are
seen, causing fever, weight loss, anorexia, and harsh, nonproductive coughing.
Animals with tuberculous pneumonitis discharge organisms in the sputum, and
aerosolized droplets are the primary means of transmission.
ii. Although pets acquire M. tuberculosis infection from people, and the spread
d e are see pn paiodan uaq nou st adod oi sop ro sies wo
risk to humans and euthanasia should be considered.
190
175, 176: Questions
75a
d u is g -   a)  s  ss
aa (est) Aep e u sies oot ue anou uo Arns uad pe den Aunban
to the wild nature of undomesticated feral cats they may be handled safely only
under anesthesia, and they are unlikely to be retrapped to receive additional
veterinary care in the future.
i. What is the ideal vaccination program in this situation?
ii. Should feral cats in trap-neuter-return (TNR) programs be tested for FeLV or
FIV?
ii. How should these vaccinated cats be marked for identification?
176 An8-year-oldspayedfemale
176
domestic longhair cat was referred for
examination because of recurrent fever
and lethargy of 4 months’ duration
(176). The cat lived exclusively indoors
with another cat, which was healthy. On
physical examination, body temperature
was increased (39.8°C), the cat had p00r
BCS (score 3/9) and haircoat, and there
was  generalized peripheral lympha-
appropriate dosages of amoxicillin,
enrofloxacin, and azithromycin had not
resolved the fever. Tests for FeLV and
FIV were negative.
i. What are the three major etiologic categories of fever?
ii. What is the best approach for diagnosing the cause of fever of unknown origin
(FUO) in this cat?
191
175,176:Answers
175 i. Despite the stressful experiences of trapping,
175b
transportation, anesthesia, and surgery, adult feral
cats have been shown to respond well to vaccin-
ation performed under anesthesia at the time of
surgery. Ideally, feral cats would be vaccinated
against FPV, FHV, and FCV when they are handled
for surgery. Public health concerns dictate that all
cats be immunized against rabies in endemic areas.
Since the efficacy of a single FeLV vaccination is
unknown and adds considerable costs to neutering
programs, it is not usually included. Vaccination not
only protects the individual feral cat receiving the vaccine, but also improves the
disease resistance and health of the colony to which it is returned.
i. The prevalence of FeLV and FIV infection in feral cat colonies tends to mirror the
low values of housecats that venture outdoors. For this reason and because neutering
reduces the highest risk factors for viral transmission (reproduction and fighting),
many large-scale feral cat neutering programs do not invest resources in testing.
 padd re ue aa Pinous siod  u ediid sies jeig '
identification (175b)
176 i. The most common causes of fever are: (1) infectious inflammation, (2) non-
infectious inflammation (e.g. autoimmune diseases), and (3) neoplasia.
i. Diagnosis of the cause of FUO is often a protracted and frustrating process.
The plan should include a logical series of diagnostic steps to rule out the most
common causes of fever first, and then to consider uncommon causes. Initial tests
should be minimally invasive and proceed to more invasive procedures if
preliminary tests are nondiagnostic. A complete blood count, biochemical panel,
and urinalysis should be performed. In this case, there was generalized lympha-
denopathy, so fine-needle aspirates of the lymph nodes are included as part of the
initial evaluation. If the cause is not identified upon the initial testing, ANA,
thoracic and abdominal radiographs, and abdominal ultrasonography with fine-
needle aspirates of any abnormalities should also be performed. If a diagnosis still
is not apparent, further evaluation should include blood and urine cultures, joint
fluid and CSF analysis, cardiac ultrasonography to rule out endocarditis, and tests
for the regionally prevalent viral, bacterial, rickettsial, fungal, and protozoal
pathogens.
192
177, 178: Questions
177 Case 177 is the same cat as case
177
176. Complete blood count, bio-
chemistry panel, and urinalysis were
performed. Cytologic evaluation of the
lymph node aspirate revealed a mixed
population of small and large lympho-
cytes with
1 an increased number of
plasma cells. No organisms or neoplastic
cells were seen (177). Cytologic evalu-
ation of joint fluid revealed an increased
number of nondegenerate neutrophils. Protein electrophoresis indicated
polyclonal gammopathy and the ANA titer was 1:128. Blood and urine cultures
were negative. Radiography of the thorax and abdomen and ultrasonography of the
abdomen and heart were normal. The owner declined CSF collection.
Blood profile/
Blood profile/
biochemistry panel
Results
 biochemistry panel
Results
Hematocrit
0.26 11
Albumin
23 g/1
RBC
4.5 × 1012/1
Globulins
61 g/1
Hemoglobin
5.0 mmol/l
Urinalysis (cystocentesis)
WBC
19.5 x 109/1
Protein
++++
Mature neutrophils
17.5 x 109/1
Protein : creatinine
3.5
Lymphocytes
1.0 × 10%/1
Specific gravity
1.045
Total protein
84 g/l
Color/appearance
yellow, hazy
i. What do the cytologic findings in the lymph node and joint fluid indicate?
ii. What is the interpretation of the laboratory values?
ii. What is the diagnosis?
iv. What is the treatment plan?
v. What is the prognosis?
178 A 6-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair
178
cat was seen for routine annual examination and
consultation. The owner did not have any concerns
about its health. On physical examination both
plaque and calculus were present on the teeth, and
there was gingival recession at several roots. The
gingiva was noted to be especially inflamed at these
sites (178), and halitosis was noted.
i. What is the condition seen in this cat?
ii. How do plaque and calculus differ and why are
they important?
iii. What is the most common organism causing
periodontitis?
193
177,178:Answers
177 i. The lymph node is reactive and the joint fluid indicates active inflammation.
ii. There is a mild nonregenerative anemia, suggesting anemia of chronic inflam-
mation, and a stress leukogram, a common response to inflammation in cats. Mild
hyperglobulinemia and hypoalbuminemia are present; protein electrophoresis
confirms a polyclonal gammopathy consistent with a chronic inflammatory
response. Proteinuria in the absence of an inflammatory urine sediment or microbial
growth suggests an immune-mediated glomerulopathy. The positive ANA test
suggests systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
ii. The tentative diagnosis is SLE. This can involve multiple organ systems and is
frequently associated with peripheral lymphadenopathy in cats. There is often a
history of antibiotic-unresponsive fever as well. Immune-mediated diseases are
frequently diagnosed after eliminating infectious or neoplastic conditions.
This case illustrates that the presence of fever and leukocytosis does not always
indicate the presence of infection.
iv. In this case, treatment was started with prednisolone, after which the lympha-
denopathy resolved. Lethargy and recurrent fever persisted, so chlorambucil was
added. The cat went into complete remission, but signs relapsed following attempts
t0 reduce the medication. SLE is a chronic condition; treatment is aimed at
controlling the inflammatory response while minimizing drug side-effects. If the
diagnosis is incorrect or a concurrent infectious disease is present, therapy may
promote dissemination of the infection.
v. The prognosis of feline SLE is fair to good if an initial remission is easily induced.
Many cats eventually become resistant to treatment or develop organ failure as a
result of the inflammatory process.
178 i. Periodontal disease may be described as inflammation and recession of
perialveolar gingival margins. It is extremely common in cats and is initiated by the
presence of plaque. This biofilm is created by normal resident microflora as a by-
product of food breakdown and saliva. It acts as an organic matrix of salivary
glycoproteins and polysaccharides adhering to enamel and providing sites for
bacteria to proliferate.
i. Calculus is the mineralized form of plaque. It facilitates further formation of
plaque as well as periodontal inflammation. Thus both supra- and subgingival
calculus and plaque must be thoroughly removed in order to control periodontal
disease.
ii. Porpbyromonas (Bacteriodes) gingivalis is associated with the progression of
periodontal disease in cats.
194
179, 180: Questions
179 Case 179 is the same cat as case
179
178. Radiographs of the teeth were
taken (179).
i. What role do antimicrobials play in
the treatment of this condition?
i. Regarding the tooth shown in the
radiograph, what treatment should be
recommended?
ii. What systemic complications of
periodontal disease may occur?
180a
180b
180 A 2-year-old neutered male domestic shorthair cat was seen because of a 3-
month history of cutaneous nodules on the left side of the thorax and the neck
(180a). It was an indoor/outdoor cat living in Florence, Italy. On physical
examination, the cat was alert and responsive, but very thin. Thoracic auscultation
was unremarkable. There were well-circumscribed nonpainful subcutaneous
nodules (1 cm in diameter} on the neck and thorax. Initial evaluation consisted of
a complete blood count, biochemistry panel, urinalysis, and FeLV and FIV tests.
Cytology of the skin nodules was also performed. Complete blood count revealed
eosinophilia. FeLV antigen and FIV antibody tests were negative. On the blood
smear, a single microfilaria of Dirofilaria immitis was detected (180b).
i. What differential diagnoses should be considered?
ii. What is the plan to confirm the diagnosis?
ili. What is the frequency of microfilaremia in heartworm disease in cats?
195
179,180:Answers
179 i. Antimicrobials are a component of periodontal therapy, but without
conscientious dental prophylaxis, progression of periodontal disease is likely t0
continue. Appropriate antibiotics are clindamycin, doxycycline, or spiramycin
combined with metronidazole. Amoxicillin/clavulanate, despite sensitivity profiles,
does not decrease the numbers of Porphyromonas gingivalis.
i. In addition to mechanical scaling and antimicrobial therapy, severely affected
teeth should be extracted. Debridement of the adjacent necrotic tissue and prolifer-
ative gingival margins should also be undertaken.
iii. In people, cerebral and myocardial infarction may occur; in dogs, cardiac, renal,
do aq    p       p
complications from periodontal inflammation and infection of the caudal
maxillary teeth. These include pain on opening the mouth with resultant anorexia,
fever, chemosis, conjunctival hyperemia, exophthalmoses, and protrusion of the
third eyelid.
180 i. Nodular subcutaneous lesions are usually inflammatory or neoplastic;
noninflammatory benign lesions are uncommon. Foreign-body reactions and
parasitic granulomas are other possibilities. In this case cytologic examination of
samples obtained by fine-needle aspiration revealed degenerate neutrophils and
macrophages, with some plasma cells and histiocytes. These findings were con-
sistent with pyogranulomatous inflammation. A lesion that contains both non-
degenerate neutrophils and a prominent fraction of mononuclear phagocytes
nocardiosis, mycobacteriosis), and protozoa must be considered.
The finding of a dirofilarial microfilaria in the circulation indicates a patent
       s n      
histopathology was performed.
ii. Additional tests include antibody and antigen tests for D. immitis and staining
for acid-fast or fungal organisms in tissue biopsies. Interpretation of heartworm
tests may be complicated for many reasons. However, the sensitivity of com-
mercially available tests has increased, and now they are highly effective in detecting
single adult female worm infestations. In the cat, detectable antigenemia develops
at about 5-8 months postinfection. Thus, the clinical signs of heartworm infection
may be present prior to the presence of detectable antigenemia.
ii. In the vast majority of cases of feline heartworm disease, cats are amicro-
filaremic. If they are present, microfilariae are usually those of D. immitis (180c),
but in northern Italy, microfilariae of D. repens have also been found.
180c
196
181, 182:Questions
181 Case 181 is the same cat as case
181
180. The heartworm antibody test was
positive in this cat. Cytology of the fine-
needle aspirates showed pyogranulo-
matous inflammation with degenerate
neutrophils and macrophages. A com-
plete surgical resection of one of the
nodules was performed. B
Histology
showsa section ofaDirofilariaimmitis
microfilaria within a nodule of pyo-
granulomatous inflammation (181).
i. What are the clinical signs and what is the outcome in cats with heartworm
disease?
i. What are typical findings in diagnostic imaging?
182a
182b
182 A 5-year-old castrated male domestic
shorthair cat was seen in the USA
because of a 3-day history of progressive
depression. It was allowed indoors and
outdoors. It was current on vaccinations. The cat had had negative FeLV and FIV
tests the previous year. On physical examination, the cat was depressed and icteric
(182a). There was fever (body temperature 39.8°C), tachycardia (200 bpm), and
tachypnea (50 bpm). Complete blood count, biochemical panel, clotting profile, and
urinalysis revealed nonregenerative anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, increased
ALT activity and ALP activity, hyperbilirubinemia, hyperammonemia, increased PTT,
and increased FDPs. On examination of the blood smear, intraerythocytic piroplasms
with *safety pin' morphology were observed in a few cells (182b).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What is the treatment for this disease?
ii. What is the prognosis?
197
181,182:Answers
181 i. In cats, D. immitis infection and consequent heartworm disease are quite
common in endemic areas, but the infection rate is only 5-20% of that of dogs.
Worm burdens are usually low (1-2 worms) but morbidity and mortality tend to
be greater than in dogs. A small worm burden can cause sudden death, chronic
vomiting, coughing, dyspnea, respiratory failure, and weight loss. Many other
symptoms may be seen, including tachycardia, syncope, and central nervous system
abnormalities. Often, the clinical signs may be confused with signs of bronchial
asthma. Skin lesions due to microfilaria or adult worms are rare; infrequently, D.
immitis larvae or adults may result in the formation of nodular to ulcerative lesions
or a papular pruritic rash due to a hypersensitivity reaction to larvae. Aberrant
adult heartworms have been recovered from many sites and the most reported cases
are incidental findings.
ii. As in dogs, radiography and echocardiography are useful in cats. Thoracic
radiography may provide strong evidence of feline hearrworm disease, and is
valuable for assessing the severity of disease and monitoring its progression or
density in about 50% of cats diagnosed with heartworm infection. In some cases,
worms are not visualized. Cardiac ultrasound examination and thoracic radio-
graphs did not show any findings associated with dirofilariasis in this case.
182 i. The diagnosis is Cytauxzoon felis infection, a tick-borne protozoal infection
of domestic and nondomestic cats. The infection is usually asymptomatic in the
reservoir host (bobcat) and other nondomestic felids. In domestic cats, infection
typically results in a rapidly progressive course of hemolytic anemia, respiratory
and hepatic failure, DIC, and shock. The time from the first clinical signs to death
is often approximately 5 days.
drugs have been tried with variable success. Recently, combination therapy with
atovaquone and azithromycin has been used and may prove superior to other drugs.
ili. Cats that present in the later stages of disease with hypothermia, DIC, and coma
have a poor prognosis for survival. Cats that survive the first 3 days of therapy
have a favorable prognosis. Recently, a higher survival rate, even among untreated
cats, has been reported, suggesting that less virulent strains or host adaptation are
developing. Nonetheless, this cat died before treatment could be initiated.
198
183, 184: Questions
183 A 14-year-old castrated male domestic
183
shorthair cat was seen because of coughing. It
was allowed to roam outside. Six months
earlier, the cat had been diagnosed with
pulmonary cryptococcosis and FIV infection.
The cat had been treated with oral itra-
conazole for the past 6 months. The cough
had resolved. Its serum cryptococcal antigen
titer had declined from a pretreatment value
of 1:256 to zero. The cryptococcal antigen test
was repeated when the cough recurred, and
was still negative.
Thoracic radiographs
showed a diffuse bronchointerstitial pattern.
A BAL was performed and on cytology,
mainly macrophages, a few eosinophils, and
a few neutrophils were seen. Three large
nematodes were seen in the bronchial wash
fluid (183) (wet preparation)
i. What nematode species is this?
ii. How should the cat be treated?
ii.What is the significance of the cat's FIV status?
184 An outbreak of upper respiratory
184
tract disease characterized by oral and
corneal ulceration, conjunctivitis, fever,
nasal discharge, and sneezing occurred
in multiple rooms at a cat rescue facility.
All cats had been tested negative for
FeLV and FIV at the time of admission
and had received MLV vaccines against
FPV, FHV, and FCV at admission and
3 weeks later. Parasite control was provided by selemectin administered monthly.
Cats remained in their originally assigned room from the time of admission to the
time of adoption. Of the 120 cats kept in the facility, the most severely affected
were kittens aged 8 weeks to 4 months. One litter of 4-month-old kittens that had
resided at the facility for 5 weeks was particularly ill, with severe oral ulceration,
salivation, anorexia, fever and dehydration (184).
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. What is the treatment?
ifi. Is the preventive health care program appropriate?
199
183,184:Answers
 ' ps a   a j o    
operculated ova with asymmetric bipolar plugs characteristic of Eucoleus aerophila
(formerly Capillaria aerophila).
q rq s  a q ro aa sd sn rae 
post-treatment to ensure elimination of infection.
ini. It is likely that FIV infection with immune dysfunction manifested clinically as
sequential respiratory infections. In healthy adult cats, Eucoleus aerophila infections
are usually asymptomatic. Quantification of lymphocyte subsets (e.g. CD4+ cells,
CD8+ cells) or viral load may help clarify whether the cat had immunosuppression
associated with chronic FIV infection. However, lymphocyte subset numbers may
not be useful as a marker of immune dysfunction in FIV-infected cats since impaired
lymphocyte responsiveness precedes the decline in CD4+ cell counts, and some
chronically infected cats have very low CD4+ cell counts without obvious clinical
immunodeficiency.
184 i. The clinical signs suggest an outbreak of viral upper respiratory tract infection.
The combination of both severe ocular and oral lesions suggests a mixed infection
with FHV and FCV, but this cannot be confirmed without virus isolation. The other
common cause of upper respiratory tract disease in cats is Bordetella bronchiseptica.
Although it does not typically cause corneal and oral ulceration, it can be present in
mixed infections.
i. In acute infections, treatment is symptomatic while the infection runs its course over
outbreaks, antibiotics should be selected with activity against B. bronchiseptica and
that can be administered once daily, for practicality. L-lysine supplementation has
been suggested in the past, but has been shown to be ineffective or possibly harmful
   e  s i ie  s r 
conjunctivitis or corneal ulceration. Oral famciclovir may be indicated in some cats
with FHV infection. The most severely affected cats may need esophagostomy tubes
t0 maintain hydration and nutrition.
ii. The preventive health program, which includes FeLV and FIV testing, MLV vaccin-
ation at admission, and routine parasite control, is appropriate. In shelters,
vaccinations may be repeated at 2-week intervals until kittens are at least 16 weeks
old. Adult cats should be vaccinated twice. Ideally, a quarantine area would be
available to house newly arriving cats. FHV and FCV are highly infectious and can
be easily transmitted by contaminated equipment or personnel, so thorough cleaning
with appropriate cleaning solutions is required. Many routinely used disinfectants,
such as quaternary ammonium products, do not inactivate both viruses.
200
185, 186: Questions
185
185 A 15-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat was seen for its annual
lost one ear in a conflict with the neighbors’ dog (185). Since the diagnosis of the
          
occasionally suffered from mild ocular and nasal discharge and stomatitis, but was
otherwise healthy.
i. What is the prognosis in FIV infection?
i. How should a FIV-infected cat be managed at home?
ii. Should a FIV-infected cat receive routine vaccinations?
186
186 Case 186 is the same cat as case 185. On physical examination, the cat had
some ocular discharge on the left side and slightly protruding third eyelids on both
sides. It also had gingivitis around some of its teeth (186).
i. How often should FIV-infected cats receive health-check visits to their veter-
inarian?
ii. What has to be considered if FIV-infected cats need veterinary care?
ii. What has to be considered if FIV-infected cats are sick?
201
185,186:Answers
185 i. FIV can cause an acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in cats resulting in
an increased risk of opportunistic infections, neurologic diseases, and tumors. In
most naturally infected cats, however, FIV infection does not cause a severe clinical
syndrome. Infected cats can live for many years and may die in old age from causes
unrelated to their FIV infection; their quality of life is usually fairly good.
s s   i s e  r   
indoors. This is not only to prevent spread to other cats in the neighborhood, but
by other animals or in the environment. Secondary infections play a major role in
the progression of FIV infection. FIV-infected cats should be fed a well-cooked,
high-quality diet to avoid the risk of acquiring food-borne bacterial or parasitic
infections, and should be neutered to reduce stresses associated with estrus, mating,
fighting and the desire to roam outside.
ii. Opinions about vaccination of FIV-infected cats differ. FIV-infected cats are more
susceptible to secondary infections; thus, routine vaccination seems to be indicated.
However, although vaccination may give protection from infection, it may also
cause progression of FIV infection due to immune stimulation causing increased
virus production. If infected cats are kept strictly indoors, the risk of being infected
may be lower than the possible harmful effect of vaccination.
186 i. Healh-check visits to the veterinarian should be performed at least 6 monthly
in order to detect changes in the health status promptly. A complete blood count,
biochemistry panel, and urinalysis should be performed annually. If there are
changes, laboratory values should be monitored more frequently.
ii. As the virus lives only for seconds outside the host and is susceptible to all
disinfectants, routine cleaning procedures will prevent transmission. In a veterinary
hospital, FIV-infected cats can be housed (in individual cages) in the same ward as
other hospitalized patients. However, they may be immunosuppressed and should
be kept away from cats with other infectious diseases. Hospital staff should wash
their hands between patients and after handling animals and cleaning cages
(primarily to protect the FIV-infected immunosuppressed cat).
ini. If FIV-infected cats are sick, prompt and accurate identification of the secondary
disease is essential to allow early therapeutic intervention and a successful outcome.
Many cats with FIV infection respond as well as uninfected cats to appropriate
medications, although a longer or more aggressive course of therapy may be needed.
be considered where their use is essential. Griseofulvin has been shown to cause
myelosuppression in FIV-infected cats and should not be used. Surgery is generally
well tolerated, although perioperative antibiotic administration should be used for
all surgeries and dental procedures.
202
187, 188: Questions
187a
187b
187 A 2-year-old neutered male dom-
 estic shorthair cat was referred because
of a hind limb injury and progressive
neurologic deterioration. It lived mainly
outdoors. It had originally been treated by a local veterinarian who had amputated
wound had broken down 6 days later. On referral, physical examination showed the
cat was in poor body condition and had an unusual facial expression (187a) and
moderately increased muscle tone in all three remaining limbs (187b). The cat was
hospitalized and the amputation wound was cleaned, debrided, and restitched.
When it was offered food the following day, it had a good appetite but was unable
to swallow properly. Soon, it was noticed that physical stimulation caused an
 obvious increase in muscle tone of the remaining limbs.
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. How should this cat be treated?
188 A 2-year-old spayed female dom-
188
estic shorthair cat was seen because of
recurrent diarrhea (188). The cat was a
single, indoor-only cat. Treatment with
metronidazole, tylosin, as well as trials
with a high-fiber diet, and a low-residue
diet had not resolved the diarrhea. Small
volumes of cow-pie to semi-formed,
malodorous stool were produced frequently, and intermittently contained mucus
and fresh blood. On physical examination, the cat was in good body condition but
had a small amount of liquid feces dripping from the anus. Fecal flotation had been
negative on two occasions.
i. What portion of the bowel is the problem localized to?
ii. What diagnostic tests should be considered?
i. How do Tritrichomonas foetus and Giardia lambia differ microscopically?
203
187,188:Answers
187 i. The cat has generalized tetanus. This disease
187c
develops as a result of anerobic infection with
Clostridium tetani of a wound. C. tetani releases an
exotoxin (tetanospasmin) which causes inhibition of
inhibitory neurotransmitter (GABA, glycine) release in
the CNS. This results in uncontrolled contraction of
skeletal muscles. The cat's peculiar facial expression, with
overly erect ears, narrow palpebral fissures, elevated
whiskers, and partial third eyelid prolapse resulted from
tetanic contraction of the muscles of facial expression,
87d
while dysphagia resulted from pharyngeal muscle spasm.
Surprisingly, jaw tone was not increased. The severity of
the cat's neurologic signs depended on its state of arousal,
with external stimulation resulting in increased muscle
tone in the limbs and face. However cats are relatively
resistant to tetanospasmin, so local tetanus is the most
common clinical manifestation of tetanus in this species.
ii. Management of generalized tetanus includes treatment
of the inciting wound, neutralization of unbound tetanus
toxin in the bloodstream and peripheral tissues using
equine antitoxin, and symptomatic therapy to minimize muscle spasm. In this case,
the most likely site of clostridial infection was the amputation stump. Accordingly,
this wound was debrided and the cat was treated with metronidazole. It improved
slowly over 2 weeks, after which time it was essentially normal in its facial expres-
difficult because of pharyngeal muscle spasm, and insertion of a feeding tube can
greatly simplify subsequent management.
188 i. This is large-bowel diarrhea (small amounts, increased frequency, good body
condition, mucus, fresh blood). Small-bowel involvement would be associated with
normal frequency, variable volume (normal to increased), weight loss, steatorrhea,
and melena.
ii. Rectal cytology or direct fecal smear using freshly voided, diarrheic feces diluted
with saline and observed under a cover slip may reveal trichomonad trophozoites
in approximately 14% of cats infected with T. foetus. Culture using commercial
kits is simple; in addition, they have a much higher sensitivity. Feces may also be
sent to a commercial laboratory with microbiology facilities to be incubated in
modified Diamond's medium or for PCR.
i. G. lambia rophozoites have two nuclei, a concave ventral disk and move like a fall-
ing leaf. T. foetus are spindle-shaped, possess a single nucleus and have an undulating
membrane along the entire length of their body. Their movement is jerky and rolling.
204
189, 190: Questions
189
189 Case 189 is the same cat as case 188. Tritrichomonas foetus was identified in
the feces of this cat (189).
i. How do cats become infected with T. foetus?
ii. What are the therapeutic options?
i. What is the prognosis for a treated vs. an untreated cat?
190 A 6-year-old spayed female domestic
061
shorthair cat was seen because of a
change of behavior over the past 2 days.
 It had become apprehensive and nervous,
whereas it was normally very friendly. It
began seeking solitude and became
irritable when approached, even rying to
bite people. The cat lived indoors and
outdoors in a rural area. It had never
been vaccinated. On physical examin-
ation the pupils were dilated, and the
39.9°C) and a blank staring expression. Over the subsequent day in the veterinary
hospital, muscle tremors and weakness developed, the cat began to pace in the cage,
and further cranial nerve signs developed. It also vocalized frequently, and its voice
changed (190).
i. What disease should be considered?
i. What progression of clinical signs is expected?
ii. How is the disease diagnosed?
iv. What therapy is recommended?
205
189,190:Answers
189 i. The sources of infection with T. foetus are unclear. Numerous potential risk
factors have been evaluated. Proximity to pigs, cattle, or horses, type of water source,
rural vs. urban, recent travel, feeding of raw meat, and outdoor access are not
identified as risk factors. Catteries and rescue shelters have a higher prevalence of
infection suggesting that hygiene, stress, and other effects of crowding might play a
role. It is also possible for a single, indoor-living cat to be infected with T. foetus.
i. Treatment with ronidazole (30 mg/kg q 24 h for 14 days) is effective. This dose
should not be exceeded as neurotoxicity may occur. Also, this drug should not be
used indiscriminately for diarrhea not confirmed to be due to T. foetus due to
neurotoxicity that may occur at recommended doses. Not enough is understood at
the present time about the pharmacokinetics of this drug in the cat. Many other
antimicrobial therapies have been tried unsuccessfully.
i. In cats treated with ronidazole, long-term cure may be expected. Cats treated
diarrhea for 4-24 months (median 9 months) before spontaneous resolution of
infection occurs.
190 i.Rabies should be considered.
ii. Cats usually develop the furious form of rabies. Paralysis develops rapidly once
clinical signs appear.
ili. The diagnosis of rabies is made by the postmortem demonstration of rabies virus
antigen in brain tissue. There is no adequately sensitive antemortem test available.
Determination of antibodies against rabies virus in blood to document recent
nation as compared to infection. Antibody detection is also not reliable as false-
negative results may occur.
iv. Treatment of suspected rabies-infected patients is not recommended because no
known therapy has proven effective. The risk to the care providers is high, and
having been exposed to rabies should be reported to local public health
authorities, who will decide according to the local laws and vaccination status of
the cat and recommend further action (e.g. quarantine, euthanasia). In this case,
the cat died suddenly. Histologic evaluation of the brain for Negri bodies and IFA
testing of the brain for rabies antigen were negative. Histopathologic findings
were consistent with FIP.
206
191, 192: Questions
191 A 9-year-old castrated male Siamese
19la
mix was referred for examination of
stomatitis (191a). The cat was known to
be infected with FIV for at least 6 years.
A biopsy of the gingival tissue was
consistent
with
 lymphoplasmacytic
stomatitis.
i. What is the pathogenesis of stomatitis
in FIV infection?
i. What treatment is most likely to
resolve the condition permanently?
A. Treatment with antibiotics such as
amoxicillin/clavulanate or clindamycin.
B. Treatment with azithromycin for bartonellosis.
C. Dental scaling and polishing with extraction of decayed teeth.
D. Full-mouth dental extraction.
E. Immunosuppressive dosages of prednisolone and/or cyclosporin.
192
192 A 5-year-old domestic shorthair cat was seen because of sudden-onset lethargy
of 1 day's duration (192). On physical examination, pale and icteric oral mucous
membranes, weak peripheral pulses, and a body temperature of 36.5°C were noted.
Additionally, the cat appeared to have diffuse abdominal pain. The respiratory rate
(66 bpm) and heart rate (240 bpm) were increased, and the systolic blood pressure
(85 mmHg) was decreased. The cat was suspected to be in endotoxemic shock.
i. What is endotoxin?
i. Is it possible to have a negative blood culture in an endotoxemic patient?
i. What are risk factors for endotoxemia in the cat?
207
191, 192:Answers
191 i. Up to 50% of FIV-infected cats may
191b
suffer from chronic ulceroproliferative stoma-
titis. It characteristically originates in the fauces
and gradually spreads rostrally, especially along
the maxillary teeth. Pain and tooth loss are
common, and severe stomatitis can lead to
anorexiaand
emaciation.
The cause
is
uncertain, although the histologic findings
suggest an immune response to chronic anti-
genic stimulation, or immune dysregulation. In
addition, circulating lymphocytes of cats with
stomatitis have higher than normal expression
of inflammatory cytokines, further implicating immune activation in the pathogenesis.
Concurrent FCV infection is often identified and may be a cofactor inducing
stomatitis along with FIV. Other infectious agents may also play a role.
ii. D. Full-mouth dental extraction. In some cats with inflammation limited to the
fauces, the canine and incisor teeth may be left in situ. Particular attention must be
paid to complete removal of all tooth roots. Therefore, dental radiographs should
be performed after the end of the procedure. Other treatments may partially palliate
the gingival inflammation (although immunosupressants should be avoided in FIV-
infected cats), but extraction is usually required to resolve the disease permanently.
 p  s  r     e r sir s
cats. Fuill-mouth dental extraction followed by a 2-week course of amoxicillin/
clavulanate resulted in complete resolution of the stomatitis in this cat (191b).
192 i. Endotoxin is lipopolysaccharide (LPS) released from the outer membrane of
lysed Gram-negative bacteria. In a healthy individual, endotoxin associated with
ingesta or intestinal flora is cleared by the gut-associated immune system and the
portal circulation. The organisms usually implicated are Pseudomonas spp.,
Escherichia spp., Klebsiella spp., Enterbacter spp., and Proteus spp.
i. In some cases of endotoxemia, viable bacteria are present in the blood leading
to positive blood cultures, but endotoxemic cats can have negative blood cultures.
Bacteria may remain compartmentalized in the tissues or intestine or may be
nonviable, resulting in negative blood cultures.
ii. Risk factors for sepsis and endotoxemia in cats include bite wounds, septic
peritonitis, pyothorax, and bacteremia secondary to pyelonephritis, gastrointestinal
disease, pneumonia, endocarditis, osteomyelitis, and pyometra. Icterus associated
with sepsis and endotoxemia is often a result of cholestasis in the absence of
structural hepatic disease or hepatic infection.
208
193, 194: Questions
193 A 12-year-old castrated male
193
domestic shorthair cat was seen
because of weight loss, dropping food
while eating, poor coat, lower energy
than previously, and halitosis (193).
On physical examination, severe
periodontal disease was noted with a
region of marked inflammation on
one side of the mandible. The man-
dibular lymph node on the same side was enlarged, and a small draining fistula was
seen adjacent to one tooth in the area.
i. How does osteomyelitis develop?
i. Which organisms may play a role?
ili. How do acute and chronic osteomyelitis differ in presentation?
iv. What treatment is recommended for this cat?
194 A 1-year-old intact female Hima-
194a
layan cat was seen because of depression
and rapid breathing. The cat lived exclu-
without vaccinations, and was fed a diet
supplemented with raw meat. On physi-
cal examination, the cat was tachypneic
(55 bpm), had high body temperature
(40.0°C), and dull mentation (194a).
194b
There was increased inspiratory effort
and bronchovesicular sounds in all lung
fields. Ophthalmic examination revealed
bilateral ocular lesions (194b).
i. What are the rule-outs for high body
temperature?
ii. What is the abnormality seen on
fundic examination?
209
193,194:Answers
193 i. Normal bone is resistant to infection. However ischemia, bacterial
contamination, the presence of foreign material, bone necrosis and sequestration,
and changes in the local or systemic immune response may all play a role in the
development of osteomyelitis.
i. Several reports indicate that Stapbylococcus spp. account for up to 60% of all
bacterial cases. Streptococcus and Enterococcus spp. are other Gram-positive
organisms that may be implicated. Gram-negative organisms are also implicated
and include Pasteurella, E. coli, and Pseudomonas spp. Anerobes that have been
cultured include Actinomyces, Nocardia, and Bacteroides and isolation of these
fastidious agents has increased with improved sample handling. Fungal organisms
may also cause osteomyelitis
ii. Acute osteomyelitis often presents with fever localized pain, erythema, swelling,
lethargy, and leukocytosis. As the condition becomes chronic, a draining tract,
lameness, or ill thrift may be the only findings.
iv. The cat should be anesthetized for teeth cleaning including subgingival curettage,
individual tooth examination including periodontal probing to evaluate and chart
pocket depths, polishing, radiography of affected teeth, and biopsy of the affected
bone for histology and culture to determine whether the affected area is neoplastic
 or infected. Establishment of drainage and debridement to rermove ischemic, necrotic
tissue is critical for optimal healing along with treatment with antimicrobials
appropriate for the agent. Antimicrobials chosen must be safe for long-term use,
must reach therapeutic levels in bone, and must be based on culture and sensitivity
results. Most often, these results will show organism susceptibility to first-generation
cephalosporins, amoxicillin/clavulanate; for Gram-negative aerobes, quinolones,
second/third-generation cephalosporins, imipenem, or ticaracillin/clavulanate may be
required. With anerobic organisms, amoxicillin/clavulanate, metronidazole, 0r
clindamycin may be effective. Antibiotics should be continued for at least 3 weeks
past clinical resolution of osteomyelitis. In the case of routine treatment of
periodontal disease, cats should receive antibiotics IV immediately prior to dental
prophylaxis because 36% of cats with periodontal disease undergoing prophylaxis
have positive blood cultures at the time of dental prophylaxis. In this case, there was
less redness in the mouth 2 weeks after dental prophylaxis. Antibiotics were
continued for another month, at which time the cat had improved greatly. Six
months later there was no apparent recurrence of the clinical signs of infection.
194 i. The two rule-outs for high body temperature are fever or hyperthermia. Fever
is more likely in this case as causes of hyperthermia (stress, overheating, hyper-
 thyroidism) were unlikely. The most common causes of fever are infectious inflamm-
ation, noninfectious inflammation (e.g. autoimmune diseases), and neoplasia.
ii. There is evidence of chorioretinitis in this cat.
210
195-197:Questions
195 Case 195 is the same cat as case 194.
195
Blood profile/
biochemistry panel
Results
Hematocrit
0.27 /1
Neutrophilia
16.5 x 10*/l
Left shift band
neutrophils
0.85 x 109/1
Lymphocytosis
8.1 × 10%/1
Monocytosis
1.20 x 10*%/
ALT - increased
255 IU/1
ALP - increased
156 IU/1
Thoracic radiographs (195) were taken.
i. What is the radiographic interpretation?
ii. What is the next diagnostic step?
196 Case 196 is the same cat as cases
196
194 and 195.A BAL was performed
through a sterile endotracheal tube. A
cytologic preparation was evaluated
(196) (Wrights-Giemsa stain).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What treatment should be provided?
ii. How did the cat probably acquire the
infection?
197A10-year-oldneuteredfemale
197
domestic shorthair cat was seen because
of ocular disease and anorexia. Physical
examination revealed weight loss, lethar-
gy, anorexia, generalized lymphadeno-
pathy, symmetric alopecia on the ear
pinnae with nodular dermatitis, and
bilateral ocular changes (197). Previous treatment consisted of amoxicillin/
clavulanate for 7 days but had not led to any improvement.
i. How can the ocular changes be characterized, and what are the differential
diagnoses for this clinical picture?
ii. What should the diagnostic plan be?
211
195-197:Answers
195 i. There is a patchy interstitial alveolar pattern of the lungs.
ii. Collection of BAL fluid for cytology and culture is indicated.
196 i. There is a mixed inflammatory reaction predominated by neutrophils and
macrophages. Several small basophilic banana-shaped organisms consistent with
Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites are present. The cat has toxoplasmosis of the lungs
with widespread dissemination to the CNS and other organs likely.
i. The drug of choice is clindamycin given at a high dose (10.0-12.5 mg/kg PO q 12 h)
for 4 weeks. Clinical improvement is expected to begin within the first days of
to increased inflammatory responses shortly after initiation of therapy. These cats may
benefit from anti-inflammatory dosages of prednisolone for a few days. Prolonged use
of immunosuppressive drugs should be avoided. Therapy was uncomplicated in this
cat and there was complete recovery from clinical signs. It should be remembered that
once an individual has recovered from toxoplasmosis, inactive tissue cysts remain
present for life and may be reactivated during immunosuppression.
ii. Cats typically acquire toxoplasmosis from hunting diseased animals or
raw meat diet. The risk of toxoplasmosis can be reduced by feeding commercial
cooked diets, cooking meat, or freezing meat to lower than -12°C for at least 24
hours.
197 i. The cat shows a bilateral uveitis with aqueous flare, iritis, hyphema, and
hypopion. The fundic examination revealed small hemorrhages and posterior
synechia. The most common causes of bilateral uveitis are systemic diseases (e.g
infectious, neoplastic). In intraocular bleeding of undetermined cause, a neoplasm
always has to be considered. Lymphoma is the most common tumor of the eyes of
cats and usually demonstrates aqueous flare, iris swelling, changes in iris color, and
iris vascularization. Infectious diseases can be caused by viral, bacterial, fungal, and
parasitic infections. The most common infectious agents include FCoV, FeLV, FIV,
Toxoplasma gondii, Bartonella spp., and fungi (e.g. cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis).
In endemic areas unusual systemic diseases (e.g. leishmaniasis, ehrlichiosis) also
have to be considered.
ii. Investigation into the cause of the uveitis includes complete blood count,
biochemistry panel, urinalysis, and tests for infectious diseases (e.g. FeLV, FIV, fungi,
T. gondi). Tests for leishmaniasis and ehrlichiosis are necessary in endemic areas.
Examination of aqueous humor and detection of local antibodies (e.g. against T.
gondi, Bartonella spp., fungi) is also an option, and antibodies detected in aqueous
humor are better suited for establishing a diagnosis than antibodies in the serum.
212
198, 199: Questions
198 Case 198 is the same cat as case 197.
861
The cat had severe uveitis (198).
Blood profile/
biochemistry panel
Results
Hematocrit - mild
nonregenerative anemia
0.29 /1
Leukopenia
4.3 x 109%/
Hyperproteinemia
91 g/1
Hypoalbuminemia
18 g/l
Hyperglobulinemia
73 g/1
Albumin : globulin
0.25
Serum
electrophoresis
showed
polyclonal gammopathy. Urinalysis was
unremarkable. FeLV antigen, FIV anti-
body, and T gondii IgM and IgG antibody tests were negative. The Leishmania spp.
antibody titer was 1:128 (high titer).
i. How can these results be interpreted?
ii. What tests should be done next?
199
199 Case 199 is the same cat as cases 197 and 198. Cytology of aqueous humor
showed primarily macrophages with rare round basophilic nuclei suggestive of
amastigotes. A bone marrow aspirate was collected (199). Bone marrow cytology
and bone marrow PCR confirmed the presence of Leishmania spp.
i. What is the diagnostic value of antibody testing and PCR for the diagnosis of
leishmaniasis?
i. What is the Leishmania spp. antibody prevalence in cats in endemic areas?
213
198,199:Answers
198 i. Mild nonregenerative anemia in cats is most commonly caused by chronic
inflammation (e.g. systemic infections, neoplasms). Tests for detection of antibodies
against Leishmania spp. in cats are not very reliable. The presence of antibodies is
not diagnostic for the disease since positive results can occur in healthy cats as well
as diseased cats. In addition, in countries in which leishmaniasis has been reported
in cats (Asia, South America, USA, the Mediterranean area including Spain,
Portugal, Italy, and France) less than 50% of the diseased cats have antibodies
against Leishmania spp.
i. Further diagnostics should include bone marrow aspiration for cytology and
PCR for Leishmania spp. on blood and bone marrow samples. In addition, cytology
can be performed on an imprint or aspirate of the pinna lesions. In doubtful cases,
immunohistochemical techniques can be used to stain the organism. PCR testing of
aqueous humor may be useful.
199 i. Antibody testing for leishmaniasis is generally less reliable in cats than in
dogs because many cats that are infected do not have detectable antibodies. The
number of clinical cases is small. PCR of bone marrow samples is the most reliable
test to diagnose the disease. PCR tests on feline blood samples are in progress but
preliminary results confirm the presence of Leishmania DNA in such speciments.
i. Antibody prevalence against Leishmania spp. in cats from endemic areas varies
widely. In one study, only 1 of 110 (0.9%) cat serum samples collected in Italy
examined by immunofluorescent antibody (IFA) and in another study only 14 of
175 (8%) samples tested by enzyme-linked immunofluorescent assay (ELISA) and
Western blot were positive for anti-Leisbmania spp. antibodies. However, other
studies performed in Italy and Spain using IFA showed an antibody prevalence of
between 42 and 59%. In some endemic areas serological surveys have also been
carried out in cats, using IHAT in Egypt, Western blot in France, and IFAT in Italy.
Sixty Egyptian cats had low serological antibody titers, from 1/32 to 1/128; in the
endemic focus of canine leishmaniasis of Alpes Maritimes, 12 out of 97 (12.5%)
cats showed antibodies versus antigens of L. infantum. Regardless of the actual
prevalence of infection, leishmaniasis should be included in the differential diagnosis
of systemic and/or dermatologic diseases in endemic areas. The cat should be
considered an animal with an active role in the transmission and diffusion of
leishmaniasis, unlike goats, calves, and horses that could serve as accidental
reservoirs of the disease. In fact it has been demonstrated that some feline parasites
(Phlebotomus perniciosus) act as vectors of L. infantum, suggesting that cats may
represent an additional domestic reservoir for this protoza.
214
Table of reference ranges
(SI units and conventional units) in adult cats
(in cats, some values (*} can be increased in stress)
Reference
Conversion
Reference
interval
factor (SI to
Physical
interval
(conventional
conventional
examination
(SI units)
units)
units)
Body weight
variable (kg)
variable (lb)
2.2
Body temperature
38.0-39.0* (°C)
100-102*(°F)
1.8 (+ 32)
Heart rate
120-180* (bpm)
120-180* (bpm)
1
 Respiratory rate
20-40* (bpm)
20-40* (bpm)
1
Systolic blood
100-160*(mmHg)
100-160*(mmHg)
1
pressure
Reference
Conversion
Reference
interval
factor (SI to
Complete blood
interval
(conventional
conventional
count
(SI units)
units)
units)
Red blood cells
5-10 (× 1012/1)
5-10 (× 106/μl)
1
Hemoglobin
5.5-10.5 (mmol/l)
8.8-16.9 (g/dl)
0.6206
Hematocrit
0.30-0.45 (1/1)
30-45%
0.01
MCV
40-55 (fl)
40-55 (fl)
1
MCH
0.8-1.0 (fmol/l)
0.8-1.0 (pg)
1
MCHC
19-22 (mmol/l)
19-22 (mmol/l)
1
Reticulocytes
0-60 (× 10°/1)
0-60 (× 103/μl)
1
Platelets
200-600 (x 10°/1)
200-600 (× 103/μ1)
MPV
11-18 (fl)
11-18 (fl)
1
White blood cells
5-18* (× 10°/1)
5-18* (× 103/μl)
1
Mature neutrophils
3-11* (×109/l)
3-11* (× 103/μl)
1
 Band neutrophils
0-0.4 (× 109/1)
0-0.4 (x 103/μl)
1
Eosinophils
0-1.0 (× 10%/1)
0-1.0 (× 103/μl)
1
Basophils
0-0.4 (× 109/1)
0-0.4 (× 103/μl)
1
Lymphocytes
1.5-7.0 (× 109/)
1.5-7.0 (× 103/μl)
1
Monocytes
0-1.0 (× 10%/1)
0-1.0 (× 103/μl)
215
Table of reference ranges
Reference
Conversion
Reference
interval
factor (SI to
Coagulation
interval
(conventional
conventional
panel
(SI units)
units)
units)
PT
0-8 (sec)
0-8 (sec)
1
PTT
0-13 (sec)
0-13 (sec)
1
TT
0-12 (sec)
0-12 (sec)
1
Antithrombin II
95-130 (%)
95-130 (%)
1
FDP
0-20 (μg/ml)
0-20 (μg/ml)
1
Reference
Conversion
Reference
interval
factor (SI to
Biochemistry
interval
{conventional
conventional
panel
(SI units)
units)
units)
ALT
0-100 (IU/)
0-100 (IU/)
1
ALP
0-50 (IU/l)
0 - 50 (IU/l)
1
GDH
0-10 (IU/l)
0-10 (IU/)
1
-GT
0-5 (IU/)
0-5 (IU/)
1
AST
0-50 (IU/)
0-50 (IU/)
1
CK
0-400 (IU/)
0-400 (IU/l)
1
LDH
0-300 (IU/l)
0-300 (IU/)
1
α-Amylase
0-2000 (IU/l)
0-2000 (IU/)
1
Lipase
0-300 (IU/)
0-300 (IU/)
1
Cholinesterase
2300-4500 (IU/)
2300-4500 (IU/l)
1
Total protein
55-80 (g/l)
5.5-8.0 (g/dl)
0.1
Albumin
25-40 (g/l)
2.5-4.0 (g/dl)
0.1
Globulins
25-50 (g/l)
2.5-5.0 (g/dl)
0.1
Bilirubin
0-5 (μmol/l)
0-0.3 (mg/dl)
0.059
Bile acids
0-20 (μmol/l)
0-8 (μg/ml)
0.41
NH,
0-60 (μmol/l)
0-60 (μEq/l)
1
Creatinine
0 - 170 (μmol/l)
0 - 1.9 (mg/dl)
0.0113
Urea
5-10 (mmol/)
14-28 (mg/dl BUN)
2.8
Glucose
4-7* (mmol/)
72-126* (mg/dl)
18
Sodium
145-155 (mmol/l)
145-155 (mEq/l)
1
Potassium
3.5-5.5 (mmol/l)
3.5-5.5 (mEq/l)
1
Chloride
110-130 (mmol/)
110-130 (mEq/l)
1
Calcium
2.1-2.6 (mmol/l)
8.4-10.4 (mg/dl)
4
Phosphate
1.0-2.3 (mmol/l)
3.1-7.1 (mg/dl)
3.1
Magnesium
0.7-2.6(mmol/l)
0.7-2.6 (mmol/l)
1
TCO2
17-24 (mmol/l)
17-24 (mEq/l)
1
Anion gap
8-19 (mval/l)
8-19 (mval/l)
1
216
Table of reference ranges
Reference
Conversion
Reference
interval
factor (SI to
interval
(conventional
conventional
Urinalysis
(SI units)
units)
units)
Color, appearance
yellow, clear
yellow, clear
Specific gravity
1.001-1.080
1.001-1.080
1
pH
5-7
5-7
1
Protein
Glucose
Ketone
Bilirubin
Blood
Protein to
0-0.5
0-0.5
1
creatinine ratio
Red blood cells
0-5 (/hpf)
0-5 (/hpf)
1
White blood cells
0-3 (/hpf)
0-3 (/hpf)
1
Casts
0 (/hpf)
0 (/hpf)
1
217
Note: locator numbers refer
anorexia (continued)
antibiotics (continned)
to case numbers
FPV 84,117
urinary tract infection
mycobacterial infection
127
abdominal distension 94,
140, 141
 antifungal therapy
95,96
pleural space infection
aspergillosis 40
abdominal effusion 94,95,
149
cryptococcosis 44, 109
96
 pyogranulomatous disease
dermatophytosis 102
abdominal lesions 154, 155
92
microsporum canis 71
abdominocentesis 94, 95
Tyzzer's disease 89
see aiso named drugs
abscess
anterior uveitis 69,72
antimicrobial cleansers
75
brain 99
FIP 77
antinuclear antibodies
epidural 156
iris color change 104
(ANA) test 177
head 156
treatment
78
antisecretory drugs,
pelvic area 107
antibiotics
Helicobacter infection 21
subarachnoid/subdural
actinomycosis 138
antiviral drugs 37,68, 168
156
Bordetella bronchiseptica
anus, neurologic disease 32
acne 75
54, 137
appetite decrease 39, 100,
Actinomyces
Chlamydophila
135,144,152
(actinomycosis) 22,49,
conjunctivitis 29
ascites 50,148,158
92,138
Chiamydophila felis
164
Aspergillus (aspergillosis)
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus
chronic cough 53
39,40
(lungworm) 121, 122,
feline leprosy 97
asthma 18,52,65
134, 142,143,144
FPV 84, 118
Aeturostrongylus
airway, structural changes
Helicobacter infection 21
abstrusus differential
52
hypotensive shock 60
diagnosis 144
airway disease, chronic 18,
intracranial disease 98,
ataxia 38, 76
19
99
pelvic limb 33,76, 135
allopurinol 131
mycobacteriosis 46, 155
atovaquone 182
alopecia
Mycobacterium fortuitum
avian influenza 86, 87,88
multifocal 70
dermatitis 31
azithromycin 182,191
pruritic circular 90, 91
Mycoplasma 8,19,132
azotemia 16,100,101,140
amphoterocin B 44, 163
neonatal sepsis 113
AZT (zidovudine) 68, 168
anaphylaxis, heartworm
nocardiosis 23
infection 62
osteomyelitis 193
Babesia (babesiosis) 27
anemia
otitis media 7
bacterial infections
babesiosis 27
 periodontal disease
cholangitis 64
nonregenerative
129,
treatment 179
cystitis 66
130, 198
pyothorax 80
encephalitis 99
angiotensin-converting
resistance 46,54
pyothorax 79,149
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
secondary infection with
sepsis 112,113
20, 158
nasal discharge 4
Bartonella (bartonellosis)
anorexia 16,27,79,134,
tetanus 85,145
146, 147
179,197
topical for FHV corneal
benazepril 158
cryptococcosis 160, 161,
ulceration 37
benzoyl peroxide shampoo
162
toxoplasmal uveitis
72
75
218
Index
biliary tract anatomy 64
chemosis, mycoplasmal
cough (continued)
bite wound
conjuncivitis 28
 pyogranulomatous disease
forebrain lesion 156
chemotherapy, nasal
92
neurologic complications
lymphosarcoma 153
soft 142,143
98,99
chest drains, actinomycosis
toxoplasmosis 152
proteinuria 157,158
138
cryptococcal antigen testing
pyothorax 79
cheyletiellosis 24
161
bladder uroliths 66, 126,
Chlamydophila felis 28,29,
cryptococcoma,multiple
127
164
cerebral 44
blepharospasm 28, 37, 114,
chlorambucil 177
Cryptococcus
164
chlorpromazine 145
(cryptococcosis) 4,26,
blindness, peripheral 42
cholangitis 64
42, 43, 44
blood loss,
chorioretinitis 104,162,
intracranial disease 160,
thrombocytopenia 151
163,194,195
161
Bordetella bronchiseptica
chronic progressive
nasal cavity disease 109
52,54,136,137,184
cerebellar ataxia 38
 nasopharyngeal
vaccine 54
clindamycin
17,75,167,
granuloma 48
Borrelia (Lyme disease)
179,196
Cryptococcus neoformans
107
Clostridium botulinum
(cryptococcosis) 162,163
botulism
120
(botulism) 120
Cuterebra myiasis 115
brain
Clostridium piliforme
cystitis, idiopathic 66
abscess 99
(Tyzzer's disease) 89
Cytauxzoon felis 182
edema/herniation 98,99
Clostridium tetani (tetanus)
 inflammatory disease 160
1, 85, 145
Demodex(demodicosis) 35,
structural disease in focal
generalized 187
70
seizures 166,167
pelvic limb paresis 128
depression
brainstem disease see
clotrimazole 40, 153
Cytanxzoon felis infection
vestibular disease
clotting disorder, scleral
182
 broad ligament opacification
hemorrhage 150, 151
fever 194,195,196
73, 74
collapsing episodes 116
Tyzzer's disease 89
bronchoalveolar lavage 18,
comedones 75
dermatitis
19, 142
conjunctival lesions,
crusting round eyes 129,
bronchopneumonia 112,
cryptococcosis 162,
130, 131
113,136,137,144
163
miliary 5
Mycoplasma-induced 132
conjunctivitis 28,29,184
nodular 30
cornea, speckling 78
pyogranulomatous 23,
cage cleaning 57
cornea, keratitic
83,154,155
calcium oxalate uroliths
precipitates/speckling
dermatophytosis 70, 71, 90,
126,127
78
91,102
calculus, dental 178
corneal ulceration 37, 184
dexamethasone,brain
calicivirus polyarthritis
93
corticosteroids 37, 135
edema 99
Capilaria aerophila see
cough
diarrhea 32
Eucoteus aerophila
bronchopneumonia 136,
giardiasis 103
(lungworm)
137
recurrent 188
cardiopulmonary disease
chronic
：52,110,111
Tyzzer's disease 89
116
Excoleusaeropbila 183
diazepam 85,145
cerebellar disease 38, 166
lungworm
121,122,133,
Dirofilaria immitis
cervical lymphadenitis,
134, 144
(dirofilariasis) 62, 65,
Streptococcus canis 14
paroxysmal 132
110, 111
219
Index
Dirofilaria immitis
eyes (continued)
feline immunodeficiency
(dirofilariasis) (ontinned)
conjunctival lesions 162,
virus (FIV) (ontinxed)
Aelurostrongylus
163
cryptococcosis association
abstrusus differential
corneal speckling 78
26
diagnosis 144
corneal ulceration 37,
lymphoma 47
 collapsing episodes 116
184
lymphomagenesis 156
cutaneous nodules 180,
crusting dermatitis 129,
lymphoplasmacytic
181
130, 131
stomatitis 191
disinfectants 57, 102
discharge 185, 186
maternal anibodies 167
toxicity 9,17,136
epiphora 114
positive antibody test 171
see also quaternary
FIP 78
 prevalence in feral cats
ammonium disinfectants
lymphoma 69, 197
175
dyspnea
neoplasia 69
feline infectious peritonitis
actinomycosis 138
periodontal disease
{FIP) 12,74
with fever 10, 11
complications 179
abdominal effusion 96
lungworm 121,122,144
pinkish mass 104, 105
anterior uveitis 77
pleural space infection
 pupil shape change in 
chronic progressive
149
FeLV 69
cerebellar ataxia 38
pyogranulomatous disease
scleral hemorrhage 150,
CNS 135
92
151
foster cat management 51
tuberculosis 174
serous-mucoid discharge
heritability 51
dysuria 66,126
28,29
littermate risk 74
solid pinkish mass 69
meningoencephalitis 77
ears
squinting 78
meningomyelitis 32
lesions 124,125
tearing 37,78
ocular lesions 78
mite infestation 5
white keratitic precipitate
pathogenesis 172
scratching 35, 36
72
prognosis 173
see also otitis entries
see also uveitis
Rivalta test 95,96
electromyography, tetanus
1
eyeworm 114
suspected rabies 190
encephalitis, bacterial 99
transmission 172
endotoxemia 192
facial muscle twitching 166
treatment 173
enilconazole 102
facial paresis 7
vaccine 148
enrofloxacin 54,137
fading kitten syndrome
virulent mutations 172
eosinophilia, hypotensive
112,113,139
weight loss in kitten 50,
shock 61
feline calicivirus (FCV) 9,
51
eosinophilic granuloma 49
17, 93, 184
feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
epidural abscess 156
vaccination 55
16
epiphora 114
feline coronavirus (FCoV)
antiviral drugs 168
erythropoietin, FIV infection
12,51,74,148
cryptococcosis association
67
antigen detection 95
26
Escherichia coli 106, 113
see aiso feline infectious
fading kitten syndrome
Eucoleus aerophila
peritonitis (FIP)
139
(lungworm) 143,183
feline herpesvirus (FHV)
immunomodulatory
saAa
28,37,184
therapy 159
anterior chamber
vaccination
55
lymphoma 47
bleeding/hemorrhage 77,
feline immunodeficiency
lymphomagenesis 156
168
virus (FIV) 67, 171, 185,
pelvic limb paresis 34
blepharospasm 114, 164
186
positive antigen test 169,
chemosis 164
chronic 183
170
220
xapul
feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
fungal infections (continued)
immune modulators 67,
(continued)
nasal bridge mass 59
159
 prevalence in feral cats
pyothorax 149
immune stimulators 67
175
skin lesions 82,83
immunosuppressed cat
pupil shape change 69
see also dermatophytosis
owner, zoonosis risk 146,
thrombocytopenia 151,
furosemide 60,99
147
168
inappetence see appetite
vaccination 55,169,170
gall bladder 63,64
decrease
viremia 169,170
gastroenteritis, Salmonella
infections
feline panleukopenia virus
133, 134
chronic cough 52
(FPV) 2,3,56,84
gentamicin 54
dyspnea with fever 10, 11
anorexia 84
Giardia (giardiasis) 103,
edematous lesions 13
chronic progressive
188
nasal discharge 25
cerebellar ataxia 38
gingival mucosa, nodules
nodular dermatitis
30
specific antibody use
119
97
pinna 124,125
transmission 58, 84
glomerular proteinuria 157
spread by contaminated
treatment 118, 119
glomerulonephritis 20
equipment 15
vaccination 55,57,58,
griseofulvin 71, 102
uveitis 197
84,117
wound 1,46
fenbendazole
122,143
HSNI avian influenza virus
see aiso bacterial
feral cats, trap-neuter-
86,87, 88
infections; fungal
return programs 175
head tilt 6, 76, 123
infections; viral
fever 148
heartworm-associated
infections
FIP 172, 173
respiratory disease
inflammation, nodular
SLE 176,177
(HARD) 65,110
dermatitis 30
toxoplasmosis 195,196
heartworm disease 61, 62,
inflammatory bowel disease
tuberculosis 174
65, 110, 111
21, 64
of unknowm origin (FUO)
collapsing episodes
116
inflammatory reaction,
176
cutaneous nodules 180,
hypotensive shock 60
filgastrim 67,119
181
interferon-α 68,168
fipronil 5,24,36
Helicobacter 21,41,165
interferon-∞o 119,168,173
fleas 8,146,147
hematuria 66,126
intestinal motility
fluconazole 44,48,125,
Histopiasma capsulatum 11
abnormalities 64
161,163
Horner's syndrome 6, 7, 76,
intracranial disease 98, 99
flucytosine 44
123
inflammatory 160
fluid therapy intracranial
hydronephrosis/hydroureter
see also brain
disease 99
106
iris, fibrin clot 104
flurbiprofen 105
hypercalcemia 127
itraconazole 11
food sensitivity 21
hypersensitivity reaction,
aspergillosis 40
foot, edematous ulcerated
chronic cough 52
ryptococcosis 44,48,
13
hypoalbuminemia 20
163
forebrain disease 160,161
hypotensive shock 60
dermatophytosis 102
forebrain lesion 156
Metarhizium anisopliae
foreign body 2, 25,80
icterus 139,148
infection 59
front limb siffness 145
imaging
protothecosis 153
fungal infections 10, 11, 49
nasal discharge 4
sporotrichosis 125
multifocal alopecia 70,
otitis media 6
ivermectin 5,24,114,183
71
imidicloprid 5
221
Index
ketoconazole 59,109,131
lymphoma 42,47
Mycobacterium xenopi
kidney
intraocular 69,197
140, 141
disseminated
renal 16,159
Mycoplasma 8,18,19
mycobacteriosis 140, 141
lymphoplasmacytic
chronic cough 52
see aiso renal entries
stomatitis 191
conjunctivitis 28
lymphosarcoma, nasal 153
cultures for diagnosis 53
lameness 93, 107
paroxysmal cough 132
Leishmania (leishmaniasis)
mandible inflammation,
myelopathy, degenerative
129,130,131
osteomyelitis 193
33,34
antibody testing 199
mannitol 99, 161
myiasis 115
uveitis 198,199
mechanical ventilation,
myringotomy 6,7
leprosy, feline 46, 47, 49,
hypotensive shock 60
97
meglumine antimoniate 131
nasal bridge mass 59, 108,
Leptospira (leptospirosis)
meningoencephalitis, FIP
77
153
45
meningomyelitis,FIP 32
nasal cavity
disease 48,
lethargy 79
mental status, abnormal 98,
108,109
cryptococcosis 160,161
166
nasal congestion,
endotoxemic shock 192
Metarhiziumanisopliae 59
protothecosis
153
FIP 135
methocarbamol 85
nasal discharge 42, 43
FPV 117
metronidazole 103,128,
mucopurulent 4,25,26
pleural space infection
179
purulent 18,39,40
149
Microsporum canis 71, 90,
nasal lymphosarcoma 153
scleral hemorrhage 150,
91
nasal polyps 25
151
midazolam 145
nasopharyngeal mass 39,
SLE 176,177
mites
40, 48
toxoplasmosis 152
cheyletiellosis 24
neoplasia 49
leukopenia 2,117, 118
ear infestation S
nodular dermatitis 30
levamisole 114
otitis externa 35,36
ocular 69
limping kitten syndrome
93
moxidectin 36,114
pinna 124
lipopolysaccharide 192
multi-valent hyperimmune
Neosartorya 42
lower urinary tract
immunoglobulin
neutropenia, FIV infection
symptoms 66
preparations 119
67
lung
multifocal intracranial and
Nocardia (nocardiosis) 22,
consolidation 132
intraocular disease 42,43
23,49
fine needle aspiration 10,
mupirocin gel 75
actinomycosis differential
11
Mycobacterium
diagnosis 138
 pulmonary lobar artery
(mycobacteriosis) 22,46,
mycobacteriosis
enlargement/pruning
47, 154, 155
differential diagnosis
116
atypical49
155
toxoplasmosis 194,195,
disseminated
140,141
sulfonamide therapy 23,
196
saprophytic opportunistic
80
lung fluke
143
141
sulfur granules 92
lungworm 121, 122,133,
Mycobacterium fortuitum,
Notodectes cati 35
134
 nodular dermatitis 31
nystagmus
cough
142,143,144
Mycobacterium
positional
42
Lyme borreliosis 107
lepraemurium (leprosy)
vestibular disease 76
lymph node enlargement
46,47,49,97
68
Mycobacterium tubercutosis
optic neuritis 42
mandibular 97
(uberculosis) 174
oral ulceration 184
222
Index
osteomyelitis 193
posaconazole 59
rhinitis
otitis externa 35, 36,123
preauricular pruritus 35, 36
mycotic 59
otitis interna 123
prednisolone
necrotizing 14
otitis media 6,7,123
anterior uveitis treatment
rhinoscopy, nasal discharge
Otodectes cynotis 5,35,36
78
4
ovariohysterectomy 73,74
FIP treamment 173
Rivalta test 50, 74
oxygen supplementation
hypotensive shock 60
FIP 95,96
10, 11
SLE treatment 177
ronidazole 189
hypotensive shock 60
thrombocytopenia 151
toxoplasmosis uveitis 105
Saimonella (salmonellosis)
palatal ulcers 17
preglomerular proteinuria
56,133, 134
pancreatitis 64
157
Salmonella enterica serovar
panniculitis 154,155
pregnancy (feline) 84, 94
typhimurium 64
Paragonimus kellicotti (lung
 pregnancy (human),
scleral hemorrhage 150,
fluke) 143
toxoplasmosis risk
152
151
parvocides S7
primaquine phosphate 27
sedatives, tetanus 85, 145
parvovirus 3,117,118
protein-losing enteropathy
seizures 42
antigen 56,57
20
after bite wound 98
see also feline
proteinuria 20,157,158
cyptococcosis 160, 161
panleukopenia virus
Proteus, urinary tract
focal 166,167
(FPV)
infection 126,127
selemectin 5,24,36
Pasteurella muitocida 4
Prototheca wickerhammi
sepsis 192
 pelvic limb
(protothecosis) 153
bacterial 112,113
ataxia 135
pulmonary lobar artery
FPV 118
injury in tetanus 187
enlargement/pruning
116
septicemia, Streptococcus
neurologic disease 32
pustules, chin area
75
canis 14
paresis 33,34,128
pyelonephritis 100,101,
shock
pentoxifylline 135
127
endotoxemic 192
periodontal disease 178,
pyothorax 79,80,149
hypotensive 60
179, 193
pyrexia, abscess in pelvic
sinusitis, frontal 14
peritonitis
region 107
skin biopsy, nodular
vomiting 2
dermatitis 30,31
see also feline infectious
quaternary ammonium
skin lesions
peritonitis (FIP)
disinfectants 9, 17,57,
abdominal 154,155
phenobarbital 99,145,167
184
chin area 75
pheohyphomycosis 42
giardiasis management
nodular 82,83,129,130,
pinna lesions 124,125
103
131
plaque, dental 178
toxicity 17,136
cryptococcosis 162
pleural effusion 79, 80,81,
dirofilariasis 180, 181
92
rabies 55,145, 190
ulcerated 82,83
pleural fluid in thorax
149
renal azotemia 100, 101
Wood's lamp 70, 90, 91,
pleural space infection
1149
renal failure, leishmaniasis
102
pneumonia
130
see also alopecia;
bronchial 112,113,136,
renal lymphoma 16, 159
dermatophytosis
137
renomegaly 16,159
soft palate disease 48
Mycopiasma-induced
132
respiratory distress 81
Sporothrix schenckii
polyarthritis, calicivirus
93
acute 10,11,18,19
(sporotrichosis) 82,83,
Porphyromonas gingivalis
retinitis 42
124,125
178,179
retinoids 75
squinting 78
223
xapul
Stapbylococcus
Toxopiasma gondii
viral infections
osteomyelitis 193
(toxoplasmosis)
upper respiratory 18, 184
stomatitis 68,191
(ontinued)
see aiso named feline virat
Streptococcus canis 14,15,
focal seizures 166, 167
infections
113
IgG antibody titer 146
vomiting 2,21
struvite uroliths 126,127
lungs 194,195,196
FPV 56,84,118
subarachnoid abscess 156
reactivated 81
 gall bladder wall changes
subcutaneous mass 22,23,
tachyzoites in neutrophils
63
108,109
81
heartworm disease 116
subdural abscess 156
uveitis 72,105
Helicobacter infection
sulfonamides, nocardiosis
tremor,head 38
41, 165
23,80
triaditis 64
ureteral obstruction 106
sulfur granules 92
Tritrichomonas foetus 188,
systemic lupus
189
weight loss 16, 20, 50, 51,
erythematosus (SLE) 176,
tympanic membrane defect
100,197
177
123
kitten 50
Tyzzer's disease 89
osteomyelitis 193
tachypnea
Wood's lamp 70, 90, 91,
actinomycosis 138
upper respiratory tract
102
toxoplasmosis 152
infection 18,42,184
wound
teeth
ureteral obstruction 100,
nonhealing 115
cleaning 193
101,106
 see also bite wound
full mouth extraction 191
ureteritis 106
wound infections 1
lymphoplasmacytic
urinary tract infection 126,
mycobacterial 46
stomatitis 191
127
periodontal disease
178,
urination, inappropriate
zidovudine 68,168
179
with hematuria and
zoonoses
terbinafine 44
dysuria 66
avian influenza 88
tetanospasmin 187
urine protein excretion
Bartonella 147
tetanus 145
158
cheyletiellosis 24
generalized 187
uroliths 66,126,127
dermatophytoses 102
localized 1,85,145
uveitis 69,72
Helicobacter 165
pelvic limb paresis 128
bilateral 197,198, 199
immunosuppressed cat
tetanus antitoxin 85, 128
causes 105
owner 146,147
tetanus toxin antibodies
FIP 77
Lyme disease 107
145
infectious agents
：197
sporotrichosis 83,125
Thelazia (eyeworm)  114
iris color change 104
toxoplasmosis 152
thoracic effusion, FIP 172,
treatment 78
tuberculosis 174
173
thorax, pleural fluid 149
vaccination 55
thrombocytopenia
151
Bordetella bronchiseptica
FeLV 151,168
54
tongue ulceration 9, 17
FeLV 55,169,170
Toxoplasma gondii
feral cats 175
(toxoplasmosis)
FIP 148
CNS dissemination 194,
FIV 171
195, 196
FPV 55,57,58
fading kitten syndrome
vestibular disease 6, 7, 42,
139
76,123
224