Jan Bruin
Leo P.S. van der Geest
Editors
Diseases of
Mites and Ticks
Springer
小尾巴宠物健康中心http:/ttahc.taobao.com
Jan Bruin · Leo PS. van der Geest
Editors
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
Previously published in Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos. 1-4, 2008
Springer
Editors
Jan Bruin
Leo PS. van der Geest
University of Amsterdam
University of Amsterdam
IBED
IBED
Section Population Biology
Section Population Biology
Kruislaan 320
Kruislaan 320
1098 SM Amsterdam
1098 SM Amsterdam
The Netherlands
The Netherlands
bruinjan@ tiscali.nl
lpsvdgeest@ casema.nl
ISBN: 978-1-4020-9694-5
e-ISBN: 978-1-4020-9695-2
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2
Library of Con gress Control Number: 2008944085
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009
No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying. microfilming, recording or otherwise, without 
written permission from the Publisher, with the exception of any material supplied specifically for the
work.
Cover ittustration: Cassava green mite filled with resting spores of the fungus Neozygites lanajoae.
photo: George Gorgen and Fabien Hountondji.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer.com
Contents
Preface
1-2
Diseases of mites and ticks: from basic pathology to microbial
control—an introduction
L.P.S.van der Geest & J.Bruin
3-6
Using RNA interference to determine the role of varisin in the innate
immune system of the hard tick Dermacentor variabilis (Acari:
Ixodidae)
W.L.
Hynes,
M.M.
Stokes,
S.M.
Hensley,
S.M.
Todd&
D.E.Sonenshine
7-15
Silencing expression of the defensin, varisin, in male Dermacentor
variabilis by RNA interference results in reduced Anaplasma marginale
infections
KM.Kocan,J.de la Fuente,R.Manzano-Roman,V.Naranjo,
W.L.Hynes &D.E.Sonenshine
17-28
Potential effects of mixed infections in ticks on transmission dynamics
of pathogens: comparative analysis of published records
H.S.Ginsberg..
29-41
An association between the Antarctic mite Alaskozetes antarcticus and
an entomophthoralean fungus of the genus Neozygites
P.D.Bridge & M.R.Worland
43-52
Diversity of acaropathogenic fungi in Poland and other European
countries
S.Balazy,
R.
Mietkiewski, C. Tkaczuk, R. Wegensteiner &
M.Wrzosek
53-70
Entomopathogenic fungi against South American tick species
E.K.K.Fernandes &V.R.E.P.Bittencourt
71-93
Contents
i
Pathogenicity and thermotolerance of entomopathogenic fungi for the
control of the scab mite, Psoroptes ovis
M.Lekimme,C.Focant,F.Farnir,B.Mignon &B.Losson.
95-104
Impact of two treatments of a formulation of Beauveria bassiana
(Deuteromycota: Hyphomycetes) conidia on Varroa mites (Acari:
Varroidae) and on honeybee (Hymenoptera: Apidae) colony health
W.G. Meikle, G. Mercadier, N. Holst & V.Girod
105-117
Topically applied myco-acaricides for the control of cattle ticks:
overcoming the challenges
P.Polar,D.Moore,M.T.K.Kairo &A.Ramsubhag....
119-148
Protection of Metarhizium anisopliae conidia from ultra-violet radiation
and their pathogenicity to Rhipicephalus evertsi evertsi ticks
M.Hedimbi,G.P.Kaaya,S. Singh,P.M.Chimwamurombe,
G.Gindin, I. Glazer & M. Samish
149-156
Evaluation of Metarhizium anisopliae (Deuteromycota: Hyphomycetes)
for control of broad mite Polyphagotarsonemus latus (Acari:
Tarsonemidae) in mulberry
M.Maketon,P.Orosz-Coghlan & J.Sinprasert
157-167
Enabling mycelial application of Hirsutella thompsonii  for
managing the coconut mite
P.SreeramaKumar & L.Singh
169-182
A tale of three acaropathogenic fungi in Israel: Hirsutella, Meira and
Acaromyces
U.Gerson,A.Gafni,Z.Paz & A.Sztejnberg
183-194
Lessons from interactions within the cassava green mite fungal
pathogen Neozygites tanajoae system and prospects for microbial
control using Entomophthorales
F.C.C.Hountondji....
195-210
Failure of the mite-pathogenic fungus Neozygites tanajoae and the
 predatory mite Neoseiulus idaeus to control a population of the cassava
green mite,Mononychellus tanajoa
S.L.Elliot,G.J.deMoraes &JD.Mumford
211-222
The effects of Pseudomonas putida biotype B on Tetranychus urticae
(Acari: Tetranychidae)
H.M. Aksoy, S.K.
Ozman-Sullivan,H. Ocal,
，N.Celik&
G.T.Sullivan
223-230
Contents
Overwintering and prevalence of Neozygites floridana (Zygomycetes:
Neozygitaceae) in hibermating females of Tetranychus urticae (Acari:
Tetranychidae) under cold climatic conditions in strawberries 
1. Klingen, G. Wersted & K. Westrum
231-245
SpraysofemulsifiableBeauveriabassianaformulationare
ovicidal towards Tetranychus urticae (Acari: Tetranychidae) at various
regimes of temperature and humidity
W.-B.Shi, M.-G.Feng & S.-S.Liu
247-257
Role of entomopathogenic fungi in the control of Tetranychus evansi
and Tetranychus urticae (Acari: Tetranychidae), pests of horticultural
crops
N.K. Maniania, D.M. Bugeme, V.W. Wekesa, 1. Delalibera Jr. &
M.Knapp..
259-274
Effect of temperature on virulence of Beauveria bassiana and
Metarhizium anisopliae isolates to Tetranychus evansi
D.M. Bugeme, N.K.Maniania, M.Knapp & HI.Boga
275-285
Side-effects of pesticides on the life cycle of the mite pathogenic
fungus Neozygitesfloridana
V.W.Wekesa,M.Knapp& 1.Delalibera Jr.
287-297
Natural enemies of mass-reared predatory mites (family Phytoseiidae)
used for biological pest control
S.Bjornson
299-306
Verified and potential pathogens of predatory mites (Acari:
Phytoseiidae)
C.Schitte & M.Dicke
307-328
Symbionts, including pathogens, of the predatory mite Metaseiulus
occidentalis: current and future analysis methods
M.A.Hoy & A.Jeyaprakash
329-347
Diseases of mites and ticks: farewell to Leo van der Geest
JanBruin
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 14, 1-2.
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9223-1 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
After more than 20 years Leo van der Geest has retired as editor of Experimental and
Applied Acarology. When in March 1985 the first issue of the journal was published, Leo
already acted as associate editor, at the side of editor-in-chief prof. Wim Helle. The forrmal
difference between the two was cancelled in 1993, when both were mentioned on the
 o   s  n  tee  o, d s o s
Ticks editor. In 1997 I myself joined as the second Mites editor.
Throughout his research and teaching career Leo has always been involved with
pathogens, first of insects, later of mites. Therefore, it should not come as a surprise that I
was struck by the idea to honour Leo's editorial retirement with a special journal issue
dedicated to the subject that he finds most interesting: acarine pathogens and pathology. I
discussed the idea with Leo, and was very pleased to learn that he not only appreciated the
token, but also that he was willing to lend his expertise to the enterprise. Next, we asked
about all relevant researchers we could think of to participate, and much to my surprise
            
world value Leo's work.
J.Bruin()
IBED, Section Population Biology, University of Amsterdam, Kruislaan 320,
1098 SM Amsterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: bruinjan @tiscali.n]
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.). Diseases of Mites and 7icks. DOl: 10.1007/978-I-4020-9695-2_1
2
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
So many authors joined that we can now proudly present a quadruple issue on Diseases
of Mites and Ticks. The 24 contributions provide a wide variety of aspects of acaro-
pathogens, just as we had hoped for. There are numerous highlights, but one particularly
worthy of mention—because it is the first time in the journal's history, and because it is yet
another token of appreciation—is the formal description of an acaropathogenic fungus,
new to science: Hirsutella vandergeesti. Cheers, Leo!
Diseases of mites and ticks: from basic pathology
to microbial control-an introduction
Leo P. S. van der Geest · Jan Bruin
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 1-4, 3-6.
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9222-2 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
One of the earliest observations of a pathogen infecting mites goes back to 1924 when
Speare and Yothers (1924) noted a vast decimation of large populations of the citrus rust
mite, Phyllocoptruta oleivora (Ashmead) on grapefruit in Florida, USA. This effect was
ascribed to the presence of an acaropathogenic fungus that was later described by Fisher
(1950) as Hirsutella thompsonii. It would still take several decades before any compre-
hensive research would be conducted on pathogens of Acari. Nowadays, pathological
investigations on mites and ticks form an important discipline within the field of acarology,
as is apparent from several recent reviews: McCoy (1996), Poinar and Poinar (1998),
Samish and Rehacek (1999), Chandler et al. (2000) and Van der Geest et al. (2000)
The current collection of 24 papers is a mixture of primary research articles and lit-
erature reviews, presenting a broad overview of the developments in about all possible
aspects of acarine diseases, stretching from basic pathology to microbial pest control. The
pathogens include fungi, bacteria, and protozoa (as well as an occasional virus and
phyidae, Ixodidae, Oribatida, Phytoseiidae, Psoroptida, Tarsonemidae, Tetranychidae,
Varroidae), and the authors come from all over the world (e.g., Belgium, Benin, Brazil,
Canada,China,France,India,Israel, Kenya,Namibia,Norway,Poland, Thailand, The
Netherlands, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, UK, USA). With such variety the contributions
can be ordered in a near infinite number of coherent ways, and we had to pick just one.
The issue kicks off with two interrelated papers, applying a molecular-biological
technique (RNA interference) to investigate a mechanistic detail of the immune system of a
hard tick, Dermacentor variabilis (Say), involved in its reaction to infections by the
rickettsial bacterium Anaplasma marginale (Hynes et al., Kocan et al.). Individual ticks are
frequently infected by more than one (type of) pathogen, which may interact in various
possible ways. Ginsberg presents a literature review of the possible effects of coinfection
of ticks, and a simple model linking the implications of coinfection with pathogen trans-
mission. Very different, yet equally basic, is the intriguing case study of the association
L. P. S. van der Geest (β) · J. Bruin
IBED, Section Population Biology,University of Amsterdam,Kruislan 320,
1098 SM Amsterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: 1psvdgeest @ casema.n]
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.). Diseases of Miies and 7icks. DOl: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2_2
4
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
between the Antarctic oribatid mite Alaskozetes antarcticus (Michael) and a member of the
fungus genus Neozygites (Bridge and Worland)this seems to be only the fourth reported
case of an arthropod infected by a fungus under these harsh climatic conditions. The genus
Neozygites has a worldwide distribution and it is well known for its entomo-/acaropath-
ogenicity. Inventories in Poland and several other Central-European countries show the
presence of Neozygites spp., as well as the other genera Hirsutella spp. and Conidioboius
spp., on various species of mites (Balazy et al.). The authors even describe two species new
to science. Still mainly descriptive, but increasingly applied, is the extensive review of
fungi found in association with a variety of tick species in South America (Fernandes and
Bittencourt). The wealth of information in this paper will help develop IPM (integrated
pest management) or biocontrol strategies and may help persuade tick controllers to
deviate from traditional chemical methods.
Lekimme et al. screened isolates of fungi from four genera, for their pathogenicity and
temperature sensitivity, aiming to find suitable control agents of Psoroptes ovis (Hering),
ously been found to induce the falling of Varroa destructor Anderson and Trueman from
bees. Following up on this, Meikle et al. compared several isolates and application methods
to improve this type of biological control of the bee parasite. Commercial products based
on entomopathogenic fungi are being applied in a growing number of control programmes
against plant pests, but their application against animal ectoparasites lacks behind, as Polar
et al. point out. Still, laboratory studies as well as pasture applications of several fungal
products have shown great promise. Instead of treating large areas of field, it could be
much more cost effective if cattle were treated topically, but so far topical application has
shown variable results.Polar et al. thoroughly review the literature on the use of myco-
acaricides against ticks in general, but emphasis is on the topical application, the host skin
environment, and how to improve the pathogens’ performance in this environment. One
relevant feature of topical application of a myco-acaricide—exposure to sunlight—is
sensitivity to UV-radiation of different formulations of conidia of Metarhizium anisopliae,
in combination with their pathogenicity against Rhipicephaius ticks-commercial sun-
screens yielded some encouraging results!
The next block of papers deals with (the control of) pest mites on plants. Conidial
suspensions of a variety of fungus species and strains were tested against the broad mite,
Polyphagotarsonemus latus (Banks) on mulberry(Maketon et al.). Metarhizium anisopliae
control of another mite—also tiny, yet devastating, with a hidden lifestyle—the coconut
mite Aceria guerreronis Keifer. Kumar and Singh report the effect of a mycelial sus-
pension of Hirsutella fhompsonii against this eriophyid mite. Hirsutella fhompsonii has
been developed to a biological miticide by McCoy and co-workers in the 1970s for the
control of the citrus rust mite in citrus orchards (cf. McCoy 1996). The fungus is in
ment of mycelial preparations against the citrus rust mite failed because of lysis of hyphal
material during storage and for that reason, the work was discontinued. Recently, the
fungus has received renewed attention for the control of other eriophyids, e.g., in coconut
in Asia (India) and in Latin America. Successful attempts have been made in India to
(      s      
Hirsutella thompsonii and several other fungi are also studied in Israel by Gerson and
o-workers, especially for their effect on citrus rust mite, but also some others. They report
some very promising results of a couple of recently described fungi (two Meira species and
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
an Acaromyces), including their probable compatibility with currently used chemical
pesticides
Entomophthoralean infections are well-known in insect and mites, particularly in spider
mites. The best-studied species is probably Neozygites tanajoae, a fungus that is specific
for the cassava green mite, Mononychellus tanajoa (Bondar). In the 1980s, the fungus was
considered to be a possible classical biological control agent that could be the solution for
the enormous infestations in cassava by M. tanajoa in the rural areas in the African
continent, after its unfortunate introduction in eastern Africa. An international collabora-
tion between the International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (lITA,Cotonou,Benin),
the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT, Cali, Colombia), Empresa Bra-
sileira de Pesquisa Agropecuaria (EMBRAPA, Brazil), and the University of Amsterdam
(The Netherlands), was set up in order to guide the introduction of the fungus into Africa.
In this issue, Hountondji reviews the current status of microbial control of the cassava
green mite in Africa. A second paper on much the same players, but now on the Brazilian
site of the system, explores the possible causes of failing control of M. tanajoa with N.
tanajoae (Elliot et al.). The importance of timing is nicely motivated.
A series of contributions deals with the control of Tetranychus species, most noticeably
the two-spotted spider mite, T. urticae Koch, known from literally hundreds of host plants
(e.g., Bolland et al. 1998). Pseudomonas putida,a saprotrophic bacterium isolated from the
soil in a Turkish greenhouse, appears to have T. urticae control potential in a carefully
arranged laboratory set-up (Aksoy et al.). Next, this potential should be corroborated in
greenhouse and field trials. Klingen and colleagues investigated the overwintering capa-
bility of Neozygites foridana in hibernating T. urticae females in strawberry in the
 Norwegian field (minimum ambient temperature ca. -15°C). It turns out that the insulation
experienced within the mites’ bodies allows the fungus to survive the winter and to
sporulate——and infect new spider mites—in early spring. The infuence of temperature and
humidity regimes on the efficacy of conidial suspensions of Beauveria bassiana against
especially the egg stage of T. urticae was investigated in China (Shi et al.). The ovicidal
activity also at rather low air humidity (ca. 5o%) indicates its potential for spider mite
control under practical field conditions.
Like the cassava green mite, also the tomato red spider mite, Tetranychus evansi Baker
and Pritchard, is suspected to originate from South America. And like the CGM, T. evansi
has caused huge problems after entering Africa, in the late 1970s. Tetranychus evansi
specializes on solanaceous horticultural crops, especially tomato. Under the hot and dry
conditions of eastern and southern Africa it can wipe out whole tomato plants within a
month. The size of the problems caused by T. evansi has stimulated much research effort,
aiming for control of this mite—the application of acaropathogens is the subject of three
contributions to this volume. First, Maniania et al. review the relative successes of a variety
of fungi in the control of both T. evansi and T. urticae, in the context of various biological
control strategies. Then Bugeme et al. focus on the effect of temperature on the efficacy of
isolates of B. bassiana and M. anisopliae against T. evansi. Thirdly, Wekesa et al. report on
a detailed study on the effects of various pesticides on N. foridana as control agent of T.
Evansi. The compatibility between fungal strains and chemicals used in cormmercial tomato
poduction is a prerequisite for successful IPM programmes.
Biological pest (mite) control by means of beneficial insects and/or mites has seen a
toseiuius persimilis Athias-Henriot. This predator is very successful in controlling spider
mites, in particular T. urticae, in a variety of greenhouse and outdoor crops. However, in a
number of instances, control was unsatisfactory due to suboptimal performance of the
6
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
predator. It turned out that pathogens could negatively affect predator populations, thus
hampering the success of pest control. This aspect of acaropathology is dealt with in the
pathogens (viruses, bacteria, microsporidia) that can pop up in mass-rearings of com-
mercial phytoseiid biocontrol agents. Schitte and Dicke treat partly the same subject, but it
a much wider context—they systematically, consistently and carefully review all (possible)
microorganisms known to have some negative effect on phytoseiid mites. In passing, they
provide much inside information on their own 10-year quest for the agent, causing the
strange behavior and poor performance of P. persimilis from their cultures in Wageningen,
starting in the early 1990s. Finally, Hoy and Jeyaprakash extend the subject of pathogens
from predatory mites to endosymbionts, focussing on their pet phytoseiid biocontrol agent,
Metaseiuius occidentalis.Although the study of these endosymbiotic bacteria,such as
Wolbachia and Cardinium, is still relatively new, they have already been found to be
virtually omnipresent—they have been found in many groups of invertebrates and they
may have a great impact on the population dynamics of a species.
Although we feel this collection of papers offers a rich variety of sides to the subject of
diseases in mites and ticks, complete coverage of mite pathology is not possible in a single
volumeofExperimentalandAppliedAcarology.Wecordiallythankallcontributing
authors, as well as the more than 50 peer reviewers, who helped us to prepare this end
result. We sincerely hope this issue will stimulate further research in this most fascinating
field.
Acknowledgments A personal note by LvdG: Experimentat and Apptied Acarology was launched in
March 1985. Dr. Wim Helle was the first editor-in-chief and I acted as associate-editor, until Wim decided
to step down because of his retirement. Now it is my turn. 1 have served the journal for a great many years as
editor, and1found it a stimulating and inspiring task to promote acarology.As many of you may know,my
main fieldofinterest liesininvertebrate pathologyandlam glad that we havehad theopportunity toprepare
an issue on pathogens of the Acari. I also would like to thank all authors who have contributed to the journal
and the reviewers for their critical rermarks when reviewing manuscripts, not just for this present issue but
for all the years that I was editor.
References
Bolland HR, Gutierrez J, Flechtmann CHW (1998) World catalogue of the spider mite family (Acari:
Tetran ychidae). Brill, Leiden
Biocontrol Sci Technol 10:357-384
Fisher FE (1950) Two new species of Hirsutetta Patouillard. Mycologia 42:13-16
Hoerauf A, Rao RU (eds) (2007) Wolbachia: a bug's life in another bug. Issues in infectious diseases, vol 5.
Karger Publishers, Basel, 150 pp
mites—-their biology, natural enemies and control. Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, pp 48 1-490
Poinar G Jr, Poinar R (1998) Parasites and pathogens of mites. Annu Rev Entomol 43:449-469
Rev Entomol 44:159-182
Speare AT, Yothers WW (1924) Is there an entomogenous fungus attacking the citrus rust mite in Florida?
Science 40:41-42
Van der Geest LPS, Elliot SL, Breeuwer JAJ, Beerling EAM (2000) Diseases of mites. Exp Appl Acaro]
24:497560
Using RNA interference to determine the role of varisin
in the innate immune system of the hard tick
Dermacentor variabilis (Acari: Ixodidae)
Wayne L. Hynes - Martha M. Stokes - Shannon M. Hensley :
S. Michelle Todd · Daniel E. Sonenshine
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 1-4, 7-15
DOl: 10.1007/s 10493-008-9158-6 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract  Defensins are an important component of the innate immune system of ticks.
These small peptides are produced by various genera of ticks, and expressed in various
tissues. In this study we used RNA interference to silence the expression of the defensin
varisin produced by the hemocytes of the American dog tick, Dermacentor variabilis.
 g a  n    a     aa s
After feeding, the ticks were removed, bled, and the hemolymph plasma and hemocytes
separated. Hemocytes were screened for the presence (or absence) of both varisin transcript
and peptide. Varisin peptide was below detectable levels and the transcript showed a
greater than 99% knockdown. The antimicrobial activity of the hemolymph plasma was
large portion of the antimicrobial activity of the hemolymph.
Keywords Innate immunity · Defensin - Varisin · RNAi · Antimicrobial activity
Introduction
Ticks are obligate blood-feeding ectoparasites that have the ability to transmit a wide variety
of disease causing rmicrobes. In fact, they have the ability to transmit more disease causing
microbes than any other blood feeding arthropod, including mosquitoes, although more
human illness is caused by mosquito-bome agents than by tick-bome ones. The hard tick
Dermacentor variabilis (American dog tick) can be found throughout the southeastem USA.
and up the east coast to Nova Scotia, Canada (Brown et al. 2005). This hard tick is a vector
of the pathogens responsible for Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (RMSF), human monocyto-
trophic ehrlichiosis (HME), tularemia, and is capable of causing tick paralysis. However,
ticks are more than *syringes-on-legs'. Although lacking the highly developed, adaptive
immune response found in vertebrates, ticks have an efficient innate immune response. The
W. L. Hynes () · M. M. Stokes · S. M. Hensley · S. M. Todd · D. E. Sonenshine
Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529-0266, USA
e-mail: whynes @odu.edu
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.), Diseases of Mites and Ticks. DO1: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2_3
7
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
innate immune system consists of both cellular and soluble components (Gillespie et al.
The cellular responses include phagocytosis, nodulation, and encapsulation (Eggenberger
et al. 1990; Inoue et al. 2001; Ceraul et al. 2002; Taylor 2006; Sonenshine and Hynes 2008).
The soluble aspects of the innate immune response include production of antimicrobial
peptides, including defensins (Bulet et al. 2003; Taylor 2006; Sonenshine and Hynes 2008).
 Invertebrates produce many different types of antimicrobial molecules when chal-
lenged by microbes or parasites (Cociancich et al. 1994; Bulet et al. 2003; Taylor 2006;
Tsuji et al. 2007; Sonenshine and Hynes 2008). Among the most conserved of these mol-
ecules are the defensins. Defensins are small cationic peptides, generally comprising
34-61 amino acids for the mature peptide (3-6 kDa), produced by organisms from plants
to invertebrates to the most complex mammals (Bulet et al. 2003; Sonenshine and Hynes
2008). Insect defensins generally have six cysteine residues that form three disulfide
bridges with linkages between Cys1-Cys4,Cys2-Cys5,and Cys3-Cys6(Bulet et al. 1999,
2003; Taylor 2006); the exception being drosomycin, produced by Drosophila melano-
gaster which has four disulfide bonds and antifungal activity (Michaut et al. 1996; Bulet
et al. 2003). Most insect defensins are active against gram positive bacteria, with some
showing activity against other microbial challengers such as gram negative bacteria, par-
asites and fungi (Cociancich et al. 1994). To date, more than 20 defensins have been
identifed from 11 species of tick (Taylor 2006; Sonenshine and Hynes 2008). Defensins
are produced as a prepro form, which is cleaved, at a highly conserved RVRR site, to
release the mature peptide (Sonenshine and Hynes 2008). Some species of tick have mul-
tiple isoforms of defensin, with Ornithodoros moubata having four isoforms (Nakajima
et al. 2001, 2002) and I. ricinus having two isoforms (Rudenko et al. 2007), while others
appear to have only one form (Hynes et al. 2005; Todd et al. 2007). The first defensin rec-
ognized from a hard tick was varisin, isolated from the hemolymph of American dog tick,
Dermacentor variabilis (Johns et al. 200la, b). The transcript sequence of varisin was
determined following RT-PCR from RNA isolated from hemocytes (Ceraul et al. 2003).
 It appears that varisin is produced in the hemocytes and released into the hermolymph fol-
lbwing microbial challenge. Although transcript has been detected in various tissues
(Ceraul 2005; Sonenshine et al. 2005; Ceraul et al. 2007) the peptide has only been
detected in the hemolymph/hemocytes. Recently a second defensin has been reported
from D. variabilis which had less than 50% similarity to varisin (Ceraul et al. 2007). In
order to understand the role of varisin in the innate immune system of D. variabilis, the
expression of the varisin gene was silenced using RNA interference (RNAi). RNAi has
been used to study gene function in ticks due to the lack of other means of genetic manip-
ulation (de la Fuente et al. 2005, 2007). In this study we show that RNAi can be used to
silence the gene for varisin and that silencing results in a decreased level of antimicrobial
activity of tick hemolymph.
Materials and methods
Ticks, injection, and bleeding
Dermacentor variabilis were obtained from a colony maintained at Old Dominion University
as previously described (Johns et al. 1998, 2001a, b). All use of animals in this research was
done in accordance with protocols approved by the Old Dominion University Institutional
Animal Use and Care Committee. Unfed virgin female ticks were injected with 1-5 μl of
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
double stranded RNA (dsRNA), or Shen's solution (Oliver et al. 1974)for the controls, using
a 30 gauge x %2" hypodermic needle attached to a 10 μl Hamilton syringe. Injection was via
the foramen between the capitulum and anterior end of the scutum. After injection, the needle
was held in the tick's body for 30 min to prevent leakage of the injected material. Subse
quently, the ticks were confined within plastic capsules attached to New Zealand white
rabbits (Oryctolagus cunicuius). After feeding for 5 days the ticks were forcibly removed from
the rabbit and hemolymph was collected by severing the forelegs at the coxal-trochanteral
joint and applying gentle pressure to the body. The clear, amber-colored liquid expressed was
collected in a glass micropipette and put into either 20 μl Shen's saline solution or 100 μl
RNA later (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) depending on the assay; Shen's for protein
and antimicrobial assays, RNA later for RT-PCR reactions. Approximately the same number
of ticks were used for both control and test injections
Previous results have suggested storage of varisin in the hemocytes which is released on
challenge (Ceraul et al. 2003). Stored varisin should be released on injection of the dsRNA.
were pin-pricked (wounded) and allowed to incubate for 1 h prior to bleeding
Double stranded RNA production
Double-stranded RNA was prepared from a PCR product, containing the entire 624 bp cDNA
fragment of varisin derived from D. variabilis hemocytes (Ceraul et al. 2003), using the
primersDEFT75:5'-TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGTACTATGCGCGGACTTTGCATCTGC
and DEFT733: 5'-TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGTAC7TACGTCGACAAAGCGCTTCGG,
which contain the T7 promoter for in vitro transcription (show in italics). Amplification was
carried out using the following cycle parameters: 94°C for 2 min, followed by 35 cycles of 94°C
for 30 s and 68°C for 1 min; 68°C for 7 min completed the run. The PCR fragment was then
used in the transcription reaction as described by the manufacturer. After transcription, the reac-
tion was treated to remove DNA and single stranded RNA, then purified, and ethanol precipi
tated. The dsRNA was then resuspended in Shen's solution for injection into ticks. Ticks were
 injected with 10"-10'2 molecules of dsRNA as described above. Control ticks were injected
with the same volume of Shen's solution.
Quantitative RT-PCR
Using the “illustra QuickPrep Micro mRNA purification kit’ (GE Healthcare, NJ) the
step was repeated if necessary. Reverse transcription reactions were carried out using the
ImProm-II Reverse Transcription System in the presence of RNasin according to the manu-
facturer's instructions (Promega Corp, Madison, WI) using either Oligo(dT) or random
hexamer primers. The synthesized cDNA was then used in real-time PCR reactions. Con
trols, in which reverse transcriptase was not added, were set up for each reaction to ensure
no DNA contamination.
Real-time PCR
Real-time PCR was carried out using the RT" SYBR Green qPCR Master Mix (SuperArray
Bioscience Corporation, Frederick, MD) on a Cepheid Smartcycler (Cepheid, Sunnyvale,
10
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
CA). Control real-time reactions were set up monitoring actin expression using 0.2 μM
final concentration of actF (5'-GTACGCCAACACCGTTCTC-3'′) and actR (5'-ATCTT
GATCTTCATGGTGGAA-3')primers.Reactions for the detection ofvarisin were 0.2 μM
vsnF (5'-ATGCGCGGACTTTGCATCT-3')and vsnR (5'-TTAATTCCTGTAGCAGGTG
CA-3'). The cDNA template (1 μl) was added last to the 25 μl reaction. All reactions were
run on the same program: 95°C for 60 s then 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 s, 60°C for 60 s, and
followed by a melt curve. C values were determined and used either in the comparative CT
method (AAC) for relative quantification, or to determine the actual number of molecules
of real-time reactions. Controls without reverse transcriptase and without template were set
up with each set of samples.
Protein gels
Hemolymph collected in Shen's solution was used to check for the presence or absence of
the varisin band in both hemolymph plasma and hemocyte lysate. Hemocytes were col-
        x        
was resuspended in 10 μl water and frozen until needed. Cells were thawed and 4 μl of the
hemocytes were mixed with loading buffer and reducing agent, then heated at 70°C for
10 min before loading on a 4-12% NuPAGE Tris-Bis SDS gel (Invitrogen) with See Blue
molecular weight marker (Invitrogen). After electrophoresis at 200 V for 35 min, the gel
was silver stained using the Silver Express staining kit (Invitrogen). A western blot analysis
of a similarly run gel was carried out as previously described (Ceraul et al. 2003) except
that the primary antibody (anti-varisin) was diluted 1:50.
Antimicrobial assay
Antimicrobial activity of hemolymph plasma was assessed using a well diffusion assay.
Aos ondan cu mno shaa saap u t cu paadid aaa pnsa aq cn (r oi) sald
agar plates, then allowed to dry, exposed to chloroform vapors for 20 min, and aired. An
overnight culture of the gram positive bacterium Micrococcus futeus was seeded onto the
          g     s
of inhibition were seen as areas of no growth around the wells. Two fold dilution series
were carried out using 0.9% saline as the diluent. The titer (arbitrary units, AU) was deter-
mined as the last dilution to show a zone of growth inhibition.
Results
Antimicrobial assay
gram positive bacteria M. futeus indicated less activity in the dsRNA treated tick hemo-
lymph, than in the ticks injected with Shen's solution (Fig. 1). When the hemolymph was
two-fold serially diluted, titers for the control (Shen's injected) were 2-4 times higher than
the test (dsRNA injected) sample. Control titers were 8-16 AU whereas the dsRNA
injected tick hemolymph was 4 AU.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
11
a
b
icks. The same volume of hemolymph was added to each well. The lower well was buffer control. Hemo-
lymph used in this assay was from 2 separate injections of varisin dsRNA
MV
1
2
3
4MW
MW1
2
3
4
MW
a
b
6.0 kDa
3.5kDa
Fig. 2 PAGE (a) and Westem blot (b) showing inhibition of defensin production by vsn dsRNA in tick
hemoly mph plasma. MW is molecular weight markers. Lanes 1 and 2 are hemolymph from ticks injected with
Shen's, lanes 3 and 4 are hemolymph from ticks injected with dsRNA. Lanes 1 and 3 are hemolymph sarmples
in which the tick was bled after removal from the rabbit, 2 and 4 are hemolymph samples obtained 1 h after
hetickswerewounded.Thearrowindicatesthevanisinband
Loss of varisin peptide in hemolymph plasma and cells
Cell lysate and hemolymph plasma were visualized on a polyacrylamide gel, stained for
protein. A representative gel of tick hemolymph plasma is shown in Fig. 2a. The varisin
peptide band is missing, or very faint, in the hemolymph plasma of those ticks treated with
dsRNA, while those treated with buffer still show the presence of a varisin-sized band. The
same effect was seen with hemocyte extracts, in that the varisin band is present in the
Western blot analysis using the anti-varisin antibody confirmed the loss of the defensin in
both hemolymph plasma (Fig. 2b) and hemocytes (not shown). The presence of multiple
bands in the westem blot is most likely due to the non-specific binding of antibodies to
other tick proteins as previously described (Ceraul et al. 2003).
To detect release of the varisin peptide following a wounding response, ticks were also
wounded 1 h prior to bleeding and collecting the hemolymph. Figure 2 shows that the
12
1.Brwin&L.P.S.van der Geest(eds.)
350-
300
250
Fluorescence
200
150
100
-control
50
113151792232522933539
-50
Cycle #
Fig. 3 Real time PCR results following amplification of cDNA derived from control and treated (dsRNA)
tick hemocytes. The insert shows the same graph with armplifcation for actin frorm the same samples as used
for varisin amplification
wounding does not result in release of varisin from dsRNA treated ticks. No difference was
seen in the presence or absence of the varisin band between non-wounded and wounded
ticks.
Real-time PCR assays
Real-time PCR was used to deterrmine the degree to which varisin transcription was
silenced in treated ticks. Representative results are shown in Fig. 3. Treatment with dsRNA
results in a decrease in the amount of varisin transcript as seen by the number of cycles
required for the transcript to be detected. Figure 3 shows control and treated samples ampli-
fed using the varisin primers. The insert shows the graphs of control and treated reactions
with the actin amplification; this ensures equal amounts of template were added to the reac-
tion.
The effect of treatment can easily be seen in this graph but to gain insight into how much
the gene is silenced in our samples we determined the amount of transcript remaining using
both the relative quantification and standard curve methodologies. A standard curve was
prepared in which the C was plotted against the number of molecules present; we used
ten-fold dilutions from 10? through 10′ copies of the varisin gene. Using the standard curve
to determine the number of molecules of varisin, we found that injection of dsRNA for
varisin resulted in a 99-99.5% knockdown. Using the AAC method for relative quantifica-
tion treatment with dsRNA the knockdown was as high as 99.9%. These results show that
injection of varisin dsRNA effectively silences the expression of the varisin gene.
Discussion
 RNA interference is an effective way of examining gene function in ticks, and has been used to
to this list varisin, which we believe to be the major defensin in tick hemolymph. Inactivation of
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
13
varisin results in a 2-4 fold reduction in the antimicrobial activity of tick hermolymph as deter-
mined by our plate assays. However, it does not account for all the inhibitory activity since
hemolymph plasma from the treated ticks was still able to inhibit the growth of M. futeus.
Micrococcus luteus was chosen as an indicator of antimicrobial activitybecause it is sensitive
to and used for detecting activity of numerous antimicrobial agents. We currently do not
kmow the antibacterial spectrum of activity (Gram positive, gram negative or fungi) of the
varisin peptide but M. futeus is very sensitive to the action of the peptide. What accounts for
the other antimicrobial activity seen in the hemolymph? Perhaps the most likely candidate is
lysozyme, which is known to be expressed by D. variabilis hemocytes (Simser et al. 2004;
Ceraul et al. 2007) and possibly released into the hemolymph plasma fraction. We have previ-
ously shown that a lysozyme is able to enhance the antimicrobial activity of varisin (Johns
t al. 2001a, b). Whether authentic tick lysozyme functions with varisin in the same manner
titer of tick hemolymph if we silenced lysozyme expression as well as varisin? RNAi studies
into this aspect are currently underway in our laboratory.
There are a number of other antimicrobial molecules present in tick hemolymph (Sonen-
shine and Hynes 2008; Taylor 2006) that could also result inhibition of microbial growth.
Activity of these other molecules would be indicated by a smaller zone of inhibition as
shown in Fig. 1. One possible peptide that could be responsible for some activity would be
the second defensin reported from D. variabilis, defensin-2 (Ceraul et al. 2007). However,
this is an unlikely player in the antimicrobial activity of hemolymph since it is expressed by
the midgut and not expressed by hemocytes.
 Defensins have been implicated as major players in the innate immune response of ticks.
We have shown that RNAi can be used to target and silence varisin expression in hemo-
cytes and therefore in hermolymph. We have previously reported that varisin was most
likely produced and stored in the hemocytes (Ceraul et al. 2003) then released into the
hemolymph upon wounding or following microbial challenge. New defensin would then be
made at a later time (Ceraul 2005). In this study, the initial challenge would be the injection
of dsRNA into the hemocoel, resulting in release of the stored defensin. Varisin released at
the time of dsRNA injection would be expected to have been lost from the tick within 24 h
(Johns 2003). Since we do not detect varisin in the hemocytes or released into the hemo-
lymph, even after another wounding (Fig. 2), it appears that RNAi effectively prevents syn-
thesis of any new varisin. Whether inhibition of varisin production has an effect on the tick,
beyond that of its role in the innate immune response is unknown. What, if any, additional
or alternative roles varisin has in tick immunity requires further investigation, since defen-
sin has been suggested to have an altermative function in mosquito immunity (Bartholomay
et al. 2004). Similarly, we do not know what is the actual in vivo effect of varisin silencing.
In a separate study reported elsewhere in this issue (Kocan et al. 2008), RNAi silencing of
varisin in male D. variabilis resulted in a reduction of Anaplasma marginale infections as
well as morphological changes in the colonies of these rickettsiae in the tick midgut.
Acknowledgements We thank the National Research Fund for Tick-Borne Diseases and the National Sci-
ence Foundation (1BN 0212901) for the support of this research.
References
Biol13:125-132
14
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Brown RN, Lane RS, Dennis DT (2005) Geographic distributions of tick-bome diseases and their vectors. In:
Goodman JL, Dennis DT, Sonenshine DE (eds) Tick-borne diseases of humans. ASM Press, Washing-
ton DC, pp 363-391
Dev Comp lmmunol 23:329-344
Bulet P, Charlet M, Hetru C (2003) Antimicrobial peptides in insect immunity. In: Ezekowitz RAB, Hoff-
mann JA (eds) Innate immunity. Humana Press Inc, Totowa, pp 89-107
Ceraul SM (200S) PhD dissertation. Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk
Ceraul SM, Sonenshine DE, Hynes WL (2002) Resistance of the tick Dermacentor variabitlis (Acari: lxodi-
dae) following challenge with the bacterium Escherichia coti (Enterobacteriales: Enterobacteriaceae). J
Med Entomol 39:376-383
Ceraul SM, Sonenshine DE, Ratzlaff RE, Hynes WL (2003) An arthropod defensin expressed by the hemo.
cytes of the American dog tick, Dermacentor variabilis (Acari: lxodidae). Insect Biochem Mol Bio]
33: 1099-1103
Ceraul SM, Dreher-Lesnick SM, Gillespie J1, Rahman MS, Azad AF (2007) New hick defensin isoform and
animicrobial gene expression in response to Ricketsia montanensis chalenge.Infect Immun 75: 1973-
1983
Cociancich S, Bulet P,Hetru C,Hoffmann JA (1994) Theinducible antibacterial peptides of insects. Parasito]
Today 10: 132-138
de la Fuente J, Almazan C, Blouin EF, Naranjo V, Kocan KM (2005) RNA interference screening in ticks for
identification of protective antigens. Parasitol Res 96: 137-141
de la Fuente J, Kocan KM, Alrmazan C, Blouin EF (2007) RNA interference for the study and genetic manip-
ulation of ticks. Trends Parasitol 23:427-433
macentor variabiis. Exp Appl Acarol 9:279-287
Gillespie JP, Kanost MR, Trenczek T (1997) Biological mediators of insect immunity. Annu Rev Entomo]
42:611643
Hynes WL, Ceraul SM, Todd SM, Seguin KC, Sonenshine DE (2005) A defensin-like gene expressed in the
black-legged tick, Ixodes scapularis. Med Vet Entomol 19:339-344
Inoue N, Hanada K, Tsuji N, Igarashi 1, Nagasawa H, Mikami T, Fujisaki K (2001) Characterization of phag-
ocytic hemocytes in Ornithodoros moubata (Acari: lxodidae). J Med Entomol 38:514519
Johns R (2003) Tick immunology and its influence on vector competence. Ph D Dissertation. Department of
Biological Sciences, Old Dominion Uni versity, Norfolk, VA, US A
Johns R, Sonenshine DE, Hynes WL (1998) Control of bacterial in fections in the hard tick Dermacentor vari-
abitis (Acari: lxodidae): evidence for the existence of antimicrobial proteins in tick hemolymph. J Med
Entomol 35:458-464
Johns R, Ohnishi J, Broadwater A, Sonenshine DE, De Silva AM, Hynes WL (2001a) Con trasts in tick innate
irmrmune responses to Borretia burgdorferi challenge: immunotolerance in Ixodes scapularis versus
immunocompetence in Dermacentor variabitis (Acari: lxodidae). J Med Entomo] 38:99-107
Johns R, Sonenshine DE, Hynes WL (2001b) ldentification of a defensin from the hemolymph of the Amer-
ican dog tick, Dermacentor variabitis. lnsect Biochem Mol Biol 31:857-865
of concept study. BMC Biotechnol 8:30
Kocan KM, de la Fuente J, Manzano-Roman R, Naranjo V, Sonenshine DE, Hynes WL (2008) Silencing
expression of the defensin, varisin,in male Dermacentor variabitis by RNA interference results in
reduced Anaplasma marginate infections. Exp Appl Acarol. doi: 10.1007/s 10493-008-9159-5
Michaut L, Fehlbaum P, Moniatte M, Van Dorsselaer A, Reichhart JM, Bulet P (1996) Determination of the
disulfide array of the first inducible antifungal peptide from insects: drosormycin from Drosophila mel-
anogaster.FEBS Lett 395:6-10
Nakajima Y, van der Goes van Naters-Yaswi A, Taylor D, Yamakawa M (2001) Two isoforms of a member
of the arthropod defensin family from the soft tick, Omithodoros moubata(Acari: Argasidae).Insect
Biochem Mol Biol 31:747-751
Nakajima Y, van der Goes van Naters-Yasui A, Taylor D, Yamakawa M (2002) Antibacterial peptide defen-
sin is involved in midgut irmrmunity of the soft tick, Ornithodoros moubata.1nsect Mol Biol 11: 611-618
Oliver JHJ, Wilkenson PR, Kohls GM (1974) Observations on hybridization on three species of North Amer-
ican Dermacentor ticks. 1 Parasitol 58:375-380
first annotation of an intron/exon structure in a hard ick defensin gene and first evidence of the occur-
rence of two isoforms of one member of the arthropod defensin family. lnsect Mol Biol 16:501-507
Schrmid-Hempel P (2005) Evolutionary ecology of insect immune defenses. Annu Rev Entomol 50:529-55 1
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
15
Simser JA, Macaluso KR, Mulenga A, Azad AF (2004) lmmune-responsive lysozymes from hemocytes of
the American dog tick, Dermacentor variabitis and an embryonic cell line of the Rocky Mountain wood
fick,D.andersoni. lnsect Biochem Mol Biol 34:1235-1246
Sonenshine DE, Hynes WL (2008) Molecular characterizaion and related aspects of the innate immune
response in ticks.Front Biosci 13:7046-7063
Sonenshine DE,Hynes WL, Ceraul SM, Mitchell R, Benzine T (2005)Host blood proteins and peptides in the
midgut of the tick Dermacentor variabilis contribute to bacterial control. Exp Appl Acarol 36:207-223
Taylor D (2006) lnnate immunity in ticks: a review.JAcaro] Soc Jpn 15:109-127
Todd SM, Sonenshine DE, Hynes WL (2007) Tissue and life-stage distribution of a defensin gene in the Lone
Star tick, Ambtyomma americanum. Med Vet Entomol 21: 141-147
defensin against Babesia sp. parasites. Infect Imrmun 75:3633-3640
Silencing expression of the defensin, varisin, in male
Dermacentor variabilis by RNA interference results
in reduced Anaplasma marginale infections
Katherine M. Kocan · Jose de la Fuente · Rail Manzano-Roman
Victoria Naranjo · Wayne L. Hynes · Daniel E. Sonenshine
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 14, 17-28.
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9159-5 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract Antimicrobial peptides, including defensins, are components of the innate
immune system in ticks that have been shown to provide protection against both
gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. Varisin, one of the defensins identified in
Dermacentor variabilis, was shown to be produced primarily in hemocytes but transcript
levels were also expressed in midguts and other tick cells. In this research, we studied
the role of varisin in the immunity of ticks to the gram-negative cattle pathogen,
(RNAi) in which male ticks were injected with varisin dsRNA and then allowed to feed and
acquire A. marginale infection on an experimentally-infected calf. Silencing expression of
varisin in hemocytes, midguts and salivary glands was confirmed by real time RT-PCR. We
expected that silencing of varisin would increase A. marginale infections in ticks, but the
results demonstrated that bacterial numbers, as deterrmined by an A. marginale msp4
quantitative PCR, were significantly reduced in the varisin-silenced ticks. Furthermore,
colonies ofA. marginale in ticks used for RNAi were morphologically abnormal from those
seen in elution buffer injected control ticks. The colony shape was irregular and in some
cases the A. marginale appeared to be free in the cytoplasm of midgut cells. Some ticks
           
silencing of varisin. This appears to be the first report of the silencing of expression of a
defensin in ticks by RNAi that resulted in reduced A. marginale infections.
Keywords Defensin ·Varisin · RNA interference · Dermacentor variabiis ·
Anaptasmamarginate
K M. Kocan·J. de la Fuente ·R. Manzano-Roman
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Center for Veterinary Health Sciences, Oklahoma State
University, Stillwater, OK, USA
1. de la Fuente ·V.Naranjo
Instituto de Investigacion en Recursos Cinegeticos IREC (CSIC-UCLM-JCCM), Ronda de Toledo s/n,
13005 Ciudad Real, Spain
W. L. Hynes · D. E. Sonenshine ()
Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529-0266, USA
e-mail: dsonensh@odu.edu
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.). Diseases of Mites αnd Ticks. DOl: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2_417
18
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Introduction
Ticks transmit a greater variety of pathogens than any other group of hemotophagous
arthropods (Sonenshine 1993). In ticks, the midgut is the frst site of exposure to a wide
variety of hemoparasites that may be ingested with the bloodmeal. Some of these hemo-
parasites are either not infective for ticks andrapidly digested or cleared by theinnate tick
immune system. Others infect midgut epithelial cells where they multiply and subsequently
infect other tissues including the salivary glands. Transmission may occur when the tick is
ingested by the vertebrate host or from salivary glands via the saliva to vertebrate hosts
when the tick feeds again. Tick-borne pathogens have apparently co-evolved with ticks for
their mutual survival because, while pathogens undergo considerable multiplication in
ticks, these infections do not appear to be detrimental to tick feeding or their biology
(Kocan et al. 1992a, 2005; Sonenshine et al. 2005)
Among the various tick-borne pathogens, those belonging to the genus Anaplasma
(Rickettsiales: Anaplasmataceae) are obligate intracellular organisms found exclusively
within parasitophorous vacuoles in the cytoplasm of both vertebrate and tick host cells
(Kocan 1986; Dumler et al. 2001). The type species, A. marginale, causes the economi-
cally important cattle disease, anaplasmosis, with Dermacentor variabilis comprising one
of the main tick vectors of this pathogen in the USA (Kocan et al. 2004).
While the molecular relationship between ticks and pathogens is not well understood,
these molecular interactions may enhance or be necessary for tick and pathogen biology
(de la Fuente et al. 2007a). In this emerging area of research, initial studies of tick host cell
response to Anaplasma infection revealed genes that are differentially expressed in
response to pathogen infection. These genes, therefore may be necessary for and facilitate
pathogen infection, multiplication and transmission (i.e. receptors) or limit infections that
favor tick survival (de la Fuente et al. 2001, 2005, 2007a, b; Manzano-Roman et al. 2007).
One component of innate immune systems of eukaryotic organisms are the small cat-
ionic peptides known as defensins, which have been identified in a wide range of species
ranging from the simplest invertebrates to mammals, as well as plants (Gillespie et al.
1997). Among invertebrates, the most completely characterized defensins contain six
cysteines and provide immunity against gram-positive bacteria (Ganz and Lherer 1994;
Fogaca et al. 2004). In insects, these defensins were found to be expressed primarily in fat
body and midgut epithelial cells (Hoffmann and Hetru 1992; Boulanger et al. 2002)
Defensins have been identified in a variety of ixodid ticks, including D. variabilis (Johns
et al. 2001a; Ceraul et al. 2003), Xxodes scapularis (Hynes et al. 2005), Ambly-
omma americanum (Todd et al. 2007),A. hebraeum (Lai et al. 2004) and R. micropius
(Fogaca et al. 2004; Tsuji et al. 2007). While defensins have clearly been shown to be
expressed in tick hemocytes (Johns et al. 2000, 2001a), they were also found to be expressed
or at least transcribed in midguts and other tick tissues in the soft tick Ornithodo-
ros moubata (Nakajima et al.
2002) and the hard ticks Amblyomma americanum and
Ixodes scapularis (Hynes et al. 2005; Todd et al. 2007). Tick defensins were shown to be
involved in protection against a wide range of organisms such as Micrococcus luteus in
Dermacentor variabilis (Johns et al. 2o0la) or Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus
as demonstrated in A. hebraeum (Lai et al. 2004). Upregulation of a defensin occurred in
response to challenge-exposure of D. variabilis with the gram-negative rickettsia, Rick-
ettsia montanensis, fed to ticks via capillary tubes (Ceraul et al. 2007). In addition,
defensins were also found to provide immunity against the protozoan parasites, Babe-
sia equi, B. gibsoni and B. microti (Tsuji et al. 2007). When varisin, the defensin found in
D. variabilis, was silenced, antimicrobial activity of hemolymph was reduced 24 fold
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
19
compared to controls, indicating that this peptide is essential for the tick's innate immune
response (Hynes et al. 2008). This collective research suggests that defensins contribute to
the elimination or modulation of microbes to which ticks are exposed.
In this study we hypothesized that expression of varisin would provide protection in
D. variabilis against infection by the gram-negative A. marginale. RNA interference
(RNAi) was used to silence the varisin gene in male D. variabilis, after which the ticks were
allowed to feed on an A. marginale-infected calf to acquire bacteria. Varisin gene silencing
was confirmed by real time RT-PCR and A. marginale abundance was determined by use of
this research were contrary to our hypothesis and demonstrated that silencing of varisin
resulted in significantly reduced A.marginale numbers. Further studies are needed to
deterrmine whether defensin may be necessary for the development of A. marginale in ticks
Materials and methods
Ticks
Dermacentor variabifis males were purchased from a laboratory colony maintained at the
Oklahoma State University (OSU), Tick Rearing Facility, Stillwater, OK, USA. Larvae and
nymphs were fed on rabbits and male ticks derived frorm the engorged nymphs were used
for these studies. Male ticks were used for these studies because they become persistently
described in the intrastadial cycle. In addition intrastadial studies avoid the possible
infuence of molting. Off-host ticks were maintained in a L12:D12 photoperiod at 22-25°C
and 95% relative humidity.
Infection of ticks with A. marginale
For infection of ticks with A. marginaie, male D. variabilis ticks injected with either
varisin dsRNA or elution buffer alone were allowed to acquire bacteria during feeding
(acquisition feeding, AF). Acquisition was done by feeding the ticks for 7 days on a
splenectomized calf that was experimentally-infected with the Virginia isolate of
A. marginale which was shown previously to be infective and transmissible by ticks
(Kocan et al. 1992a, b) when the ascending percent parasitized erythrocytes (PPE) was 3-
4%. The ticks were then removed and maintained off-host for 4 days, after which they
were allowed to feed for 7 days on a sheep to allow for development of A. marginale in
tick salivary glands and transmission (transrmission feeding, TF). Two days after infestation
of the sheep all unattached ticks were removed and discarded. All ticks were removed after
7 days of feeding and held in the humidity chamber for 4 days. The calf and sheep were
housed at the OSU Center for Veterinary Health Sciences, Laboratory Animal Resources
with a protocol approved by OSU Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
RNA interference in ticks
Oligonucleotide primers homologous to D. variabilis defensin and containing T7 promoters
for in vitro transcription and synthesis of dsRNA (DEFT75: 5'-TAATACGACTCA
CTATAGGGTACTATGCGCGGACTTTGCATCTGC and DEFT733: 5'-TAATACGACTC
ACTATAGGGTACTTACGTCGACAAAGCGCTTCGG) were synthesized to amplify tick
20
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
defensin. RT-PCR and dsRNA synthesis reactions were performed as described previously
(de la Fuente et al. 2006a, b), using the Access RT-PCR system (Prormega) and the Megascript
RNAi kit (Ambion, Austin, TX, USA). The purified dsRNA was quantified by spectrometry
(BioRad SMART SPEC 3000)
In order to test the effect of injection with varisin dsRNA on development of A. mar-
the ventral surface of the exoskeleton with approximately 0.4 μl of varisin dsRNA
(5 x 10lo-5 x 1ol molecules per μl) (de la Fuente et al. 2006a, b). The exoskeleton was
  a   do   c  a o e po d an m pd 
injected through this opening into the hemocoel using a Hamilton? syringe fitted with a
33 g needle. Twenty ticks were injected with D. variabilis subolesin dsRNA to serve as
positive controls (de la Fuente et al. 2006a, b) or elution buffer used in the final step of
purification of dsRNA (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7, 1 mM EDTA) alone to serve as negative
controls. The ticks were held in a humidity chamber for 24 h after which they were
allowed to feed on an experimentally infected calf.
Analysis of tick attachment and feeding
Tick attachment was evaluated during AF and TF as the ratio of attached ticks 48 h after
infestation on the calf to the total number of ticks. Tick mortality was evaluated as the ratio
of dead ticks after feeding on the calf (AF) or the sheep (TF) to the total number of fed
ticks. Tick attachment and mortality were compared between dsRNA and elution buffer-
injected ticks by x*-test as implemented in Mstat 4.01 (α = 0.01).
Dissection of tick tissues and hemolymph collection for determination of mRNA levels
and A. marginale infections
Midguts were dissected from five ticks after AF and stored in RNAlater (Ambion) for
extraction of DNA and RNA using Tri-Reagent (Sigma) according to manufacturer's
instructions to determine the A. marginale levels by msp4 quantitative PCR (de la Fuente
et al. 2001) and to confirm gene expression silencing by real-time RT-PCR as described
and processed for RNA and DNA studies as described. Tick tissues were processed and
analyzed individually. Midguts and salivary glands were also collected from another five
ticks and fxed for microscopy studies (see following section).
To assess the effect of defensin RNAi on the expression of defensin in tick hemocytes,
50 male D. variabilis ticks were injected with defensin dsRNA or elution buffer alone as
described above. Injected ticks were allowed to feed on a calf for 3 days after which they
were removed with forceps. Hemolymph was collected from the severed legs of two
groups of 25 ticks each from both the RNAi and control groups using finely drawn 1o0 μl
glass collecting micropipets (VWR International, Suwanee, GA, USA), and dispensed into
30 μl of sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Total RNA was extracted and the
expression of defensin was quantified by real time RT-PCR as described below.
Real-time reverse transcription (RT)-PCR analysis
Total RNA was extracted from five individual uninfected and A. marginale-infected male
D. variabilis guts and salivary glands and from two hemolymph pools from 25 ticks each
using TriReagent (Sigma) according to manufacturer's instructions. Two primers were
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
21
synthesized based on the sequences of D. variabilis defensin (Genbank accession number
AY181027;Ceraul et al. 2003) (DvDEFEN-5: TCTGGCATCATCAAGCAGAC and
DvDEFEN-3: CTGCAAGTATTCCGGGGTTA) and used for real-time RT-PCR analysis
of mRNA levels in uninfected and A. marginale-infected ticks. Subolesin mRNA levels
was done using the QuantiTec SYBR Green RT-PCR kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) and
a Bio-Rad iQ5 thermal cycler (Hercules, CA, USA) following manufacturer's recom-
CACC) using the comparative Ct method (de la Fuente et al. 2007a, b). mRNA levels were
compared between infected and uninfected ticks by Student's t-test (P = 0.05) and average
mRNA levels were used to calculate percent silencing in dsRNA-injected ticks with
respect to elution buffer-injected controls.
Quantification of A. marginale infections in ticks by PCR
Anaplasma marginale infections in dsRNA injected and control ticks were determined by 2
2001). Total DNA was extracted from five individualA. marginale-infected and uninfected
male D. variabilis collected after TF using TriReagent (Sigma) according to manufacturer's
instructions. Anapiasma marginale infection levels in tick midguts and salivary glands were
compared between dsRNA and saline injected ticks by Student's f-test (P = 0.05).
Light microscopy studies of D. variabilis gut and salivary glands
Ticks were cut in half, separating the right and left halves, and fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde
in 0.2 M sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4). Tick halves were then post-fixed in 0.2 M
sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4), dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol and embedded
in epoxy resin (Kocan et al. 1980). Thick sections (1.0 μm) were cut with an ultrami-
crotome and stained with Mallory's stain (Richardson et al. 1960). Photomicrographs were
Results
Tick attachment, feeding and A. marginale calf infection levels during tick feeding
Tick attachment and survival after AF (95% attachment and 85% survival) and TF (95%
attachment and 89% survival) did not appear to be affected by injection of ticks with
varisin dsRNA when compared to the elution buffer (100 and 97% attachment and 88 and
91% survival after AF and TF, respectively; α > 0.01) and subolesin-injected controls (95
and 100% attachment and 88 and 90% survival after AF and TF, respectively; α > 0.01)
The PPE during tick feeding on the calf experimentally infected with the Virginia isolate of
A. marginate ranged from 4.8 to 35.9%.
Silencing of expression of varisin in tick tissues
RNAi resulted in 99.4% silencing of varisin expression in tick hemolymph as determined
by real-time RT-PCR (Table 1). Silencing of the varisin gene by RNAi was also confrmed
22
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
that were injected with varisin and subolesin dsRNA
Tick tissue/collection time
Expression silencing ±SD(%)
Varisin
Subolesin
 Midguts after AF
89.9 ± 0.1*
90.0 ± 21.5*
Midguts after TF
97.4 ± 0.1*
99.7 ± 0.7*
Salivary glands after TF
57.9 ± 0.2*
99.4 ± 0.9*
Hemolymph?
99.4 ± 0.5*
ND
Total RNA was extracted from five individual ticks from each group and varisin and subolesin expression
ime RT-PCR and cormpared between dsRNA-treated and control ticks by Student's t-test (*P < 0.05).
Amplification efficiencies were normalized against β-actin using the comparative Ct method and average
buffer-injected controls
b Ticks were allowed to feed for 3 days after treatment on an uninfected calf and hemolymph was collected
from two groups of 25 ticks each. Varisin mRNA levels were determined with respect to control ticks after
RNAi by real-time RT-PCR and compared between dsRNA-treated and control ticks by Student's t-tesl
(*P < 0.05) as described above for tick guts and salivary glands. ND, not determined
by real time RT-PCR in tick midguts after AF (89%) and in the midguts (97%) and salivary
glands (57.9%) after TF as compared with the elution buffer-injected controls (Table 1).
For the positive control ticks injected with subolesin dsRNA, silencing in midguts after AF
The effect of varisin RNAi on A. marginale infections in male D. variabilis
Levels of A. marginale tick infections, as determined by a msp4 quantitative PCR and
analyzed by Student's ftest, were significantly reduced in tick midguts after AF and in
salivary glands after TF as compared with the elution buffer-injected controls (P < 0.05)
lower in tick midguts after TF as compared with the elution buffer-injected controls
(Table 2). Reduction of A. marginale levels after RNAi of the subolesin gene (positive
control) was statistically signifcant only in salivary glands collected from transmission fed
ticks (Table 2).
Expression levels of varisin in A. marginale-infected and uninfected D. variabilis
to infected ticks (P = 0.02). In contrast, varisin levels were significantly higher in the
salivary glands from A. marginale infected ticks (P = 0.05) as compared to the salivary
glands from uninfected ticks (Table 3).
Light microscopic changes in ticks injected with varisin dsRNA
Morphologic changes were observed in the colonies of A. marginale in tick midguts after
ticks. While typical large, round colonies of A. marginale, were observed in the control
ticks, colonies in the varisin dsRNA injected ticks were irregular in shape (Fig. la, b).
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
23
Table 2 Anaplasma marginate infection levels in D. variabitis males that were injected with varisin and
subolesin dsRNAs and then allowed to acquire A. marginate infection by feeding on an experimentally
infected calf
Tick tissue
Average Amarginateftick±SD
Varisin RNAi
Subolesin RNAi
Control
Midguts after AF
340 ± 535*
814 ± 122
40579 ± 6993
 Midguts after TF
1006 ± 470
1517 ± 1025
28252 ± 27788
Salivary glands after TF
2±0*
2±0*
287 ± 144
A.marginateinfection levelsinmidguts or salivary glands from fiveticks per group were dtermined by
msp4 PCR and compared between dsRNA-treated and control ticks by Student's t-test (*P < 0.05)
Table 3 Varisin expression levels in A. marginate-infected and uninfected D. variabitise
Tick tissue
Average mRNA levels ± SD (arbitrary units)
1/U
P
Uninfected
lnfected
Gut
5.5 ± 0.6
1.8 ± 1.5
0.3
0.02
Salivary gland
12.5 ± 5.2
29.2 ± 11.1
2.3
50'0
 Varisin mRNA levels were determined by real-time RT-PCR and compared between dsRNA-treated and
defensin mRNA levels significanfly decreased in tick guts but increased in tick salivary glands after
infection with A.marginate
Some tick midgut cells appeared to contain A. marginale free in the cytoplasm rather than
within the parasitophorous vacuole (Fig. 1b, arrowheads). Hemocytes in the varisin
dsRNA injected ticks were degranulated as compared with those from the controls (Fig. 1c,
d). Two of these ticks appeared to be systermically infected with microbes of unknown
identity. Large numbers of these organisms were observed in most tissues, including
midguts (Fig. 1e) and sperrmatogonia (Fig 1f). Similar systemic microbial infections were
not observed in the elution buffer or subolesin dsRNA-injected controls (data not shown).
Discussion
Ticks are exposed to a wide variety of organisms from mammalian hosts during their
extended feeding periods. While some of these organisms are not infective for ticks, others
infect tick midguts, where they undergo development and are subsequently transmitted to
other hosts during feeding or when the ticks are ingested by the host. During attachment
and blood feeding, tick genes express a variety of proteins and peptides involved in the
innate immune response that function to inhibit microbial infection, as well as mitigating
the oxidative stress and the toxic byproducts (e.g., heme) of hemoglobin digestion. These
proteins may include several stress reducing proteins such as glutathione-Stransferases
(Dreher-Lesnick et al. 2006), protease inhibitors, lectins and others (Lehane et al. 1997;
Rudenko et al. 2005; Zhou et al. 2006). In addition, anti-microbial peptides in ticks have
been reported to be upregulated in response to microbial challenge. For example, lysozyme
was found to be upregulated in tick hemolymph after challenge-exposure with E. coli
(Simser et al. 2004).
24
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
一
Fig. 1 Light micrographs of tissues in cross sections of ticks that were either injected with varisin dsRNA
or elution buffer to serve as controls.(a) Typical large round colonies (C) of A marginate, as described
previously by Kocan et al.(1992a,b), were observed in the midguts of the elution buffer injected control
ticks, (b) A. marginate colonies (C) observed in the varisin dsRNA males were irregular in shape or
appeared to be disrupted in the cytoplasm of gut cells (arrows), (c) granulated hemocytes (H) were observed
in the hemocoel of elution buffer injected control ticks,(d) in contrast to the control ticks,many hemocytes
in the varisin dsRNA injected ticks had degranulated (small arrows), (e) some ticks appeared to be
systermically infected with microbes (arrow) which were seen in the rmidguts lurmen (arrow) near gut
epithelial cells (GEC), and (f) in spermatogonia (small arrow) among prospermatids (PS). a and b,
bars = 10 μrm; c and d, bars = 5 μrm; e and f, bars = 10 μrm
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
25
An example of the ability of ticks to rapidly eliminate noninfective organisms was
demonstrated by de la Fuente et al. (2001) in which D. variabilis males that fed for 7 days
0n calves with >70% erythrocytes infected with a non-tick transrmissible isolate (Florida
isolate) of A. marginale were found to be clear of A. marginale DNA 4 days after being
removed from the infected calf.
The small cationic peptides, defensins, are a notable part of the innate response in ticks.
Defensins were found to be upregulated in response to challenge with B. burgdorferi or
gram positive bacteria (Johns et al. 2001b; Nakajima et al. 2001, 2002; Ceraul et al. 2003).
Upregulation of tick defensins has also been reported in response to gram negative bacteria
such as the intracellular rickettsia, R. montanensis (Ceraul et al. 2007) and to protozoan
pathogens such as Babesia species (Tsuji et al. 2007). The reports cited above suggest that
ticks are able toeliminate or at least curtailmost microbial infections towhich they are
exposed.
In this research we tested the hypothesis that one of the defensins identified in
D. variabilis, varisin, was involved in the tick innate immune response in response to
infection with the gram negative cattle pathogen, A. marginale. If the results supported our
hypothesis, silencing the expression of the varisin gene by RNAi would have resulted in
greater numbers of A. marginale in the ticks. While expression of varisin was confirmed to
be silenced in the midguts and hemocytes of the male D. variabilis after AF and in the
midguts and salivary glands after TF, both sites of varisin expression (Johns et al. 2001a;
Ceraul et al. 2003), the results of these studies were opposite to those expected. Silencing
 of varisin resulted in significantly lower numbers of A. marginale organisms in these male
ticks. These results suggested that defensin may play a role in A. marginale infection and
multiplication in D. variabilis in a manner different than we had expected. Interestingly,
varisin appeared down-regulated in the gut of infected ticks but it was up-regulated in the
down-regulate varisin expression to establish infection in the guts while in the salivary
glands varisin may plays a role in pathogen infection and multiplication.
Although these studies were not designed to quantify morphologic changes, the
 appearance and integrity of the A. marginale colonies in midgut epithelial cells suggested
an impact of varisin RNAi on parasite development. Within host cells, A. marginale
develop within a parasitophorous vacuole (called colonies) which is uniformly round.
However, in ticks in which varisin was silenced by RNAi, A. marginale colonies were
highly irregular and some organisms appeared to be free within the cell cytoplasm.
Another explanation for the reduction in the numbers of A. marginale organisms is that
it may have resulted from divergent changes in the levels of expression of off-target genes
(Scacheri et al. 2004; Ma et al. 2006). At least in mammalian systems, RNAi is known to
induce unexpected and divergent changes in the levels of expression of off-target genes
(Scacheri et al. 2004). Specifically, in some mammalian systems, RNAi resulted in global
upregulation of the interferon system with unexpected consequences (Siedz et al. 2003).
Similarly, as reported for saips 16 and other tick genes (Sukumaran et al. 2006; de la
Fuente et al. 2007c), defensin expression may be manipulated by the pathogen to aid in its
multiplication by an as yet undefined mechanism. Alternatively, RNAi treatment may have
affected other physiological processes that modified tick susceptibility to infection by other
pathogens. Finally, due to the redundant gene function of other defensin genes (Ceraul
et al. 2007), the possibility that silencing of the varisin gene targeted in these studies may
not be sufficient to suppress all defensin response in ticks should be considered.
Interestingly, other effects were noted in ticks after varisin RNAi. We observed that two
of five ticks appeared to have a systemic infection with an unknown microbe. Although the
26
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
microbes were seen in most tissues, infections were most notable in the midgut and testis.
However, similar systemic infections were not seen in sections of five control ticks (elution
buffer- or subolesin dsRNA-injected ticks). While the microscopy studies herein were not
designed to be quantitative, this observation provided evidence that the silencing of varisin
by RNAi may have been related to extensive multiplication of a microbe other than
A. marginale. Further studies are needed to define the relationship between other microbes
and A. marginale. We also noted degranulation of hemocytes in the ticks injected with
varisin dsRNA. However, whether either of these observations were directly related to
varisin knockdown is not known.
The results reported here illustrate the utility of RNAi as a powerful tool for studying
the effect of gene silencing in ticks as reported previously (de la Fuente et al. 2007c).
However, the effect of gene silencing may be indirect rather than direct due to off-target
RNAi effects and may be limited by our understanding of the molecular biology of tick-
pathogen interactions. Since ticks and the pathogens they transmit have co-evolved
molecular interactions to assure their survival, these interactions are likely to involve loci
in both the pathogen and the tick. Further studies are needed to fully explore the impact of
defensins on the infection and development of A. marginale in ticks.
Station (project 1669), the Walter R. Sitlington Endowed Chair for Food Animal Research (K. M. Kocan,
Oklahoma State University), Pfizer Animal Health, Kalarmazoo, Ml, USA, the Junta de Comunidades de
Castilla-La Mancha, Spain (project 06036-00 1CS-JCCM), and Ministry of Science and Education (MEC),
Spain (project AGL2005-0740i). Dr. Raul Manzano-Roman was funded by Ministerio de Educacion y
Sonenshine) and a grant frorm the National Research Fund for Tick-borne Diseases (Hynes & Sonenshine).
References
Boulanger N, Munks RJ, Hamilton JV, Vovelle F, Brun R, Lehane Ml et al (2002) Epithelial innate
immunity. A novel antimicrobial pepide with antiparasitic activity in the blood-sucking insect Sto-
Ceraul SM, Sonenshine DE, Ratzlaff RE, Hynes WL (2003) An arthropod defensin expressed by the
hemocytes of the American dog tick, Dermacentor variabitis (Acari: lxodidae). lnsect Biochem Mo]
Biol 33:1099-1103. d0i: 10.1016/S0965-1748(03) 00122-X
Ceraul SM, Dreher-Lesnick S, Gillespie JJ, Sayeedur Rahman M, Azad AF (2007) A new tick defensin
lmmun 75: 1973-1983. doi: 10.1128/1A1.01815-06
de la Fuente 1, Garcia-Garcia JC, Blouin EF, Kocan KM (200l) Major surface protein la effects tick
1714. doi: 10.1016/S0020-7519(01) 00287-9
7:549-559. doi:10.1111/j.1462-5822.2004.00485.x
de la Fuente J, Almazan C, Blouin EF, Naranjo V, Kocan KM (2006a) Reduction of tick infections with
Anaplasma marginate and A. phagocytophitum by targeting the tick protective antigen subolesin.
Parasitol Res 100:85-89. doi: 10.1007/s00436-006-0244-6
de la Fuente J, Alrmazan C, Blas-Machado U, Naranjo V, Mangold AJ, Blouin EF et al (2006b) The tick
protective antigen, 4D8, is a conserved protein involved in modulation of tick blood ingestion and
reproduction. Vaccine 24:4082-4095. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2006.02.046
de la Fuente J, Blouin EF, Manzano-Rorman R, Naranjo V, Alrmazan C, Perez de la Latra JM et al (2007a)
Functional genomic studies of tick cells in response to infection with the cattle pathogen, Ana-
plasma marginate. Genomics 90:712-722. doi: 10.1016/j.y geno.2007.08.009
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
27
de la Fuente J, Manzano-Roman R, Blouin EF, Naranjo V,Kocan KM (2007b) Spl10 transcription is
induced and required by Anaplasma phagocytophitum for infection of human prormyelocyic cells.
BMC 1nfect Dis 7:110. doi:10.1186/1471-2334-7-110
de la Fuente J, Kocan KM, Almazan C, Blouin EF (2007c) RNA interference for the study and genetic
manipulation of ticks. Trends Parasitol 23:427-433. doi: 10. 1016/j.pt.2007.07.002
Dreher-Lesnick SM, Mulenga A, Simser JA, Azad AF (2006) Differential expression of two glutathione S-
453. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2583.2006.00657.x
Dumler JS, Barbet AC, Bekker CPl, Dasch GA, Palmer GH, Ray SC et al (2001) Reorganization of the
genera in the families Rickettsiaceae and Anaplasmataceae in the order Rickettsiales: unification of
some species of Ehrlichia with Anaplasma, Cowdria with Ehrtichia and Ehrtichia with Neorickettsia,
descriptions subjective synonyms of Ehrtichia phagocytophila. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 51:2145-
2165
Fogaca AC, Lorenzini DM, Kaku LM, Esteves E, Bulet P, Daffre S (2004) Cysteine-rich antimicrobial
peptides of the catle tick Boophitus microptus: isolation, structural characterization and tissue
expression profle. Dev Comp Immunol 28:191-200. doi: 10.1016/j.dei.2003.08.001
Gillespie JP, Kanost MR, Trenczek T (1997) Biological mediators of insect immunity. Annu Rev Entomol
42:611-643. doi: 10.1146/annurev.ento.42.1.611
Hoffmann JA, Hetru C (1992) Insect defensins: inducible antibacterial peptides. lmmunol Today 13:411-
415. d0i:10.1016/0167-5699(92) 90092-L
Hy nes WL, Ceraul SM, Todd SM, Seguin KC, Sonenshine DE (2005) A defensin-like gene expressed in the
black-legged tick, Ixodes scaputaris. Med Vet Entomol 19:339-344. doi:10.1111fj.1365-2915.
2005.00579.x
Hynes WL, Stokes MM, Hensley SM, Todd SM, Sonenshine DE (2008) Using RNA interference to
determine the role of varisin in the innate immune system of the hard tick Dermacentor variabitis
Johns R, Sonenshine DE, Hynes WL (2000) Tick immunity to microbial infections: anti-bacterial peptides
Proc 10th Internatl Congr, Canberra, Australia, pp 638-644
Johns R,Sonenshine DE,Hynes WL (200la) ldentification of a defensin from the hemolymph of the
American dog tick, Dermacentor variabitis. lnsect Biochem Mol Biol 31:857-865. doi:
10.1016/S0965-1748(01)00031-5
Johns R, Ohnishi J, Broadwater A, Sonenshine DE, deSilva A, Hynes WL (2001b) Contrasts in tick immune
immunocompetence in Dermacentor variabitis.J Med Entomol38:99-107
Kocan KM (1986) Development of Anaplasma marginate in ixodid ticks: coordinated development of a
ecology of ticks. Ellis Horwood Ltd, Chichester, pp 472-505
Kocan KM, Hair JA, Ewing SA (1980) Utrastructure of Anaplasma marginate Theiler in Dermacen-
tor andersoni Stiles and Dermacentor variabitis (Say). Am J Vet Res 41: 1966-1976
Kocan KM, Goff WL, Stiller D, Claypool PL, Edwards W, Ewing SA et al (1992a) Persistence of Anα-
plasma marginate (Rickettsiales: Anaplasmataceae) in male Dermacentor andersoni (Acari: lxodidae)
transferred successively from infected to susceptible cattle. J Med Ent 29:657-668
Kocan KM, Stiller D, Goff WL, Claypool PL, Edwards W, Ewing SA et al (1992b) Development of
Anaplasma marginale in maleDermacentor andersoni transferred frominfected to susceptible cattle.
Am J Vet Res 53:499-507
Anaplasmataceae): recent advances in defining host-pathogen adaptations of a tick-borne rickettsia.
Parasitology 129:S285-S300. doi:10.1017/S0031182003004700
Kocan KM, Yoshioka J, Sonenshine DE, de la Fuente J, Ceraul SM, Blouin EF et al (2005) Capillary tube
feeding system for studying tick/pathogen interactions of Dermacentor variabitis (Acari: lxodidae)
10.1603/0022-2585(2005) 042[0864:CTFSFS]2.0.CO;2
Lai R, Lomas LO, Jonczy J, Turner PC, Rees HH (2004) Two novel non-cationic defensin-like antimicrobial
peptides from haemolymph of the female tick, Ambtyomma hebrae um. Biochem J 379:68 1-685. doi:
10.1042/B120031429
Lehane MJ, Wu D, Lehane SM (1997) Midgut-specific immune molecules are produced by the blood-
sucking insect Stomoxys catcitrans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94:11502-11507. doi:10.1073/pnas.
94.21.11502
28
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
ference screens. Nature 443:359-363. doi: 10.1038/nature05 179
Manzano-Roman R,Almazan C,Naranjo V, Blouin EF,Kocan KM,de la Fuente J (2007) Expression of
perilipin in human promyelocyic cells in response to Anaplasma phagocytophitum infection results in
modified lipid metabolism. J Med Microbiol (in press)
Nakajima Y, van Naters-Yasui AV, Taylor D, Yamakawa M (2001) Two isoforms of a member of the
arthropod defensin family from the soft tick, Omithodoros moubata (Acari: Argasidae). Insect Bio-
chem Mol Biol 31:747-751. doi:10.1016/S0965-1748(01) 00066-2
Nakajima Y, van Naters-Yasui A, Taylor D, Yamakawa M (2002) Antibacterial peptide defensin is involved
in midgut immunity of the soft tick, Omithodoros moubata. lnsect Mol Biol 1l:61l-618. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-2583.2002.00372.x
Richardson KC, Jarret L, Finke FH (1960) Embedding in epoxy resins for ultrathin sectioning in electron
microscopy. Stain Technol 35:313-323
Rudenko N, Golovchenko M, Edwards MJ, Grubhoffer L (2005) Differential expression of Ixodes ricinus
fick genes induced by blood feeding or Borretia burgdorferi infection. J Med Entomol 42:36-41. doi:
10.1603/0022-2585(2005) 042[0036:DEO1RT]2.0.C0;2
Scacheri PC, Rozenblatt-Rosen O, Caplen NJ, Wolfsberg TG, Umayam L, Lee JC et al (2004) Short
mammalian cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101:1892-1897. doi:10.1073/pnas.0308698100
Siedz CA, Holko M, de Veer MJ, Silverman RH, Williams BR (2003) Activation of the interferon system by
short-interfering RNAs. Nat Cell Biol 5:834839. doi: 10. 1038/ncb 1038
Simser JA, Macaluso KR, Mulenga A, Azad AF (2004) lmmune-responsive lysozymes from hermoc ytes of
the American dog tick,Dermacentor variabitis,and an embryonic cell line of the Rocky Mountain
wood tick, D andersoni. 1nsect Biochem Mol Biol 34:1253-1246. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2004.07.003
Sonenshine DE (1993) Biology of ticks, vol 2. Oxford University Press, New York
Sonenshine DE, Hynes WL, Ceraul SM, Mitchell RD, Benzine T (2005) Host blood proteins and peptides in
the midgut of the tick Dermacentor variabitis contribute to bacterial control. Exp Appl Acarol 36:207-
223. doi:10.1007/s10493-005-2564-0
Sukurmaran B, Narasimhan S, Anderson JF, DePonte K, Marcantonio N et al (2006) An Ixodes scapularis
protein required for survival of Anaplasma phagocytophitum in tick salivary glands. J Exp Med
203:1507-1517. doi: 10.1084/jem.20060208
Todd SM, Sonenshine DE, Hynes WL (2007) Tissue and life-stage distribution of a defensin gene in the
Lone Star Tick, Ambtyomma americanum. Med Vet Entomol 21:141-147. doi:10.111l/j.1365-
2915.2007.00682.x
Tsuji N, Battsetseg B, Boldbaatar D, Miyoshi T, Xuan X, Oliver JH Jr et al (2007) A babesial vector tick 
defensin against Babesia parasites. 1nfect lmmun 75:3633-3640. doi:10.1128/1A1.00256-07
Zhou J, Ueda M, Urmermiya R, Battsetseg B, Boldbaatar D, Xuan X et al (2006) A secreted cystatin from the
tick Haemaphysatis tongicomis and its distinct expression patterns in relation to innate immunity.
Insect Biochem Mol Biol 36:527-535. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2006.03.003
Potential effects of mixed infections in ticks
on transmission dynamics of pathogens: comparative
analysis of published records
Howard S. Ginsberg
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 1-4, 29-41.
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9175-5 @ U.S. Government 2008
Abstract  Ticks are often infected with more than one pathogen, and several field surveys
have documented nonrandom levels of coinfection. Levels of coinfection by pathogens in
four tick species were analyzed using published infection data. Coinfection patterns of
pathogens in field-collected ticks include numerous cases of higher or lower levels of
coinfection than would be expected due to chance alone, but the vast majority of these
cases can be explained on the basis of vertebrate host associations of the pathogens,
without invoking interactions between pathogens within ticks. Nevertheless, some studies
have demonstrated antagonistic interactions, and some have suggested potential mutual-
isms, between pathogens in ticks. Negative or positive interactions between pathogens
within ticks can affect pathogen prevalence, and thus transmission patterns. Probabilistic
projections suggest that the effect on transmission depends on initial conditions. When the
number of tick bites is relatively low (e.g., for ticks biting humans) changes in prevalence
in ticks are predicted to have a commensurate effects on pathogen transmission. In con-
trast, when the number of tick bites is high (e.g, for wild animal hosts) changes in
pathogen prevalence in ticks have relatively little effect on levels of transrmission to
reservoir hosts, and thus on natural transmission cycles.
Keywords Mixed infections - Ticks · Coinfection - Transmission dynamics
Introduction
Ticks serve as vectors for numerous pathogens, and individual ticks are often infected with
more than one pathogenic organism. Multiple infections can have medical significance.
because coinfection can increase severity of symptoms in humans and animals (Belongia
2002; Thomas et al. 200l). Mixed infections in ticks can also potentially infuence
transmission dynamics, because of either interactions between the pathogens within the
H. S. Ginsberg ()
USGS Patuxent Wildlife Research Center, Coastal Field Station, Woodward Hall-PLS,
University of Rhode Island, Kingston, Rl 02881, USA
e-mail: hginsberg@usgs.gov
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.). Diseases of Mites αnd Ticks. DOl: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2_529
30
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
ticks, or pathogenic effects on tick behavior or survival. This applies both to vertebrate
pathogens in ticks and to entompathogenic organisms. For example, Ross and Levin (2004)
found that some strains of Anaplasma phagocytophifum, the etiologic agent of granulocytic
anaplasmosis in humans, affect molting of Ixodes scapuiaris ticks. Hornbostel et al. (2004)
found sublethal effects of the entomopathogenic fungus Metarhizium anisopliae on
fecundity and body mass of I. scapuiaris. In cases of mixed infections, these pathogens
could potentially infuence transmission of other pathogens in the tick by virtue of their
effects on tick behavior and survival.
Investigators have used two major approaches to studying the ecological features of
mixed infections in ticks. One is to infect ticks with single or multiple pathogens in the
laboratory, and to quantify differences in pathogen persistence and transmission to lab
animals. This approach gives direct information about pathogen interactions, but these
interactions might differ in the laboratory than under field conditions. The second approach
is to quantify infection with each pathogen in field collected ticks, and to test whether the
prevalence of mixed infections is higher or lower than would be expected on the basis of
chance alone. This approach provides field tests of the interactions of pathogens, but
interpretation can be difficult because the number of mixed infections results from factors
other than just interactions of pathogens. For example, if two pathogens occur in different
vertebrate host species, then these pathogens will generally not be found together in
nymphal ticks, even if they have no interaction within the tick. Even for ticks with broad
host ranges, nymphs have generally fed only once (as larvae) and have therefore acquired
pathogens from only one vertebrate host species. In this case, proportions of mixed
infections in nymphs would be expected to be lower than in adult ticks, because the
nymphs have only fed once while adults have fed twice, and the adults might have picked
up infections from different host species
To fully assess the causes of observed levels of coinfection at a given site, it is necessary
to conduct laboratory studies and in-depth local field studies. However, it is also worth-
while to ask whether broad patterns of coinfection from numerous field sites fit the
hypotheses of antagonistic or of mutualistic interactions within ticks, or whether tick host
associations are adequate to explain the observed patterns. I briefly review some relevant
research below. A comparative analysis of published data from numerous field sites
follows.
Evidence of interactions between pathogens within tick hosts
Negative relationships between pathogens
A well-known example of negative interactions of rickettsiae within ticks is the transov-
arial transmission interference of Rickeftsia rickeffsii (agent of Rocky Mountain Spotted
Fever) in Dermacentor andersoni ticks coinfected with the nonpathogenic Spotted Fever
Group rickettsia R. peacockii (Burgdorfer et al. 1981; Macaluso and Azad 2005). Ticks
coinfected with both rickettsiae vertically transrmit only the nonpathogenic species, which
influences the distribution of R. rickettsi. Similar negative interactions apparently occur
among other arthropod-transmitted rickettsiae (Macaluso et al. 2002; Rudakov et al.
2003).
excluded infection by A. marginate in I. scapularis cells. When Dermacentor variabitis
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
31
males fed sequentially on calves infected with different strains of A. marginale, only one
strain persisted in the ticks (De la Fuente et al. 2003).
Negative interactions in ticks have also been reported for pathogens other than rick-
ettsia. For example, Alekseev et al. (1996) presented evidence that Borrelia infection
suppressed replication of tick-borne encephalitis virus in Ixodes persuicatus. Mather et al.
(1987) found that I. scapularis that were parasitized by the encyrtid wasp Ixodiphagus
hookeri were not infected with Borrelia burgdorferi and were rarely infected with Babesia
microti, two pathogens that were common in ticks not parasitized by wasp larvae. How-
ever, this phenomenon could have resulted from the host-finding behavior of the wasp
(rather than from pathogen interactions within ticks), because I. hookeri might have
preferentially parasitized ticks attached to white-tailed deer, which is a poor reservoir for
both pathogens (Samish et al. 2004)
Positive relationships between pathogens
Sutakova and Rehacek (1990) found increased spread of Coxiella burneti into tissues of
Dermacentor reticuiatus in the presence of Rickettsia phytoseiuli. In a survey of 738 Ixodes
persuicatus ticks in Russia for infection with Babesia microti (Alekseev et al. 2003), all 7
infected ticks were also infected with other pathogens (including Borrelia spp. and tick-
borne encephalitis virus (TBEV)). Postic et al. (1997) found high prevalence of mixed
infections of Borrelia genospecies in ticks and hosts, also in Russia. In the United States,
Mixson et al. (2006) found higher than random levels of coinfection of Ehrlichia chafe-
ensis and E. ewingi in Amblyomma americanum ticks. Rickettsia ambtyommii and Borrelia
fonestari also showed higher than random levels of association in this tick. Of course, these
high levels of coinfection in field-collected ticks might have resulted from ecological
factors relating to pathogen infections in reservoir hosts and tick feeding preferences,
rather than from mutualistic interactions of pathogens within the ticks.
No interactions between pathogens
Levin and Fish (2000) studied transmission of Borrelia burgdorferi and Anaplasma
phagocytophilum by Lxodes scapularis to white-footed mice in the laboratory. They found
no differences in transmission rates between singly infected and coinfected ticks. In field
studies, Korenberg et al. (1999) found no evidence of interference between TBEV and
Borrelia burgdorferi s.l. in Ixodes persuicatus ticks in Russia, and Morozova et al. (2002)
found these pathogens to be distributed independently in I. persuicatus in western Siberia.
Hornbostel et al. (2005) found no differences in prevalence of B. burgdorferi s.s. in Ixodes
scapularis ticks regardless of whether or not they were infected with the entomopathogenic
fungus Metarhizium anisopliae. Swanson and Norris (2o07) found that Borrelia burg-
dorferi s.s. and Rickeftsia spp. were distributed independently in I. scapuiaris ticks. They
found that some other pathogens co-occurred with B. burgdorferi more frequently than
expected due to chance alone, but they attributed these cases to shared enzootic cycles
rather than to interactions within the ticks.
These examples provide evidence that some pathogens display antagonistic interactions
in ticks, others display mutualisms, and many apparently do not interact within the ticks.
However, they do not provide insight into the frequency of each type of interaction among
pathogens within ticks. In the following sections I assess the frequencies of various types
of interactions between pathogens within ticks by compiling data from several field studies
32
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
that measured infections of various pathogens within ticks at various sites, and testing
whether the proportion of coinfections was significantly higher or lower than would be
expected due to chance alone. I then consider the implications of coinfections for trans-
mission dynamics of these pathogens.
Methods
The scientific literature was surveyed to find studies that reported raw data on infection
rates of pathogens in ticks, including mixed infections, with sample sizes large enough for
statistical analysis. This survey was restricted to papers where the pathogen strains were
identified (thus mostly to recent literature) and where the numbers of individuals infected
singly with each pathogen, the number coinfected with both, and the number not infected
with either, could be ascertained. Much of this work has been restricted to pathogens of
public health importance, so mostly pathogens that have been at least tentatively impli
cated in human illness were included. The numbers of ticks positive and negative for each
pathogen at each site were compiled in 2 x 2 contingency tables, and simple chi-square
tests (SAS, version 9.2) was used to assess significance. To quantify the degree of
departure of the number of mixed infections from independence, I developed an index of
coinfection (l), defined as the difference of the number of coinfections from the number
expected due to chance alone, as a percentage of the total number of infected ticks in the
sample. If α = number of ticks infected with both pathogens, b = number infected only
with pathogen 1, c = number infected only with pathogen 2, and d = number not infected
with either pathogen, then the number of observed coinfections (O) equals a, the expected
number of coinfected ticks due to chance alone (E) is given by:E=((a + b)(a +c)/
(α + b + c + d), and the total number of ticks infected by either or both pathogens (M) is:
N=a +b+c.The index of coinfection (l) is:
Ic =((O-E)/N) x 100
Note that I. is positive when the number of coinfections is greater than expected, and
negative when there are fewer coinfections than would be expected due to chance alone
I used a simple binomial model of the probability of exposure to a pathogen (Pe) when an
animal is bitten by n ticks, and with a prevalence of infection in ticks of k, (Ginsberg 1993,
2001). P, is the probability that at least one of the n ticks is infected:
Pe=1-(1-k)
Results
in Table 1. The number of mixed infections differed signficantly from the expectation due
to chance alone in about half the cases. I was positive (when significant) for mixed
infections of B. burgdorferi s.s. and B. afzelii, of B. garinii and B. valaisiana, of B.
burgdorferi s.s. and B. garinii, and of B. burgdorferi s.l. and Anaplasma phagocytophitum.
I was negative (when significant) for interactions between B. afzelli and B. valaisiana. I
garinii.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
33
Rauter et al. (2002)
Rauter et al. (2002)
Rauter et al. (2002)
Rauter et al. (2002)
Rauter et al. (2002)
Hanincova et al.
-3.23 Hanincova et al.
+2.93 Hanincova et al.
<0.0001 +10.25 Kirstein et al.
+1.71 Golubic et al.
 Golubic et al.
 Kirstein et al.
Reference
(2003b)
(1997)
(1998)
(1998)
(2003b)
(2003b)
(1997)
(2003b)
IE'I-
-0.51
-2.98
-6.44
4.92
+9.53
+5.52
+18.21
+2.00
+10.01
+3.38
0.478
0.516
<0.0001
8480
0.275
0.018
0.135
0.229
0.007
0.022
0.507
100'0
0.062
0.393
165'0
Total number
infected
25
6
6
3
326
3444
2
coinfected
Number
2
sampled
411
=
26
230
nymphs + adults
nymphs + adults
nymphs + adults
nymphs + adults
nymphs + adults
()
nymphs
adults
nymphs
sqdusu
nymphs
nymphs
nymphs
adults
adults
adults
s
Pathogen 2
B. garinii
Pathogen 1
Ixodes ricinus Borrelia
Tick species
34
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
-3.86 Hanincova et al.
-6.63 Hanincova et al.
-10.68 Hanincova et al.
+10.82 Hanincova et al.
+8.32 Hanincova et al.
+2.12 Hanincova et al.
Hanincova et al.
<0.0001 +11.74 Kirstein et al.
-2.50 Golubic et al.
<0.0001 + 10.08 Stanczak et al.
Reference
(2003b)
(2003b)
(2003b）
(2003b)
(2003b)
(1997)
(8661)
(2003b)
(2003b)
(EHZ)
(2001)
-3.36
”
0.0006-
0.197
0.111
0.038
0.239
0.005
0.557
800'0
0.596
0.153
0.260
0.234
Total number
infected
3
2
守
6
2
2
6
9
112
coinfected
Number
2
Number
sampled
174
239
三
12
Stage(s)
nymphs
sdusu
nymphs
nymphs
adults
adults
adults
adults
adults
adults
adults
adults
adults
adults
Pathogen 2
burgdorferi s.t.
Pathogen 1
Table 1 continued 
Tick species
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
35
+4.62 Alekseev et al.
Reference
(2003)
(2003)
2002)
0.004
<0.0001
Totalnumber
infected
1 17
3
coinfected
Number
8
sampled
280
280
.280
()
adults
adults
adults
adults
Pathogen 2
B.garinii
B. burgdorferi s.s.
Pathogen 1
Table 1 continued
Tick species
36
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Mixed infections of diverse pathogens in I. scapuiaris and A. americanum are shown in
Table 2. lc was positive for coinfections of Ehrlichia chafeensis and E. ewingi in A.
americanum ticks. No other significant levels of coinfection were observed.
One major effect of positive or negative interactions among pathogens within a tick
would be to raise or lower infection prevalence of the affected pathogen. The potential
effects on transrmission dynamics are shown in Fig. 1. The effects differ when tick pop-
ulations are low (e.g., one tick bite in Fig. 1) compared to when tick populations are high
(e.g., 50 tick bites) because the probability of exposure to the pathogen rapidly reaches 1.0
when hosts are exposed to numerous tick bites. When tick numbers are low, the effect on
P of changes in the proportion of ticks infected is more or less linear. When the number of
tick bites is high, on the other hand, P。 is near 1.0 unless the proportion of ticks infected is
near zero (Fig. 1).
Discussion
Nymphal ticks have generally fed only once, as larvae. Therefore, mixed infections in
          s  
presumably result from feeding on a host infected with both pathogens. Of course, some
ticks might carry mixed infections because, for example, Borrelia infections are occa-
sionally passed vertically, and larval feeding can be interrupted, which can result in a
second larval feeding, but these are probably relatively rare phenomena (Nefedova et al.
2004). Only two significant positive associations of Borrelia spp. were found in nymphal
ticks. One was for B. burgdorferi s.s. and B. afzelii in I. ricinus. Both of these Borrelia
species commonly infect rodents, suggesting that these ticks fed as larvae on rodents with
mixed infections. The other was for B. valaisiana and B. garinii in I. ricinus. These
Borrelia species commonly infect songbirds (Hanincova et al. 2003b), and these ticks
might have attached to coinfected birds. In both cases, the positive associations suggest
that there are no negative interactions between these Borrelia species within I. ricinus. In
or between B. valaisiana and B. garinii in any stage of any tick species.
Adult ticks have fed twice, once as larvae and once as nymphs. Higher than expected
occurrence of pathogens in adult ticks could result from irmmature ticks feeding on fre-
quently coinfected hosts or from positive interactions among the pathogen species (e.g-,
higher transmission efficiency of one pathogen when the tick is already infected with the
other, or higher pathogen survival in ticks in mixed infections than in single infections).
Negative associations presumably result from negative interactions between the pathogens.
Some Borrelia species primarily infect mammals while others primarily infect birds, but
tended to feed on mammals as both larvae and nymphs, while other individuals of the same
species tended to feed on birds as both larvae and nymphs. This seems unlikely, although it
is plausible that when engorged larvae drop from their hosts, they might be left in
microhabitats that would favor them biting the same type of host after molting to the
nymphal stage. This possibility is worth additional study.
Most pairs of Borrelia species showed at least some examples of higher than expected
coinfections. Reservoirs of B. burgdorferi s.s. include both mammals (Levine et al. 1985;
Kurtenbach et al. 2002) and birds (Richter et al. 2000; Ginsberg et al. 2005). Thus positive
associations could result from ticks feeding on coinfected hosts of both mammal-associated
species such as B. afzelii (Hu et al. 1997; Hanincova et al. 2003a), and with other Borrelia
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
37
-5.49 Steiner et al.
0.0002+18.80Schulze et al.
0.67 Schulze et al.
Reference
(2006)
(2005)
（2005)
0.715
805'0
0.721
0.297
Total number 
infected
5
2
2
coinfected
Number
+
 Stage Number
sampled
adults 147
adults 68
adults 121
adults 121
adults 121
Babesia odocoitei
E. chaffe ensis
 Pathogen 2
B.tonestari
E. ewingi
Borrelia burgdorferi
Ehrtichiachaffeensis
Borretia tonestari
 Pathogen 1
Anaplasma
E.ewingi
Ixodes scaputaris
Tick species
confection
Ambtyomma
85
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Fig. 1 Probability of host
exposure to a pathogen (P) at
50
different levels of tick abundance
10
0.8
and pathogen prevalence in ticks
0.6
Pe
1 tick bite
0.4
0.2
1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
PROPORTION INFECTED
species associated with both mammals and birds such as B. garinii (Kurtenbach et al.
2002). The one example of a lower than expected level of coinfection of B. afzelii and B.
garinii in I ricinus (Table l) suggests that there is no positive interaction of these
pathogens within the tick.
The one pair of Borrelia genospecies that generally showed lower than expected levels
of coinfection was B. afzelii with B. valaisiana in I. ricinus (Table 1). As already men-
tioned, B. afzelii primarily infects mammals while B. valaisiana primarily infects birds, so
individual ticks feeding on coinfected hosts is unlikely. Nevertheless, nymphal ticks can
attach to different hosts than larvae, so this negative association might suggest a negative
a marginally positive association in nymphs (data from Kirstein et al. 1997) suggests that
there is no negative interaction between these pathogens within I. ricinus ticks. Infection
and transmission experiments with these Borrelia species in I. ricinus in the lab could help
clarify the mechanisrm responsible for these results.
The positive associations between B. burgdorferi s.1. and A. phagocytophilum (Table 1)
could have resulted largely from ticks feeding on coinfected hosts because mice and other
small mammals serve as reservoirs for both of these pathogens (Kurtenbach et al. 2002;
Telford et al. 1996). Similarly, the positive association of Ehrlichia chaffeensis with E.
ewingi in Amblyomma americanum ticks (Table 2) could result from the likely role of
white-tailed deer, Odocoileus virginianus, as the primary reservoir of both rickettsial
species (Dawson et al. 2005; Paddock et al. 2005).
 The abundant examples of higher than expected levels of coinfection in ticks suggest
that hosts are frequently infected with more than one pathogen species. This could result
from positive interactions of pathogens within the vertebrate hosts, or it could simply result
animals are bitten by numerous ticks, then the probability that individual host animals are
exposed to more than one pathogen is high.
Implications for pathogen transmission patterns
In general, these results provide little evidence of negative interactions among pathogens
within ticks (with the possible exception of B. afzeli and B. valaisiana). Nevertheless,
there are a few examples in which negative interactions between pathogens have been
documented, such as the interaction of Rickefisia peacockll with R. rickeffsll (Macaluso
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
39
and Azad 2005), and the interactions among selected strains of Anaplasma marginale (de
la Fuente et al. 2003). There have also been some reports of positive interactions among
dynamics by lowering or raising infection prevalence in ticks, and thus affecting the
probability that an individual vertebrate will be exposed to the bite of an infected tick. The
potential implications of negative or positive interactions among pathogens in mixed
incidence sites for Lyme borreliosis (Ginsberg 1993). For a person who is bitten by one
tick in a given year, a negative interaction among pathogens within the tick would lower
alence in ticks (Fig. 1). If infection prevalence is lowered from 0.4 to 0.2, for example,
then the probability of exposure is also lowered from 0.4 to 0.2. In contrast, for a wild
reservoir host that is constantly exposed to ticks, and is bitten by 50 or more ticks per year,
the probability of exposure remains 1.0, even when the prevalence of infection in ticks has
been lowered from 0.4 to 0.2 (Fig. 1)
This result applies to positive interactions between pathogens within ticks as well. If
would increase to the same extent (for humans bitten by one tick per year), but the natural
transmission cycle would not be affected. Therefore, interactions among pathogens in ticks
that influence pathogen prevalence will tend to have greater direct effects on human
disease incidence than on the dynamics of natural transmission cycles. This result does not
      s   d   s  
changes in prevalence have substantial effects on the probability of exposure. The prev-
alence level at which changes in prevalence affect transmission depends on tick
abundance. For example, at sites where individual hosts are bitten by 1,0o0 ticks or more
(e.g., deer in some locales), Pe is nearly 1.0 even at low pathogen prevalence levels in
ticks.
This analysis pertains primarily to cases where transmission is primarily horizontal,
such as for Borrelia burgdorferi s.l. In contrast, when vertical transmission contributes
strongly to pathogen maintenance, as in R. rickettsii in D. andersoni (Schriefer and Azad
1994), transmission interference by other rickettsia can apparently have strong effects on
prevalence.
Hornbostel et al. (2005) found no effect of infection of I. scapuiaris ticks with the
entomopathogenic fungus, Metarhizium anisopliae, on the prevalence of B. burgdorferi in
these ticks. Beyond this observation, however, interactions between entomopathogens and
zoonotic pathogens in ticks have received little attention. Such interactions warrant further
study because they could potentially influence the effectiveness of entomopathogens as
biocontrol agents for vector-borne diseases.
Acknowledgements I thank R.A. LeBrun and G. Olsen for constructive comments on early drafts of the
manuscript. This work was supported by the U.S. Geological Survey, Patuxent Wildlife Research Center.
References
Alekseev AN, Burenkova LA, Vasil'eva IS, Dubinina EV, Chunikhin SP (1996) The functioning of foci of
40
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Alekseev AN, Semenov AV, Dubinina HV (2003) Evidence of Babesia microti infection in multi-infected
Ixodes persulcatus ticks in Russia. Exp Appl Acarol 29:345-353
Belongia EA (2002) Epidemiology and impact of coinfections acquired from Ixodes ticks. Vector-Borne
Zoon Dis 2:265-273
rickettsial diseases. Academic Press, New York, NY, pp 585-594
Christova 1, Schouls L, van de Pol 1, Park J, Panayotov S, Lefterova V, Kantardjiev T, Dumler JS (2001)
High prevalence of granulocytic ehrlichiae and Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato in Ixodes ricinus ticks
from Bulgaria. J Clin Microbiol 39:4172-4174
Dawson JE, Ewing SA, Davidson WR, Childs JE, Little SE, Standaert SM (2005) Human monocytotropic
ehrlichiosis. In: Goodman JL, Dennis DT, Sonenshine DE (eds) Tick-borne diseases of humans. ASM
Press, Washington, DC, USA, pp 292-301
De la Fuente J, Garcia-Garcia JC, Blouin EF, Saliki JT, Kocan KM (2002) Infection of tick cells and bovine
erythrocytes with one genotype of the intracellular ehrlichia Anaplasma marginate excludes infection
with other genotypes. Clin Diagnostic Lab lrmmunol 9:658-668
De la Fuente J, Blouin EF, Kocan KM (2003) lnfection exclusion of the rickettsial pathogen Anaplasma
Ginsberg HS (1993) Transmission risk of Lyme disease and implications for tick management. Am J
Epidemiol 138:65-73
Ginsberg HS (2001) Integrated pest management and allocation of control efforts for vector-borne diseases.
JVector Ecol 26:32-38
native North American birds for the Lyme disease spirochete,Borretia burgdorferi. J Med Entomol
42:445449
acteristics of Lyme borrelliosis in northwest Croatia. Acata Med Croatica S2:7-13
Hanincova K, Schafer SM, Etti S, Sewell H-S, Taragelova V, Ziak D, Labuda M, Kurtenbach K (2003a)
Association of Borrelia afzeti with rodents in Europe. Parasitol 126: 11-20
Hanincova K, Taragelova V, Koci J, Schafer SM, Hails R, Ullmann AJ, Piesman J, Labuda M, Kurtenbach
Microbiol 69:2825-2830
Hildebrandt A, Schmidt KH, Wilske B, Dorm W, Straube E, Fingerle V (2003) Prevalence of four species of
Borretia burgdorferi sensulato and coinfection with Anaplasma phagocytophila in Ixodes ricinus ticks
in central Germany. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 22:364367
Hornboste] VL, Ostfeld RS,Zhioua E, Benjamin MA (2004) Sublethal effects of Metarhizium anisopliae
(Deuteromycetes) on engorged larval, nymphal, and adult Ixodes scaputaris (Acari: lxodidae). J Med
Entomol 41:922-929
Hornbostel VL, Ostfeld RS, Benjamin MA (2005) Effectiveness of Metarhizium anisoptiae (Deuteromy-
cetes) against Ixodes scapularis (Acari: Ixodidae) engorging on Peromyscus teucopus. J Vector Eco]
30:9 1101
Hu CM, Humair P-F, Wallich R, Gem L (1997) Apodemus sp. rodents, reservoir hosts for Borretia afzeti in
an endemic area in Switzerland. Zentralbl Bakteriol 285:558-564
Kirstein F, Rijpkerma S, Molkenboer M, Gray JS (1997) Local variation in the distribution and prevalence of
Korenberg El, Kovalevskii YV, Karavanov AS, Moskvitina GG (1999) Mixed infection by tick-borne
encephalitis virus and Borrelia in ticks. Med Vet Entomol 13:204208
Kurtenbach K, Schafer SM, de Michelis S, Etti S, Sewell H-S (2002) Borretia burgdorferi sensu lato in the
vertebrate host. ln: GrayJS, Kah] O,Lane RS, Stanek G (eds) Lyme borreliosis, biology epidemiology
and control. CABl Publishing, Oxon, UK, pp 117-148
Levin ML, Fish D (2000) Acquisition of coinfection and simultaneous transmission of Borrelia burgdorferi
and Ehrtichia phagocytophita by Ixodes scaputaris ticks. 1nfect Immun 68:2183-2186
Levine JF, Wilson ML, Spielrman A (1985) Mice as reservoirs of the Lyme disease spirochete. Am J Trop
Med Hyg 34:355-360
Macaluso KR, Azad AF (2005) Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever and other spotted fever group rickettsioses.
In: Goodman JL, Dennis DT, Sonenshine DE (eds) Tick-borne diseases of humans. ASM Press,
Washington, DC, USA, pp 292-301
Macaluso KR, Sonenshine DE, Ceraul SM,Azad AF (2002) Rickettsial infection in Dermacentor variabitis
(Acari: 1xodidae) inhibits transovarial transrmission of a second Rickettsia. J Med Entomol 39:809-813
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
41
Mather TN, Piesman J, Spielman A (1987) Absence of spirochetes (Borretia burgdorferi) and piroplasms
(Babesia microti) in deer ticks (Ixodes dammini) parasitized by chalcid wasps (Hunterellus hookeri).
Med Vet Entomol 1:3-8
Mixson TR, Campbell SR, Gill JS, Ginsberg HS, Reichard MV, Schulze TL, Dasch GA (2006) Prevalence
of Ehrlichia,Borrelia,and Rickettsiat agents in Amblyomma americanum collected from nine states.」
Med Entomol 43: 1261-1268
Morozova OV, Dobrotvorsky AK, Livanova NN, Tkachev SE, Bakhvalova VN, Beklermishev AB, Cabello
FC (2002) PCR detection of Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato, tick-borne encephalitis virus, and the
Microbiol 40: 3802-3804
Nefedova VV, Korenberg El, Gorelova NB, Kovalevski YV (2004) Studies on the vertical transmission of
Paddock CD, Liddell AM, Storch GA (2005) Other causes of tick-borne ehrlichioses, including Ehrlichia
ewingi. In: Goodman JL, Dennis DT, Sonenshine DE (eds) Tick-borne diseases of humans. ASM Press,
Washington, DC, USA, Pp 258-267
sensu lato in Russia and neighboring countries: high incidence of mixed isolates. Res Microbiol
148:691702
Rauter C,Rainer O,Diterich 1, Engele M, Hartung T (2002) Distribution of clinically relevant Borretia
genospecies in ticks assessed by a novel, single-run, real-time PCR. J Clin Microbiol 40:36 43
Richter D, Spielman A, Komar N, Matuschka FR (2000) Cormpetence of American robins as reservoir hosts
for Lyme disease spirochetes. Emerg Infect Dis 6: 133-138
Ross DE, Levin ML (2004) Effects of Anaplasma phagocytophitum infection on the molting success of
Ixodes scapularis (Acari: lxodidae) larvae. J Med Entomol 41:476-483
Rudakov NV, Shpynov SN, Sarmoilenko 1E, Tankibaev MA (2003) Ecology and epidermiology of Spotted
Fever Group rickettsiae and new data from their study in Russia and Kazakhstan. Ann NY Acad Sci
990: 1224
Samish M, Ginsberg H, Glazer 1 (2004) Biological control of ticks. Parasitology 129:S389-S403
Schriefer ME, Azad AF (1994) Changing ecology of Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever. In: Sonenshine DE,
Mather TN (eds) Ecological dynamics of tick-borne zoonoses. Oxford University Press, New York, pp
314-326
Schulze TL, Jordan RA, Schulze Cl, Mixson T, Papero M (2005) Relative encounter frequencies and
prevalence of selected Borretia,Ehrtichia,and Anaplasma infectionsinAmbtyomma americanum and
Ixodes scaputaris(Acari: lxodidae) ticks from central New Jersey.J Med Entomo] 42:450-456
Staniczak J,Racewicz M, Kruminis-Lozowska W,Kubica-Biernat B (2002) Coinfection of Ixodes ricinus
)
ehrlichiosis (HGE). 1nt J Med Microbiol 291(Suppl 33): 198-201
Stanczak J, Gabre RM, Kruminis-Lozowska W, Racewicz M, Kubica-Biernat B (2004) Ixodes ricinus as a
vector of Borretia burgdorferi sensu lato,Anaplasma phagocytophitum and Babesia microti in urban
and suburban forests. Ann Agric Environ Med 1l:109-114
Steiner FE, Pinger RR, Vann CN, Abley MJ, Sullivan B, Grindle N, Clay K, Fuqua C (2006) Detection of
collected in lndiana. J Med Entomol 43:437-442
Sutakova G,Rehacek J (1990) Mixed infection of Rickettsietla phytoseiuti and Coxietla bumetii in Der-
Maryland. J Vector Ecol 32:243-251
Telford SRlll, Dawson JE, Katavolos P, Warner CK, Kolbert CP, Persing DH (1996) Perpetuation of the
agent of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis in a deer tick-rodent cycle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:6209-
6214
Thomas V, Anguita J, Barthold SW, Fikrig E (2001) Coinfection with Borretia burgdorferi and the agent of
human granulocytic ehrlichiosis alters murine immune responses, pathogen burden, and severity of
Lyme arthritis. 1nfect 1mmun 69:3359-3371
An association between the Antarctic mite Alaskozetes
antarcticus and an entomophthoraleanfungus
of the genus Neozygites
P. D. Bridge - M. R. Worland
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9190-6 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract A fungal pathogen provisionally identified as Neozygites cf. acaridis has
lecently been isolated from the Antarctic oribatid mite Alaskozetes antarcticus. The identi-
fication of the fungus is discussed with reference to recent changes in the taxonomy of Neo-
zygites. The potential role of the fungus in the Antarctic mite populations is considered in
relation to the known mite life cycles, and the particular environmental conditions in the
Antarctic.
Keywords  Oribatida · Ameronothridae · Entomopathogen - Entomophthorales
Environment : Zygomycete
TheAntarcticmiteAlaskozetesantarcticus
Alaskozetes antarcticus (Michael) (Oribatida: Ameronothridae) is a free-living, terrestrial
cryptostigmatid mite that is widely distributed throughout the maritime Antarctic. The
species has a range that extends from the cool temperate Falkland Islands (c. 51° S) to
South Eastern Alexander Island on the Antarctic Peninsula (c. 67° S) (Convey 1998). The
adult mite is heavily sclerotized, grows to about 1 mm in length and has a live mass of
of nutrient enriched ornithogenic habitats, e.g. under rocks and in crevices close to penguin
colonies.
In common with all Antarctic arthropods so far studied,A.antarcticus is freeze suscep-
tible but avoids freezing by depressing the freezing point of its body fuids and surviving in
protective compounds such as glycerol (Montiel 1998), together with the removal or mask-
ing of ice-nucleating material from its body. The mite is a detritivore and feeds largely on
algal thalli, crustose lichens, fungi and bacteria. These are all potential ice nucleators when
P. D. Bridge () · M. R. Worland
e-mail: pdbr@ bas.ac.uk
44
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
contained in the mite gut and so must be removed from its body for the mite to achieve and
maintain freezing points below -30°C.
Antarctic environment habitats
The maritime Antarctic typically experiences long periods of severe, variable weather (low
temperature with frequent freeze thaw cycles and desiccating conditions) with only short
typically only above zero for some 1-4 months in the summer each year (Walton 1982). In
contrast, large temperature variations can occur on a daily basis with soil temperatures
(Davey et al. 1992).
Survival of arthropods under such harsh conditions demands an extended life cycle, typ-
ically lasting more than 5 years from egg to egg (Convey 1994). In order to achieve this all
life stages of the population (eggs, nymphs and adults) can survive over winter. Fecundity
is low with individuals surviving up to 7 years (Convey 1998; Mitchell 1977) due to low
competition for food and virtually no predators.
Antarctic biodiversity
The maritime Antarctic supports only an impoverished terrestrial animal fauna dominated
by micro-arthropods (Acari, Collembola) and other micro-invertebrates (nematodes and
tardigrades) with just two species of Diptera (Convey 2001). Oribatid mites have a function-
ally important role in the maritime Antarctic where they are primary decomposers of lower
plant material. Microbial autotrophs form the basis of polar terrestrial ecosystem processes
(Wynn-Williams 1996) and play a fundamental role in primary colonization and stabiliza-
tion of mineral soils. Terrestrial plant biodiversity is also very limited and dominated by
bryophytes and lichens with only two flowering plants.
Despite the relatively limited terrestrial biota in the Antarctic, a wide range of fungal
species have been described from the region. Around 1,0o0 species names having been
recorded for Antarctic fungi from the late 1800s to date, and allowing for synonyms and
changed species concepts this reduces to around 7o0 species names commonly in use
(Bridge et al. 2008c). This figure is much larger than the equivalents for other taxa and so
the fungi may be the most diverse and numerous terrestrial group (in terms of species num-
bers). Representatives of all of the major fungal phyla have been reported, and although
isolation and observation studies suggest some groups, such as filamentous basidiomycetes,
may be very rare (Onofri et al. 2007), recent molecular diversity studies have suggested
that the overall distribution of taxa may be quite different to that seen from observation and
culture (Lawley et al. 2004). Most of the fungal isolations have been from soils, and
  s sn n s a s      
an important component of their life-cycle (Bridge and Spooner 2001). One particularly
interesting observation is that some fungi that are well known from particular niches and
environments elsewhere in the world can occur in an alternative niche in the Antarctic.
Examples of this include the normally ericoid mycorrhizal species Rhizoscyphusericae that
is found on liverwort roots in the Antarctic (Upson et al. 2007), and the normally coprophi-
lous species Pirelfa circinans that has been reported as the almost exclusive coloniser of
beetle carcasses on the sub-Antarctic Bird Island (Bridge et al. 2008a).
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
45
Entomogenousfungi
An entomogenous habit is relatively common among fungi, and some 750 species in 56
genera are known to be pathogens or parasites of arthropod pests alone (Hawksworth et al.
and Brady 1982; Keller and Petrini 2005; Van der Geest et al. 2000; Humber and Hansen
2005). Among these the most common pathogens of mites in the natural environment are
species of the ascomycete genus Hirsutelfa and the entomophthoralean genus Neozygites.
Some species of these genera such as H. fhompsonii have a wide host range and can infect a
broad range of invertebrates, whereas others such as N. foridana and N. tetranychi occur
exclusively on mites. Entomogenous fungi have been reported in mite populations world
wide, and although much research has been focused on their role in agricultural systems in
temperate and tropical regions, they are also known to infect mites in cooler environments
including north central Europe, Iceland and the Canadian North-west territories (e.g-, Van
der Geest et al. 2000; Hallas and Gudleifsson 2004; Humber and Hansen 2005)
conidia or other resting spores for further dissemination. The spread of infection is not
therefore strictly directly from individual to individual and often relies on the new fungal
propagules being transferred in soil or vegetation. The entire process may take only a few
  o    g    o      
number of infected individuals, and the number of infective particles, usually increases
brate populations, and the increasing infection during their life cycle can result in the
formation of epizootics. In some cases these can reduce the invertebrate population by 90%
by late-summer or autumn (e.g-, Klubertanz et al. 1991; Steenberg et al. 1996; Van der
thick walled resting spores that develop either in or on the dead insect and that subse-
quently gerrminate to produce new infective conidia (Van der Geest et al. 2000)
Antarcticentomogenous fungi
Although fungal pathogens have been reported from Antarctic nematodes, plants and
have only been three reports of fungi appearing as potential pathogens occurring on Antarc-
tic arthropods. The first of these was Arthrobotrys ferox, a springtail-capturing fungus that
was described frorm moss in Victoria Land (Onofri and Tosi 1992). Subsequently, an
entomophthoralean fungus resembling N. acaridis was reported on A. antarcticus (Bridge
and Worland 2004), and a novel ascomycete Cordyceps anamorph on Cryptopygus was
described as Paecilomyces antarcticus (Bridge et al. 2005).
A number of fungal species that have been reported as entomogenous over a wide host
range in other environments have been identified in the broad Antarctic area, including
among others Beauveria bassiana,Lecanicillium lecanii, Metarhizium anisopliae and Toly-
poctadium species (Lopez Lastra et al. 1991; Hughes and Lawley 2003; Moller and Drey-
fuss 1996; Roddam and Rath 1997). These have exclusively been isolated from plants, soils
and other environmental features. Fungal species that can infect mites elsewhere in the
world have been reported from other environmental sources in the region (see Table 1).
46
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Table 1Fungal species reported as pathogens on Acari and known to be present in the Antarctic
Mhte host (from Van der Geest et al.
Antarcticsubstrate/environment
2000 and Humber and Hansen 2005)  (from Bridge et al. 2008c)
Acremonium implicatum
Tetranychus urticae
Soil and litter
(syn. Paecitomyces terricota)
Aspergittus favus
Dinothrombium giganteum,
Lake water and air samples
Thrombidiumgigas
Beauveria bassiana
Potyphagotarsonemus latus
Lake sediment and soi]
Ctadosporium sp.
T.urticae
Soil and lichen
Ctadosporium cladosporoides
Eotranchyus sp
Tussock grass, mosses &
bryophytes, soil,
introduced wood
Lecanicillium lecanti
Abacarus hystrix,T.urticae,
Gypsum crusts,
(syn.Verticillium tecanii)
Oribatid species
bryophytes and soil
Simpliciltium tametticota
Oribatid species
Moss
(syn.Verticiltium tametlticota)
Mites collected in the Antarctic frequently “become mouldy’ when, or as, they die in
soil-free cultures. Anecdotal evidence suggests that in most cases there is considerable
ella that are common soil fungi in the Antarctic. There are a number of potential associa
tions that could occur between Antarctic fungi and mites. In other environments viable
fungi are routinely isolated from invertebrate frass, and in the Antarctic viable fungi have
been reported from the surface of beetle carapaces, and from the gut of soil-based herbivo-
rous larvae (Bridge and Denton 2007: Bridge et al. 2008a).
InfectionofAiskozetesantarcticus
A soil-free colony of A. antarcticus collected at Rip Point, Nelson Island (62°14.93' S
058°58.73′ W) off the West coast of the Antarctic Peninsula early in 2003, was examined at
the British Antarctic Survey in Cambridge in the summer of that year. Typical soil
zygomycete growth was present in some collections but a few dead individuals showed a
different fungal growth form, with short conidiophores being formed from within the body
-ouydououa jo [eorda 'soueadde Aisnp, e senpiaipu aaeg sui eipuoo aonpand c
lean infection. Dissection of individuals, together with light microscopy revealed ovoid
hyphal bodies, and dark resting spores within the mite bodies, together with curved
unbranched conidiophores and greyish light-brown primary conidia. No rhizoids were
produced and the only external hyphal growth was from soil zygomycetes (Bridge and
Worland 2004). The above characters are typical of the entomophthoralean genus Neozyg
ites, and closely match those shown by the known mite pathogenic species in the genus (see
Table 2). The fungal collection was originally described as Neozygites sp., and most of the
features relating to conidiogenesis matched fairly well to those for N. foridana and
N. acaridis. Secondary conidia were not observed, and the relatively scarce hyphal bodies
in the infected hosts were distinctly oval, and did not match either the rod shaped or spher-
ical hyphal bodies reported for N. foridana and N. acaridis, respectively (see Bridge and
Worland 2004). Neozygites foridana has been reported on a number of different tetrany-
chid mite taxa world wide (Keller 1997; Van der Geest et al. 2000; Delalibera et al. 2004).
The isolation of N. foridana from an oribatid mite would represent a major extension to its
known host range, as all previous reports have been from prostigmatid taxa, and it has been
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
47
striate brownish wall
Eotetranychus banksi,
Neozygites foridana
Slightly broadened,
claviform with
 Spherical to ovoid,
1-11 × 81-1
capilliconidia
22-26 × 20-23
Otigonychus
Bryobia sp-,
curved
Absent
Pyriform
Hyaline, broadly pyriform 
As primary, capilliconidia
brownverruclose wall
Pyriform, brown to black,
ridged with a hilum
15-17 × 12-15 
Tetranychus sp.
21.7 × 17.6
Absent
Digitate
12-17 × 10-14
subspherical,
14-25 × 14-22
Otigonychus
Spherical or
Tetranychus
Colourless,
Pyriform
urticae,
Absent
Single
() e 1e  pe (l  8 Ag pe sse wy pa A[d e)
(syn. Neozygites
Short, stout
L-s × 21-6
As primary
Ovoid
/
/u
Euseius citrifotius
Penthateus major,
Hatodyteus
destructor,
As primary
Dark brown
acaridis
Spherical
Absent
Short
Ovoid
(661 xzeg pue ( 166 1) ey Aq ouoy N u pangu 
2
Pergamusius sp.
phalangicida
coalescing
Hyaline, ovoid
01 × 2Z-61
As primary
Pandora
? Present
us)
nv'a
Keller and Petrini (2005); Keller (2006)
roughened surface
Globose or ovoid
capilliconidia
adeqs puoue
pale brown
dark brown,
Mononycheltus
As primary,
Sub-globose,
Neozygites
Unbranched
pofoum
tnajoae
Absent
(6861) qumH
Characteristic
Resting spore
Most frequent
Secondary
Rhizoids
conidia
Primary
shape
host(s)
48
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
suggested that it is restricted to this family (Pell et al. 2001). On this basis the
A. antarcficus associated fungus was provisionally identified as Neozygites cf. acaridis
(Bridge and Worland 2004).
Neozygites pathogens of mites
The morphological characteristics of the mite-associated Neozygites species are very simi-
lar. It is very difficult to grow isolates in artificial culture (Waterhouse and Brady 1982;
Leite et al. 2000), and so the identification of isolates is often limited to the morphological
features produced on the host at the time of observation. Neozygites adjarica has been con-
single collection (Delalibera et al. 2004). Most isolations from mites have been identified
as either N. foridana or Neozygites sp. Recently, isolates from cassava green mite that had
been assigned to N.foridana were re-examined and were found to have a reduced host
range and reduced cold tolerance in comparison to other N. fioridana collections. 18S ribo-
somal DNA analysis recovered the cassava green mite isolates as a separate group and this
has been named as N. tanajoae (Delalibera et al. 2004). It is therefore possible that isolates
some of these may correlate with different host ranges or environments (Delalibera et al.
2004). It was not possible to isolate the Alaskozetes pathogen in pure culture and so compa-
rable DNA, host range and temperature tolerance data are not available. Given that the
maximum summer air temperature at Nelson Island does not exceed 6°C, it would seem
likely that the Antarctic isolate would have increased cold tolerance in comparison to typi-
cal temperate and tropical isolates of all species. A definite identification of the Antarctic
isolate is therefore not yet possible, and will require further collections and some in vitro
culture.
Neozygites in sub-polar regions
The genus Neozygites is cosmopolitan in distribution, and has been widely reported from
arthropod hosts in tropical and temperate regions. The genus is considered by some authors
to function best in hot weather, but individual species have also been reported in alpine and
sub-polar areas of the northern hermisphere as pathogens of mites and aphids (Pell et al.
2001; Keller 1991; Nielsen et al. 2001). In general conidial viability appears to be better at
sub-polar regions would suggest that resting spores in the soil can survive at very low
temperatures.
Neozygites cf. acaridis has been isolated from the mite Penthaleus major in northern
Iceland, and N. freseni has also been reported from aphids in that country (Nielsen et al.
2001; Hallas and Gudleifsson 2004). These reports demonstrate that some strains of
Neozygites can function in relatively cold environments. The population dynarmics for the
strain of N. cf. acaridis in the Icelandic mite infection appear to be rather different to those
reported elsewhere. Peak infection was recorded in June from adults of the previous winter
generation, with infection in the summer adults slowly rising to only low levels in the latter
part of the summer (Hallas and Gudleifsson 2004). This may suggest that in colder climates
the fungal life cycle is slowed or interrupted during the winter, with infected adults
overwintering and the infection continuing in spring. Given the extended life cycle of
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
49
A. antarcticus with all life stages overwintering it would seem likely that a similar process
may occur in the Antarctic. In contrast, a recent study of the Cordyceps anamorph from
Antarctic springtails found that the fungus was three times more common in autumn than in
             
fungus. This contrast may be related to the differing methods of pathogenicity between
ascomycetes and entormophthoraleans but no comparable time-based information is available
for the mite pathogen.
There are no reports of significant disease constraints to Antarctic arthropod communities
of A. antarcticus the extended life cycle results in all stages of the invertebrate being
present in a population (Convey 1994, 1998). Final stages of Neozygites infections are nor-
mally seen with infected adults and so in a heterogeneous population the epizootics typical
support for this from the Icelandic observations that the prevalence of the fungal disease
was related to the high density of adult females in June (Hallas and Gudleifsson 2004).
While Neozygites appears to have a functional role within the mite population in the envi-
mnment, it may be that there is a balance between infection and recruitment but consider
able further sampling will be required, particularly in relation to life cycles and population
numbers and make-up before this can be considered.
Colonisiation and endemism
    sd      san  a 
biogeography suggests that most taxa have either evolved in isolation in the Antarctic or
are relicts from pre-glacial times (Convey and Stevens 2007). Aerobiological sampling car-
ried out in the Antarctic has shown that invertebrate colonization from airborne propagules
is limited to micro-invertebrates which have a desiccation-resistant (anhydrobiotic) stage
and which can rehydrate and resume activity if they reach a suitable habitat. Although
propagule densities in the maritime Antarctic are much lower than found in temperate
regions, they have been shown to include algae, bacteria, fungi and bryophytes (Kinlan and
Gaines 2003). Many fungi isolated from the region have airbome propagules or yeast
phases. These species have been isolated from air currents in the region and so there is the
 potential for their continual introduction (Marshall 1996).
There is very little evidence for endemism among Antarctic fungi, and although some 22
fungal species have been reported as endemic (Onofri et al. 2007), a number of these have
since been isolated from other regions, including both Arctic and alpine environments
mism seen for some fungi, but the situation for those that do not have a significant airborne
stage is less clear. There is very little evidence for co-evolution between fungi and their
hosts in the Antarctic, and all of the fungi so far recovered from endemic Antarctic nema-
todes have been identified as cosmopolitan species (Duddington et al. 1973; Gray and
Lewis-Smith 1984). This may be the case with the Antarctic Neozygites, as although
Alaskozetes is restricted to Southern latitudes (Convey 1998), the apparent host shift for
Neozygites from prostigmatid mites to the oribatid species may be the result of a cosmopol-
itan fungus being able to adapt in the absence of its usual host and under a different compe-
tition regime. This possibility could also explain other apparent host or environmental
shifts seen with Antarctic fungi such as Lecanicillium lecanii and Rhizoscyphus ericae
(Hughes and Lawley 2003; Upson et al. 2007).
50
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Future possibilities
Long-term monitoring records have shown that the environmental temperature on the
Antarctic Peninsula is rising faster than any other area of the world (King et al. 2003), and
this is resulting in shorter winter periods, an increase in available water and more ice-free
areas. In particular the availability of liquid water may be more important to biological
activity than increased temperature in Antarctic habitats (Kennedy 1993). These environ-
mental changes may affect the current interactions between the Antarctic mites and fungi,
and a number of possible scenarios might occur.
Increased temperatures and moisture with a longer summer season could allow a greater
proportion of the mite life cycle to be undertaken in a year. This would then alter the
composition of the current heterogeneous populations. It is however, unclear as to what
change the existing interaction and lead to epizootics. Major changes in the population
structure in the Antarctic are unlikely, but population structures on some sub-Antarctic
islands and those further north could be affected. However, there have been no targeted
surveys for entomopathogens in these areas, and so the current range of occurrence and
frequency of Neozygites sp. in the wider mite population is unknown.
At least seven of the 40+ fungal species that include pathogens of Acari have been
as viable cultures from soil or vegetation. These fungi may have the potential to infect the
existing mite populations under less extreme environmental conditions, and they could
provide future sources of infections in Antarctic arthropods as conditions change.
Aerial studies have shown opportunities for colonisation by new fungal species, but it is
likely that new colonisation is currently limited by low winter temperatures and a lack of
available water together with limited opportunities for dispersal (Convey 2001). A third
scenario is that clirmate change and increasing human activity (such as tourism) could
increase the likelihood of colonisation and this could result in the introduction and estab-
lishment of more aggressive mite pathogens.
Changes in the radiation climate have already occurred with the regular forrmation of the
*Ozone hole' over large areas of the Antarctic. Although there are no recorded effects of
increased ultraviolet radiation on terrestrial arthropods, the growth of fungi, cyanobacteria,
algae and cryptograms is known to be affected (Wynn-Williams 1994; Hughes et al. 2003).
In Neozygites the infective conidia are typically only lightly melanized and so may be more
sensitive to UV than the dark resting spores, although this has not been tested in an
Antarctic context. Conversely the conidia are relatively short-lived and so would have short
exposure times. The fungal growth is almost entirely within the mite body and so any UV
effect would probably be largely limited to the initial infection period. This adds a further
uncertainty to any predictions regarding future Antarctic fungal-invertebrate interactions.
s   s     s    
point for future changes, but the large number of environmental and functional uncertainties
prevent any clear models being developed until more baseline data, particularly on the
range and occurrence of the fungus in the population is available.
References
Batazy S (1993) Flora of Poland. Fungi (Mycota). vol 24. Entormophthorales. Inshitute of Botany, Krakow
Batazy S, Wisniewski J (1982) Two species of entomopathogenic fungi on the myrmecophylic mite Trachy-
uropoda coccinea (Michael, 1981) (Acari: Uropodina). Bull Pol Acad Sci, Ser Bio] Sci 30:1-12
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
51
Balazy S, Wisniewski J (1984) Records on some lower fungi occurring in mites (Acarina) from Poland. Acta
Mycologia 20: 159-172
Bridge PD, Denton G (2007) lsolaion of diverse viable fungi from the larvae of the introduced chironomid
Eretmoptera murphyi on Signy Island. Polar Biol 30:935-937
Bridge PD, Spooner BM (2001) Soil fungi: diversity and detection. Plant Soil 232: 147-154
Bridge PD, Worland MR (2004) First report of an entomophthoralean fungus on an arthropod host in Antarc.
hca. Polar Biol 27:190-192
Bridge PD, Clark MS, Pearce DA (2005) A new species of Paecilomycesisolated from the Antarctic spring-
tail Cryptopygus antarcticus. Mycotaxon 92:213-222
Bridge PD, Hughes KA, Denton JO (2008a) Association of a coprophilous fungus with an indigenous beetle
on the sub-Antarctic Bird 1sland. Polar Biol 31:657-661
Bridge PD, Newsham KK, Denton GJ (2008b) Snow mould caused by Pythium sp.; a potenial plant vascular
pathogen in the maritime Antarctic. Plant Pathol . doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3059.2008.01868.x
Bridge PD, Spooner BM, Roberts P (2008c) List of non-lichenized fungi from the Antarchic region (v. 2.1.).
http://www.antarctica.ac.uk/bas_research/data/access/fungi
antarcticus.Acta Oecologia 15:43-53
Convey P(1998) Latitudinal variation in allocation to reproduction by the Antarctic oribatid mite,Alaskoze-
tes antarcticus. Appl Soil Eco] 9:93-99
Con vey P (2001) Antarctic ecosystems. In: Levin S (ed) Encyclopedia of biodi versity, vol 1. Academic Press,
San Diego, USA
Con vey P, Stevens M1 (2007) Antarctic biodi versity. Science 317: 1877-1878
Davey MC, Pick up J, Block W (1992) Temperature variation and its biological significance in fellfield habi-
tats on a maritime Antarctic island. Antarct Sci 4:383-388
Delalibera 1, Hajek AE, Humber RA (2004) Neozygites tanajoae sp. nov., a pathogen of the cassava green
mite. Mycologia 96: 1002-1009
Duddington DL, Wyborn CHE, Lewis-Smith Rl (1973) Predacious fungi from the Antarctic. Br Antarct Surv
Bull 35:87-90
pathologia 85:81-92
Hallas TE, Gudleifsson BE (2004) Life cycles of Penthateus major(Duges) (Acari, Prostigmata) in hayfields
in northem lceland. lcelandic Agnic Sci 16-17:39-44
Hawksworth DL, Kirk PM, Sutton BC, Pegler DN (1995) Ainsworth & Bisby's Dictionary of the Fungi, 8th
edn. CAB International, Wallingford, UK
Hughes KA,Lawley B (2003) A novel Antarctic microbial endolithic community within gypsum crusts.
Environ Microbiol 5:555-565
fungi. Appl Environ Microbiol 69: 1488-1491
Humber RA (1989) Synopsis of a revisedclassification for the Entomophthorales (Zygomycotina). Mycotax -
on 34:441-460
Humber RA, Hansen KS (2005) ARSEF 1NDEX: fungus-host-location. USDA-ARS Plant Protection
Research Unit, lthaca, NY
Keller S (1991) Arthropod-pathogenic Entomophthorales of Switzerland. 1l. Erynia, Eryniopsis, Neozygites,
Zoophthora and Tarichium. Sydowia 44:39-122
Keller S (1997) The genus Neozygites (Zygomycete,Entormophthorales) with special reference to species
found in tropical regions. Sydowia 49: 118-146
Keller S (2006) Validafion of the combination Apterivorax acaricida (Petch) S. Keller. Sydowia 58:75
Keller S, Petrini O (2005) Keys to the identification of the arthropod pathogenic genera of the farmilies
Entomophthoraceae and Neozygitaceae (Zygomycetes), with descriphions of three new subfamilies and
a new genus. Sydowia 57:23-53
Kennedy AD (1993) Water as a limiting factor in the antarctic terrestrial environment: a biogeographica]
synthesis. Arct Alp Res 25:308-315
King JC, Turner J, Marshall Gl, Connally WM, Lachlan-Cope TA (2003) Antarctic Peninsula climate
Leventer A, Con vey P, Kirby M, Bindschadler R (eds) Antarctic Peninsula clirmate variability: historical
Washington DC, USA
Kinlan BP, Gaines SD (2003) Propagule dispersal in marine and terrestrial environments: a comimunity
perspective.Ecology 84:2007-2020
52
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Klubertanz Th H, Pedigo LP, Carlson RE (199 1) lmpact of fungal epizootics on the biology and management
of the two-spotted spider mite (Acari: Tetran ychidae) in Soybean. Environ Entomol 20:731-735
Lawley B, Ripley S, Bridge P, Convey P (2004) Molecular analysis of geographic patterns of eukaryotic
di versity in Antarctic soils. Appl En viron Microbiol 70:5963-5972
Leite LG, Srmith L, De Moraes GJ, Roberts DW (200o) In vitro production of hyphal bodies of the mite path-
ogenic fungus Neozygitesforidana.Mycologia 92:201-207
Lopez Lastra CC, Reboredo GR, Spinedi HA (1991) Primer registro de Totypoctadium cylindrosporum Gams
(Deuteromycotina, Hiphomycetes) para la Antartida.Contrib lnst Antartico Argentino 392: 1-11
Marshall WA (1996) Biological particles over Antarctica. Nature 383:680
        s      
State University of New York,New York
Moller C, Dreyfuss MM (1996) Microfungi from Antarctic lichens, mosses and vascular plants. Mycologia
88:922-933
Montiel PO (1998) Profiles of soluble carboh ydrates and their adaptive role in maritime Antarctic terrestrial
arthropods. Polar Biol 19:250-256
Nielsen C, Eilenberg J, Harding S, Oddsdotir E, Halldorsson G (2001) Geographical distribution and host
range of entomophthorales infecting the green spruce aphid Elatobium abietinum Walker in lceland. J
In vertebr Pathol 78:72-80
Oduor Gl, Yaninek JS, Van der Geest LPS, de Moraes Gl (1995) Survival of Neozygites cf. foridana (Zygo-
mycetes: Entomophthorales) in mummified cassava green mites and the viability of its primary conidia.
Exp Appl Acarol 19:479-488
Onoffi S, Tosi S (1992) Arthrobotrys ferox sp. nov. a springtail-capturing hyphormycete from continenta]
Antarctica. Mycotaxon 44:445-451
Onofri S, Zucconi L, Tosi S (2007) Continental Antarctic Fungi. Eching, IHW-Verlag
Falkland 1slands. Kew Bull 35:499-562
Entomophthorales. In: Butt T, Jackson C, Magan N (eds) Fungi as biocontrol agents. CAB International,
Wallingford, UK
Roddam LF, Rath AC (1997)lsolaion and characterization of Metarhizium anisopliae and Beauveria bassi-
anα from subantarctic Macquarie Island. 1 ln vertebr Pathol 69:285-288
thorales) infeching springtails (lnsecta: Collembola). J In vertebr Pathol 68:97-100
Rhizoscyphus ericae and a leafy liverwort in the maritime and sub-Antarchic. New Phytol 176:460-471
24:497560
Antarct Surv Bull 55: 111-126
Waterhouse GM,Brady BL (1982)Key to the species of Entomophthora sensu lato.Bull Br Mycol Soc
16: 113143
Wuczkowski M, Prillinger H (2004) Molecular identification of yeasts from soils of the alluvial forest nation-
al park along the ri ver Danube downstream of Vienna, Austria ('Nationalpark Donauauen'). Microbio]
Res 159:263-275
Wynn-Williams DD (1994) Potential effcts of ulraviolet radiation on Antarctic primary terrestrial coloniz-
ers: cyanobactenia, algae and cryptograms. Antarct Res Ser 62:243-257
Wynn-Williams DD (1996) Antarctic microbial diversity. Biodivers Conserv 5:1271-1293
Diversity of acaropathogenic fungi in Poland
and other European countries
Stanislaw Balazy · Ryszard Mietkiewski - Cezary Tkaczuk :
Rudolf Wegensteiner · Marta Wrzosek
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 1-4, 53-70.
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9207-1 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract The occurrence, species diversity and some aspects of taxonomical affnity and
host selectivity of acaropathogenic fungi associated with phytophagous, saprotrophic and
predacious mites in Poland and other European countries were investigated on wild and
cultivated plants, in insect feeding sites under the bark and in decayed wood. From among
33 species of fungi affecting mites only five species of Entomophthorales were separated
and the most numerous were Neozygites foridana mostly on Tetranychus urticae, N.
abacaridis on a few eriophyid species, and Conidiobolus coronatus attacking gamasid
mites most frequently of the genus Dendrolaelaps. The most frequent mite pathogens
occurring in mite communities on plants and in wood infested by insects were of the genus
Hirsutella. Until now 13 of their form-species have been recognized in these habitats, but
only H.kirchneri,H.necatrix and H. thompsonii (including its variety synnematosa) can be
treated as exclusive oligophagous pathogens of phytophagous mites, though their potential
differentiation of fungal strains was based on close morphological observations and
molecular analysis of ITS region sequences. Two new species of acaropathogenic fungi
were described in these studies. Hirsutella danubiensis sp. nov. was found in the tetr-
anychid T. urticae, whereas H. vandergeesfi sp. nov. affected phytoseiid mites of the
genera Amblyseius, Neoseiulus,Seiulus and Typhlodromus, and the tarsonemid Tarsone-
mus lacustris.
S.Batazy
Research Centre for Agricultural and Forest Environment PAS, Bukowska 19, 60-809 Poznan, Poland
R. Mietkiewski · C. Tkaczuk ()
University of Podlasie, Prusa 14, 08-110 Siedlce, Poland
e-mail: tkaczuk @ ap.siedlce.pl
R. Wegensteiner
Department of Forest and Soil Sciences, BOKU University, Hasenauerstrasse 38, 1190 Vienna, Austria
M. Wrzosek
00-478 Warsaw, Poland
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.). Diseases of Mites and Ticks. DOl: 10.1007/978-I-4020-9695-2_7
54
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
KeywordsAcaropathogenicfungi·Mites·Hirsutella·Taxonomy
New species·Neozygites·Lecanicillium·Ramuiaria
Introduction
Among the relatively small number of microbiological agents that cause infective diseases
 of mites the entomopathogenic fungi constitute the most numerous group (Lipa 1971; Van
der Geest 1985; McCoy 1996; Chandler et al. 2000; Van der Geest et al. 2000). Although
fungi affecting mites and insects generally belong to the same taxonomical entities, only
little more than 50 species show acaropathogenic capabilities, compared to >1,000 actu-
ally known insect pathogenic species excluding Laboulbeniales (Balazy 2000; Van der
Geest et al. 2000). The first cases of mite mycoses were described about 70 years after the
recognition of the infective character of insect mycoses and this delay remained until the
1970s, except for a few subtropical and tropical institutes, where mycoses of mites had
been included into some research, but usually on a very limited scale (e.g., Fisher 1950,
1951). In Poland the first records on mite mycoses appeared in the 1970s, but during the
last three decades they have been developed and widened continuously (Mietkiewski et al.
2000). The political and economical changes of the turn of the 1980s made it possible not
only to accelerate these studies in Poland but also to enter into international cooperation
 and to stimulate acaropathogenic research in other European countries (a.o., Austria,
France, Germany, Great Britain, Greece, The Netherlands, Spain). Until now the mycoses
of two groups of mites have been partly recognized: (1) phytophagous spider and gall
mites, in gardens, orchards and grasslands, and (2) saprotrophic and predacious mites,
common in subcortical insects' feeding grounds in forests and mid-feld afforestations on
trees and decayed wood.
Data on mite pathogens are scarce, hence recent investigations on mycoses of the two
groups of host mites widens our knowledge about the diversity of fungal pathogens as well
as their taxonomical affinity and host selectivity. Most material included here has been
collected or identified in 2003-2007, and this paper is supplementary to three previous
publications (Mietkiewski and Balazy 2003; Mietkiewski et al. 2003; Balazy et al. 2008)
Materials and methods
Bark and wood samples were preliminarily investigated and selected in local laboratories
Further rearing and periodical checking for the appearance of mycosed arthropod indi-
viduals, and subsequent analytical processing (isolation and identification of disease
agents, their frequency, duration and succession) were performed in the Research Centre
for Agricultural and Forest Environment of the Polish Academy of Sciences in Poznaf.
Materials were kept in rearing containers for several months and periodically checked
isolated by common insect pathology techniques (Balazy et al. 2008). The standard potato-
dextrose agar (PDA), Sabouraud-dextrose agar (SDA) and SDA enriched with egg-yolk
(SDEYA) media were used, the latter sometimes supplemented with powdered milk and/or
antibiotics. Quantitative estimations of the fungal pathogens’ share in mite mortality were
done only in high prevalence cases. Fungi were preserved alive, but in cases of epizootics
only representative strains were retained. For details on sampling methods and further
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
55
treatment of collected material we refer to previous publications (Mietkiewski et al. 2000,
2003; Balazy et al. 2008). In recent years attempts have been made to verify the patho-
genicity of particular strains by artificial infection of experimental host mites or other
invertebrates (Balazy et al. 2008). On a small scale this research has also concerned mites
from forest litter, rmoss and lichens covering tree logs and trunks, decayed tree hollows and
occasionally abandoned bird nests.
The acaropathogenic fungal species considered in this paper have been mostly collected
in orchards, meadows and settlements in the vicinity of Siedlce, Bialowieza Forest,
Wielkopolski National Park and the coniferous or mixed forests of the Wielkopolska
region, spruce forests and shelterbelts of southern Bavaria (Germany), similar ecosystems
in central and eastern Austria, Parisian Basin (Picardie, Gatinais, in north-eastern France)
and single localities in other countries. In the Siedlce area systematic collections were
continued in 2003-2007 on different plants, mostly grasses, weeds and fruit trees. Most
samples were taken during the vegetation seasons, but hibernating forms were also studied
in dead mites on fruit trees (Tkaczuk et al. 2003). Sometimes so little was left of the host
mites, that species identification was impossible.
For taxonomical differentiation of fungal strains, the macro- and micromorphological
features of the mycelium and sporulation on the host mites and in cultures were compared,
 including molecular rmarkers of the whole ITS region (ITS 1, 5.8S and ITS 2). Twenty of
them were obtained by ourselves, others were received from GenBank. The total alignment
used in this study has 636 bp. Table 1 contains information on the origin of four sequences
of recently isolated Hirsutella strains and one strain of Paecilomyces farinosus, newly
introduced as an outgroup. The sequences obtained from GenBank are characterized by
accession numbers following on the species names. Accession numbers of 15 strains earlier
characterized by the authors can be found in Balazy et al. (2008). Cordyceps strains
considered in this analysis were included as the closest teleomorphic relatives based on
BLAST search.
Total genomic DNA was extracted from fresh mycelium using the Plant DNeasy
Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). The whole ITS region was amplifed using
m ss  (i   a q sod  i  t i sd s
some ambiguous positions were amplified with the primers ITS 2 and ITS 3 as well. PCR
reactions were performed using a Mastercycler personal (Eppendorf), according to
Stensrud et al. (2005). Amplified fragrments were visualized on 1% agarose gels. The DNA
band was subsequently excised and eluted using the QIAEX II Gel Extraction Kit (Qia-
gen). Cycle sequencing reactions were performed using the purified PCR product,
AmpliTaq DNA polymerase and fuorescent dye-labeled terminators BigDye v.1 (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the manufacture's instructions. The ITS
was sequenced bidirectionally using the same primers as before. The products were
resolved by electrophoresis using Applied Biosystems' 310 DNA sequencing system.
Table 1 New Hirsutetta and Paecitomyces strains used in this study
Species
 Strain number
Host
Geographic origin
H. kirchneri
3661/1a
Abacarus hystrix
Fontainebleau, France
0207
Abacarus hystrix
Siedlce, Poland
H. tydeicota
1107
Tydeus sp.
Siedlce, Poland
H. cf. brownorum
3787m
Tarsonemid larva
Strass, Bavaria, Germany
P. farinosus
P5
Unidentified caterpillar
Bialowieza Forest, Poland
56
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Sequences (about 510 bp long) were aligned using the program CLUSTAL X
(Thompson et al. 1994) and thereafter manually adjusted by the eye. The ITS region made
as contig from two or more singular sequences from both strands of DNA were compared
with those from GenBank NCBI using BLASTN 2.2.5 (Altschul et al. 1997). Phylogenetic
and molecular evolutionary analyses were conducted using MEGA version 3.1 (Kumar
et al. 2004) and MrBayes (Ronquist and Huelsenbeck 2003)
Results and dliscussion
Diversity of mite pathogenic fungi and phylogenetic relationships of Hirsutella species
From among several dozen species of fungi affecting mites (Table 2) only five species of
Entomophthorales were separated, i.e., two Conidiobolus and three Neozygites species.
Conidiobolus coronatus is characterized by low host selectivity and strong post-infection
aggressiveness caused by highly toxic metabolites (Bogus et al. 1998; Bogus and Szc-
zepanik 2oo0). Apart from frequent infections of gamasids, mostly Dendrofaetaps spp., it
was isolated from pupae and adults of predacious beetles including Crypturgus spp., all
instars of sciarid fies, a few juvenile springtails and one larva of the longicorn beetle
i  a a s n i  na ) s d  a
from mites on plants. In turn, Neozygites species show very limited spectra of infected
hosts, often restricted to one or few closely related species. For instance, N. foridana hosts
are about 10 closely related spider mites (Tetranychidae), and often the fungus causes
severe epizootics in their populations. However, Delalibera et al. (2004) found that the
pathogenic specificity is (or can be) reflected in molecular structure (18S rDNA). On this
basis these authors described the new species N. tanajoae, strictly adapted to infect the
spider mite Mononychellus tanajoae,though the micromorphology of this pathogen did not
differ from N.foridana.Another species,N.abacaridis,infects only a few eriophyids of
the genera Abacarus, Aculodes (Mietkiewski and Balazy 2003) and Acuius fockeui—the
latter host is newly reported here. Its incidence in populations of the latter host often
exceeded 50% in autumn 2007. Only a few species of the genus Neozygites are known as
mite pathogens (Keller and Petrini 2005).
The most frequent pathogens occurring in mite communities on plants and in wood
infested by insects are Hirsutelia species. Until now 13 of their form species have been
recognized in the habitats under study, among them three undescribed species. On the basis
of accessible data and the authors' own observations only the species H. kirchneri, H.
necatrix and H. thompsonii (including its variety synnematosa) can be treated as effective
oligophagous pathogens of phytophagous mites, though their potential host ranges seem to
embrace only selected eriophyid and/or tarsonemid mites, and sometimes tetranychids. In
the Central and Western European climate conditions, only H. fhompsonii and H. kirchneri
seem to significantly reduce some eriophyid populations (Minter et al. 1983; Mietkiewski
ered a tropical species (Fisher 1950, 1951; McCoy 1996). Recent studies showed that this
fungus is the common pathogen of phytophagous mites, mainly eriophyids, in central
Europe on grasses and fruit trees (Minter and Brady 1980; Minter et al. 1983; Mietkiewski
et al.2003).In Poland both its synnematous and mononematous forms commonly occur
and some isolates also produce stromatic outgrowths, though perithecia were not obtained
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
57
       id 
uo
Nov. 2006-2007. On a branch of Corytus avellana;, FR, Dec.
abies, subcortical detritus;, GE, PO, 2003-2006, usually in
P. sylvestris, galleries of bark beetles; PO, 1997-2007
Host plant or substrate, country, date, other remarks
Potentilla anserina; leaf underside; PO, Jun. 2004
grasses, GB,FR,GE, PO, Jul.-Oct. 2003-2007
perenne;FR,Sep.2005-2007; PO,2003-2007
anserina, leaves; PO, Aug. 2004.
strongly deteriorated material; rare
2006, PO 2003-2007
Nov., 2006-2007
matenial
2004
P
Phyllocoptes
Abacarushystrix,ActodessppAcutusfock
Dendrolaelaps nostricornutus, Proctotaelaps sp.
Dendrolaelaps sp and juvenile acaridids
Tetranychus urticae,Bryobia rubriocutus
Tarsonemus potentittae, Tarsonemus sp,
Two infected gamasids
sp., Oribatid mitea
Dendrolaelaps spp.
Tetranychus urticaed
Abacarus hystrix
Abacarus hystrix
Abacarus hystrixa
Tarsonemus sp.
Bryobia sp.
Host mite
Hypocreales—Clavicipitaceous anamorphs
Hirsutetta cf. brownorum Minter et Brady
Neozygites abacaridis Mietkiewski et
Conidiobotus coronatus (Costantin)
H. minnesotensis Chen, Liu et Chen
. gregis Minter, Brady et Hall
H. necatrix Miner, Brady et Hall
Remaudiere et Keller
earlier collections
Entomophthorales
Conidiobotus sp.
Haptocillium sp.
Fungus species
Brady et Hall
Neozygitessp.
Batko
Balazy
H
H
58
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
leaf underside of Fragaria grandifora, PO. ln Abies atba, Larix
sylvestris, P. abies, Q. robur, of common
coltsfoot and rosaceous shrub leaves, Jul.-Dec. 2003-2007; GR,
subcortical galleries and on leaves; GE, FR, PO; few isolates;
Stachys sytvatica, on leaf underside; FR, Sep.-Oct. 2007
Host plant or substrate, country, date, other remarks 
Forest foor vegetation and litter; AU, Aug. 2007
Rubus idaeus; in buds; PO, Oct. 2007
species,PO,GE,2003-2007
Apr. 2004; SP, Apr. 2007
Jun.-Dec.2003-2006
Subcortical detritus P.
hurica,
 Dendrolaelaps spp., some uropodids and parasitids
Phytonemus patlidus ssp. Fragariae, Tarsonemus
Abacarus hystrix, Acutodes spp., Aceria sp., A.
Dendrolaelaps spp. and some other gamasids
Aceria phyllocoptes Dendrotaetaps sp,some
Typhtodromus sp., Tarsonemus tucustris
Acaridids, eriophyids, gamasids, uropodids,
Phytocoptes gracitis (Eriophyidae)
Remaining of an oribatid carapace
gamasids and oribatids
Gamasids and tetranychids
tussitagofotiae
Eriophyes pyri
polenlillae
tetranychids
Host mite
H. thompsoni Samson, McCoy et O'Donnell
Lecanicilium cf. tongisporum (Petch)Zare
Lecanicillum muscarium (Petch)Zare et W.
Paecitomyces farinosus (Holm ex S. F.
Lecanicillium cf. tecanii (Zimmermann)
  a  
Samson, MeCoy et O'Donnell
H. tydeicola Samson et McCoy
H. vandergeesti sp. nov.
P. fumosoroseus (Wize)
Table 2 continued
Zare et W. Gams
H. nodutosa Petch
Fungus species
et W. Gams
Gray) Fr.
Gams
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
59
subcortical material; AU, GE, FR, PO, 20042007; occasionally
 plants, in subcortical detritus and in organic soil or litter;, nof
rare; AU, FR, GE, PO, Jul.-Nov. 2004-2007; RU, Aug. 1990,
subcortical materials; GE, PO, Jun.-Nov. 2003-2007; singular
On L perenne, Festuca rubra, Agrostis stotonifera, AU, GE, FR,
 e   e    s s
plants and tree branchlets;, all countries and sites; Jul.-Nov.
Host plant or substrate, country, date, other remarks
rare; particularly on juvenile instars
Nov. 2003-2006; singular isolates
isolated even in dry conditions
2003-2007
1solates
uo
Abacarus hystrix,Acutus schtechtendati,Eriophyes
Erophyids, gamasids, acaridids and others
Abacarus hystrix, Acutodes sp, Euseius
Abacarus hystrix, Acutodes mckenziei
Proctotaetaps sp., uropodids
Dendrolaetaps spp.
Gamasid mites
oribatids
uropodids
Host mite
Acrodontium crateriforme(van Beyma) de
Simpticiltium tanosoniveum (van Beyma)
Cladosporium ctadosporoides (Fres.) de
Ramutaria tudoviciana Minter, Brady et
Sporothrix schenki Hektoen ex Parkins
Lecaniciltium spp. (various strains)
Simpticiltium spp. (various strains)
Newly recorded host mites
Other hyphomycetales
Table 2 continued
Zare et W. Gams
Fungus species
W. Gams
300H
Vries
Hall
60
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
ITS sequences indicated practically no differences between H. kirchneri and H. necatrix
on the genetic level; these species form together with H. gregis a well separated clade
(Figs. 1, 2). The strains of H. thompsonii display much greater heterogeneity. A tree made
with Neighbor Joining only with H. thompsonii strains and H. necatrix as an outgroup
reveals close affnity of all three specirmens (not shown). The strain Dq345579 (Xiang et al.
2007) was isolated in the USA by C. W. McCoy in 1981 from citrus rust mite Phylioc-
optruta oleivora. The strain 3699 came from Eriophes pyri (Losice, Poland) and was
described as H. fhompsonii cf. var. synnematosa. Data on the origin or morphology of
srain Af293899 are missing in the GenBank Database, as in publications. Hodge (1998)
obtained two sequences of H. fhompsonii var. synnematosa. Both are similar to the 3699
strain sequence and form one clade also with Dq345579, Af293844. A similar result for
other DNA regions could be a reason for separation of a new taxon from the large and
divergent H. thompsonii. The closest to this group appeared the rather homogenous H.
minnesotensis clade (Figs. 1, 2). This latter species is nematopathogenic, and has been
isolated repeatedly from juvenile and mature individuals of tarsonemid and probably
anoetid mites, reared in rotten wood of Norway spruce and black cherry in the laboratory
(Balazy et al. 2008) Single individuals have been found continuously in material from
Bavarian spruce forests over a period of up to 2 years of rearing
Hirsutella tydeicola found on Tydeus sp., Phyllocoptes abaenus and Aceria phioeo-
coptes on plum trees, is newly recorded from Poland and perhaps from Europe. In
phylogenetic trees it is situated near the nematopathogenic H. rhossiliensis, but at con-
spicuous distance. We found no information on its artificial culturing, so we inserted
mycelium of the obtained strains on SDA medium. The fungus grew slowly, attaining 2 cm
colony diameter during 1 month. Aerial mycelium forms a hard and wrinkled layer of
about 2-3 mm thick, in the centre elevated up to 5 mm of the surface,foccose and white
with a slight navy-blue tint. The hyphae are evenly thick (1.3-3.8 μm in diameter).
Phialides usually perpendicular or nearly so, protruding singly, 21-37 μm long, rarely
 attaining up to 50 μm; their basal parts are 3.8-5 μm thick, pretty abruptly narrowing near
the half of their height into needle-like smooth necks, 0.5-0.7 μm thick at the tip. Phia-
lospores fusiform, a little bent with the distal end subacute, 4.8-6.2 x 2-3.2 μm, thickest
in the central part, set in twos stuck by mucus on the neck ends. Culture reverse brown with
the stain diffusing to the medium at over 2 cm zone around the colony margin.
A much wider host range represents H. noduiosa, till now reported from insect larvae
and several saproxylic or predacious mite species (Balazy et al. 2008). Since some of this
species’ strains showed the ability to produce string-like or cylindrical synnemata of the
phialides unlike those protruding on their mononematous hyphae (Fig. 3), we selected
them for comparative molecular analysis (work in progress). An acaropathogenic strain of
from the aphid Dysaphis plantaginea (bootstrap support 98%, posterior probabilities 1.0).
The closest teleomorphic state for both is Cordyceps cochlidicola, whereas H. vermicola
sod e oddns dnsn) apeo s a un pod ae uooa jo H pue
probabilities1.0).
Similar polyphagous aspects are suspected in H. haptospora and H. rostrata. The first
was originally isolated from uropodid mites found in ant nests (Formica polyctena), but
morphologically identical strains were found on digamasellid mite species (mostly Den-
drolaelaps) and sciarid midge larvae inhabiting subcortical galleries of cambiophagous
insects on Scots pine logs and branches in Poland (Notecka Forest). Recently it was also
found on a sciarid larva in subcortical detritus of Mimosa wood near Ales, in southern
France. Contrary to the easily isolated strains from midges, the fungus on mites appeared
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
61
H.thompsonii 3698
H.thompsoni 3660 02h
H.thompsoni3660 4a
H.thompsonii3660 1
H.thompsoni 3705
H.thompsonii Af293844
100
100
H.thompsonii Dq345579
H.thompsonii 3699
H.minnesotensis 3730e
100
H.minnesotensis 3612
74 H. mirnnesotensis Dq078757
H.rostrata 3697
H.gregis 36613
H.kirchnericoremial3675a
100
H.gregis 0207
H.necatrix 3560 1a1
H.kirchner 3661 1a
66
H.kirchnen 3560 1a2
100
C.sinensis Aj309361
C.sinensis Aj309357
H.uncinata Ay365468
1:00
H.aphidis 3701
H.nodulosa 3700ct
4
H. Cf.brownorum 3787m
61
82
H.vermicola Dq345592
C.cochlidiicola Ab027377
H.vermicola Dq345589
H.vermicola Dq345581
C.emeiensis Aj309347
C.rubiginosoperitheci Ab294423
59
C.coccidicola Ab031196
H.tydeicola 1107
H.rhossiliensisDq345578
H.rhossiliensis Ay745253
100
H.rhossiliensis Ab109760
H.rhossiiensis Af169197
H.guyana Dq345595
91
H.versicolor Dq345594
Pfarinosus p5
0.02
Fig. 1 Phylogenetic tree of Hirsutetla and Cordyceps species obtained with Neighbor Joining method
(Kimura, two parameters model). Numbers below the branches are bootstrap percentage values based on
10,000 replicates
62
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Pfaninosus P5
H.rostrata 3697
H.necatrix 3560 1a1
H.kirchneri coremial 3675a
H.gregis 3661 3
66'0
H.gregis 0207
H.kirchneri 3661 1a
H.kirchnen 3560 1a2
0.99
H.guyana Dq345595
H.versicoior Dq345594
C.coccidlico/a Ab031196
0.79
H.vermicola Dq345589
0.86
H.vermicola Dq345581
1.00
C.cochlidiicola Ab027377
0.56
H.vermicola Dq345592
0.58
H.c.f.brownorum 3787m
0.52
1.00
H.aphidis 3701
0.51
H.nodulosa 3700ct
C.emeiensis Aj309347
0.98
C.rubiginosoperitheciAb294423
H.uncinata AY365468
0.97
0.64
660
C.sinensis Aj309361
C.sinensis Aj309357
H.tydeicola1107
0.91
H.rhossiiensis Ab109760
H.rhossiiensis Dq345578
1.00
H.rhossilie/nsis Ay745253
H.mossiiensis Af169197
0.97
H.thompsonii 3698
H.rhompsonii 3660 02h
0.71
0.85
H.thomp5onl/ 3660 4a
H.thompsonli 3660 1
1.00
H. thompsoni3705
H.thompsonii DQ345579
1.00 H.thompsonii AF293844
0.94
H.thompsoni 3699
H.rminnesotensis 3612
1.00H.minnesotensis DQ078757
H.minnesotensis 3730e
0.1
set using Bayesian analysis. Bayesian posterior probabilities are given on nodes
recalcitrant for culture isolation, which hinders a comparison of their genetical markers. H.
rostrata, the species common on dead mites found in bark beetle galleries, has lately been
found on a beetle larva, but attempts to artificially infect birch bark beetle (Scotyius
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
63
10μm
Fig.3 Hirsutetla nodutosa, sporulation on synnemata
ratzeburgi) larvae and codling moth (Cydia pomonella) caterpillars with its spores failed
(Balazy et al. 2008).
A fungus close to H. brownorum often occurs on instars of tarsonemids and, supposedly,
acarid, anoetid and parasitid larval forms (seldom also adults) in rotting cambium among
the galleries of bark beetle and sciarid larvae under the bark of coniferous trees. However,
the shape of its phialospores and its hyphal diameter hardly match the original description
of H. brownorum (Minter and Brady 1980). The only culture obtained yet allowed us to
establish its position in the phylogenetic tree between H. noduiosa and H. vermicola
(Figs. 1, 2). We apply for it the designation H. cf. brownorum until its nomenclatural
position is solved, which can be difficult because of the scarcity of original material of H.
 brownorum. The fungus seems to be widely distributed and it affected over 50-60% of
juvenile mites in some bark and wood laboratory rearings. Mycelium on host mites is
rather scarce, with delicate hyphae (2-2.8 μm thick) protruding mostly from mouthparts
and tarsal segments of the legs, procumbent among the cambium fibres and insect
excrements at 3-6 mm distance from the host body. Phialides usually 12-25 long (extreme
32 μm), with the basal ampulliform part 6-12 x 4-5 μm, with single or bi- to four-furcate
thin necks of the terminal parts delicately twisted. They protrude singly or oppositely,
sometimes in groups of three, laterally frorm the hyphae in rather distant intervals ca. 70-
150 μm. Phialoconidia of somewhat asymmetrical outline 4.5-5.8 x 2.8-3.5 μm, smooth,
with a small wart-like projection on the distal end directed to the side; the spores are
produced singly or in twos on the necks; on furcate or polyphialidic sporogenous cells
normal conidia developed only on one neck, on the second one and further they were
underdeveloped or not produced at all. The culture was obtained only once on SDEYA
agar, and difficult to isolate; at first mycelium was delicate, white, non-sporulating, and
velvety. After enrichment with additional egg yolks consecutive secondary subcultures
were growing a little faster and in some of them single conidiogenous cells with very weak
sporulation were produced.
Although we investigated entomopathogenic fungi in broad context, the common
polyphagous insect pathogens, e.g., Beauveria, Metarhizium, Paecilomyces (or Isaria as
64
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
rarely appear on mites. Some higher infection rates appeared in cases of a few Lecanic-
illum species, but only in favorable humidity conditions and at simultaneous high
prevalence rates of aphid or scale insects diseases, which seem to be the primary sources of
infective material. Among the most common of these pathogens, L muscarium appeared in
autumnal months on Stachys sylvatica leaves infested by Cryptomyzus ribis aphids, but the
infections of mites were sporadical. More Lecanicillium and Simplicillium strains were
isolated from mites from the subcortical communities, but their pathogenicity to mites
needs to be verified experimentally. Apart from the most common forms close to Lec-
anicilfium cf. lecanii, also L psalliotae, L potymorphum and Simpficilfium fanosoniveum
were isolated repeatedly. Although some Lecanicilfium strains isolated from mites showed
micromorphological features identical to isolates from insects, their cultures could differ
considerably in macromorphological aspects, e.g., mycelium texture, growth intensity,
medium staining and others. This suggests that the biological diversity of these organisms
is greater than mentioned in recent monographs (Zare and Gams 2001). In two grass
samples strains of Haptocillium were obtained from dead eriophyids. Mainly in autumn
Cladosporium spp. were also isolated from dead mites, though their pathogenicity to mites
and insects has as yet been documented weakly.
The constant component of fungal communities of eriophyid mites feeding on grasses is
Ramuiaria ludoviciana. Its pathogenic abilities to eriophyids have been confirmed lately in
in mid-summer and peak mite mortality falls in October and the first half of November.
Description of two new Hirsutella species
Two of the obtained Hirsufelfa forms could not be identified, so we decided to give their
full morphological characteristics as new species. Unfortunately, numerous and careful
trials to isolate cultures on artificial media failed.
Hirsutella danubiensis Tkaczuk, Balazy et Wegensteiner, spec. nov. (Fig. 4a, b)
Fungus acaropathogenicus.Mycelium in acaris copiosum,aibum ex fongis et aequoan
gustis hyphis crassitate 2.5-5.0 um constans,cum septis in spatia 15-55 um collocatis
Hyphae ex acarorum mortuorum corporibus radiate excrescunt et circiter eorum sub
Potentilla anserina foliis extenduntur.Phialides multae,tenuiconicales ad basim 2.5-3.7
crassae.35-62.5um longae(iongitudine media 48.5um).moduiate in summum exile
cofum,angustatum ad O.8-1um crassum,nonnumaquam furcillatum.cuius superficies
minimum aspera,attenuantur.Phialoconidia parva,dimensionibus 4.5-6.6 × 2.0-2.7 μm
fortius attenuata,bilateraliter symmetrica,singula vet bina in summis coffis formantur.
Inacaris mortuis Tetranychidarum (Tetranychus urticae) ex Potentilla anserina fotiis in
Danubii fuminis valle prope Vindobonam die 12 mensis Augusti anno 2007 coliectis.
Holotypus: specimen numero 1208 designatum, in collectione Universitatis Podlasiensis in
Siedice.
Hirsutella danubiensis Tkaczuk, Balazy et Wegensteiner, sp. nov. (Fig. 4a, b)
distributed in uneven distances 15-55 μm, protruding radially from dead mites and
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
65
80um
20μm
R
Fig. 4 Hirsutetla danubiensis sp. nov. a Mycelium on spider mite Tetranychus urticae, b fialides and
conidia
outspread around them on the leaf surface. Phialides numerous, very long, arising singly at
right angles from hyphae, 2.5-3.7 μm wide at the base, 35-62.5 μm long, (average
48.4 μm), sometimes forked, slender, and from approximately 2/3 of their total height
gradually tapering into a slightly warted equally narrow neck, about 0.8-1 μm thick, on the
summit. Phialoconidia small, 4.5-6.6 x 1.9-2.7 μm of the shape of orange segment, more
strongly narrowed at the distal end and bilaterally symmetrical, produced and persisting
singly or stuck in twos by a thin layer of mucus on the top of necks.
On dead Tetranychus urticae (Tetranychidae) collected on Potentilla anserina leaves in
the Danube river valley near Vienna (Austria), in August 2007. The specimen nr 1207 in
66
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
100μm
30μm
Fig. 5 Hirsutella vandergeesti sp. nov. a Mycelium on phytoseid mite, b hyphae, phialides and
phialospores
the collection of the Department of Plant Protection of the University of Podlasie in
Siedlce, found on 12 August 2007 is designed as a holotype. Hirsutella danubiensis could
be easily distinguished from the other Hirsutella species producing small conidia, and by
its very long phialides of general narrowly conical appearance, without conspicuous basal
distension. Etymology: related to the Danube valley as the site of its occurrence.
Hirsutella vandergeesti Balazy, Mietkiewski et Tkaczuk, spec. nov. (Fig. 5a, b)
Fungus acarorum pathogenicus. Acari mortui corpus textis hypharum, e celiulis elongatis
vel ovoidaeis,2-6 umcrassis constantium implent.Hyphae irregulares ramosformant et in
centibus celituiae mycelii intra hospitis corpus ovoideae aut subglobosae diametro 4-7 um,
continent myceli hyphalis reliquias,cuius cellulae in cruribus elongatae sunt.Hyphae
aerinae aequotenues.crassitudine 34 (4.5) um. exigue ramosae.ad longitudinem
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
67
34mm radiate excrescunt,maxime inter scutum dorsale etventrale atque circum partes
buccales,anales et inter basis particuta coxarum. Hyphae perveniunt ad longitudinem 2.5-
3 mm,plerumque circum acaros mortuos myceli canoalbi texta densa formantes.Parietes
hypharum externi clarofusci superficie polita, septa hyalina, paululum distincta, regulariter
in spatia 10-18um coliocantur.Phialides tenuiconicaies,maxime crassae ad basim,ex
hyphis directe,aliquando in hypharum finibus pauio oblique excrescunt.Quarum dimen-
siones (27-) 30-37(-43)x 44.5 μm ad basim, usque ad circa 4/5 suae longitudinis
totaliter recte ad crassitudinem 1.5-2 um attenuantur. Adeo paries ciarofuscus et crassus
phialides protegit.In phialidis apice tenuissimus (~O.5 um). achromaticus processus
plasmaticus,4-7 um fongus invenitur, in cuius apice phialospora formatur.Raro ex una
phialide duo colla crescunt,quorum alterum saepe-sed non semper-brevius est.Raro
etiam colium supra phialidis segmentum crassoparietalisfurcatam formam habet,quam
quam duarum sporarum formatio in collis bifurcatisrarissime notabatur.Phialoconidia
parva dimensionibus (4.0-) 4.2-5.5× 2.1-2.5(-3.0) μm,instar fructus citri sinensis
segmentorum, in parte apicali magis attenuata, saepe cumfine pautuium acuto, bilateraliter
symmetrica, fere semper singula et mucotecta formantur.
In acaris mortuis Phytoseidarum (Amblyseius sp.Neoseiulus,Seiulus sp.Typhlodro-
mus sp.).et Tarsonemidarum (Tarsonemus lacustris) ex Stachydis sylvaticae folis
collectis,in silva humida Saint Gobin prope Cessieres,in Francogalia, Septembri et
Octobri mensibus anno 2007.Folia ab insectis Aphidarum et Coccodearum atque ab
acaris Tetranychidarum indefinitis, quae non sunt infecta, inhabitantur. Holotypus:
specimen numero 4200 g designatum, in collectione mycologica Insituti Agrariae et Sil-
vestris OecotogiaeAcademiaeScientiarumPotonorumPosnaniae depositum.
Acaropathogenic fungus; the body of a dead mite filled with hyphae consisting of elon-
gated or oval cells 2-6 μm thick, irregularly branched and penetrating also into basal parts
of legs and chelicers. During the period of the abundant growth of aerial mycelium, the
cells of the internal hyphae take ovoid or subglobose forms 4-7 μm in diameter and
equally narrow 3-4 (4.5) μm thick, poorly branched and up to 3-4 mm long,grow
radially around the mite between dorsal and ventral discs, a little more abundant at the
mouth parts and between the basal segments of legs. Outer walls of the hyphae light
brownish, smooth; septa hyaline, distributed regularly in distances of 10-18 μm. Phialides
narrowly conical, thickest at the base, protruding perpendicularly, sometimes somewhat
obliquely in the terminal parts of hyphae. Their measurements are (27-) 30-36 (-43) x 4-
4.5 μm at the base, converging rectilinearly up to the height of approximately 4/5 of their
total length where they attain the thickness of 1.5-2 μm. Up to this point they are covered
               
phialide forms a very thin (0.5 μm) and thin walled, colourless plasmatic outgrowth 4-
phialide, one of them almost always shorter. The formation of two normal phialospores on
forked necks only very rarely observed. Phialoconidia small, (4-) 4.2-5.5 x 2.1-2.5 (
3.0) μm, shaped like an orange segment, more strongly narrowed at the distal end and
ventrally sinuous beneath subapiculate tip. The spores are covered with a thin layer of
mulcus.
On dead mites of the families Phytoseiidae (Amblyseius sp., Neoseiulus, Seiuius sp,
89
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
syfvatica leaves in the food plain forest St. Gobin near Laniscourt (France), in September
and October 2007. The plants were infested by aphids, coccids and tetranychid mites,
which were never found to be infected by this fungus. Specimen nr. 4200 g in the col-
lection of the Research Centre for Agricultural and Forest Environment, found on 1
September 2007, is designated as holotype. Etymology: to honour Dr. Leo Van der Geest's
merits in acarology.
Conclusions
 Fungal diseases of mites occurring on plants, under bark (in feeding galleries of cambio-
xylophagous insects), and in decayed wood are widespread in (semi)natural habitats. The
fungal pathogens of mites are closely related to most insect pathogenic fungi but only
few species are capable to infect both insects and mites. Among five reported repre-
sentatives of the order of Entomophthorales only one pleophagous species, C. coronatus,
appears capable to infect hosts of both groups, whereas from among 13 acaropathogenic
Hirsutella-species, classified as hyphomycetous clavicipitalean anamorphs of ascomy-
cetes only for two (H. nodulosa and H. rostrata), single insect species have so far been
reported as hosts. Alternatively, from the common and typically entomopathogenic
anamorphs only two species of the genus Paecifomyces were found on single mites
within this study.
A preliminary attempt to determine the affinity of particular acaropathogenic species of
Hirsutella by the analysis of ITS region sequences of the genomic DNA showed two
distinct groups infecting some phytophagous eriophyid, tarsonemid and tetranychid mites.
The first is formed by three very close species, H. gregis, H. kirchneri and H. necatrix; the
more variable. Other species are scattered singly in dendrograms, neighboring with the
entomopathogenic (H. nodulosa, H. cf. brownorum) or nematopathogenic (H. thompsonii,
H. tydeicola) clades, except H. rostrata which is clearly separated. Two newly described
species, basing on the differences in morphology (H. danubensis and H. vandergeesti),
appeared too fragile for culture isolation, therefore could not be included in ITS
sequencing. Currently Lecanicillium, Simplicillium and allied taxa are subjected to insect
and mite pathogenicity bioassays, as well as morphological analysis including exact bio-
metrics and successive nucleic acid sequencing.
The majority of the recorded acaropathogenic fungi affecting mites on plants appear
from about mid-summer, increasing in density till the first frost. Some of them, e.g,
species inhabiting subcortical insect galleries and those hibernating on branches or in buds
 and excrescences (zoocecidia) on twigs, may be collected for laboratory studies all through
the year. Resting spores of Neozygites species may be collected from fruit tree branches.
The species H. kirchneri and Ramularia ludoviciana can also be found on grasses during
winter, under the snow.
 sd s a  n e sd  ssre 
tributed randomly over the area of potential host distribution. Though the local incidence
rates may be high, e.g., H. thompsonii, H. kirchneri or N. abacaridis on eriophyids feeding
on grasses or plum leaves, this does not seem to have much effect on the general distri-
bution and density of their host mites. In fresh subcortical insects' feeding grounds,
mycosed mites were seen only singly, and their density increases usually after 2-3 weeks
of rearing
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
69
Kropczynska-Linkiewicz (SGGW-Agricultural University in Warsaw), and Drs. Anna Skoracka, Wojciech
Magowski (A. Mickiewicz University in Poznan), and Dariusz Gwiazdowicz (University of Life Sciences in
Poznan) for identification of host mites. We are indebted to Romana Liponska, M.A. and Dr. Teresa Balazy
(A. Mickiewicz University in Poznan) for preparing the Latin diagnoses and the English translation. Our
sincere thanks also go to Prof. Marek Tomalak (lnstitute of Plant Protection in Poznan) and Dr. Damian
Jozefczyk (Research Centre for Agricultural and Forest Environment in Poznan), for their help and assis-
tance with preparation of figures.
References
Altschul SF, Thomas LM, Alejandro A et al (1997) Grapped BLAST and PSl-BLAST: a new generation of
protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 25:3389-3402
Balazy S (2000) Zroznicowanie grup funkcjonalnych grzybow entomopatogenicznych (Diversity of func-
tional groups of entomopathogenic fungi). Biotechnologia 3(50): 11-32 (in Polish)
Batazy S, Wrzosek M, Sosnowska D et al (2008) Laboratory trial to infect insects and nematodes by some
113
Bogus Ml, Szczepanik M (2000) Histopathology of Conidiobotus coronatus infection in Gatteria metlonetta
larvae. Acta Parasitol 45:48-54
Bogus Ml, Szczepanik M, Balazy S et al (1998) Susceptibility of Catteria metlonetla larvae to fungal
infection. ln: Konopinska D, Goldsworthy G,Nachman RJ, Nawrot J, Orchard 1, Rosinski G (eds)
Insects: chermical, physiological and environmental aspects. University of Wroclaw, Poland
Chandler D, Davidson G, Pell JK et al (2000) Fungal biocontrol of Acari. Biocontrol Sci Technol 10:357-
384
Delalibera 1, Hajek AE, Humber RA (2004) Neozygites tanajoae sp. nov., a pathogen of the cassava green
mite. Mycologia 96(5): 1002-1009
Domsch KH, Gams W, Anderson TH (1980) Compendium of soil fungi. Academic Press, London
Fisher FE (1950) Two new species of Hirsutetla Patouillard. Mycologia 42:290-297
Fisher FE (1951) An Entomophthora attacking citrus red mite. Fla Entomol 34:83-88
Hodge KT (1998) Revisionary studies in Hirsutella (Anamorphic Hypocreales: Clavicipitaceae). UM1
Microform 9900074, Ann Arbor
Entomophthoraceae and Neozygitaceae (Zygomycetes), with descriptions of three new subfamilies and
a new genus. Sydowia 57(1):23-53
Kumar S, Koichiro T, Masatoshi N (2004) MEGA3: integrated software for molecular evolutionary genetics
analysis and sequence alignment. Brief Bioinform 5(2): 150-163
Lipa J (1971) Microbial control of mites and ticks. In: Burges HD, Hussey NW (eds) Microbial control of
insects and mites. Acadermic Press, New York
McCoy CW (1996) Pathogens of eriophyoid mites. In: Lindqiust EE, Sabelis MW, Bruin J (eds) Eriophyoid
mites—their biology natural enemies and control. Elsevier Science BV, Amsterdam
Mietkiewski R, Balazy S (2003) Neozygites abacaridis sp. nov. (Entomophthorales), a new pathogen of
phytophagous mites (Acari,Eriophyidae). J 1nvertebr Pathol 83:223-229
Mietkiewski R, Balazy S, Tkaczuk C (2000) Mycopathogens of mites in Poland—a review.Biocontrol Sci
Technol 10:459-465
Mietkiewski R, Balazy S, Tkaczuk C (2003) Mikozy szpecieli (Acari: Eriophyoidea) wystepujacych na
trawach. (Mycoses of eriophyid mites (Acari: Eriophyoidea) occurring on grasses) (in Polish). Progt
Plant Protec 43(1):268-276 (in Polish)
Minter DW, Brady BL (1980) Mononematous species of Hirsutetla. Trans Br Mycol Soc 74(2):27 1-282
Minter DW, Brady BL, Hall RA (1983) Five hyphomycetes isolated from eriophyid mites. Trans Br Myco]
Soc 81(3):455-474
Bioinforrmatics 19: 1572-1574
Stensrud O, Hywel-Jones NL, Schumacher T (200S) Towards a phylogenetic classification of Cordyceps:
ITS nrDNA sequence data confirm divergent lineages and paraphyly. Mycol Res 109:41-56
Sung GH, Hywel-Jones NL, Sung JM et al (2007) Phylogenetic classification of Cordyceps and the clav-
icipitaceous fungi. Stud Mycol 57:5-59
70
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson Tl (1994) CLUSTAL. In: lmproving the sensitivity of progressive
multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting, position specific gap penalties and weight
matrix choice.Nucleic Acids Res 22:4673
Tkaczuk C, Mietkiewski R, Balazy S (2003) Mycoses of phytophagous rmites during the winter tirme. In: 9th
European meeting of the IOBC/WPRS working group "lInsect pathogens and insect parasitic nema-
todes" Salzau, Germany,23-29 May 2003,Abstracts: 108
Van der Geest LPS (1985) Pathogens of spider mites. In: Helle W, Sabelis MW (eds) Spider mites, their
biology,natural enermies and control. Elsevier Sci,Amsterdam
Van der Geest LPS, Elliot SL, Breeuwer JAJ, Beerling EAM (2000) Diseases of mites. Exp Appl Acarol
24:497-560
White TJ, Bruns T, Lee S et al (1990) Amplification and direct sequencing of fungal ribosomal RNA genes
methods and applications. Academic Press, San Diego
Xiang MC, Yang XH, Wang ZX et al (2007) Variability of morphology, parasitism and nucleotide
sequences among isolates and species of nermatophagous Hirsutetta. Biol Control 41(1): 1 10-1 19
Zare R, Gams W (2001) A revision of Verticillium section Prostrata. IV. The genera Lecanicillium and
Simpticiltium. Nova Hedwigia 73: 1-50
Entomopathogenic fungi against South American tick
species
Everton Kort Kamp Fernandes · Vania Rita Elias Pinheiro Bittencourt
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 14, 71-93
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9161-y @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract Ticks are parasites of serious concern for humans, domesticated animals and
wild animals. Despite scientific advances, in South America the principal control method
for ticks is the use of chemical acaricides. Indiscriminate use of these products causes
environmental pollution, food contamination and development of tick resistance to aca-
ricides. In vitro studies and field trials have demonstrated that pathogenic fungal isolates
not only cause mortality of many tick species, but also reduce subsequent generations due
to effects on their reproductive efficacy. Accordingly, this review presents results of
several studies which were conducted in South America. Furtherrmore, it outlines current
information on fungal pathogens of ticks and discusses the need to develop and implement
effective strategies for use of entomopathogenic fungi to control ticks in the near future.
Keywords Fungal acaricides · Biological control · Beauveria bassiana ·
Introduction
Ticks are obligate blood-sucking Arachnids that feed on vertebrates. In South America,
four tick species [Ambtyomma cajennense (Fabricius, 1787),Anocentor nitens (Neumann,
1897), Rhipicephaius (Boophitus) micropius (Canestrini, 1887) and R. sanguineus (Latr-
eille, 1806)] are widely distributed geographically and found on domestic and wild
animals. These species are grouped in the family Ixodidae. They are hard bodied, highly
fecund, biologically diverse, and economically devastating
E. K. K. Fernandes
Department of Biology, Utah State University, Logan, UT 84322-5305, USA
V. R. E. P. Bittencourt ()
Departamento de Parasitologia Animal, Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro,
Seropedica,R1 23890-000,Brazil
e-mail: vaniabit@ ufrrj.br
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.). Diseases of Mites and Ticks. DOl: 10.1007/978-I-4020-9695-2_87
71
72
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
These four species of ticks are responsible for several problems. A. cajennense can
transmit pathogens to several animal species, including pathogens that cause severe zoo-
notic infections, such as Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, caused by Rickettsia rickettsii
(Dias and Martins 1939). A. nitens transmits several equine disease etiological-agents,
including babesiosis, and also causes skin damage that facilitates bacterial infection and
myiasis (Pfeifer et al. 1995). R. (B.) microplus, known as the cattle tick, causes annual
economic damages estimated at 2 billion dollars per year in Brazil due to slower devel-
opment of infested animals, mortality, decreased milk production, leather production
losses, etc. (Grisi et al. 2002). R. (B.) microplus can also transmit pathogens that cause
diseases such as babesiosis and anaplasmosis (Horn and Arteche 1985). R. sanguineus is an
important vector of Babesia, Ehrlichia, Hepatozon and Rickettsia to domesticated and wild
dogs (Conceigao-Silva et al. 1988; Walker et al. 2000).
In practice, ticks are mostly controlled by chemical acaricides. However, biological
control is quickly becorming one of the more attractive approaches to tick management.
Several entomopathogenic fungi are naturally associated with ticks and some have dem-
onstrated high virulence under laboratory conditions. Of all the fungal genera and species
that have been tested,Metarhizium anisopliae and Beauveria bassiana have demonstrated
the highest virulence; and therefore, these are the most investigated entomopathogenic
fungi regarding their potential for the control of tick species worldwide.
Several previous reviews describe generally tick biological control using various
pathogens in various locations, as listed by Samish and Rehacek (1999) and Samish et al.
(2004). This review, however, focuses on the use of entomopathogenic fungi to control
important tick species from Southern America, and summarizes findings and perspectives
of several authors attempting to develop effective strategies for biological control of ticks
under tropical environmental conditions.
Laboratory assays and field trials
Laboratory assays using entomopathogenic fungi are commonly used in studies on bio-
lbogical control of ticks. A laboratory assay is an important test to verify the virulence of a
fungal pathogen. It considers mortality and other data (e.g., egg production, egg hatch-
ability, longevity) that might reduce the growth rate of tick populations in the feld.
However, comparing assay results is diffcult due to variations in methods and use of
different fungal isolates. Experiments under laboratory conditions (i.e. controlled tem-
perature, humidity, day-light period) present more consistent results than similar
experiments under natural conditions, laboratory assays are expected to indicate the most
virulent isolates, and therefore those with greatest potential for biological control.
(Table 2), nymphs, adults (Table 3) and engorged females (Table 4) of several tick species
that occur in South America. In general, larva is the stage most susceptible to fungal
infection. The results indicate that certain fungal species are promising alternatives to
chemical acaricides for tick control. Various isolates of M. anisopliae and B. bassiana
demonstrated the strongest pathogenicity to all stages of all four tick species, suggesting
that they have high potential as biocontrol agents of ticks.
In most field trials, conidial suspensions are sprayed directly onto ticks or on pasture
plants to control tick infestations (Table 5). As expected, the mortality levels in field
trials were lower than those observed under laboratory conditions. This suggests that,
under commonly occurring environmental conditions, conidia may not germinate or
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
73
Study
Association between fungus and
Resultsb
ticka
Bittencourt
Metarhizium anisoptiae and
(1) lncreased E1P (29.439.5 days at 10F-10² conidia
et al.
Rhipicephatus (Boophitus)
ml′, respectively) compared to control (23.6-
(1994a)
microptus
23.8 days); (2) increased EHP (10.3-15.0 days, at
10°-10² conidia ml-′, respectively) compared to
control (6.8 days).
Bittencourt
M. anisoptiae and R. (B.)
(1) Decreased EH (66.0-3.3% at 10²-10 conidia ml,
et al.
microptus
respectively) compared to control (91.3-94.0%); (2)
(1994b)
LCso: 1.35-5.0 x 10 conidia m]- depending on
isolate.
Bittencourt
Beauveria bassiana and R. (B.)
(1) Decreased EH (86.6-20.0% at 104-10
et al.
mcropius
conidia ml—', respectively) compared to contro]
(1996)
(93.3%); (2) LCso: 2.46-2.49 × 10” conidia m]-1
depending on isolate;(3) increased E1P (22.3-30.6
days at 104-10² conidia ml-, respectively)
compared to control (21.3-22.0 days); (4) increased
EHP (6.3-9.6 days at 104-10* conidia mi-1,
respectively) compared to control (5.3-5.7 days).
Souza et al.
B. bassiana and Ambtyomma
(1) Conidial suspension with highest concentration
(1999)
cajennense
(10² conidia ml-) decreased EH (0.33%) compared
to contro] (100%); (2) LCso: 3.2-
38 × 10? conidia ml-l depending on isolate; (3) EIP
and EHP not different from control.
M.anisoptiae and A.cajennense
(1) Conidial suspension with highest concentration
(10² conidia m]-) decreased EH (1.6-0%)
compared to control (100%); (2) LCso: 3.2-11 x
10′ conidia ml-] depending on isolate; (3) ElP and
EHP not different from control.
Carneiro
B.bassiana and Anocentor nitens
(1) EH (66.4-82.5% at 10²-10^ conidia ml-],
et al.
respectively) not different from control (82.1%); (2)
(1999)
decreased E1P compared to control (25.1 days); (3)
decreased EHP (5.4 4.1 days at 10²-108
conidia ml-', respectively) compared to contro]
(6.6 days); (4) increased larva mortality (>85%)
Paiao et al.
B.bassiana and R.(B.) microptus (
(1) Decreased EH (64.7-33.9% at 10°-108
(2001a)
conidia ml—′,respectively) compared to control at
day 20 after treatment.
Onofre et al.
M. anisoptiae var.anisoptiae and
(2001)
R.(B.) microptus
conidia ml-′, respectively) compared to control
(90.0-89.4%) at day 20 after treatment.
M.anisoptiae var. acridum and R.
(1) Decreased EH (65.0-19.5% at 10*-108
(B.)microptus
conidia ml-’, respectively) compared to contro]
Fernandes
B.bassiana and R.(B.)microplus (
(1) Decreased EH (68.0-30.0% at 106-10
et al.
conidia ml-′, respectively) compared to control
(2003)
(80.0-96.0%); (2) the conidial suspension with the
highest concentration (10² conidia ml—) decreased
EHP (3.2-2.8 days) compared to control
(6.3-6.5 days).
Fernandes
M. anisoptiae and R. (B.)
01 1 0)   (1)
et al.
microptus
conidia ml-′, respectively) compared to control 
(2004)
(79.0-94.0%).
74
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
 Table 1 continued
Study
Association between fungus and
Resultsb
ticke
Polar et al.
M. anisoptiae and R. (B.)
(1) Decreased EH (15% at 10° conidia ml-) compared
(2005a)
mucropius
to control (92%); (2) increased EHP
(19.8 ± 0.5 days at 10* conidia ml-l) compared to
contro] (14.8 ± 0.5 days)
Simpticiltium lametticota and R.
(1) EH (92% at 10² conidia m]-) not different from
(B.)microptus
control (92%); (2) decreased EHP (12.7 ± 0.4 days
at 10² conidia ml-') compared to control
(14.8 ± 0.5 days).
Isaria farinosa and R. (B.)
(1) Decreased EH (78% at 10² conidia ml-') compared
microptus
to control (92%); (2) EHP (14.9 ± 0.6 days at
10² conidia m]-’) not different from control
(14.8 ± 0.5 days).
M.anisoptiae and Rhipicephatus
(1) Decreased EH (8% at 10^ conidia ml-l) compared
sanguineus
to treated (with 0.2% Tween 80 solution) and
untreated controls (66 and 67%, respectively); (2)
EH higher in R. (B.) microptus (12%) than in R.
sanguineus (8%);(3) increased EHP
(16.7 ± 0.3 days at 10° conidia ml-) compared to
treated (with 0.2% Tween 80 solution) and untreated
controls (9.7 ± 0.1 and 9.6 ± 0.1 days,
respectively).
Prette et al.
B.bassiana and R.sanguineus
(1) Decreased EH (12.1-0.7% at 10′-109 conidia m]-1,
(2005)
respectively) compared to control (98.3-95.0%) at
day 20 after treatment.
Melo et al.
M. anisoptiae and R. (B.)
(1) Conidial suspension with highest concentration (108
(2006)
microptus
conidia ml-) decreased EH(19.0 ± 14.5%)
compared to control (86.0 ± 11.4%); (2) conidial
suspensions with highest concentrations (10²and 108
conidia ml-) decreased EHP (4.6 ± 0.8 and
5.3 ± 1.8 days, respectively) compared to contro]
(8.8 ± 1.3 and 8.4 ± 0.7 days).
Angelo et al. Lecaniciltium sp. and R. (B.)
(1) EH not different from control.
(2007)
mcroptus
Studies are ordered according to year of publication
hatch; EH (egg hatchability) = % hatch
penetrate the cuticle; and/or they may cause only sub-lethal levels of infection (Samish
et al. 2004), probably due to conditions such as temperature and humidity variations,
solar radiation, and host microclimatic factors, including skin temperature, chemical
composition of animal skin secretions and animal skin microflora (reviewed by Polar
et al. 2005c). To circumvent these problems, appropriate formulations can be devised to
protect the conidia, thereby enhancing their ability to germinate and initiate the cuticle
penetration process (Bittencourt et al. 2002).
When selecting isolates for tick control, in addition to considering virulence, high
tolerance to environmental conditions should be also evaluated. Heat and cold are two very
important limiting environmental factors. Furthermore, solar radiation negatively affects
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
75
Table 2 Tick larvae treated in vitro with conidial suspensions of entomopathogenic fungi
Study
Association between
Results
fungus and ticke
Bittencourt
Metarhizium anisoptiae and
(1) lncreased mortality (29.3-97.3% at 10F
et al.
Rhipicephatus(Boophitus)
10° conidia ml-′, respectively) compared to control
(1994b)
microptus
× 10° conidia m]-1 depending on isolate.
Bittencourt
Beauveria bassiana and R.
(1) Increased mortality (18.8-88.0% at 10*-10*
et al. (1996)
(B.）microptus
conidia ml, respectively) compared to control
6.8-10.1 × 10 conidia m]-1 depending on isolate.
Barbosa et al.
B. bassiana and
(1) lncreased mortality of engorged larvae (35.0-100% at
(1997)
Rhipicephatus sanguineus
10*-10² conidia ml—′, respectively) compared to control
(24.0%) at day 30 after treatment; (2) decreased surviva]
of nymphs (24% and 11%, at 104 and 10° conidia m]-1,
respectively) compared to control (100%) at day 15 after
ecdysis
Monteiro et al. B. bassiana and R.
(1) Increased mortality (60.0-90.0% at 10"
(1998)
sanguineus
10² conidia ml-′,respectively) compared to control at
day 10 after treatment; (2) LCso: 4.7-
12 × 10” conidia m]-] depending on isolate (at
27 ± 1°C); (3) LCso: 2.2-21 × 10 conidia m]-]
depending on isolate (at room termperature).
M. anisoptiae and R.
(1) Increased Jarva mortality (13.3-96.0% at 10²-108
sarguine us
conidia ml-′, respectively) compared to control at day,
10 after treatment; (2) LCso: 1.3-14 × 10^ conidia ml-
depending on isolate (at 27 ± 1°C); (3) LCso:
7.7 × 10-4.3 × 106 conidia m]] depending on isolate
(at room temperature).
Souza et al.
B.bassiana and Ambtyomma
(1) Increased mortality (40.0-100% at 106
(1999)
cajennense
10° conidia ml, respectively) compared to control
(10.0-15.0%) at day 10 after treatment; (2) LCso:
7.9 × 10-3.9 × 10′ conidia m]-” depending on
isolate.
M. anisoptiae and A.
(1) Increased mortality (43.3-96.7% at 10²-108
cajennense
conidia ml-’, respectively) compared to contro]
(0-23.3%) at day 10 after treatment; (2) LCso:
1.8-6.5 x 10 conidia m]-1 depending on isolate.
Paiao et al.
B.bassiana and R. (B.)
(1) Increased mortality (19.6-60.7% at 10°-10° conidia
(2001a)
microptus
ml, respectively) compared to control (13.2%) at day
20 after treatment.
Samish et al.
B.bassiana and R.
(1) lncreased mortality (7.2 ± 1.8-8.2 ± 2.6% at
(2001)
sanguineus
(% 81) o o ad（[w u01
day 7 after treatment.
B. bassiana and engorged
(1) No mortality at day 10 after treatment
larvae of R. sanguineus
(10” conidia ml-)y; (2) decreased emergence of nymphs
(79.5 ± 7.6% at 10′ conidia ml-) compared to contro]
(91.8 ± 9.2%) at day 16 after treatment; (3) no mortality
of emerged nymphs at day 21 after treatment (10?
conidia ml-)
M.anisoptiae var.anisoptiae (1) 1ncreased mortality (69.3 ± 8.8-95.9 ± 3.9% at
and R. sanguineus
10′ conidia ml-l) compared to control (1.8 ± 2.6%) at
day 7 after treatment.
76
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Table 2 continued
Study
Association between
Results
fungus and ticke
M. anisoptiae var. anisoptiae (1) Increased mortality (49.1 ± 16.1-82.6 ± 13.0% at 107
and engorged larvae of R.
conidia ml-) compared to control (0%) at day 10 after
sanguineus
treatment; (2) decreased emergence of nymphs
 (  %6 6 1
） ([
increased mortality of emerged nymphs (36.8 ± 3.2-
75.3 ± 4.4% at 10′ conidia ml-) compared to control
(0%) at day 21 after treatrment.
M.anisoptiae var.acridum
(1) Increased mortality (8.8 ± 3.1-9.8 ± 4.0% at 10?
and R. sanguineus
after treatment.
M.anisoptiae var.acridum
(1) No mortality at day 10 after treatment
and engorged larvae of R.
(10” conidia m]); (2) decreased emergence of nymphs
sarguine us
(83.9 ± 7.1-81.5 ± 3.8% at 10′ conidia ml)
compared to control (91.8 ± 9.2%) at day 16 after
treatment; (3) increased mortality of emerged nymphs
(6.3 ± 3.4-13.3 ± 6.3% at 10? conidia m]) compared
Isaria fumosorosea and R.
(1) Increased mortality (6.5 ± 1.2% at 10”conidia m]-)
sanguineus
compared to control (1.8 ± 2.6%) at day 7 after
treatment.
I. fumosorosea and engorged (1) No mortality at day 10 after treatment
larvae of R. sanguineus
(10” conidia m]-)y; (2) emergence of nymphs
(88.7 ± 3.8-88.1 ± 4.1% at 10? conidia ml-) not
after treatment (10′ conidia m]-).
Fernandes
B.bassiana and R. (B.)
(1) Increased mortality (10.0-96.0% at 10-10
et al.(2003)
microptus
conidia ml', respectively) cormpared to control (0%) at
day 10 after treatment.
Fernandes
M.anisoptiae and R. (B.)
(1) Increased mortality (11.0-94.0% at 10²-108
et al.(2004)
microptus
conidia ml—, respectively) compared to control (0%) at
day 10 after treatment.
Polar et al.
M. anisoptiae and R. (B.)
(1) Decreased average survival time (9.3 ± 0.4 days at
(2005a)
microptus
10° conidia ml) compared to control
(11.8 ± 0.8 days).
Simpticitium tametlicota and (1) Average survival time (12.3 ± 0.5 days at
R.(B.) microptus
10² conidia ml-’) not different from contro]
(11.8 ± 0.8 days).
Isaria farinosa and R. (B.)
(1) Average survival time (15.4 ± 0.6 days at 10² conidia
microplus
ml) not different from control (11.8 ± 0.8 days).
M. anisoptiae and R.
(1) lncreased average survival time (14.6 ± 0.3 days at
sanguine us
10° conidia ml-) compared to treated control (with
0.2% Tween 80 solution) (12.6 ± 0.4 days), but not to
untreated control (14.1 ± 0.4 days).
Prette et al.
B.bassiana and R.
(1) Decreased larva ecdysis (33.74.6% at 10'-108
(2005)
sanguineus
conidia ml-′, respectively, with no significant 
di fferences among treatments) compared to contro]
(93.4% and 94.1%).
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
77
Table 2 continued
Study
Association between
Results
fungus and ticke
Fernandes
B.bassiana and R. (B.)
(1) Increased mortality (16.0-100% at 10*-108
et al. (2006)
mcroplus
conidia ml-, respectively) compared to control (10%) at
day 10 after treatment; (2) high virulence variability
among 50 isolates, LCso: <104 to >10 conidia ml
depending on isolate.
Bahiense et al. M. anisoptiae (aqueous
(1) in general, all M. anisopliae isolates in association with
(2006)
conidial suspension
deltamethrin had higher mortality rates than treatments
associated with
using either fungus or pyrethroid alone at lower or
deltamethrin) and a
equivalent doses used in the association, at day 10 after
pyrethroid-resistant strain
treatment; (2) LCso: Deltamethrin: 10.8 ppm (4.5-25.8
of R.(B.) microptus
ppm), and deltamethrin + Ma 10² conidia ml-1:
6.0 x 10-9 ppm (5.8 x 10-39 to -1.1 x 1023 ppm).
Melo et al.
M.anisoptiae and R.(B.)
(1) Conidial suspensions with highest concentration
(2006)
microptus
(10² conidia m]-) increased mortality (97.0 ± 4.8 and
99.0 ± 3.1%) compared to control (1.0 ± 0.1 and
2.0 ± 1.2%) at day 10 after treatment.
Angelo et al.
Lecaniciltium sp. and R. (B.) (1) Increased mortality compared to control at day 20 after
(2007)
microptus
treatment; (2) LCso: 1.16 x 10° conidia ml-1.
Studies are ordered according to year of publication
 Fungus was applied as an aqueous conidial suspension, unless specified differently
survival of entomopathogenic fungi in the feld. The UV-B portion of sunlight appears to
be directly related to reduced survival of entomopathogenic conidia in insolated field
environments (Fargues et al. 1997). Therefore, several studies have made efforts to
identify isolates with high tolerance to heat, cold and ultraviolet radiation (UV-A and UV.
2007, 2008), and these isolates may hold promise for use in biological control settings with
high insolation, such as those found in tropical environments in South America.
Isolation of entomopathogenic fungi from naturally infected ticks
Studies have reported that several tick species are naturally infected by pathogenic fungi.
In Brazil, 24.5% of the engorged female of R. (B.) microplus ticks collected from soil
were infected with B. bassiana and 10% with M. anisopliae (Costa et al. 2002), and 22%
of the R. sanguineus nymphs were infected with fungi distributed among five genera,
some of which saprophytes (Guerra et al. 2001). Engorged females of R. (B.) micropitus
naturally infected with B. bassiana were also detected in Argentina (Posadas et al. 2005)
This study isolated B. bassiana from ticks and soil samples, and concluded that this
entomopathogenic fungus not only infects this tick species, but also is found in soil of 
endemic areas.
As reviewed by Samish et al. (2004), the percentage of ticks naturally infected by fungi
varies considerably according to the stage and species of ticks and also the ecological
conditions at the sample sites. The isolation of indigenous entomopathogenic fungi is
important for developing isolates that avoid the introduction of new (exotic) fungal isolates
for tick biological control in certain environments. Moreover, indigenous isolates may be
78
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Table 3 Tick nymphs and adults treated in vitro with conidial or blastospores suspensions of entomo-
pathogenic fungi
Study
Association between fungus
Results
and tick
Reis et al.
Beauveria bassiana and
(1) Increased mortality (29-73% at 10²-10² conidia m]-1,
(2001)
unfed nymphs of
respectively) compared to control (14%) at day 15 after
Ambtyomma cajennense
treatment; (2) LCso: 1.7-18 × 10² conidia ml-)
depending on isolate.
Metarhizium anisoptiae and
(1) lncreased mortality (32-45% at 10²-10° conidia m]-],
unfed nymphs of A.
respectively) compared to control (14%) at day 15 after
cajennense
treatment; (2) LCso: 5.3-28 × 101° conidia m]-1
depending on isolate.
B.bassiana and fed nymphs
(1) Increased mortality (31-51% at 10²-10² conidia ml-],
of A.cajennense
respectively) compared to control (17%) at day 15 after
treatment:; (2) LCso: 2.7 x 10”_
7.6 x 1022 conidia ml1 depending on isolate.
M.anisoptiae and fed
(1) Increased mortality (36-65% at 10²-10² conidia m]-1,
nymphs of A. cajennense
respectively) compared to control (17%) at day 15 after
treatment; (2) LCso: 5.1 x 10°-1.0 × 103 conidia ml-]
depending on isolate.
B. bassiana and unfed adults (1) Increased mortality (47-79% at 10°-10° conidia ml-),
of A.cajennense
respectively) cormpared to control (23%) at day 15 after
treatment; (2) LCso: 1.1-3.3 × 10² conidia ml-]
depending on isolate.
M. anisoptiae and unfed
(1) lncreased mortality (49-76% at 10'-10² conidia ml-],
adults of A. cajennense
respectively) compared to control (23%) at day 15 after
treatment; (2) LCso: 1.4-4.3 × 10² conidia mi1
depending on isolate.
Samish et al.
B. bassiana and unfed
(1) Mortality (6.4 ± 4.411.3 ± 6.9% at 10′ conidia ml-)
(2001)
nymphs of Rhipicephatus
sanguineus
treatment.
B.bassiana and engorged
(1) Mortality (12.5 ± 9.6-17.5 ± 9.6% at 10′ conidia
nymphs of R. sanguineus
m]) not different from control (10.0 ± 2.5%) at day 14
after treatment; (2) emergence of adults (72.5 ± 12.6-
82.5 ± 5.0% at 10′ conidia m]-) not different from
control (75.0 ± 7.1%) at day 25 after treatment; (3) no
conidia ml-).
M.anisopliae var.anisopliae (1) lncreased mortality (47.7 ± 8.7-92.2 ± 15.6% at
and unfed nymphs of R.
10² conidia m]) compared to control (13.4 ± 3.7%) at
sarguine us
day 7 after treatment.
M. anisoptiae var.anisoptiae
(1) lncreased mortality (57.5 ± 17.1-60.0 ± 8.2% at
and engorged nymphs of R.
10′ conidia ml-) compared to control (10.0 ± 2.5%) at
sanguineus
day 14 after treatment; (2) decreased ermergence of adults
(10.0 ± 8.2-2.5 ± 3.0% at 10' conidia ml') compared
to control (75.0 ± 7.1%) at day 25 after treatment; (3)
increased mortality of emerged adults (62.5 ± 27.9-
100% at 10²conidia m]-) compared to control(0%) at
day 30 after treatment; (4) up to 100% mortality of adults
was observed at days 7-10 after emergence.
M.anisoptiae var.anisoptiae (1) 1ncreased mortality of male (22.5 ± 1.2-100%) and
and unfed adults of R.
female ticks (20.0 ± 1.5-100%) at 10? conidia m]-1
sanguineus
 1  (%1  0) [ ol 
treatment.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
79
Table 3 continued
Study
Association between fungus
Results
and ticke
M.anisoptiae var.acridum
(1) Increased mortality (22.5 ± 3.0-47.7 ± 8.7% at 10?
and unfed nymphs of R.
p e (%'  ts1) o oi adu ([u uo
sanguineus
7 after treatment.
M.anisoptiae var.acridum
(1) lncreased mortality (27.5 ± 5.0% at 10²conidia ml-1)
and engorged nymphs of R.
compared to control (10.0 ± 2.5%) at day 14 after
sanguineus
treatment; (2) decreased emergence of adults
(42.5 ± 9.6% at 10' conidia ml') compared to contro]
(75.0 ± 7.1%) at day 25 after treatment; (3) increased
mortality of emerged adults (33.3 ± 20.459.3 ± 9.1%
at 10′ conidia m]-) compared to control (0%) at day 30
after treatment.
M.anisoptiae var.acridum
(1) Increased mortality of male (6.7 ± 1.415.0 ± 1.5%)
and unfed adults of R.
and female ticks (13.3 ± 1.5-15.0 ± 6.5%) at 10”
sanguineus
conidia m]-l compared to control (5.0 ± 1.5%) at day
21 after treatment.
Isaria fumosorosea and unfed
1(1) Mortality (12.8 ± 5.0-16.1 ± 5.2% at
nymphs of R. sanguineus
10′ conidia m]-) not different from contro]
I. fumosorosea and engorged
(1) Mortality (10.0 ± 8.2-15.0 ± 5.8% at
nymphs of R. sanguineus
10′conidia ml-) not different from control
of adults (72.5 ± 15.0-75.0 ± 5.8% at 10” conidia
m]-) not different from control (75.0 ± 7.1%) at day 25
after treatment; (3) no mortality of emerged adults at day
30 after treatment (10' conidia ml-').
Kirkland et al. B. bassiana (aqueous conidial (l) Conidial or blastospores suspensions with highest
(2004)
or blastospores suspension)
concentration (10² cells ml-’) caused significant
and adults of R. sanguineus
rortality, but required at least 14 days of infection; (2)
≈40% of overall mortality occurred within 1421 days
post-infection.
B. bassiana and nymphs of R. (l) Conidial suspension with highest concentration
sanguineus
(10² conidia m]-) resulted in >60% mortality within
14 days, and almost 100% mortality within 21 days post-
infection; (2) nymphs were much more susceptible to
fungal infection and subsequent mortality than adults.
M. anisoptiae and adults of R. (l) Conidial suspension with highest concentration
sanguineus
(10° conidia ml) caused significant mortality (≈20%),
but required at least 14 days of infection; (2) ≈40%
mean mortality was observed 28 days post-infection.
R sanguineus
(10° conidia m]-) resulted in almost 60% mortality
 1      s 5
post-infection; (2) nymphs were much more susceptible
to fungal infection and subsequent mortality than adults.
Prette et al.
B.bassiana and fed nymphs
6(1) Decreased nymphs ecdysis (16.6-0% at 10²-109
(2005)
of R.sanguineus
conidia ml-', respectively, with no significant
differences armong treatments) compared to control
(93.3-100%).
Studies are ordered according to year of publication
 Fungus was applied as an aqueous conidial suspension, unless specifed differently
08
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Table 4 Engorged female ticks treated in vitro with conidial suspensions of entomopathogenic fungi
Study
Association between
Resultsb
fungus and ticke
Bittencourt
Metarhizium
(1) Decreased EP; (2) decreased EH; (3) %C: 38.5-97.4% (104-108
et al. (1992)
anisoptiae and
conidia m]-); (4) LCso: 1.1-2.2 × 10° conidia m]-) depending
Rhipicephatus
on isolate.
(Boophitus)
mcropius
Bittencourt
M.anisoptiae and R.
(1) Increased EIP (26.9-37.0 days at 10*-10² conidia ml-1,
et al.
（B.）microptus
(1994a)
increased EHP (9.8-13.2 days at 10°-10² conidia ml-
respectively) compared to control (6.9-7.0 days); (3) decreased
OP (6.3-1.3 days at 10*-10 conidia ml, respectively)
 ()  ) 
4.7% at 104-10 conidia ml-, respectively) compared to
control (54.9-55.4%).
Bittencourt
Beauveriabassiana
(1) Decreased OP (10.5-10 days at 10′-10² conidia ml--]
et al.
and R. (B.)
respectively, with no significant differences among treatments)
(1997a)
microptus
compared to control (1i.2 days); (2) conidial suspension with
highest concentration (10² conidia ml-) increased ElP
(34.1-18.4% at 10²-10² conidia m]-′, respectively)compared to
control (50.5-53.5%);(4) decreased N1(40.6-22.9% at 10²-10²
conidia ml', respectively) cormpared to control (60.6-64.4%).
Bittencourt
B. bassiana and R.
(1) Decreased EH (39.2-20.2% at 10′-10² conidia m]-],
et al.
(B.) microptus
respectively) compared to control(82.7-88.2%);(2) decreased
(1997b)
RE (19.3-5.9% at 10²-10² conidia m]-,respectively) compared
to control (44.7-45.8%); (3) %C: 4.486.7% (10-10² conidia
ml)x; (4) LCso: 2.2-870 × 10° conidia ml- depending on
isolate.
Frazzon et al.
M.anisoptiae and R.
(1) Several isolates (at 10² conidia ml-) caused 100% mortality at
(2000)
(B.)microptus
day 14 after treatment; (2) isolates, after previous passage in
ticks, induced 100% mortality within 4 and 7 days after
treatrment.
Paiao et al.
B.bassiana and R.
(1) Decreased OP (11.4-6.6 days at 10°-10² conidia ml-),
(2001a)
(B.)microptus
respectively) compared to control (12.7 days); (2) decreased EH
(74.5-68.2% at 10°-10² conidia mi, respectively) compared to
control (78.5%); (3) decreased ER (952.5-436.0 at 10108
conidia ml-, respectively) cormpared to control (1107.1); (4)
conidial suspension with highest concentration (1o² conidia
m]-) decreased EPl (54.2-42.6%) compared to control
(57.6%); 5) PRER: 13.9-64.5% at 10°-10² conidia ml
respectively.
Onofre et al.
M. anisoptiae var.
(1) %C: 3.5-60.0%(104-10² conidia ml-y(2) decreased RE
(2001)
anisoptiae and R.
(18.6-11.0% at 10-10² conidia m]-′, respectively) compared to
(B.)microptus
control (27.6-27.8%); (3) LCso: 1.4-2.3 × 10” conidia ml-1
depending on isolate.
M. anisoptiae var.
(1) %C: 10.6-75.9% (10*-10² conidia ml-); (2) decreased RE
acridum and R. (B.)
(21.3-5.3% at 10-10² conidia ml-′) compared to control
mcroplus
(29.3-42.9%); (3) LCso: 3.4-4.2 × 10? conidia ml-) depending
on isolate.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
81
Table 4 continued
Study
Association between
Resultsb
fungus and ticke
Samish et al.
M. anisoptiae var.
(1) Increased mortality (66.7 ± 11.1-100% at 10? conidia m]-)
(2001)
anisoptiae and
compared to control (16.6 ± 4.7%) at day 14 after treatment; (2)
Rhipicephatus
sanguineus
number of eggs were laid (17.3 ± 30.0-0 mg/female at 10
conidia m]-) compared to control (153.0 ± 24.0 mg/female) at
day 14 after treatment.
M.anisoptiae var.
(1) Mortality (22.2 ± 12.8-22.2 ± 6.5% at 10′ conidia ml-) not
acridum and R
different from control (16.6 ± 4.7%) at day 14 after treatment;
sanguineus
(2) decreased number of eggs were laid (93.3 ± 35.0-
55.0 ± 6.3 mg/female at 10' conidia ml') compared to contro]
(153.0 ± 24.0 mg/female) at day 14 after treatment.
Polar et al.
M. anisoptiae and R.
(1) Conidial suspension with highest concentration (10² conidia
(2005a)
(B.)microptus
ml′) decreased AST (5.2 ± 0.1 days) compared to contro]
6 days after treatment; 3) AST was shortened as concentration
increased from 1.0 x
（10′ conidia ml- (14.9 ± 0.4 days) to
5.0 × 10² conidia m]-1 (9.4 ± 0.3 days).
Simpticiltium
(1) Conidial suspension with highest concentration (10² conidia
lamellicota and R.
ml) decreased AST (11.8 ± 0.4 days) compared to control
(B.)microptus
(19.0 ± 0.5 days).
Isaria farinosa and R. (1) Conidial suspension with highest concentration (108
(B.) microptus
conidia ml-') did not reduce AST (17.3 ± 0.6 days) compared
to control (19.0 ± 0.5 days).
M.anisoptiae and R.
(1) Conidial suspension with highest concentration (10²
sanguineus
conidia ml-) decreased AST (10.3 ± 0.3 days) compared to
(17.9 ± 0.1 and 17.7 ± 0.1 days, respectively); (2) results
suggest that M. anisoptiae (at 1o° conidia mil) was more
pathogenic to R (B.) microptus (AST = 8.8 ± 0.3 days) than to
R. sanguineus (AST = 10.3 ± 0.3 days).
Polar et al.
M.anisoptiae
(1) Aqueous conidial suspension decreased AST (8.4 ± 0.4 days)
(2005b)
(aqueous or oi]-
compared to control (13.4 ± 0.5 days); (2) coconut oi]
based conidial
formulation decreased AST (4.6 ± 0.2 days) compared to
0e uosudsns
control (9.6 ± 0.8 days); (3) liquid paraffin formulation
conidia ml-) and
decreased AST (5.5 ± 0.4 days) compared to contro]
R.(B.) microptus
 gsa + [o o %0 (t) (s 80  81 1)
oil (EAO) formulation decreased AST (11.9 ± 0.5 days)
compared to control (15.2 ± 0.6 days); (5) 10% liquid
paraffin + EAO formulation decreased AST (4.4 ± 0.1 days)
compared to control (15.2 ± 0.8 days); (6) 10% liquid
paraffin + EAO and coconut oil formulations produced lower
AST compared to aqueous conidial suspension; (7) liquid
paraffin formulation did not differ from aqueous formulation; (8)
10% coconut oil + EAO formulation caused highest AST.
Polar et al.
M. anisoptiae and R.
(1) Decreased AST (6.7 ± 0.3 and 7.5 ± 0.3 days) compared to
(2005c)
(B.)microptus
control (9.6 ± 0.1 days) at 28°℃ bioassay temperature; (2)
decreased (7.1 ± 0.4 days) and no significant reduction
(9.1 ± 0.2 days) of AST compared to control (9.5 ± 0.1 days)
at temperature comparable to cattle surface(31-35°C,12 h
cycle).
82
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Table 4 continued
Study
Association between
Resultsb
fungus and ticke
Melo et al.
M. anisoptiae and R.
(1) Conidial suspension with highest concentration
(2006)
(B.) microptus
(10° conidia ml-) decreased OP (2.6 ± 1.4 and
2.7 ± 3.1 days) compared to control (9.2 ± 2.3 and
10.1 ± 2.2 days); (2) decreased EP (0.041-0.013 g at 10′-108
conidia ml-', respectively) compared to control (0.125 and
0.116 g); (3) decreased EH (20.0 ± 8.9% at 10 conidia ml-)
compared to control (72.5 ± 27.6 and 73.3 ± 19.4%); (4)
decreased N1 (26.8 ± 10.6% at 10 conidia ml-) compared to
control (66.7 ± 19.4%); (5) decreased RE (11.0 ± 6.6 and
5.6 ± 3.9% at 10² conidia ml-) compared to control
(52.2 ± 15.5 and 47.98 ± 18.0%).
Reis et al.
B.bassiana or M.
(1) %C: 86.7%(B.bassiana), (2) %C: 80.1%(M.anisoptiae)
(2007)
anisoptiae conidia
(formulated in
emulsifiable
concentrate plus
pol ymerized
cellulose gel) and
R sanguineus
Angelo et al.
Lecaniciltium sp. and
(1) Decreased OP; (2) decreased Nl; (3) decreased EPl; (4)
(2007)
R.（B.）microplus
increased EIP.
Posadas and
B.bassiana and R.
(1) 45-60% reduction of EP at 10² conidia ml-l compared to
Lecuona
(B.) microptus
control; (2) decreased EH (46-69%) at 10² conidia ml-1.
(2007)
Leemon and
M.anisoptiae
        a  ()
Jonsson
(aqueous or oi]-
concentration of aqueous conidial suspension at day 6 after
(2008)
based conidial
treatment; (2) 100% mortality at day 2 after exposure to conidia
suspension) and R.
in an oil-based formulation (10° conidia m]-), while 100%
(B.)microptus
mortality was observed at day 5 after exposure to conidia of the
same isolate in an aqueous suspension with the same
concentration (control presenting 0% mortality).
Studies are ordered according to year of publication
(Egg Production Index) = [weight of egg mass (g)initial weight of engorged female (g)] × 100; ElP (Egg
Incubation Period) = days before hatch; EHP (Egg Hatchability Period) = first to last day of hatch; EH
(Egg Hatchability) = percentage of hatch; AST (Average Survival Time); N1 (Nutrient lndex) = [weight of
egg mass (g)/initial weight of engorged female (g) - residual weight of engorged female (g)] × 100; RE
  x    s ( 
(Reproductive Effciency Index) = [weight of egg mass (g)/initial weight of engorged female (g)] × 100;
ER" (Estimated Reproduction) = [weight of egg mass (g)/initial weight of engorged female
(g)] x EH x 20,000 (20,000 is a constant corresponding to the estimated number of larvae from 1 g of
eggs); PREP (Percent Reduction of Estimated Reproduction) = [ER (Control) - ER (Treated) / ER
(Control)] x 100; %C (Percentage of Control) = RE (Control) - RE (Treated)/RE (Control) × 100
better adapted to the natural conditions (e.g., tolerance to heat, cold activity, UV-radiation)
of their geographical origins, suggesting that these isolates could reach higher efficacy in 
tick population control (Braga et al. 2001; Fernandes et al. 2007, 2008).
The virulence of B. bassiana and M. anisopliae isolates obtained by Costa et al. (2002)
from naturally infected R. (B.) micropius was evaluated by Fernandes et al. (2003, 2004,
2006), and several isolates were highly virulent to R. (B.) microplus eggs and larvae;
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
83
Study
Association between fungus and Resultsb
ticke
Castro et al.
Metarhizium anisoptiae to
(1) Decreased number of females parasitizing cattle:
(1997)
control Rhipicephatus
43.7 and 43.3 engorged females/day (at 10? and 102
(Boophitus) microptus on
conidia m]-′,respectively) compared to control (109
cattle held in pens
engorged females/day); (2) EC: 50.4 and 54.8% at
10′ and 10* conidia ml-, respectively; (3) PREP:
22.2% and 31.8% at 10? and 10° conidia ml-1,
respectively.
Correia et al.
M.anisopliae to contro] R.(B.)
1) no effect was observed on number of engorged
(1998)
microptus on cattle held in
females parasitizing the cattle; 2) fungal growth and
pens
sporulation were observed in 91.7% of engorged
females collected from cattle at day 1 after fungal
collected at days 1 and 3 after application (10? or 10&
 u  o d a d ( 
Bittenc ourt
M. anisoptiae to control R. (B.)
(1) A conidial suspension at 10² conidia m]-’ was used:
et al.
microptus on cattle in the field
no significant PE was observed; (2) engorged females
(1999a)
collected at days 1 and 7 after treatrment decreased
%)1 ( 
and 42.4%), respectively; (3) those collected at day 1
decreased N1 (44.7%) compared to control (75.5%);
(4) those collect at day 7 decreased E1P (23.1 days)
compared to control (26.0 days); (5) reduced weight
of females (0.15 g) compared to control (0.27 g) at
day 14 after treatment.
Bittencourt
Beauveria bassiana formulated
(1) PE above 50% between days 4 and 25 after
et al. (2002)
in a polymerized cellulose gel
treatment; (2) aqueous conidial suspension only or
to control Anocentor nitens on
cellulose polymerized gel only caused PE <20%.
infested horses in the field
Monteiroet al. B. bassiana to control A. nitens
(1) PE: 70.1% (10² conidia m]-)
(2003)
on cattle ears; cattle were held
in pens, ears were protected
with a cloth cover
Bittencourt
M. anisoptiae to control R. (B.)
(1) 1st bioassay: PE(2) was 17.8% (10? conidia ml-)
et al. (2003)
microptus larvae on pasture
and 17.4% (10? conidia m]-) at day 15 after
plants
treatment;(2) 2nd bioassay: PE(2) was 22.5%(10
conidia m]-) and 52.2% (10° conidia m]-) at day
15 after treatment; (3) 3rd bioassay: PE(2) was 37.8%
(10” conidia m]-) and 53.7% (10 conidia m]-) at
day 21 after treatment; (4) total PE(2) was 25.8%
(10′ conidia m]-) and 40.0% (10° conidia ml-)
after 3 bioassays; (5) results suggest that conidia
rmight persist in the pasture increasing efficiency of
treatrments.
Basso et al
M.anisopliae to control R.(B.)
(1) %C varied from 86.9% to 94.08% (10
(2005)
microptus larvae on pasture
conidia ml), from day 35 to 48 post-infestation; (2)
plants infested with engorged
in general, in each collection, fewer larvae survived
females
on Cynodon spp. pastures than on Brachiaria
brizantha pastures; (3) results suggest that efficacy of
control was infuenced by pasture plant type.
 Polar et al.
M. anisoptiae was pre-soaked for (1) A conidial suspension at 10² conidia ml-’ was used:
(2005c)
24 h and weekly sprayed on
after 3 weeks, average tick density was reduced
cattle to control R. (B.)
(8.5 ± 0.6 and 19.1 ± 0.6 ticks/host) (10² conidia
microptus in the field
ml') compared to control (29.6 ± 0.6).
8
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Table 5 continued
Study
Association between fungus and Resultsb
ticke
 Bahiense et al. M. anisoptiae only or combined (1) Mean mortality rate of ticks observed for 28 days
(2007)
with deltamethrin to control a
after treatment was 38.5% (animals sprayed with
pyrethroid strain of R. (B.)
25 ppm deltamethrin solution), 32.5% (animals
microptus on cattle held in
sprayed with conidial suspension only, 10&
pens
conidia m]-'), and 30.9% (animals sprayed with
conidial suspension combined with deltamethrin).
Alonso-Diaz
M.anisoptiae to control R.(B.)
(1) Animals were sprayed with conidial suspension
et al. (2007)
micropius on cattle in the field
every 15 days. More than 45% PE was observed a) at
day 3 and 5 after the 1st fungal application; b) at day
7 and 14 after the 2nd fungal application; (2) PE
1e  
fungal application; b) at day 5, 7 and 14 after the 4th
fungal application.
Studies are ordered according to year of publication
b EP (Egg Production) = weight of egg mass, EIP (Egg Incubation Period) = days before hatch; N1
  (      s    = (x 
engorged female (g)] × 100:; REl (Reproductive Efficiency Index) = [weight of egg mass (g)/initial weight
of engorged female (g)] × 100: ER (Estimated Reproduction) = [weight of egg mass (g)/initial weight of
from 1 g of eggs); PREP (Percent Reduction of Estimated Reproduction) = [ER (Control) - ER (Treated)/
ER (Control)] × 100; EC (Efficacy of Control) = [1 - number of engorged females on treated animals
after fungal application × number of engorged females on control animals 3 days before application of
of engorged females on control animals after application of control solution] x 100; %C (Percentage of
Control) = [1 - number of engorged females on treated animals/number of engorged females on contro]
- average of engorged female number in treated groups/average of engorged female number in contro]
groups] × 100; PE(2) (Percentage of Efficacy) = [average of live larvae collected in control groups
average of live larvae collected in treated groups/average of live larvae collected in control
groups]x100
however, their virulence was not higher to ticks than some other isolates obtained from
different arthropod orders. Therefore,the isolates obtained from R.(B.) microplus are not
necessarily the most virulent isolates to their original host.
Infection mechanism
The dynamics of the infection process of M. anisopliae on R. (B.) micropius (Bittencourt
et al. 1995, 1999b; Dutra et al. 2004; Leemon and Jonsson 2008) and R. sanguineus
(Garcia et al. 2004, 2005) has been described. Also, the infection process of B. bassiana
has been described for R. sanguineus (Kirkland et al. 2004a), and B. bassiana and
B. amorpha on R. (B.) microplus (Campos et al. 2005).
Bittencourt et al. (1995) reported that M. anisopliae was detected and isolated from R.
(B.) micropius hemolymph at day 2 post-inoculation, and at day 3 and 4 post-inoculation
the fungus was detected and isolated from internal organs. No evidence of the fungus in
natural cavities was detected by histological analysis. Four years later, Bittencourt et al.
(1999b) reported the attachment of M. anisopliae (isolate ESALQ 959) conidia to the
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
85
cuticle of R. (B.) micropius engorged females, followed by germination, and enlargement
 of the germ tube to form the appressorium.
Arruda et al. (2005) reported that M. anisopliae invades R. (B.) microplus by a process
which involves adhesion of conidia to the cuticle,conidia germination,formation of
appressoria and penetration through the cuticle. Adhesion of conidia was observed 24 h
post-infection, and gerrmination started on the tick's cuticle. Conidia differentiate to forrm
appressoria and infection pegs exert mechanical pressure, and secrete hydrolytic enzymes
from the cuticle to start the conidiogenesis process 96 h post-inoculation.
The majority of M. anisopliae conidia germinated on R. sanguineus 18 h after inocu-
lation. The fungus then penetrated through the tick cuticle after 48 h. After fungal
penetration, the principal alteration observed was the lyses of intestine and leakage of
intestinal content to hemocoel. Mortality was observed after 96 and 120 h post-infection,
and sporulation was detected after 120-144 h (Garcia et al. 2004),
These studies indicate that M. anisopliae penetration into R. (B.) micropius and R.
sanguineus occurs through the cuticle, as previously described on other arthropod species
(Alves 1998). The penetration process of the fungi through the cuticle involves secretion of
enzymes such as proteases and chitinases, and is assisted by mechanical processes of the
g a d a (hi t r p  d  sse
invades the internal organs, produces mycotoxins, and kills the host (Kaaya et al. 1991).
However, tick species may display differential susceptibility to entomopathogenic fungi
et al. 2004b),
Beauveria bassiana and M. anisopliae secrete toxic metabolites during the infection
process that contribute to the establishment and progression of disease (Roberts 1981;
Alves 1998). Accordingly, an oxalate secreted by B. bassiana is presumed to act syner-
gistically with other factors in promoting pathogenesis to ticks (Kirkland et al. 2005). Also,
 B. bassiana and B. amorpha produce subtilisin-like proteases and chitinases in the presence
of R. (B.) micropius tick cuticle (Campos et al. 2005). M.anisopliae genes encoding
proteins such as a subtilisin-like protease and GAPDH (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase) were detected in the presence of R. (B.) microplus cuticle, suggesting that
these genes may be involved in M. anisopliae pathogenicity. GAPDH is predicted to play a
role in adhesion to tick cuticle in early stages of appressorium development and attachment
(Dutra et al. 2004)
In general, tick mortality is related to the conidial concentration. According to Kaaya
et al. (1996), an increased number of conidia on the ticks' cuticle leads to increased
mortality rate. Possibly, there is ^cooperation' (mass action) between neighboring germi-
nating conidia on the arthropod cuticle (Zhioua et al. 1997).
Formulation
Several entomopathogenic organisms need to be ingested to infect their arthropod host;
however, the penetration of pathogens via oral ingestion is not feasible for arthropods that
are exclusively hematophagous. The fact that entomopathogenic fungi such as B. bassiand
and M. anisopfiae penetrate arthropod cuticles means that conidial suspensions can be
suspension formulation may improve field performance of conidia under adverse envi-
98
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
efficacy than aqueous conidial suspensions (Kaaya and Hassan 2000; Polar et al. 2005b;
Leemon and Jonsson 2008) (see Table 4). Oil formulations have been used with ultra low
volume spray technology, which proved effective probably due to improved promotion of
conidial adhesion to the hydrophobic surfaces (Prior et al. 1988). Other studies have also
demonstrated satisfactory results when conidia are formulated in a polymerized cellulose
gel (Bittencourt et al. 2002; Reis et al. 2007) or polymerized cellulose gel with emulsifi-
able concentrate (Reis et al. 2007).
 Formulation of conidial suspensions also may protect conidia against desiccation and
ultraviolet radiation. As reviewed by Fargues et al. (1996), several UV protectants
increased survival of M. favoviridae conidia exposed to ultraviolet or simulated solar
radiation under laboratory conditions. Inglis et al. (1995) also dermonstrated that the use of
UV-B protectants could increase conidial survival of B. bassiana under laboratory and
feld conditions. Therefore, correct formulation may greatly enhance the effectiveness of
entomopathogenic fungi as biocontrol agents.
Immune systemofticks
As with vertebrates, the immune system of invertebrates recognizes invading foreign
bodies as non-self, responding with cellular (hemocytic) and acellular (humoral) reactions
(Ratcliffe et al. 1985; Ratcliffe and Rowley 1987).
Five classes of hemocytes have been identified in ticks: (1) prohemocytes are believed
to be the essential stem cell from which all of the other types are formed, (2) plasmatocytes
 are believed to serve as phagocytes, exhibiting non-specific responses to corpuscular
substances has been reported, (3) granulocytes type I and type II, which are involved in
phagocytosis, also serve to encapsulate foreign material too large to be phagocitized,
depositing substances on the particle surface which forrm mermbranes and effectively
separate it from the tissue, while (4) spherulocytes and (5) oenocytoids perform roles not
 yet established in the tick circulatory system (reviewed by Sonenshine 1991). However,
spherulocytes and oenocytoids seem to be related to the granular cell complex (Tanada and
Kaya 1993), and possibly store antimicrobial peptides that are secreted following contact
with foreign organisms (Goodman et al. 2005)
A well developed capability for phagocytizing microbes and other foreign organisms
 appears to exist in ticks, similar to many other arthropods (Sonenshine 1991). However, as
has been also described in other arthropods, weak pathogens are encapsulated and destroyed,
host (Tanada and Kaya 1993). A similar phenomenon may occur in ticks infected with a
virulent form of entomopathogenic fungi, such as B. bassiana and M. anisopliae.
The immune factors that occur in the plasma are the basis for humoral immunity.
Humoral factors facilitate self/non-self recognition and activate defense reactions. It is
important to note that no globulins similar to those of vertebrates have been detected in
insects (Tanada and Kaya 1993) or ticks. In ticks, the presence of a hemolymph plasma
lectin, a glycoprotein containing complex oligosaccharides, was described agglutinating
mouse erythrocytes, and was suggested to serve as a recognition molecule (reviewed by
Sonenshine 1991). Besides lectins, defensins, lysozyme and possibly other antimicrobial
peptides are secreted into the hemolymph plasma to cormbat invasion by foreign organisms
(Goodman et al. 2005; see also Kocan et al. 2008 and Hynes et al. 2008, in this issue). More
studies are necessary to understand the role of hemolymph contents in humoral immunity.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
87
Many studies on the tick immune system are limited in identifying and quantifying
hemocytes, or in characterizing antimicrobial peptides (Sonenshine 1991; Carneiro and
Daemon 1996; Pereira et al. 2001; Silva and Bittencourt 2006). The expression of four
forms of defensin was observed in the intestine, fat body and reproductive tract of Orni-
thodorus moubata (Nakajima et al. 2001, 2002). In R. (B.) microplus, peptides that inhibit
hemolymph, ovaries of engorged females and eggs (Fogaga et al. 1999, 2006). It is not
known, however, if expression of these peptides increases after infection.
Greater understanding of the immune responses of ticks to infection by entomopatho-
genic fungi would help elucidate the infection process, and this information might be
useful in choosing appropriate entomopathogenic fungal isolates for biological control of
ticks. Also, knowledge on the effects of formulation products may prove important in
devising superior formulations for field use.
Biocontrol strategies
Based on the results reviewed in this study and the ecological conditions in South America,
the best use of entomopathogenic fungi to control ticks would probably be to apply
formulated conidia directly onto tick-infested animals. Although the spraying of conidial
suspensions on pasture plants has reduced the population of tick larvae (see Table 5), the
concentration of fungal inoculum used to control ticks in the field still remains high in
comparison to those used for agriculture arthropod pests (Maniania et al. 2007). In order to
effectively control the cattle tick, R. (B.) micropfus, the application of bio-products on an
entire pasture would not be economically feasible due to the large areas that free-range
cattle occupy in Brazil and other South American countries. On the other hand, a system
with pheromones and carbon dioxide delivery in the field could possibly attract ticks to a
localized fungus-treated spot in the vegetation; however, further investigation is needed to
improve this system (Maranga et al. 2003; Maniania et al. 2007).
studied, aiming for compatibility and synergism between them. In vitro studies have
et al. 2006); organophosphates and growth inhibitors (ie., methoprene and difubenzuron)
with M. anisopliae (Mohamed et al. 1987); amitraz, organophosphate or pyrethroid with
M. anisopliae (Paiao et al. 200lb); imidacloprid or fipronil with M. anisopliae or B.
bassiana (Moino and Alves 1998); pyrethroid with B. bassiana (Bahiense and Bittencourt
 2004); and several pyrethroids and organophosphates, combined or not, or amitraz with B.
assiana (Wenzel et al. 2004). It is important to note that most of the studies evaluated the
possible negative effects of chemical products on entomopathogenic fungi; however, Paiao
et al. (2001b), Bahiense and Bittencourt (2004) and Bahiense et al. (2006) evaluated the
possible positive effect of the combination on R. (B.) micropius mortality. The results
suggest that the combination of chemical acaricides with entomopathogenic fungi is
ptentially an important tool for integrated management of ticks.
Conclusion
Entomopathogenic fungi are the most promising of the currently available alternatives to
chemical acaricides for tick control; especially since these organisms penetrate directly
88
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
through the tick cuticle, and therefore do not need to be ingested to initiate infection. In
most cases, these fungi are able to infect all developmental stages of ticks, such as eggs,
larvae, nymphs and adults. In addition, fungi might initiate natural epizootic outbreaks
(Alves 1998), and where environmental conditions (e.g., temperature, humidity, solar
oun ue si peands pue Adn on jhung au jo Ae au aedondde ane (uoni
simple assays may detect the most virulent isolates, level of host specificity, and tolerance
to field conditions.
fungi for the control of tick populations in South America, with the exception of A. nitens
control on cattle ears using B. bassiana formulated in a polymerized cellulose gel (Bit-
tencourt et al. 2002). Only a few field trials have been conducted in South America, and in
most cases, a simple aqueous conidial suspension was used. In Brazil, an acaricide needs to
achieve 95% efficacy to be commercialized (Ministerio da Agricultura, Pecuaria e Abas-
tecimento 1997). Therefore, studies on formulation are required to improve conidial
performance under environmental conditions. Furthermore, structured control programs
need to be developed, and include information about the application method, appropriate
season for applications, and periodicity of treatments. These programs may vary with tick
species due to different biological behavior and geographic region. Future field trials
should consider these aspects.
In addition, future studies should consider (1) the association of chemical and biological
products in integrated managerment programs, (2) the impact of biological control agents on 
non-target arthropods, (3) the efficacy of biological control programs in different envi-
ronments and ecosystems, with special consideration of temperature and humidity variation,
and vegetation, (4) safety to animals and humans, (5) the infection process of fungi on ticks,
and the immune response of ticks to the fungal infection, (6) the establishment of companies
with capacity for mass production of conidia and formulation of the final product, (7) the
improvement of the shelf life of the biological product, and (8) the education of consumers.
Tick biological control offers several advantages over currently available chemical
acaricides, including lower costs; and therefore, there are increased efforts in South
America to develop new biological products. Unfortunately, regulations for microbial
pesticides in many South American countries are poorly developed and/or virtually not
enforced, and thus have impeded the development of quality biological control products.
However, while more research is necessary, entomopathogenic fungi have great prormise as
alternatives to current tick control methods, and they could alleviate many of the current
environmental and health concerns that come with the present-day methods
Acknowledgments We are grateful to Dr.Donald W.Roberts and Chad A.Keyser (Utah State University,
UT, USA) for critical review of this manuscript.We also thank National Council for Scientific and
Technological Development (CNPq) of Brazil. V.R.E.P. Bittencourt is CNPq researcher (1B).
References
Alonso-Diaz MA, Garcia L, Galindo-Velasco E et al (2007) Evaluation of Metarhizium anisoptiae
(Hy phomycetes) for the control of Boophitus microptus (Acari: Ixodidae) on naturally infested cattle in
Alves SB (1998) Controle microbiano de insetos.FEALQ, Piracicaba
Angelo IC, Fernandes EKK, Bahiense TC et al (2007) Lecanicillium tecanii—an alternative to control the
Boophitus microptus tick.Annals of the IX Biennial Conference of the Society for Tropical Veterinary
Medicine, Merida, Mexico. 198
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
68
Arruda W,Beck 1L, Schrank A et al (200S) Morphological alterations of Metarhizium anisopliae during
Bahiense TC, Bittencourt VREP (2004) Laboratory evaluation of the compatibility and the synergism
between the entomopathogenic fungus Beauveria bassiana and deltamethrin to resistant strains of
Boophitus microptus. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1026:319-322. doi:10.1196/annals.1307.049
Bahiense TC, Fernandes EKK, Bittencourt VREP (2006) Compatibility of the fungus Metarhizium ani-
soptiae and deltamethrin to control a resistant strain of Boophitus microptus tick. Vet Parasitol
141:319-324. doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2006.05.011
Bahiense TC, Fernandes EKK, Angelo 1C et al (2007) Pen trials for performance evaluation of Metarhiz-
ium anisoptiae and its association with deltamethrin to control a pyrethroid resistant strain of
Boophitus microptus.Annals of the IX Biennial Conference of the Society for Tropical Veterinary
Medicine, Merida, Mexico, p 199
Barbosa JV, Daemon E, Bittencourt VREP et al (1997) Efeitos de dois isolados do fungo Beauveria bas-
siana (Bals.) Vuill. sobre a muda larval e a sobrevivencia de ninfas de Rhipicephatus sanguineus
(Latreille, 1806) (Acari: 1xodidae). Rev Bras Parasito] Vet 6:53-56
Basso LMS, Monteiro AC, Belo MAA et al (2005) Controle de larvas de Boophitus microptus por Metα-
rhizium anisoptiae em pastagens infestadas artificialmente. Pesquisa Agropecu Bras 40:595-600. doi:
10.1590/S0100-204X2005000600010
Bittencourt VREP, Massard CL, Lima AF (1992) Uso do fungo Metarhizium anisoptiae (Metschnikoff,
1879) Sorokin, 1883, no controle do carrapato Boophitus microptus (Canestrini, 1887). Arq Univ Fed
Rur Rio J 15:197-202
Bittencourt VREP, Massard CL, Lima AF (1994a) Acao do fungo Metarhizium anisoptiae sobre a fase nao
parasitaria do ciclo biologico de Boophilus microplus. Rev Univ Rural Ser Cienc Vida 16:49-55
Bittencourt VREP, Massard CL, Lima AF (1994b) Acao do fungo Metarhizium anisoptiae em ovos e larvas
do carrapato Boophitus microptus. Rev Univ Rural Ser Cienc Vida 16:41-47
Bittencourt VREL, Massard CL, Lima AF (1995) Dinamica da infeccao do carrapato Boophitus microptus
pelo fungo Metarhizium anisopliae. Rev Univ Rural Ser Cienc Vida 17:83-88
Bittencourt VREP, Peralva SLFS, Viegas EC et al (1996) Avaliacao dos efeitos do contato de Beauve-
ria bassiana (Bals.) Vuill. com ovos e larvas de Boophitus microptus. Rev Bras Parasitol Vet 5:81-84
Bittencourt VREP, Peralva SLFS,Souza EJ (1997a) Acao de dois isolados do fungo entomopatogenico
Beauveria bassiana sobre algumas caracteristicas biologicas de femeas ingurgitadas de Boophi-
us microptus em laboratorio. Rev Univ Rural Ser Cienc Vida 19:65-71
Bittencourt VREP, Souza EJ, Peralva SLFS et al (1997b) Avaliacao da eficacia in vitro de dois isolados do
fungo entomopatogenico Beauveria bassiana (Bals.) Vuill. em femeas ingurgitadas de Boophi-
us microptus (Canestrini, 1887) (Acari: lxodidae). Rev Bras Parasito] Vet 6:49-52
Bittencourt VREP, Mascarenhas AG, Faccini JLH et al (1999a) Mecanismo de infeccao do fungo Meta-
rhizium anisopliae no carrapato Boophitus microptus em condicoes experimentais. Cienc Rural
29:351-354
Bittencourt VREP, Souza EJ, Peralva SLFS et al (1999b) Eficacia do fungo Metarhizium anisoptiae
(Metschnikoff, 1879) Sorokin, 1883 em teste de campo com bovinos infestados por carrapato
Boophitus microptus (Canestrini, 1887) (Acari: 1xodidae). Rev Bras Med Vet 21:78-82
Bittencourt VREP, Souza EJ, Costa GL et al (2002) Evaluation of a forrmulation of Beauveria bassiana for
control of Anocentor nitens.Abstracts of the IV international conference on ticks and tick-born
pathogens. Banff, Canada, p 88
Bittencourt VREP, Bahiense TC, Fernandes EKK et al (2003) Avaliacao da acao in vivo de Metarhizi-
um anisoptiae (Metschnikoff, 1879) Sorokin, 1883 aplicado sobre Brachiaria decumbens infestada com
larvas de Boophilus microptus (Canestrini, 1887) (Acari: lxodidae). Rev Bras Parasito] Vet 12:38-42
Braga GUL, Flint SD, Miller CD et al (2001) Variability in response to UV-B among species of Meta-
10.1006/jipa.200 1.5048
         
entomopathogens
Verticilium lecani and Aphanocladium atbum. Mycologia 94:912-920. doi:
10.2307/3761859
Camargo LMPCA (1983) Efeito de alguns piretroides sobre o fungo entomopatogenico Metarhizium ani-
soptiae (Metsch.) Sorokin. Biol 49:65-68
Beauveria bassiana: SEM analysis and regulation of subtilisin-like proteases and chitinases. Curr
Microbiol 50:257-261. doi:10.1007/s00284-004-4460-y
06
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Carneiro ME,Daemon E(1996)Caracterizagao dos tiposcelulares presentes nahemolinfa de larvas e ninfas
de Rhipicephatus sanguineus (Latreille) (lxodoidea, lIxodidae) em diferentes estados nutricionais. Rev
Bras Zool 13:609-620
(Bals.) Vuil. on eggs of the tick Anocentor nitens (Neumann, 1897) (Acari: lxodidae). Rev Bras
Parasitol Vet 8:59-62
Castro ABA, Bittencourt VREP, Daemon E (1997) Eficacia do fungo Metarhizium anisoptiae sobre 0
carrapato Boophitus micropius em teste de estabulo. Rev Univ Rural Ser Cienc Vida 19:73-82
Charnley AK, St. Leger RJ (199 1) The role of cuticle—degrading enzyrmes in fungal pathogenesis in insects.
 e e sed n  as  as   ()  o  o 
Press, New York
Conceicao-Silva FM, Abranches P, Silva-Pereira MCD et al (1988) Hepatozoonosis in foxes from Portugal.
J Wildl 24:344-347
Correia ACB, Fiorin AC, Monteiro AC et al (1998) Effects of Metarhizium anisoptiae on the tick
Boophitus microptus (Acari: lxodidae) in stabled cattle. J lnvertebr Pathol 7l:189-191. doi:
10.1006/jipa.1997.47 19
Costa GL, Sarquis Ml, Moraes AML et al (2002) lsolation of Beauveria bassiana and Metarhizium ani-
soptiae var. anisoptiae from Boophitus microptus tick (Canestrini, 1887), in Rio de Janeiro State,
Brazil. Mycopathologia 154:207-209. doi: 10.1023/A: 1016388618842
Dias E, Martins AV (1939) Spotted fever in Brazil. A surmmary. Am J Trop Med 19: 103-108
sequence tags expressed by Metarhizium anisoptiae during the infection process of the tick Boophi-
us microptus. Res Microbiol 155:245-251. doi:10.1016/j.resmic.2003.12.007
   s             
among isolates of entomopathogenic Hyphomycetes. Mycopathologia 135:171-181. doi:10.1007/
BF00632339
Fargues J, Rougier M, Goujet R et al (1997) lnactivation of conidia of Paecilomyces fumosoroseus by near-
ultraviolet (UVB and UVA) and visible radiation. J lnvertebr Pathol 69:70-78. doi:10.1006/jipa.
1996.4637
Fernandes EKK, Costa GL, Souza EJ et al (2003) Beauveria bassiana isolated from engorged females and
tested against eggs and larvae of Boophitus microptus. J Basic Microbiol 43:393-398. doi:
10.1002/jobm.200310263
1xodidae). J Basic Microbiol 44:270-274. doi:10.1002/jobm.2004 10392
Fernandes EKK, Costa GL, Moraes AML et al (2006) Study on morphology, pathogenity, and genetic
variability of Beauveria bassiana isolates obtained from Boophitus microptus fick. Parasitol Res
98:324-332. doi:10.1007/s00436-005-0058-y
Fernandes EKK, Rangel DEN, Moraes AML et al (2007) Variability in tolerance to UV-B radiation among
Fernandes EKK, Rangel DEN, Moraes AML et al (2008) Cold activity of Beauveria and Metarhizium, and
thermotolerance of Beauveria. J 1nvertebr Pathol 98:69-78. doi: 10.1016/j-jip. 2007.10.011
Fogaca AC, Silva Pl Jr, Miranda MT et al (1999) Antimicrobial activity of a bovine hemoglobin fragment in
the Tick Boophitus microptus. 1 Biol Chem 274:25330-25334. doi:10.1074/jbc.274.36.25330
Fogaca AC, Almeida 1C, Eberlin MN et al (2006) lxodidin, a novel antimicrobial peptide from the
hemocytes of the cattle tick Boophitus microptus with inhibitory achivity against serine proteinases.
Peptides 27:667-674. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2005.07.013
Frazzon APG, Junior ISV, Masuda A et al (2000) In vitro assessment of Metarhizium anisoptiae isolates to
control the cattle tick Boophitus microptus. Vet Parasitol 94:117-125. doi:10.1016/S0304-4017
(00)00368-X
Garcia MV, Monteiro AC, Szabo MPl (2004) Colonizacao e lesao em femeas ingurgitadas do carrapato
Garcia MV, Monteiro AC, Szabo MPl et al (2005) Mechanism of infection and colonization of Rhipi-
cephatus sanguineus eggs by Mertarhizium anisopliae as revealed by scanningeletron microscopy and
histopathology. Braz 1 Microbiol 36:368-372. doi: 10.1590/S1517-83822005000400012
Goodman JL,Dennis DT, Sonenshine DE (2005) Tick-borne diseases of humans. ASM Press, Washington
Grisi L, Massard CL, Moya BGE et al (2002) lmpacto economico das principais ectoparasitoses em bovinos
no Brasil. A Hora Vet 21:8-10
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
91
Guerra RMS, Teixeira Filho WL, Costa GL et al (200l) Fungus isolated from Ripicephatus sanguineus
(Acari: lxodidae), Cochtiomya macetlaria (Diptera: Muscidae) and Musca domestica (Diptera: Mus-
cidae), naturally infected on Seropedica, Rio de Janeiro. Cienc Anim 1l:133-136
Hom SC, Arteche CCP (1985) Situacao parasitaria da pecuaria no Brasil. A Hora Vet 4:12-32
Hy nes WL, Stokes MM, Hensley SM et al (2008) Using RNA interference to deterrmine the role of varisin in
45 (this issue)
Inglis GD, Goettel MS, Johnson DL (1995) Infuence of ultraviolet light protectants on persistence of the
Acarol 24:913-926. doi:10.1023/A:1010722914299
with the entomogenous fungi, Beauveria bassiana and Metarhizium anisoptiae. Discov Innov 3:55-60
Kaaya GP, Mwangi EN, Ouna EA (1996) Prospects for biological control of livestock ticks, Rhipicepha-
tus appendicutatus and Ambtyomma variegatum, using the entomogenous fungi Beauveria bassiana
and Metarhizium anisoptiae. J 1nvertebr Pathol 67:15-20. doi:10.1006/jipa.1996.0003
Kirkland BH, Cho EM, Keyhani NO (2004a) Differential susceptibility of Ambtyomuma maculatum and
Ambtyomma americanum (Acari: lxodidea) to the entomopathogenic fungi Beauveria bassiana and
Metarhizium anisoptiae. Biol Control 31:414-421. doi:10.1016/j.biocontrol.2004.07.007
Kirkland BH, Westwood GS, Keyhani NO (2004b) Pathogenicity of entomopathogenic fungi Beauve-
ria bassiana and Metarhizium anisoptiae to lxodidae tick species Dermacentor variabitis,
Rhipicephatus sanguineus, and Ixodes scaputaris. J Med Entomol 41:705-711
Kirkland BH, Eisa A, Keyhani NO (2005) Oxalic acid as a fungal acaracidal virulence factor. J Med
Entomol 42:346-351. doi: 10.1603/0022-2585(2005)042[0346:OAAAFA]2.0.CO;2
Kocan KM, de la Fuente 1, Manzano-Roman R et al (2008) Silencing expression of the defensin, varisin, in
male Dermacentor variabitis by RNA interference results in reduced Anaplasma marginate infections.
Exp Appl Acarol 45 (this issue), doi: 10.1007/s10493-008-9159-5
Leemon DM, Jonsson NN (2008) Laboratory studies on Australian isolates of Metarhizium anisoptiae as a
2007.07.006
Maranga RO, Hassanali A,Kaaya GP, Mueke JM (2003) Performance of a prototype baited-trap in
attracting and infecting the tick Ambtyomma variegatum (Acari: lxodidae) in field experiments. Exp
Appl Acaro] 38:211-218. doi:10.1007/s10493-006-0002-6
Melo DR,Reis RCS, Bittencourt VREP(2006)Patogenicidade in vitro do fungo Metarhizium anisopliae
(Metschnikoff, 1879) Sorokin, 1883, sobre 0 carrapato Boophitus microptus (Canestrini, 1887). Rev
Bras Parasitol 15:157-162
Ministerio da Agricultura Pecuaria e Abastecimento (1997) Regulamento tec nico para licenciarmento e/ou
48:12
Mohared AK, Pratt JP, Nelson FR (1987) Compatibility of Metarhizium anisoptiae var anisopliae with
chemical pesticides. Mycopathologia 99:99-105. doi: 10.1007/BF004369 13
Moino AM Jr, Alves SB (1998) Efeito de imidacloprid e fipronil sobre Beauveria bassiana e Metarhizi-
Monteiro SG,Bittencourt VREP,Daemon E et al (1998) Pathogenicity under laboratory conditions of the
fungi Beauveria bassiana andMetarhizium anisopliae on larvae of the tickRhipicephalus sanguineus
(Acari: lxodidae). Rev Bras Parasito] Vet 7:113-116
Monteiro SG, Bahiense TC, Bittencourt VREP (2003) Acao do fungo Beauveria bassiana (Balsamo) Vu-
illemin, 1912 sobre a fase parasitaria do carrapato Anocentor nitens Neumann, 1897) Schulze, 1937
(Acari: 1xodidae). Cienc Rural 33:559-563
Nakajima Y, Naters-Yasui VDGVA, Taylor D et al (2001) Two isoforms of a member of the arthropod
Biol 31:747-751. doi:10.1016/S0965-1748(01)00066-2
Nakajima Y, Naters-Yasui VDGVA, Taylor D et al (2002) Antibacterial peptide defensin is involved in
midgut immunity of the soft tick, Omithodoros moubata. lnsect Mol Biol 1l:6ll-618. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-2583.2002.00372.x
Onofre SB, Miniuk CM, Barros NM et al (2001) Pathogenicity of four strains of entomopathogenic fungi
against the bovine tick Boophitus microplus.AJVR 62:1478-1480. doi:10.2460/ajvr.2001.62.1478
92
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Paiao JCV, Monteiro AC, Kronka SN (200la) Susceptibility of the cattle tick Boophitus microptus (Acari:
lxodidae) to isolates of the fungus Beauveria bassiana. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 17:245-251.
doi: 10.1023/A: 1016653700599
Paiao JCV, Monteiro AC, Kronka SN (2001b) Desempenho de Metarhizium anisoptiae submetidos a
diferentes doses de carrapaticidas quimicos usados no controle de Boophitus microptus (Acari:
Ixodidae). Anais do Vll simposio de controle biologico. Pocos de Caldas, Brazil, p 160
Pereira LS, Oliveira PL,Barja-Fidalgo C et al (2001) Production of reactive oxygen species by hemoc ytes
Pfeifer Bl, Bose R, Peymann B et al (1995) Epidemiological aspects of equine babesiosis in a herd of horses
in Brazil. Vet Parasitol 58:1-8. doi: 10.1016/0304-4017(94)00704-G
Polar P, Kairo MTK, Moore D et al (2005a) Comparison of water, oils and emulsifiable adjuvant oils as
forrmulating agents for Metarhizium anisoptiae for use in control of Boophitus microplus. Myco-
pathologia 160:151-157. doi: 10.1007/s 11046-005-0120-4
acaricide for cattle tick control.Vector-borne Zoonotic Dis 5:276-284. doi:10.1089/vbz.2005.5.276
Polar P, Muro MA, Kairo MTK (2005c) Thermal characteristics of Metarhizium anisoptiae isolates
irmportant for the development of biological pesticides for the control of cattle ticks. Vet Parasitol
134:159-167. doi: 10.1016/j vetpar.2005.07.010
Posadas JB, Lecuona RE (2007) Efectividad de cepas de Beauveria bassiana (Balsarmo) Vuillemin, para e]
control microbiano de la garrapata Rhipicephatus (Boophitus) microptus (Rurrel and Barrer) (Acari:
Ixodidae). Anais do X Simposio de Controle Biologico, Brasilia, Brazil
Posadas JB, Crespo DC, Lecuona RE (2005) Aislamento de cepas de Beauveria bassiana (Balsamo) Vu-
illemin, 1912 a partir de hembras de Boophitus microptus (Canestrini,1887) (Acari: lxodidae)y
Argentino de Entomologia, San Miguel de Tucuman, Argentina
Prette N,Monteiro AC, Garcia AC et al (2005) Patogenicidade de isolados de Beauveria bassiana para
ovos, larvas e ninfas ingurgitadas de Rhipicephatus sanguineus. Cienc Rural 35:855-861
Prior C, Jollands P, Le Patoure] G et al (1988) lnfectivity of oil and water formulation of Beauveria bas-
Curculionidae). J lnvertebr Pathol 52:66-72. doi:10.1016/0022-2011(88)90103-6
Metarhizium anisoptiae conidia produced on insects and ari ficial substrates. 1 lnvertebr Pathol 87:77-83
Rangel DEN, Braga GUL, Anderson AN et al (2005) Variability in conidial thermotolerance of Meta-
rhizium anisoptiae isolates from different geographic origins. J lnvertebr Pathol 88:116-125. doi:
10.1016/j jip. 2004.11.007
Ratcliffe NA, Rowley AF (1987) lnsect responses to parasites and other pathogens. In: Soulsby EJL (ed)
protozoa, arthropods and invertebrates. C.R.C. Press, Florida
Ratcliffe NA,Rowley AF, Fitzgerald SW et al (1985) lnvertebrate inmmunity,basic concepts and recent
advances. 1nt Rev Cytol 97:183-349. doi:10.1016/S0074-7696(08)62351-7
Reis RCS, Melo DR, Souza EJ et al (200l) Acao in vitro dos fungos Beauveria bassiana Bals.) Vuill. e
Metarhizium anisoptiae (Metsch.) Sorok. sobre ninfas e adultos de Ambtyomma cajennense (Fabricius,
1787) (Acari: lxodidae). Arq Bras Med Vet Zootec 53:544-547
Reis RCS, Fernandes EKK, Bittencourt VREP (2007) Effect of fungal formulations on viability of engorged
females of Rhipicephatus sanguineus.Annals of the IX Biennial conference of the society for tropica]
veterinary medicine. Merida, Mexico, p 197
Roberts DW (198 1) Toxins of the entomopathogenic fungi. In: Burges HD (ed) Microbial control of pests
and plant disease. Acadermic, New York
Samish M,Rehacek J(1999) Pathogens and predators of ticks and their potential in biological control.Annu
Rev Entomol 44: 159-182. doi: 10.1146/annurev.ento.44. 1.159
Samish M, Gindin G,Alekseev E et al (200l) Pathogenicity of entomopathogenic fungi to different
developmental stages of Rhipicephalus sanguineus (Acari: lxodidae). J Parasitol 87:1355-1359
Samish M, Ginsberg H, Glazer 1 (2004) Biological control of ticks. Parasitology 129:389-403. doi:
10.1017/S0031182004005219
Silva SB, Bittencourt VREP (2006) Avaliacao da resposta celular de femeas ingurgitadas de Boophi-
tus microptus (Canestrini，1887) inoculadas com Metarhizium anisoptiae，Beauveria bassiana,
Peniciltium corylophitum ou Fusarium oxysporum. Rev Bras Parasitol Vet 15:151-156
Sonenshine DE (1991) Biology of ticks. Oxford University Press, New York
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
93
Souza EJ, Reis RCS, Bittencourt VREP (1999) Evaluation ofin vitro effect of the fungi Beauveria bassiana
and Metarhizium anisoptiae on eggs and larvae of Amblyomma cajennense.Rev Bras Parasitol Vet
8: 127-131
Tanada Y, Kaya HK (1993) Insect pathology. Academic Press Inc., San Diego
ticks of the world. Cambridge University, Cambridge
Wenzel IM, Barci LAG, Almeida JEM et al (2004) Compatibilidade do fungo Beauveria bassiana com
carrapaticidas quimicos utilizados no controle de Boophitus microptus (Acari: lxodidae). Arq Inst Bio]
(Sao Paulo) 71:643-645
Zhioua E, Browning M, Johnson PW et al (1997) Pathogenicity of the entormopathogenic fungus Meta-
rhizium anisoptiae (Deuteromycetes) to Ixodes scapularis (Acari: 1xodidae). J Parasitol 83:815-818.
doi: 10.2307/3284273
Pathogenicity and thermotolerance of entomopathogenic
fungi for the control of the scab mite, Psoroptes ovis
M Lekimme·C.Focant·F.Farnir·B.Mignon·B.Losson
Abstract Psoroptes ovis is responsible for a highly contagious skin condition, both in
sheep and cattle. This parasite has a marked economical impact in the sheep and cattle
industry. Biological control is considered as a realistic altermative to chemotherapeutic
control. Laboratory experiments were carried out to evaluate the pathogenicity and the
thermotolerance of twelve isolates of entomopathogenic fungi from four genera (Beauveria
Vuillemin, Metarhizium Sorokin, Paecifomyces Bainier and Verticilfium Nees).The
pathogenicity was evaluated by the survival of P. ovis females after exposure to 10° to 108
conidia ml-l in humidity chambers. Results revealed intra- and interspecies differences.
All isolates with the exception of B. bassiana IHEM3558 and V. lecanii MUCL8672
induced 50% mortality within 2 days at the highest concentration. At this concentration the
entire mite population became infected with all isolates but B.bassiana IHEM3558;
however, only four isolates gave rise to 100% infected cadavers at the lowest concentra-
tion. The thermotolerance of each isolate was evaluated by measuring its growth on an
artificial medium kept between 25 and 37.5°C. All isolates were able to grow up to 30°℃
but only two, M. anisopliae IHEM18027 and Paecilomyces farinosus MUCL18885, tol-
erated temperatures up to 35°C. These two isolates could be considered as good candidates
for further use as biopesticide taking into account their virulence and thermotolerance.
Other critical factors linked with the implementation of this type of biocontrol in P. ovis
infected animals are discussed.
Keywords  Psoroptes ovis · Biological control · Entomopathogenic fungi ·
Temperature · Virulence
M. Lekimme () ·C. Focant · B. Mignon · B. Losson
Laboratory of Parasitology and Pathology of Parasitic Diseases B43, Department of lnfectious and
Parasitic Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liege, Boulevard de Colonster 20,
4000 Liege, Belgium
e-mail: mireille.lekimme @ulg.ac.be
F. Farnir
Department of Functional Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liege, Boulevard
de Colonster 20, 4000 Liege, Belgium
96
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Introduction
Psoroptes ovis (Hering) is an ectoparasitic mite responsible for a severe debilitating der-
matitis in cattle, sheep, goats and rabbits. Until now, control of psoroptic scab is based on
the use of chemical acaricides. Nevertheless treatment failures and environmental consid-
erations have led to the development of altermative approaches, particularly the use of
entomopathogenic fungi (Smith et al. 2000; Brooks and Wall 2001, 2005; Brooks et al.
2004; Lekimme et al. 2006a; Abolins et al. 2007). Because infection by entomopathogenic
fungi such as Beauveria and Metarhizium species results from direct penetration of the
tegument without any requirement for ingestion, these organisms often display wide host
ranges. There is a growing literature dealing with their virulence and use in insects, ticks and
other members of the class Arachnida (Kaaya and Munyinyi 1995; Chandler et al. 2000;
Samish 2000; Scholte et al. 2004; Polar et al. 2008, this issue). Additionally inter- and
intraspecific differences in the pathogenicity were observed in different arthropod species
(Ferron and Diomande 1969; Daoust and Roberts 1982; Barson et al. 1994; Frazzon et al.
2000; Kaaya and Hassan 2000; Onofre et al. 2001;Samish et al. 2001; Darwish and Zayed
2002; Gindin et al. 2002; Liu et al. 2002; Scholte et al. 2004; Shi and Feng 2004)
Recently interesting results were obtained in Psoroptes mites using B. bassiana and M.
anisopliae in in vitro bioassays (Smith et al. 2000; Brooks and Wall 2001; Lekimme et al.
2006a). To abate the development of psoroptic mange, 50% of the mite population must be
    d          
infected mites reached. These two factors were unfortunately not achieved with the isolates
evaluated by these authors at a concentration of 10? conidia ml-l. It seemed thus inter-
esting to test various isolates belonging to different genera and species in order to identify a
highly virulent one. Moreover the high temperature prevailing at the skin surface of the
hosts could limit the use of these fungi for the control of P. ovis. Indeed the temperature at
       s      sa   
(Brooks et al. 2004; Polar et al. 2005). Beauveria bassiana and M. anisopliae are known to
have their optimum of growth at 25 and 30°C, respectively (Hallsworth and Magan 1999).
However, differences can be observed between isolates with respect to thermotolerance.
This could be related with their geographical origin (Fargues et al. 1997; Vidal et al. 1997;
Davidson et al. 2003; Devi et al. 2005; Rangel et al. 2005; Quesada-Moraga et al. 2006).
The aim of the present study was thus to investigate in twelve entomopathogenic fungal
isolates the in vitro pathogenicity against P. ovis and the thermotolerance. These isolates
belonged to four genera and originated from temperate and tropical areas.
Materials and methods
Mites
Psoroptes mites were isolated from the ears of chronically infested rabbits maintained at
the laboratory of the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Liege, Belgium. Adult females were
collected from freshly removed scabs (maximum 1 h) and directly transferred into conidial
or control suspensions.
Fungi
Twelve strains of five entomopathogenic fungal species belonging to four genera were
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
97
Neopeptone 10 g, Yeast Extract 10 g 1-l in deionised water) or Potato Dextrose Agar
(PDA; Difco) for 2 weeks at 27°C. Isolates were provided by the IHEM (Institut d'Hygiene
et d'Epidémiologie-Mycologie, Brussels, Belgium) or the MUCL (Mycotheque de l'Uni-
versite de Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium) collections. Isolates from temperate regions were
Beauveria bassianaIHEM18747(SDAY)andIHEM3558(SDAY),Metarhiziumanisop-
liae IHEM1552 (SDAY) and IHEM1639 (SDAY),Metarhizium brunneum MUCL9645
(PDA), Paecilomyces farinosus MUCL18885 (PDA), and Verticillium lecanii MUCL8672
(PDA). Isolates from tropical origin were B. bassiana MUCL104 (SDAY), MUCL38502
(SDAY), and MUCL39817 (SDAY), M. anisopliae IHEM18027 (SDAY), and Paecilo-
Conidia were collected by scraping the colony with a loop in sterile 0.03% PBS-Tween-
20 solution (PBST). The conidial suspension was pipetted from the plate and the con
centration was evaluated using a haemocytometer. Dilutions ranging from 1o? to 106
conidia ml-I were obtained in the same buffer.
Pathogenicity evaluation
Twenty P. ovis adult females were immersed for 5 min in the various concentrations of
conidial suspensions or in PBST alone (controls) and then transferred into handling
chambers. These chambers consisted of 3.5 cm Petri dishes filled with 1% agarose
(Lekimme et al. 2006b). The handling chambers were sealed with parafilm and placed at
27°C in an incubator exposed to the artificial illumination of the lab during working
periods. Mites were examined daily and dead mites (absence of motility) were transferred,
after washing in 0.2% sodium hypochlorite and distilled water for 30 s, into a 96-well plate
filled with 1% agarose. This plate was left at 27°C and checked every day for the apparition
of fungal hyphae on the mite body. Four bioassays were carried out with each isolate and
LTso (time to 5o% mortality) and the number of infected mites were calculated
Entomopathogenic activity of the fungi was confirmed by examining histological sections
of infected cadavers. Classical protocol for formalin fixation and paraffin embedding was
used and 5 μm sections were stained with Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS; Sigma-Aldrich).
Temperature profiles
Ten microlitres of the 10° conidia ml  suspension were inoculated onto the centre of an
SDAY or PDA plate. Plates were incubated in quadruplicates at temperatures of 25, 27.5,
30, 32.5, 35 and 37.5°C. Ten days after inoculation, the diameter of each colony was
measured (cm). Five measurements were made for each plate and the average was cal-
culated. This assay was repeated four times at all temperatures for all strains.
Statistical analysis
Data were submitted to a two way analysis of variance (SAS software, version 6.12, Cary,
NC, USA). For the pathogenicity evaluation, the LTso (dependent variable) was compared
between the 12 fungal strains and the three concentrations (independent variables); for the
temperature profiles, the colony diameter was the dependent variable while the fungi and
the termperatures were the independent ones. Normality was evaluated using the Shapiro-
Wilk test. Although the data were not distributed normally (with or without transforma
tion), the effects observed were so highly significant (P < 0.0oo1) that normality
86
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
departures should not affect the conclusions. Post-hoc multiple range tests consisted in pre-
planned contrasts.
Results
Evaluation of the pathogenicity
The susceptibility of P. ovis varied significantly according to the isolate tested
(P < 0.oo0l) (Fig. 1). For all isolates a dose responsive effect could be observed
(P < 0.0001). Only four isolates were able to infect 100% of the mites at all concentra-
tions: M. anisopliae IHEM18027, M. brunneum MUCL9645, P. farinosus MUCL18885,
and V. lecanii MUCL8672. Four isolates were able to infect 100% of the mites at 10° and
107 conidia ml-l: B. bassiana IHEM18747 and MUCL38502, and M. anisopliae
IHEM1552 and IHEM1639. Three isolates infected 100% of the mites only at the highest
concentration: B. bassiana MUCL104 and MUCL39817, and P. fumosoroseus
MUCL15122. Finally, B. bassiana IHEM3558 failed to infect all the mites at all con-
centrations (80-85% infected mites).
Verticillium lecanii MUCL8672 and B. bassiana IHEM3558 killed 50% of the mite
ppulation more slowly than the other isolates (P < 0.001 and P < 0.002, respectively)
while the former led to 100% of infection. In contrast, M. anisopliae IHEM18027 was
significantly more effective than the other isolates (P < 0.oo01).
 Histological sections confirmed the presence of fungal hyphae inside the body of the
infected mites.
ep
controls
10° conidia ml-
1
10? conidia ml-
10° conidia ml-
8.6.
8.b.
8.0.
0'8
8.6.
M.a.
M.a.
M.br.
M.a.
P.f.
P.fm.
V.1.
355818747104
3850239817
1552
1639 9645 18027 18885 15122
8672
Fungal isolate
Fig. 1 Mean time to get 50% mortality (LTso) (±SE) of adult females Psoroptes ovis after exposure to 10,
10” or 10 conidia m]of twelve isolates of entomopathogenic fungi
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
66
Evaluation of the temperature profiles
The growth of the various isolates was significantly affected by temperature (P < 0.oo01)
(Fig. 2) and there was a significant difference in colony size between the twelve isolates
(P < 0.0001). The growth was higher at 25, 27.5 and 30°C. The interaction between
isolates and temperature was also significant with a nearly perfect suitability with the
model (r² = 0.99).
Temperate and tropical strains of B. bassiana and M. anisopliae were compared
(Fig. 2a, b). The analysis of the results showed that the temperature profiles of temperate
        
in M. anisopliae (M. brunneum was considered a synonym of M. anisopliae, following
Tulloch (1976)) the difference between temperate and tropical strains was significant
(P < 0.0001) and only the tropical strain M. anisopliae IHEM18027 grew at 35°℃
(Fig. 2b). For the other isolates, no comparison could be made but it is noteworthy that also
the temperate isolate P. farinosus MUCL18885 was able to grow at 35°C (Fig. 2c).
Discussion
The use of entomopathogenic fungi for the control of psoroptic mange was first evaluated
by Smith et al. (2000). The major advantage of the fungal pathogens is that they infect their
hosts directly through the tegument. Psoroptes ovis is almost completely unsclerotised
which facilitates the penetration of the hyphae. Until now, only two species of entomo-
pathogenic fungi have shown lethal activity against this mite, i.e. M. anisopfiae (Smith
et al. 2000) and B. bassiana (Lekimme et al. 2006a). Two parameters are important for the
control of psoroptic mange with fungi. The first one is the rate of killing the target (50% of
dead mites every 2 days, according to Wall et al. 1999). This study demonstrated that
several other species of entomopathogenic fungi have a lethal activity against Psoroptes
mites. All the isolates but two (V. lecani MUCL8672 and B. bassiana IHEM3558) gave
high rates of killing, considered able to impede the development of mite populations.
Among the fungi tested, M. anisopfiae IHEM18027 seems particularly interesting with an
LTso of 0.7 days at 10? conidia ml-^ and a rate of infection of 100%. Additionally a 100%
 infection rate was also recorded at a concentration of 10° conidia ml-′. The proportion of
infected mites is also a crucial factor. Indeed, Brooks and Wall (2001, 2005) and Lekimme
et al. (2006a) have shown that the infection can be transferred from infected cadavers or
surfaces to healthy mites. This aspect is important to ensure a lasting effect to the product.
 In P. ovis-infested cattle the parasite burden is usually very high and the mites have
 numerous contacts with each other. Therefore the entomopathogenic fungi could spread
very easily on the host and in the herd. Indeed movements of the infected arthropods are
the most efficient way of dispersion for the entomopathogenic fungi such as M. anisopliae
and B. bassiana (Meyling and Eilenberg 2007). This way of infection has an additional
advantage as it allows the use of a lower concentration of conidia and, consequently, easier
and cheaper mass production.
The infection process was not really submitted to a defined photoperiod; nevertheless
the dishes received the artificial light of the lab during the working periods. Some authors
showed indeed that virulence, germination or conidial production on cadavers could be
affected or not, depending on the fungal species by the applied photoperiod (Tang and Hou
 2001; Hiroki et al. 2005). In the present study the gerrmination of the fungi tested did not
show any alteration when incubated in the dark. Standard bioassays investigating the
100
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
4
25°℃
27.5°℃
30°C
32.5°C
Colony diameter (cm)
35°C
37.5°℃
B.b
8
8
IHEM3558 IHEM18747MUCL104MUCL38502
MUCL39817
B. bassiana strains
B
25°℃
27.5°℃
0.00
ony diameter(cm)
32.5°℃
0.58
37.5°℃
V.a.
V.a.
M.br.
M.a.
IHEM1552
IHEM1639
MUCL9645
IHEM18027
M. anisopliae strains
25°℃
27.5°℃
30°℃
32.5°℃
Colony diameter (cm)
35°℃
37.5°℃
MUCL18885
Pf
P.f.
MUCL8672
7A
MUCL15122
Other fungal strains 
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
101
Fig. 2 Mean colony diameters (cm) (±SE) 10 days after inoculation of Beauveria bassiana (a),
Metarhizium anisoptiae (b) and other species (c) maintained at 25, 27.5, 30, 32.5, 35 and 37.5°℃
(n = 4). No strains were able to grow at 37.5°C
pathogenicity of entomopathogenic fungi on P. ovis are usually performed at 25-27°C, the
optimum temperature for both the mites and the fungi in vitro. However, isolates with an
where the temperature is higher (30-35°C) as shown by Polar et al. (2005). Consequently
theisolates were tested for their growth on artificial medium at temperaturesranging from
25 to 37.5°C. It appeared that all strains were capable of growth up to 30°C and all but one
(B. bassiana IHEM18747) up to 32.5°C.However optimum growth was recorded between
25 and 30°C. These results are in agreement with other studies (Hallsworth and Magan
1999; Davidson et al. 2003; Iskandarov et al. 2006; Quesada-Moraga et al. 2006). Only two
isolates, M. anisopliae IHEM18027 and P. farinosus MUCL18885, tolerated a temperature
of 35°C, and none were able to grow at 37.5°C. A comparison between tropical and
temperate strains of B. bassiana failed to show a significant difference in the aptitude to
grow at high temperatures. These results are similar to those obtained by Fargues et al.
(1997) where an association between thermotolerance and geographic origin was not
found. For M. anisopliae, a marked difference was found, in contradiction with the
observations of Rangel et al. (2005). However it is noteworthy that only one tropical strain
was included in the present study. These differences could be explained by the hosts from
which the fungi originated. In fact, isolates originating from acridids were generally more
heat tolerant because the temperatures can reach 47.4°C in this family of insects (Rangel
et al. 2005).However several of the isolates used in this study were isolated from the soil
and it is not possible to draw any conclusion.
In addition, the skin temperature on cattle fuctuates during the day (Polar et al. 2005).
Fortunately, these authors demonstrated that isolates which are more thermotolerant are
more likely to exhibit high level of pathogenicity under conditions reflecting the thermal
characteristics of the cattle coat. Brooks et al. (2004) also observed that thermotolerant
M. anisopliae isolates gave greater proportion of infection in P. ovis when compared to
isolates with a lower optimal temperature. Thus the next step should consist of an in vivo
bioassay to verify that the isolates able to grow in vitro at temperatures ranging from 30 to
35°C are able to germinate, infect the mites and sporulate on the body surface of cattle in
presence of diurnal temperature fuctuations. A recent study performed on sheep showed
that three isolates of M. anisopfiae and one specific isolate of B. bassiana can infect P. ovis
in vivo (Abolins et al. 2007) while the temperature prevailing at the sheep skin surface
usually ranged between 31 and 37°C (Brooks et al. 2004). In their study, Abolins et al.
(2007) have also demonstrated the absence of fungal inhibitors in the feece of the sheep. A
saprophytic microflora can in fact be present on the tegument of the arthropods or on the
hair of the host and stimulate or suppress the germination of the conidia in vivo (Schabel
1978; Fargues 1981; Polar et al. 2008).
Other abiotic important parameters include relative humidity and UV radiations (Luz
and Fargues 1997; Magalhaes and Boucias 2004; Polar et al. 2005; Rangel et al. 2005;
 Iskandarov et al. 2006; Fernandes et al. 2007). High relative humidity is generally con-
sidered to be necessary for conidial germination but contradictory data can be found
concerning this parameter (Lord 2005). In the case of cattle psoroptic mange, the relative
humidity at the skin surface is high.Furtherrmore,it is likely that the conidia formulation
would play a crucial role in the infection process by maintaining a high humidity level
102
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
(hydrophilic excipient) or decreasing the dependency on moisture (oil formulations)
(Brooks et al. 2004). The susceptibility of the conidia to UV radiations should not be a
 problem in P. ovis infected cattle. In fact, cattle mange is a disease occurring mainly during
the winter, when the animals are maintained indoors and not exposed to UV radiations. In
the case the conidia would still be present when the cows are turned out, the solar radi-
ations could inactivate them which could prelude the dissemination of the fungus to non-
target organisms.
From the present study, two isolates could be considered as potential control agents for
psoroptic mange: M. anisopliae IHEM18027 and P. farinosus MUCL18885. Because of
the availability of mass production procedures for the former (no commercial biopesticide
based on the use of P. farinosus exists to the authors’ knowledge; see also Kabaluk and
Gazdik 2004) and the better activity/thermotolerance observed in vitro, M. anisopliae
IHEM18027 will be used in the near future.
AcknowledgementsThis study was supported by the convention S-6145 from the Ministere de la Sante,
Belgium. We would like also to thank Dr. F. Symoens (lHEM) for providing isolates and Dr. V. Demoulin
(ULg) for his useful advice.
References
Abolins S, Thind B, Jackson V, Luke B, Moore D, Wall R et al (2007) Control of the sheep scab mite
Psoroptes ovis in vivo and in vitro using fungal pathogens. Vet Parasitol 148:310-317. doi:
10.1016/j .vetpar.2007.06.008
Barson G, Renn N, Bywater AF (1994) Laboratory evaluation of six species of entormopathogenic fungi for
the control of the house Hy (Musca domestica L.), a pest of intensive animal units. J lnvertebr Pathol
64: 107-113
Acarol 25:869-880. doi: 10.1023/A: 1020428514608
Brooks A, Wall R (2005) Horizontal transmission of fungal infection by Metarhizium anisoptiae in parasitic
Psoroptes mmites (Acari: Psoroptidae). Biol Control 34:58-65. doi: 10.1016/j.biocontrol.2005.03.016
Brooks AJ, Aquino de Muro M, Burree E, Moore D, Taylor MA, Wall R (2004) Growth and pathogenicity
of isolates of the fungus Metarhizium anisoptiae against the parasitic mite, Psoroptes ovis: effects of
temperature and formulation. Pest Manag Sci 60: 1043-1049. doi: 10.1002/ps.910
                
Biocontrol Sci Technol 10:357-384. doi:10.1080/09583150050114972
Daoust RA, Roberts DW (1982) Virulence of natural and insect-passaged strains of Metarhizium anisopliae
to mosquito larvae. J 1nvertebr Pathol 40: 107-117. doi:10.10 16/0022-2011(82)90042-8
Darwish E, Zayed A (2002) Pathogenicity of two entomopathogenic hyphomycetes, Beauveria bassiana and
Metarhizium anisoptiae, to the housefy Musca domestica L. J Egypt Soc Parasitol 32:785-796
Davidson G, Phelps K, Sunderland KD, Pell JK, Ball BV, Shaw KE et al (2003) Study of temperature-
growth interactions of entomopathogenic fungi with potential for control of Varroa destructor (Acari:
Mesostigmata) using a nonlinear model of poikilotherm developrment. J Appl Microbiol 94:8 16-825.
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2672.2003.0187 1.x
Devi KU, Sridevi V, Mohan CM, Padmavathi J (2005) Effect of high termperature and water stress on in
Vuillemin. J 1nvertebr Pathol 88: 181-189. doi:10.1016/j-jip.2005.02.001
Fargues J (198 1) Specificite des Hyphormycetes entomopathogenes et resistance interspecifique des larves
d'insectes. PhD Thesis, Universite de Paris 6, 2 vols
Beauveria bassiana isolates from different origins. Mycologia 89:389-392. doi:10.2307/3761032
Fernandes EKK, Rangel DEN, Moraes AML, Bittencourt VREP, Roberts DW (2007) Variability in toler-
ance to UV-B radiation among Beauveria spp. lsolates. J lnvertebr Pathol 96:237-243. doi:
10.1016/j-jip. 2007.05.007
Sorokin (fungi imperfecti) en fonction de l'origine des souches de ce champignon. CR Acad Sci Ser D
268:331-332
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
103
Frazzon AP, Da Silva Vaz Junior 1, Masuda A, Schrank A, Vainstein MH (200o) ln vitro assessment of
Metarhizium anisoptiae isolates to control the catfle tick Boophitus microptus. Vet Parasitol 94: 117
125. d0i:10.1016/S0304-4017(00)00368-X
stages of ticks to entomopathogenic fungi. Exp Appl Acarol 28:283-288. doi:10.1023/A:
1025379307255
Beauveria bassiana,Metarhizium anisoptiae,and Paecilomyces farinosus.JInvertebrPathol74:261-
266. doi: 10.1006/jipa.1999.4883
Hiroki S,Mitsuaki S, Noritoshi M (200s) Germination activities of two entomopathogenic fungi, Paeci-
tomyces cateniannulatus and P fumosoroseus. Kyushu J For Res 58:75-77
Iskandarov US, Guzalova AG, Davranov KD (2006) Effects of nutrient medium composition and tem-
perature on the germination of conidia and the entomopathogenic activity of the fungi. Prik] Biokhim
Mikrobiol 42:81-85
Kaaya GP, Munyinyi DM (1995) Biocontrol potential of the entomogenous fungi Beauveria bassiana and
Metarhizium anisoptiae for Tsetse Hies (Clossina spp.) at developmental sites. J lnvertebr Pathol
66:237-241. doi: 10. 1006/jipa. 1995.1095
Acarol 24:913-926. doi: 10.1023/A: 1010722914299
Kabaluk T, Gazdik K (2004) Directory of microbial pesticides for agricultural crops in OECD Countries
2004. http://www.agr.gc.ca/env/pdf/cat_e.pdf, lnternet 05 November 2007
Lekimme M, Mignon B, Tombeux S, Focant C, Marechal F, Losson B (2006a) ln vitro entomopathogenic
activity of Beauveria bassiana against Psoroptes spp. (Acari: Psoroptidae). Vet Parasitol 139: 196-202.
doi: 10. 1016/j vetpar.2006.02.041
Lekimme M, Mignon B, Leclipteux T, Tombeux S, Marechal F, Losson B (2006b) ln vitro tests for
evaluation of the hatchability of the eggs of Psoroptes mites following exposure to acaricidal com-
pounds. Med Vet Entomol 20:1-4. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2915.2006.00597.x
Liu H,Skinner M,Parker BL,Brownbridge M(2002)Pathogenicity of Beauveria bassiana and Metarhizium
anisopliae (Deuteromycotina: Hyphomycetes),and other entomopathogenic fungi against Lygus
lineotaris (Hemiptera: Miridae). J Econ Entomol 95:675-681
bassiana (Hyphomycetes: Moniliales) for the lesser grain borer,Rhyzopertha dominica (Coleoptera:
Bruchidae). Bio] Control 34:180-186. doi: 10.1016/j.biocontrol.2005.05.004
Luz C, Fargues J (1997) Temperature and moisture requirements for conidial germination of an isolate of the
hyphomycete Beauveria bassiana (Bals.) Vuill., pathogenic to Rhodnius protixus (Stahl) (Herm.,
Reduviidae). Mycopathologia 138: 117-125. doi:10.1023/A:1006803812504
Magalhaes BP, Boucias DG (2004) Effects of drying on the survival of conidiophores of Metarhizium
anisoptiae var acridum Driver & Milner. J Orthoptera Res 13:155-159. doi:10.1665/1082-6467
(2004)013[0155:EOD0TS]2.0.CO;2
Meyling NV, Eilenberg J (2007) Ecology of the entomopathogenic fungi Beauveria bassiana and Meta-
rhizium anisoptiae in temperate agroecosystems: potential for conservation biological control. Biol
Control 43:145-155. doi:10.1016/j.biocontrol.2007.07.007
Onofre SB, Miniuk CM,De Barros NM,Azevedo JL (2001) Pathogenicity of four strains of entomio-
pathogenic fungi against the bovine tick Boophitus microptus. Am J Vet Res 62:1478-1480. doi:
10.2460/ajvr.2001.62. 1478
Polar P, Aquino de Muro M, Kairo MTK, Moore D, Pegram R, John SA et al (2005) Thermal characteristics
of Metarhizium anisoptiae isolates important for the development of biologicalpesticides for the
control of catle ticks. Vet Parasitol 134: 159-167. doi:10.1016/j. vetpar.2005.07.010
cattle ticks: Overcoming the challenges. Exp Appl Acarol 45 (this issue)
Quesada-Moraga E, Maranhao EAA, Valverde-Garcia P, Santiago-Alvarez C (2006) Selection of Beauveria
bassiana isolates for control of the whiteHies Bemisia tabaci and Trialeurodes vaporariorum on the
basis of their virulence, therrmal requirerments, and toxicologic activity. Biol Control 36:274287. doi:
10. 1016/j.biocontrol.2005.09.022
10.1016/j-jip. 2004.11.007
Samish M (2000) Biocontrol of ticks. Ann N Y Acad Sci 916:172-178
developmental stages of Rhipicephalus sanguineus (Acari: 1xodidae). J Parasitol 87:1355-1359
104
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Schabel HG(1978) Percutaneous infection of Hytobius pales by Metarhizium anisopliae.J lnvertebr Pathol
31:180-187. d0i: 10.1016/0022-2011(78)90006-X
Scholte EJ,Knols BGJ,Samson RA,Takken W (2004) Entomopathogenic fungi for mosquito control: a
review. J lnsect Sci 4: 19-43
Shi WB,Feng MG (2004) Lethal effect of Beauveria bassiana, Metarhizium anisoptiae and Paecilomyces
fumosoroseus on the eggs of Tetranychus cinnabarinus (Acari: Tetranychidae) with a description of a
mite egg bioassay system. Biol Control 30:165-173. doi:10.1016/j.biocontrol.2004.01.017
Psoroptes spp. Vet Parasitol 92:97-105. doi:10.1016/S0304-4017(00)00277-6
Nomuraea riteyi, against the corn earworm, Helicoverpa armigera (Lep, Noctuidae). J Appl Entomol
125:243-248. d0i: 10.1046/j. 1439-0418.2001.00544.x
Tulloch M (1976) The genus Metarhizium. Trans Br Mycol Soc 66:407-411
Vidal C, Fargues J, Lacey LA (1997) lntraspecific variability of Paecilomyces fumosoroseus: effect of
temperature on vegetative growth. J lnvertebr Pathol 70: 18-26. doi:10.1006/jipa.1997.4658
Wall R, Smith KE, Berriatua E, French NP (1999) Simulation analysis of the population dynamics of the
mite, Psoroptes ovis, infesting sheep. Vet Parasitol 83:253-264. doi: 10.1016/S0304-4017(99)00062-X
Impact of two treatments of a formulation of Beauveria
bassiana (Deuteromycota: Hyphomycetes) conidia
(Hymenoptera: Apidae) colony health
William G. Meikle - Guy Mercadier - Niels Holst - Vincent Girod
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 1-4, 105-117.
from two strains of Beauveria bassiana, an entomopathogenic fungus. One strain was
commercial (GHA) and the other had been isolated from Varroa mites in the region
(Bb05002). Objectives were to evaluate treatment effect on colony weight, adult bee mass,
capped brood, and on Varroa fall onto sticky boards. Treatments included conidia for-
mulated with either carnauba or candelilla wax powder, candelilla wax powder alone, or
Treatment did not affect colony health. Colonies treated twice with Bb05002 conidia and
carnauba wax powder had significantly higher mite fall compared to colonies treated with
blank candelilla wax powder. The proportion of fallen mites that were infected in both
conidia treatments was higher than controls for 18 days after the second treatment. The
number of fungal propagules on the bees themselves remained elevated for about 14 days
after the second treatment. These results were compared to published results from previous
experiments with regard to infection duration.
KeywordsApis mellifera ·Varroa destructor·Beauveria bassiana·
Biopesticide · Formulation
W. G. Meikle () . G. Mercadier
European Biological Control Laboratory, USDA-ARS, Campus lnternational de Baillarguet,
CS 90013 Montferrier sur Lez, St. Gely du Fesc, 34988 Montpellier, France
e-mail: wmeikle @ars-ebcl.org
N. Holst
Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, Departrment of lntegrated Pest Managerment, University of Aarhus,
Flakkebjerg, 4200 Slagelse, Denmark
V. Girod
ADAPRO LR-CRALR, Maison des Agriculteurs, Mas de Saporta CS 30012, Lattes, 34875
Montpellier, France
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.). Diseases of Mites and 7icks. DOl: 10.1007/978-I-4020-9695-2_10 105
106
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Introduction
Varroa destructor Anderson and Trueman, one of the most serious pests of honeybees
(Apis mellifera L.) (Hymenoptera: Apidae) (Chandler et al. 2001; Martin 1998), weaken
larvae and adults by feeding on haermolymph, transmitting diseases, and inducing defor-
mities (Chandler et al. 2001; Martin 2001). Varroa infestations have been largely
responsible for the almost complete elimination of feral colonies in the U.S. (Rinderer
et al. 2001). The use of entomopathogenic fungi has been considered a promising alter-
native to chemical miticides (Chandler et al. 2001), and fungal isolates of several species
have been tested (James et al. 2006; Kanga et al. 2003, 2006; Meikle et al. 2006, 2007,
2008; Shaw et al. 2002). Meikle et al. (2006) reported the discovery of several isolates of
Beauveria bassiana (Balsamo) Vuillemin (Deuteromycota: Hyphomycetes) from Varroa
mites collected from honeybee colonies in southern France. Collecting fungal isolates from
either the target environment and/or even the target pests themselves is intended to increase
the probability of finding the best adapted isolates. For example, an isolate of Metarhizium
anisopliae (Metsch.) Sorokin (Deuteromycota: Hyphomycetes), collected from cadavers of
Ornithacris cavroisi (Finot) (Orthoptera: Acrididae) in Niger,was found in tests to be well-
adapted to the high temperatures and low humidities of the region and was subsequently
incorporated into a biopesticide against the desert locust Schistocerca gregaria Forskal
(Orthoptera: Acrididae) (Cherry et al. 1999; Lomer et al. 1997). The high temperatures and
humidities of beehives, among other factors, can present similar challenges to entomo-
pathogenic fungi.
Meikle et al. (2007, 2008) used a B. bassiana isolate, collected from Varroa, in field
experiments where it significantly increased Varroa fall and was found on the surfaces of
bees and infecting fallen Varroa mites for at least a week after a single treatment.The use
of an entomopathogenic fungus in an insect colony involves some risk. Beauveria bassiana
is known to have a broad host range (Tanada and Kaya 1993) and Meikle et al. (2006)
reported B. bassiana infections of bee pupae that had been exposed to treated Varroa mites
in laboratory bioassays. However, Jaronski et al. (2004) and Meikle et al. (2008) found
that a single application of B. bassiana did not have measurable negative impact on colony
health or survivorship. Meikle et al. (2008) observed that while a single application sig-
nificantly increased mite fall, it did not have sufficient negative impact on Varroa densities
to be considered as a complete control strategy.
Entomopathogenic fungi are usually applied in the form of conidia, which are asexual,
non-motile spores (Burges 1998), and the conidia are often combined with other materials
in order to stabilize the conidia during storage, facilitate application, protect the conidia,
and enhance conidia activity (Jones and Burges 1998). Carnauba wax, obtained from
Copernicia cerifera or C. prunifera, is hydrophobic and inert, with no nutritive value for
the conidia, and is permitted as a food additive (U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 21,
part 184, Sect. 1978) so it poses no honey contamination problems in the U.S. Formulation
with carnauba wax has been tested in previous studies and no negative effects have been
observed with respect to honeybee colony health (Meikle et al. 2007, 2008). Meikle et al.
(2008) also formulated conidia with wheat four, which is different from wax powders
because it can be used as a food source for germinating conidia and is therefore not an inert
ingredient (Burges 1998). Meikle et al. (2008) found that the impact of the wheat four
formulation on mite fall was significantly less than conidia combined with carnauba wax
pwder. Treating hives with a powder, such as powdered sugar or pollen, is known to
provoke mite fall (Fakhimzadeh 2001; Macedo et al. 2002), but 99% of the effect occurs
within 18 h (Fakhimzadeh 2001),
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
107
The main objective in this study was to evaluate the impact of two successive appli-
cations of conidia of entomopathogenic fungi on colony health and on Varroa mite fall.
Two isolates of B. bassiana were used: isolate 05002 (NRRL 30976) and strain GHA
(Laverlam International, Butte MT; Technical Grade Active Ingredient lot number 03-04-
1C/1D). Two kinds of wax powder were also compared as formulation ingredients: car-
nauba wax, as used in previous experiments, and candelilla wax, which is obtained from
Euphorbia antisyphilitica and Pedilanthus pavonis and is also safe as a human food
measured colony growth rates per week, total adult bee weight and the amounts of sealed
brood and honey. The use of growth rates, which are independent of colony size, was
intended to facilitate comparison of these results with other studies. Varroa mite fall and
the proportion infected mites were measured as in Meikle et al. (2007).
Materials and methods
Preparation of formulation
Cultures of B. bassiana isolate Bb05002 were grown on Sabouraud dextrose agar with
yeast (SDAY) (Goettel and Inglis 1997) for a minimum of 15 days. Conidia were har-
vested by scraping the surface of the cultures onto glass petri dishes with a metal spatula,
and placing the petri dishes in a crystallizing dish containing silica gel for 20-24 h at room
temperature for drying.
Four formulations were prepared: carnauba wax powder and conidia from B. bassiana
isolate 05002 ("Bb05002 + carnauba"); carnauba wax powder and conidia from B. bas-
siana isolate GHA ("BbGHA + carnauba"), candelilla wax powder and 05002 conidia
("Bb05002 + candelilla") and candelilla wax powder alone ("candelilla alone"). Since
carnauba wax powder alone had been tested in previous experiments (see Meikle et al.
2007, 2008), it was not tested here. All formulations were prepared on 8 May. The per
colony dose of Bb05002 + carnauba and BbGHA + carnauba consisted of 1.0 g conidia
of the respective isolate mixed with 9.0 g carnauba wax powder (Strahl & Pitsch Inc., West
Babylon, NY, USA) and 0.05 g hydrated silica (Hi-Sil-233, Pittsburgh Plate Glass,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA) as a fow agent. The per colony dose of Bb05002 + candelilla
consisted of 1.0 g conidia of isolate 05002 mixed with 9.0 g candelilla wax powder (Strahl
& Pitsch Inc., West Babylon, NY, USA) and 0.05 g hydrated silica. The per colony dose of
candelilla alone consisted of 9.0 g candelilla wax powder and 0.05 g silica. All formula-
tions were mixed using a food processor (Valentin Mini Chopper, SEB, Dijon, France).
The density of colony-forming units (cfu) per g formulation was determined at the time of
colony treatment by plating three sub-samples of the forrmulation diluted in distilled water
and Tween 80 (Merck, Munich, Germany) onto potato-dextrose agar, and counting the
number of colonies 96 h after plating. Formulated and unformulated conidia were stored in
a refrigerator at 4°C.
Field experiment
were part of an apiary of 52 colonies near Lattes, in southern France. The bee colonies
were kept in painted, 10-frame, wooden Langstroth brood boxes (56 l capacity) with
telescoping lids and with screens underneath the frames and queen excluders on top of the
108
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
brood box. On 17 April one sticky board (31 x 42 cm, Mann Lake Ltd, Hackensack, MN,
USA) was placed under each colony. The boards were replaced on 24 April and every 3-
4 days thereafter with fresh boards. All mites adhering to the used boards were counted,
 and 40-mite samples were taken from each board and plated on water agar (6.0 g/l) with
chloramphenicol (0.4 g/l). If a board had 40 or fewer mites, all mites were plated. Plated
mite samples were incubated at 23°C, examined for sporulation after 15 days, and the
proportion of sporulating cadavers was calculated (hereafter referred to as the "proportion
infected mites"). Temperature loggers (Thermachron iButton, Dallas Semiconductor,
Sunnyvale, CA, USA) were placed in seven hives at the center of the queen excluder on the
top of the brood box to record internal temperature hourly starting the day of treatment, and
On 2 May and at seven-day intervals until 8 June (after which hives were moved and the
     g   a  a s 
precision of 50 g (OHaus Corporation model Champ CQ100L, Pine Brook, NJ, USA). On
9 May, and again on 27 June, each hive was opened and each hive part (i.e. brood box, lids,
colony base, and frames after shaking them free of bees) was weighed using a smaller
portable electronic balance with a precision of 1 g (Kern & Sohn model 12 K 1 N, Ba-
lingen, Gerrmany). Digital photographs were taken of each side of each frame using a 3.3
megapixel camera (Nikon Coolpix 990, Tokyo, Japan). The hive was then reassembled,
and one super containing nine frames with wax foundation was weighed and placed on top
of each colony. On 27 June, the super was also weighed.
Five colonies were selected for each treatment group except the untreated control,
which had 6. Colonies were randomly assigned treatments, but treatments were occa-
sionally re-assigned to distribute treatments evenly. Colonies in the Bb05002 + carnauba,
BbGHA + carnauba and candelilla alone treatments were treated on 10 and 17 May.
Colonies in the 05002 + candelilla treatment were treated only once, on 10 May. For each
colony treatment, a plastic laboratory wash bottle (Nalge Nunc International, Rochester,
NY) was filled with a single dose of preparation, the hive lid and super removed, the
formulation blown between all brood box frames by squeezing the wash bottle, and the
super and lid replaced.
To calculate colony and adult bee weight, hive weight was divided into a “non-colony"
part, consisting of the hive pieces, e.g., brood box, lids, super, hive base, and 10 empty
frames with foundation comb, and the “colony" part, consisting of the adult bees, brood,
honey, pollen and wax (other than foundation cormb). Adult bee weight was calculated as
the difference between the sum of the weights of all the hive parts and the observed hive
weight. The non-colony weight was calculated as the total weight of all the hive parts
except brood box frames, plus the weight of 10 empty frames, or about 2.87 kg (Meikle
et al. 2008). Colony weight was calculated by subtracting the non-colony component from
the total hive weight. The area of sealed brood and sealed honey per frame was estimated
from the photographs using ArcView 3.0 (Environmental Systems Research Institute,
Redlands, CA, USA). Brood areas were inspected closely for any signs of fungal infection.
Colony entrances were inspected for unusually large numbers of dead bees.
On 2, 9, 11, 15, 18, 22 and 25 May, and on 1 and 8 June, samples of approximately 15
bees were collected from within each hive into plastic boxes in the field, the boxes placed
bees each were removed from bags of three colonies per treatment (the same colonies were
always used) for a total of 30 subsamples. Each subsample was placed in a 50 ml plastic
centrifuge tube and vortexed for 3 min. in 10 ml of a 0.1% aqueous solution of Tween 80.
Aliquots of 20 and 100 μl of the resulting suspension from each subsample were spread
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
109
onto each of three petri dishes containing potato dextrose agar with chloramphenicol
(0.4 g/l); thus six plates for each subsample. The dishes were incubated for at least 14 days
at 23°C, and the number of B. bassiana cfu were counted in the plates with 20 μl of
solution; when cfu densities became low, cfu were counted on the 1o0-μl plates.
Statistical analysis
Data were analyzed using SAS (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary NC, USA) software. Repeated
measure analyses of variance were conducted for a linear mixed model using PROC
MIXED of SAS (Littell et al. 1996) with either mite fall (log transformed), or the pro-
portion infected mites (arcsine square-root transformed) as the response variable and with
three fixed effects: treatment, date and their interaction (α = 0.05). The covariance matrix
of both response variables was inspected for patterns and residual plots were assessed
visually for variance homogeneity. Colony number was incorporated as a random effect.
The degrees of freedom were calculated using the Satterthwaite method. Analyses were
designed to maximize the degrees of freedom for detection of differences among treat-
ments. Insignificant main effects were excluded from the model but if the interaction was
significant both main factors were retained. Post hoc contrasts of the least squares means
differences were conducted for all significant factors, using Bonferroni adjustment for the
t-value probability. Because excess forrmulation on sticky boards immediately after treat-
ment may cause spurious infection data,the 1st sample after treatment was excluded from
dividing the observed value by the value for the previous sampling occasion and then
dividing the logarithm of that ratio by the number of days between the two measurements
(7). The r values for total adult bee weight and brood surface area were calculated in a
May), and then dividing the logarithm of that ratio by the number of days between these
two dates (27).
Results
Cfu density at time of treatrment was 3.70 x 10' cfu/g for the Bb05002 + carnauba
formulation,  1.79 x 10l° cfu/g for the Bb05002 + candelilla formulation and
1.72 × 1o'° cfu/g for the BbGHA + carnauba formulation. Average temperature at the
top interior of the brood boxes was 30.0°C (average minimum = 21.4°C and average
maximum = 37.8°C)
 In the analysis of colony weight r values, treatment (F4,116 = 4.72, P = 0.0014), and
date (F4,ll6 = 25.29, P < 0.0001) were significant factors, but their interaction was not
(P = 0.870) (Fig. 1). Colony growth in the candelilla alone treatment was significantly
greater than the Bb05002 + carnauba treatment (tl16 = 3.26, P = 0.0144) and the control
treatment (t116 = 4.10, P = 0.0008). Starting the day before treatment, the average total
weight gain (s.e.) for colonies treated with Bb05002 + carnauba was 4.8 kg (0.8); for
those treated with BbGHA + carnauba was 6.8 kg (2.4); for those treated with
Bb05002 + candelilla 6.0 kg (2.3); for those treated with candelilla alone was 11.6 kg
(1.8); and for the control colonies was 2.7 kg (4.8). One colony in the candelilla alone
group gained 17.8 kg, exceeding by 5.3 kg the next highest colony weight gain; removing
significantly affect the changes in surface areas of sealed brood (P = 0.905); overall, brood
110
1. Bruin & L.P. S.van der Geest (eds.)
Bb05002+carmauba
BbGHA+cainauba
Bb05002+candelilla
Candelilla only
Control
0.04
A
rate
0.03
intrinsic
0.02
0.01
Colony
0.00
-0.01
-0.02
30
25
20
15
10
5
07May
14May
21 May
28May
04Jun
Fig. 1 Daily intrinsic growth for bee colonies treated with B. bassiana isolate 05002 conidia forrmulated
with carnauba wax powder (2 treatments), B. bassiana isolate GHA conidia + carnauba wax powder (2
treatments), isolate 05002 conidia + candelilla wax powder (1 treatment), candelilla wax powder alone (2
(dashed line) and average temperature (solid line) (°C).Vertical dashed line shows treatment dates
surface area declined on average by about 1.3% during the course of the experiment. Brood
loss was 6.2% (6.0) in the Bb05002 + carnauba treatment, 1.8% (2.2) in the
BbGHA + carnauba treatment, 0.6% (0.5) in the candelilla alone treatment and 2.2% (4.0)
in the control treatment while hives in the Bb05002 + candelilla treatment gained an
average of 2.1% (2.5). No infected brood were observed in any photographs. Treatment did
not significantly affect total adult weights (P = 0.460); average total adult weights
increased by 0.32 kg (0.62) in the Bb05002 + carnauba treatment, by 0.92 kg (0.41) in the
BbGHA + carnauba treatment, by 0.24 kg (0.43) in the Bb05002 + candelilla treatment,
and by 1.67 kg (0.21) in the candelilla alone treatment; hives in the control treatment lost
an average of 0.27 kg (0.81).
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
111
In the analysis of mite fall, treatment was significant (F2,245 = 4.94, P = 0.0008) but
   )  ( = )  x  ( = )  
trasts showed that mite fall in hives treated with 05002 + carnauba was significantly
higher than in hives treated with candelilla powder alone (t245 = 4.35, P = 0.0002). No
other contrasts were significant.
Treatment (F4,160 = 62.45, P < 0.0001)， date
significant factors in explaining the proportion of infected mites. In post hoc contrasts
treatment was a significant factor (P always <Qoool) for all dates through 1 June.
 Treatrment was not significant for mites collected on 5 June, but it was again significant
(P = 0.0027) for mites collected on 8 June.
The proportion of infected mites in the treatments Bb05002+ carnauba and
BbGHA + carnauba were significantly different from zero for all days (P always
<0.0001); the same result held for the treatment Bb05002 + candelilla except that the
probability varied between <0.0001 and 0.0339 (Fig. 3). Among the hives not treated with
spores, the only occasion on which the proportion of infected mites rose to significance
occurred the candelilla alone treatment for mites collected on 5 June. At least one infected
mite was found in three of the experimental hives during the three weeks before appli-
cation. Infected mites were also found in hives not treated with conidia, probably due to
bee drift or robbing. The infection rate after the second treatment appeared to remain
05002+canauba
GHA + carnauba
05002+ candelilla
Candelilla only
Cont1ol
60
b
(BAR
50
mite fall(geoimetic&
30
20
Daily 1
10
23Apr
04Jun
Fig. 2 Daily fall (geometric average of x + 0.0l) of mites onto sticky boards placed under bee colonies
wax powder (1 treatment), candelilla wax powder alone (2 treatments), and untreated control in an
experiment conducted in May 2007 near Lattes in southern France. Vertical dashed line shows treatment
dates
112
1. Bruin & L.P. S.van der Geest (eds.)
Bb05002+carmauba
BbGHA+camauba
Bb05002+candelilla
Candelilla only
Control
1.0
A Spring 2007
imit
0.8
fall
ted:
0.6
infecte
0.4
1.7
Prop
10
1.0
B Spring 2006
imite
80
fall
infected i
0.6
0.4
rtion:
6
0.2
Propo
0.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
Fig. 3 Proportion of fallen mites that were found to be infected by B. bassiana armong bee colonies in two
05002 conidia formulated with carnauba wax powder (2 treatments), B. bassiana isolate GHA
conidia + carnauba wax powder (2 treatments), isolate 05002 conidia + candelilla wax powder (1
treatment), candelilla wax powder alone (2 treatments), and untreated control. (b) colonies treated in Spring
2006, with one treatment of either B. bassiana isolate 05002 conidia formulated with carnauba wax powder
or carnauba wax powder alone, and untreated control. Data from Meikle et al. (2007). Vertical dashed line
shows treatment days
elevated for a longer time than in hives treated with a single application of
Bb05002 + carmauba in Spring,2006.
The analysis of cfu density was conducted in the same manner as for the proportion
infected mites. No B. bassiana cfu were observed in any bee samples before application.
Treatment (F4,7o = 42.99, P < 0.0001), date (F6,7o = 43.11, P <0.0001) and treat-
ment × date (F24,70 = 5.59, P < 0.0001) were significant overall (Fig. 4). After
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
113
Bb05002+carnauba
BbGHA+cainauba
Bb05002+candelilla
 Powder only
Control
105
104
Spring2007
103
102
101
bee
 density per 1
100
105
B
Fall 2005
cfu
104
103
102
101
001
0
10
20
30
40
Day
Fig. 4 Density of colony-forrming units (cfus) per bee in two ex periments in southern France (log scale). (a)
colonies treated in Spring, 2007, with B. bassiana isolate 05002 conidia formulated with carnauba wax
powder (2 treatments), B. bassiana isolate GHA conidia + carnauba wax powder (2 treatments), isolate
05002 conidia + candelilla wax powder (1 treatment), candelilla wax powder alone (2 treatments), and
untreated control.(b) colonies treated in Fall 2005, with one treatment of either B. bassiana isolate 05002
conidia formulated with carnauba wax powder or carnauba wax powder alone, and untreated control.
Vertical dashed line shows treatment days. Data from Meikle et al. (2007)
application, treatment was a significant factor on all days (P varied from <0.0001 to
00245) until the samples collected on 1 June, after which treatment was no longer sig-
nificant. The day
after the 1st application,
11
May, cfu densities in the
Bb05002 + carnauba (t7o = 10.54, P < 0.0001), E
BbGHA + carnauba (t7o = 12.81,
P < 0.0001) and Bb05002 + candelilla (to = 11.33, P < 0.0001) were all significantly
different from O but in the next sample four days later only the cfu density in the
BbGHA + carnauba treatment was significant. In the samples collected just after the 2nd
114
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
application on 18 May, all three treatments using B. bassiana were significant but by the
rext sample only the BbGHA + carnauba treatment was significant; it remained so until
the last sample on & June. The decline in cfu density per bee was very similar to that
observed in Fall, 2005, in hives treated with a single application of Bb05002 + carnauba.
Discussion
The goals of this study were to evaluate the effects of two applications of B. bassiana
conidia, with two different strains and formulated with two kinds of wax powder, on bee
colony health and on Varroa mite fall. The experiment was conducted in the spring, when
brood densities and foraging activity were high and the sensitivity of hives to a pertur-
bation likewise high. While hives are generally not treated against Varroa in the spring in
southern France (Meikle et al. 2008), this period was chosen because a negative treatment
       ab g y c dxa  pm 
populations and/or colony food stores and weight gain. We found no negative effect of
application of entomopathogenic fungi on colony health, measured as the colony growth
rate, total adult bee weight, surface areas of capped brood, and colony survivorship.
likely due to food consumption prior to a nectar fow. Colony growth increased among all
groups thereafter. No treatment differences were observed in either total adult weight
change or changes in the amounts of sealed brood or honey. Little impact of B. bassiana
application in beehives has been observed in similar studies elsewhere (Jaronski et al.
2004; Meikle et al. 2008). While some workers (e.g. Kanga et al. 2003) have collected and
plated dead adult bees in an effort to measure bee mortality due to mycosis, this was not
done here because it was felt the data would be difficult to interpret properly. As observed
here, and by Meikle et al. (2007) and Kanga (2003), adult bees retain B. bassiana cfus on
their bodies for days and even weeks after application. Since the length of time between a
given bee's death, its ejection from the hive and its collection by the researcher is
unknown, the presence of sporulation on these cadavers, even with surface sterilization,
would not reliably indicate whether the fungus killed the bee.
Treatment was a significant factor in explaining average daily mite fall, and colonies
treated with Bb05002 + carnauba had significantly higher mite fall than those treated with
candelilla powder alone. However, average mite falls in treated hives were always higher
than both controls and candelilla powder alone within the time frame of this study so
fungal treatment did not lower mite densities as they were measured here. Mite fall in hives
treated with isolate GHA was not significantly different than the control hives. These
results should not be considered an indication that GHA could not be effective in this
context because the number of replicates per treatment was too low for a definitive answer.
Davidson et al. (2003) found that BbGHA was highly virulent against Varroa mites in lab
bioassays. Further work with different isolates is needed to determine the role that isolate
characteristics play in the field control of Varroa mites. The powder + conidia formulation
apparently distributed well in hives; the cfu densities per bee found here were similar to
those found in an earlier experiment by Meikle et al. (2007) as well as by Kanga et al.
y jed saiods 8 ot ista[ 1e pesn oym (oo7)
While large numbers of fallen mites were infected with B. bassiana, they clearly did not
all die due to infection. As observed by Meikle et al. (2007, 2008) a mite with viable
conidia on its cuticle may fall for other reasons, and in the 3-4 days between board
replacement conidia could germinate on the dead or dying mite, resulting in a false positive
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
115
because the fungus did not cause the mite to drop. Beauveria bassiana conidia grow readily
on cadavers (Tanada and Kaya 1993), and surface sterilization of the mites would reliably
remove only some of those false positives - those less than 1-2 days old (the time needed
by the fungus to establish itself within a mite). Given the low probability of false negatives
(in which a mite dies from fungal infection but the cadaver does not sporulate), the
proportion of infected mites should be considered upper-bound estimates of the true per-
centage of infection, and not necessarily related to how well the treatment works against
Varroa. However, these data can be considered indicators for the presence of viable B.
bassiana propagules in the hive.
Conidia formulated with candelilla wax was not measurably different, in terms of cfu
per bee or proportion infected mites, from those formulated with carnauba wax. This
supports the hypothesis that properties the two waxes have in common, such as being
hydrophobic and lipophilic, are those properties that are important as formulation ingre-
     t o      
itself in one important regard: although those hives were only treated once, the proportion
of infected mites increased significantly in a manner very similar to the hives in the two
groups that were treated twice with fungal formulation. Of the 26 hives in the experiment,
only seven hives increased in terms of proportion infected mites between 22 and 25 May,
that is, between five and eight days after hives in the Bb05002 + carnauba and
BbGHA + carnauba groups were treated a second time. Of those seven hives, one was in
the BbGHA + carnauba group (increase of 9%), one in the control group (increase of 7%)
and the remaining five comprised all the hives in the Bb05002 + candelilla group, with an
average increase of 36% (s.e. = 0.06) and a range of 25-59%. The likelihood that the five
hives with by far thelargest increases in infection rate would randomly turn up in the same
treatment group is low: <0.oo1. That bees with B. bassiana propagules on their bodies, as
well as infected mites, were found in that treatment group indicate that those bees must
have visited treated hives and returned to their colonies. While this could result from bees
robbing treated hives, or bee drift, why this would occur among all the hives of one
treatment and essentially none of the hives in other treatments is curious.
Spore viability over time was not directly measured in the hives but it is likely that B.
bassiana can survive there. Aerial conidia are known to tolerate high temperatures (Burges
1998). Although brood mass temperatures range from 33-36°C (Southwick 1991; Winston
1987), temperatures in broodless areas tend to be lower (Simpson 1961). The average
temperature on top of the queen excluder between the brood box and the super in this
experiment was 30.0°C. Meikle et al. (2008), in an experiment conducted in the same
location the previous year but later in the spring (thus with higher ambient temperatures),
recorded temperatures at the bottom of the brood box from 30-32°C. Temperatures in this
range present little problem for either survivorship or germination of B. bassiana conidia.
Davidson et al. (2003) observed growth in all seven of their B. bassiana isolates at 30°C
and in five of those isolates at 35°C, and Fargues et al. (1992) observed growth in all three
isolates at 32°C and one of those at 35°C. The isolate used here germinated at 34°C
(Meikle et al. 2008), so apparently conditions in much of the hive would not have pre-
vented conidium survivorship or germination. Using a simulation model of conidium
longevity (Meikle et al. 2003) based on the relationship between r.h. and conidium
moisture content described by Hong et al. (2002), at 35°C the half lives of the eight B.
bassiana isolates described in Hong et al. (2001) were estimated to be 43-135 d at 40% r.h.
and 4-13 d at 70% r.h.
The proportion infected mites in the colonies treated with conidia was significantly
higher than in controls for about 18 days after application. Meikle et al. (2008) reported
116
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
significantly higher infection rates for less than a week after a single application, while
Meikle et al. (2007) observed higher infection more than a month after single applications
in two experiments conducted in the fall. Infection half life would have been affected by
colony dynamics, weather conditions, and their interaction. A large emergence of young
bees would dilute cfu density among bees and mites and thus shorten infection half life as it
was measured here.
In these experiments no impact on colony health was observed after two successive
applications of formulation containing B. bassiana conidia. Two applications of the bio-
pesticide increased mite fall relative to the blank powder treatment but did not reduce mite
fall during the four weeks between the first application and the end of the experiment
tinguish any treatment effects, and other measures of mite density, such as number of mites
per adult bee, in addition to mite fall onto sticky boards. The results thus far are
applications, and the ecology of entormopathogenic fungi within the beehive under ambient
conditions and colony age structures.
Ackmowledgments The authors would like to thank F. Annas for help in the field; S.T. Jaronski for
supplying the GHA material; K. Hoelmer and W.A. Jones for constructive comments on the manuscript, and
References
microbial biopesticides: Beneficial microorganisms, nematodes and seed treatments. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands
             
11:429448
Cherry A, Jenkins N, Heviefo G, Bateman RP, Lomer C (1999) A West African pilot scale production plant
for aerial conidia of Metarhizium sp. for use as a mycoinsecticide against locusts and grasshoppers.
Biocontr Sci Technol 9:35-51
Davidson G, Phelps K, Sunderland KD, Pell JK, Ball BV, Shaw KE, Chandler D (2003) Study of term-
(Acari: Mesostigmata) using a nonlinear model of poikilotherm development. J Appl Microbiol
94:8 16825
Fakhirmzadeh K (2001) Effectiveness of confectioner sugar dusting to knock down Varroa destructor from
adult honey bees in laboratory trials. Apidologie 32: 139-148
Fargues J, Maniania NK, Delmas JC, Smits N (1992) 1nfuence de la temperature sur la croissance in vitro
dhyphomycetes entomopathogenes.Agronomie 12:557-564
Goettel MS, lnglis GD (1997) Fungi: Hyphomycetes. In: Lacey L (ed) Manual of techniques in insect
pathology. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, USA
Hong TD,Ellis RH, Gunn J,Moore D (2002)Relative humidity,temperature,and the equilibrium moisture
content of conidia of Beauveria bassiana (Balsamo) Vuillemin: a quantitative approach.J Stored Prod
Res 38:3341
longevity of conidia of B. bassiana. Mycol Res 105:597-602
James RR, Hayes G, Leland JE (2006) Field trials on the microbial control of Varroa with the fungus
Metarhizium anisoptiae. Am Bee J 146:968-972
assessments of microbial insecticides -how relevant are they? ln: Hokkanen H, Hajek A (eds)
Environmental impacts of microbial insecticides: Need and methods for risk assessment. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
117
(  s         )  s  s
Formulation of microbial biopesticides: Beneficial microorganisms, nematodes and seed treatrments.
Kluwer Acadermic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands
Kanga LHB, Jones WA, James RR (2003) Field trials using the fungal pathogen, Metarhizium anisoptiae
(Deuterormycetes: Hyphomycetes) to control the ectoparasitic mite, Varroa destructor (Acari: Var-
roidae) in honey bee, Apis mettifera (Hymenoptera: Apidae) colonies. J Econ Entomol 96: 1091-1099
Kanga LHB, Jones WA, Garcia C (2006) Efficacy of strips coated with Metarhizium anisoptiae for contro]
40:249-258
Littell RC, Milliken GA, Stroup WW, Wolfinger RD (1996) SAS system for mixed models. SAS lnstitute,
Cary, NC, USA
grasshoppers. Mem Ent Soc Canada 171:265-286
Macedo PA, Wu J, Ellis MD (2002) Using inert dusts to detect and assess Varroa infestations in honey bee
colonies. J Apic Res 41:3-7
Martin S (1998) A population model for the ectoparasitic mite Varroa jacobsoni in honey bee (Apis
metlifera) colonies. Ecol Model 109:267-281
Martin SJ (2001) The role of Varroa and viral pathogens in the collapse of honey bee colonies: a modelling
approach. J Appl Ecol 38:1082-1093
Meikle WG, Jaronski S, Mercadier G, Quimby PC (2003) A distributed delay routine-based simulation
model of Beauveria bassiana conidial stability in response to environmental stressors. Biocontrol
48:561578
Meikle WG, Mercadier G, Girod V, Derouane F, Jones WA (2006) Evaluation of Beauveria bassiana
(Balsamo) Vuillemin (Deuteromycota: Hyphomycetes) strains isolated from Varroa mites in southern
France. J Apic Res 45:219-220
Meikle WG, Mercadier G, Holst N, Nansen C, Girod V (2007) Duration and spread of an entomopathogenic
Varroa mites, Varroa destructor Anderson and Trueman (Acari: Varroidae), in honeybee colonies. J
Econ Entomol 100:1- 10
Meikle WG, Mercadier G, Holst N, Nansen C, Girod V (2008) lmpact of a treatment of Beauveria bassiara
(Deuteromycota: Hyphomycetes) on honeybee (Hymenoptera: Apidae) colony health and on Varroa
mites (Acari: Varroidae). Apidologie. doi:10.1051/apido:20007057
Rinderer TE, de Guzman Ll, Delatte GT, Stelzer JA,Lancaster VA,Kuznetsov V, Beaman L,Watts R,
Harris JW (200l) Resistance to the parasitic mite Varroa destructor in honey bees from far-eastern
Russia. Apidologie 32:381-394
Shaw KE,Davidson G,Clark SJ, Ball BV,Pell JK, Chandler D, Sunderland KD (2002) Laboratory
an ectoparasitic mite of the honeybee,Apis mettifera. Bio] Contr 24:266-276
Simpson J (1961) Nest climate regulation in honey bee colonies. Science 33: 1327-1333
Southwick EE (1991) The colony as a thermoregulating superorganisms. In: Goodman LJ, Fisher RC (eds)
Winston ML (1987) The biology of the honey bee. Harvard Univ Press, Cambridge, MA, USA
Topically applied myco-acaricides for the control
of cattle ticks: overcoming the challenges
Perry Polar ·Dave Moore · Moses T. K. Kairo · Adash Ramsubhag
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 1-4, 119-148.
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9170-x @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract In the absence of commercially viable and environmentally friendly options,
the management of cattle ticks is heavily dependent on the use of chemical acaricides. Due
to recent advances in production, formulation and application technology, commercial
fungus-based biological pesticides (myco-insecticides, myco-acaricides) are becoming
increasingly popular for the control of plant pests; however, they have not been used
against animal ectoparasites. The literature clearly demonstrates that entomopathogenic
fungi are pathogenic to ticks under laboratory conditions. Pasture applications have also
results suggest that major research hurdles still exist especially for the latter. Although
literature on ticks and their interactions with entomopathogenic fungi exists, there is not a
clear understanding on how this can be infuenced by the microenvironment of the cattle
skin surface. This paper critically reviews pathogen, tick target and host skin microenvi-
ronmental factors that potentially affect pathogenicity of the applied entomopathogen.
Factors influencing the route of infection for topically applied myco-acaricides are also
reviewed. Major researchable constraints and recommendations are identified and priori-
tized. In particular, there is the need for basic studies to understand the interaction of
entomopathogenic fungi with the components of the skin microenvironment, to identify
suitable strains, and to develop improved formulations to overcome the various challenges.
P. Polar (β)
CABl, Caribbean and Latin America, Curepe, Trinidad and Tobago
e-mail: p.polar @cabi.org
D. Moore
CABl Europe-UK, Bakeham Lane, Egham, Surry TW 20 9TY, UK
M.T.K.Kairo
Center for Biological Control,Florida A&M University,310 Perry-Paige South,Tallahassee,
FL 32307, USA
A.Ramsubhag
Faculty of Science and Agriculture, The University of the West Indies, St. Augustine,
Trinidad and Tobago
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.). Diseases of Mites and Ticks. DOl: 10.1007/978-I-4020-9695-2_1l119
120
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Keywords Biological pesticide · Biological control · Cattle · Entomopathogen ·
Metarhizium anisopliae ·Myco-insecticide ·Myco-acaricide · Tick
Introduction
Ticks are obligate, intermittent, ectoparasites of terrestrial vertebrates, and all species are
exclusively haematophagous in all feeding stages (Klompen et al. 1996). Blood loss due to
feeding of adult female ticks can result in reduction of live weight gain of cattle (Pegram
and Oosterwijk 1990), dry matter intake and milk yield (Jonsson et al. 1998). Approxi-
mately 10% of the currently known tick species act as vectors of a broad range of
pathogens such as those that cause theileriosis, heartwater, babesiosis and anaplasmosis.
Ticks may also cause toxic conditions (e.g., paralysis, toxicosis, irritation and allergy) and
direct damage to the skin, due to their feeding behaviour (Latif 2003; Jongejan and
Uilenberg 2004). Worldwide, there are numerous species of hard ticks (Ixodidae) within
eighteen genera (Barker and Murrell 2004) (Fig. 1). However, the most economically
 important species fall within the following genera: Amblyomma, Dermacentor, Ixodes and
Rhipicephaius, including the recently subsumed subgenus Boophiius (Barker and Murrell
2004; Kettle 1995). Ticks are likely to become increasingly important due to climate
change. Cumming and Van Vuuren (2006) predicted that climate conditions in Africa and
the rest of the world will become more suitable for African ticks with 68 of 73 tick species
studied estimated to expand in population. The areas under threat include Australia, Latin
America, parts of Asia and Europe, the oceanic islands and other countries in similar
latitude.
Ticks are intrinsically difficult to control. They lay numerous eggs, resulting in high
numbers of host-seeking first instars. In addition different species have at least one or more
developmental stage present in the environment, actively seeking hosts or alternative hosts
for feeding (Kettle 1995). The introduction of “exotic" livestock breeds, of North
Australasian kodes
lxodinae
IXODIDAE
Other Ixodes
Bothriocrotoninae (Bothriocroton)
Amblyomminae (Ambiyomma)
Haemaphysalinae (Haemaphysalis)
Rhipicephalinae & Hyalomminae (Rhipicephalus [incl.
Boophitus], Dermacentor, Hyatomma, Nosomma,
Cosmiomma, Rhipicentor, Aromalohimataya, Margaropus
NUTTALLIELLIDAE
Nuttallielinae (Nurtaliella)
ARGASIDAE
Argasinae (Argas)
Ornithodorinae (Ornithodoros, Carios,
(sngoo
Fig. 1 Working hypothesis of the phylogeny of the subfamilies of ticks (Suborder: lxodida) based on
Barker and Murrell (2004)
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
121
American and European origin, with limited natural immunity into many tropical and sub-
tropical areas, has made ticks one of the major constraints to development of a livestock
industry in these areas (Graf et al. 2004). Until the middle of the twentieth century, the
major acaricides used for tick control were arsenic derivatives, which had low efficacy and
residual effect and were highly toxic to cattle (Graf et al. 2004). Over time, a range of
acaricides including organochlorines, organophosphates, carbamates, amidines and pyre-
throids were developed for tick control. However, use of theses acaricides has resulted in
the development of resistance, accumulation of toxic residues in milk and meat, negative
effects on the environrment and humans, and high production costs (Beugnet and Char-
donnet 1995; Jonsson 1997; Latif and Jongejan 2002).
Development of resistance is common in any tick control programme which utilizes
acaricides (George et al. 2004). Ticks, such as Rhipicephaius (Boophilus) microplus
Canestrini often develop multiple acaricide resistance, which is particularly problematic,
since few effective alternative acaricides are available and these are often more expensive
(Jonsson 1997). The most effective method to slow the rate of development of resistance is
to reduce the number of pesticide treatments to a minimum (George et al. 2004). This can
be achieved through the use of geographic isolation (clean zones, quarantine areas, control
zones), acaricidal management (prophylactic, threshold or opportunistic) and vaccination
(Nari 1995; Latif and Jongejan 2002). Although the use of biological control as an
alternative to chemical pesticide application or as a resistance management tool is popular
against crop pests, it has not been effectively developed for management of ectoparasites
such as ticks. Samish and Rehacek (1999) discussed the potential of using predators,
parasitoids and biological pesticides for the control of ticks and concluded that the most
promising biological control agents were likely tobe entomopathogenic fungi (Beauveria
and Metarhizium spp.), nematodes of the family Steinernematidae and Heterorhabditidae,
and birds such as the oxpecker. (For convenience, the term ^entormopathogenic’ is used to
describe the fungi that kill insects as well as arachnids.)
Biological pesticides based on entomopathogenic fungi (myco-insecticides, myco-
acaricides) are well suited to situations where chemical pesticides have been banned or
are being phased out, but particularly where resistance to conventional pesticides has
penetration through the cuticle using physical and chemical means, and cause death
through a combination of actions, which can include depletion of nutrients, physical
cbstruction, invasion of organs or toxicosis (Inglis et al. 2001; Zimmermann 2007).
Therefore, development of resistance is unlikely due to the multiple modes of action.
Further, myco-insecticides/myco-acaricides, relative to chemical pesticides, are envi-
    s  s  
  ne  ss o       
Langewalde et al. 1999)
This review critically examines the current status of knowledge on the control of ticks
using myco-acaricides. It also identifies the challenges associated with topical application
of myco-acaricides to cattle and potential avenues for improvement.
Status of knowledge on the control of ticks using myco-acaricides
Myco-acaricides have been shown to have the ability to kill ticks under laboratory
efforts to translate these successes to the field. Two strategies for the application of
122
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
myco-acaricides against ticks currently being investigated are pasture application (off
host) and topical application (on host) to cattle. Research on pasture application has
poduced promising results. For instance, in studies with Metarhizium anisopliae
(Metschnikoff) Sorokin, Kaaya et al. (1996) noted substantial mortality of different
developmental stages of Rhipicephalus appendiculatus Neumann within 5 weeks after
application: larvae (100%), nymphs (76-95%) and adults (36-64%). In a similar
experiment using M. anisopliae and Beauveria bassiana (Balsamo), high mortality of
larvae (100%), nymphs (80-100%) and adults (80-90%) of R. appendicuiatus and
Ambiyomma variegatum Fabricius was also achieved (Kaaya and Hassan 2000). Appli-
cation of M. anisopliae and B. bassiana to pasture once a month for 6 months reduced
the number of R. appendiculatus on cattle by 92% and 80%, respectively (Kaaya and
Hassan 2000). Commercially, a M. anisopliae isolate F52 is registered in the United
States as a broad spectrum biological pesticide for the control of ticks, flies, gnats, root
weevil and grubs in greenhouses and lawns (Environmental Protection Agency 2002).
Pasture application has the potential to keep immature tick populations low and possibly
produce epizootics when conditions are favourable for fungal development. Pasture
application, however, may require the production of large quantities of conidia and
regular application over large areas to achieve control.
A highly effective topically applied myco-acaricide for cattle may directly substitute for
chemical acaricide applications. However, it is more likely to be used as a resistance
management tool, means of control during the restricted entry intervals prior to slaughter
or in organic livestock production. Additionally, relative to pasture application, a smaller
quantity of conidia is likely to be used in a confined area (e.g., spray race or dip) and the
efficiency of targeting is likely to be greater.
Research in this area has had variable results (Table 1). For instance, in pen trials, de
Castro et al. (1997) reported 50-53% reduction of the R. microplus population using a
single spray of M. anisopliae on cattle. On the other hand, Correia et al. (1998) did not
cbserve any significant effect on tick populations in a similar experiment. In pen trials,
Rijo-Camacho (1996), reported a 90% reduction in the R. microplus population after five
weekly treatments with B. bassiana and M. anisopliae in comparison to only three weekly
treatments with Lecanicillium lecanii (Zimmerman) Zare & W. Gams. (Note: the species in
relative to the chemical acaricide in field experiments although it was achieved with both
topical and pasture application (Rijo-Camacho 1996). Polar et al. (2005b) and Alonso-Diaz
et al. (2007) also reduced tick populations on cattle using weekly topical application of
M. anisopliae isolates under field conditions. These reports have demonstrated the bio-
logical feasibility of using myco-acaricides, but the variability in perforrmance implies that
significant research hurdles have to be overcome before a commercial product for topical
application to cattle or other domestic animals can be marketed.
Among the major problems previously associated with the use of myco-insecticides for
the control of plant pest were: poor quality control standards, inconsistent levels of control
and slow speed of kill (Jenkins and Grzywacz 2000; Whipps and Lumsden 2001). How-
ever, over the past 20 years knowledge of the biology and ecology of entomopathogenic
fungi and host-pathogen interactions has improved (Inglis et al. 2001; Bateman 1997;
Thomas 1999; Thomas et al. 1999) and protocols for the production of high quality
inoculum have been established (Jenkins and Grzywacz 2000). In addition formulation and
application technologies have evolved (Prior et al. 1988; Alves et al. 2002; Bateman and
Alves 2ooo) and it has been shown that many pest situations do not necessarily require
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
123
Between the 2nd spray and the end of
 Pasture treatment alone and pasture
and cattle treatment with V. tecanii
ARSEF3297 (2.7%) were low.
animal treated with the chemica
(w s-s't) sdou y 
R
Confirmed fatal infection of 
populations of R microptus.
1M1386697 (8.7%) and
Results
 of ten Holstein × Zebu
anisopliae MA34 in
the
Tween 80 weekly, the contro]
10?
(approx. 9 months) were each
lecaniiLBV1-2
control solution weekly for
unsprayed pasture.
conidia/ml M. c
groups
treatments.
Treatment
weeks.
0ML
anisoptiae MA34
Verticiltium tecanit
ARSEF3297
LBV1-2
Fungus
M
Location
Mexico
Trinidad
Cuba
Alonso-Diaz et al. (2007)
Rijo-Camacho (1996)
 Polar et al. (2005b)
Reference
Fietd triats
124
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
 over 16 days after single spray.
(50.2%) relative to the control.
(all sizes) population occurred
No significant change in the R.
(53.5%) and 10? conidia/ml
anisopliae LBMa-NB and B.
bassiana LBBb-14.
Results
R
'.
with 5 1 of 3-5 × 10? conidia/ml
LBMa-NB and B. bassiana LBBb-
months old) were each sprayed
control solution (adhesive
in Tween 80 or the contro]
 spreading agent).
conidia/ml M.
for 5 weeks.
 Treatment 
solution.
×
2
anisoptiae LBMa-
NB and Beauveria
bassiana LBBb-14
M.anisoptiae E9
M. anisoptiae 959
Fungus
A
Location
Brazi]
Brazi]
Cuba
de Castro et al. (1997)
Rijo-Camacho (1996)
Table l  continued
Correia et al. (1998)
Reference
Pen triats
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
125
rapid kill, the hallmark of chemical pesticides. Despite this progress, little of this
kmowledge has been translated to the development of myco-acaricides for tick control.
Factors infuencing pathogenicity of entomopathogenic fungi to ticks on host
Fungal pathogenicity to a target organism is determined by a variety of factors, including
physiology of the host, physiology of the fungus and the environment (Inglis et al. 2001).
interaction (Kettle 1995; Bittencourt et al. 1995a, b, 1997; Chandler et al. 2000; Inglis et al.
 2001) little is known about the significance of the skin surface micro-environment on this
interaction. This section discusses key pathogen, target and microclimate factors which
affect pathogenicity as well as factors relating to the route of infection which affect the
ability of the target to obtain a lethal dose.
Pathogen factors
Fungatspecies
trophic, unicellular or hyphal and reproduce sexually or asexually. The current
arrangement of the fungi recognises seven phyla (Hibbett et al. 2007): Ascomycota,
Basidiomycota, Blastocladiomycota, Chytridiomycota, Glomeromycota, Neocallimastig-
omycota and Microsporidia. The Glomeromycota and the Neocallimastigomycota contain
no entomopathogenic fungi. Chytridiomycota, Basidiomycota and Blastocladiomycota
 contain a few entomopathogenic species, but there are no reports of infection in the Acari
(Chandler et al. 2000). Many Microsporidia are now considered entomopathogenic fungi.
The Ascomycota have a few species which infect ticks (Table 2) but they are generally
unsuitable for myco-acaricide development. For example, Scopulariopsis brevicaulis
(Saccardo) Bainier is found in soil, stored plant and animal products, insects and ticks
(Samsinakova et al. 1974; Yoder et al. 2003; Polar 2007) and is known to cause ony-
chomycosis (fungal infection of fingernails or toenails) in humans (Onions 1966). The
yeast Candida haemuionii (van Uden & Kolipinski) Meyer & Yarrow was found to cause
high pathogenicity in a laboratory colony of the tick Ornithodorus moubata Murray;
however, this was due to contamination of the blood meal (Loosova et al. 2001)
The zygomycete subphylum Entomophthoromycotina contains important obligate
entomopathogens such as Conidiobofus, Entomophthora and Neozygites which normally
have narrow host ranges, often cause natural epizootics but are not easily grown in vitro
(St. Leger and Screen 2001). Chandler et al. (2000) demonstrated that a number of
isolates from these genera infect mites; however, only Conidioboius coronatus (Const-
antin) Batko was reported to be isolated from a tick species, Ixodes ricinus L. This
fungus is found in soil and decaying plant debris and is known to be pathogenic to a
number of insect species (Kedra and Bogus 2006), but it is known to cause entomo-
phytoramycosis (formation of tumours) in humans (Valle et al. 2001). The mould
Rhizopus thailandensis (Zygomycete) has demonstrated experimental pathogenicity to
Rhipicephaius sanguineus Latreille; however, under field conditions the performance was
poor (Casasolas-Oliver 1991).
126
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Kolomeic (1950) (in Chandler
Kolomeic (1950) (in Chandler 
 Experimental infection 
(1661) 190-55
et al. 2000)
et al. 2000)
1. (1995) (in Chandler
Cherepanova (1964) (in Kalsbeek 
Samsinakova et al. (1974)
Samsinakova et al. (1974)
Samsinakova et al. (1974)
Samsinakova et al. (1974)
Monteiro et al. (2004)
Monteiro et al. (2004)
(2001)
Monteiro et al. (2004)
Monteiro et al.(2004)
Yoder et al. (2003)
 Natural infection 
Loosova et al.
Mwangi et al.
et al. 2000)
et al. 1995)
Polar (2007)
Polar (2007)
Rhipicephatus appendicutatus
Rhipicephatus microptus
Rhipicephatus sanguineus
Dermacentor marginatus
Dermacentor reticulatus
Omithodoros moubata
Dermacentor variabtis
Hyatomma scupense
lxodid species
D. marginatus
sanguineus
R microptus
1. ricinus
I. ricinus
R
R
R
Table 2Fungi associated with ticks
Scopulariopsis brevicautis
Rhizopus thaitandensis
Aspergittus fumnigalus
Candida haemutonii
(ex-Deuteromycetes)
Aspergiltus fiavus
Aspergittus niger
Curvutaria spp.
Aspergittus sp.
Attemaria sp.
Fungal species
Ascomycota
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
127
Monteiro et al. (1998a); Samish
Samsinakova et al. (1974)
Samsinakova et al. (1974)
Kaaya and Hassan (2000)
 Experimental infection
Monteiro et al. (1998b)
Bittencourt et al. (1997)
Campos et al. (2005)
Kirkland et al. (2004)
Kirkland et al. (2004)
Kaaya et al. (1996)
Kaaya et al. (1996)
et al. (2001)
Kalsbeek et al. (1995); Samsinakova
Verissimo (1995) (in Chandler et al.
Lombardini (1953); Monteiro et al.
2000), da Costa et al. (2002)
Samsinakova et al. (1974)
Samsinakova et al. (1974)
Samsinakova et al. (1974)
Samsinakova et al. (1974)
Samsinakova et al. (1974)
Samsinakova et al. (1974)
Kalsbeek et al. (1995)
Monteiro et al. (2004)
Natural infection
Rogers (1989)
et al. (1974)
Polar (2007)
(2004)
Rhipicephatus decotoratus
Ambtyomma americanum
Ambtyomma maculatum
Ambtyommavariegatum
Anacentor nitens
Jxodid species
marginalus
D.reticutatus
R microplus
sanguineus
sanguineus
D. relicutatus
smmugimu d
R. microptus
Ficinus
ricinus
Ficinus
D
R
R
R
R
Aspergittus parasiticus
Beauveria brongniartit
Fusarium graminearum
Aspergittus tamarit
Table 2 continued
Fusarium sp.
Fungal species
128
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Kaaya et al. (1996); Kaaya and
Kaaya et al. (1996); Kaaya and
et al. (1998); Onofre et al.
(2002); Polar et al. (2005a)
Bittencourt et al.
 Experimental infection
Samish et al. (2001)
Kirkland et al. (2004)
Kirkland et al. (2004)
Souza et al. (1999)
Gindin et al. (2002)
Gindin et al. (2002)
Zhioua et al. (1997)
Hassan (2000)
Hassan (2000)
Polar (2007)
Castro
(2001); 1
Kalsbeek et al. (1995)
Kalsbeek et al. (1995)
Kalsbeek et al. (1995)
da Costa et al. (2002)
 Natural infection 
Polar (2007)
Polar (2007)
Polar (2007)
Ambtyomma cajennense
Rhipicephatus annutatus
Hyatomma excavatum
Ixodes scapularis
R. appendicutatus
Jxodid species
A.variegalum
R. microptus
R microptus
Ficinus
Ficinus
R
R
R
Fusarium proliferatum
Metarhiziumanisopliae
Fusarium napiforme
Lecanicitium lecanit
Table 2 continued
Isariafarinosus
sarialenuipes
Fungal species
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
129
Experimental infection
Onofre et al. (2001)
Samish et al. (2001)
Polar et al. (2005a)
 Polar et al. (2005a)
Cherepanova (1964) (in Kalsbeek
Koval (1974) (in Chandler et al.
Koval (1974) (in Chandler et al.
(z yy pue uoe) qoeau ee ([ouoo peoe[d aq oi guny joj wei suou e se psn q 'wnud [ewo e ion ,
Samsinakova et al. (1974)
Monteiro et al. (2004)
Kalsbeek et al. (1995)
Natural infection
Rogers (1989)
et al. 1995)
2000)
2000)
Jxodid species
sanguineus
sanguineus
Argas persicus
smoimu 
ricinus
1.ricinus
R
R
R
R
Metarhiziumflavoviridevar.
Penicittium insectivorum
Simpticiltium lametticota
Trichothecium roseum
Penicittium citrinum
Table 2 continued
Penicittium sp.
Fungal species
Zaygomycota
flavoviride
130
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
A large group of fungi, which lost the ability to, or rarely does, produce sexual
structures were formerly placed in the division Deuteromycota within the class
Hyphomycetes (Inglis et al. 2001). Although both these terms are now obsolete with
almost all the species placed at least presumptively within the Ascomycota, for purposes
of this review the terrm Deuteromycete is retained, as it is one which insect pathologists
are most familiar with. Many Deuteromycetes are facultative pathogens which generally
have a broad host range but are commonly used in biological pesticides due to ease of
mass-production and pathogenic properties (St. Leger and Screen 2001). Kalsbeek et al.
(1995) stated that the Deuteromycetes are the only fungi which have been isolated from
ticks and there are only a few exceptions to this general rule (Table 2). Some Deuter-
myco-acaricides due to safety reasons. For example, Aspergillus is known to cause
respiratory diseases in humans, birds, domesticated anirmals and many other anirmal
 sd m      s o e ) 
example, Fusarium is known to contain a complex of around three entomopathogenic
species:Fusarium coccophilum (Desm.) Wollenweber & Reinking,Fusarium larvarum
Fuckel and Fusarium juruanum P. Henn., which are strong pathogens of diaspidid scale
insects (Evans and Prior 1990), but weak pathogens or saprothrops of the Acari
(Chandler et al. 2000),
Common genera used in biological control of insects include Metarhizium, Beauveria,
Lecanicillium and Isaria (Butt et al. 200l). (Note: Fungi of Paecilomyces were placed in
the Paecilomyces section Isarioidea Samson and equated with Isaria.) These genera have
also been shown to contain species which are strongly pathogenic to a range of tick
species. Beauveria bassiana and M. anisopliae are the most commonly used species for
experimental work, but there are only a few cases where they have been isolated from ticks
(Table 2). Lecanicillium has only one entomopathogenic species, L. lecanii, which is
reported to kill ticks, mites and other insects (Chandler et al. 2000). The 12 species
currently placed in Paecilomyces section Isarioidea (although not all have corresponding
names in Isaria) are facultative pathogens of insects (especially Coleoptera and Lepi-
doptera) and of these, only Isaria farinosa (Holmsk.) Fr. and Isaria fumosorosea Wize are
reported to infect the Acari (Chandler et al. 2000). However, Polar (2007) has recently
isolated Isaria tenuipesPeck from R. microplus.
Hostspecificityofisolate
Registration of any fungal isolate for commercial use requires documentation on host
specificity, in order to assess potential impacts on non-target organisms including safety to
tick pathogenic isolate M. anisopliae ARSEF3297 demonstrated varied levels of patho-
genicity to several non-target orders such as Orthoptera (Coscineuta virens Thunberg),
Hymenoptera (Anagyrus kamali Moursi, Polistes sp.), Coleoptera (Callosobruchus mac-
uatus Fabricius) and Hemiptera (Maconellicoccus hirsutus Green) but was not pathogenic
to Araneae (spiders of the family Mecicobothiidae) or other Hymenoptera (Azteca spp.)
(Polar 2007). Ginsberg et al. (2002) similarly found broad physiological host range
characteristics with a tick pathogenic M. anisopliae isolate. This isolate exhibited patho-
genicity to mole crickets (Acheta domesficus L.) and ladybird beetles (Hippodamia
convergens Guerin-Meneville), but marginal pathogenicity to milkweed bugs (Oncopeifus
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
131
variability in the secretion of proteases and chitinolytic enzymes during the infection
process has been shown to be important (Freimoser et al. 2003).
The fact that some isolates exhibit broad physiological host ranges does not neces-
sarily imply that the ecological host range found in nature would be similarly broad.
Goettel et al. (1990) cited literature indicating that entomopathogenic fungi exhibited
narrower host ranges under field conditions, compared to laboratory conditions that may
be more suitable for the pathogen. Careful selection of isolates for narrow ecological
host ranges can reduce impacts on non-target organisms. Selected B. bassiana isolates
have been applied to control pine caterpillars (Dendrolimus sp.) in areas used to rear
silkworrm (Bombyx mori Steinhaus) with no adverse effect (Butt et al. 2001). In fact, Butt
et al. (1998) used honeybees to vector M. anisopliae for the control of the pollen beetle,
Meligethes aeneus Fabricius, while the bumble bee, Bombus impatiens Cresson, has
successfully vectored B. bassiana (Al-Mazra'awi et al. 2006). Utilizing isolates with a
infecting a wider range of arthropod pests of domestic animals (ticks, mites, flies)
without the toxic side effects to humans or animals associated with chermical pesticides,
could be desirable.
Originof isolate
isolated as compared to a new, unrelated host (Goettel et al. 1990). However, there are
several instances where isolates derived from ticks have been found to be less pathogenic
in comparison to isolates from non-tick hosts. Monteiro et al. (1998a, b) found that the M.
anisopliae isolate (Ma319), of ant origin, was more effective than the tick isolate (Ma959)
in terms of mortality to larvae and inhibition of egg hatching in R. sanguineus. Addi-
tionally, I. fumosorosea, which originated from Rhipicephalus annulatus (Say), was not as
pathogenic to R. annuiatus in comparison to strains of non-tick origin (Gindin et al. 2001).
Virulence
High concentrations of conidia (10*-10? conidia/ml) used in laboratory bioassays produce
significant mortality in cattle ticks. However, pathogenicity often declines rapidly as
              
which implies that virulence of the isolates may not be high. Considering the small size of
tick development stages, and difficulty in targeting them on the cattle surface, only few
conidia are likely to attach to the target; thus there is a need to identify highly virulent
isolates. In studies with Schistocerca gregaria (Forskal), Prior et al. (1995), using M.
anisopliae var. acridum, calculated that a dose of 500-5000 conidia/insect caused 95%
mortality in 6-7 days. However, minimum lethal doses for various developmental stages in
ticks have not been calculated.
Although mortality is desirable, sublethal effects can contribute significantly to control
efforts as they often affect reproduction and hence the future population size in the field.
reproductive parameters such as post engorgerment weights, oviposition period, weight of
egg mass, larval eclosion period and eclosion (Monteiro et al. 1998b; Onofre et al. 2001;
Samish et al. 2001; Hornbostel et al. 2004)
132
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Target factors
Tickspecies
Natural and experimental infection, by entomopathogenic fungi, has been demonstrated in
a number of tick species including: Argas persicus Oken, Ambiyomma americanum L.,
Ambtyomma cajennense (Fabricius), Ambtyomma macuiatum Koch, A.variegatum, Ana-
centor nitens Neumann, R. annuiatus, Rhipicephaius decoloratus Koch, R. micropius,
Dermacentor variablis Say,Dermacentor reticulatus Fabricus,Dermacentor marginatus
Sulzer,Hyalomma excavatum Kock,Hyalomma scupense Olenev,1. ricinus,Ixodes
scapularis Say, R. appendiculatus and R. sanguineus (Table 2).
In many instances, the geographic range of tick species of economic importance overlap
(Olwoch et al. 2003); hence, the ability to kill several tick species using a single isolate
myco-acaricide would be ideal. There are few studies which demonstrated the pathoge-
nicity of isolates to more than one tick species. Gindin et al. (2002) demonstrated
atum using isolates of M. anisoptiae, M. favoviride Gams & Roszypal, B. bassiana, P.
fumosoroseus and L. fecanii. Kaaya and Hassan (2000) also demonstrated high mortality in
A. variegatum and R. appendiculatus in experiments with M. anisopliae and B. bassiana
isolates. Polar et al. (2005a) found that R. sanguineus was less susceptible to M. anisopliae
ARSEF3297in comparison to R.microplus.
Developmental stage
Not all stages of an insect's life cycle are equally susceptible to infection by entomo-
pathogenic fungi (Butt and Goettel 2000); the same appears to be true for ticks. In several
tick species, all development stages have been shown to be susceptible to entomopatho-
 genic fungi to varying degrees. Bittencourt et al. (1994) dermonstrated the inhibition of egg
eclosion and larval mortality in R. microplus using isolates of M. anisopliae. Gindin et al.
(2002) demonstrated that an M. anisopliae isolate induced mortality to varying extents, in
engorged females, males, nymphs and larvae of B. annulafus, R. sanguineus and H. sex-
cavatum. It also reduced fecundity and egg viability in the same species. Samish et al.
(2001) compared a few isolates of four fungal species (B. bassiana, M. anisopliae, M.
anisopliae var. acridum and I. fumosoroseus) on R. sanguineus and found that unfed larvae
n   s   n  m a  m s p
females were less sensitive than engorged fermales. The ability of fungi to kill both
mitted by the younger stages such as larvae and nymphs while engorging females cause
blood loss and loss of productivity (Pegram and Oosterwijk 1990; Kettle 1995).
Finally, in insects, moulting may result in the loss of inoculum on the exuviae (Butt and
Goettel 2000). This phenomenon has not been investigated in ticks where it is also likely to
limit infection in a similar manner, particularly in one-host ticks with short life cycles, such
as R. micropfus, where moulting may occur before penetration of the germ tube.
Anatomy
In theory, ticks should be good hosts for fungal pathogens particularly in the engorged state
when the integument is stretched (Kalsbeek et al. 1995). Bittencourt et al. (1995a, b)
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
133
demonstrated that infection of R. micropius by M. anisopliae is fairly rapid with hyphae
appearing in the intermal organs 3 days post-infection. Polar et al. (2005a) questioned
whether ticks, relative to insect species, are indeed anatomically favourable to fungal
infection considering the high concentrations of conidia which are often needed to induce
(Evans 1992) may make fungal penetration and colonisation difficult in vivo. Additionally,
water availability for the germination of conidia needs to be considered. Insects lose water
through the spiracles during respiration and via faeces and saliva (Rourke and Gibbs 1999).
Moore et al. (1997) suggested that, in locusts, water for germination of the conidia may be
absorbed directly from the cuticle or from a boundary layer around the insect. However,
the structure of the tick integument is highly impermeable, restricting water loss from the
body (Evans 1992), thus water for germination of conidia on the tick surface may not be as
readily available, unless a humid boundary layer occurs to supply moisture. In argasid
ticks, excess water is eliminated via the coxal apparatus but no such structure exists in
ixodid ticks (Kettle 1995). Little urine is secreted by the Malpighian tubules and excess
fuid is eliminated by salivation passed back into the host, and hence may not be available
for germination of conidia.
Life cycte
Ticks have highly variable life cycles and feeding patterns (Kettle 1995). The majority of
ixodid ticks are three-host ticks where the larvae, nymphs and adults fall off the host after
feeding, while in one-host ticks (e.g., subgenus Boophilus and Margaropus spp.) the
developmental stages remain attached to the same individual host (Kettle 1995). As such,
resulting in more effective control compared to three-host ticks which may spend up to
90% of their time off the cattle host.
Location on host
The preferred feeding location of the ticks is also important in a myco-acaricide appli-
cation strategy. The nymphs and larvae of R. microplus may wander about the host while
the adult females often attach on the neck, flank, brisket, inguinal region and escutcheon of
the host (Kettle 1995). This suggests that R. micropius can be targeted easily through
spraying or dipping. However, immature Rhipicephaius everisi Neumann occur deep inside
the ear which makes targeting more diffcult, although Kaaya et al. (1996) suggested that
the high humidity of the ear may assist pathogenesis while the lack of ultra violet light may
favour persistence of the fungus. Targeting methods should also consider that after mo-
ulting ticks move around, thus increasing the probability of coming into contact with
conidia of an applied myco-acaricide.
Host skin microenvironment
Anatomy
Cattle skin is divided into the epidermis and the dermis from which the hair follicles which
             
animals in terms of length, diameter and the number per cm?. For example the pig has a
134
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
sparse coat cormposed of large hairs (10-20 per cm²) while cattle have a denser coat of finer
hairs which may exceed 2000 per cm' in some breeds (Jenkinson 1992).
 The intact skin provides a barrier against disease-causing organisms and environmental
challenges (Wikel 1996). The cattle coat acts as the first line of defence by physically
preventing colonisation by microbes in the environment (Jenkinson 1992). An entomo-
pathogen applied to cattle is likely to face some aspects of the innate immune defences
(i.e., non-specific factors on skin) more so than the acquired irmmune response as ento-
mopathogens are not normally invasive in mammalian tissue. Additionally, conidia which
 s         n    
pared to conidia landing on the skin surface.
Skintemperature
Temperature is a key factor infuencing entomopathogen efficiency. Increasing temperature
above 25-30°C generally reduces germination of conidia although some isolates are more
resistant to temperature than others (Moore and Morley-Davies 1994; Morley-Davies et al.
1996). Brooks et al. (2004) demonstrated that increasing temperature from 28 to 37.5°C
reduced M. anisopliae infection of the ectoparasitic mite Psoroptes ovis Hering.
  adn a m a o go s s 
Monty 1974). Monty and Garbareno (1978) found that surface temperature fuctuations of
the thorax of Holstein-Friesian cattle in Arizona (USA),under normal shaded conditions,
ranged from 28 to 40°C. These temperatures are higher than the optimum for germination,
growth and pathogenicity of most entomopathogens (20-25°C) (Inglis et al. 2001). Polar
et al. (2005b) demonstrated that different locations on cattle in Trinidad ranged from 28 to
 41°℃ with the temperature of the udder, where R. micropius are most prevalent, fuctuating
diurnallyfrom31 to35°C
Selection of isolates, which can survive and grow at temperatures similar to those which
exist on mammalian skin, assuming the temperature in the tick and on the skin are similar,
is important to the development of myco-acaricides for topical application to cattle. This
may even be important for pasture application, where infected immature stages may attach
to host to continue development. Tick pathogenic isolates are often selected in bioassays at
standard laboratory temperatures (25-27°C) (Bittencourt et al. 1994; Gindin et al. 2001).
 However, these isolates are not necessarily pathogenic at the higher temperatures found on
the cattle surface. Polar et al. (2005b) compared two M. anisopliae isolates (IM1386697
and ARSEF3297) in bioassay conditions mimicking the skin temperature of cattle (31-
35°C, fuctuating in a 12 h cycle) and at a more traditional bioassay temperature (28°C,
constant). At 28°C, both isolates produced similar pathogenicity to R. micropfus, but under
temperature in its growth profile, was more pathogenic. In field studies, after three weekly
sprays, IM1386697 had reduced the tick population on cattle by 72%, while ARSEF3297
poduced a 36% reduction, in comparison to the control. Leemon and Jonsson (2008)
subsequently evaluated 31 Australian M. anisopliae isolates for their growth between 20
and 40°C and pathogenicity to R. microplus although bioassays were carried out at 25°℃.
Fungal isolates which can grow at mammalian temperatures are generally avoided due
to the potential risk of human infection. Burgner et al. (1998) reported disseminated
infection by M. anisopliae in a 9-year-old boy undergoing chemotherapy for lymphoblastic
leukemia. This isolate was found to exhibit limited growth at 35-37°C and can be con-
sidered temperature tolerant. Revankar et al. (1999) also suggested that M. anisopliae was
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
135
responsible for two cases of sinusitis in immuno-competent hosts; however, laboratory
studies indicated that these isolates grew best at 25°C, but were unable to grow at 35°C.
Human and animal infections by M. anisopfiae are rare even in immuno-incompetent
hosts. There is insufficient evidence to conclude whether temperature tolerant isolates are
more dangerous to humans than isolates that have lower temperature tolerance. The sce-
narios suggest that the fungi of the above studies (Burgner et al. 1998; Revankar et al.
1999) were opportunists and although the fungi were present they were not necessarily
responsible for the conditions observed. Additionally, there were no reports that the fungi
were associated with exposure to myco-insecticides. Although myco-insecticides have an
excellent safety record, consideration to the peculiar features of high temperature tolerant
isolates will be necessary, in addition to the standard safety assessrments.
Coathumidity
High ambient relative humidity is known to favour mortality as it allows for greater
germination of conidia (Marcandier and Khachatourians 1987). However, it is now
believed that the relative humidity of the microenvironment is more critical than the
ambient relative humidity with regards to mortality (Inglis et al. 200l). The relative
a    go d    s  a   
pressure (Allen et al. 1970). The moisture content of the cattle coat can range from 5.8 to
27.5% and this can be infuenced by the cattle breed and environmental factors(Allen et al.
1970). The study also indicated that in hot environments the relative humidity of the cattle
coat could be up to 5.5% above the average moisture content. Additionally, a stable
humidity is likely to be maintained as the cornified squames (flat cells) are hygroscopic and
capable of absorbing 3-4 times their own weight in water from the atmosphere (Jenkinson
1992).
Availability of water to support gerrmination of conidia on the tick surface has already
been discussed as a potentially limiting factor above. Since the humidity within the cattle
  s    o      
genesis. However, the ability of skin and hair to retain moisture, thus providing a more
stable humidity, may be more important in favouring pathogenesis. The impact of skin
humidity on the pathogenesis thus remains unclear and requires further study.
SkinpH
The pH of the cattle skin varies depending on location and age (Jenkinson and Mabon
1973). The muzzle (6.4) and teats (6.13) of Ayrshire cattle had higher pH values relative to
other parts on the body. The skin pH of young heifers ranged from 5.0 to 7.6, most
frequently in the range 5.6-6.0, while that of adult cattle ranged from 4.5 to 7.6, but most
frequently in the range of 5.0-5.5. Increasing temperature and humidity did not have an
effect on skin pH.
Fungal development is generally favoured by alkaline pH and the acidic environment
which indicates that M. anisopliae can grow over a pH range of 2.5-10.5 but specific
isolates are likely to have more restricted ranges. In complex environments, such as soil.
the effects of pH are not well understood, although there are a number of studies dem-
136
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
fungi (Inglis et al. 2001). Skin pH is known to affect skin microfora (McBride 1993) which
may have possible antagonistic or synergistic effects on the applied entomopathogen.
Skinsecretions
Sebum. Sebum, a viscous/oily substance is primarily produced by a process of lipogenesis
from live cells rather than holocrine glands as is the case for most marmmals and its
secretion is influenced by sex and season (Smith and Jenkinson 1975a, b; Jenkinson 1992).
Sebum exists as an emulsion in the convex amorphous material (CAM) found on the
margins of the epidermal squames in the interfollicular region of the cattle skin, and coats
the hair shaft immediately above the skin, but does not fow across the skin surface
(Jenkinson and Lloyd 1979). It may harden to form a sealant in the spaces between the
squames and forrm a physical barrier to microorganisms at the surface cell margins and may
regulate water fow through the corneum (Jenkinson and Lloyd 1979). The composition of
lipids in sebum is complex and includes: chlosteryl esters (3%), wax diesters Type I
(37.7%) and Type I1 (7.9%), wax triesters (29.9%), triglycerides (3.6%), 2-lyso diesters
Type I (2.0%) and Type II (1.6%), lysotriesters (1.6%), free fatty alcohols (0.6%), 1-lys0
diesters Type II (4.9%), cholesterol (4.0%), free fatty acids (2.3%) and an unidentified
class (2.0%) (Downing and Lindholm 1982). Sebum composition in the sebaceous gland is
similar to skin surface lipids, except that the sebaceous glands contain a higher proportion
cholesterol (Smith and Ahmed 1976; McMaster et al. 1985)
Sebum lipids impart a disinfecting activity on the skin surface and the free fatty acids of
sebum are responsible for this property, with regard to bacteria (Wille and Kydonieus
2003). Smith and Ahmed (1976) reported that linoleic acid is a major constituent of the
triglyceride component of the sebum on the surface (17.7%) and the glands (10.2%) and
has antimicrobial properties. Additionally, myristic, palmitic and oleic acids found in
bovine sebum are also known to be bacteriostatic and even bacteriocidal. Palmitoleic acid
from human sebum,which is also present in bovine sebum,was found to be bactericidal to
gram positive bacteria (Staphylococcus aureus Rosenbach, Staphylococcus pyogenes
Rosenbach and Corynebacterium sp.) but not to Candida aibicans (C. P. Robin) Berkhout
(yeast) and gram negative bacteria such as Escherichia cofi (Migula) Castellani & Chal-
mers, Enterobacter saerogenes Horrmaeche & Edwards, Klebsiella pneumoniae (Schroeter)
Trevisan and Propiobacterium acne (Gilchrist) Douglas & Gunter (Wille and Kydonieus
2003). Palmitoleic acid was also found to inhibit the adhesion of C. albicans to the stratum
corneum (Wille and Kydonieus 2003)
Sebum potentially affects fungal germination. Barnes and Moore (1997) demonstrated
that caprilic (C-8) and capric (C-10) fatty acids are inhibitory to germination of M. ani-
sopliae while stearic acid overcame the inhibition. Sebum from cattle skin washing was
found to have 14.3% stearic acid (C-18) (McMaster et al. 1985). However, it is unclear if
capric or caprilic acid is present. Downing and Lindholm (1982) indicated that the majority
of aliphatic components in cattle sebum are above C12, however, a C10 fatty acid com-
ponent was reported. Both capric acid (0.3%) and stearic acid (0.2%) are present in wool
wax of sheep (Weitkamp 1945), but it is not known if they are in cattle sebum.
Sweat. Cattle sweat also has the potential to influence germination of fungal conidia.
Cattle sweat contains a range of ions (e.g., sodium, potassium, magnesium, calcium, chloride
and phosphorus), lactate, 3-methoxy-4-mandelic acid, proteins and corticosterols (Mabon
and Jenkinson 1971;Jenkinson et al. 1974a, b;Jenkinson and Mabon 1975; Lloyd et al. 1977).
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
137
Increasing temperature also increased the nitrogen,sodium and potassium content of sweat
(Singh and Newton 1978; Jenkinson and Mabon 1973; Jenkinson et al. 1974b).
to play a role in the immune response against microorganisms (Jenkinson et al. 1979).
Jenkinson et al. (1974b) suggested that the increased nitrogen from sweat could increase
bacterial growth on the skin surface. A similar effect may occur with fungi, as Li and
Holdom (1995) demonstrated that increased nitrogen could increase fungal growth in vitro.
The skin microflora is known to coincide with the distribution of surface sebum and sweat
emulsion which is a likely nutrient source (Lloyd et al. 1979b)
Skinmicroflora
The microbial population found on the cattle skin is present in the outer layers of the
stratum corneum and in the hair follicle infundibulum (Lloyd et al. 1979b). This population
consists mainly of mixed microcolonies of coccoid and rod shaped bacteria and, occa-
sionally, yeast and flamentous fungi are also observed (Lloyd et al. 1979b). The skin
microbial population is highly specialised and only a limited number of inhabitants are
bacteria face not only the skin's defence mechanism, but intense biological competition
(Jenkinson 1992). This may also infuence the survival of an applied entomopathogen.
Ticks which are reported to have shown natural infection by fungi have been collected
from soil or vegetation (Kalsbeek et al. 1995; Samsinakova et al. 1974; da Costa et al.
2002) and directly from animals (Polar 2007; Kalsbeek et al. 1995). As ticks are inter-
remains unclear if ticks are infected by fungi on the cattle surface, either as part of the
natural fora or as contamination, or if their immature stages pick up pathogens solely, or
relative rarity with which entomopathogenic fungi have been recorded from cattle skin. In
skin scrapings of ruminants, the fungal dermatophytes Trichophyton mentagrophytes
(Robin) Blanchard, Trichophyton rubrum (Castell.) Sabouraud and Microsporum gypseum
(Bodin) Guiart & Grigorakis have been isolated (Mitra et al. 1998), but none of these
organisms have been isolated from ticks. However, non-dermatophyte fungi including
  o       s  go s   i 
et al. 2003) and similar fungi have been isolated from ticks (Samsinakova et al. 1974; da
Costa et al. 2002; Monteiro et al. 2004).
It is of interest that,from the literature reviewed,there are no entomopathogenic fungi
isolated from permanent ectoparasites, (i.e., those with no developmental stage in the natural
environment) such as lice (Phthiraptera) and mites of the Sarcoptidae, Psoroptoidae and
Analogoidea, of warm blooded animals. All the fungal infected mites reported in Chandler
et al. (2000) and Van der Geest et al. (2000) were phytophagous or soil associates and may
have picked up the fungi from the wider environment. The one possible exception cited by
Van der Geest et al. (2000), Hirstionyssus sp., was infected by an unknown Laboulbeniales
(Ascomycota) which may have been a rodent ectoparasite such as Hirstionyssus isabellinus
Oudermans (Baker et al. 1956). This suggests that skin microfora or contarminants may not be
microenvironment may be hostile for infection. It should be considered that entomopatho-
genic fungi capable of surviving on the cattle surface may be highly effective because the
138
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Routes of infection
Mortality of a target depends on the organism picking up a lethal dose of the entomo-
pathogen. In field studies with grasshoppers and locusts, three distinct routes of fungal
infection were identified: (a) direct impaction of the target with spray droplets, (b) sec-
ondary pick-up by the target (residual infection) of spray residues frorm vegetation and soil,
and (c) secondary cycling of the pathogen from individuals infected from the first two
modes (Bateman 1997; Bateman and Chapple 2001). The extent to which the three routes
contribute overall tick mortality from an applied pathogen on cattle is likely to vary due to
the peculiarities of the cattle skin microenvironment.
Direct impaction
The hair density and length in the cattle coat varies between cattle breeds, season and other
environmental effects (Berman and Volcani 1961; Steelman et al. 1997). The nature of the
cattle coat is likely to limit the penetration of applied conidia thus limiting contact with
ticks on the skin surface. Formulation and application techniques are likely to strongly
infuence the contribution of direct impaction to overall mortality.
Secondary pick-up
Residual infection can also make a significant contribution to overall mortality. Thomas
et al. (1997) stated that in situations where direct impaction of the target with entomo-
pathogen is limited, secondary pick-up is essential for effective control. In field
experiments, 40-50% of the total infection of the grasshopper Hieroglyphus daganensis
Krauss resulted from residual infection.
 Residual infection is infuenced by initial infectivity, persistence (Thomas et al. 1997)
and availability of conidia. Polar et al. (2005c) demonstrated that emulsifiable adjuvant oils
(e.g., Newman's Cropspray 11-E, Codacide oil) increased pathogenicity in laboratory
bioassays when directly applied to ticks compared to Tween 80 formulations. However, it
should be considered that emulsifiable adjuvant oils may cause conidia to be too strongly
bound to hair, limiting availability to transfer to the target. Alternatively, conidia too
lbosely bound may become easily dislodged by movement of animals or rainfall.
Pre-soaking of conidia is one method of improving initial infectivity. Dillon and
Charnley (1985) demonstrated that pre-soaking can reduce the time to germination of
conidia. Pre-soaking has been shown to increase pathogenicity of M. anisopliae to
Manduca sexta L. (Hassan et al. 1989) but not to S. gregaria (Moore et al. 1997). Further
Prolonging field persistence of the conidia may improve the performance of the fungus
 in the field as there is a higher probability of the target encountering the entomopathogen
(Inglis et al. 2001) as well as increasing the chances of circumstances more favourable for
entomopathogens on cattle. Kaaya et al. (1996) recovered Colony Forming Units (CFUs)
from inside the ears of cattle up to 3 weeks and 1 week with M. anisopliae and B. bassiana
applications, respectively. Polar (2007) recovered CFUs of M. anisopliae frorm the
escutcheon of treated cattle using Sabouraud Dextrose Agar-Yeast plates with 100 μg/l
dodine (Lui et al. 1993). The number of CFUs declined rapidly between 24 and 48 h and
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
139
there was limited recovery 72 h after application. This suggests that time which conidia can
persist on cattle may be relatively short and may limit residual infection.
Several factors which either encourage death or germination of conidia may influence
persistence of conidia. The UVB portion (285-315 nm) of solar radiation has been shown
to be detrimental to conidial persistence (Moore and Morley-Davies 1994; Hedimbi et al.
2008, this issue). Moore et al. (1996) cited literature indicating that M. anisopliae has a half
life of 110-360 min when exposed to UV radiation (simulated sunlight) and demonstrated
the detrimental effects of UV radiation on conidial persistence increased with increasing
temperature. These laboratory results were not replicated in the field where persistence was
much greater, presumably because many conidia were shielded from direct sunlight,
entomopathogen to sunlight on the insect body, as it is assumed that penetration occurs
within 24 h in most insects (Inglis et al. 2001), but again it is likely that avoidance to the
damaging UV rays is important for persistence. The cattle coat is likely to reduce UV
damage, however, no studies have been conducted to measure the UV levels within the
cattle coat. The effect of other factors described above (e.g., skin secretions, microflora)
are likely to infuence persistence but knowledge in this area is limited.
Secondary cycling
Secondary cycling is unlikely to contribute to overall infection on the cattle surface as
infected ticks are likely to detach from the cattle host and fall off the animal. However,
increasing the amount of fungal inoculum in the natural environment through secondary
cycling, akin to pasture application, is likely to increase the levels of infection in the tick
population.
Conclusion and recommendations
Based on the constraints identified, detailed recommendations for research are listed in
Table 3. Myco-acaricides are likely to become a necessary tool considering the rate at
which resistance is developing to existing products, the high cost of developing new
chemical acaricides and the projected expansion of the geographic range of African tick
species.
This paper reviews the current status of control of cattle ticks by topical application of
ticides for application to animal systems to control ectoparasites. There are numerous
which are useful for the development of an effective system for control based on myco-
acaricides. This is similar to the position with the control of crop pests less than 20 years
ago hence lessons can be drawn from recent studies which recognise that improvements in
a succession of components are required to move successfully from isolating a fungus, to
the development of a viable myco-insecticide.
There is considerable potential for a myco-acaricide developed for pasture or topical
application to cattle for the control of ticks. Experiments with pasture application have had
excellent results while trials with topical application to cattle have been variable. The
animal skin is very complex, and temperature, moisture, pH and skin secretions are singly
or more likely in cormbination, important factors to be considered if effective myco-
140
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Table 3 Research priorities for the development of a myco-acaricide for the control of ticks
Infuencing factors
Key findings/possible impacts
Recommendations for research
Pathogen factors
Fungal species
Metarhizium and Beauveria spp.
Focus on evaluating isolates of
are the key pathogens of ticks
Metarhizium and Beauveria for tick
and have very good safety
pathogenicity.
characteristics for
Determine factors in these species which
development as myco-
are responsible for the strong
acaricides.
pathogenicity to ticks.
Host specificity of isolate
An isolate with a broad
Although narrow ecological host range
physiological host range does
isolates may have limited irmpacts on
not necessarily mean the
non-targets, a broad host range isolate
ecological host range will be
may be used to target a wider range of
similarly wide.
ectoparasites.
Determination of the ecological host
range of isolates should only be
a priority at later stages of research.
Origin of isolate
Contrary to a common belief,
Limit focus on bioprospecting for
isolates from tick species have
isolates from ticks and screen isolates
not proven to be more
from international collections with
pathogenic to ticks than non-
good production characteristics for
tick isolates.
pathogenicity to ticks.
Virulence
In bioassays, high concentrations
ldentify highly virulent tick pathogenic
of conidia are generally
isolates and calculate minimum lethal
required to produce mortality
doses for all tick stages.
in ticks which may indicate
Determine contribution of sublethal
that highly virulent isolates are
effects to tick control.
not known.
Sublethal effects can affect
reproduction in ticks and could
be used in control strategies.
Host factors
Tick species
A range of tick species are
ldentify a suite of isolates which are
susceptible to
pathogenic to a wider range of
entomopathogenic fungi.
species—these studies will need to
Single isolates may vary in
take a geographic focus depending on
pathogenicity between tick
which ticks are important in particular
species.
areas or if formulation can improve
range.
Development stage
All developmental stages are
ldentify a suite of isolates which are
susceptible to
pathogenic to mature and immature
entormopathogenic fungi but
stages and test if formulation can
single isolates may vary in
improve range.
pathogenicity.Several tick
developmental stages may be
present on animal at any given
time.
Anatomy
Ticks, particularly non-engorged
Determine if the anatomy of ticks makes
stages, may provide a greater
the use of myco-acaricides impractical
challenge to fungal
for the control of certain tick species.
colonisation than insects due to
the nature of the tick body and
other anatormical features.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
141
Table 3 continued
Infuencing factors
Key findings/possible ipacts
Recommendations for research
Life cycle
One-host ticks spend most of
Determine how long various tick species
their life cycle attached to a
are on cattle and determine
single host and are easy to
appropriate application strategy for
target using topical
myco-acaricides.
applications of myco-
acaricide. The development
stages of three-host ticks spend
the majority of their time off
host, making topical
applications of myco-acaricide
lesseffective
Location
Tick species have specialised
Determine where tick species reside on
habitats on animal host.
animals and implications for myco-
Microenvironmental factors may
acaricide application.
vary in parts of the animal host
which may affect fungal
efficacy.
Host skin microenvironment
Skin temperature
Efficiency of entomopathogenic
 Identify high temperature tolerant
fungi is generally reduced at
isolates,either those which can grow
mammalian skin temperatures.
or merely survive without detriment,
Temperature may be a major
for use in future studies.
Hmiting factor to the
Evaluate safety of high temperature
performance of a topically
tolerant isolates to mammals, at
applied myco-acaricide.
suitable stage in research.
High temperature tolerant
isolates show promise.
Coat humidity
Humidity of the skin surface is
Conduct further studies on humidity in
relatively low and may not
the cattle coat and its effect on
provide moisture necessary for
germination of conidia.
rapid germination of conidia.
Conversely, it may provide a
stable humidity allowing for
fun gal growth.
 Skin pH
Skin pH is acidic,ranging from
Assess the irmpact of pH (48) on
4.5 to 7.6, generally favouring
germination and persistence of conidia
bacteria rather than fungi. lt is
of promising isolates ldentify lower
unclear if pH of the relevant
pH tolerant strains of
range has major impacts on
entomopathogenic fungi.
fun gal perforrmance.
Assess forrmulation using buffers.
Secretions/excretions
Secretions found on the cattle
Evaluate the effect of skin secretions on
surface are complex and
fungal performance Conduct studies
consist of a range of fatty
on using microencapsulation to
acids, ions, proteins and other
minimize any negative effect of skin
compounds. Skin secretion
secretions.
may be a major limiting factor
for a topically applied myco-
acaricide.
142
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Table 3 continued
Infuencing factors
Key findings/possible irmpacts
Recommendations for research
 Skin microfora
Microfora of the skin is mainly
Studies the effects of skin microflora,
composed of specialized
incl.microbial secretions, on
bacteria.
germination and growth of
 Dermatophytes isolated from the
entomopathogenic fungi.
skin of cattle have not been
Determine if fungal infection in ticks
recovered frorm ticks; however,
originate from the skin microfora or
non-derrmatophyes such as
the wider environment. Determine if
Altemaria spp., Aspergittus
an entomopathogenic fungus can be
spp., Beauveria bassiana,
integrated into the skin microfora or if
Curvularia sp., and
entomopathogens in the skin
Penicittium sp. have been
microfora, if they exist, can be
isolated from ticks. lt is
enhanced.
unclear if infected ticks obtain
their fungi while on the host or
from the wider environment
when juvenile.
Mode of action
Direct impaction
The cattle coat, which varies with
Focus on quantifying levels of direct
breed and season, is likely to
impaction using various formulations.
reduce direct irmpaction of
conidia onto tick targets
hidden deep within the hair.
Residual infection
 Residual infection is likely to be
 Focus on maximizing residual infection
inHuenced by availability,
through addressing availability, initial
initial infectivity and
infectivity and persistence.
persistence.
Conduct forrmulation studies to balance
Emulsifiable adjuvant oil
reduction of loss of conidia frorm catfle
formulation which enhanced
coat after spraying with ease of being
pathogenicity to ticks in
picked up by ticks.
bioassays may be detrimental
Conduct further studies on pre-soaking
to residual infection due to
including the addition of nutrients to
greater adherence to hair.
sy nchronize germination.
Pre-soaking in tap water
Conduct studies on using
improved pathogenicity to R.
microencapsulation to maximize
mcroplus.
persistence.
Persistence of conidia on the
cattle surface is low.
Secondary cycling
Increasing inoculum through
Determine the contribution of secondary
secondary cycling is likely to
cycling to tick control.
reduce tick populations similar
to pasture application.
acaricides for topical application are to be developed. Therefore, fundamental research is
required to further understand how entomopathogenic fungi interact with the physical,
chemical and biological parameters of the cattle surface. These studies will then influence
the selection of isolates, and formulation and application technologies, which can lead to
the development of effective control strategies for specific tick species.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
143
References
evaporation in the coats of sweating cattle. J Agric Sci 74:247-258
Al-Mazra'awi MS, Shipp L, Broadbent B, Kevan K (2006) Biological control of Lygus tineoratis
(Hymenoptera: Apidae) vectored Beauveria bassiana in greenhouse sweet pepper. Biol Control 37:89-
97. doi: 10.1016/j.biocontrol.2005.11.014
Rl et al (2007) Evaluation of Metarhizium anisopliae (Hyphomycetes) for the control of Boophilus
microptus (Acari: 1xodidae) on naturally infested cattle in the Mexican tropics. Vet Parasitol 147:336-
340. doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2007.03.030
Alves RT, Bateman RP, Gunn J, Prior C, Leather SR (2002) Effects of different forrmulations on viability
and medium term storage of Metarhizium anisoptiae conidia. Neotrop Entomol 31:9l-99. doi:
10.1590/S1519-566X2002000100013
Aquino de Muro M, Moore D, Atkin D, Edgington S (2003) Sheep Scab Project ODO538: studies on the
Department for Environment,Food andRural Affairs (DEFRA),Government of the United Kingdom,8 pp
Baker EW, Evans TM, Gould DJ, Hull WB, Keegan HL (1956) Miscellaneous mesostigmatic mites. In:
Baker EW, Evans TM, Gould DJ, Hul WB, Keegan HL (eds) A manual of parasitic mites. Nationa]
Pest Control Association, lnc., United States of America
Barker SC, Murrell A (2004) Systematics and evolution of ticks with a list of valid genus and species narmes.
Parasitology 129:S15-S36. doi:10.1017/S0031182004005207
Barnes SE,Moore D(1997)The effect of fatty,organic orphenolic acids on thegermination of conidia of
Metarhizium favoviride. Mycol Res 101:662-666. doi:10.1017/S0953756296003152
hopper and locusts. Mem Entomol Soc Can 171:69-8 1
Appl Biol 57:163-170
Bateman RP, Chapple A (200 1) The spray application of mycopesticide formulations. In: Butt TM, Jackson
CW, Magan N (eds) Fungi as biocontrol agents—progress, problems and potential. CAB International,
Wallingford
Benjamin MA, Zhioua E, Ostfeld RS (2002) Laboratory and field evaluation of the entomopathogenic
fungus Metarhizium anisopliae(Deuteromycetes) for controlling questing adult Ixodes scaputaris
(Acari: 1xodidae). J Med Entomo] 39:723-728
Berman A, Volcani R (196l) Seasonal and regional variations in coat characteristics of dairy cattle. Aust J
Agric Res 12:528-538. doi:10.1071/AR9610528
doi: 10.1016/0304-4017(94)00686-7
Bittencourt VREP, Massard CL, de Lima AF (1994) Acao do fungo Metarhizium anisoptiae em ovos e
larvas do carrapato Boophitus microptus. Rev Univ Rural Ser Cienc Vida 16:41-47
Bittencourt VREP, Massard CL, Veigas EDC, de Lima AF (1995a) lsolamento e cultivo do fungo Meta-
rhizium anisoptiae (Metschnikoff, 1879) Sorokin, 1883, a partir do carrapato Boophitus microptus
(Canestrini, 1887) artificialmente infectado. Rev Univ Rural Ser Cienc Vida 17:55-60
Bittencourt VREP, Massard CL, de Lima AF (1995b) Dinarmica da infeccao do carrapato Boophitus mi-
croptus pelo fungo Metarhizium anisopliae.Rev Univ Rural Ser Cienc Vida 17:83-88
Bittencourt VREP, Peralva SFLDS, de Souza EJ, Mascarenhas AG, Alves SG (1997) Aqao do dois isolados
do fungo entomopatogenico Beauveria bassiana sobre algumas charisticas biologicas de femeas in-
gurgitadas de Boophitus microptus em laboratorio.Rev Univ Rural Ser Cienc Vida 19:65-71
                 
and forrmulation. Pest Manag Sci 60: 1043-1049. doi: 10.1002/ps.910
                
36: 1 146- 1150
Bioassays of entomopathogenic microbes and nermatodes. CAB International, Wallingford
Butt TM, Carreck NL, lbrahim L, Williams 1H (1998) Honey-bee-mediated infection of pollen beetle
(Metigethes aeneus Fab.) by the insect-pathogenic fungus, Metarhizium anisoptiae. Biocontrol Sci
Technol 8:533-538. doi: 10.1080/09583 159830045
144
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Butt TM, Jackson CW, Magan N (2001) Introduction—fungal biological control agents: progress, problems
problems and potential. CAB lnternational, Wallingford
Campos RA, Arruda W, Boldo JT, da Silva MV, de Barros NV, de Azevedo JL et al (2005) Boophitus
microptus infection by Beauveria amorpha and Beauveria bassiana: SEM analysis and regulation of
subtilisin-like proteases and chitinases. Curr Microbiol 50:257-261. doi:10.1007/s00284-004-4460-y
Cannon PF, Kirk PM (2007) Fungal farmilies of the world. CAB lnternational, Wallingford
Casasolas-Oliver A (1991) Pathogenicity of Rhizopus thailandensis on engorged females of Rhipicephatus
sanguineus (Acari: lxodide) host-pathogen interaction. Rev lberoam Micol 8:75-78
control Sci Technol 10:357-384. doi:10.1080/09583150050114972
Correia ACB，Fiorin AC,Monteiro AC(1998) Effects of Metarhizium anisopliae on the tick Boophitus
microplus (Acari: Ixodidae) in stabled catfle. J lnvertebr Pathol 71: 189-191. doi: 10.1006/jipa.1997.
4719
Cumming GS, Van Vuuren DP (2006) Will climate change affect ectoparasite species ranges? Glob Ecol
Biogeogr 15:486-497
da Costa GL, Sarquis MlM, de Moraes AML, Bittencourt VREP (2002) lsolation of Beauveria bassiana and
Metarhizium anisoptiae var. anisoptiae from Boophitus microptus tick (Canestrini, 1887), in Rio de
Janeiro State, Brazil. Mycopathology 154:207-209. doi:10.1023/A:1016388618842
de Castro ABA, Bittencourt VREP, Daemon E, Viegas EDC (1997) Eficacia do fungo Metarhizium ani-
soptiae sobre o carrapato Boophitus microptus em teste de estabulo. Rev Univ Rural Ser Cienc Vida
19:7382
the entomopathogenic fungus Metarhizium anisopliae. Arch Microbiol 142:204206. doi: 10.1007/
BF00447069
Downing DT, Lindholm JS (1982) Skin surface lipids of the cow. Comp Biochem Physiol 73B:327-330
soptliae strain F52 (PC Code 029056). http://www.epa.gov/oppbppd1/biopesticides/ingredients/fr_
notices/frnotices_029056.htm. Accessed 14 June 2002
Evans GO (1992) Principles of acarology. CAB lnternational, Wallingford
natural enemies and control. World crop pests, vol 4B. Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, pp 3-17
Frazzon APG, Junior IDV, Masuda A, Shrank A, Vainstein MH (2000) In vitro assessment of Metarhizium
anisoptiae isolates to control the cattle tick Boophitus microptus. Vet Parasitol 94:117-125. doi:
10.1016/S0304-4017(00)00368-X
subspecies of Metarhizium anisoptiae reveals a plethora of secreted proteins with potential activity in
insect host. Microbiology 149:239-247. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.25761-0
George JE, Pound JM, Davey RB (2004) Chemical control of ticks on catfle and resistance of these parasites
to acaricides. Parasitology 129:S353-S366. doi: 10.1017/S0031182003004682
Gindin G, Samish M, Alekseev E, Glazer l (2001) The susceptibility of Boophitus arnutatus (lxodidae) ticks
to entomopathogenic fungi. Biocontrol Sci Technol 11:111-118. doi: 10.1080/09583150020029790
7255
Ginsberg HS,Lebrun RA,Heyer K,Zhioua E (2002) Potential nontarget effects of Metarhizium anisoptiae
(Deuteromycete) used for biological control of ticks (Acari: lxodidae). Environ Entomol 31:1191-
1196
Goettel MS, Poprawski Tl, Vandenberg JD, Li Z, Roberts DW (1990) Safety to nontarget invertebrates of
fungal biocontrol agents. In: Laird M, Lacey LA, Davidson EW (eds) Safety of microbial insecticides.
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA
Graf JF, Gogolewski R, Leach-Bing N, Sabatini GA, Molento MB, Bordin EL et al (2004) Tick control: an
industry point of view. Parasitology 129:S427-S442. doi: 10.1017/S0031 182004006079
Hassan AEM, Dillon RJ, Charnley AK (1989) Infuence of accelerating germination of conidia on the
pathogenicity of Metarhizium anisoptiae for Manduca sexta. J lnvertebr Pathol 54:277-279. doi:
10.1016/0022-2011(89)90040-2
Hedimbi M, Kaaya GP, Singh S, Chimwarmurombe PM, Gindin G, Glazer 1 et al (2008) Protection of
Acarol 45 (this issue)
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
145
Hibbett DS, Binder M, Bischoff JF, Blackwell M, Cannon PF, Eriksson OE et al (2007) A higher leve]
phylogenetic classification of the fungi. Mycol Res 111:509-547. doi: 10.1016fj.mycres.2007.03.004
Hornbostel VL, Ostfeld RS, Zhioua E, Benjamin MA (2004) Sublethal effects of Metarhizium anisoptiae
(Deuteromycetes) on engorged larval, nymphal, and adult Ixodes scaputaris (Acari: lxodidae). J Med
Entomol 41:922-929
In: Butt TM, Jackson CW, Magan N (eds) Fungi as biocontrol agents—progress, problems and
potential. CAB lnternational, Wallingford
Jenkinson DM (1992) The basis of the skin ecosy stem. In: Noble WC (ed) The skin microHora and microbial
disease. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK
Jenkins NE, Grzywacz D (2000) Quality control of fungal and viral biocontrol agents—assurance of product
performance. Biocontrol Sci Technol 10:753-777. doi: 10.1080/09583150020011717
Jenkinson DM, Lloyd DH(1979)The topography of the skin surface of cattle and sheep.BrVet J 135:376-379
Jenkinson DM, Mabon RM (1973) The effect of temperature and hurmidity on the skin surface pH and the
jonic composition of skin secretions in Ayrshire catfle. Br Vet J 129:282-295
Jenkinson DM, Mabon RM (1975) The corticosterol content of catfle skin washing. Res Vet Sci 19:94-95
Jenkinson DM, Lloyd DH, Mabon RM (1979) The antigenic composition and source of soluble proteins on 
the surface of the skin of sheep. J Comp Pathol 89:43-50. doi: 10.1016/0021-9975(79)90007-0
Jenkinson DM, Mabon RM, Mason W (1974a) Sweat proteins. Br J Dermatol 90:175-181. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2133.1974.tb06382.x
Jenkinson DM, Mabon RM, Mason W (1974b) The effect of temperature and hurmidity on the losses of
nitrogenous substances from the skin of Ayrshire cattle.Res Vet Sci 17:75-80
Jongejan F, Uilenberg G (2004) The global importance of ticks. Parasitology 129:S3-S14. doi:
10.1017/S0031 182004005967
Jonsson NN (1997) Control of cattle ticks (Boophitus microptus) on Queensland dairy farms. Aust Vet J
75:802-807. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-0813.1997.tb15657.x
Jonsson NN, Mayer DG, Matschoss AL, Green PE, Ansell J (1998) Production effects of catfle tick
(Boophitus microptus) infestation of high yielding dairy cows. Vet Parasitol 78:65-77. doi:
10.1016/S0304-4017(98)00118-6
Acarol 24:913-926.doi:10.1023/A:1010722914299
Kaaya GP, Mwangi EN, Ouna EA (1996) Prospects for biological control of livestock ticks, Rhipicephatus
appendicutatus and Ambtyomma variegatum, using the entomogenous fungi Beauveria bassiana and
Metarhizium anisoptiae. J lnvertebr Pathol 67:15-20. doi: 10.1006/jipa.1996.0003
Kalsbeek V, Frandsen F, Steenberg T (1995) Entomopathogenic fungi associated with Ixodes ricinus ticks.
Exp Appl Acarol 19:45-51. doi:10.1007/BF00051936
Kedra E, Bogus Ml (2006) The infuence of Conidiobotus coronatus on phagocytic activity of insect
hemocytes. J 1nvertebr Pathol 91:50-52. doi: 10.1016/j jip.2005.06.013
Kettle DS (1995) lxodida—lxodidae (hard ticks). In: Kettle DS (ed) Medical and veterinary entomology,
2nd edn. CAB International, Wallingford, UK
Kirkland BH, Cho E, Keyhani NO (2004) Differential susceptibility of Amblyomma maculatum and
Ambtyomma americanum (Acari: lxodidea) to the entomopathogenic fungi Beauveria bassiana and
Metarhizium anisoptiae.Biol Control 31:414421. doi:10.1016fj.biocontrol.2004.07.007
[               
41:141-161. doi: 10.1146/annurev.en.41.010196.001041
Kooyman C, Bateman RP, Langewald 1, Lomer CJ, Ouambama Z, Thormas MB (1997) Operational-scale
Biol Sci 264:541-546. doi: 10.1098/rspb.1997.0077
Langewalde J, Ouambama Z, Mamadou A, Mamadou A, Peveling R, Stol 1 et al (1999) Comparison of an
organophosphate insecticide with a mycoinsecticide for the control of Oedateus senegatensis
(Orthoptera:Acrididae) and other Sahelian grasshoppers at an operational scale. Biocontrol Sci Techno]
9:199-214. doi:10.1080/09583159929785
Latif A (2003) Ticks and tickborne diseases in livestock in southern Africa. Newsletter on lntegrated
Control of Pathogenic Trypanosomes and their Vectors, vol 7, pp 19-20
Latif A, Jongejan F (2002) The wide use of acaricides for the control of livestock diseases in Africa needs a
reappraisal. Newsletter on Integrated Control of Pathogenic Trypanosomes and their Vectors, vol 6, Pp
10-12
Leemon DM, Jonsson NN (2008) Laboratory studies on Australian isolates of Metarhizium anisoptiae as a
biopesticide for the catle tick Boophiius microptus. J lnvertebr Pathol 97:4049. doi:
10.1016/j-jip.2007.07.006
146
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Li DP, Holdom DG (1995) Effects of nutrients on colony formation, growth, and sporulation of Metarhizium
anisoptiae (Deuteromycotina: Hy phomycetes). J 1nvertebr Pathol 65:253-260. doi: 10.1006/jipa.1995.
1039
Lloyd DH, Mabon RM, Jenkinson DM (1977) The antigenic constituents of cattle skin washing. J Comp
Pathol 87:75-82. doi:10.1016/0021-9975(77)90081-0
Lloyd DH, Dick WDB, Jenkinson DM (1979a) Structure of the epiderris in Ayshire bullocks. Res Vet Sci
26: 172-179
Lloyd DH, Dick WDB, Jenkinson DM (1979b) Location of the microfora in the skin of catfle. Br Vet J
135:519-526
Jxodidae). Rev Appl Entomol Ser B 41:8
haemutonii in the adults of Omithodorus moubata (Acarina: Argasidae).Folia Parasitol(Praha)
48: 149153
Lui ZY, Milner RJ, McRae CF, Lutton GC (1993) The use of dodine in selective medium for the isolation of
Metarhizium spp. from soil. J Invertebr Pathol 62:248-251. doi: 10.1006/jipa.1993.1107
Mabon RM, Jenkinson DM (1971) The excretion of 3-methoxy-4-hydroxy mandelic acid (VMA) by cattle
skin. Res Vet Sci 12:289-292
Marcandier S,Khachatourians GG (1987) Susceptibility of the migratory grasshopper,Melanoptus san-
guinipes (Fab.) (Orthoptera: Acrididae), to Beauveria bassiana (Bals.) Vuillemin (Hyphomycete):
infuence of relative humidity. Can Entomol 119:901-907
McBride ME (1993) Physical factors affecting the skin Hora and skin disease. In: Noble WC (ed) The skin
microfora and microbial disease. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp 73-101
McMaster JD, Jenkinson DM, Noble RC, Elder HY (1985) The lipid composition of bovine sebum and
derrmis. Br Vet J 141:34-41
Mitra SK, Sikdar A, Das P ( 1998) Dermatophytes isolated from selected ruminants in India. Mycopathologia
142:13-16. d0i:10.1023/A: 1006944605066
Monteiro SG, Bittencourt VREP, Daermon E, Faccini JLH (1998a) Pathogenicity under laboratory condi-
fions of the fungi Beauveria bassiana and Metarhizium anisopliae on larvae of the tick Rhipicephalus
sanguineus (Acari: lxodidae). Rev Bras Parasitol Vet 7:113-116
Monteiro SG,Carneiro ME, Bittencourt VREP, Daemon E (1998b) Effect of isolate 986 of the fungi
Beauveria bassiana (Bals) Vuill on engorged females of Anocentor nitens Neumann, 1897 (Acari:
Ixodidae). Arq Bras Med Vet Zootec 50:673-676
Monteiro SG, Matimoto LR, da Silveira FS, Leal AM (2004) lsolation of fungi in lxodids ticks naturally
infected. Rev Fac Zootec Vet Agro Uruguaiana 10:65-71
environmental temperatures and artificial cooling in Arizona. Am J Vet Res 39:877-882
Moore D, Morley-Davies J (1994) The effects of temperature and ultra-violet irradiation on conidia of
Metarhizium fiavoviride. ln: Proceedings of the Brighton crop protection conference—pest and dis-
eases, pp 1085-1090
Moore D, Higgins PM, Lomer Cl (1996) Effects of simulated and natural light on the germinafion of conidia
of Metarhizium fiavoviride Gams and Rozsypal and interactions with temperature.Biocontrol Sci
Technol 6:63-76. doi: 10.1080/09583159650039539
Moore D, Langewald J, Obognon F (1997) Effects of rehydration on the conidial viability of Metarhizium
flavoviride mycopesticide formulations. Biocontrol Sci Technol 7:87-94. doi: 10.1080/09583 1597310
72
Morley-Davies J, Moore D, Prior C (1996) Screening of Metarhizium and Beauveria spp. conidia with
exposure to simulated sunlight and a range of temperatures. Mycol Res 100:31-38
Nari A (1995) Strategies for the control of one-host ticks and relationship with tick-borne diseases in South
America. Vet Parasitol 57:153-165. doi: 10.1016/0304-4017(94)03117-F
Olwoch JM, Rautenbach Cl, Erasmus BFN, Engelbrecht FA, Jaarsveld AS (2003) Simulating tick distri-
butions over sub-Saharan Africa: the use of observed and simulated climate surfaces. J Biogeogr
30: 1221-1232. d0i: 10.1046/j.1365-2699.2003.009 13.x
Onions AHS (1966) Scoputariopsis brevicautis CM1 descriptions of pathogenic fungi and bacteria, vol 100.
Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux, Wallingford
Onofre SB, Miniuk CM, Barros NM, Azevedo JL (200 1) Pathogenicity of four strains of entomopathogenic
fungi against the bovine tick Boophitus microptus. J Vet Med 62:1478-1480
Pegram RG, Oosterwijk GP (1990) The effect of Amblyomma variegatum on liveweight gain of cattle in
Zambia. Med Vet Entomol 4:327-330. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2915.1990.tb00448.x
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
147
Polar P (2007) Studies on the use of entomopathogenic fungi for the control of cattle ticks. Ph.D. thesis, The
University of the West lndies, Trinidad
development of a myco-acaricide for cattle tick control. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 5:276-284. doi:
10.1089/vbz.2005.5.276
Polar P, Aquino de Muro M, Kairo MTK, Moore D, Pegram R, John S et al (2005b) Thermal characteristics
of Metarhizium anisoptiae isolates important for the development of biological pesticides for the
control of catfle ticks. Vet Parasitol 134: 159-167. doi:10.1016/j. vetpar.2005.07.010
Polar P, Kairo MTK, Moore D et al (2005c) Comparison of water, oils and emulsifiable adjuvant oils as
formulating agents for Metarhizium anisoptiae for use in control of Boophitus microptus.Mycopa-
thology 160:151-157. doi:10.1007/s11046-005-0120-4
Prior C, Carey M, Abraham YJ, Moore D, Bateman RP (1995) Development of a bioassay method for the
selection of entomopathogenic fungi virulent to the desert locust, Schistocerca gregaria (Forskal). J
Appl Entomol 119:567-573
Prior C, Jollands P, Le Patourel G (1988) lnfectivity of oil and water formulations of Beauveria bassiana
(Deuterormycotina: Hyphomycetes) to cocoa weevil pest Pantorhytes ptutus (Coleoptera: Curculionj-
dae). J 1nvertebr Pathol 52:66-72. doi: 10.1016/0022-2011(88)90103-6
Revankar SG, Sutton DA, Sanche SE, Rao J, Zervos M, Dashti F et al (1999) Metarrhizium [sic]anisoptiae
as a cause of sinusitis in immunocompetent host. J Clin Microbiol 37:195-198
Rijo-Camacho E (1996) Lucha biological contra la garrapata Boophitus microplus (Canestrini, 1887) con
hongos entomopatogenos. Ph.D. thesis, Instituto de Investigaciones de Sanidad Vegetal, Cuidad de la
Havana, Cuba
Rogers GD (1989) Control of the molds Aspergiltius sydowi and Penicillium citrinum in laboratory colonies
of the Lone-Star tick, Ambtyomma americanum (Acari: 1xodidae). Exp Appl Acarol 6:257-261. doi:
10.1007/BF01193985
Rourke BC, Gibbs AG (1999) Effects of lipid phase transitions on cuticular permeability: model membrane
and in situ structures. J Exp Biol 202:3255-3262
Samish M, Rehacek J (1999) Pathogens and predators of ticks and their potential in biological control. Annu
Rev Entomol 44:159-182. doi: 10.1146/annurev.ento.44.1.159
Samish M, Gindin G,Alekseev E, Glazer 1 (2001) Pathogenicity of entomopathogenic fungi to different
associated with the tick Ixodes ricinus. Folia Parasitol (Praha) 21:3848
Singh SP, Newton WM (1978) Acclimation of young calves to high temperatures: composition of blood and
skin secretions. Am J Vet Res 39:799-801
Smith JMB (1989) Opportunistic mycoses of man and other animals. CAB 1nternational, Wallingford, UK
lipid. Res Vet Sci 21:250-252
Srmith ME, Jenkinson DM (1975a) The mode of secretion of the sebaceous glands of cattle. Br Vet J
131:610-617
Agric Sci 84:57-60
Souza El,Reis RCS,Bittencourt VREP(1999) Evaluation of in vitro effect of the fungi Beauveria bassiana
and Metarhizium anisoptiae on eggs and larvae of Ambtyomma cajennense.Rev Bras Parasitol Vet
8: 12713 1
Steelman CD, Brown MA, Gbur EE, Tolley G (1997) The effects of hair density of beef catfle on Hae-
matobia irritans horn Hy populations. Med Vet Entomol 1l:257-264. doi:10.111l/j.1365-
2915.1997.tb00404.x
ambient pH, allowing extracellular protease production and activity. Microbiology 145:269 1-2691
CAB lnternational, Wallingford, UK, pp 219-238
Thomas MB (1999) Ecological approaches and the development of "truly integrated" pest management.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96:5944595 1. doi:10.1073/pnas.96.11.5944
Thomas MB, Wood SN, Langewald J, Lomer Cl (1997) Persistence of Metarhizium flavoviride and con-
sequences for biological control of grasshoppers and locust. Pestic Sci 49:47-55. doi:10.1002/
148
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Thormas MB, Wood SN, Solorzano V (1999) Application of insect-pathogen models to biological control.
Press, Cambridge, UK, pp 368-384
Valle ACF, Wanke B, Lazera MS, Monteiro PCF, Viegas ML (2001) Entomophthorarmycosis by Conid-
tobotus coronatus. Report of a case successfully treated with the combination of itraconazole and
Huconazole. Rev lnst Med Trop Sao Paulo 43:233-236
24:497-560. d0i: 10. 1023/A: 1026518418163
Weitkamp AW (1945) The acidic constituents of degras—a new method of structural elucidation. J Am
Chem Soc 67:447-454. doi:10.1021/ja01219a027
Whipps JM, Lumsden RD (200 1) Cormmercial use of fungi as plant disease biological control agents: status
and prospects. In: Butt TM, Jackson CW, Magan N (eds) Fungi as biocontrol agents—progress,
Wikel SK (1996) The irmmunology of host-ectoparasitic arthropod relationships. CAB lnternational, Wal-
lingford, UK
Wille JJ, Kydonieus A (2003) Palmitoleic acid isomer (C16:1A6) in human skin sebum is effective against
gram-posifive bacteria. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 16:176-187. doi:10.1159/000069757
Wolff MS, Monty DE (1974) Physiological response to intense surmimer heat and its effect on the estrous
cycle of non-lactating and lactating Holstein-Friesian cows in Arizona. Am J Vet Res 35:187-192
Yoder JA, Hanson PE, Zettler LW, Benoit JB, Ghisays F, Piskin KA (2003) Internal and external mycofora
of the American dog tick, Dermacentor variabtis (Acari: lxodidae), and its ecological implications.
Appl Environ Microbiol 69:4994 4996. doi: 10.1128/AEM.69.8.4994-4996.2003
Zhioua E, Browning M, Johnson PW, Ginsberg HS, LeBrun RA (1997) Pathogenicity of the entomopath-
ogenic fungus Metarhizium anisoptiae (Deuteromycete) to Ixodes scaputaris (Acari:lxodidae).J
Parasitol 83:815-818. doi:10.2307/3284273
Zimmermann G (2007) Review on safety of the entomopathogenic fungi Beauveria bassiana and Beauveria
brongniartii. Biocontrol Sci Technol 176:553-555. doi:10.1080/09583150701309006
Protection of Metarhizium anisopliae conidia
from ultra-violet radiation and their pathogenicity
to Rhipicephalus evertsi evertsi ticks
M Hedimbi · G. P. Kaaya · S. Singh · P. M. Chimwamurombe *
G. Gindin - I. Glazer - M. Samish
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 14, 149-156.
DOl: 10.1007/s 10493-008-9186-2 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract Metarhizium anisopliae conidia were formulated in water or in olive oil
containing 3% commercial sunscreens (Everysun? or E45 Sun Block 50) and exposed to
an artificial UV source for up to 5 hours. Survival of conidia after 5 h of exposure to UV in
oil formulation was 29% when protected with Everysun, 40% when protected with E45,
and 4% in control. In comparison, survival of conidia formulated in water was 13% when
protected with Everysun, 24% when protected with E45, and 0% in control. Furthermore,
the influence of sunscreens on conidia viability and virulence to Rhipicephaitus everisi
evertsi larvae and unfed adult ticks was evaluated. Adding these compounds to the conidial
formulations did not reduce the viability of the conidia. Larval mortality was 95 and 100%,
while unfed adult mortality was 90 and 97% after being exposed to unprotected conidia
formulated in water or in oil, respectively. Conidia protected by Everysun or E45 formu-
lated in water, induced 88 and 83% mortality in larvae, and 92 and 90% mortality in unfed
adults, respectively. Conidia suspended in oil and protected by Everysun or E45 induced 94
and 91% mortality in larvae, and 83 and 81% in unfed adults, respectively. These observa-
tions indicate that olive oil and the two sunscreens confer protection to conidia against
damages by UV radiation without interfering with their pathogenicity to ticks.
Keywords Metarhizium anisopliae- Ultra-violet radiation · Sunscreens · Rhipicephaius
evertsi evertsi · Conidial germination
M. Hedimbi ·G. P. Kaaya ()· P. M. Chimwamurombe
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Namibia, Pri vate Bag 13301 Windhoek, Namibia
e-mail: gkaaya @ unami.na
S. Singh
Department of Physics, University of Namibia, Pri vate Bag 1 3301 Windhoek, Namibia
G. Gindin ·1. Glazer
ARO, The Volcani Centre, P.O. Box 6, Bet Dagan 50250, Israe]
M.Sarmish
Department of Parasitology, Kirmron Veterinary Inshitute, P.O. Box 12, Bet Dagan 50250, Israel
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.), Diseases ofMites and Ticks. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2_12 149
150
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Introduction
Promising results have been reported for the potential of the entomopathogenic fungus
Metarhizium anisopliae to serve as a bio-control agent of ticks (Kaaya et al. 1996; Kaaya
2000, 2003; Kaaya and Hassan 2000). The formulation in which the conidia are suspended
is known to infuence the efficacy of the fungus (Burges 1998; Kaaya and Hassan 2000).
Conidia formulated in oil have been reported to induce higher mortalities than those formu-
lated in water alone (Kaaya 2000; Kaaya and Hassan 2000; Maranga et al. 2005). Although
the reason for higher mortality induced by oil formulations is not known, it is believed to be
due to the fact that oil blends better with insect's lipophilic cuticle than water, and that oil
spreads rapidly, presumably carrying fungal conidia to areas of cuticle that are normally
protected from the unfavorable environmental conditions (Wraight et al. 2001). Further-
more, in the field, tiny oil droplets do not evaporate as quickly as those of water, thus pro-
viding moisture to conidia for longer periods than water alone (Wraight et al. 2001;
Maranga et al. 2005).
A major obstacle in using entomopathogenic fungi under feld conditions is the rapid
inactivation of the conidia caused by ultra-violet (UV) radiation, humidity and extreme
temperatures (Fargues et al. 1996). Fungal conidia are very susceptible to solar radiation
age caused by UV radiation (Shah et al. 1998). However, such efforts have not been very
successful. In addition to inactivating conidia, UV radiation has been shown to cause delay
in the germination process of the surviving conidia (Moore et al. 1993). All these reduce
the efficiency of fungi as biocontrol agents under field conditions where there is a strong
solar irradiation (Moore et al. 1993).
Rhipicephalus everisi evertsi is a two-host tick, an economically important pest of live-
stock throughout most of Africa. It transmits Babesia equi to horses, Anaplasma marginaie
to cattle, and its saliva contains toxins that cause paralysis in lambs, adult sheep and calves
(Walker et al. 2003).
 In this study, the potential of two commercial sunscreens as improving compound for a
tick biopesticide was studied. The sunscreens protection of M. anisopliae conidia exposed
to UV radiation was measured by the ability of conidia to germinate and to form colonies.
The direct influence of the sunscreens on the ability of the conidia to induce mortalities in
unfed larvae and adult R. e. evertsi ticks are also reported.
Materials and methods
Sunscreens
Two commercial sunscreens sold for application on the skins of people were used and their
chemical compositions are provided in Table 1. These types of sunscreens were chosen
because they are readily available and they are relatively cheap compared to pure chemical
sunscreens like benzylcinnamate, and hence likely to be available even to peasant farmers.
Sunscreens developed for humans are likely to be safer to animals and probably to the envi-
ronment than pure chemicals, hence their use in this study. Furtherrmore, the SPF values of
the sunscreens used (30 and 50) are likely to confer better protection from UV radiation
than sunscreens with lower SPF values, especially in harsh environmental conditions with
high solar radiation.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
151
UV protectants
Sun protection
Chemical compositions
Manufacturer
factor (SPF)
Everysun
30
Aqua, ethylhex y] methoxycinnamate,
Perrmark
(Everysun)
benzophenone-3, c12-15 alky]
Intermational
benzoate cinnarmate, glycerine,
(South Affica)
ethylhex yl salicylate, cyclomethicone,
4-methyl benzylidene carmphor,
steareth-100, steareth-2, glycery]
stearate citrate, sucrose, mannan,
xanthan gum, phenoxy ethanol,
alk yl stearate, methy]
thiazolinone
E45 Sun Block
50
Aqua, zinc oxide, octyl stearate,
Healthcare
50 (E45)
litanium dioxide,isopropyl myristate,
(South Affica)
isohexadecane butylenes glyco]
poly glycery]-3 oleate, cety] dimethionine
copolyol, magnesium sulphate, sodium
chloride,phenoxyethanol,alurminum stearate,
alumina, lecithin, isopropyl palmitate,
methlyparaben, propylparaben
2-bromo-2-nitropropane-1,3-diol
Tick culture
Engorged R. e. evertsi adult ticks were collected from zebu cattle in Northern Namibia. All
off-host stages were maintained in the laboratory at 25°C and 100% relative humidity (RH)
and the on-host stages were fed on rabbits (Kaaya et al. 1996). Pathogenicity of conidia
was assessed on unfed stages of larvae and adult R. e. everisi.
Fungal cultures
Metarhizium anisopliae RS2 (originally isolated from Amblyomma variegatum) was cul-
tured in Petri dishes for 3 weeks at 25°C on Sabourauds Dextrose Agar (SDA) (Kaaya et al.
1996). Conidia were harvested by rinsing agar with sterile, distilled water containing
0.05%(v/v) Triton X-100. Conidia were then washed twice in sterile distilled water by cen-
trifugation at 5,000 rpm for 5 min. A hemocytometer was used to determine the concentra-
tion of conidia in the initial suspension. Serial dilutions were then made to get the desired
concentration of conidia.
Preparation of conidial formulations
Chemical sunscreens Everysun and E45 were tested for their efficacy in protecting fungal
conidia from UV radiation in both water (including 0.05% Triton X-100), and oil formula-
tions (20% olive oil + 0.05% Triton X-100 in water). A solution of 3% (v/v) of the
commercial sunscreen was prepared in the oil or water formulations. In the control groups,
conidia were suspended in the same solutions without the sunscreens. All conidial compo-
nents used in the tests started with a pre-incubation period of 30 min at standard room
   n   n     a
152
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
UVsource
An artificial UV source was used at a wavelength of 200-400 nm (AVANTES: AvaLight-
DHS, Serial No. LS-0501o01; compact and closed system). The wavelength of light emit-
ted by the UV source was detected using an AvaSpec-2048 monitor and was analyzed and
adjusted using AvaSoft 6.2 software for the AvaSpec Spectrometer. Samples were exposed
in a closed chamber at ca. 1 m from the UV source. Temperature in the chamber was main-
tained at 25± 2°C during exposure.
Effects of UV protectants on conidia viability
One ml of UV-exposed conidial suspension (200 conidia/ml) samples in water or in oil for-
mulations with and without (3%) sunscreens were spread on SDA plates using glass beads
and incubated at 25°C and 1o0% RH in the dark. Germinating conidia were counted after
48 h of incubation under a dissecting microscope and recorded as percentage gerrmination.
    sa  a a   aa  ps aa 
diameter of the germinating spore.
Protectionofconidia fromUV damage usingsunscreens
One-ml samples (200 conidia/ml) of each formulation containing sunscreen were placed in
macro disposable cuvettes (10 × 10 × 45 mm, <1 mm thick) during exposure to UV radia
2, 3, 4, and 5 h, respectively. A 0.1 ml (~20 conidia/dish) of exposed samples were then
cultured on SDA and spread using glass beads and incubated at 25°C and 100% RH in the
dark. The colonies developing from each sample were counted daily for 3 days under a dis-
secting microscope. This provided an estimate of the ability to form colonies (colony form-
ing units, CFUs). The mean ability to form colonies (%) is represented as (S/S)x 100,
where S, is the mean CFUs of the nine replicates at exposure time t, and S. is the mean
CFUs of the water control (no exposure) after 3 days gerrmination (Lee et al. 2006).
Influence ofprotectants on the virulence of conidia toRhipicephalus everisi evertsi
Unfed R. e. evertsi larvae were infected with M. anisopliae conidia by placing 20-30 larvae
  p m na snad (  ) s pd sosp n ded  
M. anisopliae suspension (1 x 10° conidia/ml) with or without 3% of the sunscreens E45
or Everysun in 20% oil or water formulations. Similarly, unfed adult ticks were infected by
dipping them in conidial suspension and placing them on filter paper in Petri dishes. The
dishes were then incubated at 25°C and 100% RH in the dark. Mortalities were recorded
daily until 21 days post-infection.
Data analysis
Normality was tested using the Kolomogorov-Smirnov test and normally distributed data
were analyzed by ANOVA and means were compared using a post-hoc Scheffé test, using
SPPS for Windows?. Each test was based on three replicates per sample and each experi-
ment was repeated three times, except the tick virulence test of conidia which was done
only once.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
153
Results
Effects of UV protectants on conidial viability
Addition of sunscreens did not affect the viability of M. anisopliae conidia in water or in
oil formulations. Gerrmination rate was 99% in control (water), and 99 and 96% among
conidia protected with Everysun or E45 formulated in water, respectively (P > 0.05).
Germination rate was 95% in control (oil), and 92 and 87% in conidia protected with
s               
difference (P > 0.05) in germination of conidia in any of the formulations with or without
UVprotectants.
Protection of conidia from UV damage using sunscreens
Survival of conidia (ability to form colonies) was observed to vary when sunscreens were
included in formulations and exposed to UV radiation for varying periods of time. The abil-
ity of conidia to germinate and form colonies decreased faster in unprotected conidia in the
two formulations as the exposure to UV radiation increased, compared to those protected
with sunscreens. After 5 h of exposure to UV radiation, none of the conidia formulated in
water were able to colonize, while 13% of the conidia protected with Everysun, and 24% of
the conidia protected with E45 gerrminated and formed colonies (P <0.01). The ability to
forrm colonies after 5 h of exposure to UV radiation in conidia forrmulated in oil was 4% in
unprotected conidia, 29% in conidia protected with Everysun, and 40% in conidia protected
with E45 (P <0.001) (Fig. 1).
Influence of protectants on the virulence of conidia to Rhipicephaius everisi evertsi
Larval mortality was found not to vary significantly in most of the treatments and controls
tested, whereas mortality of unfed adults was found not to vary significantly between con-
trols and treatments in the same formulation, but varied between formulations. Conidia
(1 x 10? conidia/ml on filter paper) suspended only in water with Triton X-100 (unpro-
tected) caused 95% mortality to unfed larvae and 83% to unfed adult R. e. evertsi ticks
Conidia protected with Everysun or E45 in water formulation caused mortalities of 88 and
83% to larvae (P > 0.05), and 83 and 81% to unfed adults (P > 0.05). Conidia formulated in
oil (unprotected) caused 100% mortality to larvae and 91% to unfed adults, whereas those
protected with Everysun or E45 in oil formulation caused larval mortality of 94 and 91%
Discussion
Unfed larvae and adult R. e. evertsi ticks were found to be highly susceptible to the entomo-
adults from several tick species to M. anisopliae was reported earlier (Kaaya and Hassan
2000). The viability and virulence of the conidia was not infuenced by any of the formula-
tions including the sunscreens tested. This irmplies that olive oil and chemical sunscreens
conidial ability to germinate on tick cuticle. Conidia of M. anisopliae and B. bassiana in oil
formulation induced higher mortalities in Rhipicephalus appendiculatus and A.variegatum
154
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Control EverysunE45
110
Aa Aa Aa
Waterformulation
100
06
(%)
80
les
coloni
70
Cc
09
form
50
01
lity
40
Ef
Abil
30
Bb
B比
Bb
10
110
100
Oil formulation
Aa
06
%)
A
80
nies
colon
70
C
60
CDbf
CDb
form
北
05
Ebc
8
40
A
50
B0
Bh
20
10
3
4
Time (hrs) of exposure to UV radiation
Fig. 1 The ability of Metarhizium anisoptiae conidia protected with E45 and Everysun to form colonies after
exposure to UV radiation for periods of O-5 h in water and oil formulations. Controls contained no sunsc-
reens. Means (±SE) of nine replicates are presented. Means with the sarme lower case letter are not signifi-
cantly different from each other among treatments in the same formulation, whereas means with the same
upper case letter are not significantly different armong treatments in different formulations (Scheff's post-hoc
test, P>0.05)
ticks than conidia formulated in water, under laboratory and feld conditions (Kaaya and
Hassan 2000; Maranga et al. 2005, 2006). The better performance by oil formulation may
be due to the fact that oil blends better with tick cuticle since the cuticle is lipophilic and
hydrophobic (Bateman et al. 1993; Maranga et al. 2005).
Oil formulation (without sunscreens) was found to improve survival rates of conidia fol-
lowing UV exposure for diferent durations, as compared to water formulation (Fig. 1). The 
ability of the conidia to form colonies was consistently higher in oil than in water forrmulation
at all durations of UV exposure. Improved protection by oil may be due to UV absorption
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
155
Table 2Ability of Metarhizium anisopliae conidia formulated in water and oil and protected with Everysun
and E45 to induce mortality in R. e. evertsi larvae and unfed adults
Protectants
Larvae
Unfed adults
Water
Oi]
Water
Oil
Contro]
95 ± 5.0 ab
100 ± 0.0 a
64 ± 1.8 c
72 ± 1.5 d
Everysun
88 ± 2.0 ab
94 ± 1.7 ab
60 ± 1.5 c
69 ± 2.1 d
E45
83 ± 1.5 b
91 ± 1.2 ab
58 ± 2.1 c
66 ± 2.1 d
Controls contained no sunscreen. Means (±SE) of three replicates are presented. Means with the same letter
are not significantly different from each other (Scheffe's post-hoc test, P > 0.05)
properties of oil (Moore et al. 1993). Since even the hydrophobic conidia in aqueous sus-
pensions have high moisture content and are metabolically active, they are more likely to
suffer DNA damage than conidia in oil formulation (Moore et al. 1996).
The addition of sunscreens significantly improved the ability of conidia to form colonies
in each formulation after UV treatment compared to the control groups without sunscreen
(Fig. 1). This indicates that the efficacy of a formulation in protecting conidia from UV
damage increases several fold with addition of a sunscreen. Moore et al. (1996) reported a
significant difference in the ability of Metarhizium favoviride to germinate after addition of 
different types of chemical sunscreens. However, their investigations used diferent iradia-
tion energy levels rather than exposure times.
Sunscreens may extend the survival of spores, especially those in direct sunlight (Moore
et al. 1993). Furthermore, fungal isolates may vary in their susceptibility to UV radiation
 and selection or genetic engineering may result in increased UV resistance of a mycopesti-
cide (Ignoffo and Garcia 1992). Results of this study show that olive oil and chemical sun-
screens can increase the ability of UV radiated conidia to colonize. However, the overall
efficacy of UV protectant under field conditions will depend also on additional factors, such
as target arthropods, season, geographical location, and time of application (Moore et al.
1993, 1996; Shah et al. 1998; Lee et al. 2006).
This study has also shown that the sunscreens Everysun or E45 do not affect the ability of
the conidia to germinate nor their pathogenicity to larvae and adults of R. e. evertsi. Similarly,
Shah et al. (1998) obtained 98 and 96% mortality in Kraussella amabile (Orthoptera), under
feld conditions, after spraying conidia of M. favoviride in formulations without and with
the sunscreen oxybenzone (2%), respectively, demonstrating that protecting conidia with
sunscreen does not affect pathogenicity. Their results, as ours, suggest that the sunscreens
can be incorporated into conidial formulations to improve their survival in the field, with-
Acknowledgements We are thankful to Mr. P. Progress and Mr. A. V. Hijarunguru for technical assistance
and to Dr. 1. Mapaure and Mr. C. Mahindi for valuable advice on statistical analysis. This project was funded
by the United States Agency for Interm ational Development (Grant No. TA-MOU-03 C22 008) to which we
are most grateful.
References
Bateman RP, Carey M, Moore D, Prior C (1993) The enhanced infectivity of Metarhizium favoviridein oil
formulations to desert locusts at low humidities. Ann Appl Biol 122: 145-152
Burges HD (1998) Formulation of mycoinsecicides. In: Burges HD (ed) Formulation of microbial biopesti-
cides. Kluwer Acadermic Publishers, Dordrecht, pp 131-187
156
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Fargues J, Goettel MS, Smits N et al (1996) Variability in suscepibility to sirmulated sunlight of conidia
among isolates of entormopathogenic Hyphomycetes. Mycopathologia 135: 17 1-18 1
(Hyphomycetes) by simulated sunlight. Environ Entomol 21:913-917
Kaaya GP(20oo) Laboratory and field evaluation of entomogenous fungi for tick con trol. Ann NY Acad Sci
916:559-564
Kaaya GP (2003) Prospects for innovative methods of tick control in Africa. Insect Sci Appl 23:59-67
Kaaya GP, Hassan S (2000) Entomogenous fungi as promising biopesticides fortick control. Exp Appl Acaro]
24:913-923
Kaaya GP, Mwangi EN, Ouna EA (1996) Prospects for biological control of livestock ticks,Rhipiceph
alus appendiculatus and Ambtyomma variegatum,using entomogenous fungi Beauveria bassiana
and Metarhizium anisoptiae.J lnvert Pathol 67:15-20
Lee JY, Kang SW, Yoon CS, Kim J, Choi DR, Kim SW (2006) Verticiltum tecanii spore formulation using
UV protectant and wetting agent and the biocontrol of cotton aphids. Biotechno] Lett 28: 1041-1045
Maranga RO, Kaaya GP, Mueke JM, Hassanali A (2005) Effects of combining the fungi Beauveria bassiana
and Metarhizium anisoptiae on the mortality of the tick Ambtyomma variegatum (lxodidae)in relation
and infecting the tick Amlyomma variegatum (Acari: lxodidae) in field experiments. Exp Appl Acaro]
38:211-218
Moore D, Bridge PD, Higgins PM, Batenman R, Prior C (1993) Ultra-violet radiation darmage to Metarhizium
favoviride conidia and the protecion given by vegetable and mineral oils and chemical sunscreens. Ann
Appl Biol 122:605-616
Moore D, Higgins PM, Lomer Cl (1996) Effects of simulated and natural sunlight on the germination of
conidia of Metarhizium favoviride Gams and Rozsypal and interactions with temperature. Biocontrol
Sci Technol 6:63-76
Shah PA, Douro-Kpindou OK, Sidibe A et al (1998) Effects of sunscreen oxybenzone on field effcacy and
persistence of Metarhizium favoviride conidia against Kraussetla amabite (Orthoptera: Acarididae)in
Mali, West Africa. Biocontrol Sci Techn 8:357-364
Walker AR, Bouattour A, Camicas JL et al (2003) Ticks of domestic animals in Affica: a gwide to identifica-
tion of species. Bioscience Reports, Edinburgh, UK, pp 140-149
Wraight SP,Jackson MA, de Kock SL (2001) Production, stabilization and formulation of fungal biocontrol
agents. In: Butt TM, Jackson CW, Mogan N (eds) Fungi as biocontrol-agents, progress, problems and
potential. CAB1 Publishing, UK, pp 253-287
Evaluation of Metarhizium anisopliae (Deuteromycota:
Hyphomycetes) for control of broad mite
Polyphagotarsonemus latus (Acari: Tarsonemidae)
in mulberry
Monchan Maketon - Patricia Orosz-Coghlan :
Jittranon Sinprasert
DOl: 10.1007/s 10493-008-9153-y @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract A study on 12 entomopathogenic fungi for controlling broad mite (Polyphago
tarsonemus latus (Banks)) in mulberry found that Metarhizium anisopliae CKM-048 was
the most virulent strain in controlling both larvae and adult broad mites at the concentration
of 2 x 10? conidia/ml. There was no ovicidal effect when tested with broad mite eggs.
Median lethal concentrations (LCso) of M. anisopliae in killing larvae and adults were
8.7 x 10° and 1.3 x 10' conidia/ml, respectively. Median lethal times (LTso) of larvae and
adults were 2.4 and 3.8 days, respectively, at the concentration of 2 x 10* conidia/ml. The
fungus was found to produce protease and chitinase. Scanning electron microscope (SEM)
studies were done to monitor the infection steps of the fungus on broad mites. A green-
house test on mulberry trees revealed that M. anisopliae could reduce the broad mite popu-
lation within 4 days after treatment. However, after 7 days, its effcacy was decreased
significantly.
KeywordsBroad mite·Polyphagotarsonemus latus·Metarhizium anisopliae
Entomopathogenic fungi · Mulberry
Introduction
Broad mite (Potyphagotarsonemus latus (Banks) has a world-wide distribution and is
kmown by a number of common names. In Thailand it is called the yellow mite, and it is a
serious problem in areas where chili (Capsicum annum) is cultivated (Kemsawasd 1976).
Besides chili, a wide variety of agricultural crops, ornamentals, and wild plants have been
recorded as hosts (Jeppson et al. 1975; Yang and Chen 1982; Ibrahim and Low 1998; Pena
M. Maketon (β) · 1. Sinprasert
      
e-mail: fscimcm@ku.ac.th
P. Orosz-Coghlan
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.), Diseases ofMites and Ticks. DOl: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2_13 157
158
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
and Campbell 2005). In the Philippines, this mite is a pest of young plants including
tomato, potato, tobacco, and ornamental plants.
White mulberry (Morus alba)is a short-lived, fast-growing, about 15-20 m tall tree. It is
native to eastern Asia and its natural fruit color is deep purple. The leaves are the preferred
feedstock for silkworrms (Bombyx mori). White mulberry is extensively planted throughout
the warrm temperate Northem Hemisphere, mainly for the silk industry. Recently tea made
of mulberry leave has become popular in some countries. Besides thrips and whitefly,
broad mite is one of the serious sucking pests on mulberry leaf. Some chemical pesticides 
are being used, such as sulfur and amitraz, but they caused some phytotoxic effect, espe-
cially during the summer season, with ambient temperature as high as 40°C. Therefore, an
integrated pest managerment program has initiated, employing predators and parasites, but
also microbial miticides. Nugroho and Ibrahim (2004) have reported on a laboratory
bioassay of three entomopathogenic fungi against broad mites on chili. They found that the
most virulent strain was Paecilomyces fumosoroseus followed by Beauveria bassiana and
Metarhiziumanisoptiae.
In this study, several entomopathogenic fungi were tested for their ability to control
broad mite adults, larvae, and egg stages on mulberry leaves in both laboratory and green
house conditions. The lethal concentration (LCso) and time (LTso) were evaluated for the
most virulent fungus. Enzyme production from the fungus was studied. Microscope and
Materials and methods
Preparation of conidial suspension
Eighty-eight soil samples and 75 homopteran, 220 isopteran, and 86 hemipteran cadavers
were sampled from northeastern and central parts of Thailand. Twelve entomopathogenic
fungi were isolated by the method of Meikle et al. (2005) and sent to the Thailand Institute
of Scientific and Technological Research (TISTR, Bangkok, Thailand) for identification.
All screen cultures were grown on potato dextrose agar (PDA) (Difco, Becton-Dickson,
  s   th           s
by lightly scraping the fungal culture surface with a sterile cell spreader into a 100-ml plas-
tic container. The conidial clumps were suspended in distilled water with 0.01% Tween 80
(ICI Americas, Norwich, NY, USA). The suspensions were vortexed for 5 min to dissoci-
ate clumps and then filtered through one layer of cheesecloth to remove conidial clumps
and mycelial debris. Concentration of each suspension was diluted to 2 x 10? conidia/ml
sions were used on the same day or the day after preparation and shaken before use. The
pure fungal culture of the most virulent strain was deposited at TISTR.
Preparing mulberry trees for rearing broad mite
A mulberry stalk of 1 cm diameter and 30 cm length was transferred into a 20-cm diameter
pot. The pots were placed in a cage (60 x 60 × 200 crm) and covered with a nylon sheet to
prevent infestation with pests. For the laboratory and greenhouse tests, 2U and 4U pots were
prepared, respectively. After new leaf growth emerged to about 10 leaves, 20 male and 20
female adult broad mites per pot were randomly introduced on the leave surface. Broad
mites were obtained from the Thai Department of Agriculture, where they had been reared
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
159
on mulberry. Broad mites were transferred by a single-hair brush pen. All work was done
under a stereo microscope.
Screening for the most virulent fungus against broad mite adults, larvae and eggs
Fourteen treatments consisting of 12 entomopathogenic fungi with an untreated control and
 a water treated control were perforrmed in three replicates. A mulberry leaf without broad
mites was cut into a 5-cm diameter circle and placed on moist cotton wool in an autoclaved
9-cm Petri dish. Twenty broad mite adults or larvae were transferred into each dish using a
single-hair brush pen. For the assays with eggs, 20 adult female mites were placed on a
clean mulberry leaf disc for 6 h at room temperature. Then females were removed and the
number of eggs laid was reduced to 20 per leaf disc by puncturing the excess eggs with a
needle.
Aliqouts of 1 ml of a fungal suspension were sprayed into a dish using a thin-layer chro-
matography (TLC) sprayer (Merck, Germany), resulting in ~1 × 10′conidia/cm² leaf sur-
face (Cuthbertson and Walters 2002). Observations were made every 12 h to check for
broad mites falling off the leaf margin. Every day for 5 days broad mite adult and larva
mortality (%) was recorded, or the percentage of unhatched eggs. All observations were
doneunderastereomicroscope.
For confirmation of fungus infestation of the dead broad mites, cadavers were dipped in
a 1o% sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) solution (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) for 5 min,
allowed to dry, placed on PDA, and monitored for possible mycelium germination.
Median lethal concentration (LCso) and time (LTso) assessment
The most virulent fungus was further studied for its median lethal concentration (LCso).
Suspensions were prepared at 2 × 10°, 2 x 10' and 2 × 10* conidia/ml and tested on larvae
3 days. For the median lethal time (LTso), a suspension was prepared at 2 × 10? conidia/ml
and tested on larvae and adults. Mortality (%) of broad mites was recorded daily for 5 days.
Analysis of enzymes produced by the most virulent fungus
Qualitativestudy
The most virulent fungus was cultured on PDA for 14 days at room temperature
(27 ± 1°C) in the dark. A 1-cm diameter piece of agar covered with mycelium was cut
using a cork borer, placed on skimmed milk agar (Difco, Becton-Dickson, Sparks, MD,
   a    a        (
production can be determined in terrms of the ratio between the clear zone diameter and the
colony's diameter (Chongcharoen and Vatanyoopaisan 2005). To investigate chitin-digest-
ing enzymes, the fungus was cultured on chitin agar (chitin from crab shells from Sigma-
Aldrich, MO, USA) (Chatdumrong 1996).
Quantitativestudy
    (     (     s
production,0.2%(W/V) skimmed milk (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to minimal-medium
160
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
(Bonants et al. 1995) cultures in 1-l conical flasks containing 250 ml culture medium and
inoculated with the most virulent fungus at 1.0 x 10° conidia/ml. Cultures were incubated
on a shaker at 125 rpm for 7 days at 27°C. Samples were drawn daily and diluted in a car-
bonate-bicarbonate bufer pH 10.2 (Dawson et al. 1969). One milliliter of diluted sample
was incubated with 1 ml of 1% azocasein (Sigma-Aldrich) at 50°C for 30 min. After that,
the reaction was terminated by the addition of 1.5 ml5%trichloroacetic acid(Sigma-
Aldrich). Non-digested azocasein was separated by centrifuging at 600g for 20 min and
culture supernatants filtered through a 0.2-μm membrane. Protease activity was measured
at 345 nm and expressed as mg dry weight per ml azocasein solubilized, based on the for
mula A34s x 0.566 x dilution factor (Lovrien et al. 1985). Protein content of the filtrate
was determined by the method of Lowry et al. (1951))
For chitinase production, minimal medium was supplemented with 0.5% (W/V) chitin
(Sigma-Aldrich). One-liter conical flasks containing 250 ml medium were inoculated with
1.0 x 10° conidia/ml of the most virulence fungus and incubated at 125 rpm for 7 days at
27°C. Daily, 1.5 ml of sample was drawn and incubated with 1 ml of 1% colloidal chitin at
37°C for 2 h (Elad et al. 1982). Precipitate was separated and the supernatant was measured
at 285 nm. Chitinase activity was indicated by the increase in absorbance of N-acetyl-L-
glucosamine.
Infection characteristics of the most virulent fungus against broad mite larvae
Twenty larvae were transferred onto a clean mulberry leaf lined with moist cotton wool and
placed in a Petri dish (n = 5). A suspension of 2 x 10? conidia/ml was sprayed on the leaf.
For the light (stereo) microscope study, cadavers were collected after 5 days, rinsed with
distilled water and dipped into Nesbitt solution (40 g chloralhydrate crystals, 10 ml HCl,
40 ml water; Sigma-Aldrich), for 10 min until the body was cleared. Infection stages were
photographed.
For the SEM study, the leaves filled with larvae were collected after 24, 48, 72, 96, and
120 h after the start of infection. Due to the tiny size of the broad mite, the leaf was cut into
1-crm? portions, placed into a rmicro well plate. The plate was kept in a 2.5% glutaraldehyde
solution (Sigma-Aldrich) adjusted with 0.2 M cacodylate buffer (Sigma-Aldrich) to pH 7.2
for 12 h at 4°C. The sample was then rinsed three times with 0.1 M cacodylate buffer pH
7.2 for 10-15 min each. The rinsed sample was placed in 1% osmium tetroxide solution
(Sigma-Aldrich) at pH 7.2 for 1 h at 4°C. The rinse with 0.1 M cacodylate buffer was
repeated three more times and the final sample was washed with an increasing series of
30%, 50%, 70%, 90% and 100% acetone solutions (Merck, NY, USA). Using the critical
point drying technique (Denton Vacuum, Cherry Hill, NJ, USA) with CO2, the samples
were dried and fumed with carbon and gold vapors, respectively (Wagner and Lewis 2000).
The samples were observed under a SEM (Hitachi S-2500).
Greenhouse study of the most virulent fungus against broad mite
Forty broad mites on a mulberry leaf were prepared as described earlier. Two suspensions
of 2 × 10′ and 2 × 10* conidia/ml, resulting in ~1 × 10° and 1 × 10′ conidia/cm', respec.
tively, were applied as described earlier. Amitraz 20% EC (MitacTM, AgrEvo) at 60 ml per
201 water, resulting in ~0.o1 mg a.i./cm', was applied for comparison, as were an
untreated and a water-treated control. All hive treatments were conducted in a completely
randomized design (n =8). Average temperature ranged between 26 and 34°C and relative
humidity was80±5%.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
161
One day before treatment, juvenile plus adult broad mites were counted on five young
leaves at the top of the 120-cm-tall plants. A TLC sprayer was used to treat the whole plant,
especially upper and lower leaves. Broad mites were counted at 1, 4, and 7 days on leaves
on the plants.
Statistical analysis
In the assays screening for virulence, treatment effects were corrected for control mortality
using Abbott's (1925) formula. Data from each trial were analyzed using analysis of vari-
a           (a) 
Toxicological data were analyzed by Probit analysis (Finney 1971) with 95% confidence
intervals, using SAS version 9.1.3. The greenhouse data were analyzed by ANOVA,
because no significant difference was observed before spraying.
Results
(27 ± 1°C) and 72 ± 2% r.h., M.anisopliae CKM-048 yielded the highest mortality
          )
M.anisopliae CKM-048(100%)and B.bassiana CKB-048(95±5%)(Fig.2).The 10
remaining isolates caused significantly lower larval mortality than these two isolates.
Dipping of the cadavers in NaOCl solution and incubating them on PDA, confirmed that all
new mycelia emerged from the cadavers were related to the original isolates. None of the
12 isolates had ovicidal activity: eggs in all treatments hatched within 1-2 days, so no fun-
 gal isolate in this experiment was effective in controlling broad mite eggs.
品
BO
itv
70
2
60
E
50
40
30
20
Fungal isolate
Fig. 1 Mortality (mean %) of broad mite adults on mulberry leaf discs, 5 days after being sprayed with sus-
pensions from 12 entomopathogenic fungi. Bars with different letters are significantly different (P <0.05,
DMRT). The fungi are: Beauveria bassiana CKB-048, Paecitomyces titacinus CKP-012, P. titacinus
CKP 032,P.fumosoroseus CKPF-001,P.fumosoroseus CKPF-095(reclassifed in part as Isaria fumosoro
sea; Luangsa-Ard et al. 2005), Glioctadium virens CKG-011, Verticillium tecanii CKVL-042, V. tecani
CKVL-053 (reclassified in part as Lecaniciltium muscarium (Petch); Zare and Gams 2001), Nomuraea rileyi
CKN-010, Cordyceps brongniartii CKC-005, and Myrothecium verrucaria CKMY-021
162
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
100
90
Mortality
B0
70
60
50
Percent
40
30
20
10
Fungal isolate
Fig. 2 Mortality (mean %) of broad mite larvae on mulberry leaf discs, 5 days after being sprayed with sus
pensions from 12 entomopathogenic fungi. Bars with different letters are significantly different (P <0.05,
DMRT). Fungi: see Fig. 1
Based on these results, M. anisopliae CKM-048 was coined the most virulent fungus
and selected for further experiments.
Median lethal concentration (LCso) and time (LTso)
The M. anisopliae CKM-048 suspension causing 50% mortality in broad mite larvae was
found to lay between 2 × 10° and 2 × 10′conidia/ml. Therefore, two additional concentra-
tions, 4 x 10° and 1 x 10′, were prepared and tested. Probit analysis showed that the calcu-
lated LCso for broad mite larvae was 8.71 x 10° conidia/ml. A similar procedure was done
with adults, resulting in an LCso of 1.32 x 10' conidia/ml (Fig. 3a).
At a concentration of 2 x 10* M. anisopliae CKM-048 conidia/ml, the LTso for larvae
was 2.36 days, and for adults 3.82 days (Fig. 3b).
Enzymes produced by the most virulent fungus
After 7 days incubation, M. anisopliae CKM-048 produced a protein- and a chitin-digest-
ing enzyme. The ratio between clear zone and colony diameter that occurred on skimmed
milk agar was 1.36 and on chitin agar it was 1.09. The quantitative study confirmed that the
fungus was capable of producing protease and chitinase activity (Table 1).
Microscopic study of infection characteristics
After dipping a broad mite cadaver infected with M. anisopliae CKM-048 in Nesbitt solu-
tion, the cadaver became transparent and mycelium was seen inside and outside the body,
whereas no mycelium was seen in the uninfected broad mite (Fig. 4).
A series of SEM pictures illustrates the infection process. At 1-2 h after contact, the
conidia of M. anisopliae CKM-048 adhered to the cuticle of a broad mite larva (Fig. 5a).
After 48-60 h, the fungus started to germinate and penetrate into the broad mite's body
(Fig. 5b, c). During 72-96 h, fungal mycelia extrude from the broad mite and cover most of
its body (Fig. 5d, e). Finally, after 120 h, the fungus started conidiogenesis and new conidia
were formed (Fig. 5f).
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
163
A
PROBIT
PROBIT
'5.6
5.75
'5.4
5.50
'5.2
5.25
'5.0
5.00
'4.8
4.75
'4.6
4.50
4.1
'4.2
4.25
4.0
4.00 
8'E
3.75
6.2
6.4
3.6
6.8
7[
7.7
62
64
6.6
3 E
7.0
7 2
LOGDOSE
LOGDOSE
B
PROBIT
PROBIT
DAY
DAY
Fig.3 Median lethal concentrahion (LCsq) of Metarhizium anisoptiae CKM-048 suspensions and median
of broad mite larvae (let) and broad mite adults (right)
Table 1  Enzyrme production by
Day
Protein
Protease
N-acetyl-L-
Chitinase
Metarhizium anisoptiae
(mg/ml)
activity
glucosamine
activity
CKM-048on agar
1
0.911
0000'0
0.122
0.08 19
2
0.567
0.0137
0.143
0.0837
3
0.472
0.0176
0.222
0.0902
0.480
0.0279
0.222
8600
5
0.588
0.0245
0.268
0.0992
6
0.574
0.0339
0.296
0.1016
7
0.567
0.0475
0.323
0.1056
Contro]
0.790
0000'0
0.163
0.0000
Greenhouse study of the most virulent fungus against broad mite
Before application, the average number of broad mites found in all treatments did not differ
significantly, hence the data could be analyzed by ANOVA. One day after spraying, amit-
164
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
A
Fig. 4 Broad mite cadavers under the light (stereo) microscope: (A) Uninfected mite, no fungal mycelium
inside the cadaver (control). (B) Mycelium of Metarhizium anisopliae CKM-048 extruded out of the infected
cadaver (indicated by arrows)
raz had immobilized almost all broad mites, whereas the numbers of moving broad mites in
the other four treatments were all about the same as before treatment (Table 2).
After 4 days, amitraz had killed all mites. The highest concentration of M. anisopliae
CKM-048 suspension had killed significantly more mites than the lower fungus concen-
tration or the water-treated control. At the untreated control the most mites were alive
(Table 2).
Surprisingly, after 7 days the number of broad mites in the treatment with the higher
rate of fungus suspension had increased tremendously, and was now not different from
the number of live mites treated with the lower fungus rate. Still, the numbers of mites
alive after 7 days were significantly lower in the fungus treatments than in the two control
treatments.
Discussion
Metarhizium anisopliae CKM-048 was the most virulent fungal strain, hence the most
promising candidate for controlling broad mite larvae and adults. Also B. bassiana CKB-
048 showed good efficacy against larvae (95% mortality) and it was the second best against
adults (ca. 5o% mortality), so this may be considered another effective microorganism
against broad mites, worthy of further investigations.
The concentrations of M. anisopliae CKM-048 needed for killing 50% of broad mite
larvae and adults (8.71 x 10° and 1.32 x 10′ conidia/ml, respectively), were not far apart.
Yet, the time needed for killing 50% (when treated with 2 x 10*conidia/ml) of adults
(3.4 days) was clearly longer than the time needed for killing half of the larvae (2.4 days).
This might point at a higher tolerance of adults compared to larvae. Mite eggs were not
found to be infected by any of the fungal isolates—perhaps the duration of the egg stage
(12 days) is simply too short for the fungal mycelium to cause harm.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
165
20um
Dum
50um
Fig. 5 A series of SEM pictures showing infection steps of Metarhizium anisopliae CKM-048 on the broad
mtite. (A) Conidia adhere on the broad mite's cuticle at 1-2 h after contact. (B) Germination from conidia at
about 48 h aftercontact.(C) Penetration into the broad mite's body about 60 h after contact.(D) Extruding
of fungus from the broad mite's body about 72 h after contact. (E) Colonization over the broad mite's body
about 96 h aftercontact.(F) After 120 h,fungus started its conidiogenesis stage
166
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Table 2 Mean number of broad mites (±SE) surviving per mulberry leaf up to 7 days after treatment
Treatment
Number of moving broad mites per leaf*
Before spray
1 day
4 days
7 days
Amitraz 20% w/v
26.40 ± 0.75ns
0.05 ± 0.03b
pO
p0
M. anisopliae CKM-048
25.73 ± 0.92
23.67 ± 0.36a
19.13 ± 2.76
30.97 ± 1.95
2 × 10conidia/ml
M. anisopliae CKM-048
25.83 ± 0.78
23.65 ± 0.8 1a
32.43 ± 1.51b
33.80 ± 0.49
2 × 10'conidia/ml
Control (treated)
26.73 ± 0.31
24.00 ± 0.43a
37.18 ± 1.28b
38.80 ± 1.08b
Control (untreated)
25.80 ± 0.74
23.99 ± 1.03
47.82 ± 1.52a
52.28 ± 2.38a
% Coefficient of variation
7.29
9.48
17.21
13.39
*Means followed by the same letter within a column did not differ significantly (P>0.05,DMRT)
The finding of enzyme activity confirmed the fungus’ modes of action, because both
protein- and chitin-digesting enzymes would be needed for lysis of the mite's cuticle, prior
to mycelia penetration. Furtherrmore, the microscopic evidence underpinned the fungal
infection of the mite.
The greenhouse assay suggested that M. anisopliae CKM-048 has a fairly short persis-
tence on mulberry leave. Therefore, re-application of M.anisopliae CKM-048 within
34 days will be necessary. The application of microbial pesticides needs to be repeated
especially for short-life-cycle pests, such as broad mites. Broad mites not only have a short
life cycle, they are also parthenogenetical (Gerson 1992), and they are known to use insect
hosts, specifically some whiteflies species, to move phoretically from plant to plant
(Palevsky et al. 2001)-both factors will favour their potential rapid re-emergence.
Broad mite has not yet developed resistance to amitraz. However, M. anisopliae CKM
048 could be considered as an alternative tool for broad mite control in an integrated pest
management program.
AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank the following people and institutions for their contributions:
Dr. Tewin Kulpiyawat (Thai Department of Agriculture) for supporting the broad mite culture, Ms. Lawan
Chatanon (TlSTR) for fungal identification, and the Enzyme Technology and Waste Management Research
Unit (Kasetsart Agricultural and Agro-lndustrial Product Improvement lnstitute, KAPl) for enzyme analyses.
References
Abbott WS (1925) A method of computing the effechiveness of an insecticide. J Econ Entomol 18:265-267
Bonants PJM, Fitter PFL, Thijs H, den Belder E, Waalwijk C, Henfling JWDM (1995) A basic serine protease
141:775-784
Chatdumrong V (1996) Microbial selection for chitin digesting enzyme production. MS thesis, Kasetsart
University,Bangkok (in Thai)
Chongcharoen R, Vatanyoopaisan S (2005) Study of lipase production in bacteria isolated from natural and
industrial sources. Kasetsart J (Nat Sci) 39: 161-166
Cuthbertson AGS, Walters KFA (2002) Pathenogenecity of the entomopathogenic fungus, Lecanicillium
Mycopathologia 160:315-319
Dackman C, Chet 1, Hertz BN (1989) Fungal parasitism of the cyst nematode Heterodera schachti: infection
and enzyme activity. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 62:201-208
Dawson RMC, Elliott DC, Elliott WH, Jones KM (1969) Data for biochemical research. Oxford University
Press, London, 592 pp
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
167
Elad Y, Chet 1, Henis Y (1982) Dedradation of plant pathogenic fungi by Trichoderma harzianum. Can J
Microbiol 28:719-725
Fnney DJ (1971) Probit analysis, 3rd edn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 333 pp
Gerson U (1992) Biology and control of the broad mite, Potyphagotarsonemus tatus (Banks) (Acari:
Tarsonemidae). Exp Appl Acarol 13:163-178
Ibrahim YB,Low W(1998) Life cycle of the broad mite Potyphagotarsonemus tatus (Bank) (Acari):
Prostigmata; Tarsonemidae anditsinnate proliferating capacity on chili. Malaysian Appl Biol 27:51-56
Jeppson LR, Keifer HH, Baker EW (1975) Mite injurious to economic plants. Uni versity of California Press,
Berkeley
Kemsawasd J (1976) Leaf curl disease of chili caused by the broad mite Potyphagotarsonemus tatus (Banks)
and its control. MS thesis, Kasetsart University, Bangkok (in Thai)
Khan A, Williums K, Molloy MP, Nevalainen H (2003) Purification and characterization of a serine protease
and chihinase activity on 2D gels. Protein Expr Purif 32:210-220
Luangsa-Ard J1, Hywel-Jones NL, Marmoch L, Samson RA (2005) On the relationships of Paecitomyces sect.
Isarioidea species. Mycol Res 109(5):581-589
J Biol Chem 193:265-275
Meikle WG, Mercadier G, Rosengaus RB, Kirk AA, Derouane F, Ouimby PC (2005) Evaluation of an
entomopathogenic fungus, Paecitomyces fumosoroseus (Wize) Brown and Smith (Deuteromycota:
Hyphomycetes) obtained from Formosan subterranean termites (lsop.: Rhinoterrmitidae). J Appl
Entomol 129(6):315-322
Nugroho 1, Ibrahim Y (2004) Laboratory bioassay of some entomophathogenic fungi against broad mite. Inter
J Agric Biol 6(2):223-225
phoretic relationship between the broad mite, Potyphagotarsonemus tatus (Acari: Tarsonemidae), and its
insect host? Exp Appl Acarol 25(3):217-224
Pena JE, Campbell CW (2005) Broad mite. ED1S. http://edis.ifas.ufl.edw/CHO2O, 13 September 2005.
Wagner BL, Lewis LC (2000) Colonization of Com, Zea mays, by the Entomopathogenic Fungus Beauveria
bassiana. Appl Environ Microbiol 66(8):3468-3473
Yang OH, Chen CX (1982) A study on Polyphagotarsonemus latus Banks. Kunchong Zhishi 19:24-26
Zare R,Gams W (2001) A revision of Verticiltium section Prostrata IV.The genera Lecanicillium and
Simticillium gen. nov. Nova Hedwigia 73: 1-50
Enabling mycelial application of Hirsutella thompsonii
for managing the coconut mite
P. Sreerama Kumar · Leena Singh
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 1-4, 169-182.
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9177-3 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract  Laboratory and field studies were conducted to examine the prospect of mycelial
application of Hirsutella fhompsonii as an alternative to the use of mycelial-conidial for-
mulations ofthe fungus in the suppression of the coconut mite,Aceria guerreronis. In a series
of laboratory experiments, glycerol, yeast extract powder and dehydrated malt extract broth
were found to be the best among nine substances investigated as possible adjuvants for use on
coconut palms in the field along with H. fhompsonii mycelia. H. fhompsonii biomass in the
lad eipruoo anou papei osge nq saonoo aou paonpond Aluo pou snanfpe jo aouasad
highly significantly in two methods, with glycerol showing an average of 106% increase over
control. Though irradiance with simulated sunlight resulted in reduced conidiogenesis, in
duced substantial conidiation compared with control, irrespective of the two incubation
conditions. Better conidiation was observed under alternating light-dark regime than under
total darkness in all the treatments. Glycerol boosted the pathogenicity of H. fhompsonii by
16.5% over control. In the field, a newly developed mycelial forrmulation of H. thompsonii
 s   o  q     o 
combination with glycerol resulted in a tolerable mean nut damage grade of 2.0 during the
pre-harvest stage, compared with an acute score of 4.0 in control palms.
Keywords Aceria guerreronis · Adjuvants · Coconut eriophyid mite
Hirsutella fhompsonii·Mycelial application
Introduction
Aceria guerreronis Keifer (Acari: Eriophyidae), one of the most destructive pests of the
coconut palm (Cocos nucifera L.), is present in 22 countries spread over the Americas,
P. Sreerama Kumar (β) · L. Singh
Project Directorate of Biological Control, P. O. Box 2491, H.A. Farm Post, Hebbal.
Bellary Road, Bangalore 560 024, lndia
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.). Diseases of Mites and Ticks. DOl: 10.1007/978-I-4020-9695-2_14 169
170
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Africa and the Indian sub-continent (Navia et al. 2005). Its occurrence in the Sultanate of
Oman is also now confirmed (Sreerama Kumar, personal observation, 2007). India, which
ranks third behind Indonesia and the Philippines in terms of coconut production, is the only
one out of these three countries to be afflicted with this nut-inhabiting mite. Both in India
about the same time—the acarofungal pathogen, Hirsutella fhompsonii Fisher (mitosporic
fungi: Hyphomycetes), is perceived as one of the most potent biological control agents for
this pest (Sreerama Kumar and Singh 2000; Sreerama Kumar 2002; Fernando et al. 2007)
especially because a majority of coconut growers desist using chemical pesticides.
Because of the huge demand, a powder formulation (Mycohit) of H. fhompsonii was
developed during 2000 in India to enable its registration and commercialisation (Sreerama
Kumar and Singh 2000; Sreerama Kumar 2002). Later, two liquid variants of this product,
viz. Mycohit-LG20 and Mycohit-OS, have also been formulated, extensively field-tested
and found to be equally effective (Sreerama Kumar 2006). Unlike most of the commercial
mycopesticides, which contain only spores or conidia (Jenkins et al. 1998), these bio-
     o n    
disseminating the fungus, and conidia to target stray mites and to passively enter the
perianth along with the spray fluid.
Production of high-concentration, mycelial-conidial formulations of H. fhompsonii with
 an acceptable shelf-life usually involves a long biormass production cycle consisting of the
diation or sporulation phase to obtain enough conidia. Therefore, our simultaneous research
focussed on reducing the production cycle (ie., eliminating the sporulation phase) and the
prospect of using mycelia alone as an effective alternative to control the coconut mite. Since
the shorter shelf-life of formulated H. fhompsonii could be a deterrent to commercialisation
to some extent (McCoy 1981), mycelia-based products could be used to meet the niche, *no
storage' or ^immediate use' market through advance orders from consumers.
There are several advantages of using H. thompsonii mycelial fragrments in the field
(McCoy et al. 1971). For a cryptic pest like the coconut mite, the amount of inoculum
coming in direct contact with the pest immediately after application is negligible. The
triggering of microepizootics within the niche of the perianth depends mostly on the
sporulation of mycelia on the plant surface proximate to the infested nuts. The repeated
cycles of sporulation on the plant surface determine the rate of spread of the disease in the
mite population. Therefore, once applied, growth and sporulation of H. thompsonii
mycelium on the plant surface is essential.
Availability of enough nutrition should be ensured for the initial establishment and
saprophytic growth of the fungus through inclusion of nutrients in the spray (McCoy and
Couch1982).Furthermore,since several environmentalfactors either directly or indirectly
infuence the survival and persistence of fungal propagules (Roberts and Campbell 1977;
Fuxa 1987), specifically the delicate mycelial fragments, protection against these fuctu-
ating factors needs to be taken care of. Natural sunlight, in particular, is considered to be
the harshest of factors as it is capable of killing fungi within hours of exposure (Moore
et al. 1993; Inglis et al. 1995; Fargues et al. 1996). Moisture is another critical factor for
the fungus to survive and propagate (Inglis et al. 2001). Several additives have multifar-
jous qualities and are known to simultaneously act as a nutrient, humectant, sunscreen, etc.
(Burges 1998).
Hence, the idea behind the work reported in this paper was to find out whether
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
171
adjuvants and concluded with a field trial that proved the ability of mycelia alone to bring
        e od  
damage.
Materials and methods
Fungal culture
An Indian isolate [MF(Ag)66] of H. thompsoni originating from infected A. guerreronis
collected in Kerala was used throughout the studies. A monosporal sub-culture of the
isolate was propagated on homemade potato dextrose agar (PDA) in Petri dishes (90 mm
diameter) at 25°C for 30 days for use as inoculum. Stock cultures were stored at 4-5°C on
slants of the same medium.
Mycelial beads or pellets (ca. 2.5 mm diameter) of H. thompsonii were produced in an
Erlenmeyer fask (500 ml capacity) containing 200 ml of Sabouraud dextrose broth (SDB;
HiMedia) through shake-fask fermentation with an orbital shaker (200 rpm, 5 days)
[Orbitek-L', Scigenics Biotech (Private) Limited, Chennai, India]
Effect of different adjuvants on the growth characteristics of Hirsutella fhompsonii
Nine substances (Table 1) were tested for their suitability as adjuvants at 0.5% concen-
tration (w/v or v/v) in three laboratory experiments consisting of treatments each of which
was replicated thrice. In all the experiments, incubations were done under a 12-h photo-
period at room temperature (28 ± 2°C).
Table 1Details of substances used as adjuvants
Substance
Manufacturer
Code
Known properties
Gelatine
HiMedia Laboratories, Mumbai,
RM019
Humectant, nutrient 
lndia
Glycerol
S.D. Fine-Chem, Mumbai, India
38454 L 05
 Humectant, nutrient 
Malt extract broth
Laboratorios Conda, Madrid,
1245
Nutrient, humectant
(dehydrated culture
Spain (Supplier: Colloids
medium)
Impex, Bangalore, India)
Nutrient broth (dehydrated
HiMedia
M002
Nutrient, humectant 
culture medium)
Potato dextrose broth
HiMedia
M403
Nutrient, humectant
(dehydrated culture
medium)
Potato flour
HiMedia
RM848
Nutrient, binder,
humectant
Sabouraud dextrose broth
HiMedia
M033
Nutrient, humectant
(dehydrated culture
medium)
 Skimmed milk powder
'Amulya Dairy Whitener',
Nutrient, humectant
(partly skimmed milk &
Sabarkantha District Co-
sucrose)
operative Milk Producers'
Union, Himatnagar, lndia 
Yeast extract powder
S.D. Fine-Chem
49117 K 05 Nutrient, humectant
172
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
In experiment 1, test adjuvants were added separately to 10-ml aliquots of the H. fhom-
psoni biomass suspension in spent medium. Quantities of 0.1 ml were pipetted out onto a
sterile filter paper disc placed inside a Petri dish and the resultant colonies were counted after
In experiment 2, the adjuvants were added separately to sterile deionised water and nine
pellets were dunked in each test liquid (9 ml) separately for 30 min. Pellets dunked in
used to pierce through the treated pellets at the rate of three beads per pin. Three such
loaded pins were kept in 15-ml sterile glass vials at the rate of one pin per vial for each
treatment and incubated for 48 h. At the end of the incubation period, pellets from each pin
were transferred to 1 ml of sterile deionised water containing 0.2% Tween 80, vortexed for
5 min, and the conidia were counted per pellet with a haemocytometer ('Bright-Line',
Hausser Scientific, Horsham, PA, USA).
  [ s g g n sd g an o an  g xa 
ment. In the first method, 5 ml of the biomass was transferred along with the spent medium
to 15-ml glass vials and each adjuvant was added separately, swirled and incubated for
30 days by which time a sporulating mycelial mat (ca. 20 mm diameter) was formed on the
surface of the undisturbed medium. Biomass without any additive served as control. In the
second method, the adjuvant solutions were prepared separately, and the pellets obtained
from 10 ml of shake-flask culture of H. fhompsonii were added to 5 ml each of the
adjuvant liquid taken in 15-ml glass vials. Pellets added to sterile deionised water were
used as control. In both methods, at the end of the incubation period, the 20-mm-diameter
mycelial mat was transferred to 10 ml of 0.2% aqueous Tween 80, vortexed for 5 min, and
the conidial productivity was estimated with a haemocytometer.
Growth and conidiation of mycelial pellets on excised parts of the coconut palm
The following parts of the coconut palm (Purseglove 1972) were tested for their suitability
separately with the three selected adjuvants [glycerol, yeast extract powder (YEP) and malt
  s ) (   i ) s   )  
perianth lobes (Nos. 4, 5 & 6) (inner surface); nut surface or exocarp (green portion of
tender nut); healthy meristematic portion of tender nut; main axis or peduncle; sub-axis or
short peduncle; leafet (adaxial and abaxial surfaces); exposed root; trunk bark and su-
berised or necrosed tissue of mite-infested tender nut. These plant parts were excised into
    (       s   o z x  d 
the adjuvants (0.5%) were placed individually on the plant parts (5 pellets/part) kept in
Petri dishes (3 replicates/part) lined with a thin layer of damp cotton and incubated at room
temperature with a 12-h photoperiod. Observations were recorded for growth and coni-
diation of mycelial pellets frequently (at least three times in a 24-h period) for up to 96 h.
Comparisons were made with pellets treated with sterile deionised water.
Effect of simulated sunlight on the conidiation of Hirsutella fhompsonil
Mycelial beads of H. fhompsonii treated with the three adjuvants in the same fashion as in
the previous experiment were placed equidistant from each other in a Petri dish (90 mm
diameter) (10 pellets/dish) lined with a circle of moistened filter paper. Pellets treated with
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
173
only sterile deionised water served as control. For each adjuvant and control, a set of six
Petri dishes (without lids) containing the treated pellets was exposed to an irradiance of
500 W/m? for 1 h at 35°C in a sunlight simulator (*'Suntest CPS+', Atlas Material Testing
Technology, Linsengericht, Germany). A 11oo-W air-cooled xenon arc lamp gave an
output spectrum closely resembling sunlight in a total exposure area of 560 cm² inside the
simulator chamber.
After sunlight treatment, the lids were replaced and two sub-sets of three Petri dishes
each for the adjuvants and control were further incubated at alternating light-dark regime
control, a similar protocol was followed with Petri dishes enclosed in black paper while
inside the simulator, but other incubation conditions remained the same. At the end of the
incubation period, all pellets from each Petri dish were transferred to 5 ml of sterile
deionised water containing 0.2% Tween 80, vortexed for 5 min, and the conidia per pellet
were counted with a haemocytometer.
Pathogenicity of adjuvant-treated pellets
Before the field trial, the three best adjuvants were tested for their effect on the patho-
genicity of H. fhompsonli towards the coconut mite through a mortality-based assessment.
Chips (20 mm diameter) were sliced from beneath the perianth of young, freshly harvested
nutlets showing very high mite infestation (>20 live adult mites/mm²) after carefully
removing the bracts. The pellets treated as in the plant parts study were first allowed to
germinate for 24 h and then transferred to the surface of the chip contained in the centre of
a clean 200-mm glass Petri dish, at a rate of five pellets per chip. The Petri dishes arranged
There were five replicate Petri dishes for each adjuvant and control. After 96 h, the rate of
infection by H. fhompsonli was deterrmined by assessing the percentage of mites infected
(those showing exiting hyphal strands) in a 4-mm-diameter area at three randomly selected
places on the Petri dish surface (Sreerama Kumar 2007); they were treated in Nesbitt's
clearing reagent, mounted in Hoyer's fuid, and examined with a phase-contrast micro-
scope (McCoy et al. 1971).
Development of a mycelial formulation of H. thompsonii
For field evaluation, a mycelia-alone variant (Mycohit-M) of the already available powder
formulation (Mycohit) was developed during 2006-2007. The isolate MF(Ag)66 consti-
tuted the active ingredient of the new product with a concentration of 2.5 × 10° colony-
forming units (cfu) per gram. The formulation process and ingredients, including the
carrier and the additives (or formulants) incorporated into the final product were the same
as the original product. However, the finer details of the formulation are not disclosed in
this paper.
Field trial
A field trial was conducted between September 2006 and June 2007 at a heavily infested
coconut plantation in Huskuru village, Bangalore Rural district, Karnataka, India, for
174
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
feld indicated a high level of mite incidence as evidenced by a damage score of 4.0. A
block of 84 palms (7 rows x 12 palms) at the centre of the grove was selected, out of
which the first three rows were used as a set for the fungal treatment and the last two as a
set for the chemical and control treatments, with a buffer of two untreated rows in between
these sub-blocks. The individual treatments were randormised 12 times each within their
respective sets.
The treatments were as follows: (1) H. thompsoni formulation (10 g l-l) + gycerol
(5 ml 1 '), (2) H. thompsonii formulation (10 g 1 l) + YEP (5 g I '), (3) H. thompsonii
formulation (10 g 1') + MEB (5 g 1'), (4) chemical acaricide (Triazophos 40% EC;
Trifos 40°, Cheminova India Limited, Panoli, India)(5 ml 1 '), and (5)control (plain water).
After harvesting the mature coconuts from each experimental palm, the bunches were
numbered by considering the fully open inforescence as the first bunch and the preceding
older bunches sequentially as second, third, etc. The second and third bunches were tagged
by tying insulated electric wire of the best-visible colours, viz. black and red, respectively,
 at the base of the main axis or peduncle. For obtaining pre-treatment population data, the
third nutlet frorm the bottom of the bunch was sampled from the fourth and fifth bunches.
The population of live mites (all motile stages, i.e. larvae, nymphs and adults) was esti-
mated at three places on the nut surface with the aid of a stereozoom microscope (63x) in
the laboratory and expressed as mean number of live mites per mm?. Following the pre-
treatment sampling, all the bunches were treated with the specific spray fuid (2 l/palm)
using a portable, lightweight, hand-compression sprayer (3.5 1 capacity) ('Marut’ MT-36,
Aspee-American Spring & Pressing Works, Mumbai, India). All the spray fuids were
prepared in plain water and applied thrice as sprays at fortnightly intervals during early
mornings.
The post-treatment population count of the mite was recorded in all the palms 6 weeks
after the first round of treatment. Population counts were made on two nuts, one each from
         s    n
 a  sd    d  s    
separately and were graded individually based on the damage caused by the mite. The
grading system was as follows: 1: no damage, 2: 1-10%, 3: 11-25%, 4: 26-50%, and 5:
>50% of damage with reduction in size and great distortion.
Data analysis
All laboratory experiments were performed twice and the field trial once. For the labo-
ratory experiments, the results from only one trial are presented because a similar trend
was observed between the trials with homogeneity of variances determined with Bartlett's
test. A completely randormised design was used for all laboratory experiments. Data from
from the sunlight study,for which two-way ANOVA was followed. Prior to analysis, the
data from conidial counts were subjected to log(x)-transformation to improve homogeneity
of variances. Data on colony counts on the filter paper and pathogenicity were square-root-
sunlight study) at a significance level of α =0.05.
Statistical analysis was done using GraphPad Prism version 5.01 for Windows,
GraphPad Software, San Diego, California, USA (www.graphpad.com)
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
175
Results
Effect of adjuvants on the growth characteristics of Hirsutella fhompsonii
The number of fungal colonies formed on the filter paper by H. thompsonii biomass in the
(19.3) emerged from the biomass treated with glycerol (Table 2), which was followed by
MEB and YEP treatments. The lowest number of colonies (2.3) was formed by gelatine-
and nutrient broth-treated pellets. Hyphal development and extension occurred in less than
24 h only in glycerol treatment. In other treatments, it took anywhere between 24 and 48 h,
except in the case of gelatine and nutrient broth, both of which took longer.
Several test adjuvants were able to take sporulation levels much higher than the
untreated control (F9,20 = 15.06, P < 0.0001). Glycerol topped with the maximum
conidial production of 4.92 x 10f conidia/pellet, which was 69.1% more than the control
(Table 2). YEP and MEB treatments produced 4.50 x 104 and 4.45 x 104 conidia/pellet,
respectively. Gelatine was the least effective among all the treatments with the lowest
numbers of conidia (2.91 x 10/pellet)
In terms of conidia density generated on a 20-mm-diameter mycelial mat, the treatments
varied significantly. In the first method (F9,2o = 9.180, P = 0.0001) of assessment in which
adjuvants were added directly to the spent medium, the highest conidial production of
39.00 x 10°/mycelial mat was observed in glycerol-treated fungal pellets after 30 days of
incubation (Table 2). This quantity was 68.0% more than that obtained from control biomass.
An increase of 62.4% and 60.6% conidia over control was observed with MEB and YEP
Gelatine-treated pellets yielded the fewest conidia. In the second method, wherein pellets
were added to the adjuvant solution (F9,20 = 46.00, P < 0.0001), once again glycerol
Table 2 Effect of adjuvants on the growth characteristics of Hirsutetla thompsonii
Adjuvant
No. of colonies/filter
No. of conidia/pellet
No. of conidia/20-mm-diarmeter
paper (±SE)
(x10)(± SE)
mycelial mat (x10²) (±SE)
Method 1
Method 2
Gelatine
2.3 ± 0.33 e
2.91 ± 0.23 d
20.39 ± 0.96 d
5.94 ± 0.20 d
Glycero]
19.3 ± 0.88 a
4.92 ± 0.15 a
39.00 ± 0.69 a
16.56 ± 0.48 a
Malt extract
10.0 ± 1.53 b
4.45 ± 0.09 bc
37.72 ± 1.59 a
14.17 ± 0.33 a
broth
Nutrient broth
2.3 ±0.33 e
3.07 ± 0.14 d
25.95 ± 2.04 bcd
8.56 ± 0.48 bc
Potato dextrose
5.3 ± 0.88 cd
3.35 ± 0.17 d
32.89 ± 4.77 abc
9.83 ± 0.10 b
broth
Potato Hour
7.3 ± 0.88 bc
3.37 ± 0.13 d
35.00 ± 2.62 ab
10.50 ± 0.91 b
Sabouraud
6.3 ± 0.67 bc
3.45 ± 0.09 cd
32.28 ± 0.62 abc
8.83 ± 0.50 bc
dextrose broth
 Skimmed milk
2.7 ± 0.33 d
3.04 ± 0.23 d
31.22 ± 0.39 abc
6.11 ± 0.49 d
powder
Yeast extract
8.0 ± 0.58 bc
4.50 ± 0.13 ab
37.28 ± 1.27 ab
16.34 ± 0.33 a
powder
Control
5.7 ± 0.67 cd
2.91 ± 0.23 d
23.22 ± 2.68 cd
6.78 ± 0.55 cd
Data in each column were subjected to one-way ANOVA. Means in each colurmn followed by the same
letter did not differ significanly (Tukey's HSD, P > 0.05)
176
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
treatrment resulted in the maxirmum number of conidia (16.56 × 10²/mycelial mat). Least
effective was the gelatine treatment, which produced just 5.94 x 10? conidia.
Growth and conidiation of mycelial pellets on excised parts of the coconut palm
Conidiation of adjuvant-treated mycelial pellets occurred on various parts of the coconut
  a    u     o sd   
progress of fresh fungal growth out of the pellets was the best on the nut surface or exocarp
(green portion of tender nut). The spread of the fungus was very feeble on the inner and
outer tepals. An unexpected shrinkage of the mycelial pellets was observed on the short
peduncle as well as on the adaxial and abaxial surfaces of the leaflet.
Effect of simulated sunlight on the conidiation of Hirsutella thompsoni
Irradiance with simulated sunlight for 1h resulted in reduced conidiogenesis by
H. thompsonii (Table 4). Generally, adjuvant-treated pellets, both exposed and unexposed
to simulated sunlight, produced substantial conidia compared with untreated control,
irrespective of the two incubation conditions, ie., alternating light-dark and total darkness.
Better conidiation was observed under alternating light-dark regime than under total
darkness in all the treatments (F3,32 = 39.21, P < 0.0001) (Table 4). However, there was
no interaction effect (F9,32 = 0.6778, P = 0.72).
The three adjuvants shielded the pellets from adverse sunlight to certain extent and
(F3,32 = 19.91, P < 0.0001). However, even glycerol, the best adjuvant, induced 25.6%
fewer conidia per pellet after sunlight treatment and incubation under alternating light-
dark conditions when compared with its conidia production due to unexposure and incu-
bation under the same conditions.
Glycerol-treated pellets after exposure to sunlight produced 28.4% and 45.8% more
conidia under alternating light-dark and totally dark regimes, respectively, when compared
with water-treated, exposed pellets under the same incubation conditions.
Pathogenicity of adjuvant-treated pellets
Prior to field-testing of the fungus, the adjuvant-treated pellets were tested for pathoge-
nicity towards the coconut mite. The adjuvants were found to significantly increase the
pathogenicity of H. thompsonii towards the coconut mite (F3,16 = 3.865, P = 0.0296)
Glycerol-treated pellets were the most effective in terms of the mortality caused, a 16.5%
increase over control pellets, whereas mortality caused by pellets treated with the other two
adjuvants was interrmediate (Fig. 1).
Field trial
The pre-treatment counts of live mites per mm? of the nut surface just below the perianth
ranged from 6.48 to 12.27 in the fourth bunch and from 3.46 to 6.65 in the fifth bunch, but
there were no significant differences among the experimental palms in terms of mite
population in the two bunches, both separately and collectively (Table 5).
A significant reduction in the post-treatment population of the coconut mite was observed
in nut samples collected from the tagged bunch 1 (F4,55 = 19.19, P < 0.0001) as well as the
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
177
Total maturity of conidia
 [Shrinkage of pellets in 
 Shrinkage of pellets
Further conidiation 
Further conidiation 
Further conidiation
Shrinkage of pellets
Shrinkage of pellets
Shrinkage of pellets
Further conidiation
Further conidiation
Further conidiation
and release
control]
72-96 h
substrate, continued conidiation and
 Spread of the fungus on the substrate,
substrate, continued conidiation and
continued conidiation and release
 Sparse spread of the fungus on the
 pellets in
 pellets in
pellets in
Conidiation [Shrinkage of 
Conidiation [Shrinkage of 
n [Shrinkage of 
Conidiation
control]
control]
Conidiation
release
release
control]
Conidiation
Conidiation
Conidiation
48-72 h
Hyphal extension, heavy phialide
 Sparse to moderate conidiation 
formation and conidiogenesis
formation and conidiogenesis
formation and conidiogenesis
Hyphal extension and phialide
Hyphal extension and phialide
Hyphal extension and phialide
Sparse phialide formation
Sparse phialide formation
Sparse phialide formation
fommaton
formaton
fomation
24-48 h
 and sparse phialide initiation 
Tepals or perianth lobes (Nos. Hyphal formation, exten sion
Tepals or perianth lobes (Nos. Hyphal formation, exten sion
Hyphal formation, extension
Hyphal formation, extension,
Hyphal formation, extension
Hyphal formation, exten sion 
and phialide initiation
and phialide initiation
and phialide initiation
and phialide initiation
and phialide initiation
phialideinitiation
Hyphal formation and
Hyphal formation and
phialide initiation
yphal formation and
extension
extension
extension
0-24 h
Table 3 Growth and conidiation (
Suberised or necrosed tissue
 of mite-infested tender nut 
1, 2 & 3) (outer surface)
4,5 & 6)(inner surface)
Sub-axis or short peduncle
portion of tender nut)
Meristematic portion of
Leaflet (adaxial surface)
Main axis or peduncle
Leaflet (abaxial surface)
tender nut
Exposed root
Trunk bark
178
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Table 4 Effect of sunlight on the conidiation of Hirsutella thompsonii pellets treated separately with three
selec ted adjuvants
Treatment
No.of conidia/pellet (x10) (± SE)
Simulated sunlight (exposed)
Simulated sunlight (unexposed)
Alternating light-dark
Totally dark
Alternating light-dark
Totally dark
Glycero]
3.66 ± 0.13 a
3.31 ± 0.15 a
4.92 ± 0.15 a
4.30 ± 0.32 a
YEP
3.18 ± 0.20 ab
3.09 ± 0.05 a
4.46 ± 0.13 ab
4.23 ± 0.15 a
MEB
3.00 ± 0.31 ab
2.40 ± 0.09 b
4.19 ± 0.34 ab
3.47 ± 0.13 ab
Contro]
2.85 ± 0.16 b
2.27 ± 0.16 b
3.74 ± 0.29 b
3.09 ± 0.32 b
Means in each column followed by the same letter did not differ significantly (Bonferroni test, P > 0.05;
after two-way ANOVA)
90
80
mite
70
60
ab
50
口
40
30
OT
20
I4
0
Glycerol
YEP
MEB
Control
Fig. 1 Pathogenicity of Hirsuteta thompsonii treated with three selected adjuvants against the coconut
mite (mean mortality ± SE). Bars with the same letter did not differ significantly (Tukey's HSD, P > 0.05;
after one-way ANOVA)
tagged bunch 2 (F4,55 = 9.951, P < 00001) of the palms applied with H. fhompsonii in
combination with glycerol, YEP or MEB (Table 5). The fungus was able to cause disease in
the mite on all the sprayed palms as evidenced during the post-treatment sampling.
In both the tagged bunches, the fungus in the presence of MEB performed the best with
 an overall reduction of 97.1% in the mite population over control. This treatment was even
better than the chemical, triazophos. Glycerol and YEP could also bring about an overall
decline in live mites over control, namely 92.5% and 85.6%, respectively.
 In terms of the pre-harvest damage grades, all the fungal treatments were on a par with
the chemical and superior to control in both the tagged bunch 1 (F4,ss = 18.45,
P < 0.0001) and the tagged bunch 2 (F4,5s = 24.16, P < 0.0001) (Table 5).
Discussion
The feasibility of using H. thompsonii in the mycelial stage itself to suppress the coconut
mite has been demonstrated through the present studies. Several adjuvants have been found
to have an additive effect on the perforrmance of the fungus against the coconut mite.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
179
2.0 ± 0.19 a
2.1 ± 0.18 a
2.2 ± 0.17 a
2.0 ± 0.13 a
91100 901 9600099861119940199919118981288821908564221
2
Table 5 Effect of Hirsutelta thompsoni combined separately with three selected adjuvants on the coconut mite population and pre-harvest nut damage in the feld
 Pre-harvest nut damage grade (±SE)
Mean
2.0 ± 0.22 a
2.0 ± 0.15 a
2.0 ± 0.20 a2
2.2 ± 0.20 a
bunch 2
0.84 ± 0.67 a 1.9 ± 0.19 a
2.3 ± 0.26 a
0.32 ± 0.15 a 2.1 ± 0.22 a
0.71 ± 0.45 a 2.0 ± 0.18 a1
ged
bunch
1.61 ± 0.52 a
Mean
59'0干 96′0
2.04 ± 0.98 a
0.52 ± 0.24 a
0.86 ± 0.41 a
bunch
Post-treatment
0.71 ± 0.71 a
1.18 ± 0.62 a
0.11 ± 0.1l a
0.56 ± 0.56 a
Tagged
bunch
8 t20 F57'S 8 090 F 6'5 8 87'1 F 8t9
:1.24 a6.65 ± 1.87 a7.19 ± 1.30 a
99182821915
:1.47 a 3.46 ± 0.71 a 6.43 ± 0.91 a
Mean
No. of live mites/mm² (±SE)
 Sth bunch
Pre-treatment
4th bunch
9.40 ±
11.91 :
H. thompsoni + glycerol
H. thompsonii + YEP
H. thompsonii + MEB
Triazophos
Treatment
Control
180
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Out of the nine adjuvants evaluated, glycerol, YEP and MEB consistently performed
well in all the laboratory experiments (Table 2) and so were further taken up to the field
trial.Potato dextrose broth,potato four and SDB, though not found to be as competent as
these other three, could still be considered for field use after additional tests. The laboratory
studies also indicated that not all substances with recognised nutrient or humectant qual-
ities would augment the perforrmance of H. thompsonii. For example, skimmed milk
powder, gelatine and nutrient broth were either ineffective or only slightly better than
control. Assigning the exact reason for the difference in perforrmance of each of these test
adjuvants seems impossible because of the differences in their macro- and micronutrient
contents and their availability to the fungus.
McCoy et al. (1971) cited several advantages of using fragmented mycelium of
H. thompsonii on citrus foliage, such as elimination of surface phase for sporulation during
production, avoiding problems associated with the loss of conidial viability prior to use and
after application in the field, etc. Later, McCoy and Couch (1982) demonstrated the utility
of certain adjuvants to stimulate conidiation of H. thompsonii on citrus foliage.
In this work, the growth and conidiation of adjuvant-treated mycelial beads of
H. thompsonii apparently varied among the different plant parts used as substrates for the
a  ad    s g   e sa s  
plant parts, more so on the nut surface, indicating the possible additive effect of the
treatments under the actual field situation (Table 3). However, the variations could be
explained as the impact of the texture of the plant surface as well as the interaction of the
resident microfora with the fungus. Tank-mixed nutrients enable biopesticide fungi to
grow and sporulate on the plant parts thus aiding continual infection of surviving mites.
McCoy et al. (1975) used unsulphured molasses or citrus molasses as adjuvants along with
fragmented mycelia against the citrus rust mite, and achieved effective control of the pest.
The three adjuvants did not affect the pathogenicity of H. thompsoni. The fungus
treated with selected adjuvants in fact caused higher mortality of the mite in the laboratory
experiment (Fig. 1). The most apparent reason for the increased mite mortality could be the
ability of the adjuvants to raise the inoculum levels through enhancing the conidiation of
the fungus during the incubation time.
Exposure to simulated sunlight affected the conidiogenesis of H. thompsonii (Table 4).
Adjuvant-treated pellets,both exposed and unexposed to simulated sunlight,produced
appreciable numbers of conidia compared with control, irrespective of the two incubation
could recover later during the incubation putting forth numerable sporulating hyphae and a
few distorted phialides. Overall, better conidiation was observed under alternating light-
dark regime than under total darkness in all the treatments, which led to the application of
the fungus in the early morning hours in the feld. The number of mites that come in
contact with the inoculum would be more during the night, by which time conidiogenesis
of the fungus would have commenced. The coconut mite usually comes out of the perianth
between 02:00 and 06:00 hours (a.m.) and mostly moves to other nuts (Moore and
Alexander 1987), thus getting infected and at the same time spreading the disease.
Glycerol, the most effective adjuvant, has excellent hygroscopic property (Burges 1998)
and may have conserved moisture better in the pellets even after the sunlight treatment to
     1   )      
extraordinary ability of H. fhompsonii to photoreactivate after damage induced by expo-
sure to far-ultraviolet light (FUV; 200-300 nm) has been demonstrated (Kenneth et al.
1979; Tuveson and McCoy 1982). Similarly, Kenneth et al. (1979) also found no
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
181
differences between FUV-treated and untreated H. thompsonii mycelium. Nevertheless, in
the case of H. fhompsonii on coconuts, sunlight may not always be as critical as it may be
to the fungi applied to the exposed foliage of other crops because of lower penetration of
thelightrays through thecoconut crown.
The general incidence of the coconut mite at the field trial site had not come down
during the experiment period of nine months as observed in control palms that still scored
4.0 at the end of the trial (Table 5). There was actually a slight increase of 21.2% in the
population of the mite over the period of less than 2 months from pre-treatment to post-
treatment analyses as detected in control palms. However, this potential increase was
negated by the application of H. fhompsonii. In the 36 palms that constituted the three
fungal treatments, the combined mean post-treatment mite population was a staggering
86.7% less than that of the mean pre-treatment population. This population collapse was
aided by the adjuvants presumably by their humectant, nutrient and adhesive qualities
(Burges 1998). By absorbing water in the moist night and slowly losing it in the dry
daytime, these nutrients might have acted as water-availability buffers for H. fhompsonii
(Burges 1998). This effect was anticipated to happen in the field on the basis of the
laboratory study (Fig. 1) in which an increase in coconut mite mortality resulted due to
addition of adjuvants toH. thompsonii inoculum.Also,the unique microclimatic condi-
tions within the coconut crown might have supported the survival, development and
initiation of disease by the fungus. While the temperature within the crown tends to be
below the ground level temperature, the relative humidity tends to be higher inside the
crown (Sreerama Kumar, unpublished observations).
medium has been achieved (Sreerama Kumar et al. 2005) but shelf-life problems, if any,
need to be sorted out during the commercialisation process. Nevertheless, for a pest like
A. guerreronis that is widespread and prevalent throughout the year on coconuts, myco-
acaricide shelf-life problems could be tackled through innovative marketing and immediate
use, as in the case of the mycoherbicide “De Vine' in USA (Kenney 1986). Multilocation
trials are going on in six states and the final results will be examined closely to arrive at a
decision on the recommendation of mycelial application of H. thompsonii against the
coconut mite in India.
Acknowledgerments The Project Director, Project Directorate of Biological Control, kindly provided the
research facilities. We wish to thank Mr N.C. Ramaiah, for allowing us to perform the field trial in his
coc onut plantation.
References
Burges HD (1998) Forrmulation of mycoinsecticides. ln: Burges HD (ed) Forrmulation of rmicrobial bio-
pesticides: beneficial microorganisms, nematodes and seed treatments. Kluwer Academic Publishers
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, p 131-185
Fargues J, Goettel MS, Smits N, Ouedraogo A, Vidal C, Lacey LA, Lomer CJ, Rougier M (1996) Variability
Mycopathologia 135: 171-181
Fernando LCP, Manoj P, Hapuarachchi DCL, Edgington S (2007) Evaluation of four isolates of Hirsutet-
Fuxa JR (1987) Ecological considerations for the use of entomopathogens in IPM.Annu Rev Entomol
32:225-251
Goettel MS, lnglis GD (1997) Fungi: Hyphomycetes. In: Lacey LA (ed) Manual of techniques in insect
pathology. Academic Press, London, UK, pp 213-249
182
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
entomopathogenic fungus, Beauveria bassiana. Biol Control 5:581-590
Inglis GD, Goettel MS, Butt TM, Stansser H (2001) Use of hy phormycetous fungi for managing insect pests.
In: Butt TM, Jackson C, Magan N (eds) Fungi as biocontrol agents: progress, problems and potential.
CAB Publishing, CAB lnternational, Wallingford, UK, pp 23-69
Jenkins NE, Heviefo G, Langewald J, Cherry Al, Lomer CJ (1998) Development of mass production
technology for aerial conidia for use as mycopesticides. Biocontrol News Inform 19(1):21N-3 1N
Kenneth R, Muttath Tl, Gerson U (1979) Hirsutelta thompsoni, a fungal pathogen of mites.1. Biology of
the fungus in vitro. Ann Appl Biol 91:21-28
Kenney DS (1986) DeVine?—The way it was developed—an industrialist's view. Weed Sci 34(Suppl. 1):
15-16
McCoy CW (198 1) Pest control by the fungus Hirsutetla thompsonii. In: Burges HD (ed) Microbial control
of pests and plant diseases 1970- 1980. Academic Press, London, UK, pp 499-512
McCoy CW, Couch TL (1982) Microbial control of the citrus rust mite with the mycoacaricide, Mycar?.
Fla Entomol 65:116-126
McCoy CW, Selhime AG, Kanavel RF, Hill A1 (1971) Suppression of citrus rust mite populations with
application of fragmented mycelia of Hirsutella thompsonii. J lnvertebr Pathol 17:270-276
McCoy CW, Hill A1, Kanavel RF (1975) Large-scale production of the fungal pathogen Hirsutetta thom-
psonit in submerged culture and its formulation for application in the field. Entomophaga 20:229-240
Moore D, Alexander L (1987) Aspects of migration and colonization of the coconut palm by the coconut
mite, Eriophyes guerreronis (Keifer) (Acari: Eriophyidae). Bull Entomol Res 77:641-650
Moore D, Bridge PD, Higgins PM, Bateman RP, Prior C (1993) Ultraviolet radiation damage to Meta-
rhizium favoviride conidia and the protection given by vegetable and mineral oils and chemical
sunscreens. Ann Appl Biol 122:605-616
Navia D, de Moraes Gj, Roderick G, Navajas M (2005) The invasive coconut mite Aceria guerreronis
(Acari: Eriophyidae): origin and invasion sources inferred from mitochondrial (16S) and nuclear (ITS)
sequences. Bull Entomol Res 95:505-516
Roberts DW, Campbell AS (1977) Stability of entomopathogenic fungi. Misc Publ Entomol Soc Am
10(3): 19-76
Sreerama Kumar P (2002) Developrment of a biopesticide for the coconut mite in lndia. In: Proceedings of
Brighton, UK, 18-21 November 2002, pp 335-340
Sreerama KumarP(2006)Hirsutella thompsoni asamycoacaricide forAceria guerreronisoncoconut inIndia:
research, development and other aspects. In: Bruin J (ed) Abstract book, twelfth international congress of
Aceria guerreronis, with special reference to Hirsutella thompsonii infection. Syst Appl Acarol 12:81-83
Sreerama Kumar P, Singh SP (2000) Hirsutetla thompsonit: The best biological control option for the
management of the coconut mite in lndia. lndian Coconut J 31(5):11-17
 Sreerama Kumar P, Singh L, Tabassum H (2005) Potential use of polyethylene glycol in the mass pro-
duction of nonsynnematous and synnematous strains of Hirsutetla thompsonii Fisher in submerged
culture. J Biol Control 19(2): 105-113
Tuveson RW,McCoy CW(1982) Far-ultraviolet sensitivity and photoreactivation of Hirsutella thompsonii
Ann Appl Biol 101:13-18
A tale of three acaropathogenic fungi in Israel: Hirsutella,
MeiraandAcaromyces
U. Gerson·A.Gafni · Z. Paz·A.Sztejnberg
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 1-4, 183-194.
DOl: 10.1007/s 10493-008-9202-6 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract We review published and unpublished studies conducted in Israel with six aca-
ppathogenic fungi, assayed in order to control the citrus rust mite, Phyllocoptruta oleivora
(Ashmead) (CRM). Hirsutella thompsonii Fisher was introduced twice, killed 80-90% of
the exposed mites, but due to its requirements for near-saturation humidities was deemed
unsuitable for local outdoors conditions. Hirsutella kirchneri (Rostrup) Minter et al. and
Hirsutella necatrix Minter et al. were also introduced and assayed against CRM and spider
mites, but their efficacy was unsatisfactory. Three indigenous fungi found to be associated
with mites, Meira geulakonigii, Meira argovae and Acaromyces ingoldii—all three
several mites. Meira geulakonigii killed 80-90% of several spider mites and of the CRM,
predators assayed. Mortality was not due to parasitization; extracts from the media in
which the fungi had developed caused considerable mite death, suggesting that it was a
result of fungal toxins. Data from a field study indicated that spraying blastoconidia of
M. geulakonigli on grapefruits infested by CRM significantly reduced pest-incurred dam-
endophytic within sealed grapefruit flowers and in the flavedo of the fruits' peel. Neither in
the laboratory nor in the field was any evidence ever obtained that this fungus damaged the
plants, leading us to hypothesize that M. geulakonigii serves as a "body guard" of grape
fruits (and perhaps other plants as well). All three fungi suffered very little mortality after
being exposed to various insecticides and acaricides that are in current local use (with the
exception of sulfur). The ability of M. geulakonigii to reduce mite numbers without affect-
ing the host plant, the minimal fungal effect on some predatory mites, its endophytic nature
U.Gerson (β)
Department of Entomology, Faculty of Agricultural, Food and Environmental Quality Sciences
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, P.O. Box 12, 76100 Rehovot, 1srae]
e-mail: Gerson @ agri.huji.ac.il
A.Gafni·Z.Paz·A.Sztejnberg
Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology,Faculty of Agricultural,Food and Environmental
Quality Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, P.O. Box 12, 76100 Rehovot, Israe]
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.), Diseases of Mites and Ticks. DO1: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2_15 183
184
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
along with the apparent tolerance of M. geuiakonigli to many insecticides and acaricides,
Introduction
Mites (Acari) are major plant pests whose control is increasingly becoming more problem-
atic. Acaricides are expensive from the economic as well as environmental point of view
and the target mites rapidly develop resistance to new products. Biological control by mites
(Gerson et al. 2003) is an attractive possibility as are acaropathogenic fungi, which are a
growing component in the non-chemical arsenal available to control pestiferous mites.
Recent examples include testing such fungi against the cassava green mite (Mononychellus
evansi Baker & Pritchard (Wekesa et al. 2006). Many of these fungi (or strains thereof)
also affect insects, but a few appear to affect only mites. Van der Geest et al. (2000) com-
piled a list of fungi that are specific and pathogenic to mites. Of these, only a few
Hirsutella kirchneri (Rostrup) Minter, Brady & Hall, H. noduiosa Petch, H. fhompsonii
Fisher, Neozygetes foridana (Weiser & Muma) and Paecilomyces eriophytis (Massee)
Leatherdale—were recorded from more than one or two acarine hosts. Chandler et al.
(2000) listed fungi that were reported to infect mites, including some (e.g-, Metarhizium
anisopliae (Metchnikof) Sorokin) that have a broad host range and may not be specific.
Since then we have added three acaropathogenic species that appear to be indigenous to
Boekhout, Gerson, Scorzetti & Sztejnberg and Acaromyces ingoldii Boekhout,Gerson,
Scorzetti & Sztejnberg, which were assayed against several citrus mites (Paz et al. 2007a).
Here we review our past and on-going efforts to control pestiferous mites with three spe-
cies of Hirsutella, two species of Meira and with A. ingoldii. Our main efforts were aimed
at controlling the citrus rust mite (CRM), Phyffocoptruta oleivora (Ashmead) (Eriophyi-
dae), the major pest of citrus in Israel, which is becoming increasingly difficult to control
by chemical means (Palevsky et al. 2003). The efficacy of the fungi was also tested against
several other acarine citrus pests, such as the oriental spider mite, Eutetranychus orientalis
(Klein) and the red citrus mite,Panonychus citri (McGregor)
Hirsutettaspp.
Hirsutella thompsoni, the best-studied species in this genus, was initially discovered and
described from Florida (Fisher 1950), where it was found to attack and kill CRM. The
application of this fungus against rust and bud mites, spider mites and the broad mite,
Polyphagotarsonemus latus (Banks) was reviewed several times (Chandler et al. 2000; van
der Geest et al. 20o0), and more recently it was tried against the varroa mite, Varrod
destructor Anderson & Trueman (Kanga et al. 2002). Aside from North America, the
fungus has been isolated from different parts of the world, including Poland (Mietkiewski
    s     )    
Africa (Odongo et al. 1998) and Brazil (van der Geest et al. 2000).
In the early 1970s we introduced a culture of H. fhompsonii (accession number HTRM-3)
from the University of Florida at Lake Alfred, maintained it on 3.9% w/v potato dextrose
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
185
agar (PDA) at 25°C in Petri dishes, and mass-produced the fungus on unprocessed wheat
bran fakes (Kenneth et al. 1979). Its effect on mites assignable to several acarine taxa
(Table 1) was assayed by placing therm for 1-2 h on sporulating fungal mats and then
removing them to suitable substrates or leaving them in situ (Gerson et al. 1979). The two
citrus pests, Eutetranychus orientalis and the carmine spider mite, Tetranychus cinnabari-
nus (Boisduval), were transferred to citrus leaves maintained at 25°C and 100% relative
humidity (r.h.). Tyrophagus putrescentiae (Schrank), Rhizogtyphus robini Claparede,
Tarsonemus sp., Nothrus biciliatus (Koch) and Parasitus fmetorum (Berlese) were left on
the mats. The tick Argas persicus (Oken) was kept within a vial placed at 100% r.h. The
fungus infected and killed >80% of the citrus pests (all mortality values corrected accord-
ing to Abbott 1925), whereas T. putrescentiae, R. robini, Tarsonemus sp. and N. biciliatus
fed, developed and oviposited on the mycelium. In addition, the fungus had no effect
on P. fmetorum or on the tick (Table 1).
These results led to an experiment in which 300 fungus-inoculated T. cinnabarinus, in
batches of 100, inoculated as above, were exposed to various humidity conditions at 25°℃.
One batch (a) was kept for 18 h at ca. 50% r.h., followed by 6 h at saturation, approximat-
ing outdoors conditions along the coastal plain of Israel in the summer. A second batch (b)
was held for 6 h at ca 50% r.h., and then for 18 h at saturation, and the third (c) was main-
tained throughout at 100% r.h. Mortality in the latter treatment came to 98%, but in experi-
ment (a) it reached only 65%, and in (b) to 74%. In another experiment, intended to
simulate summer greenhouse conditions, conducted like (a) but this time the mites were
transferred from 25°C for 18 h at 50% r.h. to 33°C at saturation, their mortality reached
Table 1 Infection rates of mites representing pests, natural enemies, scavengers and a ick in several families
and orders by Hirsutella thompsonii (HT; data from Gerson et al. 1979), Hirsutetla kirchneri (HK; data from
Sztejnberg et al. 1997; Gafni 1997) and by Hirsutetla necatrix (HN; data from Gafni 1997)
Mites
Economic status
Infecivity (%)
HT
HK
HN
Tetranychidae
Eutetranychus orientatis
Minor plant pest
08
70-80
16
Panonychus citri
Major citrus pest
NT
90
Tetranychuscinnabarinus
 Major plant pest
8
70-80
17-25
Eriophyidae
Phyltocoptruta oteivora
 Major citrus pest
NT
90
NT
Tarsonemidae
Potyphagotarsonemus tatus
 Major plant pest
NT
0
NT
Tarsonemus sp.
Scavenger
0
NT
0
Acaridae
Tyrophagus putrescentiae
Scavenger
0
0
0
Rhizogtyphus robini
Major plant pest
0
NT
Hemisarcoptidae
Hemisarcoptes coccophagus
Parasite of armored scales
NT
50
NT
Nothridae
Nothrus biciliatus
Scavenger
0
NT
NT
Parasitidae
Parasitus fimetorum
General predator
0
NT
NT
Phytoseidae
Typhtodromus athiasae
General predator
NT
0
NT
Argasidae
Argas persicus
A tick,parasite of poultry
0
NT
NT
NT not tested
186
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
70%. These results indicated that under the prevailing summer conditions in Israel,
H. fhompsonii would not provide satisfactory carmine spider mite control either outdoors,
where relative humidities seldom reach even 8o%, or in greenhouses, wherein summer
temperatures may be quite high (Gerson et al. 1979). A further discouraging opinion, for
similar reasons, about mite control with H. fhompsonii under protected cultivation was
expressed by Rombach and Gillespie (1988).
In the early 1990s we introduced two other isolates of H. thompsonii, one originating
from Papua New Guinea (ARSEF 414), the other from Zimbabwe (ARSEF 255). Both
were obtained from the Collection of Entomopathogenic Fungi of the USDA at Ithaca,
New York, and were cultured as above. Their effect on T. cinnabarinus was assayed by
spraying the mites with suspensions (ca. 10' spores/ml) of the two isolates while main-
   s         
water only) were then kept at 25°C and observed for 3 days. By that time isolate 414 killed
ca. 80% of the mites, isolate 255 only 35% (Chernin et al. 1997).
Having found that H. thompsonii may reduce mite numbers only at or very close to air
moisture saturation, as well as being variable in its lethality, we tried two other options in
efforts to control CRM. The first was to obtain, through hyphal anastomosis, intraspecific
heterokaryons that would be less susceptible to aridity. Although we obtained several het-
erokaryons that were distinguishable by random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD)
markers and by different α-esterase isoenzyme patterns (Mozes-Koch et al. 1995), none
were suitable for our purpose (unpublished data).
The second approach was to introduce two other reported acaropathogenic species,
namely H. kirchneri and Hirsutella necatrix Minter, Brady & Hall. Both were originally
isolated from the cereal rust mite, Abacarus hystrix (Nalepa), infesting Lolium in
Berkshire, UK (Minter et al. 1983). Cultures of both were obtained frorm the International
Mycological Institute, Surrey, UK, in September 1990. The culture of H. kirchneri was
original accession number IMI 257456, and that of H. necatrix was IM1 252317.
Hirsutella kirchneri has been reported from several parts of the world (aside from the
UK), such as Poland, infecting eriophyid mites (Mietkiewski et al. 2000), Australia, from
the cyclamen mite, Phytonemus pallidus (Banks) (unpublished data), and Cuba (Cabrera
and Dominguez 1987), where it was isolated from P. oteivora. The latter host report indi-
cated that this fungus was a suitable candidate for our purpose. It was cultured and candi-
date host mites (some of which were challenged earlier and others that were not; Table 1)
were inoculated, as above. Panonychus citri, T. cinnabarinus, P. oleivora and E. orientalis
suffered high (70-90%) mortality within 3 days (Fig. 1 shows infected P. oleivora). The
site (Sztejnberg et al. 1997). Hirsutella kirchneri killed mites at humidities somewhat
lower than 1o0% and also differed from H. thompsonii in other aspects (see below).
Aside from the UK, H. necatrix was isolated in Poland from an eriophyid mite
this fungus as above and the candidate mites were likewise inoculated. However, in con-
trast to the other two species of Hirsutella, it caused little mortality, coming only to 16% in
E. orientalis and 17-25% in T. cinnabarinus. These results are consistent with the data of
Lewis et al. (1981), who observed that H. necatrix (initially believed to be H. thompsonii)
caused 16% mortality of the cereal rust mite.
Believing that the chitinolytic activity of these fungi may shed some light on their patho-
genicity to mites, we looked at this activity in H. necatrix and two isolates of H. thompsonii
(414 and 255, noted above). All three produced chitinase, but 414 and 255 produced more
than H. necatrix. In addition, the latter failed to produce elastase and differed from the
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
187
0446
10.OUAGRI
Fig. 1 Hirsutetla kirchneri growing out of the body of the citrus rust mite, Phyllocoptruta oleivora, and
detail. Note the form of the conidiogenous cells bearing the conidia (from Doron-Shloush 1995)
H. thompsonii isolates in the pattern of its chitinases and proteases. We hypothesized that
these enzymatic differences are consistent with the lower lethality of H. necatrix to mites.
The (albeit reduced) ability of this fungus to kill mites is probably due to enzymes that in
part substitute for its elastase and chitinase deficiency (Chernin et al. 1997).
All three fungi can be cultured on bran and also grew saprophytically on the cadavers of
various insects, which they probably invade via the thin intra-segmental membranes or the
tracheae, and may be one means that enables their survival in the field.
To conclude, our efforts with the three species of Hirsutella indicated that they were
inadequatefor the control ofP.oleivora in ourregion.
Meira and Acaromyces
Laboratory studies
Our failures with Hirsutella spp. led us to search for and examine cadavers of P. oleivora
 and other phytophagous mites that had died in the feld without any apparent cause, e.g., in
usprayed citrus orchards. These efforts culminated in the finding, isolating and identifying
of the indigenous fungi M. geulakonigii and A. ingoldii from cadavers of P. oleivora, and
M. argovae from T. cinnabarinus and P. oleivora (full details in Boekhout et al. 2003). In a
prelirminary experiment M. geulakonigii (10? blastoconidia/ml) was sprayed onto P. oleivora
and Pa. citri, maintained on citrus seedlings in the laboratory, causing ca. 80% mortality
within 1 week. This led us to explore the effect of all three fungi on these and other mites.
The target mites included three species of citrus, E. orientalis, Pa. citri and P. oleivora,
along with T. cinnabarinus and T. urticae, who seldom infest citrus, but are major pests of
other crops. All were maintained on 2-months-old (two-leafed) sour orange (Citrus auran-
fium) seedlings in the laboratory, at 25°C and under a 12L:12D photoperiodic regime. The
mites were separately sprayed (10? blastoconidia/ml) with each of the three fungi and
observed after 1 week and after 2 weeks. In addition, the fungi were assayed against the
non-target R. robini and the predatory phytoseiid mites Phytoseiuius persimilis Athias
Henriot, Iphiseius degenerans Berlese and Neoseiuius californicus (McGregor). Individu
als of R. robini were placed on cultures of the three fungi maintained on PDA in Petri
dishes. The predators were kept on young citrus seedlings, P. persimilis was supplied with
prey (T. cinnabarinus), and the other two with common reed (Typha domingensis) pollen.
All three were sprayed as above and examined 1 week later.
The results with the five phytophagous species (Fig. 2) show that all tested fungi
affected all mites, with the exception of M. argovae being harmless to T. urticae. The
188
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
mControl
Ma
Mg
Ai
100
80
MORTALITY
60
40
20
Fig. 2Percentagemortalities of Phyllocoptruta oteivora,Eutetrarnychus orientatis,Panonychus citri,Tetranychus
cinnabarinus, and Tetranychus urticae, sprayed either with Meira argovae (Ma), Meira geulakonigii (Mg)or with
Acaromyces ingoldii (4i) (all at 10 blastoconidia/ml). Asterisk on column showing effect of M. argovae on Z.
urticae denotes the only result that is not significantly different from the controls (Modified from Paz et al. 2007a)
pattem of lethality was variable for the fungi as well as for the five target mites, variation
that is expressed when the data are separately observed after 1 week and after 2 weeks.
Mortality rates for P. oleivora, E. orientalis and Pa. citri did not change much by the sec-
ond week, but those of T. cinnabarinus increased two- or threefold as a result of being
exposed to all three fungi, and those of T. urticae almost threefold after being sprayed by
M. geuiakonigii (Paz et al. 2007a). These results indicate that there is much selectivity in
the effect of the fungi on susceptible mites, which could be exploited when using them
either alone or in combination with other natural enemies.
Of the other mites assayed, R. robini fed on the mycelium of all three fungi, suffering no
ill-effects. The predators P. persimilis and N. californicus were unaffected by all three
fungi. On the other hand, I. degenerans showed considerable mortality after being exposed
to the two Meira spp., but was unaffected by A. ingoldii (Fig. 3). The variability in these
data is consistent with the variable effects of these fungi on the phytophagous mites, proba-
bly due to the different toxins that they produce.
A unique feature of all three fungi was that they did not invade the bodies of the affected
mites, which usually died without physical contact with the various fungi. However, the
fungi did grow on the mites' cadavers (Paz et al. 2007a).
A field study
The effect of M. geulakonigii on P. oleivora was assayed in the same organic grapefruit
orchard whence the fungus was initially discovered. Observations conducted over several
years showed that the pest occurred there only for a limited period of time, from mid-sum-
mer on, and was at most causing minimal damage (Z. Barkay, personal communication).
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
189
70
N. californicus
60
50
田1degenerans
Mortality
40
P.persimilis
30
%
b
20
yy
10
0-
Control
Ma
Mg
Ai
Fig.3 Mortality (%) of Neoseiutus catifomicus, Iphiseius degenerans, and Phytoseutus persimitis, sprayed
with Meira argovae, Meira geutakonigii or Acaromyces ingotdii (all at 10 blastoconidia/ml). Different letters
indicate significant differences between treatments (P < 0.05; from Paz 2007)
per tree, either once a month (for five consecutive months), or once a season; control grape-
fruits received only water. Mites were counted within two randomly chosen areas of 1 cm?
from each of five fruits collected arbitrarily. At the end of the season fruits from all three
treatments were assessed for damage (extent of russeting). Mite numbers were similar on
fruits sprayed every month and on those treated only once per season, but were signifi-
cantly lower than on the control fruits (Table 2). Damage was similar on fruits of both
groups of sprayed grapefruits (ca. 12.5%), as compared to almost 23% in the control
(unsprayed) fruits. A supplementary spray of M. geulakonigii may thus protect grapefruits
against the injurious P. oleivora and increase their market value (Paz et al. 2007a).
Grapefruit leaf, fower bud and fruit samples were regularly taken throughout the trial
and separately examined for the presence of M. geutakonigii in external washings and
within the leaves and the fruits. Using conventional mycological methods, the fungus could
be isolated neither from the phyllosphere nor from the fruits' surface. Given that mite
damage was clearly reduced, this conundrum led to the hypothesis that the fungus may be
endophytic, not epiphytic (Paz et al. 2007b). Three methods, suggested by Stone et al.
Table 2 The effects of a single (seasonal) or of monthly applications of 1-] of Meira geulakonigii suspension
(10 blastoconidia/ml) per tree on the populations of Phytlocoptruta oteivora that infest grapefruits, during
twosurmirmiers
Year
Month
Single
Monthly
Contro]
application
applications
2003
Early July
0.07
0.07
0.07
Late July
0.4
0.4
17.1
Late August
64.3
56.0
137.6a
September
82.0
83.0
45.0
2004
Mid-July
0.7
0.7
0.7
Early August
7.8
7.8
9.4
Mid-August
76.5
105.4
198.0a
Early Septermber
72.6
63.4
131.5a
Mid-September
9.7
3.0
5.1
Mtes were counted in two randomly chosen areas of 1 cm? grapefruit from five fruits collected haphazardly
a Contro] values that are significantly different within the same row (modified from Paz et al. 2007a)
190
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
(2000), were used to test this hypothesis: (1) isolating the fungus from the intermal parts of
grapefruit peel; (2) visualization of peel cross sections by scanning electron microscopy,
and (3) use of a fungus-specific primer for PCR amplification. The latter detected fungal
result. A suitable PCR and a quantitative real time (qRT)-PCR-based method were also devel-
oped to assess and to quantify the occurrence of M. geulakonigii inside the grapefruit peel.
Use of the qRT-PCR methodology enabled us to confirm the presence of the fungus in
sealed flower samples and in the flavedo of the fruits' peel, and it was also detected in
washings of grapefruit leaves, but not within their tissues. The possibility of inoculat-
ing M. geulakonigii into pristine grapefruits was explored by using plant material obtained
from a commercial orchard where the absence of M. geulakonigii was first determined
by PCR. The plant material was sprayed with 30 ml suspensions of M. geulakonigii
(10° blastoconidia/ml) per grapefruit. Meira geulakonigii was detected on the fruit skin and
in the flavedo from the fist day and up to 60 days after application, although at and after
30 days the fungal population declined (Paz et al. 2007b).
no trace of this fungus was found in the inoculated grapefruits using species-specific
primers (unpublished data).
No evidence was obtained either in the laboratory or in the field studies that these fungi
caused any damage to the plants.
How do the fungi kill mites?
No evidence was found that M.geulakonigiiinvades the bodies of the affected mites,which
often died without obvious physical contact with the fungi. This led us to examine the
hypothesis that mite mortality may be due to toxic metabolites secreted from this fungus.
Crude extracts of M. geulakonigii applied against P. oleivora caused their rapid, total
mortality (100% after 24 h). In addition, M. argovae also secreted some metabolites and a
spray thereof was toxic to P. oleivora. Work is continuing on its isolation by using HPLC
methodology (unpublished). In consequence, it appears that the fungi (at least the two
Meira spp.) kill mites by their toxic secretions.
Effect of pesticides
With the view of using A. ingoldii, M. argovae, and M. geulakonigii within integrated pest
management (IPM) programs, their susceptibilities to a series of insecticides and acaricides
(all currently used in Israel), was tested by applying the methodologies of Torgeson (1967).
Colony growth was assessed by placing an 8 mm disk of PDA, covered by the mycelium of
the tested fungus, in the center of a Petri dish with PDA, to which each of the appropriate
pesticides (Table 3) were forrmerly added. Susceptibility was assessed by measuring the
diameter of each colony's growth after 6 weeks at 25°C. Spore germination was
determined by placing 0.1 ml of a spore suspension (containing 10" spores/ml, from every
fungus) in a Petri dish with 10 ml PDA, to which one of each of the tested pesticides was
added. The dishes were incubated at 25°C for 2448 h, after which spore germination was
assessed. Untreated controls consisted of PDA with deionized water. Each treatment was
replicated four times, and the entire experiment was repeated twice.
The results (Table 3) indicate that almost all tested pesticides (except sulfur, which
like buprofezin and dimethoate, adversely affected colony growth and/or spore germination,
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
191
Table 3 The effect of several insecticides and acaricides on the colony growth and spore germination of
Acaromyces ingoldii, Meira argovae and Meira geutakonigit
Genericname
RecommendedAcaromyces ingoldi
Meira argovae
Meira geutakonigi
a.i.dosage
Colony
Spore
Colony
Spore
Colony
Spore
growth
germination
growth
germination
growth
germination
Abamectin
9-22
97
131
86
97
69
NT
Azadirachtin
9,700
124
108
99
112
86
105
Buprofezin
250
113
8
85
08
99
53
Chlorfenapyr
96-160
108
86
62
79
85
86
Dimethoate
75-150
41
112
78
105
8
86
Fenpyroximate
25-100
115
101
88
95
91
08
Imidacloprid
175
96
101
100
67
101
100
Methoxyfenozide
96
t01
105
101
102
99
104
Pyrazophos
300-500
67
128
51
64
68
59
Sulfur
2,800-7,000
93
28
86
63
81
1
Teflubenzuron
75-150
NT
NT
100
110
62
NT
Pesticide concentrations assessed were according to the acive-ingredient (a.i.) dosages (in ppm) recom-
mended for field use in Israel;, variation in ranges results from usage on different crops at high- or at low-vol-
ume applications. Mean colony growth and spore germination values were calculatedin percentages from the
results in the un treated contro]
NT not tested
A. Gafni and A. Sztejnberg, unpublished
but not to the extent that this would affect fungal survival in the feld. The increased growth
 and germination values obtained after exposure to some pesticides probably stems from the
ability of the fungi to metabolize specific molecules (or their components).
Discussion
Hirsutella spp.
A comparison between H. thompsoni and H. kirchneri, as based on our data, reveals three
main differences: (1) the pathogenicity of the former seems to be restricted to plant mites,
whereas H. kirchneri infected a greater variety of acarine species; (2) at 25-27°C H. thom-
 psonii developed on PDA much faster than H. kirchneri, forming a colony of 70 mm diam-
eter in 18 days, as compared to a colony of only 25 mm after 30 days by the latter; and (3)
H. thompsonii infested and killed mites only at or near saturation, whereas H. kirchneri
affected mites at ≥80% r.h. Due to the low pathogenicity of H. necatrix to plant mites, it
will not be discussed further.
Our results with both H. thompsonii and H. kirchneri were obtained from isolates that
represent only a narrow genetic pool. The forrmer fungus is known to be very pleomorphic,
with many isolates collected and identified from different parts of the world (Boucias et al.
1982; Mozes-Koch et al. 1995; Aghajanzadeh et al. 2007). Such isolates may arise through
geographical isolation but also by anastomosis (unpublished data). The variability inherent
in the entity currently called H. fhompsonii is consistent with its reported attack on members
of the family Tarsonemidae and on the varroa mite. As to H. kirchneri, its failure to infect
the broad mite was unexpected, because this fungus was initially collected from a member
of the same mite family (cited by Minter et al. 1983). The parasitic mite H. coccophagus
192
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
appears to be the only mermber of the Astigrmata affected by these fungi. The possible
adverse effect of the susceptibility of this natural enemy to H. kirchneri may be offset by the
reducing its chances of becoming infected in the field (Sztejnberg et al. 1997)
MeiraandAcaromyces
Meira spp. and Acaromyces are hard to isolate, slow-growing fungi and difficult to identify
by conventional morphological methods; in fact, their deterrmination required a variety of
physiological and molecular methods (Boekhout et al. 2003). This may explain the paradox
of their being common (we collected several isolates of M. argovae in various regions of
 Israel), while not having hitherto been found, despite much local work on citrus fungi. Our
suggests that additional, related taxa may also be found.
The discovery of the endophytic presence of M. geulakonigii within closed grapefruit
Howers and in its fruit peel throughout the season raises intriguing questions. These include
the origin of the inoculation and its mode of transmission (via seeds or at grafting? Could
they be windbome or do they adhere to arthropods?); does the fungus also occur in other
citrus species and varieties, and in other plants? Should the association between citrus and
this fungus be found to be prevalent, another interesting query would be about the benefits
may be of mutual benefit The fungus lives in or on various parts of its host plants through-
out the year as a saprophyte, affecting mites as these become numerous enough to come in
touch with the fungus or its secretions. At this time the fungus may possibly act as a “body-
guard’ (Elliot et al. 2000), reducing the damage that CRM causes the grapefruit. This asso-
ciation is similar to that of the entomopathogenic fungus Beauveria bassiana (Balsamo)
Vuillermin, which forms endophytic relationships with various plants without damaging
them, thus providing alternate options for biological pest control (Lewis et al. 2001; Akello
et al. 2007).
As noted, no evidence was obtained that the fungi damage the plants in any way, no
relevant phytotoxicity was observed, nor did the augmentative sprays, whether seasonal or
monthly, reduce fruit weight or size distribution.
Fungi that attack insects are parasitic, invading the bodies of their hosts (Diaz et al.
2006). This also holds for acaropathogenic fungi, e.g. H. thompsonii and N. foridana, as
well as for mite and insect pathogenic fungi (e.g. Beauveria spp. and Metarhizium spp.),
which penetrate the mites' bodies and then secrete toxic compounds (Chandler et al. 2o00).
Meira and Acaromyces thus appear to be unique in being non-parasitic antagonists of
mites. As neither Meira spp. nor A. ingoidii are parasitic (Sztejnberg et al. 2004), we
assumed that their mode of action, e.g. the cause of mite death, was due to toxic secretions.
which is antagonistic to phytopathogenic fungi, exerts its effect by the secretion of toxic
fatty acids (Avis et al. 2001). The putative toxins secreted by Meira spp. and A. ingoldii
affect a wider range of organisms, because they are also antagonists of powdery mildew
diseases (Sztejnberg et al. 2004; Gerson et al. 2005), other phytopathogenic fungi and
bacteria (unpublished data).
The ability of M. geuiakonigii to reduce mite numbers without affecting the host plant,
its low toxicity to some predatory mites, its endophytic nature along with the apparent tol-
erance to many insecticides and acaricides, suggest that this fungus could be suitable for
IPM programs. Notwithstanding our limited field trial, more out-of-doors data are needed
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
193
in order to evaluate the commercial potential of this species, as well as that of the other two
fungi, as biological control agents.
Finally, do Hirsutelfa, Meira and Acaromyces interact with other natural enemies (Roy
and Pell 2000)? In our experience with species of Hirsutella, the single case of an adverse
effect was H. kirchneri, affecting H. coccophagus. As to Meira, both its species reduced the
numbers of one of the predatory mites (Fig. 3).
References
Abbott WS (1925) A method of computing the effechi veness of an insecticide. J Econ Entomol 18:265-267
Akello J, Dubois T, Gold CS et al (2007) Beauveria bassiana (Balsarmo) Vuillermin as an endophyte in tissue
cuture banana (Musα spp). 1 lnvertebr Pathol 96: 34-42
Avis Tl, Caron Sl, Boekhout T et al (2001) Molecular and physiological analysis of the powdery mildew
antagonist Pseudozyma focculosa and related fungi.Phytopathology 91:249-254
Aghajanzadeh S, Prasad DT, Malik B (2007) Genehic diversity in Hirsutetta thompsonii isolates based on
random amplified polymorphic DNA analysis. Biocontrol 52:375-383
Bao J, Chen HK, Gonchen W (199o) Studies on Hirsutetla necatrix Minter et al. and H. satumaensis newly
occurring in Zhejiang Province. Acta Agric Univer Zhejiangensis 16:10-13
Boekhout T, Theelen B, Houbraken J et al (2003) Nove] anamorphic mite-associated fungi belonging to the
Ustilaginomycetes: Meira geutakonigii gen.nov., sp.nov., Meira argovae sp.nov. and Acaromyces
ingoidii gen. nov., sp. nov. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 53: 1655-1664
Boucias DG, McCoy CW, Joslyn Dl (1982) Isozyme differentiation among 17 geographical isolates of Hirsu-
telta thompsonii.J1nvertebrPatho]39:329-337
Cabrera R1, Dominguez D (1987) Hirsutella nodulosa e Hirsutella kirchneri, dos nuevos hongos patogenos
del acaro del moho, Phyttocoptruta oleivora. Cien Tecno Agricol Protec Plant 10: 139-142
Chandler D, Davidson G, Pell JK et al (2000) Fungal biocontrol of acari. Biocontrol Sci Technol 10:357-384
Chernin L, Gafni A, Mozes-Koch R et al (1997) Chitinolytic activity of the acaropathogenic fungi Hirsutetla
thompsonii and Hirsutetta necatrix. Can J Microbiol 43:440-446
Dara SK (2007) Laboratory evaluation of fungus Hirsutella thompsonit(Deuteromycotina: Hyphomycetes)
for the control of the cassava green mite, Mononychettus tanajoa (Acari: Tetranychidae). Bionotes
9: 18-19
Diaz MP, Macias AF, Navarro SR, De la Torres M (2006) Mechanism of action of entomopathogenic fungi.
Interciencia 31:856-860
Doron-Shloush S (1995) The biology of the fungus Hirsutella kirchneri and its influence on the citrus rust
mite. MSc Thesis, Faculty of Agriculture, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israe]
Elliot SL, Sabelis MW, Janssen A, van der Geest LPS, Beerling EAM, Fransen J (2000) Can plants use ento-
mopathogens as body guards? Ecol Lett 3:228-235
Fsher FE (1950) Two new species of Hirsutetta Patouillard. Mycologia 42: 190-297
Gafni A (1997) The biology of the acaropathogenic fungus Hirsutella necatrix. MSc Thesis, Faculty of Agri-
culture, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israe]
interactions. Ann Appl Biol 91:29-40
Gerson U, Paz Z, Kushnir L, Sztejnberg A (2005) New fungi to control phytophagous mites and phytopath.
ogenic fungi. 1OBC/WPRS Bull 28(1):103-106
Gerson U, Smiley RL, Ochoa R (2003) Mites (Acari) for pest control. Blackwell Science, Ox ford, UK
Hountondji FCC, Hanna R, Cherry AJ et al (2007) Scaling up tests on virulence of the cassava green mite
fungal pathogen Neozygites tanajoae (Entomophthorales: Neozygitaceae) under controlled conditions:
first observations at the population level. Exp Appl Acarol 41: 153- 168
Kanga LHB, James RR, Boucias DG (2002) Hirsutetla thompsoni and Metarhizium anisoptiae as potential
microbial control agents of Varroa destructor, a honey bee parasit. J Invertebr Pathol 81: 175-184
fungus in vitro. Ann Appl Biol 91:21-28
Kumar PS,Anuroop CP (2004) A method to test the pathogenicity of fungi to Aceria guerreronsis with
particular reference to Hirsutetla thompsoni. Syst Appl Acarol 9:11-14
Lewis GC, Heard Al, Brady BL, Minter DW (1981) Fungal parasitism of the eriophyid mite vector of
ryegrass mosaic virus. In: Proc 1981 Briish Crop Prot Conf, pp 109-1 11
194
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Lewis LC,Bruck DJ, Gunnarson RD, Bidne KG (2001) Assessment of plant pathogenicity of endophytic
Beauveria bassiara in Bt transgenic and non-transgenic corn. Crop Sci 41: 1395- 1400
Mietkiewski R, Batazy S, Tkaczuk C (2000) Mycopathogens of mites in Poland—a review. Biocontro] Sci
Technol 10:459-465
Minter DW, Brady BL, Hall RA (1983) Five Hyphomycetes isolated from eriophyid mites. Trans Br Mycol
Soc 81:455-471
Mozes-Koch R, Edelbaum O, Livneh O et al (1995) ldentification of Hirsutetla species, isolates within a
species and intraspecific heterokaryons by random amplified polymorphic DNA. Z Pflanzenkrankh
Pflanzenschutz 102:284-290
Odongo B, Odindo MO, Brownbridge M, Kumar R (1998) Comparative biological efficacy of Hirsutella
thompsoni and Neoseiutus teke for cassava mite (Mononychettus tanajoa) suppression. Biocontrol Sci
Tech 8:345-355
Palevsky E, Argov Y, Ben-David T, Gerson U (2003) ldentification and evaluation of potential predators of
Paz Z (2007) Biological control of phytophagous mites by the fungi Meira geulakonigii, Meira argovae and
Acaromyces ingoldi: host range and mechanism. PhD Thesis, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusa-
Jem, lsrae]
Paz Z, Gerson U, Sztejnberg A (2007a) Assaying three new fungi against citrus mites in the laboratory, and
a field trial. Biocon trol 52:855-862
geulakonigii on the citrus rust mite Phyttocoptruta oteivora. 1 Appl Microbiol 103:2570-2579
Rombach MC, Roberts DW, Shepard BM (1986) Hirsutetta thompsoni Fisher infecting phytophgous mites
in the Philippines. Philipp Entomol 6:620-622
Rombach MC, Gillespie AT (i9s8) Entomogenous Hyphomycetes for insect and mite control on greenhouse
crops. Biocontrol News Inf 9:7-18
Roy HE, Pell JK (2000) Interaction between entomopathogenic fungi and other natural enemies: Implication
for biological control. Biocontrol Sci Technol 10:737-752
Stone JK, Bacon CW, White JF Jr (2000) An overview of endophytic microbes: endophytism defined. ln:
Bacon CW, White JF Jr (eds) Microbial endophytes. Marcel Dekker, NY, pp 3-29
Sztejnberg A,Doron-Shloush S, Gerson U (1997) The biology of the acaropathogenic fungus Hirsutetla
kirchneri. Biocontrol Sci Technol 7:577-590
Sztejnberg A, Paz Z, Boekhout T et al (2004) A new fungus with dual biocontrol capabilities: reducing the
numbers of phytophagous mites and powdery mildew disease damage. Crop Prot 23: 1125-1 129
advanced treatise, vol 1. Academic Press, New York, pp 93-123
van der Geest LPS, Elliot SL, Breeuwer JAJ, Beerling EAM (2000) Diseases of mites. Exp Appl Acaro]
24:497560
Wekesa VW, Knapp M, Maniania NK, Boga Hl (2006) Effects of Beauveria bassiana and Metarhizium
anisoptiae on mortality, fecundity and egg fertility of Tetranychus evansi. J Appl Entomol 130: 155- 159
Lessons from interactions within the cassava green mite
fungal pathogen Neozygites tanajoae system and
prospects for microbial control using Entomophthorales
Fabien C. C. Hountondji
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 1-4, 195-210.
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9209-z @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract Most fungal pathogens lack the capacity to search for their host but rather
develop sit-and-wait strategies that favour contact with them. The success of these strat-
egies depends upon the interactions of the pathogen with its host, the host plant and the
environmental conditions, which altogether determine its transmissibility. Given the lim-
ited success that has characterized application of sustainable microbial control, particularly
using Entomophthorales, interaction studies have been conducted with the entomophtho-
ralean fungus Neozygites tanajoae, pathogenic to the cassava green mite (CGM),
Mononychelius fanajoa, to help understand differences observed between laboratory and
feld performances of this pathogen. Reciprocal pathogen-host interactions as well as
tritrophic interactions involving the host plant were studied. It was found that herbivory
triggers the release of volatiles that promote sporulation of isolates of N. tanajoae, whereas
the host mite avoids haloes of spores of this pathogen. However, the host mite does not
avoid the pathogen when inside the mummified fungus-killed cadaver. The status of
microbial control of CGM in Africa is reviewed and implications of these interactions are
discussed for prospective application of microbial control using Entomophthorales.
Keywords
SAvoidance ·Epizootic ·Individual-level interaction · Manihot escufenta ·
Virulence
F. C. C. Hountondji ()
Biological Control Centre for Africa, lnternational Institute of Tropical Agriculture
Cotonou, Republic of Benin
e-mail: fabienho @ yahoo.com
Present Address:
F.C.C.Hountondji
Expertise, Action and Research for Development (EAR-Development), P.O. Box 2015,
Abomey-Calavi,Republic of Benin
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.). Diseases of Mites and Ticks. DOl: 10.1007/978-I-4020-9695-2_16 195
196
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Introduction
A few sustainable microbial control programs using entormophthoralean fungal pathogens
to control arthropod pests have been very successful (Hajek et al. 2005, 2007). The well-
kmown case of sustainable microbial control success using Entomophthorales is that of
Entomophaga maimaiga against the gypsy moth populations in North America. However,
whether the early success of this pathogen was the result of release efforts or due to
accidental introduction is still unclear (Hajek et al. 1995a, 2007). Moreover, in other
programs that resulted in establishment, subsequent performance of established Entom-
ophthorales was generally erratic, too slow or unpredictable (Milner et al. 1982; Wilding
et al. 1990; Dara and Semtner 1996; Bidochka et al. 1997).
The reasons behind low performance in microbial control are still poorly understood.
Epizootics are largely driven by pathogen-host characteristics and environmental condi-
tions such as the capacity of the pathogen to overcome host defences, its transmissibility,
 i   so e pe s n  d  
1994). Most epizootiological studies focus on aspects of primary pathogen-host interac-
tions and the effects of host plant food on within-host dynamics of the pathogen (e.g. Hajek
However, information on direct interactions between the host plant and the entomo-
pathogen is scarce (Brown et al. 1995; Baverstock et al. 2005; Munster et al. 2005), and
potential of the genetic diversity in host-pathogen systems is poorly explored and utilized.
Candidate fungal isolates in many cases failed to demonstrate the performance they show
in the laboratory, at the individual-level, under field conditions, at the metapopulation-level
(e.g. Hajek et al. 1996; Inglis et al. 2001). In many cases, selection for microbial control
candidates has been carried out in laboratory by treating single or a group of individual
host(s) with the pathogen in a confined environment and screening them, based on viru-
lence parameters such as time and dose mortalities. In such bioassays aspects related to the
host plant, such as indirect signalling of host presence and habitat abiotic conditions, are
 not taken into account, which excludes population-level interactions that seem important
for virulence assessment (Elliot et al. 2002a)
An example of such interactions is the microbial control of the cassava green mite
(CGM), Mononychellus tanajoa, a pest of cassava, Manihot escuienta Crantz, in Africa,
with the fungal pathogen Neozygites tanajoae (Delalibera, Hajek and Humber). The tro-
phic system N. tanajoae-M. tanajoa-cassava is illustrated in Fig. 1. While Brazilian and
African isolates of N. tanajoae do not differ in virulence under laboratory conditions,
Brazilian isolates are characterized by regular epizootics in the field (Hountondji et al.
2007). In an attempt to understand the differential performance of this pathogen, tritrophic
interaction studies between fungus, host mite and cassava were carried out.
Effectiveness of N. tanajoae does not only depend on abiotic factors and host density; it
can also be influenced by biotic factors related to the host and/or the host plant (Hountondji
2005). The host plant may influence sporulation of entomopathogens, e.g. by delaying
sporulation until susceptible hosts are available as observed in other entomopathogens
(Brown et al. 1995; Klingen et al. 2002), or possibly also by releasing volatiles that pro-
mote production of spores following plant feeding by the herbivorous host (Baverstock
et al. 2005; Hountondji et al. 2005). Apart from the influence of the host plant on spor-
ulation, the herbivorous mite may be attracted or learn to avoid haloes of spores. These
hypotheses have been tested for the N. tanajoae-M. tanajoa-cassava system. Integrated
sustainable control using Entomophthorales.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
197
The study system
Spore2
Spore 1
PATHOGEN
Capilliconidia formation
N.tanajoae
Avoidahce
sporulation
Infection
HERBIVORE
Green mite
Mummified
M. tanajod
HIPV
-MeSA
Herbivory
PLANT
COSsava
Leafdamaged
by M.tanajoa
Fig. 1 Diagram of the study system with the trophic chain. The different levels (rectangles) are represented
on the left-hand side; the products of the interactions between the different trophic levels are represented on
he right-hand side; specific interactions are indicated in gothic characters; the different elements of the
system are connected by arrows with the dotted ones pointing at the products of interactions between two
trophic levels. HIPV Herbivore-induced plant volatiles;MeSA Methyl salicylate (based on Hountondji 2005)
Here, it is demonstrated that interactions between N. tanajoae, M. tanajoa and the host
plant can indeed infuence the microbial control and the implications are discussed.
Description of the study system
The fungus
The entomophthorale N. tanajoae, previously known as N. foridana and renamed by
Delalibera Jr. et al. (2004), is a pathogen of M. tanajoa. It infects the mite through body
contact and ermission of a germ tube that penetrates the cuticle of the mite and develops
into hyphal bodies, which multiply through binary division and progressively fill the
haemocoel of the mite. Infected mites can still move the first and the second day, and may
thus help in the dissemination of the pathogen. They die within 3-5 days at ca. 28°℃
(Oduor et al. 1995a). Freshly dead infected mites dry out and become mummified (hence
 called *mummies') in a few hours, after which they sporulate if conditions are favourable.
Optimum sporulation conditions are fulfilled in the dark when humidity is near satu-
ration and temperature around 18-23°C (Oduor et al. 1996). Sporulation starts with the
process of conidiation which results in ejection of non-infective spores (conidia) from the
198
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
mummified infected host and ends with development of conidia into infective spores
(capilliconidia), each on top of a slender capillary tube. Capilliconidia possess a glue-like
end serving to attach to the mite. Both conidia and capilliconidia are displayed on the
substrate within 5 mm around the sporulating mummy and are easily recognized as they
form a halo around the mummy. Host mites get infected when they pass through a halo of
spores and get capilliconidia attached to their body. Infectivity was found to be age-
dependent (Elliot et al. 2002b) whereas time to mortality was infuenced by the number of
attaching capilliconidia (Oduor et al. 1997a). Production and distribution of haloes of
spores and host density are therefore important factors of the transmissibility of
N. tanajoae.
The acaropathogen N. tanajoae is difficult to grow in vitro, on artificial medium (Leite
et al. 2000; Delalibera Jr. et al. 2003). Significant work was done by Delalibera Jr. et al.
(2003) who developed a procedure for hyphal body culturing using IPL-41 medium
enriched with yeastolate, lactalbumin and fetal bovine serum. However, further research is
still needed to improve the yield of hyphal body production and sporulation from artifi.
cially produced hyphal bodies for practical applications. Production, release and storage of
N.tanajoaetherefore stillrely on the naturalhost.
The mite
 doo pooy ads nn u so go isd e si no  a piun 
Africa (Yaninek and Herren 1988). It is preferably associated with cassava as host plant
and is rarely found inhabiting other plants. It mainly lives on the underside of cassava
leaves where it feeds on the leaf parenchyma. The developmental life of M. tanajoa is
mainly influenced by temperature and relative humidity and was found to be 12.5 days
under controlled conditions of 28°C and 60% RH (Yaninek et al. 1989)
Accidentally introduced to Africa in the early 1970s, M. tanajoa has become one of the
major cassava pests (Nyiira 1972; Lyon 1973; Yaninek and Herren 1988). Heavy infes-
tations have been observed on the continent with up to 80% yield loss and occasional plant
death. In South America, its area of origin, M. tanajoa is kept under control by a complex
of natural enemies (Yaninek and Herren 1988). A few indigenous predators attack
M. tanajoa in Africa but their action is not sufficient to prevent pest outbreaks. The
International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (IITA) initiated a classical biological
control M. tanajoa (Yaninek and Herren 1988). Two phytoseiid predators, Typhiodrom
alus manihoti and T. aripo, were successfully introduced against the pest (Yaninek et al.
1993, 1998; Yaninek and Hanna 2003; Hanna et al. 2005). However, the impact of these
phytoseids depends on the cassava variety (particularly for T. aripo) and their establish-
ment in dry savannas and in some mid-altitude regions in Africa is still a challenge (Hanna
and Toko 2003).
Dynamics and within-plant distribution of mite populations are found to be infuenced
by the nutritional status of the leaves (Yaninek et al. 1989) as well as the presence of
predators (Magalhaes et al. 2002; Onzo et al. 2003). However, main dynamics are driven
by upwards migration due to formation of new leaves as the cassava plant grows; this
explains the higher densities observed on younger cassava leaves (Yaninek et al. 1991).
The migration behaviour of the host determines its within-plant distribution and
dynamics; it is thus an important factor to consider for sustainable microbial control
applications.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
199
Cassavaplant
Cassava is a euphorbiaceous plant which originated from South America, particularly from
Brazil (Olsen and Schaal 1999).It was introduced to Africa in the sixteenth century and
has become one of the major staple food crops in sub-Saharan Africa (Yaninek and Herren
tings and is harvested between 8 and 36 months after planting (Cock 1985). It is attacked
by several pests amongst which M. tanajoa and another tetranychid mite Oligony-
chus gossypii (Gutierrez and Bonato 1994), the latter being indigenous to Africa where it is
a minor pest in some areas. Infection of O. gossypii by a Neozygites species was also
observed in the field but at extremely low levels; however, it appears not to be the same
species as N. tanajoae (Delalibera Jr. and Hajek 2004).
In Africa, cassava is extensively cultivated and cassava fields are closely installed
particularly in high-production areas, exhibiting sometimes contiguous cassava vegetation
over large areas. At early ages (1-4 months), cassava fields have limited shading and
plants are mostly isolated. However, at later stages, shading becomes increasingly
important due to canopy development ensuring contacts between plants. Shading and
cassava plant distribution condition host distribution and dynamics; these factors may
infuence epizootic establishment and dispersal of N. tanajoae.
Status of Neozygites tanajoae-based microbial control of the cassava green mite
Host specificity of Neozygites tanajoae
Host range is an important characteristic in the selection of biocontrol candidates. It
determines the level of specialization of the biocontrol candidate with the host and may
play a role in its persistence in the field. Preliminary work by de Moraes and Delalibera Jr.
(1992) demonstrated the non-pathogenicity of N. tanajoae to closely related tetranychid
mite species (Tetranychus urticae and T. bastosi). In order to introduce South American
isolates of N. tanajoae to Africa for controlling M. tanajoa, additional pathogenicity tests
were conducted with predators and parasitoids of the cassava agroecosystems, silkworms
and bees. None of the species tested was a suitable host for the development of N. tana-
joae, which demonstrates its safety for introduction into Africa (Hountondji et al. 2002a).
Further bioassays and DNA work by Delalibera Jr. et al. (2004) also confirmed the
specificity of N. tanajoae and support the speciation proposed by these authors.
Natural occurrence of Neozygites tanajoae
Occurrence of N. tanajoae is poorly investigated due to geographically limited research on
the acaropathogen. Neozygites tanajoae was first discovered as a cause of infection in
M. tanajoa populations in Venezuela in the mid 1980s (Agudelo-Silva 1986). Later, severe
epizootics were reported in other countries of South America, e.g. Colormbia (Alvarez
Afanador et al. 1993) and particularly Brazil where more frequent epizootics have been
observed in the North East (Delalibera Jr. et al. 1992). The fungus was also found in
Africa, particularly in Kenya (Bartkowski et al. 1988), in Benin (Yaninek et al. 1996), in
Ghana and in Tanzania (Hountondji and Hanna, unpublished data). It is not known whether
N. tanajoae was introduced with its host to Africa or not, since nothing is known about its
dispersal and to date, its distribution is only partially assessed on the continent. However,
200
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
given the specificity of N. tanajoae to its host, one of the serious hypotheses to be con-
sidered about its origin is that of its host (i.e. South America).
Prevalence of N. tanajoae shows great variation between geographical areas. In South
America, high-prevalence has been observed in Columbia and particularly in Northeastern
Brazil (Delalibera Jr. et al. 1992; Alvarez Afanador et al. 1993). In Africa, however, lower
prevalence has generally been observed with especially very low infection levels in Benin
before the releases of the acaropathogen in 1999 (Yaninek et al. 1996; Dara et al. 2001).
Nevertheless, exceptionally, infections above 10% have been observed on this continent in
the absence of releases or far away from the release areas.
Releases and post-release prevalence of Neozygites tanajoae
The epizootic potential of Brazilian isolates of N. tanajoae has led research at IITA to
consider introducing Brazilian isolates against CGM. Brazilian isolates were imported to
Benin through the University of Amsterdarm. Preliminary virulence studies in laboratory
failed to reveal significant differences between these isolates and the indigenous Beninese
isolate. This prompted some field experimental releases in order to measure the perfor-
mance of the isolates under natural conditions (Hountondji et al. 2002b), where field age,
cassava variety, cultural practices, host densities at releases, and abiotic conditions were
similar.
Due to the difficulty to culture the fungus in vitro, an in vivo release procedure was
used to release Brazilian isolates in two agroecological zones, in early 1999 in South-
Benin, where it had never been found. Post-release monitoring in Southeastern Benin,
11 months later, showed epizootics in three fields where Brazilian isolates were inoculated
out of the 20 release fields, with infection levels between 20 and 35%. In Northeastern
Benin, epizootics were also observed with infection levels between 15 and 70%, 10 months
following the releases. Consistently heavier infections were observed in fields inoculated
with Brazilian isolates compared to those inoculated with the Beninese isolate. Post-release
surveys conducted after observing the first epizootics indicated the prevalence of higher
N. foridana infections, more pronounced around the release sites compared to the pre-
release situation. Although these observations credit the establishment and potential dis-
persal of Brazilian isolates, characterization studies are needed to confirm this.
is underway to assess the relative performance (as far as establishment, distribution and
M. tanajoa in Benin and other African countries.
Interaction studies
Interaction between a pathogen and its arthropod host can take place at several scales
related to the density and spatial distribution of both species. However, for the sake of
simplistic representation of these interactions, the individual scale and the population
scale may be considered. The individual-level interactions involve interactions between
a single host or a group of hosts and one or a group of spore(s) of the pathogen,
whereas the population-level interactions involve populations of the host or the path-
ogenorboth.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
201
Individual-levelinteractions
In this section, individual-level interactions as revealed through laboratory virulence
studies are presented as well as infochemical-based interactions
Laboratoryvirutence
Virulence is commonly defined as the power of a pathogen to produce disease in the host
(Shapiro-Ilan et al. 2005). Virulence therefore refers to the capacity (including a dimension
of time) of the pathogen to harm the host, which involves mainly physiological, physical
and chemical interactions. Preliminary work conducted by Oduor et al. (1997a) demon-
strated the ability of a single spore of N. tanajoae to infect a host; however, the proportion
of infected hosts was found to increase with pathogen inoculum size (Oduor et al. 1997a)
Laboratory bioassays conducted in closed-dish environment to study virulence of
N. tanajoae did not show significant differences in infection levels between two South
American isolates known for causing severe epizootics and two African isolates with generally
low-prevalence (Dara, Hountondji and Lomer, unpublished data). Other studies conducted by
Delalibera Jr. and Hajek (2004) on 23 isolates including thetwo Brazilian isolates and one ofthe
African isolates found that most isolates were highly virulent, causing >90% infection. These
authors suggested considering the rate of mummification, which revealed rather important
differences as high as 25% between the African isolate and one of the Brazilian isolates, as a
plausible parameter for selection of N. tanajoae isolates for biological control. However, better
traits are still expected from a virulent isolate after mummification, which are, e.g. related to
conidiation, production of capilliconidia, contact with host, penetration and host invasion.
Roteofinfochemicats
Arthropods use chemical information to locate their food,victims,or hosts,and enemies in
their environment. Herbivores may use cues from plants to locate their host plant and cues
from their natural enemies to develop avoidance behaviour. Similarly, natural enemies may
locate their victims or hosts through their cues. Beyond these direct interactions between
successive levels of a trophic system, indirect interactions can also be observed in a
tritrophic system, ie. plants can promote the effectiveness of natural enermies such as
predators and parasitoids, e.g. through the release of HIPV when attacked by herbivores
(Price et al. 1980; Dicke and Sabelis 1988; Dicke et al. 1990; Turlings et al. 1990). Little is
kown about the effect of HIPV on entomopathogens, particularly fungi (Hountondji et al.
2005; Baverstock et al. 2005). Neozygites tanajoae is one of the entomopathogens whose
interactions have been studied up to the third trophic level.
Response of Neozygites tanajoae fo cues Neozygites tanajoae sits and waits for its host;
hence cues cannot help it find its host. However, they may influence the production of
spores by the acaropathogenic fungus and thus promote or demote its transmissibility. The
role of infochemicals in the interactions between N. tanajoae and M. tanajoa was studied
by Hountondji et al. (2005). Effect of green leaf volatiles (GLV) and HIPV on conidiation
and production of capilliconidia was mainly tested. Effect of herbivore cues alone was not
tested as the condition of occurrence of the mite cues alone is less likely to happen in the
nature. The volatiles tested have an influence on the conidiation of N. tanajoae, and the
importance of the effect varied with the isolates. On the one hand, it was found that GLV
202
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
inhibit the production of conidia (428 ± 41 vs. 275 ± 47 conidia per mummy for clean air
and GLV, respectively, Hountondji et al. 2005). Amongst the main volatiles produced by
cassava leaves in absence of herbivory is (trans)-(E)-2-hexenal (Hountondji et al. 2005),
which is known to have an inhibitory effect on the production of spores by fungi (Brown
et al. 1995). Whether the effect of GLV is a delay in conidiation or a complete inhibition is
still to be investigated.
On the other hand, when exposed to HIPV from M. tanajoa-infested cassava leaves
versus clean air the production of conidia was increased by 37% and 14% for an African
and a South American isolate, respectively (Hountondji et al. 2005). Little or no effect was
observed for the production of capilliconidia except for one South American isolate where
the production was promoted by 75.2% in the presence of HIPV (ti6 = 2.23, P = 0.02;
Hountondji et al. in press). Amongst the volatiles produced following herbivory is methyl
salicylate (MeSA), a compound found to elicit behavioural responses of various predators
 and parasitoids to their victims or hosts. It may thus function as an indicator of herbivore
damage and is evaluated for its role in promoting conidiation of N. tanajoae. It was found
that the African isolate produced 37% more conidia in an environment with MeSA than
without MeSA (306 ± 53 vs. 223 ± 38 conidia per mummy,respectively,Hountondji
et al. 2006); no consistent response was found for the South American isolate. The vari-
ability observed between the whole HIPV blend and MeSA suggests the specificity of the
responses of N. tanajoae isolates which may depend on the concentration of the blend/
volatile and may well involve other volatiles than MeSA in the HIPV blend.
GLV inhibit conidiation of N. tanajoae whereas HIPV promote it. From a functional
point of view, when on the leaf, N. tanajoae will profit from a delay in conidiation until
release of HIPV signalling the presence of the herbivorous mite. However, this leaves
unexplained why conidiation readily takes place in clean air, if under dry conditions the
fungus inside the mummy could survive a few days or more (Oduor et al. 1995b; Elliot
et al. 2002c; Van der Geest et al. 2000). It is hypothesized that the fungus does not gain by
delaying sporulation in an environment without cues from plants and it may only suc-
cessfully infect in the event of an unlucky herbivore passing by.
The response of N. tanajoae to volatile cues questions the olfactory perception in this
fungus.Signalling is known to play an important role during penetration of the host by
fungi (Kulkarni et al. 2005), e.g. through chemical and topographical recognition of the
host surface (Hajek and St. Leger 1994). It is not excluded in the case of N. tanajoae that
mummies capture volatiles from the environment, which interfere with the biochemistry of
the release of conidia by, for instance, promoting spore release by conidiogenous cells.
Advances in molecular studies have allowed detecting in a few fungi G-protein coupled
receptors—GPCRs- and GPCR-like receptors, which are able to bind with ligands such as
odorants and pheromones to generate processes such as olfactory sensations (Kulkarni
et al. 2005). It is not known whether these receptors are also present amongst Entom-
ophthorales. However, the responses of N. tanajoae and Pandora neoaphidis to volatile
cues (Hountondji et al. 2005, 2006; Baverstock et al. 2005) suggest the existence of
olfactory receptors in these fungi.
promote the production of spores by the entomopathogen, the behaviour of the herbivorous
mite is determining for the propagation of N. tanajoae amongst hosts. A series of
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
203
experiments was conducted to study the behaviour of M. fanajoa in the presence of the
acaropathogen (Hountondji 2005; Hountondji et al. in press). One experiment used cassava
leaf discs and tested the habitat preference and the oviposition behaviour of M. tanajoa in a
two-choice unit with spores or infected hosts versus a control. Another experiment used
cassava leaves and tested the habitat preference of M. tanajoa between lobes with and
lobes without spores of N. tanajoae.
Evidence was found for a South American isolate that naive mites avoid leaf discs with
spores of N. tanajoae (41 ± 3% of migrating mites went to the disc with spores). The
avoidance behaviour was somewhat less obvious for one African isolate (44 ± 4%).
without spores for all isolates. When mites was given prior experience with N. tanajoae
either by exposing them to live infected, not yet sporulating, conspecifics or to dead
infectious conspecifics (presence of infective spores)the avoidance tendency decreased
with experience and even disappeared. Moreover, egg production was not affected by the
presence of spores for the experienced mites. The only exception was observed with mites
that had previous experience with spores of the African isolate; they consistently produced
fewer eggs. Avoidance of N. fanajoae spores was also observed in the experiment using
whole leaves, particularly for the South American isolate for which 43% less migration
towards spores was observed. Although fewer migrating mites were generally observed on
the lobes with spores than on those without spores for the Beninese isolate, the difference
(17%) was not significant. Pathogen distribution amongst leaf lobes appears to influence
the importance of avoidance depending on the isolate. Avoidance was more pronounced
when spores were displayed on two lobes than on three lobes for the South American
isolate, whereas it is the opposite for the Beninese isolate. Concentration of cues may
therefore differentially influence N. tanajoae isolates.
When infected, not yet sporulating, hosts were used instead of spores, naive M. tanajoa
showed neither avoidance/repellence nor difference in egg production. M. tanajoa does not
recognize the pathogen when it is inside the mite. It is hypothesized that live infected mites
carry N. tanajoae to highly infested patches where they settle and stay unnoticed until they
release spores. It is suspected that N. tanajoae induces this behaviour in the live infected
mite and so it is referred to as a ^Trojan horse hypothesis'
Population-level interactions
Individual interactions provide basic understanding of interactions between organisms, but
host systems where transmission is an important factor for pathogen perforrmance. For sit-
and-wait pathogens such as N. tanajoae, whose use as a biopesticide is not yet possible,
           s 
to consider in the selection of isolates for virulence.
Greenhousevirulence
Population-level virulence conducted in the greenhouse showed that both a high-preva
and that the epizootic level of the isolates depended on the inoculum density (Hountondji
et al. 2007). The African isolate which has low field performance developed a more severe
epizootic at the high inoculum, whereas the South American isolate with high field
204
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
performance did so at the low inoculum. Dispersal from the inoculated plants to down-
wind, clean plants was also evaluated and showed more mites dispersed when upwind
plants were inoculated with the South American isolate than when inoculated with the
African isolate.These results demonstrate that differences in virulence of entomopatho-
genic fungi can be revealed at the patch (local population) level even when not detected at
the individual-level and that suboptimal (inoculum, host density or weather) conditions
may be important in differentiating isolates.
Prediction on fhe microbial controtof Mononychellus tanajoa
Predictions on the N. tanajoae-M. tanajoa-cassava system were developed by Oduor et al.
(1997b) to explain the dynamics of N. tanajoae in local CGM populations. They found that
N. tanajoae alone was unable to drive local CGM populations to extinction. However,
post-release observations on the dynamics of N. tanajoae and its host have shown evidence
of control of the mite populations in the greenhouse as well as in the field (Hountondji
et al. 2002b, 2007). The failure of the model to predict control of the mite by N. tanajoae
has led to reconsider relevant parameters in the model to re-evaluate the predictions.
Misestimating of two of the model parameters, namely the per capita rate of loss of
of the misrmatch. The value of the rate of loss of infectiousness is actualized
(0.048 < μ < 0.071, instead of 0.004 day') based on recent observations, which showed
that capilliconidia can only survive 2-3 weeks under natural conditions on cassava plant
(Hountondji and Hanna, unpublished data), instead of 233 days assumed by Oduor et al.
(1997b). The new value of the rate of loss of infectiousness is used to make new pre-
dictions based on possible β solutions for extinction of local mite populations to occur
(Hountondji 2005). It was found that the likely threshold β beyond which extinction can
occur varies between 0.062 and 0.067 cm^/day under field conditions, using exact solutions
of a ^pancake’ version of the model, whereas it varies between 0.085 and 0.091 cm'/day
using iterations based on the full model, which includes weather conditions. These values
of β are at least 1.5 times as high as the β value in Oduor et al. (0.039 cm^/day). In
addition, similar iterations conducted to obtain extinction of mite populations as early as
 3 weeks after inoculation (as observed in greenhouse experiments) indicated even higher β
mite by the pathogen provided that the transrmission rate is twice as high as that estimated
by Oduor et al.
In the model developed by Oduor et al. (1997b), effects of biotic factors related to the
host and/or the host plant—such as plant volatiles, HIPV and pathogen avoidance by the
host—were not considered in the experiments to estimate parameters of the model. The
model was based on the assumption of constant transrmission rate, where population-level
interactions capable of modifying the transmission rate of the pathogen were not included.
The new prediction resulting from improved model parameters matches with observations
subsequent to the application of the microbial control of the mite using N. tanajoae in
Africa as yet observed following releases (Hountondji et al. 2002)
Implications for sustainable microbial control
Application of sustainable microbial control has been a challenge for researchers and
scientists for several reasons. Firstly, most microorganisms are difficult to detect by non-
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
205
specialists and are feared for the threat some of them have represented to human being
through epidermics, veterinary and plant diseases. These characteristics make them difficult
to market for research applications; e.g. regulations for importation and releases of
microbial control agents have been delayed and are constraining (Hajek et al. 2007).
Secondly, knowledge about epizootiology of insect diseases is still limited and a few
 species-cases of sustainable microbial control with particular reference to fungal pathogens
have proved to be ^very' successful (Hajek et al. 2007). Thirdly, microbial control research
is relatively expensive and requires advanced technologies for sound and safe research
such as molecular techniques for strain-level identification. Fourthly, unlike arthropods,
most pathogensexcept nematodes to some extent—are not capable of moving to their
host, which may be a reason for unsuccessful establishment of released pathogens such as
Entomophthorales or a limitation for long-term control by those formulated as biopesti-
strategy, and production of persistence structure), which mostly rely on biotic and abiotic
factors. Once the abiotic conditions for the development and seasonal cycling of a path-
ogen are fulfilled, the success of a microbial control relies on the interactions of the
pathogen with its host in the environment. Main interactions involved may be behavioural,
chemical, physical, physiological, or their combination (Hajek and St. Leger 1994). These
interactions may happen at the individual-level or at the (meta) population-level and may
involve more than two trophic levels with reference to tritrophic interactions.
In the N. tanajoae-M. tanajoa-cassava system, individual interactions start with the
behavioural patterns of both N. tanajoae and the mite, which are infuenced by info-
chemicals released in the environment by cassava,the mite,the pathogen and/or other
natural enermies, as a result of herbivory, predation, physiological or pathological pro-
cesses. Several scenarios can be sketched out regarding ways interactions may infuence
efficacy of an entomophthorale, with reference to the N. tanajoae system. Firstly, healthy
mites may move to more nutritious and more secure patches of the leaves following
nutrient depletion (Yaninek et al. 1989) or threat of natural enemies (Magalhaes et al.
2002; Onzo et al. 2003). In these movements, they may avoid to some extent dense patches
of N. tanajoae spores but may settle in the vicinity of infected mites as they fail to
recognize the pathogen inside the host. Secondly, the pathogen may produce more spores
following HIPV emission (Hountondji et al. 2005; Baverstock et al. 2005) or may
manipulate infected hosts to drive it to densely infested patches, thereby increasing the
chances of contact with new hosts. Thirdly, in the absence of immediate hosts, GLV may
inhibit/delay the spores until a signal of host presence (Brown et al. 1995; Hountondji
et al. 2005). Fourthly, behavioural interactions lead to contact between the pathogen and
the host with subsequent initiation and development of infection through physical,
chemical, and physiological processes leading to exploitation of the host body (Hajek and
St. Leger 1994). Although this was not studied for the N. tanajoae system, host plant
quality can influence development of the pathogen inside the host (Hajek et al. 1995b;
Cory and Hoover 2006; Raymond and Hails 2007). Also, infection processes end up with
 preparation of sporogenous structures, which therefore suggest a possible role of host plant
quality in future sporulation; nutritional quality is known to infuence fungal sporulation
(Dahlberg and van Etten 1982).
Development and multiplication inside the host may sometimes lead to production of
resistant structures such as resting spores. However, in the case of N. tanajoae, resting
spores are rarely found and specific factors triggering their production are still unclear
(Elliot et al. 2002c; 2002d), unlike other entomophthoralean pathogens such as
206
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Entomophaga maimaiga (Hajek and Humber 1997; Kogan and Hajek 2000) Changes in
factors such as host population, host plant quality, and abiotic factors are suspected to
cause such physiological shift (Elliot et al. 2002c). Further studies are needed to under-
stand resting spore forrmation, as this is important for long-term establishment of the
pathogen and subsequent control efficacy.
Population-level interactions have been overlooked in the evaluation of virulence of
insect pathogens as can be inferred from the commonly accepted definition of ^virulence?
and from applications made of it in conducting microbial control (refer to ^individual-leve]
interactions’ above). These parameters are commonly measured at the individual-level,
under optimum abiotic conditions, where the pathogen is directly inoculated to the host,
commonly selected through these procedures and applied in the field for microbial control
purposes. However, the results of the interaction studies exposed earlier suggest the
importance of other dimensions of interactions at the population-level. Three types of such
interactions may be added to the individual-level interactions to produce the outcome
behaviour of the system at the population-level:
1. Host-host interactions at the population-level, which condition host numerical
response related to exploitation of host plant resources and avoidance/escaping of
natural enemies;
2.1
Pathogen-pathogen interactions at the population-level, which determine attack,
          s
suggested by the non-linear killing rate of the host at different inoculum sizes of a
single strain (e.g., N. tanajoae; Oduor et al. 1997a) and possible multiple infection
trades between strains (Gandon and Michalakis 2002; Nowak and Sigmund 2002), e.g.
betweenlocaland exotic strains;
3.1
ns s s  ssd pn  s sn 
These interactions may well explain the unpredictable field results of microbial control
efforts when abiotic host and inoculum conditions of epizootics are fulfilled. As shown
earlier, interaction studies revealed the importance of cue concentration in the expression
of the isolates. Effect of cues would be more expressed at the population than at the
 individual-level. Population-level interactions can thus better predict the behaviour of a
pathogen) conditions, which commonly happen in the field. Efficient selection of candi-
dates for microbial control needs therefore to consider testing population-level
performances of candidate pathogens besides tests at the individual-level. Population-level
investigations of the performance of pathogen strains should also consider appropriate
inoculation time and conditions amenable to successful establishment and dispersal of the
pathogen.
Conclusions
Insight within the N. tanajoae-M. tanajoa-cassava system has revealed reciprocal patho-
gen-host interactions, as well as tritrophic interactions, that may have profound
consequences at the population-level and consequently for the field performance of the
pathogen. These interactions could well explain the differential field performance of
N. tanajoae isolates, despite the similar laboratory virulence of the same isolates.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
207
Interactions within a pathogen-host system are determining for the transmissibility of the
pathogen and thus its epizootic potential. The outcome of these interactions may vary
depending on the pathogen, host, host plant and environmental conditions prevailing,
whether optimal or suboptimalfor the developmentof thepathogen.
The example of the system studied sheds some light on the application of sustainable
microbial control, with special reference to the use of Entomophthorales. Particularly,
selection of pathogenic strains and knowledge of appropriate inoculation conditions for a
given system would better pay if population-level tests are added to individual-level
investigations.
Acknowledgements Thanks to M.W. Sabelis and R. Hanna for guiding my thoughts during the interaction
studies, which greatly inspired me in writing this article, to A. Yessoufou for reviewing the English, and to
three anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments.
References
Agudelo-Silva P (1986) A species of Triplosporium (Zygomycetes: Entomophthorales) infecting Mon-
onychettus progressivus (Acari: Tetranychidae) in Venezuela. Fla Entomol 67:444 446
Alvarez Afanador JM, Acosta A, Bellotti AC, Braun AR (1993) Estudios de patogenicidad de un hongo
asociado con Mononychetlus tanajoa (Bondar), acaro plaga de la yuca (Manihot escutenta Crantz)
Rev Colomb Entomol 19:10-20
Bartkowski J, Odindo MO, Otieno WA (1988) Some fungal pathogens of the cassava green spider mites
Baverstock J, Elliot SL, Alderson PG, Pell JK (2005) Response of the entomopathogenic fungus Pan-
dora neoaphidis to aphid-induced plant volatiles. J lnvertebr Pathol 89:157-164
Bidochka MJ, Walsh SRA, Rarmos ME, Leger RJ, Carruthers Rl, Silver JC, Roberts DW (1997) The cloned
DNA probes distinguish endemic and exotic Entomophaga gryli fungal pathotype infections in
grasshopper life stages. Mol Ecol 6(4):303-308
Brown GC, Prochaska GL, Hildebrand DF, Nordin GL, Jackson DM (1995) Green leaf volatiles inhibit
conidial germination of the entomopathogen Pandora neoaphidis (Entomopthorales: Entomophthor-
aceae).Environ Entormol 24(6):1637-1643
Cock JH (1985) Cassava, new potential for a neglected crop. Westview Press, Boulder, p 191
286
Dahlberg KR, van Etten JL (1982) Physiology and biochemistry of fungal sporulation. Ann Rev Phytopatho]
20:281-301
Dara SK, Semtner P] (1996) Artificial introduction of Pandora neoaphidis (Zygomycotina: Entomoph-
thorales) for the control of Myzus nicotianae (Homoptera: Aphididae) on Hue-cured tobacco. ln: 29th
Annual meeting of the Society for Invertebrate Pathology, September 1-6, 1996, Cordoba, Spain, p 18
Dara SK, Lomer CJ, Hountondji FCC, Yaninek JS (20o1) Seasonal incidence of two fungal pathogens
Neozygites fioridana (Zygomycotina: Zygomycetes) and Hirsuteila thompsoni (Deuteromycotina:
in the 2lst century.Proceedings of the 7th triennial symposium of the International Society for
Tropical Root Crops-Africa Branch (1STRC-AB), October 11-17, 1998, Cotonou, pp 503-507
de Moraes GJ, Delalibera 1 Jr (1992) Specificity of a strain of Neozygites sp. (Zygomycetes: Entomoph-
thorales) to Mononycheltus tanajoa (Acari: Tetranychidae). Exp Appl Acarol 14:89-94
ites floridana (Zygomycetes: Entomophthorales) isolates pathogenic to the cassava green mite. Bio]
Control 30:608-616
Delalibera 1 Jr, Sosa Gomez DR, de Moraes GJ, de Alencar JA, Farias Araujo W (1992) lnfection of
Mononychelus tanajoa (Acari: Tetranychidae) by the fungus Neozygites sp. (Entomophthorales) in
Northeastern Brazil. Fla Entomol 75: 145- 147
Delalibera 1 Jr, Hajek AE,Humber RA (2003) Use of cell culture media for cultivation of mite pathogenic
fungi Neozygites tanajoae and Neozygites foridana. J lnvertebr Pathol 84:119-127
mite. Mycologia 96: 1002-1009
208
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Delalibera 1 Jr, Demetrio CGB, Manly BFl, Hajek AE (2006) Effect of relative humidity and origin of isolates
of Neozygites tanajoae (Zygomycetes: Entomophthorales) on production of conidiafrom cassava green
mite, Mononyche ttus tanajoa (Acari: Tetran ychidae), cadavers. Biol Control 39:489-496
Dicke M, Sabelis MW (1988) How plants obtain predatory mites as bodyguards. Neth J Zool 38: 148-165
Dicke M, Sabelis MW, Takabayashi J, Bruin J, Posthumus MA (1990) Plant strategies of manipulating
Ecol 16:3091-3118
Metz JAJ, Sabelis MW, Sigmund K (eds) Adaptive dynamics of infectious diseases: in pursuit of
         s
Elliot SL, Mumford JD, de Moraes GJ (2002c) The role of resting spores in the survival of the mite-
pathogenic fungus Neozygites floridana from Mononychellus tanajoa during dry periods in Brazil. 1
Invertebr Pathol 8 1: 148-157
Elliot SL, de Moraes GJ, Mumford JD (2002d) lmportance of ambient saturation deficits in an epizootic of
the fungus Neozygites fioridana in cassava green mite (Mononychettus tanajoa). Exp Appl Acaro]
27: 1125
Dieckmann U, Metz JAJ, Sabelis MW, Sigmund K (eds) Adaptive dynamics of infectious diseases: in
pursuit of virulence management. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, Pp 150-164
leurs predateurs. J Afr Zool 108: 191-200
Hajek AE, Humber RA (1997) Formation and germination of Entomophaga maimaga azygospores. Can J
Bot 75: 1739-1747
Hajek AE, Leger RJ (1994) lnteractions between fungal pathogens and insect hosts. Annu Rev Entomo]
39:293322
America. Am Entomol 41:31-42
Hajek AE, Renwick JAA, Roberts DW (1995b) Effects of larval host-plant on the gypsy-moth (Lepidoptera:
Lymantridae) fungal pathogen, Entomophaga maimaiga (Zy gomycetes: Entomophthorales). Environ
Entomol 24: 1307-1314
Hajek AE, Butler L, Walsh SRA, Silver JC, Hain FP, Hasting FL, Odell TM, Smitley DR (1996) Host range
Entomophthorales) in the field versus laboratory. Environ Entomol 25(4):709-721
classical biological control of insects and mites. USDA, Forest Service, FHTET, Morgantown (WV),
USA, 59 p
Hajek AE, Mc Manus ML, Delalibera 1 Jr (2007) A review of introductions of pathogens and nermatodes for
classical biological control of insects and mites. Biol Control 41: 1-13
Hanna R, Toko M (2003) Africa-wide classical biological control of cassava green mite-overview,
accomplishments and future action and priorities. In: Hanna R, Toko M (eds) ln: Proceedings of the
third inter-regional meeting of the Africa-wide cassava green mite biocontrol project. Biological
Control Centre for Africa, International Institute of Tropical Agriculture, Benin, pp 4 12
Hanna R, Onzo A, Lingeman R, Sabelis MW, Yaninek JS (2005) Seasonal cycles and persistence in an
36:257-283
population dynamics. PhD thesis, University of Amsterdam, p 150
Hountondji FCC,Yaninek JS, de Moraes GJ, Oduor Gl (2002a) Host specificity of the cassava green mite
pathogen Neozygites floridana. Biocontrol 47:61-66
Hountondji FCC, Lomer Cl, Hanna R, Cherry AJ, Dara SK (2002b) Field evaluation of Brazilian isolates of
Neozygites fioridana (Entomophthorales: Neozygitaceae) for the microbial control of cassava green
mite in Benin, West Africa. Biocontrol Sci Technol 12:361-363
Hountondji FCC, Sabelis MW,Hanna R, Janssen A (2005) Herbivore-induced plant volatiles trigger
mite.J Chem Ecol 31:1003-1021
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
209
plant odour, promote sporulation of the mite-pathogenic fungus Neozygites tanajoae? Exp Appl Acarol
39:63-74
Hountondji FCC, Hanna R, Cherry AJ, Sabelis MW,Agboton B,Korie S (2007) Scaling-up tests on
virulence of the cassava green mite fungal pathogen Neozygites tanajoae (Entomophthorales: Neo
41: 153168
Hountondji FCC,Sabelis MW, Hanna R (in press) The role of infochemicals in the interaction between
CABl, Wallingford, pp 27-69
Klingen l, Hajek A, Meadow R, Renwick JAA (2002) Effect of brassicaceous plants on the survival and
infectivity of insect pathogenic fungi. BioContro] 47:411-425
Kogan PH, Hajek AE (200o) In vitro formation of resting spores by the insect pathogenic fungus Entom-
ophaga maimaiga.Jlnvertebr Pathol 75:193-201
pathogenic fungus Magnaporthe grisea. Genome Biol 6(R24):1-14
Leite LG, Smith L, de Moraes GJ, Roberts DW (2000) ln vitro production of hyphal bodies of the mite
Lyon WF (1973) A plant-feeding mite Mononychettus tanajoa Bondar (Acarina: Tetranychidae) new to the
african continent threatens cassava (Marinot esculenta Crantz) in Uganda, East Africa. Pest Artic
News summ 19:36-37
Magalhaes S, Janssen A, Hanna R, Sabelis MW (2002) Flexible antipredator behaviour in herbi vorous rmites
through vertical migraion in a plant. Oecologia 132: 143-149
Milner RJ, Soper RS, Lutton GG (1982) Field release of an Israeli strain of the fungus Zoophthora radicans
(Brefeld) Batko for the biological control of Therioaphis trifoti (Monell) f. maculata. J Aust Entomol
Soc 21:113-118
Munster M, Janssen A, Clerivet A, Heuvel J (2005) Can plants use an entormopathogenic virus as a defence
against herbi vores? Oecologia 143:396-401
Nowak MA,Sigmund K (2002) Super-and co-infection: the two extremes. 1n: Dieckmann U, Metz JAJ,
Sabelis MW, Sigmund K (eds) Adaptive dynamics of infectious diseases: in pursuit of virulence
management. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 124137
Nyira ZM (1972) Report of investigation of cassava mite,Mononychellus tanajoa (Bondar). Kawanda
Research Station, Kampala, Uganda, p 14
Oduor Gl, de Moraes GJ,Yaninek JS,Van der Geest LPS (1995a) Effect of temperature, humidity and
photoperiod on mortality of Mononychetlus tanajoa (Acari: Tetranychidae) infected by Neozygites cf.
floridarna (Zygormycetes: Entomophthorales). Exp Appl Acarol 19:571-579
Oduor Gl, Yaninek JS, Van der Geest LPS, de Moraes Gl (1995b) Survival of Neozygites cf. floridana
conidia. Exp Appl Acarol 19:479-488
Oduor Gl, de Moraes GJ, van der Geest LPS, Yaninek JS (1996) Production and germination of primary
conidia of Neozygites foridana (Zygomycetes: Entomophthorales) under constant temperatures,
humidities, and photoperiods. J 1nvertebr Pathol 68:213-222
pathogenicity of Neozygites foridana (Zygomycetes: Entomophthorales) to Mononychellus tanajoa
(Acari: Tetranychidae). J lnvertebr Patho] 70:127-130
Oduor Gl, Sabelis MW, Lingeman R, van der Geest LPS, de Moraes GJ, Yaninek JS (1997b) Modeling
onycheltus tanajoa). Exp Appl Acarol 21:485-506
Olsen KM, Schaal BA (1999) Evidence on the origin of cassava: phylogeography of Manihot escutenta.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:5586-5591
migration in predatory and herbivorous mites within cassava plants. Oikos 10l:59-69
Price PW, Bouton CE, Gross P, McPheron BA, Thompson JN, Weis AE (1980) lnteractions among three
trophic levels: infuence of plant on interactions between insect herbivores and natural enemies. Annu
Rev Ecol Syst 11:41-65
  s       d       
210
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Shapiro-llan Dl, Fuxa FR, Lacey LA, Onstad DW, Kaya HK (2005) Definitions of pathogenecity and
virulence in invertebrate pathology.J lnvertebrPathol 88:1-7
seeking parasitic wasps. Science 250:1251-1253
Van der Geest LPS, Elliot SL, Breeuwer JAJ, Beerling EAM (2000) Diseases of mites. Exp Appl Acarol
24:497-560
Wilding N, Mardell SK, Brobyn Pl, Wratten SD, Lomas J (1990) The effect of introducing the aphid
YaninekJS,Herren HR(19s8)Introduction and spread of the cassavagreenmite,Mononychettus tanajoa
Bondar (Acari: Tetranychidae), an exotic pest in Africa and the search for appropriate control meth-
ods—a review. Bull Entomol Res 78:1-13
Yaninek JS, Hanna R (2003) Cassava green mite in Africa: a unique example of successful classica]
L (eds) Biological control in 1PM systerms in Africa. CABl Publishing, Wallingford, UK, pp 61-75
Yaninek JS, Herren AR, Gutierrez AP (1989) Dynarmics of Mononychettus tanajoa (Acari: Tetranychidae)
in Africa: seasonal factors affecting phenology and abundance. Environ Entomol 18:625-632
Yaninek JS, Baumgaertner J, Gutierrez AP (1991) Sampling Mononyche ttus tanajoa (Acari: Tetranychidae)
on cassava in Africa. Bull Entomol Res 81:201-208
exotic cassava green mite in Africa. Exp Appl Acarol 16: 145-160
Yaninek JS, Saizonou S, Onzo A, Zannou 1, Gnan vossou D (1996) Seasonal and habitat variability in the
fungal pathogens: Neozygites cf. Biocontrol Sci Technol 6:23-33
Yaninek JS, Megevand B, Ojo B, Cudjoe AR, Abole E, Onzo A, Zannou l (1998) Establishment and spread
of Typhtodromatus manihoti (Acari:Phytoseiidae),an introduced phytoseiid predator of Monony-
chettus tanajoa (Acari: Tetranychidae) in Africa. Environ Entomol 27:1496-150S
Failure of the mite-pathogenic fungus Neozygites tanajoae
and the predatory mite Neoseiulus idaeus to control a
population of the cassava green mite, Mononychellus
tanajoa
Simon L. Elliot - Gilberto J. de Moraes · John D. Mumford
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 14, 211-222
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9164-8 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract  Monitoring of a population of the phytophagous cassava green mite, Mon-
Brazil, in mid-1996. In spite of the presence of extremely high densities of the predatory
phytoseiid mite Neoseiuius idaeus Denmark & Muma, the phytophagous mite population
reached such high densities itself that there was total overexploitation of the cassava plants,
leading to total leaf loss. Meanwhile, the mite-pathogenic fungus Neozygites fanajoae
Delalibera, Humber & Hajek did not affect the M. tanajoa population in its growth phase
as there was no inoculum present, even though we predict from a simple regression model
that there was the potential for epizootics at that time. Soon after the M. tanajoa population
crashed due to defoliation, there could have been an epizootic but there were simply no
mite hosts to infect. These data demonstrate the ineffectiveness of one natural enemy (the
predator) in terms of prey population regulation and demonstrate the importance of timing
in the possible effectiveness of the other (the pathogen). For the pathogen, this probably
explains its sporadic effect on host populations as previously reported. We conclude that
the fungus is likely to be most useful as an adjunct to biological control with predatory
mites other than N. idaeus.
Keywords Neozygites tanajoae · Cassava green mite · Epizootiology :
Fungal pathogen · Biological control · Predatory mites
S. L. Elliot (β)
Departrment of Animal Biology, Federal University of Vicosa, Vicosa, MG 36570-000, Brazil
e-mail: selliot @ ufv.br
G. J. de Moraes
Queiroz, 13418-900 Piracicaba, SP, Brazi]
1. D. Mumford
Centre for Environmental Policy, Faculty of Natural Sciences, lmperial College London,
South Kensington Campus, London SW7 2AZ, UK
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.). Diseases of Mfites and Ttcks. DOl: 10.1007/978-l-4020-9695-2_17211
212
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Introduction
Of the fungi which are pathogenic to insects and mites, the Entomophthorales are
perhaps the group with the most potential within pest management strategies which
seek to harness or promote natural epizootics (Pell et al. 2001). In spider mites (Acari:
Tetranychidae), epizootics of the mite-pathogenic fungi Neozygites foridana Fisher and
N. tanajoae Delalibera, Humber & Hajek (Entomophthorales: Neozygitaceae) can
decimate host populations within a few weeks (Delalibera et al. 1999; Elliot et al.
2002a). With respect to the cassava green mite Mononychelius tanajoa Bondar, an
important pest of cassava in northeastern Brazil and in Africa, this has led to a long-
running effort to harness this epizootic potential for pest management (note that the
fungus previously reported as N. foridana and affecting M. tanajoa was recently
described as N. tanajoae; Delalibera et al. 2004). This effort has focussed on classical
biological control involving the introduction of Brazilian isolates into Africa where the
cassava system is exotic (de Moraes and Delalibera 1992; Delalibera et al. 1992;
Yaninek et al. 1996; Elliot et al. 2000; Hountondji et al. 2002a,2002b; Delalibera and
Hajek 2004).
Approaches other than classical biological control have been considered, however. One
is inundative control, an approach which is principally reliant upon the action of the initial
biological material introduced as a biopesticide. This is probably not a realistic option due
to difficulties of in vitro culturing (but see Leite et al. 2000; Delalibera et al. 2003) and the
inaccessibility of even conventional pesticides (and spray equipment) to resource-poor
cassava growers. Strategies with more potential are inoculative control, which relies
principally upon reproduction of the pathogen and the impact of subsequent cycles of the
pathogen (Thomas 1999; Eilenberg et al. 2001; Elliot et al. 2002d), or conservation bio-
control in which the environment is manipulated so as to favour the action of the fungus.
These last two could be ofinterest in their own right aswell aswhen acting as components
of a classical biological strategy.
Although the potential for natural epizootics of N. tanajoae to control populations of
M. tanajoa has been demonstrated, the variability of this control has also been noted
(Oduor et al. 1997; Elliot et al. 2000). Attempting either to harness this in new areas via the
establishment of exotic strains or to improve upon it by the artificial introduction of
the fungus, both in terms of the abiotic conditions and the availability of potential hosts
(Oduor et al. 1997; Elliot et al. 2002a). The sensitivity of the pathogen to abiotic condi-
tions, particularly saturation deficits, has been demonstrated in laboratory (Oduor et al.
1995a, b, 1996a, b, 1997) and field studies (Elliot et al. 2002a). In the latter case, we
followed a field population of M. tanajoa so as to identify the potential for the introduction
 of an inoculum in this sort of setting.
Here, we monitored mite and pathogen populations on leaves as well as airborne fungal
inoculum. In addition, we used experimental measures of the potential for horizontal
transmission in the field. We combine these data with estimates of epizootic potential
y  sn    s  e   y  
regression model which related mortality of new hosts to the quantity of inoculum
available and night-time saturation deficits (Elliot et al. 2002a). Combined these give us
several avenues to identify periods when the introduction of inoculum might have led to an
epizootic and control of the pest mite population.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
213
Materials and methods
Monitoring M. tanajoa population levels
This study was conducted in a grower's cassava field ("Field A") in Piritiba, central Bahia,
northeastern Brazil, from 11 April to 9 September, 1996. Every three or four days, samples
  )        
were collected from randomly chosen plants while crossing the field in three zig-zags. As
such, the procedure followed that of Elliot et al. (2002a): leaves were collected in the
morning and transported in paper bags for examination of the undersides under binocular
microscopes. Counts were made of M. tanajoa (eggs, nymphs and adult femaleslarvae
and adult males were counted but the data are not presented here) on the central lobe of
each leaf (Nachman et al. 1990, 1993; Elliot et al. 2002a), while predatory mites and
Neozygites-killed M. tanajoa cadavers ("mummies") were counted on the entire leaves.
By measuring the length of the central lobe and counting the number of lobes, leaf areas
could be estimated so that all of these counts could be converted into densities per 100 cm^
of leaf area (Elliot et al. 2002a), this figure approximating the area of the cassava leaves
Of these leaves, the number which presented 100% chlorosis through feeding injury was
recorded. Meanwhile, following the observation of heavy M. tanajoa-induced leaf loss
from 20 May, 100 plants were chosen randomly on each sampling date and the presence or
absence of leaves on the first and eighth nodes was recorded.
Sentinel plants
In the same Field A as monitoring of mite populations was conducted, sentinel plants with
s   s         s 
From 24 May to 2 August, plants infested with uninfected adult female M. tanajoa (taken
from a different field in the region) were placed among the cassava plants in Field A every
6 days and were examined after three and six days. These were potted cassava plants on to
which healthy adult female M. tanajoa had been placed ca. three days prior to the placement
of the plants in the field. To ensure that these mites were not contaminated with the
pathogen, twenty individuals from the same source were mounted on slides in Amman's
At monitoring, five leaves per plant were examined for mummies and five live mites from
each leaf were mounted on a microscope slide for microscopic examination for the presence
of capilliconidia and/or hyphal bodies (Steinkraus et al. 1999; Elliot et al. 2002a, c).
Horizontal transmission
In a second cassava field ("Field B"), approximately 1.5 km distant from Field A, weekly
        o  s    s
infected host to a new host. In each test, twenty clip-cages were placed on the undersides of
high x 2 cm diameter), wire-framed and covered with mite-proof gauze; the rim of the
open ends bore a foam ring to provide a seal and cages were fixed to the leaves with wire
clips. Three laboratory-produced N. tanajoae-killed mite cadavers (mummies) and six
adult female mites were placed on the leaf surface prior to fixing each cage in position. T'o
ensure that these mites were not contaminated with the pathogen, twenty individuals from
the same source were mounted on slides in Amman's Blue/Hoyer's mixture to examine
214
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
microscopically—at no stage were signs of disease noted. Ten control mummies were kept
for 24 h in a dark incubator at 18°C and 100% RH: on all test dates, at least eight of the ten
leaf lobes with cages were taken to the laboratory where mummies and mites were
mounted as above for microscopic examination.
Climatic data
Hourly temperature and relative humidity data were recorded using a hygrothermometer
kept in a Stevenson screen. These were converted to hourly saturation deficits from which
the minima for each night were recorded (this parameter best explained variations in
infection levels in Elliot et al. 2002a). From these data, three-day means of saturation
deficit minima were calculated. A pluviometer was used to measure rainfall in a nearby
yard. These instruments were <l km from Fields A and B.
Estimates of epizootic potential: regression model
In a concurrent study (Elliot et al. 2002a), monitoring was undertaken of a nearby field
       g  a s m  m (  )
N. tanajoae did occur. Those data were used to generate a regression model which
explained 70% of the variance in N. tanajoae-induced host mortality according to inoc-
uum levels (mummy density) and 3-night saturation deficit minima (SDminsa) one week
prior to sampling (Elliot et al. 2002a). (Note that host density was not a significant
parameter in the original regression. Further, although densities here sometimes exceeded
those in the original study, which could leave to a partial overestimation of transmission,
this would not alter conclusions that an epizootic could occur.) This model is:
Mortalitywk1 = (sin(0.1537 mummy densitywko
0.1594(SDminsa × mummy density wko)2
       n   s
transformation of mortality (a percentage) to obtain normality in the data. (Note that in the
original paper, Elliot et al. 2002a, the square function was omitted and this mistake was not
spotted.) The measured climatic data were used to estimate, for each sample date, the
nymphs and adult females. Note that the great majority of infection of M. tanajoa occurs in
these stages for reasons discussed by Elliot et al. (2002c). Calculations were made of the
mortality expected from the introduction of 1, 5 or 25 mummies per 100 cm? leaf area
(N.B. most leaves were only slightly larger than this and the range of the original
regression was 0-28 mummies per 100 cm′). These expected mortalities were multiplied
tality of these introductions in those populations.
Results
(the life stages most likely to be infected in the field; Elliot et al. 2002c) per 100 crm^ on
apical leaves and over 200 per 100 cm? on median leaves (Figs. 1a and 2a). This peak was
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
215
accompanied by a corresponding peak of nearly 25,000 eggs per 100 cm? on the apical
leaves (Fig. la). Towards the end of this peak, there were high densities of the predatory
mite Neoseiuius idaeus Denmark & Muma (no other predatory mites were detected),
(a)1200
25000
1000
（100cm
(100cm
20000
- Adult females plus
800
sudwAu
A
densi
..O...Eggs
15000
den
600
tanajoa
66a
10000
400
tanajoa
5000
200
M
(b)
120 -
Predators
700
..-O .. Dead mites
100
600
(100cm
500
mites
80
400
60
Predatory
300
40
Dead
200
20
QQ
100
(c) 1.0
1.0
chlorotic
0.8
Mummies
0.8
{100
. Chlorosis
entirely
tanajoa
0.6
0.6
5
M
0.4
0.4
leav
Mummified
0.2
0.2
0.0
0.C
Sample Date
Fig. 1 Monitoring Mononychettus tanajoa densities on apical leaves of cassava, Piritiba, Bahia, Brazil,
1996. (a) Densities of active M. tanajoa hife stages and eggs; (b) densities of phytoseid predators and dead
M. tanajoa; (c) densities of cadavers of M. tanajoa killed and mummified by Neozygites tanajoae and leaf
injury (asproportion of leaveswhich were 100% chlorotic)
216
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
(a) 500
1400
Adultfemalesplus
1200
400
rymphs
.0...Eggs
1000
300
density
800
600
66a
200
najoa
400
100
200
M
(b)
Predators
70
12
...o... Dead mites
[100cm
60
[100cm
10
50
mites
8
8
40
Predatory
6
30
M
20
2
10
(c)
1.0
1.0
Mummies
0.8
0.8
chlorot
00L)
...Damage
tanajoa
rely
0.6
0.6
entir
M
0.4
0.4
LQI
0.2
0.2
0.0
0.0
SampleDate
Fig. 2 Monitoring Mononycheltus tanajoa densities on median leaves of cassava, Piritiba, Bahia, Brazil,
1996. (a) Densities of active M. tanajoa hife stages and eggs; (b) densities of phytoseid predators and dead
M. tanajoa; (c) densities of cadavers of M. tanajoa killed and mummified by Neozygites tanajoae and leaf
injury (as proportion of leaves which were 100% chlorotic)
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
217
coinciding with a drop in M. tanajoa egg densities and an increase in predated M. tanajoa
cadavers (Figs. 1b and 2b). Immediately prior to this, however, there was 100% chlorosis
nu ep) sued 1a8ss an jo ssol jeal [ion Aq paoy (oz pue ol 'shie) sagl go
shown). Having crashed to zero, mite populations began to recover in early August.
Meanwhile, the pathogen N. tanajoae was only observed at very low levels well past the
first peak in M. tanajoa densities, whether in the natural population (Figs. 1c and 2c) or on
the mites on the sentinel plants (Table 1). The results of experimental tests of transmission
from early May to mid-July are presented in Table 2. During the M. tanajoa peak (mid-
May), whilst percentage mumrmy sporulation was mostly high, few mites were observed
bearing capilliconidia. These were found more from the end of June on and full trans-
mission, to the production of hyphal bodies, was only observed in July. This period
corresponds with low levels of saturation deficit (Fig. 3a) and also with the period in which
the pathogen was observed in the nearby field described by Elliot et al. (2002a)
 In April and early May, when M. tanajoa populations were increasing, 3-day means of
saturation deficit were around 0.9 mmHg (Fig. 3a). This dropped to approximately
0.5 mmHg at the end of May when the M. tanajoa population was crashing and persisted at
around this level until the end of the study. Using the regression model, percentage
mortalities resulting from three inoculum densities were estimated on the basis of these
saturation deficit minima (Fig. 3b). This pattern was similar to the saturation deficit
Table 1 Structures of Neozyg-
Date
Mites
Total
Mites with
Total
ites tanajoae observed in
bearing
number of
hyphal
mites
Mononychetlus tanajoa spider
capilliconidia  capilliconidia
bodies
ccollected
rmites on sentinel plants in a field
in Piritiba, central Bahia, 1996
May
24
0
0
0
293
27
0
0
0
222
30
0
0
0
642
June
2
0
0
0
375
5
0
0
0
348
6
1
1
0
307
11
0
0
0
375
14
0
0
0
375
17
0
0
0
375
20
0
375
忆
0
0
0
269
26
0
0
191
30
2
4
0
336
July
02
4
5
2
320
90
21
1
285
80
2
0
2
353
11
0
0
0
300
15
1
1
0
371
17
3
2
356
21
1
1
0
370
忆
4
7
0
360
26
0
0
0
372
August
02
0
0
0
345
Total
26
42
5
7,915
218
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
cages in a field in Piritiba, central Bahia, 1996
Date
Mummies
M.tanajoa
Sporulation
N
Bearing fun gal
Capilliconida
With hyphal
心
(%)
structures (%)
 per mite
bodies (%)
1-7 May
66
47
1
0.04
0
72
7-13 May
62
45
3
50'0
0
78
16-22 May
0
48
0.00
0
61
22-28 May
92
25
15
0.20
0
40
30 May-6 Jun
08
54
40
3.33
4
79
7-13 Jun
91
53
46
2.41
0
82
12-20 Jun
90
52
12
0.53
0
57
27 Jun-3 Jul
96
53
24
0.79
15
73
6-12 Jul
98
56
19
1.10
11
12-18 Jul
74
46
14
0.20
9
67
Total
75
479
20
1.05
5
673
 pattern, but amplified. Combining these predictions with the numbers of adult females and
nymphs on leaves, we see three periods when we would have expected to see further
cycling of the pathogen in the host M. tanajoa population, given inoculum: mid- to late
April then May and finally August (Fig. 3c, d). The greater of these, in May, corresponds
with declining M. tanajoa population levels. The other two periods, early May and late
August, corresponded with rising M. tanajoa population levels, but were of a lesser
magnitude.
Discussion
Of three factors which might have controlled populations of the herbivorous mite
M. tanajoa, predation, parasitism and resource depletion, it is clear that it was the latter
which was most important on this occasion. Densities of active mites peaked at 1,600
 individuals per 100 crm² of leaf so it is unsurprising that leaf loss ensued. This density is far
above those used by Oduor et al. (1997) to model epizootics in this system (they took 440
mites per 100 crm² as a characteristic density, probably a quite realistic figure during
population growth and prior to overexploitation). The crash in the prey population cannot
be attributed to the predators, however, as the cassava leaves were entirely chlorotic and
massive leaf loss was observed, such that it even became difficult to find sample material.
 It is apparent, then, that the predators did not control the herbivorous M. tanajoa popu-
lations before the latter had depleted their resources (leaves) through overexploitation.
Meanwhile, the population of predatory mites reached a mean of ca. 130 active individuals
per leaf but only by the time over 70% of the plants' leaves had been lost.
 It is noteworthy, then, that neither natural enemy controlled M. tanajoa populations to
 any great degree and certainly in no way of possible interest for use in pest management.
For the pathogen N. tanajoae, considering that it apparently did regulate M. tanajoa
populations in a nearby field in the same season (Elliot et al. 2002a), this observation
requires explanation.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
219
(a)
20C
Apical leaves
Median leaves
1000
100
·3d. SD minima
BDD
00
00
(b)60%
 - 1 Mummly
- 5Mummies
50%
25 Mummies
20%
10%
(c) 500
o--1 Mummy
450
 - 5 Mummies
APICAL LEAVES
400
25 Mummies
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
(d) 250
0 --1 Mummy
- 5 Mummies
200
θ— 25 Mummies
MEDIANLEAVES
10:0G
150
5C
三
三
二
了
宁
总
Sample Date
Fig. 3 Modelling epizootic potential in field populations of cassava green mite (Mononychetius tanajoa),
Pritiba, Bahia, Brazil, 1996. (a) Field monitoring of densities of M. tanajoa adults and nymphs (pooled)
on apical and median leaves of cassava (see Figs. 1 and 2) and 3-day minima of saturation deficits;
or 25 mummies (M. tanajoa killed by Neozygites tanajoae) present per 100 cm²; (c and d) Absolute
mortalities expected in M. tanajoa populations on apical and median leaves, from percentage mortalities
predicted
220
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
During the first phase of M. tanajoa population growth (until the end of May), the
fungus N. tanajoae was not detected on mites on sentinel plants (Table 1). Meanwhile, in
of mummies but very little to no transmission (note that the cages would be expected to
increase transmission). At the same time, night-time saturation deficits were at their
greatest (i.e., it was dry; Fig. 3a). This is reflected in limited epizootic capacity according
to the regression model (Fig. 3b-d), except in late May when there is some potential for
transrmission. This potential is, however, unrealised in the field, probably due to a lag
between favourable conditions and germination of fungal resting spores in the environment
(Elliot et al. 2002b). From June onwards, transmission was possible according to the clip-
cage experiments (Table 2) and according to model predictions (Fig. 3b), but the fungus
was only observed consistently on sentinel mites from the end of June. In June, however,
there were simply no mites for the pathogen to infect (Figs. 1, 2, and 3c, d). It appears that
each of the stages (mummy sporulation, capilliconidium pick-up, and hyphal body pro-
duction) was in some way limited, as there is a stepwise progress from early May when
sporulation of murmmified cadavers was lower and few capilliconidia were found, to late
May/early June, when sporulation and capilliconidium pick-up were high, but few mites
had hyphal bodies, and on to July, when full transmission was observed at higher levels.
Put simply, the fungus arrived in the system too late.
Once the cassava plants began to recover from leaf loss, and the herbivorous M. tanajoa
population also began to recover on the new foliage, abiotic conditions were briefly
did not reappear until several months later (data not shown).
There were, therefore, three periods when there was epizootic potential but no pathogen
inoculum (Figs. 3c, d). According to the data inputted to the regression model, it was
indeed only after defoliation that we could have expected most fungus-induced mortality
(Fig. 3b): one mummy per leaf is predicted to yield 50-100 new mummies, while higher
This sort of dynamic has to be seen as a limitation for this fungus as a biological control
agent, in this system at least and on this occasion, and probably explains in part the
variability of its effectiveness as a source of population regulation (Elliot et al. 2000).
Under such situations, the obvious solution would be to find a way to introduce inoculum
in periods when there is epizootic potential, but one must question this sort of strategy in a
system of very low economic inputs such as cassava, and in which it would be difficult to
predict periods of epizootic potential. Also, this would require an economically viable
means of production of inoculum.
Acknowledgements We thank Adailson de Luna and Valter Silva, as well as the people of Sumare.
Piritiba, Bahia, for their considerable help in carrying out this study. The work was funded by the llTA/
do Tropico Semi-Arido (EMBRAPA), Petrolina, Pernambuco, Brazil, provided logistical support
References
BF01219101
Delalibera Jl, Hajek AE (2004) Pathogenicity and specificity of Neozygites tanajoae and Neozygites flori-
30:608-616. doi: 10.1016/j.biocontrol.2004.02.008
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
221
Delalibera Jl, de Moraes GJ, Sosa-Gomez DR (1999) Epizootias de Neozygites foridana (Zygomycetes,
Entomophthorales) e dinarmica populacional de acaros fitoseideos predadores de Mononychettus
tanajoa (Acari, Phytoseiidae e Tetranychidae) na Bahia. Rev Bras Entomol 43:287-291
Delalibera Jl, Hajek AE, Humber RA (2003) Use of cell culture media for cultivation of the mite-pathogenic
fungi Neozygites tanajoae and Neozygites floridana. J lnvertebr Pathol 84:119-127. doi:
10. 1016/j jip. 2003.09.005
Delalibera Jl, Hajek AE, Humber RA (2004) Neozygites tanajoae sp. nov., a pathogen of the cassava green
mite. Mycologia 96: 1002-1009. doi:10.2307/3762084
Delalibera Jl, Sosa-Gomez DR, de Moraes Gl et al (1992) lnfection of Mononychettus tanajoa (Acari:
Tetranychidae) by the fungus Neozygites sp. in Northeastern Brazil. Fla Entomol 75:145-147. doi:
10.2307/3495493
BioControl 46:387-400. doi: 10.1023/A:1014193329979
Elliot SL, de Moraes Gl, Delalibera Jl et al (2000) Potential of the mite-pathogenic fungus Neozygites
(Acari: Tetranychidae). Bull ent Res 90:191-200
Elliot SL, de Moraes GJ, Mumford JD (2002a) lmportance of ambient saturation deficits in an epizootic of
the fungus Neozygites fioridana in cassava green mites (Mononychettus tanajoa). Exp Appl Acarol
27:11-25. d0i:10.1023/A:1021556908382
Elliot SL, Mumford JD, de Moraes Gl (2002b) The role of resting spores in the survival of the mite-
In vertebr Pathol 81: 148-157. doi:10.1016/S0022-2011(02)00192-1
Elliot SL, Mumford JD, de Moraes GJ et al (2002c) Age-dependent of infection of cassava green mmites by a
Elliot SL, Sabelis MW, Adler FR et al (2002d) Management of virulence in biocontrol agents. The adaptive
dynamics of infectious diseases: in pursuit of virulence management. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Hountondji FCC, Lomer CJ, Hanna R et al (2002a) Field evaluation of Brazilian isolates of Neozygites
floridara (Entomophthorales: Neozygitaceae) for the microbial control of cassava green mite in Benin,
West Africa. Biocontrol Sci Technol 12:361-370. doi:10.1080/09583150220128149
Hountondji FCC, Yaninek JS, de Moraes GJ et al (2002b) Host specificity of the cassava green mite
pathogen Neozygites floridana. BioControl 47:61-66. doi: 10. 1023/A: 1014438220511
Leite LG,Smith L, Moraes GJ et al (2000) ln vitro production of hyphal bodies of the mite pathogenic
fungus Neozygites floridana. Mycologia 92:201-207. doi: 10.2307/3761551
Nachman G, Pedersen OC, Muinster-Swendsen Jet al (1990) Sampling strategies for assessing the intra-plant
density of the cassava green mite (Mononychettus tanajoa): a case study. Exp Appl Acarol 9:31-49.
doi: 10.1007/BF01198981
Nachman G, Skovgard H, Tomkiewicz J et al (1993) Sampling strategies for assessing the overall density of
the cassava green mite (Mononychellus tanajoa).Exp Appl Acarol 17:5-28
Oduor Gl, de Moraes GJ, van der Geest LPS et al (1996a) Production and germination of primary conidia of
Neozygites floridana (Zygomycetes: Entomophthorales) under constant temperature, humidity, and
light conditions. 1 1n vertebr Pathol 68:213-222. doi: 10.1006/jipa.1996.0088
Oduor Gl, de Moraes GJ, Yaninek JS et al (199Sa) Effect of temperature, humidity and photoperiod on
mortality of Mononychettus tanajoa (Acari: Tetranychidae) infected by Neozygites cf.floridana
Oduor Gl, Sabelis MW, Lingeman R et al (1997) Modelling fungal (Neozygites cf. foridara) epizootics in
local populations of cassava green mites (Mononychettus tanajoa). Exp Appl Acarol 21:485-506. doi:
10.1023/A:1018488130731
Oduor Gl, Yaninek JS, van der Geest LPS et al (1995b) Survival of Neozygites cf. foridana (Zygomycetes:
Appl Acarol 19:479-488. doi:10.1007/BF00052916
Oduor Gl,Yaninek JS, van der Geest LPS et al (1996b) Germination and viability of capilliconidia of
light conditions. J lnvertebr Pathol 67:267-278. doi: 10.1006/jipa.1996.0042
Pell JK, Eilenberg J, Hajek A et al (200l). Biology, ecology and pest management potential of entom-
ophthorales. In: Butt TM, Jackson CW, Magan N (eds) Fungi as biocontrol agents. Progress, problems
and potential. CABl Publishing, Wallingford
Steinkraus DC, Howard MN, Boys GO (1999) Infection of sentinel cotton aphids (Homoptera: Aphididae)
by aerial conidia of Neozygites fresenii (Entomophthorales: Neozygitaceae). Biol Control 14: 181- 185.
doi: 10.1006/bcon.1998.0690
222
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Proc Natl Acad Sci US A 96:5944. doi: 10. 1073/pnas.96.11.5944
Yaninek JS, Saizonou S, Onzo A et al (1996) Seasonal and habitat variability in the fungal pathogens,
Neozygites cf. Horidana and Hirsutella thormpsonii, associated with cassava mites in Benin, West
Africa. Biocontrol Sci Technol 6:23-33. doi:10.1080/09583159650039502
The effects of Pseudomonas putida biotype B
on Tetranychus urticae(Acari:Tetranychidae)
H Murat Aksoy · Sebahat K. Ozman-Sullivan · Heval Ocal · Nuray Celik ·
Gregory T. Sullivan
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 1-4, 223-230.
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9155-9 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract This study investigated Pseudomonas putida biotype B as a potential bio-
lbgical control agent of Tetranychus urticae. The bacteria were isolated from greenhouse
soil from Carsamba, Turkey. The experiment was carried out in a completely randomized
cations of a suspension of P. putida biotype B (10*-10? colony forming units/ml) were
applied to newly emerged, copulated females. Dead mite and egg counts were started on
the 3rd day after treatments, and observations were continued daily until all the mites
had died and egg hatching had finished. Both types of bacterial application significantly
reduced total egg numbers and egg hatching, compared to their respective controls.
Bacterial spraying was significantly more effective than dipping—the spray application
demonstrated 1o0% efficacy and resulted in the fewest viable eggs. The results of this
study indicated that P. pufida biotype B has a strong efficacy in causing mortality in
T.urticae.
Keywords Fluorescent bacteria ·Pseudomonas putida·Tetranychus urticae
Biological control
Introduction
The two-spotted spider mite, Tetranychus urticae Koch (Acari: Tetranychidae), is the most
polyphagous species of spider mites. Recent checklists of host plants include about 1,200
species (Bolland et al. 1998; Zhang 2003). After overwintering, the females migrate to
weeds and other herbaceous plants. Direct damage of the mite is due to feeding punctures
the leaves become spotty, and then dry out. If attacks are heavy, the plant may die. The
H M. Aksoy · S. K. Ozman-Sullivan () · H. Ocal · N. Celik
Department of Plant Protection, Faculty of Agriculture, Ondokuz Mayis University,
55139 Samsun, Turkey
e-mail: sozman @omu.edu.tr
G.T.Sullivan
Ondokuz Mayis University, OYDEM, 55139 Samsun, Turkey
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.), Diseases of Mfites and Tticks. DOl: I0.1007/978-l-4020-9695-2_18223
224
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
development of T. urticae is fastest between 23 and 30°C, and at a relative humidity of less
than 50% (Jeppson et al. 1975; Hussey and Scopes 1985; van de Vrie 1985). Fecundity and
fertility of T. urticae are age-specific functions, strongly dependent on factors such as host
plant, food quality, temperature, population size and density. Adaptive strategies of the
two-spotted spider mite, as a colonizing type of species, are based on high fecundity in the
young females and a female-biased offspring sex ratio, leading to a rapid population
increase (Carey and Bradley 1982; Sabelis 1985).
Conventional control treatments for the two-spotted spider mite require the application
of broad spectrum acaricides which, in addition to controlling the pest, also eliminate most 
predators, including predatory mites. Moreover, acaricides cause the development of
pesticide-resistant strains of T. urticae and residue problems (Muir and Cranham 1979;
Cho et al. 1995; Goka 1998; Devine et al. 2001; Nauen et al. 2001; Kim et al. 2006). To
alleviate these problems, alternative strategies for spider mite control can utilise biocontrol
agents, including parasites, predators and pathogens. Biological control of spider mites by
predators is widely used, especially by phytoseiid mites, for example Phytoseiulus per-
   s     d  n  i
worldwide (Zhang 2003; Gerson et al. 2003; Gerson and Weintraub 2007)
ricides are the species Hirsutella thompsonii Fisher, Neozygites foridana Weiser and
Muma, Beauveria bassiana (Balsamo) Vuillemin, and Verticillium lecanii (Zimm.)
Viégas (Askary et al. 1998; Chandler et al. 2000, 2005; van der Geest et al. 2000). As
for bacteria, Bacilius fhuringiensis Berliner is a well-known control agent, but this
species is not a pathogen sensu stricto (van der Geest et al. 2000). Some fuorescent
pseudomonads have been shown to be potential biocontrol agents of plant root diseases
(Scher and Baker 1982; Park et al. 1988; Walsh et al. 2001). In addition, Aksoy and
Mennan (2004) demonstrated the effects of a fluorescent Pseudomonas sp. isolate against
nematodes. None of the fuorescent pseudomonads has yet been used as a biocontrol
agent of mites. Neverthless, an infection that caused disease in T. urticae was identified
as Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Poinar and Poinar 1998). This is an example of the
increasing interest in pathogens of mites, as indicated by the large number of reviews on
this subject (McCoy 1996; Poinar and Poinar 1998; Chandler et al. 2000; van der Geest
et al.2000)
Pseudomonas putida Trevisan, the subject of this study, is a gram negative, rod-shaped,
saprophytic soil bacterium (Anzai et al. 2000). It demonstrates a very diverse metabolism,
including the ability to degrade organic solvents such as toluene, and the compounds
naphthalene and styrene oil (Marques and Ramos 1993; Gomes et al. 2005; Ward et al.
2006). Pseudomonas putida has also demonstrated potential biocontrol properties, as an
effective antagonist of damping off diseases such as Pythium and Fusarium (Amer and
Utkhede 2000; Validov et al. 2007).
In this study, the potential of P. putida biotype B as a biocontrol agent of T. urticae was
examined by determining its effects on mortality, fecundity and egg hatching.
Materials and methods
Experiments were conducted in a growth room at 25 ± 1°C, L16:D8 photoperiod, and
 55% r.h., at the Department of Plant Protection of Ondokuz Mayis University, Samsun,
Turkey. All observations were made with a stereo-binocular microscope.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
225
Soil sampling
A total of 30 soil samples was collected from tomato greenhouses in villages of Carsamba
in Samsun province, Turkey in 2004-2005. Relative to the size of greenhouse, 3-12
samples were randomly collected from 0 to 20 cm depth and mixed. A sub-sample of
~1 kg of soil was then taken per greenhouse and stored in sterile, polyethylene bags at
4°C for 2-3 days before processing.
Isolations
Stored soil samples were used to isolate fluorescent Pseudomonas isolates. Firstly, each
soil sample was sieved through a 1-mm-mesh sieve, mixed at a ratio of 1:10 with sterile,
distilled water, shaken thoroughly on a rotary shaker at 150 rpm at 24-26°C for 60 min,
 and serial dilutions (10-2-10-4) were prepared. Diluted samples were placed on King's B
Agar (KBA) and incubated at 24-26°C for 24-48 h. Identification of bacterial isolates was
based on colony morphology and fuorescent character, according to the standard diag-
nostic methods (Lelliott and Stead 1987; Kiewnick and Sands 2001). One of the fuorescent
Pseudomonas isolates, FPin2 (Fluorescent Pseudomonas isolate number 2) was selected
for this study after a preliminary study. It was later identified by using the computer-
analysis of bacterial fatty acids.
The bacterial isolate was also re-isolated from the dead T. urficae from the experiment
to verify that the same bacterial isolate was the cause of death. For this purpose, the dead
mites were surface-sterilized in 0.5% sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl), rinsed several times in
sterile water, gently blotted dry on paper towels, placed on KBA and incubated at 24-26*C
for 24-48 h. This pure isolate, which was later identified using MIS and shown to be
identical to the isolate described previously, was used to inoculate healthy T. urticae and
shown to cause the same disease symptoms and mortality.
Bioassay
Newly emerged, copulated females of T. urticae and bean leaves (Phaseolus vuigaris L.)
were used for the experiments. Bean plants were grown in pots, and T. urticae was reared
as a stock culture in the laboratory on the beans. For the applications, freshly cut, 3-cm-
diameter bean leaf discs were placed upper surface down on water-saturated sponges in 10-
cm-diameter Petri dishes. Stikem SpecialTM was painted around each leaf disc to form a
with four treatments (spraying, dipping and a control for each treatment) and 10 replica-
tions, and with five mites in each replication. Spraying and dipping applications of the
bacterial suspension of P. putida biotype B at 10*-10? colony forming units (CFU) ml-I
were applied to newly hatched, copulated adults. For the spraying application, after the
 mites had been placed on the leaf discs, the suspension was applied from a distance of 25-
  s   n           
with very fine droplets. For the dipping application, the leaf discs were dipped in the
suspension for 5 s. Tetranychus urticae were then transferred to these leaf discs. Sterile
water was applied for the controls. Counting of dead mites and eggs started on the 3rd day
s    s        
had died and egg hatching had finished. After being counted daily, the eggs for each
replication were transferred to an untreated leaf disc for hatching observations.
226
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Statistical analysis
To determine the efficacy (%) of P. putida biotype B on T. urticae, mortality data were
while egg hatching, mortality and efficacy data were arcsin√x-transformed, because the
formed because of heteroscedasticity. Instead, differences among the treatments were
analysed with the nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis test, for total egg number, egg hatching
and mortality. Dunn's multiple comparison tests were then applied to determine any further
differences among the groups. The Mann-Whitney U-test was performed to test for dif-
ferences in efficacy between the spraying and dipping bacterial treatments. All
computations were performed using Minitab (Minitab 2000, V. 13.20).
Results
Identification of fuorescent Pseudomonas isolates
Atotal of seven distinct fuorescent Pseudomonas isolates were obtained from 30 soil samples
taken in Carsarmba, Turkey; three were from Damlatas village, four from Karabahce village.
Isolate FPin2 from Damlatas, which had been effective in pre-testing on T. urticae, was later
identified using MIS as P. putida biotype B. Colonies of P. putida biotype B on KBA were
whitish-grey, raised, and with diffusible, yellowish-green pigment, and they fuoresced undet
King'sBAgar
PseudomonasputidaB-
Tetranychusurticae
Fig. 1 Pseudomonas putida biotype B colonies growing from dead Tetranychus urticae
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
227
Table 1 The effects (mean ± standard error) of Pseudomonas putida biotype B (PpB) on Tetranychus
urticae*
Treatments
Mortality (%)
Efficacy (%)
Total egg number
Egg hatching (%)
 Spraying control
20 ± 3.0 c
106.7 ± 35.22 ab
100 a
Spraying PpB
100 a
100 a
2.6 ± 0.76 c
46.3 ± 13.86 c
Dipping control
6 ± 3.1 d
163.7 ± 53.98 a
97.4 ± 1.84 a
Dipping PpB
80 ± 5.2 b
78.5 ± 5.67 b
37.8 ± 5.97 b
93.4 ± 1.35 b
*Different letters within a column signify difference (P<0.01)
dead T. urticae was reintroduced to healthy T. urticae in which it again showed the same
pathology, and was again identified as P. pufida biotype B.
The effects of Pseudomonas putida biotype B on Tetranychus urticae
After P. pufida biotype B applications on T. urticae, the symptoms were: slowing down of
movements, cessation of feeding, reduced egg laying, and then occurrence of brown-black
coloration. The earliest deaths occurred within the first day after the treatments. All the
mites in the spraying bacterial treatment died within 4 days, so statistical analysis for
differences in adult mortality among the treatments (Table 1). The highest mortality
(100%) was for the spraying bacterial treatrment and the lowest was 6% for the dipping
control. Bacterial dipping caused 78.5% mite mortality, significantly lower than the effect
of bacterial spraying. Because no mites had survived more than 4 days after bacterial
spraying, the total egg numbers (2.6 eggs) were much lower than after dipping (37.8 eggs),
where some mites remained alive and continued to lay eggs (Table 1).
Almost all eggs hatched in the two controls, but egg hatching was reduced to 46% in the
spraying application (Table 1). In 3 of the 10 spray replicates, no eggs were laid due to the
premature deaths of all the mites. In those three cases, O% egg hatching was assumed.
Discussion
The results of this study indicate that P. putida biotype B has a strong efficacy in causing
mortality of the phytophagous mite T. urficae, but the mechanisms are not clear. However,
there is evidence that the genus Pseudomonas contains virulent species. General support
for our results comes from the effects on insect pests of different Pseudomonas strains,
Broadway et al. 1998). In a specific case, Vodovar et al. (2006) reported that Pseudomonas
entomophila exhibits virulence against Drosophila melanogaster Meigen that may be due
to strong hemolytic activity, involving proteins such as lipases, chitinases and/or hydro-
lases. It may be that one or more of these factors also contributed to the mortality of
T. urticae caused by P. putida biotype B in the current study. Because chitin is a structural
component of the gut lining of insects and mites, chitin metabolism is considered to be an
excellent target for selective pest control. Research on bacteria-mediated insect control has
indicated that bacterial chitinases may hydrolyze the insect's chitin (Kramer and Muthu-
krishnan 1997; Broadway et al. 1998). Various modes of action have been demonstrated
for P. putida's antagonistic effects against soil-borne diseases. They include the production
228
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
of secondary metabolites and antifungal compounds (Dowling and O'Gara 1994; Mau-
rhofer et al. 1998; Ramamoorthy et al. 2001; Raaijmakers et al. 2002), and the production
of the lytic enzymes chitinase and glucanase which act on fungal cell wall components
(Singh et al. 1999). Wilson et al. (2002) reported that bacterial hemolysins are exotoxins
that attack blood cell mermbranes and cause cell rupture by poorly defined mechanisms.
especially given the rapidity of death of T. urticae in the current study.
In the spraying application in the current study,the vegetative cells of P. putida biotype
B were applied directly to the body surface of the mites. According to Vodovar et al.
(2006), pathogenic bacteria rely on a variety of cell surface-associated virulence factors
that allow adhesion to the host surface and promote effective colonization. If applicable to
P. pufida biotype B, this adhesion could enhance the incursion of proteases, chitinases,
lipases and hydrolases through the cuticle, stigmas and body orifices of T. urticae, initi-
ating the rapid death of the mite. The mites' body surfaces were wetted and provided an
ideal environment for the survival, colonisation and reproduction of P. putida biotype B.
However, further research is necessary to elucidate the mode of action of P. putida biotype
B; for instance, the enzymes produced by the pathogen need to be identified.
In comparison to spraying, mortality after dipping was lower and more protracted. This
may be attributable to the body surface of T. urticae not being wetted, providing a less
being introduced to the body surface indirectly, e.g. by brushing the ventral surface of the
body against the leaf disc surface and cleaning the mouthparts. Infection by P. putida
biotype B via dipping would therefore have been later and arguably at lower levels of
inoculation, hence the lower levels of mortality spread over a longer period. Separately, the
spraying control mortality was higher than for the dipping control. We cannot explain this,
given that the very low spraying pressure was unlikely to have caused physical damage to
the mites. However, there was a highly significant difference between the bacterial spray
and its control, so clearly something caused mortality, distinct from the spraying method.
Despite the fact that the mechanisms are unclear, P. putida biotype B caused substantial
mortality of T. urticae in a relatively short time, especially in the spray application, and
also reduced egg numbers and egg hatching. However, further experiments are needed to
assess the efficacy of P. pufida biotype B and other biotypes against T. urticae at lower
concentrations and in glasshouse and field experiments, in order to quantify its potential as
a biological control agent. The compatibility of P. putida biotype B with biocontrol agents
currently employed to control T. urficae would also need to be carefully assessed.
Ackmowledgements We would like to thank Dr. Recep Kotan of Ataturk University Biotechnology
Center, Erzurum, Turkey for the identification of the bacterial biotype; and Dr. Soner Cankaya of Ondokuz
Mayis University, Samsun, Turkey for statistical analysis.
References
Aksoy HM, Mennan S (2004) Biological control of Heterodera cruciferae (Tylenchida: Heteroderidae)
of lettuce and cucumber. Can J Microbiol 46(9):809-816
Anzai Y, Kim H, Park JY, Wakabayashi H, Oyaizu H (2000) Phylogenetic affliation of the pseudomonads
based on 16S rRNA sequence. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 50(4):1563-1589
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
229
Askary H, Carrieare Y, Bealanger RR, Brodeur J (1998) Pathogenicity of the fungus Verticiltium lecani to
aphids and powdery mildew. Biocontrol Sci Technol 8:23-32
Tetranychidae). Brill Academic Publishers, Leiden
Broadway RM, Gongora C, Kain WC, Sanderson JA, Monroy JA, Bennett KC, Warner JB, Hoffman MP
24:985-998
Carey JR, Bradley JW (1982) Developmental rates, vital schedules, sex-ratios and life tables for Tetrary
chus urticae,T. turkestani and T. pacificus (Acarina: Tetranychidae) on cotton.Acarologia 23:333-
345
Chandler D, Davidson G, Pell JL, Ball BV, Shaw K, Sunderland KD (2000) Fungal biocontrol of Acari.
Biocontrol Sci Technol 10:357-384
Chandler D, Davidson G, Jacobson R1 (2005) Laboratory and glasshouse evaluation of entomopathogenic
fungi against the two-spotted spiderrmite, Tetranychus urticae (Acari: Tetranychidae) on tomato,
Lycopersicon escutentum. Biocontrol Sci Technol 15:37-54
Cho JR, Kim Y1, Ahn Yl, Yoo JK, Lee JO (1995) Monitoring of acaricide resistance in field-collected
Devine GJ, Barber M,Denholm 1 (2001) lncidence and inheritance of resistance to METl-acaricides in
European strains of the two-spotted spider mite (Tetranychus urticae) (Acari: Tetranychidae). Pest
Manag Sci 57:443-448
Dowling DN, O'Gara F (1994) Metabolites of Pseudomonas involved in the biocontrol of plant disease.
Trends Biotechnol 12:133-141
63(7):658676
Gerson U, Smiley RL, Ochoa R (2003) Mites (Acari) in biological control. Blackwell Science, Boston
Goka K (1998) Mode of inheritance of resistance to three new acaricides in the Kanzawa spider mite,
Tetranychus kanzawai Kishida (Acari:Tetranychidae).Exp Appl Acarol 22:699-708
Gormes NCM, Kosheleva lA, Abraham WR, Srmalla K (2005) Effects of the inoculant strain Pseudomonas
putida KT2442 (pNF142) and of naphthalene contamination on the soil bacterial community. FEMS
Microbiol Ecol 54(1):21-33
Hussey NW, Scopes NEA (1985) Greenhouse vegetables. In: Helle W, Sabelis MW (eds) Spider mites-
their biology, natural enemies and control, vol 1B. Elsevier Science Publ, Amsterdam, pp 285-298
Jeppson LR, Keifer HH, Baker EW (1975) Mites injurious to economic plants. University of California Pres,
Berkeley
Kiewnick AB, Sands DC (2001) Gram-negative bacteria: Pseudomonas. In: Schaad NW, Jones JB, Chun W
(eds) Laboratory guide for identification of plant pathogenic bacteria, third edn. The American Phy
topathological Society, St. Paul, pp 84-120
Kim Y1, Park HM, Cho JR, Ahn Y1 (2006) Muliple resistance and biochemical mechanisms of pyridaben
resistance in Tetranychus urticae (Acari: Tetranychidae). J Econ Entomol 99(3):954958
Kramer Kl, Muthukrishnan S (1997) Insect chitinases: molecular biology and potential use as biopesticides.
Insect Biochem Mol 27:887-900
Lelliott RA, Stead DE (1987) Methods for diagnosis of bacterial diseases of plants. In: Saettler AW, Schaad
NW, Roth DA (eds) Methods in plant pathology. Oxford, UK, p 100-200
Marques S, Ramos JL (1993) Transcriptional control of the Pseudomonas putida TOL plasmid catabolic
pathways. Mol Microbiol 9(5):923-929
Maurhofer M, Reimmann C, Sacherer SP, Heeb S, Haas D,Defago G (1998) Salicylic acid biosynthetic
McCoy CW (1996) Pathogens of eriophyoid mites. In: Lindquist EE, Sabelis MW, Bruin J (eds) Eriophyoid
rmites—their biology, natural enermies and control. Elsevier Science Publ, Amsterdam, pp 48 1-490
Minitab (2000) Minitab statistical software, release 13.20. Minitab Inc., State College, PA, USA
hops. Proc Br Crop Prot Conf 1:161-167
Nauen R, Stumpf N, Elbert A, Zebitz CPW, Winkler V (2001) Acaricide toxicity and resistance in larvae of
different strains of Tetranychus urticae and Panonychus utmi (Acari: Tetranychidae).Pest Manag Sci
57:253-261
Park CS, Paulitz TC,Baker R (1988) Biocontrol of Fusarium wilt of cucumber resulting from interactions
between Pseudomonas putida and non-pathogenic isolates of Fusarium oxysporum.Phytopathology
78: 190194
Poinar GO, Poinar R (1998) Parasites and pathogens of mites. Annu Rev Entomol 43:449-469
230
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Raaijmakers JM, Vlami M, De Souza JT (2002) Antibioic production by bacterial biocontrol agents.
Antonie Leeuwenhoek lnt J G81:537-547
resistance by plant growth promoting rhizobacteria in crop plants against pests and diseases. Crop Prot
20: 1-11
Sabelis MW (1985) Reproduction and sex allocation. ln: Helle W, Sabelis MW (eds) Spider mitestheir
biology, natural enemies and control, vol 1B. Elsevier Science Publ, Amsterdam, pp 73-94
Scher FM, Baker R (1982) Effect of Pseudomonas putida and synthetic iron chelator on induction of soil
suppressiveness to Fusarium wilt pathogens. Phytopathology 72:567-1573
Singh PP, Shin YC, Park CS, Chung YR (1999) Biological control of Fusarium wilt of cucumber by
chitinolytic bacteria. Phytopathology 89:92-99
Validov S,KamilovaF,QiS,Stephan D,Wang JJ,Makarova N,Lugtenberg B(2007)Selection of bacteria
able to control Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. radicis-tycopersici in stonewool substrate. J Appl Microbiol
102(2):461471
van de Vrie M (1985) Greenhouse ornamentals. In: Helle W, Sabelis MW (eds) Spider mites—their biology,
natural enemies and control, vol 1B. Elsevier Science Publ, Amsterdam, pp 273-284
van der Geest LPS, Elliot SL, Breeuwer JAJ, Beerling EAM (2000) Diseases of mites. Exp Appl Acaro]
24:497560
Vodovar N, Vallenet D, Cruveiller S, Rouy Z, Barbe V, Acosta C, Cattolico L, Jubin C, Lajus A, Segurens
B, Vacherie B, Wincker P, Weissenbach J, Lemaitre B, Medigue C, Boccard F (2006) Complete
genome sequence of the entomopathogenic and metabolically versatile soil bacterium Pseudomonas
entomophila. Nat Biotechnol 24:673-679
Walsh UF, Morrissey JP,O'Gara F (2001) Pseudomonas for biocontrol phytopathogens: from functional
genomics to commercial exploitation.Curr Opin Biotechnol 12:289-295
Ward PG, Goff M, Donner M,Kaminsky W, O'Connor KE (2006)A two step chemo-biotechnological
conversion of polystyrene to a biodegradable thermoplastic. Environ Sci Technol 40(7):2433-2437
Wilson M, McNab R,Henderson B (2002) Bacterial disease mechanisms. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Zehnder G, Kloepper JW, Yao C, Wei G (1997) Induction of systemic resistance in cucumber against
cucumber beetles (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) by plant growth promoting rhizobacteria. J Econ
Entomol 90:39 1396
Zhang ZQ (2003) Mites of greenhouses: identification, biology and control. CABl Publishing, Wallingford
Overwintering and prevalence of Neozygites floridana
(Zygomycetes: Neozygitaceae) in hibernating females
of Tetranychus urticae (Acari: Tetranychidae) under
cold climatic conditions in strawberries
Ingeborg Klingen · Gunnar Wersted · Karin Westrum
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 1-4, 23 1-245.
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9178-2 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract To evaluate overwintering strategies of the fungus Neozygites foridana, an
important natural enemy of Tetranychus urticae, hibernating T. urticae females were
investigated for the presence of fungal structures throughout one winter (October 12, 2006
to February 19, 2007) in field-grown strawberries in a cold climate in Norway (min.
ambient temp -15.3°C). Neozygites foridana was present as hyphal bodies inside live,
hibernating fermales in T urticae populations throughout the sampling period. The lowest
percentages of hibernating females with hyphal bodies were found at the two first dates of
sampling at 5.5 and 0% on October 12 and 19, respectively. The prevalence then increased
and peaked at 54.4% on January 14. Resting spores (immature) were also found in live
hibernating females at some dates, but at lower prevalence than for hyphal bodies and
predominantly only until November 8. Prevalence of resting spores in live hibernating
females ranged from 2.5 to 13.8%.Total number of T. urticae was also recorded,and most
mites of all four categories (nymphs, males, non-hibernating and hibernating females) were
found at the first sampling date. At this date non-hibernating females were the most
abundant. A sharp decrease in non-hibernating females, nymphs and males was, however,
seen from mid-October to mid-November; also numbers of hibernating females decreased,
but not as fast. The relative abundance of hibernating females compared to non-hibernating
females increased from 32.2% at the first collection (October 12) to 97.7% at the last
collection (February 2). This study confirms that N. foridana survives the winter as a semi-
latent hyphal body infection, protected inside live hibernating females. It is therefore ready
to develop and sporulate as soon as climatic conditions permit, resulting in early season
infection of T. urticae.
1. Klingen () · G. W2rsted · K. Westrum
Plant Health and Plant Protection Division, Norwegian Institute for Agricultural and Environmenta]
Research (Bioforsk), Hogskoleveien 7, 1432 Aas, Norway
e-mail: ingeborg.klingen @bioforsk.no
G.W2rsted
Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Norwegian University of Life Sciences,
PO Box 5003, 1432 Aas, Norway
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.). Diseases of Mites and Ticks. DOl: 10.1007/978-I-4020-9695-2_19 231
232
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Keywords
s Diapause · Hibernating females · Hyphal bodies · Neozygites foridana :
Overwintering·Resting spores·Tetranychus urticae
Introduction
The two-spotted spider mite, Tetranychus urticae Koch (Acari: Tetranychidae) has a broad
host plant range and is an annual pest of many crops throughout the world (Greco et al.
2005), including strawberries (Cross et al. 2001; Easterbrook et al. 2001; Garcia-Mari and
Gonzalez-Zamora 1999; Raworth 1986). Tetranychus urticae lowers the potential yield of
strawberries due to a reduction in photosynthesis and transpiration in leaves, caused by its
feeding on mesophyll and parenchyma cells (Sances et al. 1979, 1982; Veerman 1985).
Use of acaricides is the main strategy to control T. urticae in field crops, and development
of resistance in T. urticae populations is common (Cranham and Helle 1985; Devine et al.
2001). Resistance may lead to increased use of acaricides that may in turn increase pro-
environment. Public concern on the negative effects of pesticides has resulted in a focus on
the development of biological control methods and conservation biological control may be
one way of controlling T. urticae. Most studies on conservation biological control of T.
        sd  sg 
natural enemy of T. urticae, is also a good candidate (van der Geest et al. 2000).
the cuticle and produce spores (primary conidia) on conidiophores. Primary conidia are
actively ejected from swollen brown mite cadavers, referred to as mummies, and these
conidia gerrminate to form the infective and more persistent capilliconidia that infect new
mites (Carner 1976; Delalibera et al. 2006; Elliot 1998). Neozygites spp. are considered by
many authors to be a major factor causing decline in populations of T. urticae in different
crops when microclimatic conditions are right (Boykin et al. 1984; Carner and Canerday
1970; Dick and Buschman 1995; Klubertanz et al. 1991; Smitley et al. 1986b). Pesticides
may limit the survival and efficacy of N. foridana and laboratory studies on the effect of
 pesticides on N. foridana have been conducted, resulting in suggestions on how to manage
pesticide application to reduce negative effects on this beneficial fungus (Klingen and
Westrum 2007; Klubertantz et al. 1991). Further, a successful extension-based integrated
pest management (IPM) strategy has been established for the related insect pathogenic
fungus Neozygites fresenii (Nowakowski), infecting cotton aphid, Aphis gossypii Glover, in
which growers withhold insecticide applications for aphids when N. fresenii epizootics are
predicted to control the cotton aphid (Steinkraus 2000).
Overwintering of pathogens through long periods of unfavourable conditions is another
factor that may limit the survival and efficacy of a pathogen in a pest insect or mite population,
and can be critical for their use in biological control (Elliot et al. 2002). Tetranychus urticae is
kmown to overwinter as hibernating females (Veerrman 1985), and these partly inactive
females may harbour N. foridana. The mite exhibits a facultative diapause in adult females
only, and the diapause is induced during the larval and nymphal stages by short-day pho-
toperiods (Veerman 1977a), but temperature and nutrition may also contribute to this
 induction (Veerman 1985). Termination ofthe diapause depends on the period of chilling and
 on the photoperiod, at least during the first 3 or4 months of diapause (Veerman 1977b, 1985).
Little is known about the distribution of hibernating T. urticae females in strawberry
fields during the winter in Norway. One study in Norwegian strawberry fields reported,
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
233
however, that aggregation of hibernating females was seen in dark places such as below
wilted leaves and under the plastic cover (Stenseth 1976). No hibernating females were
found directly on the soil. According to Veerman (1985), 7T. urticae females that have been
induced to diapause feed only very little before they leave the host plant in search of dark
hibernation sites. It is not well known how N. foridana survives the harsh conditions
throughout a cold winter, and only a few studies report fungal structures that may survive.
Only one of these studies is conducted throughout the winter, but under warmer climatic
conditions than at our study site (Brandenburg and Kennedy 1981; Klubertanz et al. 1991;
Mietkiewski et al. 1993). In previous studies in Norway,however, females of T. urticae
infected by N. foridana were found as early as March 18 in 2003 (Nordengen and Klingen
2006). The mean temperature at this time of year was low (1.7°C) (http://mt.bioforsk.
no/agrometbase/getweatherdata.php), and the resulting development of an infection was
probably very slow. This indicates that such an early infection could not have been ini-
tiated by resting spores from plant debris but rather was a latent infection of N. foridana
present in hibernating females. The aim of this study was therefore to investigate whether
N. foridana may be present inside living hibernating females of T. urticae throughout the
winter season, and if so, in what prevalence and what stage of its fungal life cycle. The
occurrence of T. urficae hibernating females, non-hibernating females, males and nymphs
found in samples throughout the winter was also investigated.
Materials and methods
Field information and climatic recordings
The study was conducted in a south-sloping 1-ha strawberry field (cultivar Corona, planted
in 2004) in Lier in southeastern Norway (59°47 N, 10°16′ E). Strawberries were grown
conventionally, and the acaricides hexythiazox and methiocarb were used once in spring
and after harvest, respectively. The insecticide esfenvalerate was used once before bud
break, and the fungicides fenhexamid, cyprodinil + fudioxonil and tolylfuanid were used
twice each during summer. The sampling site was established autumn 2o06 along the
border at the north end of the field and measured 10 m downslope x 10 double rows. Poles
of 60 cm were inserted into the ground for every 1 m downslope. To facilitate collection of
strawberry leaves from the field after snowfall, the sampling site was covered by a
Polyfelt polypropylene cover (140 g/m^) placed on top of the poles from October 26. The
part of the strawberry field that was not used for sampling was naturally covered with at
least 10 cm fuffy snow from mid-January to mid-February. Temperature below and above
the cover were recorded from January 15 to March 23 with Tiny Tag? loggers (INTAB
Interface-Teknik AB, Stenkullen, Sweden). Recordings from a weather station in Lier,
located 2 km east of the field, were also used for more comprehensive weather data for the
whole  winter  (http://lmt.bioforsk.no/agrometbase/getweatherdata.php). RH  was only
measured at the weather station.
Sampling mites in the field
Hibernating females of T. urficae were obtained by weekly collection of green trifoliate
strawberry leaves, from October12, 2006 to January 30, 2007, except the three last weeks of
December. During October and November, one trifoliate strawberry leaf was collected from
each of the 10 double rows at 10 sampling points downslope, giving a total of 1o0 leaves per
234
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
sampling date. To obtain sufficiently high mite numbers when the mite population started to
decline (from December 6),two leaves were taken from each double row and each sampling
point, giving a total of 2o0 leaves per sampling date. Leaves were collected randomly from
5, 12 and 19) mites were collected by taking a handful (approximately 0.1 1) of plant debris
from the ground surrounding the strawberry plants in each row and at each sampling point.
The collected plant debris consisted mainly of wilted strawberry leaves and stems, plus
some straw. One handful of debris for each double row and at each of the ten sampling
points resulted in 100 handfuls (10 1) of debris for each date. Samples were placed in paper
bags and brought immediately to the laboratory for processing.
Extraction of mites from samples
Washingoutmitesfromgreenleaves
Samples from each sampling point (ten green trifoliate leaves) were placed in individual
plastic boxes (2 1) filled with soapy water at ca. 40*C (0.5 ml washing detergent in 1.5 1
water). Leaves were immersed in the soapy water overnight at room temperature and mites
were washed out the next morning and placed in a glass vial containing 20 ml 80% ethanol
as described by Nordengen and Klingen (2006)
Extracting mites from plant debris
Mites from samples of plant debris were extracted by using a Berlese funnel method (Hutchins
e[d I I noy 'sauu jo juaaou pnemdn juaaand on pasn sem azneh ou eun ndaoxa (t6e1
debris from each sampling point was placed on top of a metal sieve (3 x 3 mm mesh) in
individual Berlese funnel. The tip of the funnel was inserted through the lid of a plastic cup
containing 20 ml 80% ethanol. A 40 W incandescent light bulb was mounted on top of the
funnel 10 cm above the debris. Funnels were left like this for 7 days for mites to crawl out ofthe
plant debris, away from the light bulb, and to fall into the cup containing the ethanol.
Recording mite numbers
Ethanol samples were investigated for presence of T. urticae immediately after processing.
The mites were counted and categorized as nymphs, males, and hibernating and non-
hibermating females under a compound microscope (6.3-50x) using a counting grid
consisting of 8 equal sectors. The term hibernation for females of T. urticae (when an
orange-red body colour appears) is generally used to denote a state of dormancy (diapause
or quiescence) which occurs during winter months (Veerman 1985), and this is also how
we use the term in this paper.
Neozygites foridana infections
LiveMethod A:infections in hibernatingfemalesfrom ethanotsamptes
Due to practical constraints (peaks in work load) it is an advantage to use a method where
to quantify hyphal bodies of N. foridana in T. urficae stored in ethanol (Nordengen and
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
235
Klingen 2006) and adapted it to include observation of all fungal stages in hibernating
females. All hibernating females that looked like they had been alive when collected (orange-
red in colour, not injured and having a body full of “content") were mounted in 5o% lactic
acid and observed under the microscope (200-400x) for the presence of N. foridana (see
Table 1 for numbers of hibernating females (n) mounted at each date). This method is called
Live Method A below. Hibernating females were classified as infected when resting spores or
hyphal bodies were present. They were also classified as infected when at least one germi-
mated capilliconidium was attached to the mite body. Previous studies have shown that it only
takes one attached capilliconidium to produce a lethal infection (Oduor et al. 1997), and that
capilliconidia attached to the mite body indicate a strong infection potential and hence a good
estimate for the infection level (Delalibera et al. 2000). Humber (1997) and Keller (1991)
were used for identification of N. foridana fungal structures.
Live Method B:infections in hibernating femaies directly mounted
To ensure that the infection level of N. foridana recorded by Live Method A was not an
artefact of the method, a direct method was used as a control. In the control method, N.
foridana infection was investigated in live T. urticae hibernating females transferred
directly from green leaves to a slide by a small paint brush. This method is called Live
Method B below.Leaf samples were randomly collected from the same sample site as for
Live Method A on 9 sampling dates between October 26 and February 5. One collection
 h             s
numbers), 50 live mites were mounted directly in lactophenol cotton blue (LPCB, with
0.0016% cotton blue) and checked for hyphal bodies and resting spores under a microscope
          
collected on February 12 were also incubated individually in vials on strawberry leaf disks
as described in Klingen and Westrum (2006).
Restingsporesof Neozygitesforidana in deadmites
To quantify the prevalence of resting spores of N. foridana in dead T. urticae, ethanol
samples were also inspected for cadavers filled with black resting spores using a compound
microscope (6.3-50x) with contrast illumination. Fresh leaves collected for Live Method
B were also observed under a compound microscope (6.3-50x) to search for dead mites
Statistical analysis
To compare infection levels obtained by the two methods (Live Method A and B) a
pairwise t-test was used. Statistical analyses were conducted with MINITAB? (2006)
Results
Neozygites fHoridana in hibernating females, Live Method A and B
Hibernating females (Live Method A) were found with hyphal bodies of N. foridana on all
sampling dates, except October 19. The lowest percentages of hibernating females with
hyphal bodies were found in the beginning of the collection period; 5.5 and 0% on October
236
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Live Method A: Mounted live looking mites from ethanol samples. Mites were obtained from green sirawberry leaves until January 30. After this date mites were obtained
Dead mites
MRestSp
#With
Q
[10] %
64.0
3
53.3
28.0
一
IRestSp
2
0
% Hyp/Cap
0'95
3
28.0
50.0
Live method Bb
#Mounted
(u)
只
¥---30
¥-0492652
3
% Total
infection
14.3
40.0
3
3
3
from plant debris from the ground surrounding the strawberry plants
IRestSp
8'8
6
□
0
% Hyp/Cap
3
25.0
23
3
#
Live method A
#Mounted
(u)
4
- = No observation
6
4
7
29
7
2
3
12.10.06
19.10.06
26.10.06
02.11.06
08.11.06
14.11.06
22.11.06
30.11.06
06.12.06
201010
20 10'80
14.01.07
22.01.07
30.01.07
05.02.07
12.02.07
19.02.07
23.03.07
Date
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
237
Only immature resting spores were observed in live hibernating females, and these were
only found at the first five dates of collection. Prevalence of resting spores was generally
lower than for hyphal bodies, ranging from 2.5 to 13.8% (Table 1).
Hibernating females (Live Method B) were found with hyphal bodies of N. foridana at
all 10 sampling dates, but resting spores were found at three sampling dates only. The
highest prevalence of hyphal bodies was found on January 14 (65.3%). Also with this
method, live hibernating females were found with immature resting spores only. These
were detected at the first two collection dates. Further, a single observation of one mite
         s ss s n 
The pairwise t-test revealed that the Live Method B detected a higher total prevalence of
N. foridana (T = 3.59, P = 0.007) than Live Method A. During collection of live
hibernating females from leaves, sporulating cadavers were also observed on leaves on
Novermber 2 and December 6. Out of the live mites incubated on February 12, 60% were
found with N. foridana fungal structures at death, and out of these 30% sporulated.
Resting spores in cadavers and on leaf surface
Cadavers containing mature resting spores were found from October 26 till January 22
(Table 1). Leaves with a mass of resting spores from disintegrated cadavers were observed
on January 8 (Fig. 1.6)
Recently killed mites flled with resting spores found on fresh leaves were dark brown to
black, swollen and had a raspberry-like textured cuticle that was not easily broken when
handled, even when dry (Fig. 1.1). Most cadavers found at Norwegian locations have
thread-like rhizoids, but rhizoids with disk-like holdfasts have also been observed
(Fig. 1.5.). Rhizoids were present on each side of the mite body. Cadavers containing
several of the fungal stages (hyphal bodies, resting spores, conidiophores, primary conidia
and capilliconidia) in the same individual were found quite frequently
Occurrence of Tetranychus urticae
The highest numbers of mites of all four categories (nymphs, males, non-hibernating and
hibernating females) were found at the first sampling (October 12). A sharp decrease in
non-hibernating females, nymphs and males was seen from mid-October to mid-November
(Fig. 2A). Numbers of hibernating females also decreased, but not as fast as for the three
other T. urticae categories. The relative abundance of hibernating females compared to
non-hibernating females increased from 38.9% at the first collection (October 12)to 97.7%
at the last collection (February 2). Numbers of hibernating females increased from 20
(January 30) to 80 (February 5) when the substrate for collecting mites was changed from
green leaf samples to plant debris from the ground. Both non-hibernating and hibernating
females were found at all sampling dates, while nymphs and males were not observed at
the last three dates when the plant debris method was used (Fig. 2A).
Climatic conditions at weather station and below cover
The temperature below the cover was generally higher than at the weather station, and the
mean difference measured for the collection period was 3.9°C. When the lowest temper-
ature recorded at the weather station was -15.3°C (January 22) the temperature below the
238
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
2
Fig. 1 (1) Resting spore cadaver of Tetranychus urticae killed by Neozygites fioridana. (2) Hibernating
female of T. urticae infected with resting spores of N. floridana. Scale bar = 100 μm. (3) Hyphal body
cadavers (murmmies) of T. urticae killed by N. floridana. (4) Hibernating female of T. urticae infected with
hyphal bodies of N. fioridana. Scale bar = 100 μm. (5) Three rhizoids with disk-like holdfasts on resting
spore cadaver of T. urticae killed by N. floridana. Scale bar = 10 μm. (6) Disintegrated cadavers leaving
just a mass of resting spores on the leaf surface
cover was -1.0°C. The lowest temperature recorded below the cover was -5.2°C
(February 12) and on this date the temperature at the weather station was -10.0°C. On
both these dates, live hibernating females with hyphal bodies were found. The highest
temperature recorded below the cover was 2.9°C (February 5). On this date, the temper-
ature above the cover was 3.4°C. Temperatures recorded at the weather station, when
sporulating cadavers were found, were -6.9°C (low) and 4.3°C (high) on Novermber 2, and
1.0°C (low) and 6.5°C (high) on December 6. The highest mean RH recorded at
the weather station was 96.4% (November 14), the lowest 64.9% (January 14). However,
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
239
A
160
120
Sa
40
00
0
总
sdwAN #
20
nO
Maxtempweatherstation
Min temp weather station Esa Max temp below cover
AuvMin temp below cover
Mean RH
-Max RH
Fig. 2 (A) Number of Tetrarychus urticae hibernating females, non-hibernating females, males and
nymphs found per 100 leaves and % females hibernating per sampling date during the winter 2006/2007.
Mites were obtained from green strawberry leaves until January 30, after this date mites were obtained from
plant debris from the ground surrounding the strawberry plants. The arrow indicates this. (B) The max and
rin termperatures below snow cover in the sarmpling site, and at a nearby weather station during the winter
2006/2007. The relative humidity was recorded at the weather station only
RH is known to vary greatly throughout a 24-h cycle; the max RH during a 24-h cycle was
always higher than 87% and mostly above 96% (Fig. 2B)
Discussion
Prevalence of hyphal bodies in hibernating females found in this study was high. The
hyphal bodies were viable and not a dead end for the pathogen, and a 30% sporulation of
240
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
live hibernating females incubated on February 12 confirmed this. Neozygites foridana
transfers its inoculum from one season to another efficiently by overwintering as hyphal
 bodies inside live mites. The pathogen remains dormant and protected inside its host during
the winter and is ready to infect other mites as soon as conditions are favourable.
An early-season introduction of N. foridana to control T. urticae in strawberries is
important, since T.urticae is known to cause reductions in strawberry yield at much lower
population levels in early season than in late season (Sances et al. 1981). For N. foridana
dissemination of the fungus need to be favoured. The adapted use of pesticides, especially
fungicides (Klingen and Westrum 2007) might therefore be very important at this time of
the year. Further, the climatic conditions for sporulation and dissemination need to be
suitable for the fungus. A sporulating cadaver in this study was found as late as November
 2 and December 6. In this period ambient temperatures between -6.9°C (low) and 10.0°℃
(high) were measured. This indicates that isolates of N. foridana from this location in
Norway can tolerate quite low temperatures and still be able to sporulate during warm
periods of the winter. However, to obtain precise knowledge on the minimum temperature
requirement for sporulation of this isolate, a controlled laboratory study is needed. Spor-
ulation of N. foridana at low temperatures in laboratory studies has been reported by
others, and Brandenburg and Kennedy (1981) showed that an isolate from North Carolina
could sporulate at 5°C. Further, Smitley et al. (1986a) reported that the minimum
requirements for sporulation for an isolate from North Carolina was 4.4°C. Climatic
observations below the cover in our study showed that the cover probably enhanced the
temperature with on average about 3.9°C, and this probably improved the conditions for
sporulation in N. foridana. The presence of snow is known to modify temperature fuc-
tuations, and normally the temperature below fuffy snow is higher than above the snow
during periods of the winter when air temperature is below O°C (Helen K. French, pers.
comm.). In our study, the field was covered with snow from mid-January to mid-February.
In the area of Norway where this study was conducted, an unstable snow cover is quite
common, but years with earlier and more stable snow cover may also occur.
Live hibernating females were observed with immature resting spores only. In a study
conducted by Delalibera et al. (2000), only immature resting spores of Neozygites sp. were
found in live females of the cassava green mite, Mononychellus tanajoa (Bondar) (Acari:
Tetranychidae). Further, hyphal bodies of other fungal species (Entomophaga maimaiga
Humber, Shima zu & spoer and E. gryllii (Fresenius) Batko (Zygomycetes: Entomoph-
thorales)) are known to begin maturation to the final double-walled resting spore stage after
death of their hosts (Hajek and Humber 1997; Tillotson and Margolies 1990). Day length,
temperature, host age/stage and fungal isolate are factors known to affect the production of
resting spores (Hajek 1997; Thomsen et al. 2001; Nilsen and Steenberg 2004), but
kmowledge concerning factors important for the production of resting spores of N. fori-
reported, however, an increasing number of dead T. urticae filled with resting spores from
the beginning of September in Poland. Hours of light in Poland at this time of year is about
14 (http://www.heavens-above.com/) and corresponds to the period for induction of
hibernating females in central Europe (Helle 1962). Hence, the state of the host may play
an important role for the induction of resting spores. Our study was started too late to
observe a potential increase in resting spore formation during autumn, but it suggests that
resting spore formation is terrminated in early November. In that part of the season both
hours of light and temperature are still falling and the hours of light is about 8 (Brahde
1970.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
241
Cadavers filled with resting spores were only found until January 22. It is likely that
these cadavers had disintegrated, as suggested by Elliot et al. (2002). Overwintering in the
form of resting spores is a strategy which enables the fungus to maintain itself outside a
living host (Hajek 1997), and in our studies we found leaves with disintegrated cadavers
leaving just a mass of resting spores on the leaf surface (Fig. 1.6) until January 8. Hence,
resting spores later in the season would probably only have been obtained by recovering
them from plant debris or from the soil as described for the entomophthoralean fungi E.
       s s  h a 
1997). The finding of cadavers in our study was similar to what Elliot et al. (2002)
described for N. foridana (syn. N. tanajoa Delalibera Jr., Humber & Hajek) in M. tanajoa,
except that M. tanajoa cadavers with resting spores were easily broken when dry even with
Asea nou sem apnis sno u punng sanods sunsan ym pety jaaepo aui suueq anuae
broken probably because of the strong cuticle that hibernating females have. Carner (1976)
describes T. urticae cadavers with resting spores of Entomophthora sp. near foridana to be
swollen and shiny black and fragile. When broken, it released a dark liquid into the leaf.
No such liquid was seen from cadavers with resting spores in our study. Rhizoids with
disk-like holdfasts were also observed on a resting spore cadaver in our study. Keller
(1991) reported, however, that rhizoids of N. foridana have unspecialized endings. In
contrast to what Elliot et al. (2002) found, we found cadavers containing both resting
spores and conidiophores in the same individual. Nemoto and Aoki (1975) also reported a
few observations where both resting spores and the last stage of conidial formation were
present in thesame individual.
There are only a few previous studies on survival of Neozygites sp. in T. urticae
1981). This was, however, in a region where T. urticae was active on wild hosts during the
winter and regular infection cycles of N. foridana occurred. Minimum winter temperature
in North Carolina is about -2°C (in January), and hence much higher than in our study.
Klubertanz et al. (1991) argue that the presence of resting spores in T. urticae cadavers late
in the summer in Iowa, USA (January low: -13°C) indicated that N. foridana is not
dependent upon a live host for winter survival, and we support this statement. We also
suggest, however, that the protection of the fungus inside the cold temperature tolerant
hibermating females found in our study (Fig. 1.3 and 1.4) is an important survival strategy.
 Further, it is not affected by low temperature as long as it is above the freezing point for the
hibernating female. Mietkiewski et al. (1993) observed dead cadavers filled with resting
spores from the beginning of September. However, no observations of live mites
throughout the winter were conducted.
Hibernating females of T. urticae were found when air temperatures were down to -
15.3°C in our study. This supports previous laboratory studies stating that T. urticae from
Norwegian populations can tolerate temperatures down to -22.4°C (Stenseth 1965). The
relative abundance of hibernating compared to non-hibernating females increased
throughout our study period (October 12-February 2). The critical day length for pro-
duction of hibernating females in T. urticae populations from similar latitudes (60°N) is
reported to be about 17 days (Veerman 1985). This suggests that the induction of hiber-
nating females at our location started already in the end of July (Brahde 1970). According
to Stenseth (1976), however, hibernating females are produced in the beginning of August
at these latitudes in Norway. Further, Veerman (1985) stated that local climatic conditions
are the most important factors determining the date of entry into diapause and temperatures
later in the season may have played an important role in the induction of hibernating
242
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Brandenburg and Kennedy (1981)
http:// www.rssWeather.com
http:// www.rssWeather.com
Mietkiewski et al. (1993)
References
This study
Min. temp: - 15°℃
Min. temp:- 12°℃
Max. temp: -2°℃
Min. temp: -2°℃
 temp: + 8°℃
Lowest winter
Min. temp:-
temperatures
January 22
January,
January;
January
Max.
to 52°21' N and from 18°27' E
Poland, Siedlce, Biala Podlaska
lowa, USA (41°57' N, 93°23' W)
North Carolina, USA (35°36 N,
and Konin (from 52°03' N
Norway, Lier (S947' N,
Location (coordinates
geographic center)
to 23°13′ E)
10°16′ E)
females until January 8. Resting
spores in dead mummified mites
 throughout winter. Resting spores
Hyphal bodies in Jive hibernating
 Hyphal bodies in active mites
fermales throughout winter.
mites in late summer.
 only in November.
until January 22.
Fungal structures
Reported name
Neozygites sp.
of fungus
foridana
foridana
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
243
females. Stenseth (1976) conducted a strawberry feld study at As in southeastern Norway
(59°42' N, 10°44' E) on the relative abundance of hibernating compared to non-hiber-
nating females from August to October. The highest relative abundance of hibernating
females was found at 40% in Septermber in the first year of the study (1973). In the second
year of his study (1974), more than 30% of the females found were hibernating. These
numbers are similar to what we found in our study at the same time of the year. Numbers of
hibernating females increased when collecting plant debris on the ground instead of leaves
on the plant in our study. This was probably due to the fact that more hibernating females
are found in the plant debris since hibernating females move away from the host plant in
search of dark hibernation sites (Stenseth 1976, Veerman 1985). The reason we still chose
to use the green leaf sampling method as long as possible was because we were concerned
that the light and heat in the Berlese funnel method used for plant debris would affect the
diapause of hibernating females.
The high prevalence of hyphal bodies of N. foridana inside hibernating females of T.
urticae suggests that the fungus survives the winter under protected conditions. Immature
resting spores were also found but at much lower prevalence. This may indicate that the
major overwintering strategy is hyphal bodies in hibernating females and that resting
spores are produced mainly for sexual recombination. On the other hand, a higher pro-
portion of mites with resting spores might have occurred earlier in the season at dates that
were not included in this study. To obtain the tools that may help us to manipulate the
system in a way that would enhance early season control of T. urticae by N. foridana in
conservation biological control, we need to know under what climatic conditions (tem-
perature and RH) hibernating females with hyphal bodies will die and sporulate. Further it
would be of great help to understand which T. urticae densities and distribution patterns
cadaver. To understand the role of resting spores in this system there is also a need to
conduct studies on how and when resting spores are able to infect healthy mites in the
  e si a h o a    nd o   nd so n 
kmow when resting spore production is induced and terminated and whether they need a
dormant period before germination.
Inger Hal vorsen and Drs. Nina Trandem, Arne Stensvand, and Richard Meadow for their comments on this
References
Brahde R (1970) Solas stilling i Norge Universitetsforlaget, Oslo, Norway (ln Norwegian)
Brandenburg RL, Kennedy GG (1981) Overwintering of the pathogen Entomophthora foridana and its host,
the twospotted spider mite. J Econ Entomol 74:428-431
Boykin LS, Campbell WV, Beute MK (1984) Effect of pesticides on Neozygites floridana (Entomoph-
thorales: Entomophthoraceae) and arthropod predators attacking the twospotted spider mite (Acari:
Tetran ychidae) in North Carolina peanut fields. J Econ Entomol 77:969-975
Carner GR (1976) A description of the life cycle of Entomophthora sp. in the two-spotted spider mite.
J lnvertebr Pathol 28:245-254
Carner GR, Canerday TD (1970) Entomophthora sp. as a factor in the regulation of the two-spotted spider
mite on cotton. Ecol Entomol 63:638-640
Cranham JE, Helle W (1985) Pesticide resistance in tetranychidae. In: Helle W, Sabelis MW (eds) Spider
mites their biology, natural enemies and control, vol 1B. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 405-421
244
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Cross JV, Easterbrook MA, Crook AM, Crook D, Fitzgerald JD, lInnocenzi PJ, Jay CN, Solomon MG (200 1)
Review: natural enemies and biocontrol of pests of strawberry in northem and central Europe. Bio-
control Sci Technol 11: 165-216
Delalibera l Jr, De Moraes Gl, Lapointe ST, Da Silva CAD, Tamai MA (2000) Termporal variability and
progression of Neozygites sp. (Zygomycetes: Entomophthorales) in populations of Mononycheltus
tanajoa (Bondar) (Acari: Tetranychidae). Ann Soc Entomol Brasil 29:523-535
Delalibera l Jr, Demetrio CGB, Manly BFl, Hajek AE (2006) Effect of relative humidity and of isolates of
mite, Mononychellus tanajoae (Acari: Tetranychidae), cadavers. Biol Control 39:489-496
Devine Gl, Barber M, Denholm l (200l) lncidence and inheritance of resistance to METl-acaricides in
European strains of the two-spotted spider mite (Tetranychus urticae) (Acari: Tetranychidae). Pest
Manage Sci 57:443-448
Dick GL, Buschman LL (1995) Seasonal occurrence of a fungal pathogen, Neozygites adjarica (Entom-
ophthorales: Neozygitaceae), infecting banks grass mites, Otigonychus pratensis and twospotted spider
mites, Tetranychus urticae (Acari: Tetranychidae), in field corn. J Kans Entomol Soc 64:425-436
Easterbrook MA, Fitzgerald JD, Solormon MG (200l) Biological control of strawberry tarsonemid mite
Phytonemus pattidus and two-spotted spider mite Tetranychus urticae on strawberry in the UK using
species of Neoseiutus (Amblyseius) (Acari: Phytoseidae). Exp Appl Acarol 25:25-36
Elliot SL (1998) Ecology and epizootiology of Neozygites floridana, a pathogen of the cassava green mite.
Imperial College at Silwood Park, Berkshire, United Kingdom. (Ph.D. Thesis)
Eliot SL, Mumford JD, de Moraes GJ (2002) The role of resting spores in the survival of the mite-
pathogenic fungus Neozygites floridana from Mononychelus tanajoa during dry periods in Brazil.
J lnvertebr Pathol 81: 148-157
Garcia-Mari F, Gonzalez-Zamora JE (1999) Biological control of Tetranychus urticae (Acari: Tetrany
chidae) with naturally occurring predators in strawberry plantings in Valencia, Spain.Exp Appl Acarol
23:487495
Greco NM, Pereyra PC, Guillade A (2005) Host-plant acceptance and performance of Tetranychus urticae
(Acari: Tetranychidae). J App] Entomol 130:32-36
ecology. Plenum Press, New York, pp 193-247
Hajek AE, Humber RA (1997) Formation and germination of Entomophaga maimaiga azygospores. Can J
Bot 75: 1739-1747
Helle W (1962) Genetics of resistance to organophosphorus compounds and its relation to diapause in
Academic Press, San Diego, pp 153-185
Buntin GD (eds) Handbook of sampling methods for arthropods in agriculture. CRC Press, London,
Pp 74-96
Keller S (1991) Arthropod-pathogenic entomophthorales of Switzerland.1ll. Erynia,Erynopsis, Neozygites,
Zoophthora and Tarichum. Sydowia 43:39-122
Tetranychus urticae (Acari:Tetranychidae)and its fungalnaturalenemy Neozygites foridana
(Zygomycetes:Entomophthorales).Biol Control 43:222-230
Klubertanz TH, Pedigo LP, Carlson RE (1991) lmpact of fungal epizootics on the biology and management
of the two spotted spider mite (Acari: Tetran ychidae) in soybean. Environ Entomol 20:73 1-735
Mietkiewski R, Balazy S, van der Geest LPS (1993) Observations on a mycosis of spider mites (Acari:
MINITAB (2006) Relase 14. State College, USA
Nemoto H, Aoki J (1975) Entomophthora floridana (Entomophthorales: Entomophthoraceae) attacking the
sugi spider mite, Otigonychus hondoensis (Acarina : Tetranychidae), in Japan. Appl Ent Zool 10:90-95
Nilsen C, Steenberg T (2004) Entomophthoralean fungi infecting the bird cherry-oat aphid, Rhopalosiphum
padi, feeding on its winter host bird cherry, Prunus padus. J lnvertebr Pathol 87:70-73
Nordengen 1, Klingen 1 (2006) Comparison of methods for estimating the prevalence of Neozygites floridana
in Tetranychus urticae populations infesting strawberries. J Invertebr Pathol 92: 1-6
pathogenicity of Neozygites floridana (Zygomycetes:Entomophthorales) to Mononychettus tanajoa
(Acari: Tetranychidae). J lnvertebr Pathol 70: 127-130
Raworth DA (1986) An economic threshold function for the twospotted spider mite, Tetranychus urticae
(Acari: Tetranychidae), on strawberries. Canadian Entomol 118:9-6
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
245
Sances FV, Wyman JA, Ting 1P (1979) Physiological responses to spider mite infestation on strawberies
Environ Entomol 8:711-714
Sances FV, Wyman JA, Ting 1P, Vansteenwyk RA, Oatman ER (1981) Spider mite interactions with
10:442448
Sances FV, Toscano NC, Oatman ER, Lapre LF, Johnson MW, Voth V (1982) Reductions in plant processes
secondary conidia, infection, and pathogenesis of Neozygites floridana, a pathogen of the twospotted
spider mite, Tetranychus urticae. J lnvertebr Pathol 47:325-332
Smitley DR,Kennedy GG, Brooks WM (1986b) Role of the entomogenous fungus, Neozygites foridana, in
population declines of the twospotted spider mite,Tetranychus urticae in field corn.Entomol Exp Appl
41:255-264
Steinkraus DC (20oo) Documentation of naturally-occurring pathogens and their impact in agroecosystems.
In: Lacey L, Kaya Field HK (eds) Manual of techniques in invertebrate pathology. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, The Netherlands, pp 303-320
Stenseth C (1965) Cold hardiness in the two-spoted spider mite (Tetranychus urticae Koch). Entomol Exp
Appl 8:33-38
Stenseth C (1976) Overvintring av veksthusspinnmidd (Tetranychus urticae)i jordbarfelt. Gartneryrket
66:374376 (ln Norwegian)
Thomsen L, Brescani J, Eilenberg J (2001) Formation and germination of resting spores from different
strains from the Entomophthora muscae complex produced in Musca domestica. Can 1 Bot 79:1076-
1082
van der Geest LPS, Elliot SL, Breeuwer JAJ, Beerling EAM (2000) Diseases of mites. Exp Appl Acarol
24:497-560
Tillotson DK,MargoliesDC(1990) Effect of cadaver age on production of infective stages of Entomophaga
grytti pathotype 2in infected Melanoptus differentiatis.J1nvertebrPathol55:202-206
Veerman A(1977a) Aspects of the induction of diapause in a laboratory strain of the mite Tetranychus
urticae. J lnsect Physiol 23:703-711
Veerman A (1977b) Photoperiodic termination of diapause in spider mites. Nature 266:526-527
Veerman A (1985) Diapause. In: Helle W, Sabelis MW (eds) Spider mites their biology, natural enemies and
control, vol 1A. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 279-316
Sprays of emulsifiable Beauveria bassiana formulation
are ovicidal towards Tetranychus urticae (Acari:
Tetranychidae) at various regimes of temperature
and humidity
Wei-Bing Shi · Ming-Guang Feng · Shu-Sheng Liu
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 14, 247-257.
DOl: 10.1007/s 10493-008-9172-8 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract Aerial conidia of Beauveria bassiana in an emulsifiable formulation germi-
nated by >95% after 24 h exposure to the regimes of 20, 25 and 30°℃ with 51%, 74% and
95% RH. Ovicidal activities of the formulation towards two-spotted spider mite, Tetrany-
chus urticae, were assayed at the concentrations of 0, 18, 160 and 693 conidia mm-2
sprayed eggs on the leaves were directly exposed to the different regimes for hatch after
24 h maintenance in covered Petri dishes. Generally, hatched proportions increased over
pst-spray days and decreased with the elevated fungal concentrations; no more eggs
hatched from day 9 or 10 onwards. Based on the counts of the hatched/non-hatched
eggs in the different regimes, the fnal egg mortalities were 15.0-40.4%, 48.9-66.6%
and 62.9-87.5% at the low, medium and high concentrations, respectively, but only
5.6-11.3% in blank controls. The RH effect on the fungal action was significant at 20 and
25°C but not at 30°C whereas the effect of temperature was significant at 51% and 74% RH
but not at 95% RH. Probit analysis of the egg mortalities versus the fungal sprays generated
median lethal concentrations (LCso) of 65-320 conidia mm²? at all the regimes, and of
only 65-78 conidia mm-2 at 25-30°C with 74-95% RH. The results highlight ovicidal
activities of the emulsifiable formulation against the mite species at the tested regimes and
its potential use in spider mite control.
Keywords Beauveria bassiana· Tetranychus urticae· Fungal formulation·Ovicidal
activity · Environmental effect · Spider mite control
W.-B. Shi - M.-G. Feng ()
Institute of Microbiology, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang Uni versity, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang 3 10058, China
e-mail: mgfeng @zju.edu.cn
M.-G. Feng · S.-S. Liu
Institute of Insect Science, College of A griculture and Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang 3 10029, China
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.), Diseases of Mites and Ticks. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2_20  247
248
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Introduction
The two-spotted spider mite, Tetranychus urticae Koch [including synonymous
T. cinnabarinus (Boisduval); Ros and Breeuwer 2007], infests a large variety of economic
plants worldwide (Hazan et al. 1974; Ho et al. 1997). Spider mite control in the past few
decades has relied upon a number of acaricides, such as organochlorides and organophos-
phates (Gerson and Cohen 1989). This reliance on chemicals has generally caused mite resis-
   e    sd  s   s nd  
2001). Some acaricides, such as dicofol, cyhexatin and fenbutatin oxide, have thus been pro-
hibited from mite control on vegetables, melons, fruits and tea in China, making it necessary
to search for altemative control measures. Fungal pathogens of mites are considered to be
potential for the purpose (Poinar 1998; Chandler et al. 2000; Van der Geest et al. 2000).
Entomopathogenic hyphomycetes, such as Beauveria bassiana (Balsamo) Vuellemin,
Metarhizium anisopliae (Metschnikoff) Sorokin and Paecilomyces fumosoroseus (Wize)
Brown & Smith, are well-known fungal biocontrol agents (Feng et al. 1994; Faria and
Wraight 2001; Roberts and Leger 2004) and have been formulated for wide application to
et al. 2004a, b; Pu et al. 2005). They are also potential mite pathogens despite rare preva-
lence in the field (Chandler et al. 2000). Recently, some fungal isolates derived from host
insects have proven to kill spider mite eggs under laboratory conditions and unforrmulated
2004), which can be reduced greatly by low application rates of pyridaben included in
fungal sprays (Shi et al. 2005). In other studies, the fungal insect pathogens are also found
capable of infecting active stages of spider mites (Alves et al. 2002; Wekesa et al. 2005,
2006; Maniania et al. 2008; Shi et al. 2008a) and ectoparasitic mites (Shaw et al. 2002;
Lekimme et al. 2006, 2008; Meikle et al. 2008).
Environmental temperature and relative humidity (RH) are known to affect conidial germi-
nation, colony growth, and host infection of the fungal pathogens (Feng et al. 1994; Roberts
infection of the fungal agents (Milner et al. 1997; Luz and Fargues 1999). Although common
fungal agents in unformulated form have proven to infect various stages of mite pests under
controlled conditions (Shi and Feng 2004; Lekimme et al. 2006; Wekesa et al. 2005, 2006),
the possible effects of selected formulations andvariable environments on their acaricidal
activities have not yet been understood. This has hindered a sound evaluation of their poten-
tial in mite control. In the present study, aerial conidia of the ovicidal B. bassiana isolate
found previously (Shi and Feng 2004) were formulated into an oil-based, emulsifable carrier
and then sprayed onto leaves where T. urticae eggs were laid in advance. Our goals were to
evaluate ovicidal activities of the formulation at gradient application rates and to determine
the efects of different temperature and humidity regimes on the hatch rates and mortalities of
the mite eggs. The data presented in this paper would help to value the potential of the fungal
forrmulation for incorporation into mite pest managerment systems.
Materials and methods
Preparation of aerial conidia and emulsifiable formulation
The ovicidal isolate, B. bassiana SG8702, was derived from a naturally mycosed aphid
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
249
Entomopathogenic Fungal Cultures, Ithaca, NY, USA). This isolate has been formulated
for control of greenhouse whiteflies (Feng et al. 2004a) and tea leafhoppers (Feng et al.
2004b; Pu et al. 2005). It was preserved as a mixture of dried conidia with sterile sands at
-72°C. To produce conidia in this study, the preserved conidia were used to inoculate the
plates of Sabouraud dextrose agar plus 1% yeast extract (SDAY) for 7 days incubation at
25°C. The resultant conidia were suspended in Sabouraud dextrose broth (SDB) and incu-
pax sea anmno pimb nunsn aui wdi oll ne buus Aq Desz ne saep z ioy pag
with steamed rice at the rate of 10% (v/w) and the mixture was then poured into 15-cm-
diameter Petri dishes (100 g per dish). After 7 days growth and conidiation at 25°C, the rice
cultures were dried overnight in a ventilation chamber at 33°C and then passed through an
electrically vibrating sieve (10 threads mm') for harvest of conidia, followed by vacuum
drying to ca. 5% water content at ambient temperature (Ye et al. 2006).
The dried conidial powder was uniformly suspended in a mixture of 95% (v/v) industrial
paraffin as oil carrier and 5% (v/v) fatty alcohol polyethylene glycol ether *AEO-3’ as
emulsifier (Xiaoshan Chemical Additives, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China). The emulsifiable
formulation was standardized to 1 x 10'" conidia ml-' and used immediately or stored at
6°Cin dark for bioassaysbelow.
Viability assays at different regimes
Aqueous dilution (1 x 10° conidia ml-') of the emulsifiable formulation was prepared and
100 μl aliquots were smeared evenly onto the 90-mm-diameter plates of SDAY supple-
mented with 0.1% chloramphenicol to prevent possible bacterial contamination. Not
movered with lids,the smeared SDAY plates were maintained in incubators at 20, 25 and
30 ± 1°C with 12:12 L:D, respectively. Each incubator included three Perspex chambers
(135 x 135 x 185 mm), in which 51%, 74% and 95% RH were achieved by pumping
continuously moisture-specific air from the last of three rubber-tube-connected jars into
each chamber (Feng et al. 1999). Aqueous solutions of 59.8%, 31.4% and 18.8% (v/v)
glycerin were separately half-filled into each set of the jars to generate the RHs at 20-30°℃
(Doberski 1981). The conidia smeared on the plates were thus exposed to nine treatments
Germinated and non-germinated conidia at each of the regimes were counted after 12
and 24 h incubation under microscope at 400x magnification (three counts of >100 conidia
per plate). Conidial viability at a given regime was determined as percentages of the germi
nated conidia (with visible germ tubes) in total.
Preparation of the mite eggs
The eggs of T. urticae were prepared using a detached leaf system described by Shi and
Feng (2004). A laboratory population of the mite species was maintained on fava bean
(Vicia faba L.) plants in a walk-in growth room at the regime of 23 ± 2°C and 12:12 L:D.
Twenty vigorous adult females arbitrarily taken from the population were transferred to a
 d   a s           
anl agar plate below the leaf. The females were allowed to lay eggs freely for 18 h and then
removed. A certain number of eggs (usually 30-40) were left on each leaf to receive treat-
ments as follows. The detached leaf system could support a mite colony for 15 days or so,
warranting normal hatch of the mite eggs with no need for leaf change during a bioassay.
250
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Ovicidal assays of B. bassiana at different regimes
Aqueous dilutions (1 × 10, 1 × 107 and 1 x 10° conidia ml-') of the emulsifable formu-
lation were sprayed onto the eggs on the leaves for inoculation using a non-touch leaf
method (Shi and Feng 2004). Briefly, each uncovered dish of the detached leaf bearing the
mite eggs was placed on the center of the bottom specimen dish (11 cm diameter) of an
Automatic Potter Spray Tower (Burkard Scientific, Uxbridge, Middx, UK) to receive a
2-ml spray of each conidial dilution from its top nozzle at the working pressure of
0.7 kg crm-" (the manufacturer's guide). Separate equal-volume sprays of the three aqueous
dilutions resulted in different concentrations of the conidia deposited onto the mite eggs and
of the conidia deposited onto a glass slip (20 x 20 mm; five 0.2165-mm? view felds per
slip), which was placed beside the dish under each spray. The same-volume spray of
100-fold aqueous dilution of the liquid carrier alone (i.e., the mixture of 95% paraffin and
5% emulsifier) was included as blank control of the three fungal sprays in each bioassay.
covered with lids and maintained overmight at 25°C and 12:12 L:D to favor conidial germi
nation. Subsequently, all the dishes with the sprayed leaves and mite eggs were uncovered
and arranged randomly into the regimes of 20-30°C and 51-95% RH (humidity chambers)
as described above with each regime including the three fungal concentrations as treat-
ments. Egg hatches were daily examined until no more eggs hatched for three consecutive
days at any of the regimes. All non-hatched eggs, together with the detached leaves, were
examined under a dissection microscope for verification of fungal infection. Final egg mor-
talities in different treatments were computed based on the last-day counts of the hatched
and non-hatched eggs. All the bioassays were repeated three times during a period of
75days.
Data analysis
The 12-and 24-h germination rates of the formulated conidia exposed to the temperature
and RH regimes were analyzed using two-way ANOVA. Hatched proportions of the mite
and 51-95% RH were plotted over post-spray days. Variation in egg mortalities at a given
RH or temperature was differentiated among the fungal concentrations by two-way
ANOVA. The egg mortalities caused by the fungal sprays at each of the combined regimes
were corrected using background mortality in the corresponding blank control and then
subjected to probit analysis. A linear concentration- mortality relationship from each analy-
sis was used to estimate median lethal concentration (LCso) and associated 95% confidence
limits (CL) as an index for ovicidal activity of the fungal formulation at each regime. An
updated version of DPS software (Tang and Feng 2007) was used in all the analyses.
Results
Effects of temperature and RH on the viability of oil-formulated conidia
The viabilities of B. bassiana conidia formulated were significantly affected by temperature
9z = 9124 :4 z1) H4 49 10u 109 (100 > d 049 = 9124 :4 t2 :100> d 6141 = 912 :4 21)
    =   =   o= 
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
251
100-
C
95-
inati
30
%
20-
DC
10
545545545
5455455745
XXXXXXXX
KXXXX
XXx
20 2020 252525 30 30 30202020 25 25 25303033
Temperature xRH
Fig. 1 Comparison of the viabilities of the forrmulated Beauveria bassiana conidiaincubated for 12 (shad-
ing bars) and 24 h (white bars) on SDAY plates at the regimes of 20, 25 and 30°℃ with 51%, 74% and 95%
RH, respectively. Bars with different letters differed significantly in height (Tukey's HSD, P <0.05). Error
bars: SD
variables also had significant effect on the viabilities (12 h: F4,16 = 3.3, P =0.04; 24 h:
F4,16 = 21.7, P <0.01). Germination ranged from 5.1% at the regime of 20°C and 51% RH
to 22.4% at 25°C and 95% RH after 12 h incubation but reached 95.6-98.3% in all the
regimes by 24 h (Fig. 1). Thus, the oil-formulated conidia had high viabilities despite some
variation perhaps due to the temperature and RH interaction.
After12 h incubation, the overall mean germination rates (± SD) at 51-95% RH were
significantly higher at 25°C (18.1 ± 3.6%) than at 20 (8.3 ± 3.5%) or 30°C (6.4 ± 1.5%)
(Tukey's HSD, P <0.05). By the end of 24 h incubation, however, mean germination rates
in the three RH treatments were very close among the temperatures, ie., 98.0 ± 0.5% at
20°℃, 98.3 ± 0.2% at 25°C, and 96.4 ± 0.7% at 30°C. Moreover, overall mean germina-
tion rates at 95% RH (12 h: 10.9 ± 4.3%; 24 h: 97.7 ± 1.0%) did not differ significantly
from those at 51% RH (12 h: 11.8 ± 8.1%; 24 h: 97.3 ± 1.4%) or at 74% RH (12 h:
10.2 ± 5.7%; 24 h: 97.7 ± 0.6%) when the three-termperature observations were pooled
(Tukey's HSD, P > 0.05).
Hatch trends of sprayed mite eggs at different regimes
Sprays of the three conidial dilutions generated mean concentrations of 17.9 (±3.0), 160.4
(±17.1) and 693.1 (±183.6) conidia mm-2 deposited on the leaves with 39 (25-76) eggs
per capita in the repeated bioassays. Thus, a total number of 4,218 mite eggs sprayed at
0-693 conidia mm-2 were exposed to the regimes of 20, 25 and 30°℃ with 51%, 74% and
95%RH
The trends of hatched proportions of the mite eggs at all the regimes are illustrated over
     s        
were dependent on both fungal concentrations and post-spray days. Most of the mite eggs
in blank controls or sprayed at the low fungal concentration hatched within 7-9 days but no
egg hatch was observed in the first 2 days. Differences in hatch rates were small among the
        t r    
were observed hatching from day 9 or 10 onwards. As a result, different numbers of the
mite eggs were not hatched in the fungal treatments irrespective of the regimes.
252
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
[a)
20Cx95%R
[e)
25℃xB5%R
h
11
Q.
.
Days after fungal spray
Fig. 2 The trends of the hatched proportions of Tetranychus urticae eggs at the regimes of 20, 25 and 30°℃
with 51%, 74% and 95% RH over days afterbeing sprayed with the emulsifiable Beauveria bassiana formu-
lation at the concentrations of 0-693 conidia mm -²(0 = blank control). Error bars: SD
Variations in the final mortalities of the mite eggs at the different fungal concentrations
were differentiated by two-way ANOVA (Table 1). The fungal concentration was consis-
tently most infuential on the egg mortalities (maximal F with minimal P) at a given tem-
perature or RH. This indicates that the egg mortalities were attributed to infection by
B. bassiana. The RH effects on the mortalities were significant only at 20 and 25°C
(P <0.01) but insignificant at 30°C (P =0.79). The RH and concentration interaction was
not significant at a given temperature (P >0.05). The effect of temperature on the mortali-
ties was significant only at 51% or 74% RH (P <0.01) but not at 95% RH (P =0.23). How-
ever, a significant effect was found in the interaction of temperature with the fungal
concentration at 95% RH (P < 0.01).
The egg mortalities caused by the fungal formulation fell in the range of 62.5-87.9% at
the high concentration and of 48.9-66.6% at the medium, varying with the temperature/RH
regimes (Fig. 3). These were significantly higher than the background mortalities of
5.6-11.3% in the blank controls (Tukey's HSD, P <0.05). The low fungal concentration
resulted in the mortalities of 15.0-40.4% but only those at the regimes of 25°C or 74-95%
RH were significantly higher than the mortalities in the controls.
LCsos as indices of ovicidal activities at different regimes
The linear concentration-mortality relationships determined by probit analysis generated
the LCso values and associated 95% CL for the tested formulation against the mite eggs at
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
253
Table 1Variation in the mortalities of Tetranychus urticae eggs atributed to the sprays of Beauveria ba.ss-
siana formulation (0-693 conidia mm-2) at different temperature and RH regimes
Source of variation
Given temperature
Source of variation
Given RH
F
P
P
20°℃
51% RH
Replicate
2,22
0.5
0.60
Replicate
2,22
0.6
0.56
RH
2,22
11.9
<0.01
Termperature
2,22
10.3
<0.01
Funga] spray
3, 22
245.2
<0.01
Fungal spray
3,22
229.0
<0.01
RH× spray
6,22
2.3
0.07
Temp × spray
6,22
1.8
0.15
25°℃
74%RH
Replicate
2,22
1.0
0.39
Replicate
2,22
0.5
0.60
RH
2,22
7.6
<0.01
2,22
7.1
<0.01
Fungal spray
3, 22
335.3
<0.01
Fungal spray
3,22
166.3
<0.01
RH × spray
6,22
1.6
0.21
Temp× spray
6,22
3.3
0.02
DoOc
95%RH
Replicate
2,22
0.1
0.87
Replicate
2,22
1.2
0.33
RH
2,22
0.2
0.79
Temperature
2,22
1.6
0.23
Fungal spray
3,22
161.1
<0.01
Fungal spray
3,22
335.4
<0.01
RH × spray
6,22
2.3
0.08
Temp× spray
6,22
4.3
<0.01
100
100
(a)2℃
(b) 25"℃
(c) arc
 51% RH
W4 74% RH
S5% RH
2
(d) 51%RH
+
5%RH
R 20C
AIV25°C
R 30°C
Conidialconcentration
Fig. 3 Comparison of the final mortalities of Tetranychus urticae eggs at the different concentrations of
Beauveria bassiana formulation (no. conidia mm-²; 0 = blank control) at the regimes of 20, 25 and 30°C with
51%, 74% and 95% RH, respectively. Bars with different lowercase letters in each graph differed significantly
in height (Tukey's HSD,P<0.05).Error bars: SD
all the regimes (Table 2). The fungal formulation was highly ovicidal with the LCso declin-
ing with increased RH at a given temperature. The maximal LCso at the regime of 20°C and
51% RH was 320 conidia mm-2. Those at the regimes of 25-30°C with 74-95% RH were
only 65-78 conidia mm-2.
Discussion
In summary, the formulated B. bassiana conidia were highly viable at the regimes of
20-30°C with 51-95% RH. The hatched proportions of T. urticae eggs after exposure to
254
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Table 2 The LCso estimates and associated 95% confidence limits (CL) for the ovicidal achiviies of ermulsi-
fiable Beauveria bassiana formulation against Tetranychus urticae at different temperature and RH regimes,
based on probit anal ysis
Temp (°C)
RH (%)
Intercept
Slope ± SE
x²
P*
LCso with 95% CL
(no.conidia mm-²)
20
51
2.35
1.06 ± 0.17
2.40
0.12
319.9 (209.5-593.1)
20
2.02
1.26 ± 0.17
2.12
0.15
233.0 (167.9-354.4)
20
95
2.36
1.29 ± 0.15
0.22
0.64
111.0 (80.5-150.9)
25
51
2.99
0.94 ± 0.12
0.10
0.75
135.7 (94.1-197.3)
25
74
3.74
0.68 ± 0.12
0.00
0.99
70.7 (35.6-118.4)
25
95
3.61
0.76 ± 0.11
0.12
0.73
66.1 (37.5-103.4)
30
51
2.47
1.18 ± 0.14
0.29
0.59
136.0 (96.5-193.4)
30
74
3.81
0.63 ± 0.12
66'0
0.32
78.7 (39.6-135.5)
30
95
3.71
0.71 ± 0.11
0.59
0.44
65.4 (36.4103.2)
* Homogeneity for the fit was accepted if P > 0.05 for the x test (df = 2)
fungal sprays of 18-693 conidia mm-2 were generally lower than those in blank controls
a a sn s   s a S a a  as
higher than those in blank controls irrespective of the temperature/RH regimes. The RH
effect on the fungal action was significant at 20 and 25°C but not at 30°C whereas the effect
of termperature was significant at 51% and 74% RH but not at 95% RH. The ovicidal LCso s
of the formulation spanned from 65 to 320 conidia mm-2 at all the regimes but fell in a
very narrow range of 65-78 conidia mm-2 at 25-30°C with 74-95% RH. The results indi-
cate a conspicuous ovicidal activity of the fungal formulation towards the spider mite spe-
cies at the concerned regimes.
  si    s  e   e    
uisite for their germination and infection. Gerrmination in vitro is related to expression of
fungal virulence (Jackson et al. 1989; Altre et al. 1999). Since conidial germination is
2004) and spider mite eggs are usually laid on the surfaces of leaves or shoots with some
moisture (e.g-, metabolic water, dew), the formulated conidia in this study were allowed to
germinate for 24 h on uncovered SDAY plates entirely exposed to the regimes of 51-95%
RH and 20-30°C. These are normal conditions for heavy infestation of spider mite pests in
the field. The observed high viabilities help to interpret the high egg mortalities caused by
B. bassiana at the same regimes. This indicates that the emulsifiable formulation would be
able to act on spider mites under feld conditions. Other reports have also shown substantial
infections of B. bassiana and/or M. anisopliae to southerm pine beetle adults at 55-94% RH
(Moore 1973), elm bark beetle larvae at 51-100% RH (Doberski 1981), grasshoppers at
12-100% RH (Marcandier and Khachatourians 1987), and the Chagas' disease vector
Rhodnius prolixus Stal at 43-97% RH (Fargues and Luz 2000), despite higher mortalities
associated with higher RH.
The LCso of the tested B. bassiana formulation against T. urticae eggs ranged from 65
conidia mm^ at 30°C and 95% RH to 320 at 20°C and 51% RH. We think that the emulsifi-
able formulation has greatly enhanced ovicidal activities of the fungal agent in comparison
with an LCso of 548 (393-857) or 546 (406-818) conidia mm-2 (plain conidia suspended in
0.02% Tween-80) toward the eggs of the same mite species at 25°℃ under moist conditions
(Shi and Feng 2004; Shi et al. 2005). This supports previous reports on oil-increased efficacy
of M. anisopliae against whiteflies (Malsam et al. 2002) and of B. bassiana against aphids
(Ye et al. 2005), and on improved adaptation of oil formulations to low-humidity environ-
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
255
ments for insect control (Bateman et al. 1993; Kooyman and Godonou 1997). Although
possible mechanisms involved in the enhancement of fungal activities by the oil-based forrmu-
lation are not clear at present, we postulate that the enhancement may result from better
attachment of the formulated conidia to target pests and from improved protection of the
conidia from desiccation after spray. This warrants more studies.
The ovicidal activities of the emulsifiable formulation tested at different temperature/RH
regimes highlight its potential for practical incorporation into mite pest management due to
the rate of ca. 1.5 x 10'3 conidia ha-' has provided significant control of citrus red mites,
Panonychus citri (McGregor), in the orchards of east China (Shi and Feng 2006) and of
cotton spider mites,mainly Tetranychus fruncates Ehara and T. furkestani (Ugarov &
Nikolski), in the Tarim Basin of northwest China (Shi et al. 2008b). However, spider mites
in southern China and other subtropical areas often infest crops heavily during hot summer,
which is a challenge for the tolerance of the fungal formulation to outdoor thermal stress
often around 40°C. If fungal candidates with greater thermotolerance and other improved
traits (Ying and Feng 2004; Zou et al. 2006) are formulated into the oil-based carrier, appli-
cation of fungal forrmulations to more stressed seasons or environments for spider mite
control would be more promising. This also warrants future studies.
Acknowledgements Funding of this study was provided jointly by the grants from the Natural Science
Foundation of China (30571250), the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2006BAD08 A02 and
2007 DFA3100), and the Zhejiang Provincial R&D Program (2007C12035)
References
Altre JA, Vandenberg JD, Cantone FA (1999) Pathogenicity of Paecilomyces fumosoroseus isolates to dia-
mondback moth,Plutetla xylostetta: correlation with spore size, germinaion speed, and attachment to
cuhicle. 1 1nvertebr Pathol 73:332-338. doi: 10.1006/jipa.1999.4844
Alves SB, Rossi LS, Lopes RB, Tamai MA,Pereira RM (2002) Beauveria bassiana yeast phase on agar
medium and its pathogenicity against Diatraea saccharatis (Lepidoptera: Crambidae) and Tetranychus
urticae(Acari: Tetranychidae).J1nvertebr Pathol 81:70-77. doi:10.1016/S0022-2011(02)00147-7
Bateman RP, Carey M, Moore D, Prior C (1993) The enhanced infectivity of Metarhizium favoviride in oil
formulations to desert locusts at low humidities. Ann Appl Biol 122:145-152. doi:10.1111/j.1744.
7348.1993.tb04022.x
contro] Sci Technol 10:357-384. doi:10.1080/09583150050114972
Dagli F, Tunc l (200l) Dicofol resistance in Tetranychus cinnabarinus: resistance and stability of resistance
in populations from Antalya, Turkey. Pest Manag Sci 57:609-614. doi: 10.1002/ps.334
Doberski JW (1981) Cormparative laboratory studies on three fungal pathogens of the elm bark beetle, Scolytus
scotytus: effect of temperature and humidity on infection by Beauveria bassiana, Metarhizium anisoptiae
and Paecilomyces farinosus. J lnvertebr Pathol 37: 195-200. doi: 10.1016/0022-2011(8 1)90075-6
Faria M,Wraight SP (2001) Biological control of Bemisia tabaci with fungi. Crop Prot 20:767-778.
doi: 10.1016/S0261-2194(01)001 10-7
Beauveria bassiana for Rhodnius protixus. 1 lnvertebr Pathol 75:202-211. doi:10.1006/jipa.1999.4923
Feng MG, Johnson JB,Kish LP (1990) Survey of entomopathogenic fungi naturally infecting cereal aphids
(Homoptera: Aphididae) of irrigated grain crops in southwestem ldaho. Environ Entomol 19:15341542
Feng MG, Popra wski Tl, Khachatourians GG (1994) Production, formulation and application of the entomo-
pathogenic fungus Beauveria bassiana for insect control: current status. Biocontrol Sci Technol 4:3-34
Feng MG, Xu Q, Xu JH (1999) Humidity control in biological experiments: modified device and methodo]-
ogy. Chin J Appl Ecol 10:357-361 in Chinese
Feng MG, Chen B, Ying SH (2004a) Trials of Beauveria bassiana, Paecilomyces fumosoroseus and imida-
cloprid for management of Triateurodes vaporariorum (Homoptera: Aleyrodidae) on greenhouse grown
lettuce. Biocon trol Sci Technol 14:531-544. doi:10.1080/09583 150410001682269
256
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
                
Empoasca vitis in southern China. Crop Prot 23:489-496. doi:10.1016/j.cropro.2003. 10.004
throids. Exp Appl Acarol 6:29-46. doi: 10.1007/BF0119323 1
dae) in China: a review. Syst Appl Acarol 3:3-7
Hazan A, Gerson U, Tahori AS (1974)Spider mite webbing 1 The production of webbing under various envi-
ronmental conditions. Acarologia 16:68-84
Ho CC, Lo CC, Chen WH (1997) Spider mite (Acari: Tetranychidae) on various crops in Taiwan. J Agric Res
China 46:333-346
Jackson CW, Heale JB, Llewellyn M (1989) Characteristics relating to the pathogenicity of Metarhizium ani-
sopliae toward Nitaparvata lugens.J lnvertebr Pathol 53:25-31. doi:10.1016/0022-2011(89)90070-0
Kooyman C, Godonou 1(1997) Infection of Schistocerca gregaria (Orthoptera: Acrididae) hoppers by Meta-
rhizium favoviride (Deuteromycotina: Hyphormycetes) conidia in an oil formulation applied under des-
ert condihions. Bull Entomol Res 87:105-107
of desert locust (Schistocerca gregaria Forskal) hoppers in Mauritania using an oil formulaion of the
entomopathogenic fungus Metarhizium favoviride. Biocontro] Sci Technol 7:603-611. doi: 10.1080/
09583159730659
Lekirmme M, Mignon B, Tombeux S, Focant C, Marechal F, Losson B (2006) In vitro entomopathogenic
achivity of Beauveria bassiana against Psoroptes spp. (Acari: Psoroptidae). Vet Parasitol 139: 196-202.
doi: 10. 1016/j. vetpar.2006.02.041
Lekimme M,Focant C,Famir F,Mignon B,Losson B (2008)Pathogenicity and thermotolerance of entomo-
Luz C, Fargues J (1999) Dependence of the entomopathogenic fungus, Beauveria bassiana, on high humidity
for infection of Rhodnius prolixus.Mycopathology 146:33-41. doi:10.1023/A:1007019402490
Malsam O, Kilian M, Oerke EC, Dehne HW (2002) Oils for increased eficacy of Metarhizium anisoptiae to
control whiteflies.Biocontrol Sci Technol 12:337-348.doi:10.1080/09583150220128121
Maniania NK, Bugerme DM, Wekesa VW, Delalibera 1 Jr, Knapp M (2008) Role of entomopathogenic fungi
in the control of Tetranychus evansi and Tetranychus urticae (Acari: Tetranychidae) pests of horticul-
tural crops. Exp Appl Acarol 45(this issue)
Marcandier S, Khachatourians GG (1987) Suscepibility of the migratory grasshopper, Metanoptus sanguin-
ipes (Fab.) (Orthoptera: Acrididae), to Beauveria bassiana (Bals.) Vuillemin (Hyphomycete): influence
of relative humidity.Can Entomol 119:901-907
Meik]e WG, Mercadier G, Holst N, Girod V (2008) lmpact of two treatments of a formulation of Beauveria
bassiana (Deuteromycota: Hyphomycetes) conidia on Varroa mites (Acari:Varroidae) and on honey-
bee (Hymenoptera: Apidae) colony health. Exp Appl Acaro] 45(this issue)
the hyphomycete, Metarhizium anisopliae. 1 lnvertebr Pathol 69:64-69. doi: 10.1006/jipa. 1996.4636
tures and humidities. Environ Entomol 2:5457
Poinar G0 Jr (1998) Parasites and pathogens of mites. Annu Rev Entomol 43:449-469. doi: 10.1146/annu-
tev.ento.43.1.449
Pu XY, Feng MG, Shi CH (2005) lmpact of three application methods on the field eficacy of a Beauveria
bassiana-based mycoinsecticide against the false-eye leafhopper, Empoasca vitis (Homoptera: Cicade]-
lidae) in tea canopy. Crop Prot 24: 167-175. doi: 10.1016/j.cropro.2004.07.006
aspects. Adv Appl Microbiol 54:1-70. doi:10.1016/S0065-2164(04)54001-7
Ros V1D, Breeuwer JAJ (2007) Spider mite (Acari: Tetranychidae) mitochondrial COl phylogeny reviewed:
host plant relationships, phylogeography, reproductive parasites and barcoding. Exp Appl Acaro]
42:239-262. doi: 10.1007/s10493-007-9092-z
Shaw KE, Davidson G, Clark SJ, Ball BV, Pell JK, Chandler D et al (2002) Laboratory bioassays to assess
of the honeybee, Apis mellifera. Biol Control 24:266-276. doi: 10.1016/S1049-9644(02)00029-4
Shi WB, Feng MG (2004) Lethal effect of Beauveria bassiana, Metarhizium anisoptiae, and Paecitomyces
mite egg bioassay system. Biol Control 30:165-173. doi: 10.1016/j.biocontrol.2004.01.017
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
257
                
daben for sustainable control of citrus red mite Panonychus citri (Acari: Tetranychidae) in orchards.
Biol Control 39:210-217. doi: 10.1016/j.bi0control.2006.06.016
of fungal infection to Tetranychus cinnabarinus (Acari: Tetranychidae) eggs by sublethal application
rates of pyridaben. Appl Entomol Zool (Jpn)40:659-666. doi:10.1303/aez.2005.659
Shi WB, Zhang L, Feng MG (2008a) Time-concentration-mortality responses of carmine spider mite (Acari:
Tetranychidae)females tobiocontrol agents of three hypocrealean fungi in a standardized bioassay sys-
tem.Biol Control 46.doi:10.1016/j.biocontrol.2008.04.006
Shi WB, Zhang LL, Feng MG (2008b) Field tmials of four formulations of Beauveria bassiana and Metarhiz-
ium anisoptiae for control of cotton spider mites (Acari: Tetranychidae) in the Tarim Basin of China.
Biol Control 45:48-55. doi: 10.1016/j.biocontrol.2007.11.006
Tang QY, Feng MG (2007) DPS data processing system: experimental design, statistical analysis and data
mining. Science Press, Beijing
Van der Geest LPS, Elliot SL, Breeuwer JAJ, Beerling EAM (2000) Diseases of mites. Exp Appl Acaro]
24:497-560. d0i: 10.1023/A: 1026518418 163
Wekesa VW, Maniania NK, Knapp M, Boga Hl (2005) Pathogenicity of Beauveria bassiana and Metarhizi-
um anisopliae to the tobacco spider mite Tetranychus evansi.Exp Appl Acarol 36:41-50.doi:10.1007/
s10493-005-0508-3
Wekesa VW, Knapp M, Maniania NK, Boga Hl (2006) Efects of Beauveria bassiana and Metarhizium ani-
doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0418.2006.01043.x
Wraight SP,Ramos ME (2002) Application parameters affecting field effcacy of Beauveria bassiana foliar
treatments against Colorado potato beele Leptinotarsa decemtineata. Biol Control 23:164-178.
doi:10.1006/bcon.2001.1004
Wraight SP, Carruthers Rl, Jaronski ST, Bradley CA, Garza Cl, Galaini-Wraight S (2000) Evaluation of the
entomopathogenic fungi Beauveria bassiana and Paecitomyces fumosoroseus for microbial control of
the silverleaf whitefly,Bemisia argentifoli.Bio] Contro] 17:203-217.doi:10.1006/bcon.1999.0799
Ye SD, Dun YH, Feng MG (2005) Time and concentration dependent interactions of Beauveria bassiana with
sublethal rates of imidacloprid against the aphid pests Macrosiphonietla sanbormi and Myzus persicae.
Ye SD, Ying SH, Chen C, Feng MG (2006) New solid-state fermentation chamber for bulk production of aerial
conidia of fungal biocontrol agents on rice. Biotechnol Lett 28:799-804. doi: 10. 1007/s10529-006-9004-z
Ying SH, Feng MG (2004) Relationship between thermotolerance and hydrophobin-like proteins in aerial
Microbiol 97:323-33 1. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2004.0231 1.x
  a  e   s  ()  g      
azole resistance and therrmotolerance of fungal biocontrol agent Beauveria bassiana. Environ Microbio]
8:2096-2105. d0i: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2006.01086.x
Role of entomopathogenic fungi in the control
of Tetranychus evansi and Tetranychus urticae
(Acari: Tetranychidae), pests of horticultural crops
Nguya K. Maniania · David M. Bugeme -
Vitalis W. Wekesa · Italo Delalibera Jr. :
MarkusKnapp
DOl: 10.1007/s 10493-008-9180-8 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract The spider mites Tetranychus urticae Koch and Tetranychus evansi Baker and
spider mite populations belong to the order Entomophthorales and include Neozygites spp.
Studies are being carried out to develop some of these fungi as mycoacaricides, as stand-
rently in use or as a component of integrated mite management. Although emphasis has
been put on inundative releases, entomopathogenic fungi can also be used in classical,
conservation and augmentative biological control. Perrmanent establishment of an exotic
agent in a new area of introduction may be possible in the case of spider mites. Conserva-
tion biological control can be achieved by identifying strategies to promote any natural
enermies already present within crop ecosystems, based on a thorough understanding of
their biology, ecology and behaviour. Further research should focus on development of
efficient mass production systems, formulation, and delivery systems of fungal pathogens.
Keywords Tetranychidae·Spider mites · Tetranychus evansi · Tetranychus urticae
Introduction
The two-spotted spider mite, Tetranychus urticae Koch, and the tomato red spider mite,
Tetranychus evansi Baker and Pritchard, are among the most important pests of horticultural
crops, such as tomato, cut fowers, French beans, eggplants and cucumber. Whereas
q sdao [n go shi apim e jo nsad apimom e se uo uaq su ann 
N. K. Maniania () · D. M. Bugeme · M. Knapp
lnternational Centre of lnsect Physiology and Ecology (1ClPE), PO Box 30772, Nairobi, Kenya
e-mail: nmaniania@icipe.org
V. W. Wekesa - 1. Delalibera Jr.
Department of Entomology, Plant Pathology and Agricultural Zoology, University of Sao Paulo,
ESALQ Campus, Av. Padua Dias 11 CP 9, Piracicaba, SP 13418-900, Brazil
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.), Diseases ofMites and Ticks. DO1: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2_21259
260
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
outdoors and in the greenhouses, the importance of T. evansi has dramatically increased
during the last decade. Tetranychus evansi is probably of South American origin (Gutierrez
and Etienne 1986) and invaded Africa in the late 1970s (Blair 1983; Meyer 1987; Knapp
et al. 2003), Europe in the mid 1990s (Ferragut and Escudero 1999; Migeon 2005) and parts
of Southeast Asia in 2004 (Ho et al. 2004). It is a major pest of tomatoes in eastern and
southern Africa (Knapp et al. 2003; Saunyama and Knapp 2003). Ifleft uncontrolled under
1969), and the farmer can lose his production within a week's time. The economic impor-
tance of T. urticae and its control were extensively reviewed by Helle and Sabelis (1985a,
b). Biological control of T. urticae with phytoseiid predatory mites has been successful
mainly in protected environments but also in open fields in many parts of the world (e.g-,
Gerson et al. 2003; Zhang 2003). Farmers in Africa largely rely on expensive synthetic pes-
et al. 2000; Saunyama and Knapp 2003). Although no effective biological control strategy
has yet been developed, a Brazilian strain of the predatory mite Phytoseiuius longipes Evans
and the pathogenic fungus Neozygites foridana Weiser and Muma have recently shown
promising results in laboratory experiments (Furtado et al. 2007; Wekesa et al. 2007).
 Detailed information on the distribution of both mite species, including maps and many rel-
evant references, are in Migeon and Dorkeld (2006). Alternatives to chemical control need
to be developed because spider mites can rapidly develop resistance to acaricides, and due
Research and development of biological control options for spider mites has largely
concentrated on the conservation of natural enemies and releases of predatory mites (Nyrop
et al. 1998; Gerson et al. 2003; Zhang 2003). However, this is often not sufficient and
supplementary sprays of acaricides are needed. Entormopathogenic fungi may play a major
control programme, either as a stand-alone solution in replacement of synthetic acaricides
that are currently in use, or as a component of integrated mite management. The diseases
caused by entomopathogenic fungi in mites and spider mites were reviewed by van der
 sa ()    )  e   q ( 
ties of exploiting fungal pathogens for biological control of Acari, including mites. In this
paper we review the use of fungal pathogens in the inundative, conservation and classical
biological control of T. urticae and T. evansi.
Entomopathogenic fungi associated with Tetranychus evansi and Tetranychus urficae
Natural incidence
Entomopathogenic fungi can play an important role in the regulation of arthropod pest
populations. Many reports have been published on natural incidence of entomopathogenic
fungi on tetranychid mites, including T. evansi and T. urficae, and were reviewed by van
der Geest (1985); Chandler et al. (2000) and by van der Geest et al. (2000) (Table 1). The
fungi known to cause high infections in T. evansi and T. urticae populations belong to the
order Entomophthorales and include Neozygites spp., the mitosporic fungi Hirsutella thom-
psonii Fisher and members of the Lecanicillium (=Verticillium) lecanii complex.
Identification of mite pathogenic species of Neozygites is still unresolved. Four species
of Neozygites were described from spider mites: N. foridana, N. tetranychi, N. adjarica
and more recently N. tanajoae. Both N. tetranychi and N. adjarica are only known from a
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
261
Table 1 Entomopathogenic fungi reported naturally on Tetranychus evansi and Tetranychus urticae
Fungal species
Host
Reference
Zy gomycota
Basidiobotus sp.
T. uricae
egina (1976) (cited by van der Geest 1985)
Conidiobolus obscurus
T. uricae
egina and Cinowski (1970) (in van der Geest 1985),
Andreeva and Shtemshis (1995) (cited by Chandler et al. 20C
Entomophthora sp.
T. uricae
Kenneth et al. (1971) (cited by van der Geest 1985)
Neozygites foridana
T.urticae
Weiser and Muma (1966), Kenneth et al. 1972 (cited by
van der Geest 1985), Smitley et al. (1986), Keller (1991),
Mietkiewski et al. (1993), Shih and Shiue (1994), Dick
and Buschman (1995) (cited by Chandleret al. 2000),
Smith and Furr (1975) (cited by van der Geest et al. 2000)
T.evansi
Faboe（2007)
Neozygites sp. near foridana
T.uricae
Ramaseshiah (1971) (cited by van der Geest 1985)
Neozygites tetranychi
T.uricae
Weiser (1968) (cited by van der Geest 1985)
Neozygites sp.
T.uricae
Cincadze et al. (1976) (cited by van der Geest 1985), Camer
and Canerday (1968), Camer (1976), Brandenburg and
Kennedy (1981), Klubertanz et al. (1991) (cited by
Chandler et al. 2000)
T.evansi
Humber et al. (1981)
Ascomycota
Beauveria bassiana
T.uricae
Wright and Kennedy (1996) (cited by Chandleret al. 2000)
Lecanicitltium
T. urnicae
Gams (1971) (cited by van der Geest 1985), Gillespie et al.
(=Verticitiium) tecani
(1982), Andreeva and Shtemshis (1995) (cited by
Chandler et al. 2000), Chandler et al. (2005).
Metarhizium anisoptiae
T.urticae
D.M. Bugeme (unpubl. data)
single collection. A comparison of these four species indicates a considerable overlap of
taxonomic characteristics, such as spore sizes. Neozygites adjarica is considered a syno-
nym of N. foridana (Keller 1991; Balazy 1993). Neozygites tetranychi also might be N.
foridana (Balazy 1993). In the past, N. foridana was called Triplosporium foridana (Ken-
neth et al. 1972), Triptosporium sp. (Humber et al. 1981), and Entomophthora foridana
(Nemoto et al. 1975). More recently, authors have referred to the pathogens associated with
spider mites as N. foridana (Keller, 1997; Kennedy and Smitley 1988; Mietkiewski et al.
2000). In this paper, we will consider all Neozygites species pathogenic to T. urticae and
T. evansi as N. foridana, although we think that more studies are needed to clarify the
taxonomy of this species complex.
Susceptibility of Tetranychus urticae and Tetranychus evansi to fungal infections under
laboratory conditions
Fungi that are not associated with arthropod hosts in nature can be tested for their patho-
genic activity against different target species in the laboratory (Hall and Papierok 1982).
Experimental infections, induced under controlled conditions, allow testing of the patho-
genic activity of different fungal isolates with the aim of developing them as biological con-
trol agents or biopesticides. The fungal pathogens that have been tested against T. evansi
and T. urticae in the laboratory are listed in Table 2. The report in this section focuses on
recently published articles published after the reviews by Chandler et al. (2000) and van der
Geest et al. (2000).
Tamai et al. (2002a) screened 45 isolates of mitosporic fungi against T. urticae, includ-
ing 32 isolates of Beauveria bassiana (Balsamo) Vuillemin, 10 isolates of Metarhizium
262
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Table 2 Entomopathogenic fungi tested against Tetranychus evarsi and Tetranychus urticae in the laboratory
Fungal species
Host
Reference
Basidiobotus sp.
T. urticae
Jegina (1976) (cited by van der Geest 1985)
Beauveria bassiana
T.urticae
Tamai et al. (1999) (cited by lrigaray et al. 2003), Alves et al.
(2002), lrigaray et al. (2003), Bugeme et al. (unpubl. data)
T. evansi
Wekesa et al. (2005), Bugeme et al. (unpubl. data)
Hirsutetta thompsonii
T. urticae
Gerson et al. (1979), Gardner et al. (1982) (cited by Chandler
et al. 2000), Chandler et al. (2005)
Lecaniciltium tecani
T. urticae
Gillespie et al. (1982), Chandler et al. (2005)
L.muscarium
T.urticae
Mineiro et al. (2004)
Metarhiziumanisopliae
T.urticae
Chandler et al. (2005), Bugeme et al. (unpubl. data)
T. evansi
Wekesa et al. (2005), Bugeme et al. (unpubl. data)
Neozygites foridana
T. urticae
Smitley et al. (1986)
Meira geutakonigii
T. urticae
Paz et al. (2007)
Meira argovae
T. urticae
Paz et al. (2007)
Acaromyces ingoldii
T. urticae
Paz et al. (2007)
anisopliae (Metchnikoff), one each of Aschersonia aleyrodis Webber, Hirsutella sp. and
Isaria farinosa (= Paecilomyces farinosus) (Holmsk.) Fr. Among these isolates, eight
B. bassiana and four M. anisopliae isolates caused >80% and 90% mortality, respectively,
 at concentration of 5 × 10′ conidia ml-', 5 days postinfection. Applied at concentration of
1.7 × 107 conidia ml-', Hirsutella sp. caused 73% mite mortality. Aschersonia aleyrodis
and I. farinosa were not pathogenic to the two-spotted spider mite. The authors concluded
that M. anisopliae, B. bassiana and Hirsutella sp. were the most promising fungi to be
formulated as mycoacaricides for T. urticae control. The authors also noted that conidia,
blastospores and yeast-like cells of five isolates of B. bassiana were pathogenic against the
same mite. Lethal concentration to 50% mortality (LCso) values ranged from 4.95 to
82.1 x 10° cells ml-1.
Irigaray et al. (2003) evaluated the efficacy of Naturalis-L? (a B. bassiana-based corm-
mercial biopesticide) against the two-spotted spider mite and obtained lethal concentration
values (LCso) of 3184 viable conidia ml-l for the juvenile stages and 1949 viable
conidia ml- for the adults. Naturalis-L caused significant egg mortality compared to the
control, with no significant differences amongst egg age classes (24-, 48-, 72-, and 96-h-old
eggs) at the tested concentrations of 1,400-22,800 viable conidia ml-'. In another study,
Simova and Draganova (2003)evaluated the virulence of four isolates of B. bassiana, one
isolate each of M. anisopliae, I. farinosa and of L. lecanii, to T. urticae at conidial concen-
trations of 2 x 10 conidia ml-l. Six out of the seven isolates tested were virulent to
T. urticae and one isolate of B. bassiana outperformed the others with lethal time to 50%
mortality (LTso) values of between 1.3 and 1.4 days. Except for I. farinosa, which was less
virulent, the other isolates were equally virulent to T. urticae. Chandler et al. (2005) tested
40 isolates of anamorphic entomopathogenic fungi from six genera against T. urticae,
along with three commercial fungus-based products: Naturalis-L?, Mycar? (H. thompsoni)
and Mycotal (Lecanicillium (=Verticillium) muscarium). Three isolates, M. anisopliae,
Hirsutella spp. and L. muscarium, and the three commercial isolates, were pathogenic to
T.urticae.Koike et al.(2005) also demonstrated that four isolates of L. lecanii (Vertalec,
Mycotal, A-2, B-2) were pathogenic against T. urticae, but the levels of virulence differed
among the isolates. Alves et al. (2002) compared the virulence of yeast-like cells and
conidia of B. bassiana against T. urticae and found that their virulence was similar, causing
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
263
mortalities of 42.8-45.0% at a concentration of 107 cells ml-', and of 74.4-77.8% at
10²cells m]-1.
Recently, new taxa of fungi were described as Exobasidiomycetidae of the class Ustilag
inomycetes (Basidiomycota) (Boekhout et al. 2003), that include Meira geulakonigii gen
nov., sp. nov., Meira argovae sp. nov. and Acaromyces ingoidii gen. nov., sp. nov. Their
pathogenicity was evaluated in the laboratory against herbivorous mites including T. urticae
(Paz et al. 2007). With the exception to M. argovae which was not virulent, M. geuiakonigii
and A. ingoldii caused mortalities of 81.9-90.0% to T. urticae, 7 and 14 days post-applica-
tion, respectively. Some isolates of H. fhompsonli produce metabolites in broth cultures and
exudates over the surface of solid cultures (Cabrera and Lopez 1977; Samson et al. 1980).
These metabolites have been reported to be toxic to mites (Omoto and McCoy 1998)
Rosas-Acevedo et al. (2003)recently tested the effect of an exudate of H. thompsonii Mexi-
can strain HtM1201 on T. urticae egg production and obtained 100% reduction in mite
fecundity after topical application of the metabolite over the initial 6 days of the experiment.
They also observed that depending on the exudate dosage, mites partially recovered within
3 and 6 days post-treatment, but produced fewer eggs. Further studies are needed to identify
metabolites and quantify exudate concentration.
Wekesa et al.(2005)evaluated 17isolates of M.anisopliae and two isolates of B.bassiana
against T. evansi. All isolates were pathogenic to adult female mites, causing 22.1-82.6%
mortalities. Isolates causing more than 70% mortality were subjected to dose-response bio-
assays. The LCso values ranged between 0.7 x 10' and 2.5 x 10' conidia ml- and the
LTso values of the most active isolates of B. bassiana and M. anisopliae strains varied
between 4.6 and 5.8 days. Adults were more susceptible to B. bassiana and M. anisopliae
infections than immatures. Both isolates also caused egg mortality of >80% at a concentra-
tion of 1.0 x 10? conidia ml-'. When deutonymphs were treated with a sub-lethal concen-
tration of 1.0 x 10^ conidia ml-′ of either isolate, the adults that developed from these
deutonymphs laid significantly fewer eggs than untreated mites (Wekesa et al. 2006).
Field and glasshouse assessment of fungi for mite management
Relatively few field trials have been undertaken to evaluate entomopathogenic fungi
against T. urticae and, even to a lesser extent, T. evansi. Dresner (1949) treated 7. urticae
with a dust formulation of conidia containing 0.5% spores of B. bassiana in the field and
obtained 71% mortality. In a semi-field experiment using B. bassiana against T. urticae
infesting chrysanthermum (Dendranthema grandifiora) (Ramat), Alves et al. (1998)
obtained results that were better than the chemical pesticide used. Tamai et al. (2002a)
reported similar results with B. bassiana against T. urticae on chrysanthemum when the
fungus was applied at a concentration of 2 x 10? conidia ml-'. They also observed that
However, the reduction was lower in strawberry (Fragaria sp.) than in chrysanthemum,
with a mean density of 13 mites/leafet 21 days after application of 1 x 10° or
5 × 10?conidia ml-', compared to 43 mites/leaflet in control plots. The authors also
observed an effect of strawberry varieties on the pathogen performance, with the varieties
'Campinas’ and *Princesa Isabel’ having the lowest mite densities. Tamai et al. (2002a)
concluded that M. anisoptiae, B. bassiana and Hirsuteffa sp. were the promising fungi to be
formulated as mycoacaricides for T. urficae control.
Chandler et al. (2005) obtained reductions of T. urticae populations in a glasshouse
following spray applications of B. bassiana, H. thompsoni, M. anisopliae, L. lecanii and
Naturalis-L?. Naturalis-L reduced T. urticae nurmbers by up to 97%. In another glasshouse
264
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
experiment, single sprays of Naturalis-L resulted in 98% reductions of adults, nymphs and
eggs of T. urticae (Chandler et al. 2005). However, attempts to use an entomopathogenic
fungus to control T. urticae in greenhouses by Andreeva and Shtemshis (1995) (cited by
Irigaray et al. 2003) were unsuccessful.
Wekesa et al. (2005) treated potted tomato plants artificially infested with T. evansi with
oil and aqueous formulations of B. bassiana and M. anisopliae, and obtained reductions of
aod  th n  e s p  m   dd  a
ment. Conidia formulated in oil outperformed the ones formulated in water. For instance,
the number of mites/leaf on middle leaves was 24.2 and 5.3 in the aqueous formulations of
M. anisoptiae and B. bassiana, respectively, compared to 2.3 and 0.3 mites/leaf in oil
formulations of M. anisopliae and B. bassiana, respectively, 14 days post-treatment.
Research efforts intended to develop entomopathogenic fungi as mycoinsecticides in general,
and acaricides in particular, have markedly increased in recent years (Faria and Wraight
augmentative biological control, emphasis has been placed on their development as inunda-
tive augmentative control agents (Goettel and Hajek 2ou1).
Classical biological control
Classical biological control aims at the permanent establishment of an exotic agent in a new
area. Pathogens used for classical biological control are extremely host specific and have
great potential to persist in the environment and cause epizootics.While examples of the
use of parasitoids and predators in classical biological control abound in literature, there are
only few reported examples about entomopathogenic fungi (Hajek et al. 2007). Nineteen
species of entomopathogenic fungi have been used in 57 classical biological control pro-
grams, but only three mite species were targets for the classical approach. Hirsutella thom-
psoni Fisher var. synnematosa Samson, McCoy & O'Donnell was introduced from
(Ashmead) in 1985. At the same time, H. fhompsonii Fisher var. vinacea Samson, McCoy
& O'Donnell from North Carolina was also released in Argentina. Infection after release
was high but persistence is unknown and the project was discontinued (Hajek et al. 2005).
Neozygites fanajoae Delalibera, Hajek and Humber was introduced into Benin against
the cassava green mite, Mononychelius tanajoa Bondar, in 1998-2000 (Yaninek and Hanna
2003), where it is established (Hountondji et al. 2002b). Indeed, preliminary surveys
conducted in the semi-arid region of North-eastem Brazil have identified N. foridana as a
pathogen of T. evansi (Furtado et al. 2007). This pathogen has previously been reported
from T. evansi over 25 years ago (Humber et al. 1981) and plans are underway to import
this fungus to Africa as a possible agent for the classical biological control of T. evansi
(V. Wekesa and M. Knapp, unpublished).
Inundative augmentative biological control
Use of fungi as biopesticides is considered an attractive strategy in inundation biological
control, not only in the control of mites but also for the control of several agricultural pests.
because the effect on the targets with this strategy is relatively fast. From a cormmercial
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
265
point of view, this strategy is similar to a *chemical approach' where the fungal inoculum is
applied directly to the crop or the target pest and control is achieved exclusively by the
released propagules themselves (Eilenberg et al. 2o01). Entomopathogenic fungi in the
Ascomycota, order Hypocreales, are well suited for this inundative strategy based on their
relatively wide host range, ease of production, formulation and application (Wraight et al.
2001). A major disadvantage of using fungi in this strategy is the dependence of most
species on high relative humidity and success may only be guaranteed therefore where
optimum humidity conditions are met. However, the fact that dry and hot conditions
normally favour development of spider mites may compromise control efficiency, but this
could be overcome by high relative humidity during night, favouring fungal sporulation
and germination. Moreover, since epizootic development is density dependent and high
mite density is common on crops, this makes fungi good candidates for spider mite control.
Because of the high strain variability and wide host range of Hypocreales, most mem-
bers of this group have the potential to be developed as mycoinsecticides and mycoacari-
cides. However, they require many steps in their development as mycoinsecticides,
including isolation, identification, strain selection, mass production and formulation, field
trial, registration and commercialization (Zimmerman 1986). Strain selection is consid-
ered an essential starting point in their successful development (Soper and Ward 1981).
Consequently, many isolates of entomopathogenic fungi have been screened against
T. urticae and T. evansi and hold potential for their development as mycoacaricides (see
the mycoacaricides, of which 17 formulations were developed to control mites of the fam-
ily Tetranychidae.
Entormophthoralean fungi, on the other hand, possess very few characteristics that can
fit them into the inundation biological control paradigm. A strong positive attribute of this
group is their general high virulence, an attribute that makes them desirable for the inun-
dation strategy. However, the major drawback of this group is that their infective stages
are rather short-lived, making their development and use far more difficult. Another short-
coming is the difficulty associated with mass production. Recent attermpts suggest that
conditions (Shah et al. 2000). Production of high value crops, including several horticul-
tural crops, is increasingly been undertaken in greenhouses, and the use of entomophtho-
ralean fungi might become more attractive under these conditions, because environmental
conditions that normally favour the efficacy of these fungi can be easily manipulated. The
use of entomophthoralean fungi under greenhouse conditions has another advantage over
alternative control agents in that efficient horizontal transmission, which relies on avail-
ability of susceptible hosts, may be increased and repetitive application may be unneces-
sary. However, reliance on horizontal transmission implies that these fungi are dependent
on host population density for survival and dispersal, which means that their efficacy may
be compromised at low host densities (Fuxa 1987). Intrinsic differences in mite suscepti-
bility to N. tanajoae and N. foridana is associated with the mite life stages, size and
behaviour, as well as age (Elliot et al. 2002). Host death caused by these fungi normally
occurs at night, when relative humidity is high, favorable for sporulation (Hajek and St
Leger 1994). Sporulated conidia germinate to form infective capilliconidia (Fig. 1) that
infest arthropod hosts during the day, when their activities are accelerated following
increased daytime temperatures.
Another limitation in the use of fungal pathogens to control spider mites is the lack of
been made in the formulation of Hyphomycetes fungi, whose aerial spores can be produced
266
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
B
C
E
D
Fig. 1Schematic diagram of thelife cycle of Neozygites foridana infeshing the tomato spidermite, Tetranychus
evans: mummified mite (a), sporulated mummy (b), primary conidium (c), geminating primary conidium (d),
capilliconidium (e), and hyphal bodies (f). Courtesy of V.W. Wekesa
easily on common media, little progress has been made with the Entomophthorales whose
mermbers include major pathogens of spider mites. Formulation of fungal pathogens can
extend shelf life, facilitate handling and application, aid in persistence due to protection
from harmful environmental factors and enhance effcacy by increasing contact with the
target pests (Jones and Burges 1998). The use of oil formulations in ultra low volume
(ULV) spraying has recently helped to overcome many problems on the use of M. anisopliae
to control locusts in Africa (Bateman 1997). Application of M. anisopliae and B. bassiana
 in oil emulsion has been tested against T. evansi with very promising results (Wekesa et al.
2005).
The fragility of the hyphal bodies and protoplasts from members of the Entomophtho-
rales has made formulation difficult. Dried mycelia of Zoophthora radicans (Brefeld)
Batko were formulated with sugar coating as a method for their long-terrm storage (McCabe
has been demonstrated as a promising method for formulating conidia (Shah et al. 1998).
Sugar coating of dry mycelia and algination of the hyphal matrix was facilitated by the in
vitro culturing of the fungal species.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
267
Conservation biological control
Conservation biological control involves “modification of the environment or existing
practices to protect and enhance natural enemies ... to reduce the effect of pests" (Eilenberg
et al. 2001; Fuxa 1998). It does not rely on the addition of natural enemies but rather on
identifying strategies to promote those natural enemies already present within crop ecosys-
terms, based on a thorough understanding of their biology, ecology and behaviour (Gurr
et al. 1998; Landis and Menalled 1998). Despite the important role played by Entomoph-
thorales in the natural regulation of arthropod pests, little consideration has been given to
understanding their ecology and function in crop ecosystems (Pell 2007). Because of their
 m ny Ae pung uadoa 'snndod nsad ehen a u nssiad on A
these cropping systems. Research in the UK is evaluating the potential use of arable field
    s      a  n s
mies, including entomophthoralean fungi, for dispersal into field crop to suppress pest
the presence of a succession of different pest and non-pest insects feeding on non-crop
plants in the field boundaries that provide sufficient host densities for continuous infection
transmission and dispersal of inoculum into the crop. Future studies should consider these
practices and their infuence on the biological control of T. evansi and T. urticae.
Entomopathogenic fungi as a component of spider mite IPM
Although effective in the management of many arthropod pests, the use of entomopatho-
genic fungi will not supersede the use of synthetic pesticides in all commercial production
systems, but in many instances may be applied in conjunction with pesticides in integrated
pest management (IPM) programmes. Regardless of whether an entomopathogenic fungus
is to be classically introduced, conserved or augmented in an environment as part of an
IPM programme, it is crucial to know how it might be affected by the synthetic pesticides
commonly used in that environment, in order to determine whether the pesticide applica-
tion needs to be momentarily or spatially separated from the most susceptible life stages of
the fungal pathogen (Pell et al. 2001). It is therefore essential to be aware of the adverse
effects that chemical pesticides may have on the efficacy of fungal biological control
agents, or the adverse effects the entomopathogenic fungi can have on other natural
enemies, especially on predatory mites.
Since the interactions between diferent pests and disease control methods constitute a
key factor in IPM strategies, we shall concentrate in this section on the interactions
between entomopathogenic fungi and pesticides, and on the interactions between entomo-
pathogenic fungi and other natural enermies that are used in the same agro-ecosystems
while controlling T. urficae and T. evansi.
Interactions between entomopathogenic fungi and pesticides
Several studies showed negative or positive interactions between entomopathogenic fungi
and pesticides used in the same environment for controlling mite populations. While studying
the effects of four concentrations of the insecticide imidacloprid (50, 100, 200 and
500 ppm) on two spider mite pathogens, N. tanajoae and H. fhompsonii, Dara and Hountondji
and the formation of infective capilliconidia in N. tanajoae,thus significantly reducing its
268
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
infectivity on mites. In contrast, the same insecticide, at a concentration of 100 ppm and
above, increased conidial germination in H. fhompsonii. However, no synergism between
imidacloprid and H. fhompsonili was detected on the mortality of the cassava green mite.
Suppression and reduction of the infection level of N. foridana in T. urticae populations
by the fungicide benomyl (a benzimidazole) have been reported in bean and corn fields
(Brandenburg and Kennedy 1982, 1983). Other fungicides, such as chlorothalonil, manco-
zeb and maneb also reduced the infection level of N. foridana in T. urticae populations
e    e        
Smitley et al. 1986). Klingen and Westrum (2007) compared the effect of different pesti-
cides (fungicides,insecticides,acaricides and molluscicides) used in strawberry plantation
on N. foridana. Although their negative effects varied with fungicide, all fungicides tested
(tolylfluanid, fenhexamid, cyprodinil + Hudioxonil) were harmful to N. foridana and could
potentially reduce its survival and efficacy, while the acaricide/insecticide/molluscicide,
methiocarb, appeared to have a stimulating effect on the fungus.
Apart from N. foridana and H. thompsonii, the two major mite-pathogenic fungi, the
entomopathogenic B. bassiana, M. anisopliae and members of the L. lecanii complex are also
potential biological control agents of tetranychid mites. Tamai et al. (2002b) studied the toxic-
ity of 93 products (three stickers, 36 fungicides and 54 insecticides/acaricides), normally used
to control insects and diseases, to the fungus B. bassiana, and found much variability in the
toxicity of different classes of products. All stickers were very toxic to the fungus, whereas
 only three out of 36 fungicides (propamocarb hydrochloride, sulphur and kasugamycin) and
24 out of 54 insecticides/acaricides (including those with the following active ingredients:
abamectin, acephate, acetamiprid, betacyfluthrin, bifenthrin, ciromazine, deltamethrin, diafen-
thiuron, difubenzuron, dimethoate, fenpropathrin, fenpyroximate, fenvalerate, imidacloprid,
metamidophos, propargite, and tebufenozide etriclorfon) were compatible with B. bassiana.
Wenzel et al. (2004) evaluated the compatibility of the insecticides Provado (imidachloprid)
and Trigard700PM (cyromazine) to the entomopathogenic fungus L. lecani, in terms of veg-
etative growth, sporulation, conidial viability and pathogenicity against T. urticae. All the
insecticides tested were compatible with L. lecanii in all evaluated parameters and mite mor-
tality was above 68% in all treatments. Compatibility of B. bassiana with triflumuron was
investigated for the control of T. urticae by Irigaray et al. (2003). Combination of B. bassiana
decrease of T. urticae egg mortality. Triflumuron reduced mycelial growth but not conidial
germination of B. bassiana. They concluded that B. bassiana is a possible candidate to be
included in IPM programs of T. urticae with trifurmuron. Shi et al. (2005) investigated the
effects of 10 acaricides on B. bassiana in the laboratory. At field concentration rates, dicofol,
chlorpyrifos, abamectin, liuyangmycin, and azocyclotin significantly reduced the germination
rate of B. bassiana conidia, whereas pyridaben, propargite, hexythiazox, amitraz and matrine
had no effect. Combinations of B. bassiana with pyridaben, the acaricide with the least effect
on conidia gerrmination, significantly increased the mortality of Tetranychus cinnabarinus
(Boisduval) eggs compared to B. bassiana alone. According to Inglis et al. (2001), pesticides
that are inhibitory in the laboratory do not always exhibit the same action in field conditions.
This may be due to the concentration of the pesticide used in the field or to applying the pesti-
cide in a manner that minimizes contact with the fungus.
Interactions between entomopathogenic fungi and other natural enemies
Pathogens may contribute to the suppression of spider mite populations in combination with
other arthropod natural enemies. However, because natural enemies of spider mites have
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
269
evolved and function in a multitrophic context, it is important to assess interactions within
complexes of natural enemies if they are to be exploited effectively in pest management
   s    d      
synergistically/additively (e.g-, enhanced transmission and dispersal of spider mite patho-
and Stiling 1996; Roy and Pell 2000).
Only a few reports are available on the interactions between entomopathogenic fungi
and other spider mite natural enemies. Ludwig and Oetting (2001) studied the susceptibility
of Phytoseiutus persimilis Athias-Henriot and Iphiseius degenerans (Berlese) to B. bassi-
ana (strain JW-1). The natural enemies were highly susceptible to infection by B. bassiana
under laboratory conditions, whereas lower infection rates were observed in greenhouse tri-
als. Ludwig and Oetting (2o01) also evaluated the susceptibility of I. degenerans to the
entomopathogenic fungi B. bassiana (strain GHA), L. lecanii and M.anisopliae in a green
house and observed that the predatory mite was least susceptible to M. anisopliae, followed
by L. lecanii and B. bassiana. Studying the effect of B. bassiana on the predatory mite Neo-
seiuius cucumeris Oudemans, Jacobson et al. (2001) found that B. bassiana had no detri-
mental effect on the mite when sprayed onto excised cucumber leaves in a laboratory
bioassay, or when sprayed onto glasshouse-grown cucumbers. They suggested that a myco-
pesticide based on B. bassiana could be used as a second line of defence to support preven-
tative pest management with N. cucumeris. Chandler et al. (2005) evaluated the efficacy of
Naturalis-L? as a supplermentary treatrment to P. persimilis for the control of T. urticae
populations on tomato in a glasshouse. Application of P. persimilis on its own did not
reduce numbers of T. urticae adults, nymphs or eggs. In contrast, application of
P. persimilis + Naturalis-L? reduced numbers of T. urticae adults, nymphs and eggs
ompared with all other treatments. Fewer P. persimilis were recorded from the
P. persimilis + Naturalis-L treatment than from the P. persimilis treatment alone. Since it
was not clear if this was caused by Naturalis-L? directly killing P. persimilis, or by lack of
prey causing the predatory mites to migrate, the authors suggested that further work on the
 mode of action of Naturalis-L? and its compatibility with P. persimilis be conducted.
Recent studies on the effect of N. foridana on T. evansi and its predator P. longipes
showed that, despite being able to attach to the body of P. longipes, N. floridana is unable
to infect it (Wekesa et al. 2007). Although N. foridana and N. tanajoae have been reported
to be non-pathogenic to some phytoseiids and several non-target insects (Moraes and Dela-
libera 1992; Hountondji et al. 2002a; Wekesa et al. 2007), Furtado et al. (1996) reported
that the fungus Neozygites acaricida (Petch) is pathogenic to the phytoseid mite Euseius
citrifolius Denmark and Muma.
Conclusions and prospects for future development
Compared to other biological control agents (e.g-, predators, parasitoids, Bacillus thuringi-
ensis), the development of entomopathogenic fungi for inoculative or inundative and
classical biological control programs is still far from satisfactory. However, entomopatho-
 genic fungi have a considerable potential to become major components of sustainable IPM,
provided there is continued investment in research, technology transfer and education
[               )
practices, reduce synthetic pesticides and protect the environment. Successful use of
270
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
lation, compatibility with other control agents and on better systems of delivery, including
timing of applications.
More research is required to make in vitro production of entomophthoralean fungi
(hyphal bodies, conidia or resting spores) possible, together with development of appropri-
ate formulations for better delivery to target spider mites. Some entomophthoralean fungi
produce resting spores in submerged culture and these spores can be harvested, forrmulated
and applied in the field for control of pests in inoculative releases (Kogan and Hajek 2000).
The potential of conidia as the basis of a commercial product is limited by their rapid envi-
thick-walled and robust, long-lived and environmentally stable. Resting spores, therefore,
have potential as alternative commercial inocula for use in augmentation (inoculative and
mycoacaricide use) approach. No studies have been undertaken with the mite-specific
Entomophthorales to apply their spores in the aforesaid manner for biological control. For
paenduu Asea aq uo ne shns isaq a aq cn waas sanods bunsan jauny go dnaa si
and attempts at their mass production should primarily be of this stage. Future studies
should investigate methods for the induction of resting spore formation in N. foridana
either through nutritional or physical stress, followed by other tests that can enable the use
of this fungus as a mycoacaricide.
Difficulties associated with the establishment of in vitro cultures of these pathogens are
likely to be circumvented through selection and development of new inexpensive cell
culture media. The use of genetic manipulation to overcome other limitations is promising.
For instance, recombinant DNA technology can be used to expand the host range of the
promising host-specific strains so that they can be used to target multiple pest mite species,
as has been done with other fungal pathogens (St. Leger 2001). Bioprospecting for the
discovery of fungal isolates with new traits should also be considered. For instance, surveys
 s  sa      a ss  
increase the possibility of obtaining a wide range of strains for use in different agroecoys-
tems.
For the development of mycoacaricides based on entomopathogenic fungi in the Asco-
mycota, order Hypocreales, screening for more efficient strains is still necessary. Efficient
mass production methods and formulations also need to be developed. A major problem for
open field applications is the requirement of high ambient humidities for successful infec-
tion. The commercial products Vertalec and Mycotal, based on the L. lecanii complex and
used in the control of aphids, thrips and whiteflies, are exclusively used in greenhouses
where humidity can be modifed to favour infection (Milner 1997). However, recent
advances in formulation technology have resulted in an adjuvant that enhances the activity
ofMycotal at lowhumidities (Shah and Pell 2003).
Entomopathogenic fungi can play an important role in IPM if used in conjunction with
other strategies for sustainable pest control (Shah and Pell 2003). To achieve this, the com-
patibility of the mycoacaricides with other mite biocontrol agents, especially phytoseid
mites, as well as with synthetic pesticides, needs to be investigated.
needs considerable investment in multidisciplinary research by the public and private
sectors. When commercial interests are absent, as in the development of classical biological
control and conservation strategies, especially in developing countries, long-term govern-
ment support is essential.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
271
References
Alves SB, Tamai MA, Lopes RB (1998) Avaliacao de Beauveria bassiana (Bals.) Vuill. para controle de
Tetranychus urticae Koch em crisantemo.ln: Abstracts 17th Brazil. congr entormol Rio de Janeiro,
p1068
Alves SB,Rossi LS,Lopes RB,Tamai MA, Pereira RM (2002) Beauveria bassiana yeast phase on agar
medium and its pathogenicity against Diatraea saccharatis (Lepidoptera: Crambidae) and Tetranychus
urticae (Acari: Tetranychidae). J ln vertebr Pathol 81:70-77
Balazy S(1993) Flora of Poland. Fungi (Mycota). Vol 24. Entomophthorales. Institute of Botany, Krakow,
356pp
and locusts.Mem Ent Soc Can 171:67-79
Blair BW (1983) Tetranychus evansi Baker & Pritchard (Acari: Tetranychidae), a new pest of tobacco in
Boekhout T, Theelen B, Houbraken J, Robert V, Scorzetti G, Gafni A, Gerson U, Sztejnberg A (2003) Nove]
nov., Meira argovae sp. nov. and Acaromyces ingoldi gen.nov., sp. nov. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol
53:16551664
Boykin LS, Campbell WV, Beute MK (1984) Efect of pesticides on Neozygites foridana (Entomophtho-
rales: Entomophthoraceae) and arthropod predators attacking the twospotted spider mite (Acari:
Tetranychidae) in North Carolina peanut fields. J Econ Entomol 77:969-974
Brandenburg RL, Kennedy GG (1981) Overwintering to the pathogen Entomophthora foridana and its host,
the twospotted spider mite. J Econ Entomol 74:428-431
75:691694
Brandenburg RL, Kennedy GG (1983) Interactive effect of selected pesticides on the twospotted spider mite
and its fungal pathogen Neozygites foridana. Entomol Exp Appl 34:240-254
Cabrera Rl, Lopez A (1977) Estudio sobre la conservacion de la flora micologica de loscitricosen Cuba.Cien
Tec Agric Serie Citricos y Otros Frutales 1:97-112
Chandler D, Davidson G, Pell JG, Ball BV, Shaw K, Sunderland KD (2000) Fungal biocontrol of Acari.
Biocontrol Sci Technol 10:357-384
fungi against the two-spotted spider mite, Tetranychus urticae (Acari: Tetranychidae), on tomato,
Lycopersicon esculentum.Biocontrol Sci Technol 15:37-54
foridana (Zygomycota: Zygomycetes) and Hirsutetla thompsonii (Deuteromycota: Hyphomycetes). Insect
Sci Appl 21:133-138
de Faria MR, Wraight SP (2007) Mycoinsecticides and Mycoacaricides: A comprehensive list with worldwide
coverage and intermational classification of formulation types. Biol Control 43:537-556
de Moraes Gl, Delalibera 1 Jr (1992) Specificity of a strain of Neozygites sp. (Zygomycetes: Entomophtho-
rales) to Mononychettus tanajoa (Acari: Tetranychidae). Exp Appl Acarol 14:89-94
Dresner E (1949) Culture and use of entomogenous fungi for the control of insects. Contrib Boyce Thormpson
lnst 15:319-335
Ejlenberg J, Hajek AE, Lomer C (20o1) Suggestions for unifying the terminology in biological control.
Biocontro] 46:387-400
Elliot SL, Mumford JD, Moraes GJ, Sabelis MW (2002) Age-specific rates of infection of cassa va green mites
by a fungal pathogen in Brazil. Exp Appl Acarol 27: 169-180
108:383402
Ferragut F, Escudero LA (1999) Tetranychus evansi Baker & Pritchard (Acari, Tetranychidae), una nueva
arana roja en los cultivos horticolas espanoles. Boletin de Sanidad Vegetal, Plagas 25:157-164
Fiaboe KKM (2007) Studies of potential predators of tomato red spider mite Tetranychus evarsi Baker and
Pritchard for possible introduction as biocontrol agents in Africa. Thesis, Kenyatta University, Nairobi,
Kenya
Furtado 1P, de Moraes GJ, Keller S (1996) lnfection of Euseius citrifotius (Acari: Phytoseidae) by an entom-
ophthoralean fungus in Brazil. Rev Ecossistema 21:85-86
272
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Furtado 1P, de Moraes Gl, Kreiter S, Garcin M-S, Knapp M (2007) Potential of a Brazilian population of
Ph ytoseidae, Tetranychidae). Biol Control 42: 139-147
Fuxa JR (1987) Ecological considerations for the use of entomopathogens in 1PM. Annu Rev Entomol
32:225-251
Fuxa JR ( 1998) Environmental manipulation for microbial control of insects. ln: Barbosa P (ed) Conservation
biological con trol. Acadermic Press, San Diego,pp 25s-268
Gardner WA, Oetting RD, Storey GK (1982) Susceptibility of the two-spotted spider mite, Tetranychus
urticae Koch, to the fungal pathogen Hirsutetla thompsonii Fisher. Fla Entomol 65:458-465
Gerson U, Kenneth R, Muttah Tl (1979) Hirsutetta thompsoni, a fungal pathogen of mites host pathogen
interaction. Ann Appl Biol 91:29-40
Gerson U, Smiley RL, Ochoa R (2003) Mites (Acari) for pest control. Blackwell, Oxford, 539 pp
      s       s    s)
Tetranychus urticae, by Verticiium tecanii. In: Abstracts of offered papers of the third intemational
colloquium on in vertebrate pathology, Brighton, UK, 6-10 September 1982, p 100
pods. In: Wajnberg E, Scott JK, Quimby PC (eds) Evaluating indirect ecological effects of biologica)
control. CABl, UK, pp 81-96
tions for the control of pests. In: Barbosa P (ed) Conservation biological control. Academic Press, San
Diego, pp 155-183
Gutierrez J, Eienne J (1986) Les Tetranychidae de l'引e de la Reunion et quelques-uns de leurs predateurs.
Agron Trop 4 1:8491
Hajek AE, St Leger RJ (1994) lnteractions between fungal pathogens and insect hosts. Annu Rev Entomo]
39:293322
Hajek AE, McManus ML, Delalibera 1 Jr (2005) Catalogue of introductions of pathogens and nematodes for
classical biological control of insects and mites. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest
Heath Protection,For.Heal.Techn,Fort Collins,59 p
Hajek AE, McManus ML, Delalibera 1 Jr (2007) A review of introductions of pathogens and nematodes for
classical biological control of insects and mites. Biol Control 41: 1-13
importance. Parasitology 8:205-240
Helle W, Sabelis MW (1985a) Spider mites—their biology, natural enemies and control,vol 1A. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, 405 pp
Helle W, Sabelis MW (198Sb) Spider mites—their biology, natural enemies and control, vol 1b. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, 458 pp
Ho CC, Wang SC, Chien YL (2004) Field observation on 2 newly recorded spider mites in Taiwan. Pl Protect
Bull 47:39 1-402
Hountondji FCC, Yaninek JS, Moraes Gl, Oduor G1 (2002a) Host specificity of cassava green mite pathogen
Neozygites foridana. Biocontrol 47:61-66
Hountondji FCC, Lomer C1, Hanna R, Cherry Al, Dara SK (2002b) Field evaluation of Brazilian isolates of
Humber RA, de Moraes GJ, Santos dos JM (1981) Natural infection of Tetranychus evansi (Acarina:
Entomophaga 26:421-425
CABl, Wallingford, pp 27-69
lrigaray FJSC, Marco-Mancebon V, Perez-Moreno I (2003) The entomopathogenic fungus Beauveria bassi-
anα and its compatibility with triflumuron: effects on the two-spotted spider mite Tetranychus urticae.
Biol Control 26: 168-173
Jacobson Rl, Chandler D, Fenlon J, Russel KM (200l) Compatibility of Beauveria bassiana (Balsamo)
Vuillemin with Amblyseius cucumeris Oudemans (Acarina: Phytoseiidae) to control Franktinietla
occidentalis Pergande (Thysanoptera: Thripidae) on cucumber plants. Biocontrol Sci Technol 11:391-400
Jones KA, Burges HD (1998) Technology of formulation and application. In: Burges HD (ed) Formulation
of microbial biopesticides. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp 7-30
Zoophthora and Tarichium. Sydowia 43:39-122
found in tropical regions. Sydowia 49: 118- 146
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
273
Kennedy GG, Smitley DR (1988) Method of controling plant feeding mites with the fungus Neozygites
foridana. US Patent v.4: 752,468, 7
Kenneth R, Wallis G, Gerson U, Plaut HN (1972) Observations and experiments on Triptosporium foridarum
(Entomophthorales) attacking spider mites in Israel. 1 lnvertebr Pathol 19:366-369
Klingen 1, Westrum K (2007) The effect of pesticides used in strawberries on the phytophagous mite Tetranychus
urticae (Acari: Tetranychidae) and its fungal natural enermy Neozygites foridana (Zygomycetes:
Entomophthorales). Biol Control 43:222-230
Knapp M, Wagener B, Navajas M (2003) Molecular discrimination between the spider mite Tetranychus
evansi Baker & Prichard, an important pest of tomatoes in southern Afica, and the closely related
species 7. urticae Koch (Acarina: Tetranychidae). Afr Entomol 11:300-304
maimaiga in cell culture. J 1nvertebr Pathol 75:193-2001
Koike M, Kodama T, Kikuchi A, Okabe M, Kuramoti K, Saito Y (2005) Effects of Verticillium tecanii
seiutus persimitis. In: Abstracts of 38th annual meeting of society ofinvertebrate pathology, Anchorage,
Alaska, USA, pp 7-11
Landis DA, Menalled FD (1998) Ecological considerations in the conservation of effecive parasitoid com-
munities in agricultural systems. In: Barbosa P (ed) Conservation biological control. Academic Press,
San Diego, pp 101-121
Ludwig SW, Oetting RD (2001) Susceptibility of natural enemies to infection by Beauveria bassiana and
McCabe D, Soper RS (1985) Preparation of an entomopathogenic fungal insect control agent. US Patent 4,
530, 834
Meyer MKP (Smith) (1987) African Tetranychidae (Acari: Prostigmata)-with reference to the world genera.
Entomology Memoir, Department of Agriculture and Water Supply,Rep.S. Afr.69:1-175
Metkiewski R, Balazy S, van der Geest LPS (1993) Observations on a mycosis of spider mites (Acari:
Tetranychidae) caused by Neozygites foridana in Poland. 1 lnvertebr Pathol 61:317-319
Metkiewski R, Balazy S, Tkaczuk C (2000) Mycopathogens of mites in Poland: a review. Biocontrol Sci
Technol 10:459-465
Migeon A (2005) Un nouvel acarien ravageur en France: Tetranychus evansi Bakeret Pritchard. Phytoma -
La Defense des Vegetaux 579:38-43
www.mon tpellier.inra.fr/CBGP/spmweb
Mneiro JL, Raga A, Leite LG, Humber RA, Sato ME, Nicastro RL (2004) Pathogenicity in the laboratory of
the fungus Lecanicilium muscariurm against phytophagous mites. In: Brazilian entomological congress
abstracts and proceedings, Sept. 2004, Gramado, Brazil, p 176
Nemoto H, Kobayashi M, Takizawa Y (1975) Entomophthora foridara (Entomophthorales: Entomophthora
ceae) attacking the sugi spider mite, Otigonychus hondoensis (Acari: Tetranychidae) Japan. Appl Entormo]
Zool 10:90-95
Nyrop J, English-Loeb G, Roda A (1998) Conservation biological control of spider mites in perennial
cropping systems. In: Barbosa P (ed) Conservation biological control. Acadermic Press, San Diego,
pp 307-333
Omoto C, McCoy CW (1998) Toxicity of purified fungal toxin Hirsutellin A to the citrus rust mite Phyltoc-
optruta oteivora(Ash).Jlnvertebr Pathol 72:319-322
Paz Z, Gerson U, Sztejnberg A (2007) Assaying three new fungi against citrus mites in the laboratory, and a
field tmial. Biocontrol 52:855-862
pest management. Research Signpost, Kerala, pp 145-177
Pell JK, Eilenberg J, Hajek AE, Steinkraus DS (200l) Biology, ecology and pest management potential of
Entomophthorales. In: Butt TM, Jackson C, Magan N (eds) Fungi as biocontrol agents: progress,
problems and potential. CABl, Wallingford, p 7 1
Soc Am 62:898903
Rosas-Acevedo JL, Boucias DG, Lezama R, Sims K, Pescador A (2003) Exudate frorm sporulating cultures
Appl Acarol 29:213-225
Roy HE, Pell JK (2000) Interactions between entomopathogenic fungi and other natural enermies: lmplications
for biological control.Biocontrol Sci Technol 10:737-752
274
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Samson RA, McCoy CW, O'Donnel KL (1980) Taxonomy of the acarine parasite Hirsutella thompsonii.
Mycologia 72:359-377
Mill.) on red spider mite (Tetranychus evansi Baker & Pritchard)incidence and crop yield in Zimbabwe.
Afr Crop Sci J 11:269-277
Shah PA, Pell JK (2003) Entomopathogenic fungi as biological contro] agents. Appl Microbiol Biotechno]
61:413-423
Shah PA,Aebi M,Tuor U (1998) Method to immobilize the aphid-pathogenic fungus Erynia neoaphidis in
an Alginate matrix for biocontrol. Appl Environ Microbiol 64:42604263
Shah PA, Aebi M, Tuor U (2000) Infection of Macrosiphum euphorbiae with mycelial preparations of Erynia
neoaphidis in a greenhouse trial. Mycol Res 104:645-652
Shi WB, Jiang J, Feng MG (2o0s) Compatibility of ten acaricides with Beauveria bassiana andenhancement
rates of pyridaben. Appl Entomol Zool 40:659-666
chidae, Acarina). Rasteniev'dni Nauki 40:87-90
Smitley DR, Kennedy GG, Brooks WM (1986) Role of the entomogenous fungus, Neozygites foridana, in
population declines of thetwospotted spider mite, Tetranychus urticae,on field corn.Entomol ExpAppl
41:255-264
GC (ed) Biological control in crop production. BARC symposium No. 5, Allanheld, Osmun, Totowa,
pp 161-180
Jackson CW, Magan N (eds) Fungi as biocontrol agents. CABl Publishing, Wallingford, pp 219-237
Tarmai MA,Alves NB, Neves PS (1999) Patogenicidade de Beauveria bassiana (Bals.) Vuill. ao acaro
Tetranychus urticae Koch. Sci Agric 56:285-288
Tamai MA, Alves SB, de Almeida JEM, Faion M (2002a) Evaluation of entomopathogenic fungi for control
of Tetranychus urticae Koch (Acari: Tetranychidae). Arq Inst Biol 69:77-84
            
Beauveria bassiana (Bals.). Vuill Arq lnst Biol 69:89-96
biology, natural enemies and control, vol 1B. World Crop Pests. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 247-258
van der Geest LPS, Elliot SL, Breeuwer JAJ, Beerling EAM (2000) Diseases of mites. Exp Appl Acarol
24:497-560
Wekesa VW, Maniania NK, Knapp M, Boga Hl (2005) Pathogenicity of Beauveria bassiana and Metarhizium
anisoptiae to the tobacco spider mite Tetranychus evansi. Exp Appl Acarol 36:41-50
Wekesa VW, Knapp M, Maniania NK, Boga Hl (2006) Effects of Beauveria bassiana and Metarhiziun
anisoptiae on mortality, fecundity and egg fertility of Tetranychus evansi. Appl Entomol 130: 155- 159
Wekesa WV, de Moraes Gl, Knapp M, Delalibera 1 Jr (2007) Interactions of two natural enemies of Tetrarychus
rmite,Phytoseiutus tongipes (Acari:Phytoseiidae). Biol Control 41:408-414
Wenzel IM, Batista Filho A, de Almeida AMB, Mineiro JLC (2004) Evaluation of the effect of pesticides on
the development and pathogenicity of the entomopathogenic fungus Lecaniciium tecani. Arq Inst Bio]
71: 172174
agents. In: Butt TM, Jackson CW, Magan N (eds) Fungi as biocontrol agents. CABl, Wallingford,
pp 253-287
Yaninek S, Hanna R (2003) Cassava green mite in Africa—a unique example of successful classical biolog
ical control of a mite pest on a continental scale. In: Neuensch wander P, Borgemeister C, Langewald
J (eds) Biological control in IPM systems in Africa. CAB International, UK, pp 61-75
Zhang Z-Q (2003) Mites of greenhouses. ldentification, biology and control. CABl, UK,244 pp
Effect of temperature on virulence of Beauveria bassiana
and Metarhizium anisopliae isolates to Tetranychus evansi
David M. Bugeme · Nguya K. Maniania · Markus Knapp · Hamadi I. Boga
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 1-4, 275-285.
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9179-1 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract  The virulence of three isolates of Beauveria bassiana (Bals.) Vuill. and 23
isolates of Metarhizium anisopliae (Metschnik.) Sorok. (Ascomycota: Hypocreales)
against the tomato spider mite, Tetranychus evansi Baker and Pritchard (Acari: Tetrany-
chidae), was assessed in the laboratory. The effect of temperature on gerrmination, radial
growth and virulence of selected isolates (two isolates of B. bassiana and nine of
M. anisopfiae) on T. evansi was also investigated in the laboratory. All the fungal isolates
tested were pathogenic to the adult females of T. evansi, and there were significant dif-
ferences in mortality between fungal isolates. The lethal time to 50% mortality (LTso)
values ranged from 4.2 to 8.1 days and the LT9o values from 5.6 to 15.1 days. Temperature
had significant effects on germination, radial growth and virulence of the various isolates.
The best fungal germination was observed at 25 and 30°C, while for the fungal radial
growth it was 30°C. All the isolates germinated and grew at all temperatures, but germi-
mation and radial growth varied with isolate and temperature. The selected isolates were all
virulent to T. evansi, but virulence varied also with isolate and temperature.
Keywords  Ascomycota · Beauveria bassiana · Hypocreales · Germination :
Metarhizium anisopliae · Pathogenicity · Radial growth · Tetranychidae ·
Tetranychus evansi · Virulence
Introduction
The spider mite, Tetranychus evansi Baker & Pritchard (Acari: Tetranychidae), is an exotic
mite species, probably of South American origin (Gutierrez and Etienne 1986) and was
first recorded in Africa in 1979 in Zimbabwe (Blair 1983), from where it spread
D. M. Bugeme · N. K. Maniania () · M. Knapp
International Centre of lnsect Physiology and Ecology (JIClPE), P.O. Box 30772, Nairobi, Kenya
e-mail: nmaniania @icipe.org
D. M. Bugeme · H. 1. Boga
Department of Botany, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology (JKUAT),
Nairobi, Kenya
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.). Diseases of Mites and 7icks. DOl: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2_22275
276
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
northwards. More recently, it was also reported from central, western and northern Africa
(Bonato 1999; Kreiter et al. 2002; Duvermey et al. 2005). It is a pest of solanaceous crops,
especially tomatoes (Silva 1954; Ramalho and Flechtmann 1979; de Moraes et al. 1986). If
3-5 weeks, and the farmer can lose his production within a week's time. For instance, yield
losses of up to 90% have been reported in Zimbabwe (Saunyama and Knapp 2003)
Due to problems related to the use of synthetic acaricides in controlling T. evansi (spider
mite resistance and environmental contamination), the control of this pest is still a major
problem for farmers and attracts a strong attention in the world of researchers. Thus, non-
chemical control measures are being developed at the International Centre of Insect
Physiology and Ecology (ICIPE) as alternatives to synthetic acaricides for the control of T.
and wild tomato germplasm and biological control using predatory mites and entomo-
pathogenic fungi.
Biological control of T. evansi with the predatory mites, Neoseiulus californicus
McGregor and Phyfoseiuius persimilis Athias-Henriot, was not effective (de Moraes and
McMurtry 1986; Escudero and Ferragut 2005); however, a recently discovered strain of P.
longipes Evans has shown promising results in laboratory experiments (Furtado et al.
2007). The virulence of entomopathogenic fungi including Beauveria bassiana (Bals.)
Vuill. and Metarhizium anisopliae (Metsch.) Sorok.(Ascomycota:Hypocreales) towards
spider mite species have been reported by many authors (Chandler et al. 2000; Barreto
et al. 2004; Wekesa et al. 2005).
 However, entomopathogenic fungi are exposed to a number of biotic and abiotic factors.
 Temperature, humidity and solar radiation are probably the most important environmental
survival and virulence- the host and the host-pathogen interaction (Ekesi et al. 1999; Dimbi
et al. 2004; Kiewnick 2006). In general, optimum temperatures for germination, growth,
 sporulation and virulence of entomopathogenic fungi have been reported to range between
20 and 30°C (Ekesi et al. 1999; Tefera and Pringle 2003; Dimbi et al. 2004; Kiewnick
2006). Since variation in temperature tolerance among isolates can be significant (Ekesi
et al. 1999; Tefera and Pringle 2003;Dimbi et al.2004), this study was therefore initiated
to evaluate (i) the virulence of B. bassiana and M. anisopliae isolates to T. evansi and (ii)
to test the effect of temperatures on germination, radial growth and virulence of the
selected isolates to T. evansi in order to pick isolates with a broad temperature range for
further studies.
Materials and methods
Mite cultures
A stock culture of T. evansi was established in the laboratory at the ICIPE Headquarters,
Nairobi, Kenya. Tetranychus evansi was reared on tomato, Lycopersicon escuientum Mill.
variety Cal-J at 26 ± 2°C, 60-70% RH and a 12:12 L:D photoperiod. The initial culture
originated from mites collected from tomato plants at Mwea Irrigation Scheme, Kenya, in
2001. Quiescent deutonymphs were collected from the mite culture using a fine camel hair
brush and placed on tomato leaf discs. Two days later, newly emerged adult female mites
were selected and used in the experiments.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
277
Fungal cultures and viability assessments
 e         s   
Germplasm Centre (Table 1). Conidia were harvested by scraping the surface of 3-week-
old sporulating cultures grown on Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) in Petri dishes at
26 ± 2°℃. Conidia were suspended in 20 ml sterile distilled water containing 0.05% Triton
X-1oo. The suspension was vortexed for 5 minutes to produce homogenous conidial
suspension. The viability of conidia was then determined by spread-plating O.1 ml of the
suspension (titrated to 3.0 × 10° conidia ml-')on SDA plates. A sterile microscope cover
slip was placed on each plate. Plates were incubated at 26 ± 2°C and the percentage
gerrmination was determined from 1o0-spores for each plate using a compound microscope
at 400 X magnification.
Bioassays
Virulencetests
The virulence of fungal isolates against T. evansi was tested by spraying 10 ml of a standard
concentration of 1.0 x 107 conidia ml- l on both sides of tomato leaf discs(25 mm diameter)
using the Burgerjon's spray tower (Burgerjon 1956) (INRA, Dijon, France), corresponding to
3.8 × 10° conidia cm-^ In the controltreatments, leaf discs were sprayed with sterile distilled
water containing 0.05% Triton X-100. The leaf discs were then air-dried under the laminar flow
cabinet for 20 min and placed on wet cotton wool in Petri dishes. T'wenty 1-2-day-old adult
female T. evansi were then placed onto each of the treated tomato leaf discs. Mites were
maintained in an incubator at 25 ± 2°C and transferred onto untreated leaf discs after 4 days.
Mortality was recorded daily for 10 days. Dead mites were transferred to Petri dishes lined with
moist filter paper to allow the growth of fungus on the surface of the cadaver. Mortality caused
randomized blocks and replicated six times. The same experimental procedure was used in the
experiments on the effect of termperature on the virulence of fungal isolates against T. evansi
with the only difference that mites were maintained at various temperatures (20, 25, 30 and
35°C) and the treatment was replicated four times.
Effect of temperature on germination of fungi
Fungal isolates (11) that caused mortalities >70% within 10 days (LT9o) were selected for this
 'sae[d vas uo pends sm ,_[u wpiuoo qol x E jo (lu Io) uoisuadsns [po pms
sterile microscope cover slip was randomly placed on each plate. Plates were sealed with
Parafilm M and incubated at 20, 25, 30 and 35°C in complete darkness. At 24 h post-inocu-
lation, 1 ml formaldehyde (0.5%) was transferred onto each plate to halt germination.
fication. Treatments were arranged in complete randomized blocks and replicated four times
Effect of temperature on radial growth
This study was also carried out on the 11 selected fungal isolates during the virulence
bioassay. Conidial suspension of 1 x 10' conidia ml-' was spread-plated on SDA plates,
which were then incubated at 26 ± 2°C for 3 days in order to obtain mycelial mats. The
278
1. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
unsporulated mycelial mats were cut from culture plates into round agar plugs using an 8-
mm diameter cork borer (Rapilly 1968). Each agar plug was then transferred singly onto
the centre of a fresh SDA plate. Plates were sealed with Parafilrm M and incubated in
complete darkness at 20, 25, 30 and 35°C. Radial growth was then recorded daily for
10 days by measuring colony cardinal diameters, through two orthogonal axes previously
drawn on the bottom of each Petri dish to serve as a reference, using a simple plastic ruler.
The experiment was replicated four times.
Statistical analysis
Mortality data were corrected for natural rmortality in the controls (Abbott 1925) and arcsine-
transformed to normalize the data before analysis of variance (ANOVA) (SAS Institute
1999-2001). Means were separated by Student-Newman-Keuls test at P = 0.05. Lethal time
to 50% mortality (LTso) and the lethal time to 90% mortality (LToo) values were estirmated
with repeated measures logistic regression using generalised estimating equations (GEE)
(Stokes et al. 2000). All analyses were carried out using the GENMOD procedure of SAS
(SAS Institute 1999-2001). Data on germination were also arcsine-transformed before
Results
Virulence of fungal isolates
In the viability tests, 86.9 ± 1.0 to 96.3 ± 0.7% of spores germinated. Mean mortality in
         h s  
pathogenic to adult females of T. evansi. Mortality caused by B. bassiana was not sig-
nificantly different between the isolates. However, there was a significant difference in
mortality between isolates of M. anisopliae (F26,135 = 20.49; P < 0.0001) (Table 1). The
LTso values ranged from 4.2 to 8.1 days and the LToo values from 5.6 to 15.1 days, with B.
ssiana isolate ICIPE279 having the shortest lethal time values of 4.2 (LTso) and 5.6 days
(LT9o) (Table 1). Based on these results, 11 fungal isolates were selected for furthet
studies.
Effect of temperature on germination of fungal isolates
The germination for all isolates was above 65% at the four temperatures, except at 35°C where
germination was low in B. bassiana isolates ICIPE279 and ICIPE278. Gerrmination values
ranged from 65.8% to 86.3%, from 74.9% to 95.0%, from 81.7% to 96.8% and from 15.1% to
85.6% at 20, 25, 30 and 35°C, respectively. Significant differences in germination between
fungal isolates were observed at 20°℃ (Fto,33 = 9.18; P < 0.0001), 25°C (Flo,33 = 28.16;
P < 0.0001), 30°C (F10,33 = 7.92; P < 0.0001) and 35°C (F10,33 = 284.49; P < 0.0001)
Effect of temperature on radial growth
fungal isolates at 20°C (F10,33 = 31.28; P < U.0001), 25"C (Ft0,33 = 14.22; P < 0.0001),
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
279
Table 1Pathogenicity of Beauveria bassiana and Metarhizium anisopliae isolates against Tetranychus
evansi
Species!
Year of isolation, Host/
Percent
LTso (days) (95%LTo (days) (95%
lsolates
Substrate
mortality ± SE
fiducial limits)
fiducial limits)
Beauveria bassiana
ICIPE279
1996, Soil
95.2 ± 2.3a
4.2 (3.64.9)
5.6 (4.8-6.4)
JCIPE273
2004, Soil
83.3 ± 5.6abcd
6.0 (5.3-7.9)
7.5 (6.4-8.7)
ICIPE278
2005, Cyclocephata sp.
83.0 ± 7.7abcd
5.0 (3.3-7.7)
7.1 (4.6-10.9)
Metarhizium anisoptiae
JCIPE24
1999, Soil
90.5 ± 3.8ab
6.3 (5.8-6.8)
7.3 (6.6-8.1)
JCIPE84
2003,Onitacris turbidda
89.4 ± 3.7abc
(6′9-0'9) 5′9
7.5 (7.0-8.0)
IC1PE78
1990,Temnoschoita
88  8'98
5.7 (4.6-7.0)
7.6 (6.1-9.5)
nigroptagiata
ICIPE43
2005, Soil
84.8 ± 5.7abcd
6.0 (4.9-7.4)
8.0 (6.7-9.6)
ICIPE55
2005, Soil
81.7 ± 9.2abcd
5.6 (4.5-6.9)
7.4 (5.7-9.7)
ICIPE59
2005,Caterpillar
79.9 ± 7.1abcd
6.0 (6.47.6)
8.3 (7.4-9.2)
ICIPE8
1990,Gatteria mellonella
79.3 ± 8.8abcd
6.5 (4.6-7.0)
7.9 (6.5-9.5)
ICIPE51
2005, Soil
73.0 ± 7.2abcde
7.5 (6.6-8.4)
9.4 (8.3-10.6)
ICIPE7
1996,Ambtyomma
70.9 ± 6.3abcdef
7.7 (6.6-9.0)
9.8 (8.2-11.7)
variegatum
ICIPE25
1999, Sandy Soil
68.4 ± 8.0abcdef
7.2 (6.6-7.9)
8.9 (7.7-10.1)
ICIPE48
2005,Unknown
60.1 ± 7.9bcdefg
7.6 (6.6-8.8)
10.7 (9.1-12.6)
ICIPE49
2005, Soil
57.9 ± 9.0cdefg
7.9 (4.0-15.5)
12.9 (7.0-23.8)
ICIPE315
2005,Tetranychus urticae
54.6 ± 6.3defg
7.7 (6.3-9.4)
15.1 (10.8-21.0)
JC1PE316
2005, Tetranychus spp.
54.0 ± 10.5defg
8.1 (6.69.9)
11.2 (8.7-14.3)
JCIPE95
2005, Soil
44.3 ± 11.5efg
ICIPE62
1990, Soil
43.8 ± 10.4efg
ICIPE21
1999, Lacusta gregaria
43.7 ± 8.2efg
一
JCIPE30
1989,Busseota fusca
42.4 ± 12.5efg
一
JCIPE41
1990, Soil
40.6 ± 3.5fg
ICIPE18
1989, Soil
37.0 ± 9.4gh
JC1PE97
2005, Unknown
35.8 ± 7.3gh
JCIPE69
1990, Soil
35.0 ± 4.3gh
ICIPE20
1989, Soil
30.4 ± 4.5gh
一
Contro]
12.9 ± 0.9h
Percent mortality, LTso and LToo values at 25 ± 2°C
Means followed by the sarme letter are not significantly different (Student-Newman-Keuls test, P > 0.05)
lates grew at all temperatures but for most isolates, the growth was slower at 20 and 35°℃,
than at 25 and 30°C. The two isolates of B. bassiana recorded the least radial growth at all
temperatures. Fungal radial growth varied from 0.6 to 2.1, from 1.2 to 2.4, from 1.2 to 4.4
and from 0.7 to 2.3 mm day-↓ at 20, 25, 30 and 35°C, respectively.
280
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Effectof temperature onvirulence
Mortality in the controls did not exceed 7.5%,except at 35°C where 16.3% mortality was
   is n a n d a  s  ih  
temperatures; however, mortality varied with fungal isolate and temperature (Table 2). For
instance, significant differences in mortalities were observed between fungal isolates at 20
(Flo,33 = 2.43; P = 0.0267) and 25°C (F1o,33 = 2.62; P = 0.0181). There was no
significant difference in mortality between fungal isolates at 30 (Fto,33 = 0.98;
P = 0.4762) and 35°C (Fto,33 = 1.15; P = 0.3607) (Table 2). Among the fungal iso-
lates, only B. bassiana isolate ICIPE279 was virulent across temperatures followed by
B. bassiana isolate ICIPE278 and M. anisopliae isolate ICIPE7 (Table 2). The LTso values
ranged from 6.8 to 24.6 days at 20°C, from 4.8 to 9.7 days at 25°C, from 2.6 to 5.8 days at
30°C and from 1.9 to 3.4 days at 35°C (Table 2). The LTgo values ranged from 9.0 to 35.3,
from 6.7 to 11.6, from 3.3 to 7.2 and from 2.8 to 4.9 days at 20, 25, 30 and 35°℃,
respectively (Table 2).
Discussion
Out of 26 fungal isolates tested in the present study, 13 isolates were previously tested
against T. evansi (Wekesa et al. 2005) and were all pathogenic to the mite; but there was
significant variation between the isolates. Variation in the pathogenic activity between the
26 fungal isolates against T. evansi was also observed in the present study. Intraspecific
differences in the pathogenicity of the mitosporic fungi B. bassiana, M. anisopliae.
Hirsutella fhompsonii Fisher and Lecanicillium lecanii complex have also been reported in
other mite species (Tamai et al. 2002; Barreto et al. 2004; Alves et al. 2005; Brooks and
Wall 2005; Chandler et al. 2005).
It is generally admitted that the most virulent fungal isolates are the ones isolated from
the host. This is true in some cases as the one reported by Pena et al. (1996) where fungal
isolates that originated from the mite Polyphagotarsonemus latus Banks were more vir-
ulent to this species than those isolated from other hosts. However, this was not the case in
our study where the virulent isolates did not originate from spider mite species. The two
fungal isolates isolated from Tetranychus species (ICIPE315 and ICIPE316) were not
virulent to T. evansi. Wekesa et al. (2005) reported similar results with the same mite
species. The virulence of fungal isolates from non-Acari hosts to Acari hosts have also
been reported elsewhere (Kaaya et al. 1996; Samish et al. 2001; Shaw et al. 2002).
The best temperature for germination of the 11 selected fungal isolates was between 25
and 30°C, which is in agreement with other published reports (Ekesi et al. 1999; Tefera
and Pringle 2003; Dimbi et al. 2004; Kiewnick 2006). However, germination of B. bas-
siana isolates was low at 35°C, compared to those of M. anisopliae isolates. Although all
the fungal isolates grew at all the temperatures, it appeared that the favourable temperature
for most isolates was 30°C. Similar results were reported by Tefera and Pringle (2003).
However, Ekesi et al. (1999) and Dimbi et al. (2004) reported that the optimum temper-
ature for radial growth of most isolates of B. bassiana and M. anisopliae was 25 and 30°C.
Ouedraogo et al. (1997) reported that the optimum temperature for vegetative growth of
M. anisopliae isolates ranged between 25 and 32°C, with 25°C being the optimum for most
isolates. The growth rate of fungal isolates did not necessarily relate to virulence. For
example, the B. bassiana isolate ICIPE279 that had a radial growth of 0.6 mm/day at 20°C
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
281
ee   ua smds odos wp mg a md 
LTo (95% fiducial limits)
LTeo (95% fiducial limits)
8.7 (7.6-10.1)
6.7 (4.4-10.2)
12.5 (10.5-14.8)
9.2 (7.5-11.2)
11.6 (10.3-13.0)
(7.5-8.0)
(7.5-11.8)
8.1 (6.5-10.2)
11.0 (9.3-13.1)
10.5 (9.2-11.9)
(88-8'2) 5'8
2.9 (1.6-5.1)
2.8 (2.4-3.2)
3.0 (2.8-5.1)
4.4 (3.8-5.1)
3.3 (2.7-3.9)
7.7
9.4 
LTso (95% fiducial limits)
LTso(95%fiduciallimits)
7.5 (6.4-8.8)
4.8 (3.0-7.6)
9.7 (8.610.9)
7.1 (6.0-8.4)
9.3 (8.9-9.7)
6.2 (5.9-6.5)
7.4 (6.4-8.6)
6.5 (5.1-8.2)
8.1 (7.1-9.2)
8.8 (7.9-9.8)
6.8 (6.4-7.3)
1.9 (1.0-3.5)
2.0 (1.5-2.6)
2.6 (2.5-2.8)
3.4 (3.0-3.9)
2.7 (2.2-3.3)
Mortality SE
72.7 ± 7.8abAB
77.3 ± 13.3abA
83.7 ± 2.8abAB
% Mortality SE
88.5 ± 4.3abA
90.4 ± 4.1abA
75.0 ± 10.2bA
90.3 ± 6.2abA
66.5 ± 6.5abB
65.4 ± 12.3abA
54.4 ± 9.8bB
97.1 ± 1.7aA
98.5 ± 1.5aA
97.1 ± 1.7aA
97.2 ± 1.6aA
91.5 ± 3.7aA
100aA
25°℃
LTo (95% fiducial limits)
LTo (95% fiducial limits)
9.0 (6.6-12.3)
13.4 (8.9-20.0)
12.7 (11.8-13.7)
35.3 (17.0-73.4)
13.4 (8.4-21.3)
13.4 (10.3-17.5)
18.8 (14.5-24.4)
15.6 (11.6-20.8)
15.9 (11.6-21.9)
16.1 (13.1-19.7)
10.0 (7.5-13.3)
5.0 (4.8-5.2)
3.3 (2.7-4.1)
(3.4-5.8)
(6.3-8.3)
5.2 (4.5-6.0)
2
LTso (95% fducial limits)
LTso (95% fiducial limits)
(6.413.2)
11.3 (10.5-12.3)
24.6 (15.2-40.0)
8.9 (6.1-13.0)
(8.7-13.4)
(8.1-15.3)
13.0 (10.2-16.4)
(6.8-16.1)
13.5 (11.415.9)
(5.3-8.6)
(5.8-9.5)
4.1 (3.8-4.6)
2.6 (2.1-3.2)
3.7 (3.0-4.6)
5.8 (5.0-6.7)
4.4 (3.9-5.0)
2
10.8
11.1
10.5
7.4
Mortality ± SE
% Mortality ± SE
72.5 ± 15.1aA
50.5 ± 15.8abB
26.3 ± 10.labC
8.8 ± 2.4bB
50.9 ± 12.1abB
37.8 ± 12.1abB
± 6.6abB
42.5 ± 10.6abC
30.4 ± 12.3abB
64.8 ± 13.4abB
98.5 ± 4.4aA
93.8 ± 4.4aA
100aA
100aA
100aA
43.8 :
21.3 :
M. anisoptiae
M.anisoptiae
B. bassiana
ICIPE279
ICIPE278
B.bassiana
ICIPE279
ICIPE278
mortality
Species/
ICIPES5
ICIPE59
ICIPE78
ICIPE84
ICIPE24
ICIPE25
ICIPE43
isolates
ICIPE8
ICIPE7
ICIPE55
ICIPE59
ICIPE78
282
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
LToo (95% fiducial limits)
3.4 (2.9-4.1)
(2.7-3.9)
(3.04.3)
3.9 (3.1-5.0)
3.2 (3.1-3.3)
4.9 (3.47.0)
3
(1 [ %5) 07
2.9 (2.4-3.3)
(2.4-3.2)
(2.6-3.5)
3.0 (2.3-3.8)
2.9 (2.8-3.1)
3.2 (1.95.5)
2
3
% Mortality SE
86.8 ± 11.4aA
91.4 ± 5.0aAB
± 4.4aA
100aA
100aA
100aA
866
LTo (95% fiducial limits)
5.3 (4.6-6.0)
(4.8-6.0)
(5.5-7.6)
(5.3-6.4)
(3.8-5.1)
(3.0-6.2)
3
LTso (95% fiducial limits)
4.3 (3.8-4.8)
(3.94.9)
(4.0-5.5)
(3.0-4.0)
(2.54.9)
(4.6-5.
5.2
4.7
3.5
3.5
SE
% Mortality ±S
93.8 ± 6.3aA
98.6 ± 1.4aA
98.6 ± 1.4aA
Table 2 continued
100aA
100aA
100aA
ICIPE84
ICIPE24
ICIPE25
ICIPE8
ICIPE43
ICIPE7
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
283
caused 72.5% mortality in T. evansi while the M. anisopliae isolate ICIPE55 with a radial
growth of 2.1 mm/day induced only 26.3% mortality at the same temperature
The infection of B. bassiana and M. anisopliae in T. evansi increased as temperature
increased. Most fungal isolates were more (highly) virulent at 25, 30 and 35°C than at
 20°C, which is in agreement with other published reports (Thomas and Jenkins 1997; Ekesi
et al. 1999; Dimbi et al. 2004). For instance, Dimbi et al. (2004) reported that M. ani-
sopliae isolates were more virulent to the three African tephritid fruit fies, Ceratitis
capitata (Wiedemann), C. fasciventris (Bezzi) and C. cosyra (Walker) at 25, 30 and 35,
than at 20°C. However, Ekesi et al. (1999) showed that some isolates of B. bassiana and
M. anisopliae were highly virulent at 20°C when infecting the legume fower thrips,
Megalurothrips sjostedti (Trybom).
The findings of this study highlight the importance of strain selection as stressed by
Soper and Ward (1981). Beauveria bassiana isolates ICIPE279 and ICIPE278, and M.
anisopliae isolates ICIPE78 and ICIPE7 were selected as candidates for control of T.
evansi because of their ability to infect and cause a high rate of mortality between 20 and
35°C, which is the range of temperature where the pest is found. However, further studies-
such as the effect of these isolates on the various developmental stages of T. evansi, the
effect of host plant on the virulence of the fungal isolate(s), the efficacy of these isolates in
reducing T. evansi populations in screenhouse and field-need to be carried out in order to
       s    
grated spider mite management.
Acknowledgments The authors are grateful to Drs. N. Jiang and F. Schultess (lClPE) for reviewing the
first draft of the manuscript. The authors are also grateful to A. Wanjoya for statistical advice and Ms. E.O.
Ouna, Mr. R. Rotich, Mr. C. Kyallo and Mr. B. Muia for technical assistance. This study received financial
support from the Sll-Dutch government fund through the African Regional Postgraduate Prograrmme in
Insect Science (ARPPlS) of ICIPE and from the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and
Development (BMZ)
References
Abbott WS (1925) A method of compufing the effectiveness of an insecticide. J Econ Entormol 18:265-267
mite Phyttocoptruta oteivora. Exp Appl Acarol 37:117-122
Barreto RS, Marques EJ, Gondim MGC Jr, de Oleivera JV (2004) Selection of Beauveria bassiana (Bals.)
Vuill.and Metarhizium anisoptiae(Metch.) Sorok.for the control of the mite Mononychellus tanajoa
(Bondar). Sci Agr 61:659-664
Benz S (1987) Environment. ln: Fuxa JR, Tanada Y (eds) Epizootiology of insect diseases. Wiley, New
York, pp 177-214
Blair BW (1983). Tetranychus evansi Baker and Pritchard (Acari: Tetranychidae); a new pest of tobacco in
Zimbabwe. In: CORESTA phytopathology and agronomy study group. Bergerac, France, p 1
Tetran ychidae). Exp Appl Acarol 23: 11-19
Psoroptes mmites (Acari: Psoroptidae). Biol Control 34:58-65
Burgerjon A (1956) Pulverisation de poudrage au laboratoire par des preparations pathogenes insecticides.
Ann Epiphyt 4:677-688
Chandler D, Davidson G, Pell JK, Ball BV, Shaw K, Sunderland KD (2000) Fungal biocontrol of Acari.
Biocontrol Sci Technol 10:357-384
Chandler D, Davidson G, Jacobson R1 (2005) Laboratory and glasshouse evaluation of entomopathogenic
fungi against the two-spotted spider mite, Tetranychus urticae (Acari: Tetranychidae), on tomato,
Lycopersicon esculentum. Biocontrol Sci Technol 15:37-54
284
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
de Moraes GJ, McMurtry JA (1986) Suitability of the spider mite Tetranychus evansi as prey for Phyto-
seiutus persimitis. Entomol Exp Appl 40:109-115
tomateiro industrial em Petrolina, PE e racionalizacao do uso de defensivos agricolas. Bol Pesq
EMPRABA 28:28p
growth and virulence of Metarhizium anisoptiae to three species of African tephritid fruit Hies.Bio-
contro] 49:83-94
chidae sur les cultures maraicheres dans le Sine-Salourm (Senegal). ln: Annales comptes rendus de
deuxieme colloque international sur les acariens des cultures de l'AFPP, Montpellier, France, 24-25
October 2005
Ekesi S, Maniania NK, Ampong-Nyarko K (1999) Effect of temperature on germination, radial growth and
virulence of Metarhizium anisoptiae and Beauveria bassiana on Megalurothrips sjostedti.Biocontrol
Sci Tec hnol 9: 177-185
Escudero LA, Ferragut F (2005) Neoseiutus catifornicus and Phytoseiutus persimilis (Acari: Phytoseiidae)
chidae). Biol Control 32:378-384
Ferragut F, Escudero LA (1999) Tetranychus evansi Baker & Pritchard (Acari, Tetranychidae),una nueva
arana roja en los cultivos horticolas espanoles. Bol Sanid Veg Plagas 25:157-164
Furtado IP, Moraes GJ, De KreiterS, Garcin M-S, Knapp M (2007) Potential of aBrazilian population of the
Phytoseiidae, Tetranychidae). Biol Contr 42: 139-147
Gutierrez J, Etienne J (1986) Les Tetranychidae de l'ie de la Reunion et quelques-uns de leurs predateurs.
Agron Trop 41:84-91
Inglis DG, Goettel MS, Butt TM, Strasser H (200l) Use of hyphomycetes fungi for managing insect pests.
CABl 1nternational, Wallingford, pp 23-69
appendicutatus and Ambtyomma variegatum, using the entomogenous fungi Beauveria bassiana and
Metarhizium anisoptiae. J lnvertebr Pathol 67:15-20
Kiewnick S (2006) Effect of temperature on growth, germination, germ-tube extension and survival of
Prostigmata and Mesostigmata) of some northern Tunisian crop. Acarologia 42:389-402
isolates of Metarhizium anisoptiae and M. flavoviride. Mycopathologia 137:37-43
Pena JE, Osborne LS, Duncan RE (1996) Potential of fungi as biocontrol agents of Polyphagotarsonermus
tatus (Acari: Tarsonemidae). Entomophaga 41:27-36
Ramalho FS, Flechtmann CHW (1979) Niveis de infestacao de Tetranychus (T.) evansi Baker, Pritchard,
1960 em diferentes fases de desenvolvimento do tomateiro. Rev Agric 54:51-56
SAS Institute (1999-2001) SAS/STAT User's Guide. Version 8.01. SAS lnsfitute Inc., Cary
and crop yield in Zimbabwe. Afr Crop Sci J 11:269-277
Shaw KE,Davidson G, Clark SJ, Ball BV,Pell JK, Chandler D, Sunderland KD (2002) Laboratory
bioassays to assess the pathogenicity of mitosporic fungi to Varroa destructor (Acari: Mesostigmata),
an ectoparasite mite of the honeybee, Apis melifera.Biol Control 24:266-276
Silva P (1954) Um novo acaro novico ao tomateiro na Bahia (Tetranychus marianae McGregor, 1950-
Acarina). Bol lnst Biol Bahia l:18-37
Smith Meyer MKP (1996) Mite pests and their predators on cultivated plants in Southern Africa: vegetables
and berries. ARC-Plant Protection Research lnstitute, Pretoria
Papavizas GC (ed) Biological control in crop production, BARC Symposium No. 5. Allanheld, Osmun,
Totowa, pp 161-180
Stokes ME, Davis CS, Koch GG (2000) Categorical data analysis using the SAS system. SAS Institute Inc.,
Cary
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
285
Tamai MA, Alves SB, Almeida JEM, Faion M (2002) Evaluation of entomopathogenic fungi for control of
Tetranychus urticae Koch (Acari: Tetranychidae).Arq Inst Biol 69:77-84
Tefera T, Pringle K (2003) Germination, radial growth, and sporulation of Beauveria bassiana to Chito
partettus (Lepidoptera: Pyralidae) at different temperatures. Biocontrol Sci Technol 13:699-704
Thomas MB, Jenkins NE (1997) Effects of temperature on growth of Metarhizium favoviride and virulence
to the variegated grasshopper,Zonocerus variegatus. Mycol Res 101:1469-1474
Wekesa VW, Maniania NK, Knapp M, Boga Hl (2005) Pathogenicity of Beauveria bassiana and
Metarhizium anisoptiae to the tobacco spider mite Tetranychus evansi. Exp Appl Acarol 36:41-50
Side-effects of pesticides on the life cycle of the mite
pathogenic fungus Neozygites foridana
V. W. Wekesa - M. Knapp - I. Delalibera Jr.
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 14, 287-297.
DOl: 10.1007/s 10493-008-9168-4 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract The tomato red spider mite, Tetranychus evansi Baker and Pritchard, is an
invasive species in Africa causing considerable damage to Solanaceous crops. The fungal
pathogen Neozygites foridana Weiser and Muma from Brazil has been considered a potential
candidate for introduction into Africa for the control of T. evansi. To be incorporated in the
tomato production system, N. foridana has to be compatible with the pesticides used for the
control of other pests and diseases. Pesticides used in tomatoes that might affect the fungus
were therefore studied by the use of different methods. Two insecticides (Lambda-cyhalothrin
and Methomyl), two acaricides (Propargite and Abamectin), and two fungicides (Captan and
Mancozeb) were tested in two concentrations: the mean commercial rate (CR) and 5o% of the
mean commercial rate (CR/2). Fungus-killed mite cadavers or the substrates used for sporula-
tion (leaf discs and coverslips) were either immersed or sprayed with the pesticides before
testing their effects on sporulation, germination of primary conidia and infectivity of
N. fioridana. Direct immersion of cadavers, coverslips or leaf discs into pesticides affected
capilliconidia was neither affected by the method of application nor the concentration of the
pesticides. The fungicides Captan and Mancozeb resulted in a high reduction in sporulation
gerrmination of primary conidia. Methomyl and Abamectin resulted in less effects on
N.foridana.
V. W. Wekesa · 1. Delalibera Jr. ()
'Luiz de Queiroz', ES ALQ/USP, 13418-900 Piracicaba, SP, Brazil
e-rmail: italo @esalq.usp.br
M.Knapp
IC1PE-African lnsect Science for Food and Health, PO Box 30772, 00100 Nairobi, Kenya
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.), Diseases ofMites and Ticks. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2_23 287
288
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Introduction
The tomato red spider mite,Tetranychus evansi Baker and Pritchard, is an invasive species
in Africa causing considerable damage to solanaceous crops (Saunyama and Knapp 2003).
In tomato, T. evansi is frequently controlled by intensive application of acaricides (Blair
           
Phytophthora infestans (Mont.), are controlled by the use of insecticides and fungicides,
respectively.
 In several countries, epizootics of Neozygites foridana Weiser and Muma (Zygomycetes:
 Entomophthorales) have been associated with rapid decline in populations of spider mites
(Camer and Canerday 1970; Smith and Furr 1975; Boykin et al. 1984), including T. evansi
   s           
     n    ss s   
Neozygites foridana collected in Brazil has been considered as a potential candidate for
classical biological control of T.evansi in Africa. To maxirmize the potential of
N. foridana in controlling T. evansi on tomato, it is necessary to incorporate the use of
selective pesticides for managerment of other tomato pests to reduce the negative effect this
might have on N.foridana.
The direct impact fungicides have on natural epizootics of entomopathogenic fungi has
been demonstrated for diferent species. For example, application of fungicides has been
implicated in the reduction of Neozygites spp. incidence in the field resulting in host popu-
lation increases of mainly aphids and mites (Brandenburg and Kennedy 1983; Boykin et al.
1984; Bower et al. 1995; Klingen and Westrum 2007).
Although it might be desirable to conduct field experiments to determine the effect of
pesticides on the disease dynamics of the entomopathogenic fungi, field experiments are
expensive, time consuming, and often not appropriate to identify specific factors that affect
the entomopathogenic fungi. To identify compatibility of pesticides on entomopathogens,
laboratory bioassays are therefore usually the first steps in selecting pesticides for use in
integrated pest management programs (Morjan et al. 2002).
Studies conducted to determine the inhibitory effects of pesticides on other species of
entomophthoralean fungi usually focus on the impact of pesticides on gerrmination of
conidia and hyphal growth in culture media containing each pesticide (Hall and Dunn
   s 1 1   61 1 1  1 s 1
of pesticides on N. foridana have received little attention, mostly because of difficulties
associated with the establishment of in vitro cultures of this pathogen (Morjan et al. 2002).
Neozygites foridana produces three types of spores and has a more complex life cycle
than the anamorphs of the Ascomycota within the order Hypocreales ("imperfect fungi”
formerly in the Deuteromycota). Primary conidia of N. foridana are actively discharged
from the conidiophores of the mummified host mites, referred to as cadavers. A prirmary
conidium lands on the leaf surface and gerrminates to form a secondary type of conidium,
the infective capilliconidium (Smitley et al. 1986; Oduor et al. 1996; Delalibera et al.
2006). The host needs to come in contact with the capilliconidium to become infected.
 Neozygites foridana also produces resting spores for long-term survival probably when
conditions are unfavorable. Therefore, there are many stages of the life cycle that can be
affected by application of pesticides.
The aim of this study was to test the effect of fungicides, acaricides and insecticides used
in commercial tomato production on sporulation, germination, infectivity and mortality of
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
289
T. evansi by N. foridana and to describe laboratory methods which can be used for toxicity
tests without necessarily growing the fungus on artificial media.
Materials and methods
Fungal production
The N.foridana isolate (LQ2) used in this study was initially collected as mummified
T. evansi mites at a greenhouse of the University of Sao Paulo in Piracicaba, Sao Paulo,
Brazil, during an epizootic in September 2004. It was stored for 1 year in vials containing
silica gel at -10°C, before use in this study. New cadavers were produced by exposing
healthy T. evansi females to sporulating cadavers from the stock culture. Sporulation was
obtained by keeping cadavers at 25°C in darkness on tomato leaf discs (1.2 crm diameter)
placed on top of a moist sponge in closed Petri dishes (9 cm diameter) at 100% RH for
16 h. Mites exposed to the sporulating cadavers were then maintained in an incubator at
25°C and 50% RH under natural light-dark regime (12D:12L) and cadavers were collected
  s  s   s  s    e  s 
application on only newly forrmed cadavers (not stored ones) and on conidia discharged
from them.
Pesticides used
Information on trade names, active ingredients, and types of pesticide, formulations, chem-
ical groups and recommended concentrations of the pesticides are shown in Table 1. Two
insecticides, Karate Zeon 50 CS (Syngenta) and Lannate? BR (Dupont), two acaricides,
Omite? 720 EC (Crompton) and Abamex@ (Bequisa), and two fungicides, Orthocide? 500
(Arysta Lifescience) and Dithane NT (Dow Agrosciences), were chosen for their frequent
use by farmers in tomato crop. Pesticides were used in two concentrations: commercial rate
(CR), which is the mean recommended concentration for application in tomato, and 50% of
amended with 0.05% Tween 80 as a surfactant.
General experimental set up
The effect of pesticides on N. foridana was tested using two contamination methods:
dipping and spraying. Cadavers, leaf discs or coverslips used in the bioassays were either
dipped into, or sprayed with, the pesticides. Different bioassays were conducted to
Table 1Pesticides used in selectivity studies with Neozygites foridana
Active ingredient
Trade name Type of peshicide
Formulation Chemical group Concentration (CR)
Methomy]
Lannate
Insecticide
SC
Carbarmate
100 ml/100 1
Lambda-cyhalothrin Karate
lnsecticide
SD
Pyrethroid
40 ml/100 1
Propargite
Omite
Acaricide
EC
Alkyl sulfate
50 ml/100 1
Abamectin
Abarmex
Acaricide
EC
A vermectin
75 ml/100 1
Captan
Orthocide
Fungicide
WP
Dicarboximide
240 g/100 ]
Mancozeb
Dithane
Fungicide/Acaricide WP
Dithiocarbarmate 300 g/100 1
CR = Mean recommended concentration of the formulated product for application in 1001 of water per ha,
EC = Emusifiable concentrate, WP = Wettable powder, SC = Soluble concentrate, CS = Capsulated suspension
290
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
determine the effect of pesticides on sporulation, gerrmination of primary conidia, and
development of the fungus inside the mite. All experiments were repeated three times
Effect of pesticides on sporulation
The effect of pesticides on sporulation was evaluated by measuring direct and indirect
effects. The direct effects were measured by immersing cadavers into the pesticides
(cadaver treatment). The indirect effect was measured by immersing leaf discs into pesti-
cides (leaf treatment) before transferring the cadavers onto these discs. Similarly, direct and
indirect effects were tested by spraying cadavers on leaf discs or spraying leaf discs before
transferring the cadavers onto them
Cadavertreatment
Ten cadavers were introduced into microcentrifuge tubes and then 0.5 ml of each pesticide
at either concentration (CR or CR/2) amended with 0.05% Tween 80 was added into each
tube and agitated for 2 min. The content of each tube was then poured onto filter papers to
drain the excess pesticides. Control cadavers were given the same treatments as described
above except that they were introduced into distilled water amended with 0.05% Tween 80.
After 2 h, the treated cadavers were individually placed on untreated discs of tomato leaves
(1.2 cm in diameter) resting on a wet sponge inside a Petri dish (9 cm diameter). The dishes
were closed to reach about 100% RH and incubated at 25°C in darkness for 16 h. The
number of conidia discharged per mummy was estimated by observing the leaf disc directly
[o n m l s  s p oo po e 
scale (0: no sporulation, 1: 1-100, 2: 101-500, and 3: >501 conidia).
In a paralll experiment, ten cadavers were placed on a filter paper and sprayed with 2 ml
of each pesticide at either concentration using a Potter Precision Laboratory Spray Tower
(Burkard Manufacturing, Rickmansworth, Herts, UK), calibrated at 68.95 kPa with a mean
deposition of 1.5 mg of residue/cm?. Sprayed cadavers were air-dried for 2 h and were then
transferred individually onto unsprayed tomato leaf discs and processed as described above.
Leaftreatment
Ten leaf discs were individually dipped in each pesticide at either concentrations (CR and
CR/2) for 2 min and were then air-dried for 2 h. Similarly, ten leaf discs were sprayed with
2 ml of each pesticide solution. A cadaver taken from the stock culture was then placed in
the center of each disc, transferred onto moist sponge in a closed Petri dish and incubated at
25°C in darkness for 16 h, before sporulation was evaluated as described above. Control
leaf discs were dipped in or sprayed with distilled water amended with 0.05% Tween 80
and all other experimental procedures were similar to those described above.
Effect of pesticides on germination of primary conidia
Three square photo-etched coverslips (23 × 23 mm) (Electron Microscopy Sciences,
Hatfield, PA, USA) with alphanumeric coded squares were immersed into or sprayed with
the mean concentration (CR) of each pesticide and air-dried for 2 h before two cadavers
water amended in 0.05% Tween 80. The coverslips with cadavers were then transferred
onto a sponge soaked in distilled water in a closed Petri dish at 25°C in darkness for 16 h.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
291
Gerrmination of conidia was observed using a compound microscope and the number of
germinated and un-germinated conidia in five arbitrarily selected squares within the field of
view was recorded using an enumeration counter. Total conidial germination included
conidia that were in the process of forming or had already formed secondary conidia or capil.
liconidia. Percent germination was computed by dividing the number of germinated conidia
with the total number of conidia counted in a specified field and multiplying by 100
Effect of pesticides on infectivity of capilliconidia
Leaf discs with sporulating cadavers—frorm the study on the effect of pesticides on
sporulation by immersion and spraying—were used to test the infectivity of the produced
capilliconidia. Only leaf discs with the highest spore numbers (category 3) were selected
for the test. Fifteen T. evansi females were introduced onto each of the ten leaf discs
containing the spores and placed at 25°C in the incubation chamber. Mortality of these
mites was checked daily for 7 days.
Effect of pesticides on mortality of N. foridana inoculated T. evansi
Only Captan and Methomyl were used in this study because they were the only pesticides that
did not kill the mites exposed to leaf discs containing these pesticides. Ten leaf discs were
immersed into each pesticide in a single concentration (CR) and allowed to dry for 2 h. Fifteen
T. evansi females were transferred to the treated leaf discs. After 48 h of feeding on the treated
leaf discs, the mites were transferred to new leaf discs each with a sporulating N. foridana
cadaver. These mites stayed for 24 h on these leaf discs for contarmination and were then
transferred to new and larger leaf discs and observed daily for infection and mortality for
7 days. Control leaf discs were immersed in distilled water amended with 0.05% Tween 80
and all other experimental procedures were as described for the pesticide treatments. The leaf
discs were changed after the fourth day. Dead mites were mounted and observed under the
microscope for hyphal bodies to confirm that the cause of death was N. foridana.
Data analysis
The effects of pesticides on sporulation, germination and infectivity were compared by
using a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with treatment, concentration and applica-
tion method as factors (PROC GLM, SAS Institute 1998). Percentages germination and
mortality were arcsine transformed before analysis to homogenize variances. Means were
within group treatment effects.
Results
Effect of pesticides on sporulation of N. foridana
Cadaver treatment
The negative effect of pesticides on N. foridana sporulation was higher when the cadavers
were immersed into pesticides than when sprayed (F3s,324 = 11.66, P = 0.0001) (Table 2).
292
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
or spraying with mean recommended concentration (CR) or half that concentration (CR/2) of pesticides
Pesticide
Imrmersed cadavers
Sprayed cadavers
CR/2
CR
CR/2
CR
Methomy]
1.7 ± 0.2bc
1.4 ± 0.2c
2.3 ± 0.2ab
2.6 ± 0.2a
2.3 ± 0.3ab
2.3 ± 0.1ab
Lambda-cyhalothrin
1.8 ± 0.2bc
1.5 ± 0.2c
2.2 ± 0.2ab
2.3 ± 0.3ab
2.3 ± 0.3ab
2.7 ± 0.2a
Propargite
2.5 ± 0.2b
0.3 ±0.2d
2.5 ± 0.2ab
1.9 ± 0.4bc
1.9 ± 0.4bc
2.5 ± 0.2ab
Abamectin
3.0 ± 0a
1.3 ± 0.4c
2.8 ± 0.1a
1.8± 0.4bc1.6±0.4bc
2.4± 0.2ab
Captan
0.6 ± 0.2c
70002090q7017070E0
12.4± 0.3a
Mancozeb
30F00
200 F00
1.6 ± 0.2b
0.3±0.2cd0.1±0.1cd2.4±0.2a
Numbers of conidia (Mean ± SE) were estimated based on a categorical scale of 0 = 0, 1 = 1-100, 2 = 101-
500,and 3 =>501 conidia/mummified mite
Means within columns and rows followed by the same letters are not significantly different (DMRT, P >0.05)
When cadavers were immersed into the pesticides, Lambda-cyhalothrin, Methomyl,
Abamectin and Propargite had no effect on sporulation at CR/2 concentration but
sporulation was lower at CR. Captan and Mancozeb significantly reduced sporulation
both at CR/2 and CR. When cadavers were sprayed with the pesticides, Methomyl,
Lambda-Cyhalothrin, Propargite and Abamectin had no effect on sporulation at neither
of the concentrations.Cadavers sprayed with Mancozeb and Captan sporulatedless both
at CR/2 and CR.
Leaftreatment
Cadavers placed on leaf discs that were immersed into Lambda-Cyhalothrin sporulated and
produced as many conidia as the control (Table 3). Methomyl, Propargite and Abamectin at
CR/2 did not affect sporulation, but at CR these pesticides affected sporulation. Mancozeb and
on leaf discs, sporulation was unaffected at the lower concentration, but at CR sporulation was
affected. Leaf discs sprayed with CR/2 or CR of Methomyl, Lambda-Cyhalothrin, Abamectin
and Captan did not result in differences in sporulation. Mancozeb, however, inhibited
sporulation at both CR/2 and CR when leaf discs were sprayed. In general, sporulation was
significantly higher when leaf discs were sprayed than when immersed in both Mancozeb and
Captan (F11,10s = 11.78, P =0.0001).
Effect of pesticides on germination of primary conidia
Gerrmination of primary conidia was significantly affected by the pesticides and also by the
method of pesticides application: immersion and spray of coverslips (Table 4). Propargite and
Mancozeb totally inhibited germination of conidia after immersion of coverslips. When
coverslips were sprayed, germination was totally inhibited by Mancozeb and only 7.0 ± 2.0%
of primary conidia gerrminated when sprayed with Propargite. Lambda-Cyhalothrin and
Captan also reduced gerrmination in both application methods. Methomyl was the only
pesticide that did not affect germination when coverslips were either immersed or sprayed.
Overall, germination of primary conidia was significantly higher on coverslips that were
sprayed than irmmersed (F29,6o = 22.51, P = 0.0001).
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
293
Table 3Sporulation of Neozygites foridana from mummified Tetranychus evansi females on leaf discs im-
mersed or sprayed with mean recommended concentration (CR) or half the mean recommended concen tration
(CR/2) of pesticides
Pesticide
Irmmersed leaf discs
Sprayed leaf discs
CR/2
CR
Control
CR/2
CR
Control
Methomy]
2.0± 0.2b
1.4 ± 0.2d
2.2 ± 0.2b
2.9± 0.1a
2.9±0.1a
2.9 ± 0.1a
Lambda-cyhalothrin
1.9 ±0.2bc
1.7± 0.2bc
2.0 ± 0.3bc
2.5 ± 0.3abc
2.1± 0.4bcd
2.7± 0.2ab
Propargite
3.0±0.0a
1.8 ± 0.4bc
3.0 ± 0.0a
2.1± 0.4bc
1.9 ±0.3cd
2.7 ± 0.2ab
Abamectin
2.9 ± 0.1a
1.9 ± 0.4bc
3.0 ± 0.0a
2.5 ± 0.3abc
2.3 ± 0.3abc
2.3 ±0.2abc
Captan
0.7±0.3e
0.4±0.2ef
2.2± 0.2b
1.7 ±0.5abc
1.4±0.4cde
2.5±0.2abc
Mancozeb
0.0±0.0g
80'0 F0′0
1.9 ± 0.2bcd
1.0 ± 0.3de
0.7 ±0.4de
2.5 ±0.2abc
Numbers of conidia (Mean ± SE) were estimated based on a categorical scale of 0 = 0, 1 = 1-100, 2 = 101-
500,and 3=>501 conidia/mummified mite
Means within columns and rows followed by same letters are not significantly different (DMRT, P > 0.05)
Table 4 Effect of pesticides on germination of Neozygites foridana primary conidia when cadavers were
placed to sporulate on coverslips immersed into or sprayed with mean recommended concen tration (CR) of
pesticides
Pesticide
Immersed coverslips
Sprayed coverslips
CR
Contro]
CR
Control
Methomy]
78.2 ± 5.8abc
70.2 ± 5.8abc
84.7 ± 2.0a
78.1 ± 7.6a
Lambda-cyhalothrin
42.8 ± 21.7d
70.2 ± 5.8abc
61.3 ± 4.8bc
78.1 ± 7.6a
Abamectin
54.9 ± 11.2 cd
56.6 ± 9.0 cd
57.1 ± 4.2 cd
82.5 ± 4.0a
Propargite
0.0±0.0e
56.6 ± 9.0 cd
7.0 ± 2.0e
82.5 ± 4.0a
Captan
21.4 ± 1.4e
59.4 ± 9.5bcd
66.8 ± 4.1bc
77.7 ± 0.7a
Mancozeb
0.0± 0.0e
59.4 ± 9.5bcd
0.0±0.0e
77.7 ± 0.7a
Data are mean percent germinahion ± SE
Means within columns and rows followed by the same letters are not significantly different (DMRT, P > O.05)
Effect of pesticides on infectivity of capilliconidia
Infectivity of conidia after exposure to pesticides was measured as a function of mortality
of the exposed mites. More than half of the mites transferred to leaf discs treated with
 Propargite, Abamectin, Mancozeb or Lambda-Cyhalothrin died after 1 day indicating a
direct effect of the products on the mites and therefore these products were not used in the
infectivity test (Table 5). Methomyl and Captan were the only pesticides used to test
infectivity when leaf discs were either immersed or sprayed. Lower mortality of fungus-
inoculated mites was observed when leaf discs were immersed rather than sprayed with
Methomyl and Captan (F9,3g =10.22, P =0.0001) regardless of the concentration used,
 indicating an effect of the pesticide application method. Neither Methomyl nor Captan
affected infectivity when leaf discs were sprayed with the pesticides. However, reduced
infectivity was seen for leaf discs immersed into pesticides at CR. When cadavers were
either immersed or sprayed, all pesticides except Mancozeb (not tested due to insufficient
sporulation) were used to test pathogenicity of the sporulating fungus. None of the
pesticides reduced the percent of mites killed by N. foridana compared to the controls.
However, when cadavers were sprayed, mite mortality was higher than when immersed
294
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Table5Effectof pesicides oninfectivity of NeozygitesforidanacapilliconidiatoTetranychus evansiwhen
leaf discs were immersed or sprayed with mean concentration (CR) or half the mean concentration (CR/2) of
pesticides
Pesticide
Irmirmiersed leaf discs
Sprayed leaf discs
CR/2
CR
Contro]
CR/2
CR
Contro]
Methomy]
47.3 ± 7.4cd
41.8 ± 4.4d
61.3 ± 6.1bc
76.9 ± 6.4ab
82.6 ± 1.4a
76.9 ± 2.4ab
Captan
48.2 ± 4.9cd39.5 ± 3.0d
161.3 ± 6.1bc
77.5 ± 6.7ab
77.1 ± 6.0b
76.9 ± 2.4ab
Means within columns and rows followed by the same letters are not significantly diferent (DMRT, P > 0.05)
mummifeid mites were irmmersed in or sprayed with mean recommended concentration (CR) or half the mean
recommended concentration (CR/2) of pesticides
Pesticide
Immersed cadavers
Sprayed cadavers
CR/2
CR
Contro]
CR/2
CR
Contro]
Methomy]
56.0 ± 4.0cdef 53.3 ± 3.4cdef 61.3 ± 6.1bcde 70.5 ± 5.8abcd 82.8 ± 5.1a 72.9 ± 3.4abc
Lambda-
55.6 ± 4.8cdef 53.0 ± 4.6def 61.3 ± 6.1bcde 73.7 ± 7.1abc 77.7 ± 6.1ab 72.9 ± 3.4abc
Captan
40.4 ± 4.7f
46.7 ± 6.7ef 52.0 ± 5.6def 70.4 ± 4.4abcd 77.8 ± 6.2ab 79.0 ± 4.7ab
Abamectin
54.9 ± 6.7cdef 51.3 ± 5.7def 60.3 ± 3.8bcde 76.0 ± 3.4ab 75.3 ± 6.7ab 78.0 ± 5.4ab
Propargite
63.3 ± 4.9bcde 53.3 ± 3.9def 60.3 ± 3.8bcde 68.6 ± 8.9abcd 75.1 ± 7.2ab 78.0 ± 5.4ab
Data represents the percent mortality (mean ± SE) of T. evansi 7 days post-inoculation
Means within columns and rows followed by the same letters are not significantly different (DMRT, P >0.05)
into the pesticides (Fzs,97 = 4.30, P =0.0001) (Table 6). For all pesticides, mortality did not
differ between concentrations CR/2 and CR when cadavers were immersed (Fi,s =0.16,
P =0.70) or sprayed (F1,s = 0.20, P =0.67). Immersion of cadavers into Methomyl at CR
resulted in lower mite mortality than sprayed cadavers (F1,s = 18.17, P = 0.0028).
Effect of pesticides on mortality of N.foridana inoculated T.evansi
Neither Methomyl nor Captan affected mortality by N. foridana on T. evansi (F2.27 = 0.18,
 P =0.84). Mean mortality of mites that were placed onto leaf discs contaminated with
Methomyl, Captan or water (=control) before transfer to leaf discs with sporulating cadavers
of N. foridana was 73.2 ± 4.1, 76.5 ± 5.0 and 73.2 ± 4.4%, respectively.
Discussion
The detrimental effects of pesticides used to control insects, mites and fungal diseases in
commercial tomato production on sporulation, germination and infectivity of N. foridana
varied as a function of the methods of contamination, chemical nature and concentration.
The fungicides Mancozeb and Captan that resulted in the most negative effects on sporula-
tion and germination of N. foridana may reduce disease transmission and development of
     
(Dithane) reduced the incidence and efficiency of N. foridana in Tetranychus urticae Koch
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
295
in peanut fields. Brandenburg and Kennedy (1983) also reported a reduced incidence of
N. foridana in T. urticae after application of the fungicides Benomyl and Chlorothalonil
and associated this efect to inhibition of conidial germination by these fungicides.
Acaricides such as Propargite, which do not inhibit sporulation but affect primary
conidia gerrmination, may have a moderate effect on the fungus in the field compared to
those pesticides that inhibit sporulation because the life span of a primary conidium is
much shorter than the life span of a mummified mite. However, any pesticide that inhibits
the formation of capilliconidia, the only infective spores of N. foridana, may have an
impact on the overall mite control. The impact of Propargite on N. foridana can only be
determined conclusively with results from a field experiment.
No effects on infectivity of the capilliconidia was observed from the pesticides after
exposure. Seermingly, some pesticides inhibit sporulation or germination of primary
conidia, but the capilliconidia produced under the exposure of these pesticides mantain the
potential to infect their hosts. Viability of conidia is very important because the power of
the fungus to kill its hosts depends on this factor as only viable conidia have the capacity to
germinate and adhere tohealthyhosts.
It was expected that once the mites feed on pesticide contaminated leaves, they could
ingest and accumulate the pesticides that may inhibit vegetative growth of the fungus and
reduce mite mortality due to infection. Since the control mites were not subjected to pesticide
contarminated leaf discs, higher mortality due to the fungus was anticipated. However, mor-
tality in treatments with the insecticide Methomyl and the fungicide Captan was similar to the
mortality in the controls suggesting that the pesticides did not affect fungal development.
The effect of pesticides on N. foridana was higher when immersed than sprayed and
mn pasodxa si snun aun nn sonpad a yo sunon a um paeiosse Aqqad si s
despite being of equal concentration. Differences between the controls observed in the
gerrmination study were attributed to independent incubation of control lots together with
each pesticide group. It is also possible that Tween 80, the surfactant used in the two
controls, could have been the cause of differential germination because more of the
products could be retained on the coverslips when they were immersed than sprayed.
Although the spray tower method may give comparable results to field application of
pesticides, the equipment may not be readily available in many laboratories, as a result, its
use in pesticide testing may be limited. However, the effect of direct immersion of leaf
discs or cadavers into pesticide solutions is stronger and may not refect a field situation,
but it represents a rapid method to assess both direct and indirect effects of these pesticides
e n  ssd a a ssi    is a  s a 
during pest attack. Also, if a product is considered compatible with the pathogen in this
laboratory method (worst scenario) it may warrant selectivity in the field. The same line of 
thought applies to differences observed between maximum concentration and half the
that does not affect the fungi has higher chances of being non-toxic in the field than a low
concentration that is toxic under laboratory conditions.
An important consideration in the use of laboratory methods is the determination of how
accurately they represent field conditions. However, it is unlikely that pesticides which
affect the fungus at low concentrations in in vitro tests will fail to produce effects under
recommended field concentrations. Given that high toxicity of chemical products in labora
tory experiments does not always reveal high toxicity in the field, the laboratory tests are
useful and indicate the possibility of the effects that may occur in the field (Alves et al.
1998). Field applications of pesticides usually achieve less-than-perfect coverage, perhaps
providing spatial refugia for entomopathogenic fungi. Apart from the presence of refuges,
296
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
spatial heterogeneity, photodegradation and removal by rain could be possible reasons for
reduced exposure of the fungus to toxic compounds and this could be the reason why
in vitro studies and feld studies may not always produce similar results (Jaros-Su et al.
1999).
 The effect of pesticides on Neozygites spp. has been studied mostly in the field (Boykin
et al. 1984; Wells et al. 2000). Field studies are usually limited to a small number of
products and it takes a long time to reveal any differences in the infection levels or the
density of propagules in the soil. For this reason, there is need for the generation of labora-
tory data on the effect of pesticides on specific aspects of the fungus such as sporulation,
germination and viability. However, this has been hampered by lack of a defined protocol
to test this fungus without growing it on artificial media. The laboratory tests described
here simulate an in vivo situation and allow the fexibility of dosing a pesticide under con-
trolled conditions. These tests also bypass the process of growing N. foridana on artificial
media. The results obtained using these methods indicate that the insecticide Methomyl,
and the acaricide Abamectin produced varied efects on N. foridana with both inhibiting
sporulation at CR where leaf discs were immersed but not when sprayed. Methomyl also
reduces infectivity when leaf discs are immersed and not when sprayed. Thus, these
pesticides may not affect the inoculum potential of the N. foridana in the field and may be
compatible with conservation strategies of pest control. Lambda-Cyhalothrin has a mild
effect on conidia gerrmination of N. foridana when the coverslips are immersed and this
effect substantially reduces when they are sprayed. The acaricide Propargite strongly affects
gerrmination just like the fungicides Mancozeb and Captan both of which affect sporulation
and may not be compatible with N. foridana.
Acknowledgements We thank Prof. Dr. Gilberto Jose de Moraes and the two anonyrmous reviewers for
their valuable cormments on the ealier version of this manuscript, Prof. Dr. Celso Omoto for permission to use
of a fellowship from the Academy of Sciences for the Developing World (TW AS) and the Brazilian National
Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperafion and Development (BMZ)
References
Controle microbiano de insetos. FEALQ, Piracicaba, Brazil, pp 217-238
Blair BW (1989) Laboratory screening of acaricides against Tetranychus evansi Baker and Pritchard. Crop
Prot 8:212-216. d0i:10.1016/0261-2194(89)90029-X
Bower KN, Berkett LP, Costante JF (1995) Non-target effect of a fungicide spray prograrm on phytophagous
and predacious mite populaions in a scab-resistant apple orchard. Environ Entomol 24:423-430
Boykin LS, Carmpbell WV, Beute MK (1984) Effect of pesticides on Neozygites foridana (Entormophthorales:
Entomophthoraceae) and arthropod predators attacking the two-spotted spider mite (Acari: Tetranychidae)
in North Carolina peanut fields. J Econ Entomol 77:969-975
Brandenburg RL, Kennedy GG (1983) lnteractive effects of selected pesticides on the two-spotted spider mite
Camer GR,Canerday TD (1970) Entomophthora sp. as a factor in the regulation of the two-spotted spider
mite in cotton. J Econ Entomol 63:638-640
of Neozygites tanajoae (Zygomycetes: Entomophthorales) on produchion of conidia from cassava green
mite, Mononychettus tanajoa (Acari: Tetranychidae) cadavers. Biol Control 39:489-496. doi:10.1016/
j.biocontrol.2006.08.003
Hall 1M, Dunn PH (1959) The effect of certain insecticides and fungicides on the fungi pathogenic to alfalfa
aphid. J Econ Entomol 52:28-29
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
297
Humber RA, Moraes G], dos Santos JM (1981) Natural infection of Tetrarychus evarsi (Acarina: Tetranychidae)
by a Triplosporium spp. (Zygomycetes: Entomophthorales) in Northeastem Brazil. Entomophaga 26:421-
425. doi:10.1007/BF02374716
Jaros-Su J, Groden E, Zhang J (1999) Effects of selected fungicides and the timing of fungicide application
on Beauveria bassiana-induced mortality of the Colorado potato beele (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae).
Biol Control 15:259-269. doi:10.1006/bcon.1999.0724
Entomopthora sphaerosprema(Fresenius).Can Entomol 94:818-825
Kingen 1, Westrum K (2007) The effect of pesicides used in strawberries on the phytophagous mite
mycetes: Entomophthorales). Biol Control 43:222-230. doi: 10.1016/j.biocontrol.2007.07.013
Morjan WE, Pedigo LP, Lewis LC (2002) Fungicidal effects of Glyphosate and Glyphosate formulations on
four species of entomopathogenic fungi. Environ Entomol 31: 1206-1212
Oduor Gl, Yaninek JS, van der Geest LPS, de Moraes Gl (1996) Germination and viability of capilliconidia
of Neozygites foridana (Zygomycetes: Entomophthorales) under constant termperature, humidity, and
light conditions. J lnvertebr Pathol 67:267-278. doi: 10.1006/jipa.1996.0042
SAS Institute (1998) User's manual, version 7.0. SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA
Mill.) on red spider mite (Tetranychus evansi Baker and Pritchard) incidence and crop yieldin Zimbabwe.
Afr Crop Sci J 11:269-277
Smith JW, Furr RE (1975) Spider mites and some natural control agents found in cotton in the delta area of
Mississippi. Environ Entormol 4:559-560
Smitley DR, Brooks WM, Kennedy GG (1986) Environmental effects on production of primary and second-
ary conidia, infection and pathogenesis of Neozygites foridana, a pathogen of two-spotted spider mite,
Tetranychus urticae.J lnvertebrPathol 47:325-332.doi:10.1016/0022-2011(86)90103-5
Wells ML, McPherson RM, Ruberson JR, Herzog GA (2000) Effect of fungicide application on activity of
Neozygites fresenii (Entomophthorales: Neozygitacea) and cotton aphid (Homoptera: Aphididae) sup-
pression.JEcon Entomol 93:1118-1126
Yendol WG (1968) Factors affecting germination of Entomophthora conidia. J Invertebr Pathol 10: 116-121.
doi: 10.1016/0022-2011(68)90271-1
Natural enemies of mass-reared predatory mites (family
Phytoseiidae) used for biological pest control
SusanBjornson
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 14, 299-306.
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9187-1 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract Predatory mites of the family Phytoseiidae are valued natural enermies that pro-
vide effective pest control in greenhouses and on agricultural crops. Mass-reared phytosei-
ids are occasionally associated with microorganisms and although their effects are not
always apparent, some are pathogenic and reduce host fitess. Invertebrate pathogens are
encountered more frequently in mass production systems than in nature because rearing
sion and increase an individual's susceptibility to disease. Although unidentified microor-
ganisms have been reported in phytoseids, bacteria and microsporidia have been detected
accumulation of birefringent crystals in the legs of Phytoseiuius persimilis and infection
reduces the fitness of this spider mite predator.Wolbachia,detected in Metaseiulus occi-
dentalis and other phytoseids, may cause cytoplasmic incompatibilities that affect fecun-
dity. However, the effects of Rickettsiella phytoseiuli on P. persimilis are unknown.
Microsporidia are spore-forming pathogens that infect Neoseiulus cucumeris, N. barkeri,
M. occidentalis and P. persimilis. Microsporidia cause chronic, debilitating disease and
noticed. Routine screening of individuals is important to prevent diseased mites from being
introduced into existing mass-rearings and to ensure that mite populations remain free from
their management in phytoseiid mass-rearings are discussed.
KeywordsAmblyseius·Metaseiulus·Neoseiius·Phytoseiulus·Phytoseiids
Microorganisms · Bacteria · Microsporidia - Disease
S.Bjornson ()
Department of Biology, Saint Mary's Uni versity, 923 Robie Street, Halifax,
NS, Canada B3H 3C3
e-mail: susan.bjorn son @ smu.ca
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.), Diseases ofMites and Ticks. DOI: I0.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2_24 299
000
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Introduction
The spider mite predator, Phytoseiuius persimilis Athias-Henriot, was the first mass-pro-
duced natural enemy to be made commercially available for biological pest control in
Europe (van Lenteren et al. 1997). Since its introduction almost 40 years ago, phytoseiids
have gained recognition for their importance as natural enemies of thrips, whiteflies and
spider mites. Several phytoseiids are now available for pest control.
Phytoseiids, like other mass-produced and field-collected arthropods, are occasionally
associated with microorganisms. Although some microorganisms are known to affect host
fitness, the role of others has yet to be determined. Diseases, and the microorganisms that
cause them, are encountered more frequently in mass production systems than in nature
mission (Goodwin 1984). Overcrowding may also lead to temporary starvation or other
stresses, which are thought to increase disease susceptibility (Goodwin 1984; Kluge and
Caldwell 1992)
Once detected, the identification of a particular microorganism is essential if one is to
fore, the mere presence of a particular microbe is often insufficient for determining a cause
and effect relationship. Depending on the microorganism that is detected, a conclusive
satisfaction of Koch's Postulates.
This summary will focus on the types of natural enermies associated with phytoseiids,
their effects on host fitness and efficacy, the means by which disease-causing microbes are
detected, and strategies for their management in mass production systems. Further informa-
tion may be found in comprehensive reviews regarding the parasites, pathogens and
diseases of mites (Poinar and Poinar 1998; van der Geest et al. 2000) and pathogens of
mass-produced natural enemies and pollinators (Bjornson and Schitte 2003).
Unidentified microorganisms
Hess and Hoy (1982) reported two unidentified microorganisms in Metaseiuius occiden-
talis (Nesbitt) that are associated with two, distinct pathologies. Some adult females have
extruding rectal plugs that often stick to the substrate and prevent the affected mites from
moving. Other mites become thin and translucent and high mortality is observed among
immature mites. In both cases, affected females fail to oviposit or produce few eggs. One
type of microorganism was found in all mites examined but it is not considered to be detri-
mental to M. occidentalis. However, a second, rickettsia-like microorganism found in the
ovaries of some females is associated with rectal plug formation. Both pathologies are
observed when mites are reared under crowded conditions.
Viruses
present only in the cytoplasm of cells infected with Rickettsiella phytoseiufi. The authors
conclude that the virus inadvertently infects P. persimilis when virus-contaminated food is
ingested. Mites infected with R. phytoseiufi and the yirus show no external signs associated
 iai     ou si  ns   
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
301
1988). In other studies, non-occluded viruses were observed in Neoseiuius (formerly
Amblyseius) cucumeris (Oudemans) and P. persimilis (Steiner 1993; Bjornson et al. 1997)
but their effects are unknown.
Bacteria
Hoy and Jeyaprakash (2005) sequenced four bacterial genomes from M. occidentalis and
three additional genomes from the spider mite Tetranychus urticae Koch, which is often
prey for M. occidentalis and other phytoseiids. Although Wolbachia are the only microor-
ganisms detected in both M. occidentalis and T. urticae, there are no genetic differences in
the rRNA sequences of these microorganisms. Wolbachia are thought to cause cytoplasmic
incompatibility in M. occidentalis (Johanowicz and Hoy 1996) and although other microor-
ganisms have been detected in this predator (Hess and Hoy 1982; Jeyaprakash and Hoy
2004; Hoy and Jeyaprakash 2005), they may or may not affect host fitness. Wolbachia are
also detected in other phytoseiids (Steiner 1993) but their effects on host fitness have not
been established.
Rickettsiella phytoseiuli was detected in P. persimilis from a laboratory mass-rearing in
the USSR (Suiakova and Rittgen 1978) but not in predators that were examined from other
sources (Sufakova and Arutunyan 1990). R. phytoseiuli is a pleomorphic (able to assume
different forms) bacterium that was detected in all mites examined. It is present in most tis-
sues of adult mites and is particularly abundant in the dorsal body region. However, this
bacterium does not infect immature P. persimilis.
The bacterium Acaricomes phytoseiuli causes specific disease symptoms in adult female
2006a). Although molecular screening revealed that A. phytoseiuli is a rather common
pathogen in European populations of P. persimilis, the bacterium has not been detected in
 mites frorm other continents (Gols et al. 2007). Mites with non-responding syndrome do not
react as strongly to herbivore-induced plant volatiles as do uninfected mites (Schitte et al.
2006a). This aberrant behaviour may develop in unaffected mites when they are exposed to
live, non-responsive females or their faeces (Schitte et al. 2006b)
Although normal in size after mating, the majority of female predators (76%) from the
non-responding population becomes dorso-ventrally flattened, has reduced oviposition
rates and dies prematurely. Affected mites consume few prey and tend to disperse from
areas where prey is located. Mortality is higher for non-responsive mites than for
P. persimilis that respond to herbivore-induced plant volatiles and some affected females
have an accumulation of birefringent, dumbbell-shaped crystals in their legs. Unaffected
(responsive) females may accumulate similar crystals in their bodies but these are restricted
to the Malpighian tubules and rectum.
Arutunjan (1985) described dumbbell-shaped entities in the gut of P. persimilis as bacte-
ria. These entities are similar in morphology to dumbbell-shaped crystals that were
when live mites are exarmined by stereomicroscopy. Mites may have a white dot in the dis-
the body in the region of the Malpighian tubules. Occasionally predators with both
symptoms are observed (Bjomson and Raworth 2003) and in some cases, crystals accumu-
late in the legs (Schitte et al. 2006a). The proportion of white opisthosomal coloration in
302
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
treated with high concentrations of 20-20-20 (N-P-K) fertilizer. Furthermore, some
symptomatic mites become asymptomatic after wastes are egested from the anus (Bjornson
and Raworth 2003). Birefringent crystals are thought to be excreted under normal
circumstances but in some cases, crystal accumulation is linked to reduced fecundity and
accumulate in the legs (Schitte et al. 2006a).
Discoloration of the distal opisthosoma has been observed in Euseius hibisci (Chant)
when fed a diet consisting only of citrus red mites, Panonychus citri (McGregor) (see
      s         
is attributed to incomplete digestion of prey. Predators become less robust at successive
moults and adult females are dorso-ventrally fattened and produce few or no eggs. The
authors conclude that E. hibisci is not an obligate predator of P. citri and requires pollen as
well as prey mites for food.
In many cases, bacteria are readily detected by light microscopy. Simple and differential
staining provides some information regarding bacterial shape, size and morphology but fur-
ther tests are required for taxonomic identification (see Pukall et al. 2006). Transmission
electron microscopy and molecular techniques can be used to detect and identify bacteria
(Wolbachia and Rickettsia) that are too small to be observed by light microscopy (see
Jeyaprakash and Hoy 2004; Hoy and Jeyaprakash 2005). Antibiotics are used to eliminate
Wolbachia from insect parasitoids (Dedeine et al. 2001; Lundgren and Heimpel 2003) but
the efficacy of such remedies in mass-reared phytoseiids has not been investigated.
Microsporidia
Microsporidia are spore-forming, intracellular pathogens that cause sub-lethal and debili-
tating disease. Microsporidian spores may be transmitted both horizontally (from one indi-
vidual to another) or vertically (from parent to offspring) and are somewhat resistant to
harsh environmental conditions (Maddox 1973). Mass-reared arthropods are often confined
 to small areas and high host population densities favour pathogen transmission. Microspor-
idia may remain undetected in mite colonies because symptoms are not usually associated
with infection. These pathogens may be detected once predatory mites fail to thrive and a
decrease in their productivity is noticed.
Microsporidia reduce the productivity of mass-reared N. cucumeris and N. barkeri
(Hughes) (Beerling and van der Geest 1991). These predators are commercially available
for controlling western fower and onion thrips [Frankliniella occidentalis (Pergande) and
Thrips tabaci Lindeman], respectively. Symptoms of infection (sluggishness, swollen and
whitish bodies) are observed only in heavily infected individuals when spores are abun-
dant. The organs of these individuals are occluded when whole mounts of mites are exam-
ined by light microscopy. Prey mites (Acarus siro L. and Tyrophagus putrescentiae
Schrank) are also infected. Symptoms are similar to those observed for N. cucumeris and
N. barkeri but less pronounced. Based on spore dimensions and the hosts infected, three
microsporidia are thought to infect both predatory and prey mites of this production system
(Beerling and van der Geest 1991; Beerling et al. 1993).
Beerling and van der Geest (1991) conclude that vertical transmission plays an impor-
gest several possible means for successful horizontal transmission. These include: direct
contact with spores that are liberated into the environment, direct contact between healthy
and diseased individuals,and transmission through cannibalism or grooming.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
303
Host fitness of the spider mite predator, M. occidentalis, is reduced when laboratory
colonies are infected with the microsporidium, Oligosporidium occidentalis. Microsporidia-
infected mites do not live as long or produce as many eggs as uninfected mites and
microsporidiosis results in male-biased sex ratios (Olsen and Hoy 2002). O. occidentalis
produces two types of spores: one is common in immature and young adult mites whereas
the other is found in eggs and in older adults. The first spore type is slightly smaller than the
latter and is thought to be important for autoinfection (re-infection of the same host) and
transovarial (vertical) transmission of the pathogen. The second spore type is thought to be
transmitted horizontally (Becnel et al. 2002). Cannibalism of eggs and immatures by
M. occidentalis adult females provides a route for pathogen transmission (Olsen and Hoy
 2002). Microsporidian spores and other developmental stages infect several host tissues but
there are no external signs associated with infection (Becnel et al. 2002). Spider mites
(T. urticae) are not infected with the pathogen.
Three microsporidia were found in the spider mite predator P. persimilis from three
commercial sources (Bjomson and Keddie 2000). Microsporidia reduce the fecundity, lon-
gevity and prey consumption of infected P. persimilis females (Bjomson and Keddie
1999). As is the case for M. occidentalis, sex ratios of microsporidia-infected P. persimilis
are male-biased and although several host tissues are infected, there are no overt external
o s        s s  s
microsporidia may reduce the performance of predators (Bjomson and Keddie 1999; Olsen
 and Hoy 2002) and may ultimately prevent predator populations frorm becorming estab-
lished in new environments.
One of the microsporidian pathogens in P. persimilis is transmitted vertically and may
become prevalent within mass-rearings over a short time (Bjornson and Keddie 2001).
Horizontal transmission occurs through direct contact but this is not observed frequently
under laboratory conditions. Prey mites (7. urticae) are not infected with microsporidia and
Microsporidia are also known to infect A. siro and T. putrescentiae in phytoseiid mass-
rearings (Beerling et al. 1993; Larsson et al. 1997) but horizontal transmission of micro-
 sporidia from prey to predatory mites has not been demonstrated. Even if microsporidia
from infected prey mites prove to be host specific and are not transmitted to predators, it is
important to ensure that prey mite colonies remain free from these pathogens. Microsporid-
iosis may affect the vigour of prey mites and the sustainability of phytoseiid colonies that
depend on prey mites for food.
Routine examination of infected phytoseids by light microscopy can be labour-inten-
sive and require some expertise but it is a reliable and relatively inexpensive means of
detecting microsporidian spores. Microsporidia may be present in only a few individuals
when pathogen prevalence is low; therefore, the examination of many individuals from a
made from whole mites that are air-dried, fixed in methanol and stained in buffered Giemsa
prior to their examination by light microscopy.
Screening may be used as a means to isolate healthy individuals and establish micro-
progeny, which are also isolated. When vertical transmission of a microsporidium is high,
as may be the case in M. occidentalis and P. persimilis mass-rearings (Bjomson and Keddie
2001; Olsen and Hoy 2002), random examination of some of these progeny over a pro-
longed period will help determine if the parent female is infected. As a final measure, each
parent female is examined for microsporidian spores to verify that her remaining progeny
are pathogen-free. In this way, uninfected mites may be isolated from infected ones and
304
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
microsporidia-free colonies may be established from the uninfected progeny. This tech-
nique of separating uninfected individuals from infected ones is referred to as Pasteur's
method (Tanada and Kaya 1993). Although other methods for removing microsporidia
from arthropods have proven successful (Olsen and Hoy 2002), the methodology intro-
duced by Pasteur remains the only means for definitively removing microsporidia frorm
arthropod colonies with low levels of infection.
Another means of detecting microsporidia in phytoseiids involves the use of monoclonal
antibodies for ELISA testing (Beerling et al. 1993). Although immunoassays may be
efficient for detecting pathogens in mass-reared arthropods, the use of ELISA testing
requires specialized equipment and may be costly to develop.
In some cases, microsporidia may be reduced or eliminated by treating infected arthro-
pods with chemicals or heat treatments (Hsiao and Hsiao 1973; Geden et al. 1995; Olsen
and Hoy 2002). Although antimicrosporidial agents (benzimidazole) have been used for
controlling microsporidia in insects with variable success, chemical compounds do not pro-
vide effective control of microsporidia in P. persimilis (Bjornson 1998). Further studies
may prove fruitful; however, chemical compounds may not be well suited for controlling
microsporidia in phytoseiids. Chermicals are usually added to artificial diets or sugar
solutions but some arthropods (particularly phytoseiids) cannot be reared successfully on
artificial diets. Furthermore, it is difficult to determine how much of the chemical agent is
consumed when chemicals are added to food that is eaten.
Heat treatments are successful for reducing infection in M. occidentalis (Olsen and Hoy
2002). The number of viable microsporidian spores is reduced when microsporidia-infected
mites are reared at high temperatures (32-35°C) for several days. Under these conditions,
spores that remain in the host tissues are thought to become non-viable because all subse-
ments are successful for eliminating microsporidia from M. occidentalis,this technique
may be of limited value when used to control microsporidia in other phytoseiids. The mor-
tality of M.occidentalis waslow(~20%;Olsenand Hoy 2002)when individuals were
reared at high temperatures; however, P. persimilis does not survive well at high tempera-
tures and heat treatments are not effective for controlling microsporidia in this predator
(Bjornson 1998). Spore viability is dependent on environmental factors, including tempera-
ture, humidity, and exposure to ultraviolet light (Maddox 1973). The use of heat treatments
as a means to reduce microsporidiosis in M. occidentalis (Olsen and Hoy 2002) provides
evidence that pathogen development and spore viability may be reduced when rearing
conditions are altered. Sanitation of rearing facilities and equipment also helps reduce
pathogen transmission.
Conclusion
Although many factors infuence the outcome of a particular biological control program,
tebrate pathogens are often overlooked in scientific studies and in mass-production systems
when things go awry. It is essential to use pathogen-free beneficial arthropods in scientific
studies if quality control testing is to have meaning and to avoid the misinterpretation of
data (Goodwin 1984).
Not all microorganisms are pathogenic; therefore, it is important to correctly identify all
microorganisms and determine their impact on host fitness. Both bacteria and microspor-
idia have been reported from mass-reared phytoseiids and some of these cause subtle
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
305
symptoms that may be overlooked. Quarantine of introduced or newly-acquired arthropods,
in combination with routine microscopic examination of feld-collected specimens (or
specimens otherwise introduced into a mass rearing), is recommended so that invertebrate
pathogens are not inadvertently introduced into existing arthropod colonies (Goodwin
1984; Bjornson and Keddie 1999).
References
Arutunjan ES (1985) Structural peculiarities of the digestive tract in phytoseid mites. Zb Biol (Arm) 38:590
596
Becnel J1, Jeyaprakash A, Hoy MA, Shapiro A (2002) Morphological and rmolecular characterization of a
new microsporidian species from the predatory mite Metaseiulus occidentatis (Nesbitt) (Acari, Phyto-
seiidae). J lnvertebr Patho] 79: 163-172
Beerling EAM, Rouppe van der Voort JN, Kwakman P(1993) Microsporidiosis in mass rearings predatory
Beerling EAM, van der Geest LPS (1991) Microsporidiosis in mass-rearings of the predatory mites Ambtyse-
ius cucumeris and A.barkeri(Acarina: Phytoseiidae).Proc Exper & Appl Entormol 2:157-162
Bjomson S. 1998. Morphology and pathology of the predatory mite, Phytoseiutus persimiltis Athias-Henriot
(Acari: Phytoseidae). PhD Thesis. University of Alberta, Edmonton, 232 pp
Bjornson S, Keddie BA (1999) Effects of Microsporidium phytoseiuti (Microsporidia) on the perforrmance of
the predatory mite, Phytoseiutus persimilis (Acari: Phytoseidae). Biol Control 15:153-161
predatory mite, Phytoseiutus persimilis Athias-Henriot. J Invertebr Pathol 76:293-300
Bjornson S, Keddie BA (200l) Disease prevalence and transmission of Microsporidium phytoseiutiinfecting
the predatory mite, Phytoseiutus persimitis (Acari, Ph ytoseidae). J ln vertebr Pathol 77: 114119
Bjornson S, Raworth DA (2003) Effects of plant nutrition on the expression of abdominal discoloration in
Phytoseiutus persimitis(Acari:Phytoseidae). Can Entomol 135:129-138
simitis Athias-Henriot: Prevalence of symptoms and their correlation with short-term performance. Biol
Control 19:17-27
Bjornson S, Schitte C (2003) Pathogens of mass-produced natural enemies and pollinators. In: van Lenteren
Publishing, Wallingford, UK, pp 133-165
Bjomson S, Steiner MY, Keddie BA (1997) Birefringent crystals and abdominal discoloration in the preda-
tory mite Phytoseiulus persimilis (Acari: Phytoseiidae). J In vertebr Pathol 69:85-91
Dedeine F, Vavre F, Fleury F, Loppin B, Hochberg ME, Bouletreau M (200l) Removing symbiotic Wotba-
chia bacteria specifically inhibits 0ogenesisin a parasiic wasp. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:6247-6252
Geden CJ, Long SJ, Rutz DA, Becnel J1 (1995) Nosema disease of the parasitoid Muscidifurax raptor(Hyme-
noptera: Preromalidae): prevalence, pattems of transmission, management, and impact. Biol Contro]
5:607-614
Gols R, Schitte C, Stouthamer R,Dicke M (2007) PCR-based identification of the pathogenic bacterium
Acaricomes phytoseiuti, in the biological control agent Phytoseiutus persimitis (Acari: Phytoseiidae).
Biol Control 42:3 16-325
Goodwin RH (1984) Recognition and diagnosis of diseases in insectaries and the effects of disease agents on
insect biology. In: King EG, Leppla NC (eds) Advances and challenges in insect rearing. US Department
of Agricuture, New Orleans, Louisiana, pp 96-129
Hess RT, Hoy MA (1982) Microorganisms associated with the spider mite predator Metaseiutus (= Typhto-
dromus) occidentatis: electron microscope observations. J In vertebr Pathol 40:98-106
Phytoseidae) and its prey, Tetranychus urticae (Acani: Tetranychidae). Biol Control 32:427-44 1
Hsiao TH, Hsiao C (1973) Benomyl: a nove] drug for controlling a microsporidian disease of the alfalfa
wee vil. J lnvertebr Pathol 22:303-304
improves detechion of bacteria from single females or eggs of Metaseiutus occidentatis (Nesbitt) (Acari:
Ph ytoseidae). J Invertebr Pathol 86: 11 1-1 16
Johanowicz DL, Hoy MA ( 1996) Wolbachia in a predator-prey system: 16S ribosomal DNA analysis of two phy-
toseids (Acari: Phytoseidae) and their prey (Acari: Tetranychidae). Ann Entomo] Soc Am 89:435-441
90
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Kluge RL, Caldwell PM ( 1992) Microsporidian diseases and biological weed control agents: to release or not
to release? Biocont News & lnfo 13:43N-47N
Larsson Jl, Steiner MY, Bjornson S (1997) Intexta acarivora gen. et. sp. n. (Microspora: Chytridiopsidae)
Utrastructural study and descriphion of a new microsporidian parasite of the forage mite Tyrophagus
putrescentiae (Acari: Acaridae). Acta Protozool 36:295-304
Lundgren JG, Heimpel GE (2003) Quality assessment of three species of commercially produced Trichogramma
and its first report of thelytoky in commercially produced Trichog ramma. Bio Control 26:68-73
Maddox JV (1973) The persistence of the microsporidia in the environment. Misc Publ Entomo] Soc Amer
9:99-104
Olsen LE, Hoy MA (2002) Heat curing Metaseiutus occidentatis (Nesbitt) (Acari, Phytoseiidae) of a fitness-
reducing microsporidiur.J Invertebr Pathol 79:173-178
Poinar G Jr, Poinar R (1998) Parasites and pathogens of mites. Annu Rev Entomol 43:449-469
Pukal R, Schumann P, Schitte C, Gols R, Dicke M (2006) Acaricomes phytoseiuti gen.nov., sp. nov.,iso-
lated from the predatory mite Phytoseiutus persimilis. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 56:465-469
(Acari, Phytoseidae): 1. Sy mptoms in adult females. Exper Appl Acarol 38:275-297
Schitte C, Poitevin O, Negash T, Dicke M (2006b) A novel disease affecing the predatory mite Phytoseiutus
persimilis (Acari, Phytoseidae): 2. Disease transmission by adult females. Exper Appl Acaro] 39:85-103
Steiner MY (1993) Quality control requirerments for pest biological control agents. Alberta Govermment
Publication AECV93-R6, Vegreville AB
Sutakova G (1988) Electron microscopic study of developmental stages of Rickettsietla phytoseiuli in
Phytoseiutus persimitis Athias-Henriot (Gamasoidea: Phytoseidae) mites. Acta Virol 32:50-54
Sutakova G,Arutunyan ES (1990)The spidermite predator Phytoseiutus persimtis andits association with
microorganisms: an electron microscope study. Acta Entomol Bohemoslov 87:431-434
Sutakova G, Rittgen F (1978) Ricketsietta phytoseiuti and virus-like particles in Phytoseiutus persimitis
(Gamasoidea: Phytoseiidae) mites. Acta Virol 22:333-336
Tanada Y, Kaya HK (1993) lnvertebrate Pathology. Academic Press, San Diego 666
Tanagoshi LK, Fagerulund J, Nishio-Wong JY (1981) Significance of temperature and food resources to the
developmental biology of Amblyseius hibisci (Chant) (Acarina, Phytoseidae). Z Ang Ent 92:409-419
van der Geest LPS, Elliott SL, Breeuwer JAJ, Beerling EAM (2000) Diseases of mites. Exper Appl Acarol
24:497-560
biological con trol of pests in Europe. Biol Con trol 10: 143-149
Verified and potential pathogens of predatory mites
(Acari:Phytoseiidae)
Conny Schitte · Marcel Dicke
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 1-4, 307-328.
DOl: 10.1007/s10493-008-9188-0 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract Several species of phytoseiid mites (Acari: Phytoseiidae), including species of
the genera Amblyseius,Galendromus, Metaseiulus, Neoseiulus,Phytoseiuius and Typhlo-
dromus, are currently reared for biological control of various crop pests and/or as model
organisms for the study of predator-prey interactions. Pathogen-free phytoseiid mites are
important to obtain high efficacy in biological pest control and to get reliable data in mite
research, as pathogens may affect the performance of their host or alter their reproduction and
behaviour. Potential and verified pathogens have been reported for phytoseid mites during
the past 25 years. The present review provides an overview, including potential pathogens
with unknown host effects (17 reports), endosymbiotic Wolbachia (seven reports), other
bacteria (including Cardinium and Spiroplasma) (four reports), cases of unidentified diseases
(three reports) and cases of verified pathogens (six reports). From the latter group four reports
refer to Microsporidia, one to a fungus and one to a bacterium. Only five entities have been
studied in detail, including Wolbachia infecting seven predatory mite species, other endo-
symbiotic bacteria infecting Metaseitius (Galendromus, Typhiodromus) occidentalis
(Nesbitt), the bacterium Acaricomes phytoseiuli infecting Phytoseiulus persimilis Athias-
Henriot, the microsporidium Microsporidium phytoseiuli infecting P. persimilis and the
microsporidium Oligosproridium occidentalis infecting M. occidentalis. In four cases
(Wolbachia, A. phytoseiuli, M. phytoseiuli and O. occidentalis) an infection may be con-
nected with fitness costs of the host. Moreover, infection is not always readily visible as no
obvious gross symptoms are present. Monitoring of these entities on a routine and continuous
attention should be paid to field-collected mites before introduction into the laboratory or
mass rearing, and to mites that are exchanged among rearing facilities. However, at present
general pathogen monitoring is not yet practical as effects of many entities are unknown
More research effort is needed concerning verified and potential pathogens of commercially
reared arthropods and those used as model organisms in research.
C. Schitte (β) · M. Dicke
Laboratory of Entomology, Wageningen University, P.O. Box 8031,
6700 EH Wageningen, The Netherlands
e-mail: conny.schuette@ telfort.n]
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.). Diseases of Mites αand Ticks. DOl: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2_25307
308
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Keywords
    
Protozoa·Fungi·Biologicalcontrol
Introduction
Several species of phytoseiid mites, including species of the genera Amblyseius, Galen-
dromus, Metaseiutus, Neoseiulus, Phytoseiulus and Typhlodromus, are currently reared for
biological control of pests, including spider mites (Tetranychus spp.) and thrips (Thrips
tabaci Lindeman and Frankliniella occidentalis Pergande) in protected crops, outdoor
vegetables, fruit and other horticultural crops (van Lenteren 2003a, b). Phytoseiid predatory
mites include specialists such as Phytoseiuius persimilis Athias-Henriot, which attack
spider mites (Tetranychus spp.), selective predators such as Neoseiuius (Ambtyseius) cali-
fornicus (McGregor) and generalists such as Neoseiulus (Amblyseius) cucumeris
(Oudemans), that prey on microarthropods but can reproduce on a pollen diet and utilise
plant exudates, honeydew and fungi as food supplements (McMurtry and Croft 1997).
Among the 30 species that, by the beginning of this century, are being produced in com-
mercial insectaries on a large scale are four phytoseiid species (van Lenteren 2003a, b).
The success of biological control programmes is, among other factors, dependent on the
health of the beneficials that are used. In several cases reports of poor performance in
mass-reared phytoseiid mites have raised questions regarding their quality and efficacy in
biological control (Steiner 1993a, b; Steiner and Bjornson 1996; Bjornson et al. 2000;
Raworth and Bjornson 2002; Blumel and Hausdorf 2002) and have stimulated research in
mite pathology (Poinar and Poinar 1998; van der Geest et al. 2000; Bjornson and Schitte
2003). Moreover, phytoseiid mites are used in several research groups for the study of
predator-prey interactions and foraging behaviour (Yao and Chant 1990; Margolies et al.
1997; Dicke et al. 1998; Zemek and Nachman 1999; Janssen 1999; Schausberger and Croft
2000; Maeda et al. 2001; Skirvin and Fenlon 2003a, b). Pathogens may also alter the
behaviour of their host (Horton and Moore 1993), thereby influencing outcomes of
behavioural research. Hence, care should be taken to maintain healthy laboratory stocks.
Verified and potential pathogens have been reported in phytoseiid mites collected from
the field (Furtado et al. 1996), from those currently mass-produced for biological pest
control (Beerling and van der Geest 1991a, b; Bjornson and Keddie 2000; Gols et al. 2007)
and from laboratory populations (Hess and Hoy 1982; Becnel et al. 2002; Schuitte et al.
2008b; Pukall et al. 2006; Gols et al. 2007). For the latter two cases it could not be
determined whether the entities originated from field-collected natural enemies or arose in
 mass-rearing systems as a result of intense and continuous rearing under laboratory con-
ditions. Mass-reared host populations may be more susceptible to diseases than field
populations, as genetic variation is lower and immune responses may be comprormised by
stress factors including sub-optimal climatic conditions, starvation and overcrowding
(Lighthart et al. 1988; Sikorowski and Lawrence 1994). Moreover, in mass-production of
arthropods climatic conditions may be better suited for pathogens and horizontal pathogen
transmission may be more effective than in natural situations (Sikorowski and Lawrence
1994). These factors may thus enhance disease incidence and the development of novel
diseases and/or virulent pathotypes in mass-reared populations. The following review of
verified and potential pathogens in phytoseid mites includes cases with unknown host
effects, cases of infection with endosymbiotic bacteria, cases of unidentified diseases and
cases of identified diseases, with known pathologies and transmission modes.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
Viruses
General characteristics of viruses in insects and mites
Viruses may be defined as biological macromolecules that have the ability to multiply
within living cells. They are reported from mites and virtually every insect order and are
the smallest of all entomopathogens. These pathogens, comprised of genomic RNA or
DNA bound to a protein coat (capsid), are considered the simplest entities capable of
replication (Boucias and Pendland 1998). Viral diseases are one of the most widely
investigated infections in insects (Tanada and Kaya 1993). Some viruses are occluded at
random in proteinaceous occlusion bodies that can be detected under the light microscope,
whereas most non-occluded viruses can be detected only with the aid of the electron
microscope (Lacey 1997).
 In general, infection occurs after viruses have been ingested, but transmission may
occur via the host egg (=transovarially), through natural body openings (for example
general characteristics of viral infection in insects include: coloration (white, yellow, light
blue, iridescent blue, green, purple or orange) of the gut, the fat body or the entire body,
blackening of the body after death, weakening of the outer skin leading to rupturing and
release of liquefied body contents (Evans and Shapiro 1997). Infected individuals may
show reduced feeding, poor reproduction performance, extended development, extremely
extended longevity, body paralysis or lethal sensitivity to CO, (Evans and Shapiro 1997).
Behavioural changes of insects infected by viruses include: changes in level of activity
(wandering behaviour) and changes of microhabitat preference, such as elevation seeking
behaviour (="tree-top" diseases), movement to exposed locations and diurnal behaviour of
nocturnal insects (Horton and Moore 1993)
Viruses of phytoseiid mites
Six reports exist on unidentified viruses of phytoseid mites (Table 1). In all cases
virus-like particles were detected in electron microscopic studies, but host effects have not
been studied. Unidentified, non-occluded virus-like particles were observed in the yolk
 o (  e a) s s  s   o
P. persimilis females carried unidentified, non-occluded virus-like particles in the yolk of
developing eggs (Steiner 1993a; Bjornson et al. 1997).
Table 1 Viruses recorded in phytoseiid mites
Pathogen
Phytoseiid host/origin°
Symptoms
References
Non-occluded virus
Neoseiutus cucumerisic
Unknown
Bjornson et al. (1997)
Non-occluded virus
Phytoseiutus persimitislc
Unknown
Steiner (1993a),
Bjornson et al. (1997)
Virus-like particles
Phytoseiutus persimitisf
Unknown
Sut'akova and Rittgen (1978)
Virus-like particles (type 1)
Metaseiutus occidentatisf]
Unknown
Poinar and Poinar (1998)
Virus-like particles (type 2)
Metaseiutus occidentatisf
Known
Poinar and Poinar (1998)
Virus-like particles (type 3)
Metaseiutus occidentatis/]
Known
Poinar and Poinar (1998)
 Origin: c, commercial population; 1, Jaboratory population
310
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Phytoseiuius persimilis infected with Rickettsiella phytoseiuli contained non-occluded
virus-like particles, which both were abundant and visible in the dorsal part of the body,
 when the host was also carrying the virus-like particles (Sut'akova and Rittgen 1978).
Three separate types of non-occluded icosahedral virus-like particles were detected in
ultrastructural micrographs of M. occidentalis. The predatory mites originated from pop-
ulations showing the following disease symptoms: adult female predators had a lower egg
yeap jae soueieedde pazaleied e peu pue Auappns peip ^Aaeauol paonpai ‘uononpon
(Poinar and Poinar 1998). The authors clearly state that particles located in the epithelial
cells (diameter = 47 nm, electron dense core 35 nm) were not associated with any par-
ticular disease symptom. These particles were similar to particles found in epithelial cells
of healthy as well as diseased prey mites Tetranychus urticae Koch (Poinar and Poinar
1998). A second type of particles (diameter = 38 nm, electron dense core 30 nm) was
present in the gut cells. These particles were found in large numbers in the midgut nuclei
and as free virions in the cytoplasm of the gut cells and the midgut lumen (Poinar and
Poinar 1998). The third type of particles (diameter = 45 nm, electron dense core 35 nm)
was only present in the gut tissue. The authors do not give any detailed information
whether the latter two types of viruses were only found in predatory mites showing disease
symptoms. They also did not perform experiments to show whether these viruses are the
primary source of infection or rather secondary invaders. However they suggest that
viruses may be important disease agents in mites and that they may be present as latent as
well as overt infections (Poinar and Poinar 1998).
Bacteria
General characteristics of bacteria in insects and mites
Bacteria are unicellular prokaryotes, their genetic information being contained within a
single, double-stranded DNA molecule and small self-replicating DNA molecules termed
plasmids or prophages (Boucias and Pendland 1998). Many bacteria are opportunistic
  d    ss s a     s
tions are favourable. Others are more fastidious and can grow only in the appropriate host
(Boucias and Pendland 1998).
Bacterial pathogens invade their hosts mostly through the mouth and digestive tract.
Less often, they are transmitted through the egg, trachea or wounds in the integument
(Tanada and Kaya 1993). Upon invasion, bacterial pathogens may develop as intracellular
Bacterial infections may be classified as (1) bacteremia, when bacteria multiply in the
hemolymph of the host without producing toxins; (2) septicaemia, when bacteria multiply
 in the hermocoel and may produce toxins and kill the host; or (3) toxaemia, when bacteria
stay confined to the gut lumen where they produce toxins (Tanada and Kaya 1993).
Diagnostic features considered as general characteristics of bacterial infection include:
distinct colour changes (white, red, amber, black or brown), reduced feeding, stopping of
feeding, excretion of diarrhoea-like feces, vomiting, weakening of the outer skin, degen-
eration of internal tissues, cadavers becoming black, odiferous, shrivelled, dry and hard
(Tanada and Kaya 1993; Lacey 1997).
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
311
The vast majority of research on bacterial insect pathogens over the past 30 years has
focused on the toxin-producing Bacilius species (Boucias and Pendland 1998). However,
studies on the effects of B-exotoxin from Bacillus thuringiensis on phytyoseiid mites are
not included in the present review as they do not represent a pathogen in the true sense of
the word (for a review see van der Geest et al.2000).Only very little work has been done
on other bacterial pathogens. This is mainly due to the fact that bacteria isolated from
species that may infect plants and vertebrates, which makes them less interesting for the
development as microbial control agents (Boucias and Pendland 1998). Several entomo-
pathogenic species have been identified in the genus Serratia including S. marcescens.
Various entomopathogenic strains of S. marcescens are characterised by the production of
enzymes and exocellular toxins. However, it is still unclear whether this pathogen is able to
actively invade its host. In many cases diseases have been associated with poor sanitation
and crowded rearing conditions (Boucias and Pendland 1998)
Bacteria belonging to the family Rickettsiaceae are obligately intracellular and multiply
in eukaryotic cells. Entomopathogens of this group belong to the genera Rickettsia,
Rickettsiella and Wolbachia (Boucias and Pendland 1998). Members of the genus Rick-
ettsiella are common pathogens, whereas those of the genus Wolbachia are seldom
pathogenic in the true sense but have evolved various means to manipulate their hosts in
order to enhance their own transmission (see Stouthamer et al. 1999).
The genus Rickettsiella is comprised of a heterogeneous group of bacteria, all members
being highly fastidious arthropod pathogens. A lack of homology has been demonstrated
for certain members of this genus, suggesting the eventual revision of this group (Boucias
and Pendland 1998). Rickettsiella have developmental cycles involving the production of
various cell phenotypes. The infectious particle is a small, dense rod or disc-shaped cell.
All species are transmitted by feeding or through wounds. Many Rickettsiella undergo
extensive replication in the fat body following ingestion and penetration of the alimentary
tract. At present relatively few species associated to insects have been found (Boucias and
 Pendland 1998). Rickettsial infections may induce prominent behavioural changes in the
host, including elevation-seeking behaviour and changes in temperature preference (Hor-
ton and Moore 1993)
Wolbachia are cormmon cytoplasmic symbionts of insects, crustaceans, mites and flarial
the host biology by inducing parthenogenesis (whereby infected females exclusively
male-killing (whereby infected male embryos die, while female embryos develop into
infected females), cytoplasmic incompatibility (unidirectional in its simplest form:
whereby the crossing of an uninfected female and an infected male may result in embryo
mortality), or by enhancing host fecundity (Stouthamer et al. 1999).
Wolbachia may be present in various tissues but are predominately present in gonadal
Therefore, infected mothers give rise to infected offspring. Phylogenetic studies of
Wolbachia indicate that horizontal transmission must have takenplace rather frequently.
An intraspecific horizontal transfer of Wolbachia has recently been reported (Huigens et al.
2000). Because culturing of Wotbachia outside hosts has been successful in only one case,
molecular techniques such as the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) are used in detecting
Wolbachia infections (Stouthamer et al. 1993).
Recently a novel lineage of intracellular bacteria has been shown to be associated with
several reproductive disorders, including (1) parthenogenesis in a number of parasitoid
312
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
wasps in the genus Encarsia (Zchori-Fein et al. 2001, 2004), (2) feminization in several
plasmic incompatibility in Encarsia pergandiella Howard (Hunter et al. 2003).
Phylogenetic analysis of the 16S rRNA gene placed this bacterium in the Bacteroidetes
group (=Cytophaga-Flexibacter-Bacteroides or CFB group). This bacterium has been
called the Encarsia bacterium (Zchori-Fein et al. 2001), the CFB-BP (Weeks and
Breeuwer 2003), and the Cytophaga-like organism (CLO) (Hunter et al. 2003; Weeks
et al. 2003; Weeks and Stouthamer 2004). Recently it has been suggested to classify this
symbiont from Encarsia as “Candidatus Cardinium hertigii"(Zchori-Fein et al. 2004).A
large screening study has shown that the bacterium is prevalent armong arthropods, and that
double infection with Wolbachia may occur (Weeks et al. 2003)
Members of the bacterial genus Spiroplasma have also been shown to interfere with
reproduction in their arthropod hosts. They are referred to as sex ratio organisms or SRO's
and they cause the total elimination of the male progeny in several species. The genus
Spiroplasma is very diverse, containing species that may infect plants, insects and verte-
brates (Boucias and Pendland 1998). Several species are well known insect pathogens
whiereas others are known as SRO's and for others no effects have been recorded (Boucias
and Pendland 1998).
Bacteria of phytoseiid mites
The majority of the identified bacteria recorded in phytoseiid mites are intracellular bac-
teria of the genera Rickettsielfa, Wolbachia, Cardinium and Spiroplasma (Table 2)
Woibachia seem to be widespread among phytoseid mites, as they are found by several
authors in numerous populations of seven phytoseiid species.
Rickettsiellaphytoseiuti
Intracellular, rickettsia-like entities named Rickettsiella phytoseiuli have been observed
during microscopic studies of P. persimilis (see for a review Sut'akova 1994). Predators
originated from a laboratory population of the Ukraine (Sut'akova and Rittgen 1978) and did
not show developmental abnormalities, morphological changes or increased mortality.
However, all investigated mites contained polymorphous entities that were considered to
crystal-forming and small dark particles (Sut'akova and Rittgen 1978). In adult mites,
infection was detected in all organs except the nervous tissue, whereas larvae and nymphs and
prey spider mites (T. urticae) were never infected with R. phytoseiuli (Sut'akova 1988,
population from the Armenian Republic did not. However, other apparently symbiotic micro-
adult female Dermacentor reticulatus Fabricius ticks, where it formed all six known
developmental stages (Sut'akova and Rehacek 1989). Pathological effects were never
recorded, though some individuals carried the microbes in high densities (Sut'akova 1991).
Endosymbiotic bacteria including Wofbachia, Cardinium and Spiroplasma
ymbionts were detected in eight of nine laboratory populations of M. occidentalis and in four
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
313
Table 2 Bacteria recorded in phytoseid mites
Pathogen
Ph ytoseiid host/origin 
Syrmptoms
References
Rickettsiella phytoseiuli
Phytoseiutus persimitisf
Unknown
Sut' akova and Ruttgen (1978)
Wotbachia
Gatendromus annectens!?
Unknown
Weeks et al. (2003)
Phytoseiutus tongipest?
Unknown
Weeks et al. (2003)
Metaseiutus occidentatisf
Knownb
Johanowicz and Hoy (1996),
Breeuwer and Jacobs (1996),
Weeks et al. (2003)
Neoseiutus barkerilf
Unknown
Breeuwer and Jacobs (1996)
Neoseiutus bibens
Unknown
Breeuwer and Jacobs (1996)
Phytoseiutus persimitisfc
Unknown
Steiner (1993b),
Breeuwer and Jacobs (1996),
Bjornson et al. (1997),
Weeks et al. (2003)
Proprioseiopsis tenisf
Unknown
Corpuz-Raros (2005)
Cardinium
Metaseiutus occidentatis,f
Knownb
Weeks et al. (2003), Weeks and
Stouthamer (2004),
Hoy and Jeyaprakash (2005)
Euseius fintandicusf
Unknown
Enigl and Schausberger (2007)
Spiroptasma
Neoseiutus catifornicus/
Unknown
Enigl and Schausberger (2007)
Bacteroidetes&
Metaseiutus occidentatis/,f
Unknown
Hoy and Jeyaprakash (2005)
Enterobacter
Acaricomes phytoseiuti
Phytoseiutus persimitis/l, c
Knownb
Schitte (2006), Schutte et al.
(1995, 1996, 1998,
2006a, b, 2008a, b),
Dicke et al. (2000),
Pukall et al. (2006),
Gols et al. (2007)
Unidentified bacteria
Metaseiutus occidentatisf
Known
Hess and Hoy (1982)
Phytoseiutus persimitisic
Unknown
Steiner(1993b),cited in
Schitte et al. (2005)
Neoseiutus cucumeris!?
Unknown
Cited in Schitte et al. (2005)
Neoseiutus barkeril?
Unknown
Cited in Schutte et al. (2005)
 Origin: c, commercial population; 1, laboratory population; f,field population; ?, unknown
bSymptom induction established by experiments
laboratory populations of T. urticae that served as food for M. occidentalis (Johanowicz and
Hoy 1996). In M. occidentalis, Wolbachia caused non-reciprocal reproductive incompati-
bilities between infected males and uninfected females. Uninfected females crossed with
infected males produced few eggs and no female progeny. Many of the produced eggs were
shrivelled (Johanowicz and Hoy 1998b). The mechanisms by which Wolbachia cause
reproductive incompatibilities in M. occidentalis are unknown. Wolbachia infection seems
to be associated with fitness costs as the number of female progeny was lower in infected
control crosses than in uninfected control crosses. These fitness costs may have prevented the
rapid spread of Wolbachia in three laboratory populations of M. occidentalis (Johanowicz
and Hoy 1999). Wolbachia were eliminated from M. occidentalis when the predators were
reared at an elevated temperature (33°C) (Johanowicz and Hoy 1998a, b).
Moreover, Breeuwer and Jacobs (1996) detected Wolbachia in a population of
M. occidentalis from the USA, in a commercial population of P. persimilis from the
314
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Netherlands, in a population of Neoseiuius (Ambiyseius) barkeri Hughes collected in the
Netherlands and a population of Neoseiuius (Ambiyseius) bibens Blommers from Mada-
gascar. Wolbachia-infection has also been found in Galendromus annectens (De Leon) and
Phytoseiuius longipes Evans (Weeks et al. 2003) and in a laboratory stock of Proprio-
seiopsis (Amblyseius) lenis (Corpuz-Raros & Rimando) frorm the Philippines (Corpuz-
Raros 2005). The effects of Wolbachia on the species other than M. occidentalis have not
yet been investigated, but it is likely that Wolbachia are associated with non-reciprocal
reproductive incompatibilities (for a discussion, see Breeuwer and Jacobs 1996). Rick-
ettsia-like particles, belonging to the genus Wolbachia were also reported by Steiner
(1993b); Bjornson et al. (1997). The latter author detected with molecular methods that
Wolbachia was present in commercial P. persimilis populations from seven sources. It
even has been suggested that the intracellular bacteria of P. persimilis named Rickettsiella
phytoseiuli (Sut'akova and Rittgen 1978) and the rickettsia-like microorganisms observed
in M. occidentalis (Hess and Hoy 1982) may in fact be Wolbachia (for a discussion see van
der Geest et al. 2000).
However, recently Enigl et al. (2005) screened several strains of P. persimilis (seven
strains obtained from Europe, Africa and the USA and alcohol samples of 10 other strains)
for the occurrence of Woibachia and no sample tested positive. They therefore suggested
that infection of P.persimilis with Wolbachia seems to be rare and of minor importance
(Enigl et al. 2005). During this study T. urticae used as food for the different strains of
P. persimilis was infected with Wolbachia. The authors prevented false positive results
from undigested prey by starving P. persimilis or feeding them Wolbachia-free T. urticae
before the PCR tests. After a period of 16 h at 25°C and 48 h at 20°C Wolbachia was no
longer detected in the predators (Enigl et al. 2005). Moreover, the same authors could not
detect Wolbachia in six other phytoseiid species, including N. cucumeris, N. barkeri,
Euseius fnlandicus (Oudemans), Kampimodromus aberrans (Oudemans), N. californicus
and Typhlodromus pyri Scheuten (Enigl and Schausberger 2007).
In a large-scale survey of arthropod hosts infection with the endosymbiotic bacterium
Candidatus Cardinium hertigii was detected by sensitive hemi-nested PCR in M. occidentalis
(Banks), Neoseiuius (Ambtyseits) faliacis (Garman), M. longipes, Galendromus heiveoius
(Chant) and G. annectens. Interestingly M. occidentalis showed double infection of Wol-
bachia and Cardinium. In another study Weeks and Stouthamer (2004) reported that three
inbred lines of M. occidentalis showed a clear and significant increase in fecundity
associated with infection by Cardinium. Fecundity advantage of infected females versus
non-infected females was approximately 1.6 times over a 6-day oviposition period. As the
endosymbiont described by Hess and Hoy (1982) has recently been identified as Cardinium
(Weeks and Breeuwer 2003) and as M. occidentalis may harbour both Wolbachia and
Cardinium at the same time, the authors suggest that the results of the studies of Johan-
owicz and Hoy (1998a) on cytoplasmic incompatibility in M. occidentalis may have been
infuenced by the presence of Cardinium (Weeks et al. 2003). In a molecular screening,
using a high-fidelity PCR protocol (allowing the detection of as few as 100 copies of
Wolbachia DNA, Jeyaprakash and Hoy 2004), several bacterial species were detected in
M. occidentalis after the clones were sequenced: one each was closely related to species in
the genera Enterobacter, Wotbachia and Cardinium, and one was related to an unnamed
microorganism in the phylum Bacteroidetes (Hoy and Jeyaprakash 2005). PCR tests with
newly designed primers for the sequences of the detected bacteria were positive for several
laboratory and field-collected M. occidentalis populations suggesting that all bacteria are
important in the biology of this phytoseiid species (Hoy and Jeyaprakash 2005).
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
315
 In a recent survey Enigl and Schausberger (2007) screened several predatory mite
species with a PCR technique for infection with Cardinium and Spiroplasma. Cardinium
was detected in two populations of E. fnlandicus. Test results were negative for N. cu-
cumeris, N. barkeri, K. aberrans, N. californicus and T. pyri. Spiroplasma was found in
N. californicus. Test results were negative for N. cucumeris, N. barkeri, E. finiandicus,
K. aberrans and T. pyri. However, it is not very probable that Spiroplasma is a pathogen or
SRO in this case, as in an earlier study Spiropiasma did not have any effect on the number
of eggs produced and the percentage of female offspring of N. californicus (Zchori-Fein
et al., unpublished data, cited in Enigl and Schausberger 2007).
Acaricomesphytoseiuti
Lighthart et al. (1988) were the first to show susceptibility of a predatory mite to a bacterial
pathogen. The authors tested the effect of several stress factors on the susceptibility of
M. occidentalis to the weak bacterial pathogen Serratia marcescens. A high pre-inoculation
temperature pulse under relatively uncrowded conditions was most effective in enhancing
susceptibility, higher mortality being the only disease symptom. Remarkably, starvation did
not have such an effect. However, the bacterial isolate did not originate from mites.
Thus, the only well documented case of a bacterial disease in phytoseiid mites repre-
sents the infection of P. persimilis with Acaricomes phytoseiuli (Schitte 2006; Schiitte
et al. 1995, 1996, 1998, 2006a, b, 2008a, b; Dicke et al. 2000; Pukall et al. 2006; Gols
et al. 2007). During the early 1990s the first conspicuous disease symptom that became
obvious was a behavioural change (Schuitte et al. 1995; Dicke et al. 2000). An important
behavioural characteristic of healthy adult female P. persimilis is their attraction to plant
odours, currently called “herbivore-induced plant volatiles" (HIPV), which are released in
and Sabelis 1988). Since 1983 this behavioural response has been reported in numerous
laboratories (see reviews by Dicke et al. 1998, Sabelis et al., 1999) and it has been shown
that it plays an important role in successful host location in the field (Zemek and Nachman
1999; Janssen 1999). However, since mid 1992 a laboratory population of P. persimilis
showed a lower degree of attraction to herbivore-induced plant volatiles than in the first
part of 1992 and the previous year. This so-called non-responding (=NR) population
originated from the normally responding population from a Dutch natural enemy producer
and had been reared in the laboratory for many years prior to 1992. The behavioural
change occurred suddenly and was of a permanent nature. Moreover at the beginning of
1994 the same behavioural change occurred in a population of P. persimilis from a
commercial source (Dicke et al. 2000). A similar phenomenon had occurred earlier in two
other species of phytoseiid mites reared at the same laboratory. Between July 1985 and
November 1987 the attraction to herbivore-induced plant volatiles fuctuated widely in
three laboratory populations of Amblyseius potentillae (Garman) (=Amblyseius andersoni
(Chant) and one laboratory population of T. pyri (Dicke et al. 1991). Several possible
causes for this variation were investigated, but no definite conclusions could be drawn
(Dicke et al. 1991).
As several experiments on the behavioural change in P. persimilis indicated that it was
most probably caused by an infectious agent (Schitte et al., unpublished; Dicke et al.
2000), follow-up studies aimed at verifying this hypothesis. A crucial first step towards
verification of this hypothesis was evidence of the infectious character of the behavioural
NR-population and their products showed a lower degree of attraction and a higher
316
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
mortality than predators that had been exposed to the products of live conspecifics of the
NR-population (Schitte et al. 1998). In a diseased population early dying individuals are
likely candidates to carry and release pathogens and common routes of disease transmis-
sion consist of pathogen release prior to or after death and cannibalism on dead
conspecifics(Andreadis1987)
In a comparative study other characteristics of the NR-population were investigated in
order to describe a distinct disease syndrome, designated the *non-responding (=NR)
syndrome' (Schitte et al. 2006a). The following set of symptoms was described for adult
females from the NR-population: (1) size change by shrinkage to dorso-ventrally fattened
form, (2) reduced fecundity caused by oviposition stop after shrinkage, (3) high mortality
several days after shrinkage, (4) presence of excretory crystals in the legs, (5) low pre-
dation and/or feeding rate, (6) low excretion rate, (7) low degree of attraction to prey-
induced plant volatiles, (8) short choice time during behavioural test, (9) early dispersal
from prey-patches (Schitte et al. 1995, 2006a). Interestingly there are several publications
in which remarkable peculiarities of P. persimilis have been stated, that are similar to the
NR-syndrome among which (1) poor performance in terms of fecundity and survival
(Steiner 1993a, b; Steiner and Bjornson 1996; Raworth and Bjornson 2002; Blimel and
Hausdorf 2002); (2) poor performance in terms of life span (De Courcy Williams et al.
2004a); (3) size change by shrinkage to dorso-ventrally fattened form (Bjornson et al.
2000); (4) remarkable effect of rearing condition on olfactory response (Maeda et al.
2000); (5) remarkable differences in dispersal behaviour (van de Vrie and Price 1997;
Skirvin and Fenlon 2003a); (6) unusual results concerning the predation rate (Skirvin and
Fenlon 2003b).However,most of these studies did not consider or test the possibility of
pathogen infection (for a detailed discussion see Schiitte 2006)
Several routes of transmission were investigated for six of the nine symptoms of the
NR-syndrome. There was no evidence for (1) vertical transmission, i.e. transmission from
parent to offspring directly via the egg, (2) interspecific horizontal transmission between
the prey T. urticae and adult female P. persimilis, (3) horizontal transmission via body
fuids, ie. from squashed female predators to female P. persimilis (Schitte et al. 2006b).
Instead there was clear evidence for horizontal transmission between and among genera-
tions via feces and debris released by diseased adult female P. persimilis (Schitte et al.
2006b). After contact with feces and debris deposited by diseased females during only
1 day,the majority of healthy female P.persimilis (65%)became dorso-ventrally flattened
after only 3 days. From eggs laid by diseased mothers a minority of the offspring became
dorso-ventrally flattened (17%) when adult. This was only the case, when the eggs were
left on the place where the mother had laid them (Schitte et al. 2006b)
With knowledge about the main reservoir of the infectious agent it could be determined
to which group the pathogen in question belongs (Schiitte et al. 2008a). A reliable bioassay
for testing the infectiousness of predator feces and debris fractions was developed, by
keeping healthy adult female predators during a period of 3 days on prey-infested bean
After exposure six of the nine symptoms as listed above were assessed. A vast majority of
healthy female P. persimilis (88-100%) became dorso-ventrally fattened after contact
vanished totally when the suspension was treated with the antibiotic tetracycline. Moreover
did the bacterial fraction of feces and debris suspension collected from symptomatic
predators induce the NR-syndrome whereas the viral fraction of the same suspension did
not (Schutte et al. 2008a). These findings proved that bacteria are involved in the induction
oftheNR-syndrome
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
317
Numerous bacterial isolates from mated female predators from the NR-population and
their feces and debris were tested for their effects on healthy adult female P. persimilis
(Schitte et al., unpublished data). The final aim, namely satisfying the Koch's postulates of
pathogenicity was achieved with only one isolate, representing a new bacterial species in a
new genus, described as Acaricomes phytoseiuli (Pukall et al. 2006). The NR-syndrome
was clearly induced in those predators that had been exposed to the bacterial inoculum
(=treatment predators), whereas predators exposed to water (=control predators) did not
show the NR-syndrome. Moreover, A. phytoseiuli was never isolated from control pre-
dators whereas it could be re-isolated from 60% of the treatment predators and from feces
of 41% of treatment predators (Schitte et al. 2008b). Light and electron microscopic
studies of predators exposed to A. phyfoseiuli revealed striking bacterial accumulations in
the lumen of the alimentary tract together with extreme degeneration of its epithelium. In
addition, bacterial foci also occurred in the fat body. These phenomena were not observed
in control predators that had been exposed to sterile water (Schitte et al. 2008b). Thus
A. phytoseiufi may infect the predatory mite P. persimilis and induce the occurrence of the
NR-syndrome in adult female P. persimilis.
Acaricomes phytoseiuli is a gram-positive, rod-shaped, none-spore-forming bacterium
Comparative analysis of the 16S rDNA sequence revealed that the strain was a new
member of the family of the Micrococcaceae. Nearest phylogenetic neighbours were
determined as Renibacterium satmoninarum (94.0%), Arthrobacter giobiformis (94.8%)
Acaricomes is closely related to the genus Arthrobacter. Recently a specific and reliable
PCR-test has been developed for the detection of A. phytoseiuli (Gols et al. 2007). In two
In one test 36% of the predators had become symptomatic and 38% of the predators tested
positive; in the second test 70% of the predators had become symptomatic and 61% of the
predators tested positive. Moreover a significant negative correlation was found between
the proportion of predators being attracted to herbivore induced plant volatiles and the
proportion of PCR-positive samples (Gols et al. 2007). By using this molecular detection
method it was demonstrated that A. phytoseiuli is rather widespread among European
populations of P. persimilis. All but one of the seven European populations of P. persimifis
out to be negative. The prey mite T. urticae and other commercially used predatory mite
species including A.andersoni (=A. potentillae), N.cucumeris,Iphiseius (Ambtyseius)
degenerans (Berlese), N. californicus, Hypoaspis acuieifer Canestrini and Hypoaspis miles
Berlese, were not infected (Gols et al. 2007). It can thus be concluded, that A. phytoseiuli
is currently infecting several populations of commercial and laboratory populations of
 P. persimilis, and that it has detrimental effects on therm. Screening of populations on a
regular basis for an infection with A. phyfoseiuli should therefore be executed, as in this
case a reliable detection method has been developed. Possible methods of curing infected
populations consist of antibiotic treatment (Schitte et al. 2008a) and washing of eggs with
bleech (Schitte et al. 2006b).
Unidentifiedbacteria
Hess and Hoy (1982) observed two different pathological manifestations in several labo-
ratory populations of M. occidentalis. (1) Some adult females were plump and had a
cream-coloured to pink rectal “plug" that extruded from their posterior end and occa-
sionally caused mites to become glued to the substrate. The rectal plug was associated with
318
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
motor dysfunction, reduced oviposition and eventually death, and was most common in
older females. Immatures and males rarely had rectal plugs. (2) Mites became very pale
and so thin that they became translucent. Females failed to oviposit, immatures exhibited
high mortality and colonies died out. According to the authors both pathologies were
associated with overcrowding (Hess and Hoy 1982). The authors described two morpho-
logically distinct unidentified micro-organisms in symptomatic and non-symptomatic
M. occidentalis. Whether these forms represent one or two species was not established.
in all mites in varying numbers and in all tissues examined, except ovarian and nervous
tissues. According to the authors this micro-organism did not appear to be detrimental. The
second rickettsia-like form (type B) occurred both intra- and extracellularly. This type was
present in two-thirds of symptormatic and asymptormatic mites. In some cases it completely
dominated the internal organs and the hemocoel and was associated with the rectal plug.
Thin and pale mites also contained predominantly the second type, but tissues of these
mites appeared more damaged, perhaps accounting for their lucidity. When present in
moderate numbers, these micro-organisms were observed in the hemocoel, the Malpighian
tubules and within the ovarian tissue, which may suggest transovarial transmission (Hess
and Hoy 1982). The authors did not determine whether the increase of the second bacterial
type was the primary cause of the disease or a secondary effect. Later it has been suggested
that the rickettsia-like microorganisms (type B) may in fact be Wolbachia (for a discussion
see van der Geest et al. 2000) and that the endosymbiont (type A) is likely to be Cardinium
(Weeks and Breeuwer 2003)
In a microscopic study of the digestive tract of P. persimilis, bacteria-like entities
detected in the gut lumen were thought to have entered the digestive tract during feeding
(Arutunyan 1985). However, these bacteria bear a marked similarity to birefringent
dumbbell-shaped crystals that are frequently observed in the Malpighian tubules, the
digestive tract and rectum of phytoseiid mites (Steiner 1993b; Schitte et al. 1995;
Di Palma 1996; Bjornson et al. 1997, 2000; R. G. Kleespies, pers. comm.).
Bacterial micro-organisms other than rickettsia have been recorded for dead and mor-
ibund P. persimilis (Steiner 1993b). However, the author stated that these bacteria are
secondary opportunistic invaders rather than a primary infection source. Moreover
unidentified bacteria were reported in microscopic investigations of several diseased mite
populations of P. persimilis, N. cucumeris and N. barkeri (cited in Schitte et al. 2005).
Protozoa
General characteristics of protozoa in insects and mites
All protozoa recorded for phytoseiid mites belong to the phylum Microspora. Micro-
sporidia are small, spore-forming protozoa. However, recent molecular studies indicate
that they are related to fungi, which may in part explain the sensitivity of microsporidia to
selected anti-fungal drugs (Boucias and Pendland 1998). Microsporidia infect a wide range
of hosts from all major animal phyla, fish and arthropods being their most common hosts
(Tanada and Kaya 1993). They are obligate intracellular parasites that lack typical mito-
 chondria, a classical Golgi apparatus, centrioles and peroxisomes (Boucias and Pendland
1998). Many species cause severe and acute infections in insects, but some produce only
inapparent and chronic infections, that nonetheless may play an important role in host
regulation (Tanada and Kaya 1993)
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
319
The microsporidia have a complex biology that may involve two obligate hosts, vertical
or horizontal transmission and/or multiple cell-types (Boucias and Pendland 1998). The
life cycle consists of two phases, the vegetative phase and the sporulation phase, which
results in the production of transmissible spores. In most cases the spore-to-spore cycle
takes place in one cell (Tanada and Kaya 1993). Microsporidia may invade the host tissues
when spores are ingested, when the pathogen is transrmitted from parent to progeny, or
occasionally through wounds in the integument (Tanada and Kaya 1993). Microsporidian
spores are structurally unique and contain a characteristic tube-like polar filament through
which an infective stage (sporoplasm) is injected into an adjacent host cell. This starts the
infective cycle of the pathogen.
Diagnostic features considered as general characteristics of microsporidian infection are
variable and may include: retardation of development and growth, reduced activity,
abnormal coloration, diapause alterations, reduction of longevity and reproductive per-
formance (Boucias and Pendland 1998). Microsporidia-infected insects may also exhibit
behavioural changes including changes in temperature preference (Horton and Moore
1993).
Protozoa of phytoseiid mites
Microsporidia seem to be rather common among phytoseid mites. Microsporidiosis has
been observed in four phytoseiid species of varying origin (Table 3).
Oligosporidiumoccidentalis
A new microsporidian pathogen has recently been isolated from a laboratory population of
M. occidentalis (Becnel et al. 2002). Immature stages and mature spores were found in the
cytoplasm of ceacal cells, lyrate organ cells, ganglia, epithelial cells, muscle, ovary and
mature eggs (Becnel et al. 2002). Microsporidia were never detected in the spider mite
(T. urticae) prey of M. occidentalis (Olsen and Hoy 2002). Two classes of uninucleate
a  sny ed a go  a u d  d a s
presence of a large posterior vacuole in one spore type (Becnel et al. 2002). The authors
suspect that spores with long filaments are involved in horizontal disease transmission,
which may take place by cannibalism of infected eggs (Olsen and Hoy 2002), whereas
Table 3 Protozoa recorded in phytoseiid mites
Pathogen
Phytoseid host/origin
Syrmptoms References
Microsporidium phytoseiuti Phytoseiutus persimitisic Knownb
Bjornson et al. (1996)
Otigosporidium
Metaseiutus
Knownb
Becnel et al. (2002)
occidentalis
occidentatisf
Nosema steinhausi
Neoseiutus cucumerisic Unknown Huger (1988)
Neoseiutus barkerilc
Unknown Huger (1988)
Unidentified microsporidia
ANeoseiutus barkerilc
Known Beerling and van der Geest (199la, b)
Neoseiutus cucumeris/c  Known  Beerling and van der Geest (199la, b)
Phytoseiutus persimitis/c Unknown Bjornson and Keddie (2000)
Phytoseiutus persimitis/c Unknown Bjornson and Keddie (2000)
 Origin: c, commercial population; 1, laboratory population
b Symptom induction established by ex periments
320
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
spores with the short polar filament may play a role in autoinfection and vertical tran-
sovarial transmission, that is highly efficient (99% infected offspring is produced by
infected parents) (Olsen and Hoy 2002).
Molecular data (analysis of small subunit ribosomal DNA) indicated that this micros-
poridium is a new species, which is most closely related to the Nosemal Variomorpha clade
of microsporidia, whereas developmental and morphological data suggest a placement into
the genus Unikaryon or Oligosporidium. The authors discuss this conflict of morphological
and molecular data and assign the new species the name Oligosporidium occidentalis.
Predators infected by O. occidentalis did not exhibit any external signs of infections.
However, O. occidentalis has clear negative effects on its host. Infected female predators
had a shorter life span, a lower oviposition rate and a lower number of female offspring, as
          
effective to cure infected populations of M. occidentalis and did induce relatively low
mortality (~20%). Predator colonies initiated from mites that were reared from egg to
adult at 33°C showed an initial reduction in infection.However,disease incidence raised to
98% after 10 weeks. Colonies initiated from progeny of the heat-treated mites remained
healthy during the observation period of 10 weeks (Olsen and Hoy 2002).
Microsporidium phytoseiufi and unidentified microsporidia in Phytoseiuius persimilis
commercial sources. The species assigned as Microsporidium phytoseiuli was isolated
 dod g n () ss   n a n  odo 
Israel (Bjornson and Keddie 2000). Becnel et al. (2002) suggested that M. phytoseiuti may
also be a member of the genus Oligosporidium, because of a number of biological and
morphological similarities with O. occidentalis
The microsporidia of P. persimilis were not restricted to specific tissues and spores were
found in muscle fibres, the super- and suboesophageal ganglia, ovaries, eggs, cells
underlying the cuticle, and cells lining the caecal lumen and Malpighian tubules. Early
development of all three microsporidia occurred in cells of the lyrate organ. The lyrate
organ occupies a significant portion of the body and is thought to be involved in oogenesis
or embryogenesis. Each microsporidium occupied a specific site within these cells.
Infection of the lyrate organ may be necessary for the efficient vertical transmission of
microsporidia in P. persimilis (Bjornson et al. 1996; Bjornson and Keddie 2000).
Microsporidium phytoseiuli was not present in the prey mites, T. urticae. Therefore,
prey mites did not contribute to pathogen transmission among P. persimilis mites.
Maternal-mediated vertical transmission of M.phytoseiuli was 1oo%.Males did not
contribute to infection of the progeny. Horizontal transmission of M. phytoseiufi did not
occur when uninfected adult predators were kept together with infected P. persimilis
females or on leaves carrying solutions of microsporidian spores. Horizontal transmission
was low (about 15%) when uninfected immatures were kept together with infected adult
and immature mites (Bjornson and Keddie 2001). At present little is known regarding the
mechanisms of transmission.
Microsporidia-infected P. persimilis did not exhibit any obvious external symptoms.
Therefore, routine monitoring is necessary to detect microsporidia when disease preva-
lence is low (Bjornson and Keddie 1999). P. persimilis infected by M. phytoseiuli
produced fewer eggs, had a reduced longevity and lower prey consumption rate than
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
321
healthy predators. Moreover, infected females produced fewer female progeny than
uninfected females, as the sex ratio of offspring of infected females is male biased
(Bjornson and Keddie 1999)
Several methods to cure an infection with microsporidia were tested by Bjornson (1998)
The antimicrobial compounds albendazole, fumagillin, metronidazole and nifedipine were
ineffective for control of microsporidia in P. persimilis, regardless of their dose. The author
doubted whether the chemical compounds were able to penetrate the egg chorion. Rearing
predators at 30°C did not eliminate microsporidian infections either. The Pasteur method,
whereby progeny of healthy mothers is selected for the rearing, was the only effective
means to eliminate microsporidia from P. persimiis populations (Bjornson 1998).
Unidentified microsporidia and Nosema steinhausi in Neoseiulus cucumeris
and N. barkeri
Unidentified microsporidia were reported in commercial mass-rearings of N. cucumeris
and N. barkeri (Beerling and van der Geest 1991a, b). This was the first report of
microsporidia in mass-reared predatory mites. Predators of the commercial populations
showed a low reproduction rate and unsatisfactory predation capacity. Moreover, mites
were sluggish and had a swollen and whitish appearance (Beerling and van der Geest
1991a). Squash preparations of symptomatic mites revealed the presence of numerous
microsporidian spores and heavily infected predators released spores after death (Beerling
and van der Geest 1991a). Microsporidia were also present in the prey mites but the
mechanisms of pathogen transmission have not been determined for this system. Three
types of microsporidian spores have been found in N. cucumeris and N. barkeri (Beerling
et al. 1993), but it is unclear whether they represent one species of microsporidia with three
different spore types or three distinct species. Oblong spores were detected in both predator
and prey species, small and more oval spores were exclusively found in prey mites.
Beerling et al. (1993) developed a monoclonal antibody ELISA as a bioassay for the
detection of microsporidia in mass-reared N. cucumeris and N. barkeri. Monoclonal
Xand pue noepand yoq un nuasaid sem peu adk anods auo noy paonpoud anam sarpoqn
species. Further work is needed to determine the sensitivity of this test as a suitable
screening method for microsporidia in mites. Interestingly, Huger (1988) detected the
microsporidium Nosema steinhausi in diseased mass-reared populations of the same
phytoseiid species (N. cucumeris and N. barkeri).
Fungi
General characteristics of fungi in insects and mites
Fungi are eukaryotic heterotrophes that obtain nutrients either from dead organic matter
(saprobes) or from living organisms (parasites). Some parasitic fungi are obligate patho-
gens, but the majority are facultative pathogens capable of growing without their host
attach to and penetrate host cuticle or spiracles; however, some penetrate through the gut.
They replicate inside the host, usually in the hemocoel, where they compete for soluble
mutrients and may release mycotoxins, which interfere with normal host development and
metamorphosis and in some cases with the immune defense mechanisms (Boucias and
Pendland 1998). Fungi then invade and digest tissues and cause premature death of the
322
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Table 4 Fungi recorded in phytoseid mites
Pathogen
Phytoseiid host/origin
Symptoms
References
Neozygites sp.
Euseius citrifotiusff
Known
Furtado et al. (1996)
Neozygites acaricida
Euseius citrifotiusf
Unknown
Keller (1997)
N. cf. acaridis
Euseius citrifotiusf
Unknown
Keller (1997)
Unidentified fungi
Phytoseiutus persimitisr?
Unknown
Cited in Schutte et al. (2005)
 Origin: f, field population; ?, unknown
host. Thereafter the fungus lives as a saprophyte on the cadaver, producing spores. Under
umfavorable conditions resting forms are produced (Tanada and Kaya 1993) Adhesion and
germination of fungal spores on the host cuticle are highly dependent on relative humidity
and temperature, but light conditions and nutritional requirements are also important
factors (Tanada and Kaya 1993).
Diagnostic features considered as general characteristics of fungal infection may
include: blackening surfaces at sites where fungi have penetrated, coloration (white, yel-
low, black), reduced feeding, the presence of flamentous hyphae, the presence of
characteristically coloured reproductive structures (fruiting structures, spores) on the
external surface of the dead host, weakness and partial paralysis, bodies may be hard
(Boucias and Pendland 1998).
In some cases, behavioural changes occur prior to death. Symptoms in insects may
include restlessness, loss of coordination and body tremors, reproductive behaviour by
castrated hosts and changes in microhabitat preference (Horton and Moore 1993; Boucias
and Pendland 1998). The latter include elevation-seeking behaviour (fungal “summit
disease"), movement to exposed locations, change in oviposition or foraging sites and
change in temperature preference (Horton and Moore 1993).
Fungi in phytoseiid mites
Pathogenic fungi have been recorded for only two phytoseiid species up to now (Table 4).
Field-collected Euseius citrifolius Denmark and Muma were heavily infected by the fungus
Neozygites sp. (Furtado et al. 1996) and showed a high rate of mortality. Some cadavers
carried near-white hyphae that produced pear-shaped conidia. However, Neoseiulus
(Ambiyseius) idaeus Denmark and Muma and Typhiodromaius (Amblyseius) limonicus
(Garman and McGregor) were not infected by Neozygites sp. isolated from the cassava
green mite in laboratory tests (De Moraes and Delalibera 1992). Euseius citrifolius col-
lected in Brazil on two subsequent occasions contained viable resting spores and hyphal
bodies of two distinct fungal species identified as Neozygites acaricida and N. cf. acaridis
(Keller 1997). Moreover unidentified fungi were reported in microscopic investigations of
a diseased population of P. persimilis (cited in Schitte et al. 2005).
Unidentified diseases
General characteristics in insects and mites
Insect diseases may be broadly categorised as either infectious or non-infectious, based on
the respective presence or absence of a transmissible living organism. Diseases classified
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
323
as non-infectious may be caused by mechanical injury, adverse physical environmental
factors, chemical agents, injuries made by predators and parasitoids, genetic factors,
nutritional deficiencies and hormonal disruption (Tanada and Kaya 1993). Traditionally,
insect pathologists have focused their research on infectious diseases that might be caused
by a variety of pathogens. However, non-infectious diseases may play an important role in
insect populations (Tanada and Kaya 1993). Thus, in cases of obvious detrimental
symptoms where the involvement of pathogens cannot be proved, pathogens may not (yet)
bedetectableorother factorsmaycause thedisease.
Unidentified diseases of phytoseiid mites
For phytoseiid mites several reports exist on poor performance, anatomical peculiarities
and peculiar colorations (Tanigoshi et al. 1981; Tanigoshi 1982; Hess and Hoy 1982;
Bjornson et al. 1997, 2000). However, in these cases it was not unambiguously shown that
pathogens may have been involved (Table 5).
Tanigoshi et al. (1981) observed the formation of a dark-red occlusion within the ali-
mentary tract near the distal end of the opisthosoma for Euseius (Ambtyseius) hibisci (Chant)
of both sexes when fed exclusively on Panonychus citri (McGregor). Newly eclosed
E. hibisci larvae acquired a red coloration of the gut directly after feeding and became less
robust and vigorous after each moult. Complete immature mortality occurred at 32 and 35°℃.
Immediately after the last moult female predators became dorso-ventrally flattened, more
concave in profile, lethargic, did not lay eggs and exhibited the characteristic dark-red gut
occlusion prior to their death. The pigmented mass inside the mite was thought to be asso-
ciated with the incomplete digestion of the prey mites, as symptoms were not observed in
Birefringent, dumbbell-shaped crystals have been observed in P. persimilis from several
discoloration of the opisthosoma. Discoloration may include (1) a white dorsal spot at the
distal end of the opisthosoma, (2) two white stripes along the dorsal lateral sides of the body
 2000). Mites carrying discoloration(s) appeared lethargic and provided poor pest control
(Steiner 1993b; Bjornson et al. 1997). Rectal plugs, which were observed when symptoms
were more pronounced, often disrupted normal excretion and might cause the affected
individual to become stuck to the leaf surface (Bjornson et al. 1997). The frequent occur
rence of a prominent white dot in the opisthosoma of P. persimilis was correlated with
reduced fecundity and predation rate in mites examined following shipment from com-
mercial producers (Bjornson et al. 2000). Crystals were observed in immature and adult
P. persimilis (Bjornson et al. 1997); therefore, non-excessive crystal formation is likely a
normal physiological process (Bjornson et al. 1997). An examination of P. persimilis from
14 commercial and academic sources revealed no correlation between the occurrence of
crystals and the presence of microsporidia, rickettsia or virus-like particles in P. persimilis
Table 5 Unidentified diseases recorded in phytoseiid mites
Pathogen
Phytoseiid host/origin
Syrmptoms
References
Unidentified
Euseius hibiscif
Known
Tanigoshi et al. (198 1)
Unidentified
Phytoseiutus persimitisfc
Known
Bjornson et al. (1997, 2000)
 Origin: c, commercial population; 1, laboratory population
324
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
(Bjornson et al. 1997). However, in a follow-up study Bjornson and Raworth (2003) found
that the expression of white opisthosomal discolorations in P. persimilis does not neces-
sarily affect predator performance and concluded that the opisthosomal discolorations are
an expression of normal excretory function in P. persimiis related to plant nutrition
(Bjornson and Raworth 2003).
Conclusions
Several potential pathogens—pathogens in the true sense and unidentified diseases—have
been reported for phytoseiid mites. However, the status and impact of many described
entities on their host is unclear. Fourteen reports are descriptive with unknown host effects;
three reports mention pathological manifestations without proving the final cause of the
symptoms and eleven reports describe endosymbiotic bacteria. Only six reports present
pathogens in the true sense of the word. From the latter group four reports refer to
Microsporidia, one to a bacterium and one to a fungus. Microsporidian infections often
appear not to be readily visible as no obvious external symptoms are present and female
predators infected by A. phyfoseiufi may be mistaken for unmated females. Such infections
may thus remain undetected for extended periods meanwhile spreading in the case of
exchange of predator populations among producers and laboratories. Screening of these
pathogens on a regular basis is therefore advisable for maintenance of healthy predator
populations over long periods. However, as only few pathogens in the true sense are
 s d       on s l so n d 
phytoseiid mite mass rearings. Yet, the reports on true pathogens, often made in response
to unexpected phenomena in a mass rearing, show that pathogens of beneficial mites can be
an important factor hampering the quality of the mass-reared mites. The final conclusion of
this review therefore is that more research on diseases of beneficial mites that are applied
in biological pest control is needed.
Ackmowledgement We are grateful to Joop van Lenteren for his helpful comments on an earlier version of
this manuscript.
References
Andreadis TG (1987) Transmission. ln: Fuxa JR, Tanada Y (eds) Epizootiology of insect diseases. Wiley,
New York, pp 159-176
Arutunyan ES (1985) Structural peculiarities of the digestive tract of phytoseiid mites. Biologicheskii
Zhurnal Armeni 35:394400 (in Russian)
new microsporidian species from the predatory mite Metaseiutus occidentatis (Nesbitt) (Acari, Phy-
toseiidae). J 1nvertebr Pathol 79: 163-172
Beerling EAM, van der Geest LPS (199la) Microsporidiosis in mass—rearings of the predatory mites
Amsterdam 2: 157-162
Beerling EAM, van der Geest LPS (1991b) A microsporidium (Microspora: Pleistophoridae) in mass
a problem. Bull 1OBC/WPRS 14:5-8
Beerling EAM, van der Voort RJ, Kwakman P (1993) Microsporidiosis in mass rearings of predatory mites:
Bjornson S (1998) Morphology and pathology of the predatory mite Phytoseiutus persimilis Athias-Henriot
(Acari: Phytoseidae). PhD Thesis, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada, 232 pp
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
325
Bjornson S, Keddie BA (1999) Effects of Microsporidium phytoseiuti (Microsporidia) on the perforrmance
of the predatory mite, Phytoseiutus persimitis (Acari, Phytoseiidae). Biol Control 15:153-161
Bjornson S, Keddie BA (200o) Development and pathology of two undescribed species of Microsporidia
infecting the predatory mite, Phytoseiutus persimitis Athias-Henriot. J ln vertebr Pathol 76:293-300
Bjornson S,Keddie BA(2001) Disease prevalence and transmission of Microsporidium phytoseiulinfecting
Bjornson S, Raworth DA (2003) Effects of plant nutrition on the expression of abdominal discoloration in
Phytoseiutus persimitis (Acari: Phytoseiidae). Can Entomol 135:129-138
CABl Publishing, Wallingford, UK, Pp 133-165
Bjornson S, Steiner MY, Keddie BA (1996) Ultrastruc ture and pathology of Microsporidium phytoseiuti n.
sp. infecting the predatory mite, Phytoseiutus persimilis Athias-Henriot (Acari: Phytoseiidae). J ln-
vertebr Pathol 68:223-230
Bjornson S, Steiner MY, Keddie BA (1997) Birefringent crystals and abdominal discolorafion in the
predatory mite Phytoseiutus persimitis (Acari: Phytoseiidae). J lnvertebr Pathol 69:85-91
Bjornson S, Raworth DA, Bedard C (200o) Abdominal discoloration and the predatory mite Phytoseiutus
persimitis Athias-Henriot: prevalence of symptoms and their correlation with short-term performance.
Biol Control 19:17-27
Bluimel S, Hausdorf H (2002) Results of quality control tests with Phytoseiutus persimilis, Neoseiutus
cucumeris and Orius laevigatus in Austria. Bull 1OBC/WPRS 25:17-20
Boucias DG, Pendland JC (1998) Principles of insect pathology. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, USA
7pP
Breeuwer JAJ, Jacobs G (1996) Wotbachia: intracellular manipulators of mite reproduction. Exp Appl
Acarol 20:421434
Wotbachia infection in predatory mites (Phytoseiidae, Acari) from the Philippines. Philipp Agricult
Scient 88:431-439
De Courcy Williams ME, Kravar-Garde L, Fenlon JS, Sunderland KD (2004) Phytoseiid mites in protected
crops: the effect of humidity and food availability on egg hatch, and adult life span of Iphiseius
degenerans, Neoseiutus cucumeris, N. califomicus and Phytoseiutus persimitis (Acari: Phytoseiidae).
Exp Appl Acarol 32:1-13
De Moraes GJ, Delalibera I Jr (1992) Specificity of a strain of Neozygites sp. (Zygomycetes: Entomoph
Dicke M, Sabelis MW (1988) How plants obtain predatory mites as bodyguards. Neth J Zool 38: 148-165
control of mass reared arthropods", Wageningen, March 1991, pp 55-65
Dicke M, Takabayashi J, Posthurus MA, Schitte C, Krips OE (1998) Plant-phytoseid interactions med-
iated by herbivore-induced plant volatiles: variation in production of cues and in responses of
predatory mites. Exp Appl Acarol 22:311-333
Dicke M, Schite C, Dijkman H (2000) Change in behavioral response to herbi vore-induced plant volatiles
in a predatory mite population. J Chem Ecol 26: 1497-1514
Di Palma A (1996) Thyphtodromus rhenanoides Athias-Henriot e T.exhitaratus Ragusa (Acari: Meso-
stigmata: Phytoseiidae): Osservazioni morfologiche, strutturali e considerazioni funzionali. PhD
Thesis, University of Bari, ltaly, 115 pp
Enigl M, Schausberger P(2007) lncidence of the endosymbionts Wotbachia, Cardinium and Spiroplasma in
phytoseiid mites and associated prey. Exp Appl Acarol 42:75-85
Enigl M,Zchori-Fein E, Schausberger P (2005) Negative evidence of Wolbachia in the predaceous mite
Phytoseiutus persimitis. Exp Appl Acarol 36:249-262
Evans H, Shapiro M (1997) Viruses. In: Lacey LA (ed) Manual of techniques in insect pathology. Academic
Press, San Diego, CA, USA, Pp 17-53
Furtado 1P, De Moraes GJ, Keller S (1996) lnfection of Euseius citrifotius (Acari: Phytoseiidae) by an
entomophthoralean fungus in Brazil. Rev Ecossistema 21:85-86
Gols R, Schutte C, Stouthamer R, Dicke M (2007) PCR-based identificafion of the pathogenic bacterium,
Acaricomes phytoseiuti, in the biological control agent Phytoseiutus persimitis.Biol Control 42:316-325
Groot TVM, Breeuwer JAl (2006) Cardinium symbionts induce haploid thelytoky in most clones of three
Hess RT, Hoy MA (1982) Microorganisms associated with the spider mite predator Metaseiutus
(=Typhtlodromus) occidentalis: electron microscope observations.J 1nvertebr Patho] 40:98-106
326
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Horton DR, Moore J (1993) Behavioral effects of parasites and pathogens in insect hosts. In: Beckage NE
Press, San Diego, CA, USA, Pp 107-124
Hoy MA, Jeyaprakash A (2005) Microbial diversity in the predatory mite Metaseiutus occidentatis (Acari:
Phytoseidae) and its prey, Tetranychus urticae (Acari: Tetranychidae). Biol Control 32:427-441
Huger AM (1988) Diagnosis of microsporidian infections in mass-rearings of the predatory mites Amb-
tyseius cucumeris and Neoseiutus barkeri. Annual report of the federal biological research centre for
agriculture and forestry, pp 77-78
Huigens ME, Luck RF, Klaassen RH et al (2000) Infectious parthenogenesis. Nature 405:178-179
Hunter MS,Perlman SJ,Kelly SE (2003) A bacterial symbiont in the Bacteroidetes induces cytoplasmic
incompatibility in the parasitoid wasp Encarsia pergandietta. Proc R Soc Lond B 270:2185-2190
Janssen A (1999) Plants with spider mite prey attract more predatory mites than clean plants under
greenhouse conditions. Entomol Exp Appl 90:191-198
improves detection of bacteria from single females or eggs of Metaseiutus occidentatis (Nesbit)
(Acari: Phytoseiidae). J 1nvertebr Pathol 86: 111-116
Johanowicz DL, Hoy MA (1996) Wotbachia in a predator-prey system: 16S ribosomal DNA analysis of two
phytoseids (Acari: Phytoseidae) and their prey (Acari: Tetranychidae). Ann Ent Soc Am 89:435-441
Johanowicz DL,Hoy MA (1998a) Experimental induction and termination of non-reciprocal reproductive
Johanowicz DL, Hoy MA (1998b) The manipulation of arthropod reproduction by Wotbachia endos-
ymbionts. Fla Entomol 81:310-317
Johanowicz DL, Hoy MA (1999) Wotbachia infection dynamics in experimental laboratory populations of
Metaseiutus occidentalis. Entomol Exp Appl 93:259-268
Keller S (1997) The genus Neozygites (Zygomycetes, Entomophthorales) with special reference to species
found in tropical regions. Sydowia 49:118-146
Lacey L (ed) (1997) Manual of techniques in insect pathology. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, USA, 409
PP
Lighthart B, Sewall D, Thormas DR (1988) Effect of several stress factors on the susceptibility of the
predatory mite,Metaseiulus occidentatis (Acari: Phytoseiidae),to the weak bacterial pathogen Serratia
marcescens. J lnvertebr Pathol 52:33-42
Maeda T, Takabayashi J,Yano S, Takafuji A (200o) The effects of rearing conditions on the olfactory
response of predatory mites, Phytoseiutus persimilis and Ambtyseius womersteyi (Acari: Phytoseiidae).
Appl Entomol Zool 35:345-351
the predatory mite Ambtyseius womersteyi to Tetranychus urticae-infested plant volatiles (Acari:
Phytoseiidae, Tetranychidae). Exp Appl Acarol 25:55-64
Margolies DC, Sabelis MW, Boyer JE (1997) Response of a phytoseid predator to herbivore induced plant
volatiles: selection on attraction and effect on prey exploitation. J Ins Behav 10:695-709
McMurtry JA, Croft BA (1997) Life-styles of phytoseid mites and their roles in biological control. Annu
Rev Entomol 42:291-321
Olsen LE, Hoy MA (2002) Heat curing Metaseiutus occidentalis (Nesbitt) (Acari, Phytoseiidae) of a fitness
reducing microsporidium. J lnvertebr Pathol 79: 173-178
Poinar G, Poinar R (1998) Parasites and pathogens of mites. Annu Rev Entomol 43:449-469
Pukall R, Schumann P, Schuitte C et al (2006) Acaricomes phytoseiuti gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from the
predatory mite Phytoseiutus persimitis. 1nt J Syst Evol Microbiol 56:465-469
Raworth DA,Bjornson S (2002) Fecundity and survival of mass reared Phytoseiutus persimilis (Acari:
Phytoseiidae). Bull 1OBC/WPRS 25:233-236
Sabelis MW, van de Baan HE (1983) Location of distant spider mite colonies by phytoseiid predators
dermonstration of specific kairomones emitted by Tetranychus urticae and Panonychus utmi.Entomol
Exp Appl 33:303-314
Sabelis MW, Janssen A, Pallini A et al (1999) Behavioral responses of predatory and herbivorous arthropods
to induced plant volatiles: from evolutionary ecology to agricultural applications. In: Agrawal AA,
Tuzun S, Bent E (eds) Induced plant defences against pathogens and herbivores. Biochemistry ecology
and agriculture. APS Press, St. Paul, pp 269-296
Schitte C(2006)A novelbacterial disease of the predatorymitePhytoseiutus persimilis: disease syndrome,
disease transmission and pathogen isolation. PhD Thesis, Wageningen University, Wageningen,
The Netherlands, 208 pp
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
327
                
Phytoseiutus persimilis: some characteristics of a mite population that does not respond to herbivore-
plant signals? Proc Exp Appl Entormol NEV Amsterdam 7:195-196
Schutte C, Baarlen P, van Dijkman H, Dicke M (1998) Change in foraging behaviour of the predatory mite
88:295300
Schite C, Bjornson S, Kleespies RG, Huger AM (2005) Natural enemies applied in biological pest control:
pathogens in field and mass-reared populations. Bull 1OBC/WPRS 28:185-188
Schite C, Klijn P, Dicke M (2006a) A novel disease affecting the predatory mite Phytoseiulus persimilis
Schitte C, Negash T, Poitevin O, Dicke M (2006b) A novel disease affecting the predatory mite Phyto-
39:85103
Schitte C, Poitevin O, Dicke M (2008a) A novel disease affecting the predatory mite Phytoseiutus persimitis
(Acari: Phytoseiidae): evidence for the involvement of bacteria. Biocon Sci Techno] 18: 1- 19
Schuitte C, Gols R, Kleespies RG, Poitevin O, Dicke M (2008b) Novel bacterial pathogen Acaricomes
phytoseiuli causes severe disease symptoms and histopathological changes in the predatory mite
Phytoseiutus persimitis (Acari, Phytoseiidae). J lnvert Pathol 98: 127-135
Sikorowski PP, Lawrence AM (1994) Microbial contamination and insect rearing. Am Entomol 40:240-253
Skirvin D, Fenlon J (2003a) Of mites and movement: the effect of plant connectedness and temperature on
movement of Phytoseiulus persimitis.Biol Control 27:242-250
Skirvin D, Fenlon J (2003b) The effect of temperature on the functional response of Phytoseiutus persimilis
(Acari: Phytoseiidae). Exp Appl Acarol 31:37-49
Steiner MY (1993a) Some observations on the quality of biological control organisms used in greenhouses.
Bull 10BC/WPRS 16: 165-168
Publication AECV93-R6,Alberta Environmental Centre,Vergeville,AB,112 pp
Steiner MY, Bjornson S (1996) Performance of Phytoseiutus persimitis and other biological control
agents—on what are we basing our standards? Bull 1OBC/WPRS 19:163-166
reproduction.Annu Rev Microbiol 53:71-102
Stouthamer R, Breeuwer JAJ, Luck RF, Werren JH (1993) Molecular identification of micro-organisms
associated with parthenogenesis. Nature 361:66-68
Sut'akova G (1988) Electron microscopic study of developmental stages of Rickettsielta phytoseiuti in
Phytoseiuius persimilis Athias-Henriot (Gamasoidea: Phytoseiidae) mites. Acta Virol 32:50-54
Sut'akova G (1991) Ricketsietta phytoseiuli and its relation to mites and ticks. In: Dusbabek F, Bukva V
(eds) Modern Acarology. Academia, Praque, pp 45-48
Sut'akova G(1994) Phenomenon of Ricketsietia phytoseiutin Phytoseiutus persimitis mite.Acta Microbiol
Immun Hungarica 41:4 11-414
Sut'akova G, Arutunyan ES (1990) The spider mite predator Phytoseiutus persimitis and its association with
micro-organisms: an electron microscope study. Acta Entomol Bohemoslov 87:431-434
Sut'akova G,Rehacek J (1989)Experimental infection with Ricketsietta phytoseiutin adult female Der-
Sut'akova G,Ruittgen F (1978) Rickettsietta phytoseiuti and virus-like particles in Phytoseiutus persimilis
(Gamasoidea: Phytoseiidae) mites. Acta Virol 22:333-336
Tanada Y, Kaya HK (1993) lnsect pathology. Academic Press, San Diego, 666 pp
Tanigoshi LK (1982) Advances in knowledge of the biology of the Phytoseidae. In: Hoy MA (ed) Recent
advances in knowledge of the Phytoseidae. Agricultural Science Publications, Berkely, pp 1-22
Tanigoshi LK, Fagerlund J, Nishio-Wong JY (198 1) Significance of temperature and food resources of the
developmental biology of Ambtyseius hibisci (Chant) (Acarina,Phytoseiidae). Z Angew Entomio]
92:409419
van de Vrie M, Price JF (1997) Location and dispersal of Phytoseiutus persimitis in strawberry ecosystems.
Med Fac Landbouww Univ Gent 62:449-454
24:497560
van Lenteren JC (2003a) Need of quality control for mass-produced biological control agents. In: van
procedures. CAB1 Publishing, Wallingford, UK, pp 1-18
328
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
van Lenteren JC (2003b) Commercial availability of biological control agents. ln: van Lenteren JC (ed)
Quality control and production of biological control agents: theory and testing procedures. CABl
Publishing, Wallingford, UK, pp 167-179
Weeks AR, Breeuwer JAl (2003) A new bacterium from the Cytophaga-Ftavobacterium-Bacteroides
phylum that causes sex-ratio distortion. In: Bourtzis K, Miller TA (eds) Insect symbiosis. CRC Press,
New York, NY, USA, pp 165-176
Weeks AR, Stouthamer R (2004) lncreased fecundity associated with infection by a Cytophaga-like
intracellular bacterium in the predatory mite, Metaseiutus occidentatis.Proc R Soc Lond B 271:S193-
S195
Weeks AR, Marec F, Breeuwer JAJ (2001) A mite species that consists entirely of haploid females. Science
292:2479-2482
Weeks AR, Velten R,Stouthamer R (2003)Incidence of a new sex-ratio-distorting endosymbiotic bacterium
among arthropods. Proc R Soc Lond B 270:1857-1865
Yao DS, Chant DA (1990) Changes in body weight of two species of predatory mites (Acarina: Phyto-
seiidae) as a consequence of feeding in an interactive systerm. Exp Appl Acarol 8: 195-220
nogenesis and a change in host selection behavior in parasitoids wasps. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
98:12555-12560
Zchori-Fein E,Perlman SJ,Kelly SE et al (2004) Characterization of a “Bacteroidetes” symbiont in
Evol Microbiol 54:961-968
location and distance moved by Phytoseiulus persimilis (Acari: Phytoseiidae). Exp Appl Acarol 23:21-40
Symbionts, including pathogens, of the predatory mite
Metaseiulus occidentalis:current and future analysis
methods
Marjorie A. Hoy · A. Jeyaprakash
Originally published in the journal Experimental and Applied Acarology, Volume 46, Nos 14, 329-347.
DOl: 10.1007/s 10493-008-9185-3 @ Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract Metaseiulus (=Typhlodromus or Galendromus) occidentalis (Nesbitt) (Acari:
Phytoseiidae) is an effective natural enemy of pest mites in a variety of crops around the
world, although it is considered to be endemic in the western USA.A broad understanding
of much of its biology, ecology, behavior, and genetics has been obtained over the past
60 years, but the role(s) symbionts play, which includes pathogens and other microorgan-
isms, remains to be resolved fully. Until molecular tools became available, analysis meth-
ods were limited primarily to microscopic observations; some viruses and rickettsia-like
organisms were observed infecting ^diseased’ M. occidentalis, but it is not clear which
one(s) was the causal agent(s) of the disease(s). Subsequent to the development of the poly-
merase chain reaction (PCR) and genome sequencing, we identified putative gut symbionts
and reproductive tract symbionts in M. occidentalis, as well as a microsporidian pathogen.
A new phylogenetic analysis of the Bacteroidetes-Flavobacterium group suggests the
unnamed Bacteroidetes in M. occidentalis is associated with the digestive tract. However,
much of our current inforrmation about the role these microorganisms play in the biology of
M. occidentalis is based on correlation, lacking the strength of fulfilling Koch's postulates.
We also currently lack any knowledge of the importance of these microorganisms under
field conditions. In the future, it should be possible to leam what role(s) these organisms
play in the biology of this important predator using metagenomics approaches to analyze
the transcriptome and to deterrmine their relative abundance within their hosts with the
quantitative PCR. We have just begun to resolve these relationships.
Keywords Phytoseiidae · Metaseiulus (= Typhtodromus or Galendromus) occidentalis 
Microbial symbionts · Pathogens · Assessment methods · Metagenomics · Bacteroidetes -
Wolbachia·Cardinium·Enterobacter·Oligosporidium.Viruses·Serratia
M. A. Hoy (β) · A. Jeyaprakash
Department of Entormology and Nematology, University of Florida, PO Box 1 10620,
Gaines ville, FL 32611, US A
e-mail: mahoy @ifas.ufl.edu
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.), Diseases ofMites and Ticks. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9695-2_26 329
330
1.Brwin &L.P.S.van der Geest(eds.)
Introduction
The western orchard predatory mite, Metaseiuius (= Typhlodromus or Galendromus)
occidentalis (Nesbitt) (Acari: Phytoseiidae) is an effective natural enemy of a variety of
pest mites. It can control a variety of tetranychid, eriophyid, and tarsonemid pests in apples,
grapes,almonds, cotton, and strawberries in the western United States of America (Hoyt
1969; Flaherty and Huffaker 1970; McMurtry et al. 1970; McMurtry 1982; Hoy 1985a;
Kostiainen and Hoy 1996). It has been imported and established in Australia and New
Zealand in classical biological control programs for the control of mites in apple and peach
orchards (Readshaw 1975; Field 1978). This natural enemy is especially effective in
integrated pest management programs (IPM) in deciduous orchards, vineyards, and straw-
berries, where it can maintain pest mites under low densities over long periods of time, in
part because it developed resistances to insecticides through field selection. Between 1970
and early 1981, at least 470 papers were published on the Phytoseiidae (Tanigoshi 1982)
and between 1960 and 1994, more than 420 papers were published on M.occidentalis
alone (Kostiainen and Hoy 1996).
Thus, because M. occidentalis is an economically important species in IPM programs,
we know a fair amount about its basic biology, including developmental rates when reared
on different prey, mating behavior, sex ratios, preoviposition and oviposition behavior,
overwintering and diapause behavior, feeding habits, tolerance of or resistance to pesti-
cides, prey range, prey consumption, dispersal behavior, production of sex pheromones and
interactions with other phytoseiids or with insect predators (for a review see Tanigoshi
1982; for an indexed bibliography on all papers published on the Phytoseiidae between
1960 and 1994 see Kostiainen and Hoy 1996; also see McMurtry et al. 1970; McMurtry
1982;Hoy1985a,b,1990 forkey references).
A number of genetic studies have been conducted on M. occidentalis (Hoy 1985b; Hoy
and Cave 1985). The number of chromosomes (3 and 6 in males and females, respectively)
and the genetic system of M. occidentalis was shown to be parahaploidy instead of arrheno-
toky, with haploid males being derived from fertilized eggs in which the paternally derived
chromosomes are heterochromatinized and lost from the nuclear genome to result in a
haploid adult with chromosomes derived from their mothers (Hoy 1979; Nelson-Rees et al.
1980).Whether this unusual genetic system is influenced by the microbial associates
(Wolbachia or Cardinium) of M. occidentalis is unknown. This predator has undergone
laboratory selection for an inability to diapause in an effort to enhance its ability to control
Tetranychus urticae Koch in greenhouse roses during the winter (Field and Hoy 1985), as
well as for its ability to survive synthetic pyrethroid, carbamate and sulfur pesticides for
use in IPM programs in apple, pear and almond orchards and vineyards (Hoy et al. 1985;
Hoy 1990). Whether pesticide-resistant microbial symbionts are associated with these
resistances also remains unknown, but many soil microorganisms have been documented to
degrade pesticides (Felsot 1989) and microbial gut symbionts of a tephritid have been
implicated in the pesticide resistance of its host (Boush and Matsumura 1967).
Metaseiuius occidentalis has been genetically modified using recombinant DNA methods
and was the first transgenic arthropod containing a transgene (the lacZ marker gene) to be
released into the field in a small-scale, short-term field trial (Presnail and Hoy 1992; Hoy
2000). Recently, the complete mitochondrial genome of M. occidentalis was sequenced,
revealing some unique characteristics compared to the mitochondrial genomes of other
chelicerate arthropods (Jeyaprakash and Hoy 2007). Because mitochondrial organelles are
derived from endosymbiotic bacteria, these unusual features will be discussed briefly
below.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
331
Despite this extensive research conducted over the past 60 years, until recently we knew
little about the microbial associates of M. occidentalis, including its endosymbionts. We
adhere to the term 'symbiosis' in its original definition of "organisms living together, usu-
ally in close association with one another, to the benefit of at least one organism, with the
partners referred to as symbionts." Within the general concept of symbiosis, there are sub-
categories, including parasitism and mutualism (Douglas 1994; Bourtzis et al. 2006).
Symbionts may be obligatory, facultative, intracellular, extracellular, have neutral, posi-
tive, or negative effects on their host's overall health. Infection by a particular bacterium
may be beneficial to a host under some circumstances but harrmful in other hosts or environ-
ments. At one extreme are the ancient symbionts that live in specialized 'bacteriomes' (host
s   n a p rs    s so  s
necessary for host survival. Pathogenic symbionts may be pathogens at all times, or they
may become pathogenic only when the host immune system allows the microorganism to
increase in density.
The goal of this review is to discuss what we know about the microbial associates
(whether they are called endosymbionts, mutualists, pathogens, or have an unknown rela-
tionship) of this important predator and provide a brief overview of what can be learned as
new methods are applied to understanding these relationships. First, we will discuss the
known pathogens of M. occidentalis, which includes viruses, microsporidia, and bacteria.
Then we will discuss what we know (and don't) about the microbial endosymbionts of
M. occidentalis and their interactions with their host. In addition, we will discuss some of
the methodological issues restricting our understanding of these relationships.
Pathogens and putative pathogens of Metaseiulus occidentalis
Viruses
The only viruses reported to infect this predator appear to be those based on transrmission
electron microscope (TEM) studies of laboratory colony specimens provided by M.A. Hoy
to R. Poinar (Poinar and Poinar 1998). The *sick' M. occidentalis females in the laboratory
colonies exhibited lowered egg production, reduced longevity and died suddenly with a
paralyzed appearance. TEM analysis showed three separate types of icosahedral virus parti-
cles present. One was located in epithelial cells, and was 47 nm in diameter with a 35-nm
electron dense core. Some particles appeared hexagonal in cross section and were some-
times associated with paracrystalline structures. Poinar and Poinar (1998) indicated these
icosahedral particles were similar to those reported in Panonychus citri (McGregor), and
also were similar to the icosahedral particles found in epithelial cells of infected and
healthy T. urticae. It is possible this virus was obtained from their T. urticae prey.
The second type of virus observed in M. occidentalis was approximately 38 nm in diameter
and was found in the gut cells, with a 30-nm electron dense core (Poinar and Poinar 1998).
These particles occurred in large numbers in the midgut nuclei, but free virions also were
found in the cytoplasm of the gut cells and the lumen of the midgut. The third virus
observed in M. occidentalis was 45 nm in diameter with a 35-nm dense core and only
found in gut tissue.
It is not clear if one or more of these viruses were the cause of symptoms observed in
these laboratory colonies of M. occidentalis. Nor do we know whether the viruses occur in
fieldpopulations because the specimens providedwere all from crowded laboratory
332
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
colonies. Likewise, it is unknown whether M. occidentalis became infected by feeding on
virus-infected prey. Much more needs to be done to resolve the effects, if any, of viruses on
the biology of M. occidentalis
Microsporidia
A new species of microsporidium, Oligosporidium occidentalis, was described by Becnel
et al. (2002) from specimens of M. occidentalis obtained from laboratory colonies in
Gainesville, Florida. Both ultrastructural and molecular data were used to describe the
species,which is in the Nosema/Vairimorpha clade of microsporidia based on molecular
data, although the morphological and molecular data are not congruent.
All stages of O. occidentalis are haplokaryotic and develop in direct contact with the
 ss  s s    ne  o or
formed in eggs, immatures, and adults of M. occidentalis. There are two types of spores,
one with a short and one with a longer polar filament. Horizontal transmission occurs by
cannibalism of eggs and other stages and perhaps involves the spores with the long polar
filament. Spores with the short polar filament may play a role in autoinfection and vertical
(transovarial) transmission, which is highly efficient in transferring the microsporidium
from adults of M. occidentalis to progeny.
The morphological and molecular data were in conflict, with the morphological data plac-
ing the new species in either the Oligosporidium or the Unikaryon genus, but the molecular
data (based on ssrRNA) placed this microsporidium within the Nosema/Vairimorpha clade
(Becnel et al. 2002). A 1.2-kb DNA band was amplified from genomic DNA preparations
of infected M. occidentalis by high-fidelity PCR using microsporidian ssrRNA primers.
The sequence data were unique, but most closely related to sequences obtained from
N.vespula (UU11047), N. portugal (AF033316), Vairimorpha tymantriae (AF033315),
and V. necatrix(Y00266)(Becnelet al.2002).There are other recentexamples where mor-
    a       
other mites and arachnids, as well as members of the Unikaryonidae, may establish better
relationships.
Mites infected with O. occidentalis did not exhibit any extermal or gross signs of infection
(Becnel et al. 2002). However, based on TEM analysis, O. occidentalis developed in eggs,
larvae, nymphs, and adults of M. occidentalis and immature stages and mature spores of
O.occidentalis were found in the cytoplasm of cecal cells, lyrate organ cells, ganglia,
epithelial cells, rmuscle, within the ovary, and in developing and mature eggs.
Olson and Hoy (2002) quantified the effects of infection by O. occidentalis and showed
adults, and fewer female progeny. Infection status appeared to have no effect on male
longevity or progeny survival to larval and adult stages.
Three different heat treatments were tested to deterrmine if it was possible to heat-cure
 g      s      s 
chamber at 33°C and 50-80% RH, then held at 27°C, infection rates were reduced but the
microsporidia were not eliminated; 79% of the eggs treated in this manner survived to the
ately after treatment. Most of these spores probably were inviable because after 2 weeks,
only 2% of the mites appeared infected but after 4, 6, 8, and 10 weeks the infection
frequency in the colony derived from these heat-treated eggs climbed to 27, 83, 94, and
98%,respectively,indicating this heat treatment was only partly effective. By contrast,
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
333
when G. eggs were deposited within the growth chamber and they and their progeny (G)
were reared to adulthood at 33°C, all the G, mites were disease free.
It was possible to produce infected lines of M. occidentalis by feeding adult females
progeny of these fed females, indicating that horizontal transrmission could occur by canni-
balism (Olson and Hoy 2002). We had no evidence that the microsporidia are transmitted
in feces of infected mites.
We are unaware of any field populations that have been infected with O. occidentalis.
However, mass rearing of M. occidentalis for augmentative releases could be negatively
affected should colonies become infected with this pathogen. The crowding and stress
associated with mass rearing would facilitate the spread of the disease, especially if prey
densities were inadequate. Because M. occidentalis is an obligatory predator, cannibalism can
become more prevalent when colonies are reared with inadequate prey (Hoy, unpublished).
Other species of microsporidia have been found infecting other species of predatory
mites, including Phytoseiutus persimilis Athias-Henriot (Bjornson et al. 1996, 1997),
Neoseiuius (Ambtyseius)cucumeris Oudemans and N.(A.) barkeri (Hughes) (Beerling and
van der Geest 1991). It is unknown whether M. occidentalis can be infected by more than
one species of microsporidia.
Rickettsia or Rickettsia-like microorganisms as pathogens?
Two morphologically distinct microorganisms, described as Rickettsia-like based on TEM,
were found in tissues of three laboratory colonies of M. occidentafis reared on T. urticae
(Hess and Hoy 1982). These colonies were examined because they were producing few
eggs and several colonies died out. The ‘sick' mites had two different pathologies: some
adult females were plump and had a crearm to pink plug that extruded from the rectum.
Occasionally these plugged females became glued to the substrate. Plugged females rarely
produced eggs, even though they appeared plump and gravid. Immatures and males rarely
showed this plug. The second pathology affected females and immatures; in this case the
 s    n  s     a n s
died, especially during their molts.
The two forms were described based on cell wall structure and cytoplasmic inclusions,
although the forms were also described as pleomorphic (Hess and Hoy 1982). Type A was
observed in all mites examined, while type B was observed in approximately two-thirds of
the sick and healthy mites examined. Type B microorganisms occurred in all ovaries and
eggs, indicating transovarial transmission may take place. In some mites, large numbers of
type B bacteria were observed in all the internal organs, within the hemocoel, and within
Malpighian tubule lumens and in the rectal plug. Because Rickettsia are intracellular
microorganisms, their presence outside of tissues suggests they were pathogenic to their
host cells.
The type A organism was small, ovoid, and approximately 0.75 microns long and
0.5 microns wide (Hess and Hoy 1982). The type A organism had a trilaminar mermbrane
7 nm thick. Exterior to the plasma mermbrane was a clear zone of variable width (12-15 nm)
inside of which an intermediate electron-dense layer was often seen. This layer sometimes
was applied closely to the outer cell wall. The cell wall was approxirmately 15 nm thick and
divided into three layers. Another diagnostic of this organism was an internal fascicle of
     ie  s  
versely through the organism. These tubular structures were associated with an electron
dense plate through which they extended to connect to the plasma mermbrane. All were
334
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
intracellular, occurring singly or in groups of two and three in all tissues except ovarian and
nervous tissue. These were most numerous in the midgut, Malpighian tubules, and epider-
mis; their numbers increased to the point of filling the cytoplasm of a cell when type B
microorganisms were also present.
Type B microorganisms were both intra- and extra-cellular, were rod-shaped, measuring
0.5 microns in width and up to 2 microns in length (Hess and Hoy 1982). They often had an
indistinct internal unit membrane 7 m wide and were bounded by an outer trilaminar mem-
brane of about 9 nm. The outer mermbrane frequently had a scalloped or wavy appearance.
These membranes were separated by a clear area varying from 10 to 18 nm in width. Type
B organisms varied considerably in substructure, but all possessed the same bounding
membranes. Microorganisms of type B, when present in moderate numbers, were found
free in the hemocoel, which is considered atypical for Rickeftsia, and in the cytoplasm of
the Malpighian tubules, as well as the ovaries.
Group B organisms were also found within membrane-bound vacuoles of cells “similar
in structure to the mycetomes of insects" (Hess and Hoy 1982). To our knowledge, mycet-
omes have not been identified in the Phytoseiidae, but should be looked for because their
presence suggests a very longterrm relationship between the mite and the microbial inhabit-
ants of the mycetomes. The "substructure of the microorganisms within the membrane-
bound vacuoles differed from that of the microorganisms found free in the hemocoel" and
"within the ovary,"' suggesting there might have been a third type of microorganism pres-
ent. Because Hoy and Jeyaprakash (2005) found two bacterial species (Bacteroidetes and
Enterobacter) typically associated with the gut of arthropods within M. occidentalis using a
high-fidelity PCR protocol, it is possible that these type B organisms in the *mycetomes'
are symbionts that have increased in density.
Recently, Hoy and Jeyaprakash (unpublished) isolated M. occidentalis females from a
the bacterial DNA,then cloned and sequenced the products.Interestingly, only the
bacteria previously discovered in “healthy’ females were found, including Wolbachia,
Cardinium, an undescribed species of Bacteroidetes, and an Enterobacter species (Hoy
and Jeyaprakash 2005) These data suggest, but do not prove, that titers of one or more
endosymbiont could increase in stressed mites, leading to *disease.' Dale and Moran
(2006) stated that “as more cases of chronic bacterial infection are characterized, the
distinction between pathogenesis and mutualism has become increasingly blurred.
Infection by a particular bacterium may be beneficial to a host under some circumstances
but harmful in other hosts or environments."
An altermative interpretation is that pathogenic Rickettsia-like organisms could be
obtained by M. occidentalis from their prey and remain in the gut or move into other tissues,
but it is not clear whether M. occidentalis picked up any Rickettsia through feeding or
horizontal transfer in the study by Hess and Hoy (1982). Hoy and Jeyaprakash (2005) subse-
quently found a Rickeftsia-like organism in some populations of T. urticae, a common prey
species for M. occidentalis, although these Rickeftsia DNA sequences were not found in the
carbaryl-organophosphorus-sulfur resistant (COS) colony of M. occidentalis in Gainesville,
where the subsequent PCR analysis of the plug was conducted, perhaps because the adults
were fed on T. urticae that lacked the Ricketisia. However, we do not know the infection
status of the 7. urticae fed to the ‘sick' mites examined in the earlier Hess and Hoy (1982)
study and these also could have been the cause of the pathology. Without molecular data to
identify the bacteria it is difficult to compare past and current observations.
The presence of Rickettsia in some T. urticae colonies by Hoy and Jeyaprakash (2005)
was a puzzle because bacteria in this genus are best known as arthropod-vectored
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
335
pathogens of vertebrates. Recent surveys, however, have shown that Rickettsia are found
fairly often in arthropods and other invertebrates, even though the arthropod hosts are not
associated with vertebrates. Perlman et al. (2006) suggested that Rickettsia could be symbi-
onts that are transmitted vertically in invertebrates and only secondarily serve as pathogens
of some vertebrates. Clearly, we could continue to identify more microorganisms from
M. occidentalis and T. urticae when other populations are evaluated.
Serratia marcescens
Lighthart et al. (1988) showed that, under laboratory conditions, experimentally applied
Serratia marcescens could cause mortality and reduce fecundity under high relative humidity,
and in crowded, food-stressed, and heat-stressed adult females of M. occidentalis. These
lesults suggest that poor mass-rearing conditions could facilitate the infection of
M.occidentalis with this pathogen(or others),but we are unaware of any colonies naturally
infected with S.marcescens.
Symbionts ofMetaseiulusoccidentalis
Themitochondrion:the ultimatemicrobialendosymbiont
Mitochondria are descended from microbial endosymbionts and are now essential cellular
organelles. The typical arthropod mitochondrial genome is circular, ranging in size from 15
to 17 kb in size and encodes 13 proteins, 22 transfer RNAs, two ribosomal RNAs and a
D-loop control sequence for initiating replication, with the genes located on one or both
strands (Wolstenholme 1992; Boore 1999). When the mitochondrion from M. occidentalis
was sequenced completely, we were surprised to learn that it is nearly 25 kb in size, which
makes it the largest known mitochondrion so far detected in the Chelicerata (Jeyaprakash
and Hoy 2007).
The large size was due to the presence of a duplicated region (9.9 kb) and a small
(345 bp) triplicated region, in addition to the expected 14.7-kb segment containing the
copies of the D-loop control sequence and two genes (ND3 and ND6) appeared to be
 other known Chelicerata. The transfer RNA genes all are atypical, degenerate and difficult
to detect; all have lost their usual clover-leaf-shaped structure. Three transfer RNAs use
anticodons different from those used by other Chelicerata and this is reflected in the codon
usage by the 11 protein-coding genes. This mitochondrial genome has been exceptionally
active, recombining, rearranging, and undergoing sequence losses, especially in the transfer
RNAs. Whether these unusual features are unique to M. occidentalis will be resolved once
other phytoseiid mitochondrial genomes are sequenced. These results suggest that the
genomes of the symbionts of M. occidentalis could exhibit unusual features compared to
related microorganisms in other arthropods.
Gut symbionts
Hoy and Jeyaprakash (2005) used high-fidelity PCR and primers designed to identify
Eubacteria, Archaeabacteria, iridoviruses, Helicosporidia, Cytophaga-like microorgan-
isms, Wotbachia and its bacteriophage WO, fungi, and yeast-like organisms to determine
336
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
the diversity of microorganisms in the COS laboratory colony and in field-collected colo-
nies of M. occidentalis. No Archaeabacteria, iridoviruses, Helicosporidia, fungi, or yeast-
like organisms were found in the colonies of M. occidentalis tested using the high-fidelity
protocol, which detects as few as 100 copies of target DNA 100% of the time and 10 copies
50% of the time (Jeyaprakash and Hoy 2000).
One DNA sequence using 16S primers was obtained from M. occidentalis that was
related to an unnamed bacterium belonging to the Phylum Bacteroidetes (GenBank acces-
sion AY753171) that is closely related to one isolated from the gut of the lepidopteran
Lymantria dispar (L) (Hoy and Jeyaprakash 2005). In addition, two sequences were iso-
lated that were related to Enterobacter species (GenBank accessions AY753172.
two Enterobacter sequences displayed 8-bp differences and were 1.9 and 2.3% divergent
respectively. Because Enterobacter strains are usually found associated with the digestive
tract in arthropods, we concluded that it is likely that the two unidentified strains of Entero
bacter in M. occidentalis are gut symbionts. Unfortunately, we have not confirmed their
location(s) by in situ hybridization.
The Bacteroidetes species present in M. occidentalis was related to a bacterium isolated
cytes (which have only been suggested as occurring in M. occidentalis by Hess and Hoy
1982). As noted by McCutcheon and Moran (2007), Bacteroidetes species are widely
distributed in the environment and can be found in coastal marine waters, the human gut
and dental plaques, and in insects. McCutcheon and Moran (2007) sequenced the genome
of a Bacteroidetes species (Suicia) that was isolated from the bacteriome of the sharp-
shooter Homalodisca vitripennis (German) and found that its genome was extremely
the size of the smallest known Bacteroidetes genome. Such a reduction indicates a very
longterrm relationship with its host. Based on their genome analysis, Suicia is “"largely
devoted to essential amino acid synthesis," with the pathways for leucine, valine, threonine,
isoleucine, phenylalanine, and tryptophan all complete. Sulcia has a minimal set of genes to
transcribe RNA, to translate protein, and to replicate its genome, but its set of tRNA
synthetases is incomplete. Genes involved in DNA repair are limited, and Suicia contains
few transporters that would allow molecules to cross the cell membrane. It appears that the
metabolic capabilities of Suicia and Baumannia (the other symbiont of the sharpshooter)
are "broadly complementary in that Suicia is primarily devoted to amino acid biosynthesis
whereas Baumannia is primarily devoted to cofactor and vitamin synthesis" (McCutcheon
and Moran 2007). We do not know whether the Bacteroidetes species in M. occidentalis
also provides nutritional services for its host or its location in its host. However, because it
is transovarially transmitted, it may be an important or, even, essential associate of
M.occidentalis.
When the analysis of microbial associates of M. occidentalis was conducted by Hoy and
Jeyaprakash (2005), few DNA sequences were available in GenBank for comparison in the
Bacteroidetes-Flavobacterium group that were associated with arthropods. Figure 1 shows
a new Bayesian phylogeny based on additional sequences. It is interesting to note that all
Cardinium sequences cluster together, as expected. The unnamed species of Bacteroidetes
from M. occidentalis, however, clusters with endosymbionts from the "fat body endos-
ymbionts (Blattabacterium spp.)" from Cryptocercus woodroaches (Maekawa et al. 2005).
It also clusters with the endosymbiotic bacteria associated with bacteriomes from armored
scale insects (Gruwell et al. 2007), and to Suicia isolated from bacteriomes from the
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
337
Tetranychus cinnabarinus Cardirnium (6 sequences)
100
100
Baraustiumr sp., Endosymbiont 
66
Petrobia harti Endosymbiont
92
Erevipajpus obovatus Endosymbiont
 Scaphoideus fitanus Cardinium
97
99
Metaserurus occidentalis COS strain Cardinium
6
70
M. occidentalis CoS strain Cardinrun
75
M. occidentalis Cardinium
74[
M. occidentalis COS strain Cardinium
Oppiella nova Endosymbiont
88
5. poenicis Endosymbiont
51
62
B. fewisi Endosymbiont
B.califomicus Endosymbiont
B. phoenicis Endosymbiont
96
Aspediotus paraneni Cardiniur
100
 Aspidiotus reri Endosymbiont
100
Aphytis fingnanensis Endosymbiont
Encarsia hispida Cardinium rertigii
100
100
Plagiomerus dliaspidis Endosymbiont
E. pergandietta Endosymbiont
100
96
E. pergandiena Endosymbiont
Marietta sp., Cardfinir
M. oocidentalis COS strain Bacteroidetes
100
96
 Pseudaulacaspis prunicola Flavobactenium
100
100
Chionaspis etrusca Flavobacterium
100
Diaspis cocois Flavobacterium
Lepidosaphes gloveni Ffavobacterium
100
100
100
Crypfocercus puncturlarus Brattabacterium
C.relictusBlatobacterium
100
Mastorermes darwirniensis Blatabacterium
Homalodlisca coagulata Suicia muelleri
Coleomegilsa macuiata Endosymbiam
M. occidentalis COS strain Wolbachia
Acyrthosiphon pisun Buchneraaphiclicola
M. occidentalis COS strain Enterobacter (2 sequences)
Escherichia coli
Fig. 1 Bacterial 16S rRNA sequences from the mites M. occidentalis (AY279413, AY635291, AY753169-
AY753173 and AY754820), Bataustiurm sp., (AY279411), Brevipatpus phoenicis (AF279412 and AF350221),
B. tewisi (AB116515), B. califomicus (AB116514),B. obovatus (AY279401), Oppiella nova (AY279414),
insects
6Aspediotus paranerii(AY327469),
Aspidiotus nerii
(AY279402),
Pseudaulacaspis prunicota
(DQ868853), Chionaspis etrusca (DQ868858), Diaspis cocois (DQ868816) and Lepidosaphes gloverii
(DQ868832), the hymenopterans Aphytis tingnanensis (AY279404),
Encarsia hispida(
(AY331187),
E.pergandiella (AF319783 and AY026335), Plagiomerus diaspidis (AY327472) and
1Marietta
sp.
(AY327470), the leafhopper Scaphoideus titanus (AM042540), the cockroaches Cryptocercus punctutatus
(AF322471) and C. retictus (AB211183), the termite Mastotermes darwiniensis (Z35665), the sharp-shooter
Homatodisca coagulata (AY147399) and the ladybird beetle Coteomegilla maculata (Y13889) were obtained
from GenBank.Sequences from the aphid Acyrthosiphon pisum (M27039) symbiont and from Escherichia coti
(AE000474) were included as outgroups, all were aligned using CLUSTAL X (1618 aligned characters) to gen-
erate a tree using the bestfit model (GTR +G+ l) in MrBayes (ngen= 1 million, printfreq= 10000,
sample freq = 100, nchains = 4, burinin = 2500). Posterior probability values are shown before the node
338
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
sharpshooter. These relationships suggest that the unnamed Bacteroidetes from
M. occidentalis could be from a putative mycetocyte. The main anomaly in this clade is the
endosymbiont from the ladybeetle Coteomegilla maculata (Mulsant), which Hurst et al.
(1997) suggested is associated with male killing in C. macuiata. However, Hurst et al. (1997)
sequenced only four clones isolated from beetles with the sex-ratio trait and it is possible they
could have found other microorganisms if more clones had been sequenced.
Alternatively, other Bacteroidetes species (especially Cardinium) have been implicated
as causing reproductive incompatibility, parthenogenesis, or feminization in some arthro-
pods (Hunter et al. 2003; Zchori-Fein and Perlman 2004; Zchori-Fein et al. 2004), so addi-
tional work must be conducted to resolve how diverse the phenotypes are that are
associated with these microorganisms. Clearly, much more needs to be learmed about the
role of Bacteroidetes species in arthropod biology. Without obtaining colonies of
M. occidentalis that have only one type of microorganism (e.g-, either Wolbachia or Cardi-
nium or the undescribed species of Bacteroidetes), it is difficult to assign a function to these
microbial symbionts in M. occidentalis.
To determine if infections of M. occidentalis with the undescribed species of Bacteroi
detes or Enterobacter were a laboratory artifact, species-specific primers were designed
from the sequences obtained from the COS colony of M. occidentalis and used to amplify
DNA from field-collected colonies (grapes from Washington, hops from Washington,
           
expected DNA bands were produced, indicating that these symbionts were found consis
tently in both laboratory-reared and field-collected populations of M. occidentalis sampled
from diverse crops and geographic areas.
Reproductive tract symbionts
Using 16S rRNA primers and a high-fidelity PCR protocol, Hoy and Jeyaprakash (2005)
found that the COS laboratory strain of M. occidentalis had one Wolbachia strain and one
unnamed species related to Candidatus Cardinium hertigii (Fig. 1). When colonies of
M. occidentalis isolated from grapes and hops in Washington or almonds and cherries in
Califormia were screened, all were positive for these sequences. As expected, both the
Wolbachia and bacteria related to Candidatus Cardinium hertigii are transovarially transmitted
(Jeyaprakash and Hoy 2004).
The role(s) that the Enterobacter, Wotbachia, Cardinium or unnamed species of Bacter
oidetes symbionts play remains unclear due to several methodological diffculties (and due
to a lack of resources to conduct the experiments). In fact, we don't know precisely where
these microorganisms can be found in M. occidentalis. Without conducting in situ hybrid-
ization on different tissues using probes specific for these microorganisms, we can only
speculate that they are restricted to specific tissues. Some Wolbachia, for example, can be
found in tissues other than the reproductive tract in other arthropods.
Other potential endosymbionts, including pathogens
Enigl and Schausberger (2007) conducted a survey of seven species of phytoseiids using
Wotbachia, Cardinium, and Spiroplasma primers. Spiroplasma was detected in the
phytoseiid Neoseiuius (Amblyseius) californicus (McGregor), but none of the other phytoseiic
species tested. Whether one or more populations of M. occidentalis carry Spiroplasma is
unknown, because Hoy and Jeyaprakash (2005) did not survey their populations for
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
339
Spiropiasma and we are unaware of any other surveys of M. occidentalis populations for
this organism.
Hoy and Jeyaprakash (2005) found that none of the six colonies of M. occidentalis
tested contained the WO bacteriophage of Wolbachia, despite the fact that two of the
T. urticae colonies did. It is always possible that a broader survey of M. occidentalis colo-
nieswouldyieldevidenceofinfectionofWolbachiawithWObacteriophage
Gols et al. (2007) found a pathogenic bacterium, Acaricomes phytoseiuli, in six of seven
populations of P. persimilis from several commercial sources. This bacterium reduced
longevity and fecundity and altered behavior, reducing attraction to herbivore-induced
plant volatiles, which could reduce efficacy of these important natural enemies in augmen-
tative biological control programs. However, the other predators tested [P. macropilis
positive for A. phytoseiuli. Gols et al. (2007)questioned whether A. phytoseiuli is restricted
to mass rearing programs where stress could enhance infection or whether the pathogen
originates from infection of a field population of P. persimiis that was later introduced into
contact with feces deposited by infected mites and the disease is considered to be "highly
infectious." It would be interesting to learn whether this pathogen can be introduced into
other phytoseiids, including M. occidentalis
Methodology
High fidelity versus standard allele-specific PCR
When Johanowicz and Hoy (1996, 1998a, b, 1999) worked on Wolbachia using the *stan-
dard’allele-specific PCR,we believed,based on a failure to amplify PCR products,that we
had heat-cured M.occidentalis and removed the Wolbachia.At that time,we were not
aware that M. occidentalis was infected with additional microorganisms such as the rickett-
sia-like microorganisms observed by Hess and Hoy (1982). Subsequently, when we began
to use a more sensitive and specific PCR protocol [known as high-fidelity or long PCR
(Barnes 1994) because it incorporates a second DNA polymerase that has proof-reading
ability], we discovered that we were probably getting false negatives in our standard PCRs
for Wolbachia. This is because the high-fidelity PCR is six to eight orders of magnitude
more sensitive than standard allele-specific PCR (Jeyaprakash and Hoy 2000). It would be
very helpful if, in the future, all authors reporting on the presence/absence of specifc
microorganisms reported the sensitivity of their PCR protocol.
Multiple displacement amplification
Because M. occidentalis is so small, it is difficult to obtain consistent PCR products using
Wolbachia-specific primers from single eggs or adults, even when using high-fidelity PCR
(Jeyaprakash and Hoy 2000). In order to determine whether individual adults or eggs were
positive for Wolbachia, we used a multiple displacement amplification (MDA) protocol to
amplify the DNA prior to conducting a high-fidelity PCR (Jeyaprakash and Hoy 2004).
MDA amplifies genomic DNA frorm purified and unpurified lysates at 30°C in a few hours
without a thermal cycler (Dean et al. 2002). It uses exonuclease-resistant thiophosphate
 d   n  d s sx  
340
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
amplify the genomic DNA. It is assumed that the hexamers bind at random over the
genome, allowing the Phi29 DNA polymerase to synthesize DNA strands up to 10 kb in
length, thus enriching each amplified DNA stand by approximately 10,000-fold. DNA
amplified by MDA can be used as templates for the PCR, as well as for use in other studies,
such as Southem blot analysis.
We discovered that using MDA could produce a detectable DNA band after high-fidelity
PCR from as little as 0.01 femtograms of plasmid containing the target DNA at least 50% of
the time, which is equivalent to the ability to amplify a single copy (Jeyaprakash and Hoy
2004). Detectable PCR products using wsp primers for Wolbachia also could be produced
from naturally infected single females and eggs of M. occidentalis, which allows detailed
studies of infection frequency and transovarial transrmission of several microorganisms asso-
ciated with this predatory mite. MDA analysis of eggs of the COS colony of M. occidentalis
indicatedWolbachia and Cardiniumwere transovarially transrmitted.NoPCRprimers for the
Enterobacter or unnamed species of Bacteroidetes were used, and it would be interesting to
             
of the MDA protocol would provide more substance to claims that individuals are negative
for a particular microorganism.
Wolbachia infection dynamics in experimental laboratory populations of
Metaseiutusoccidentalis
Wolbachia has been shown to increase the prevalence of Wolbachia-infected hosts in a
population (reviewed by Johanowicz and Hoy 1999). Models using three parameters (the
proportional failure of a mother to transmit Wolbachia to her offspring, the proportion of
progeny produced by incormpatible crosses relative to compatible crosses, and the relative
ftness of infected matings relative to uninfected matings) have been used to predict
whether Wolbachia would sweep through a population, which could be useful in driving
useful genes into target populations in genetic manipulation projects.
To investigate whether Wolbachia would sweep through replicated populations of
M. occidentalis under laboratory conditions over 12 generations after being initiated with
an initial infection frequency of 1o%, we monitored reproductive compatibility in popula-
tions *with and without Wolbachia' and also used standard allele-specific PCR as a second
indicator (Johanowicz and Hoy 1999). Unfortunately, at the time of this experiment, we
were not aware that this population was also infected with Cardinium, Enterobacteror the
unnamed species of Bacteroidetes. To date, we cannot determine whether the effects
observed in the experiment were due to low titers of Wotbachia or to Cardinium, or, even,
to the other bacterial symbionts.Wehave tried to eliminateWolbachia and Cardinium in
colonies of M. occidentalis using both heat and antibiotic treatments (Hoy and Jeyaprak-
ash, unpublished), but have been unable to completely eliminate either based on high-
fidelity PCR assays, perhaps due to the fact that high-fidelity PCR is so sensitive that we
can detect as few as 1o0 copies of Wolbachia or Cardinium DNA consistently and as few
as 10 copies approximately 50% of the time. Thus, although the titer of these microorgan-
isms may have been reduced, they were not completely eliminated based on high-fidelity
PCR data. Quantitative PCR could allow us to determine at what titer the reproductive
incompatibility is expressed when heat-treated and untreated mites are crossed. Alterna-
tively, the failure to eliminate both bacteria could be because the Wolbachia or Cardinium
genomes have been incorporated into the nuclear genome of M. occidentalis, as it has with
other arthropods.
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
341
In any case, Johanowicz and Hoy (1999) found that the proportion of compatible crosses
did not change over time in the mixed populations containing individuals putatively with
and without Wolbachia. Furthermore, unexpected compatibility occurred, which could be
explained most easily by imperfect maternal transmission of Wolbachia, at a rate of 0.05.
The relative numbers of viable eggs indicated that there were also fimess costs. Fewer
daughters were produced in the incompatible crosses, which could be due to the effects of
Wolbachia (or Cardinium)on the parahaploid genetic system of M. occidentalis. Thus, the
initial infection frequency of 10% was apparently below an unstable equilibrium frequency
(Hoffman et al. 1990).
When this study was designed, the choice of an initial infection frequency of 0.10 was
influenced by earlier studies and by the belief that releasing more than 10% of the absolute
population density in a practical pest management program is likely to be diffcult and
expensive. Estimates of population densities in the field suggest that there could be as many
as 20 million M. occidentalis per acre (Hoy 1982). If so, then as many as 200,000 mites per
acre might be needed to reach the 10% release rate; if releases were made in early spring,
then as many as 2,000 mites per acre would be required, which is potentially cost effective.
However, the fimess costs observed, whether due to Wolbachia or Cardinium or both, were
serious; although egg production was not significantly different in infected versus unin-
fected control crosses, there were significantly fewer daughters produced in the infected
crosses, resulting in a fitness cost of 0.60 for infected crosses relative to uninfected crosses.
A variety of other assumptions were violated in the models. For example, remating by
M. occidentalis females is common, which increases the chance that uninfected females
will mate successfully with uninfected males within their reproductive lifespan. The
normal sex ratio of M. occidentalis also violates the models' assumption of a 1:1 sex ratio
and the assumption of panmixis also may be violated because non-random mating has been
observed in this species (Hoy and Cave 1988).
This experiment, although flawed because we cannot resolve whether the results were
due to infection with Wolbachia or Cardinium or other microbial endosymbionts, suggests
that one or more of these microorganisms may be causing‘disease.'By contrast, Weeks
and Stouthamer (2003) suggested that a Cytophaga-like organism, now considered Cardi-
nium, was associated with a "significant increase in the fecundity of infected females."
These authors used adults of M. occidentalis obtained from a commercial facility in Cali-
fornia and reared them on Tetranychus cinnabarinus (Boisd.) (believed to not be infected
with Wolbachia or Cardinium,although the authors do not indicate how they know the
prey were negative nor do they indicate the sensitivity of their heminested PCR protocol
used to conclude that the M. occidentalis were negative for these infections). A subsample
of M. occidentalis was treated with tetracycline and inbred lines were developed that, puta
tively, were infected with Cardinium but not with Wolbachia. Crosses were made between
three infected and uninfected lines and fitness was evaluated using the number of eggs, egg
viability, F1 mortality, and adult sex ratio. All three crosses indicated the infected females
deposited more eggs over 6 days compared to the uninfected females, although egg viabil-
ity was not different. However, fecundity of infected females averaged only 10.0 eggs/
only 7.3 eggs/female/6 days. Because M. occidentalis females typically deposit 2 (or more)
eggs per female per day if healthy and well fed during 6 days, the level of fecundity
due to their use of tetracycline to treat the colonies is unknown; we speculate that elimina-
tion of gut symbionts (such as Enterobacter, if present) could have reduced vigor in their
colonies. Similar results are given for the second line. We agree with the conclusion of
342
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Weeks and Stouthamer (2003) that "until these effects can be partitioned out, the actual
phenotypic effects" of any of the symbionts cannot be resolved. We believe that any future
studies on the symbionts of M. occidentalis should be conducted on populations that have
had a complete characterization of their microbial fauna. Ideally, studies should be
conducted on lines that lack all but the symbiont species of interest and the sensitivity of
the PCR protocols used should be characterized.
Conclusions
Although we know a great deal about the biology, behavior, genetics, and effectiveness of
M.occidentalis as a natural enemy in IPM systems, we clearly lack a comprehensive
understanding of the role of pathogens, symbionts, and other microbial associates of this
predatory mite. We know nothing about the role of pathogens in the population dynamics
of this important predator under field conditions.
This gap in knowledge has occurred in part because there was little recognition that the
microbes associated with M. occidentafis were important. In addition, the tools with which
to study these interactions have been lacking until recently and still are underutilized. Until
the invention of the PCR,it was difficult to resolve how many types of microorganisms
were presentwithin M.occidentalis.Furthermore,without the ability to work with strains
of mites that have differing numbers of microbial endosymbionts, it is difficult to resolve
the role(s) these organisms play in the biology of this predator. At present it is unclear
whether any of these microorganisms are obligatory or whether they can be eliminated
without harm, although the fact that Wolbachia and Cardinium are transovarially transmit-
Moreover, we do not know what tissues these microorganisms inhabit in M. occidentalis,
nor do we understand whether their titer affects their host.
It is possible that the use of metagenomic tools may resolve some of these difficulties. If
the genomes of these microorganisms were sequenced and the function(s) of the genes
analyzed, the physiological roles that these organisms play may be resolved (Handelsman
2004; Woyke et al. 2006). As noted by McCutcheon and Moran (2007), obtaining symbiont
DNA separately from insects (or mites) is diffiault.McCutcheon and Moran (2007)
attempted to enrich for the Bacteroidetes (Sulcia) DNA in their project by dissecting the
appropriate bacteriome from the insect host, but they still got a complex sample containing
DNA from the insect, as well as from Suicia and Baumannia (another symbiont), with the
insect DNA constituting the majority fraction of the sample by weight and the Sulcia DNA
representing the majority of the bacterial fraction. However, the sequenced microbial DNA
could be analyzed and a new software (GLIMMER) developed to discriminate between
host and symbiont DNA was not needed (McCutcheon and Moran 2007). Certainly, if the
is conducted, any “bacterial’ DNA sequences obtained should not be discarded as
contaminants but, rather, assembled and analyzed for their possible function. It is likely
that a considerable proportion of the microbial genomes in M. occidentafis can be obtained
in this manner.
Because it has been difficult, at least using the colonies of M. occidentafis in our labora
tory, to develop strains that lack Wolbachia or Cardinium (based on high-fidelity PCR
data) using heat or antibiotic treatrments, it also may be necessary to analyze these popula-
tions to deterrmine whether Wolbachia or Cardinium genomes have been horizontally trans
ferred into the nuclear genome, as has been shown for at least 11 other arthropod species
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
343
(Hotopp et al. 2007). If horizontal transfer into the nuclear genome of M. occidentalis has
occurred, it will be interesting to determine whether any symbiont genes are transcribed, as
was reported for some Wolbachia genes. Insertion of symbiont genes into the nuclear
genome is reminiscent of the steps involved in the evolution of the bacterial symbiont that
became the mitochondrial organelle. Clearly, many interesting questions remain to be
answered about the relationships between the genomes of Wolbachia, Bacteroidetes, Car-
dinium and the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes of M. occidentalis.
Mass rearing or laboratory rearing of M. occidentalis typically occurs under conditions
that are considerably more crowded than would occur under field conditions and these con-
ditions cause stress. Whether the endosymbionts of M. occidentalis ever become patho-
genic in the event that the immune system of M.occidentalis becomes compromised
remains to be confirmed. The electron micrographs published by Poinar and Poinar (1998)
suggest that pathogenesis might occur if these microbial symbionts were to increase in den-
sity because the phenotype of the electron micrographs suggest that Cardinium, the
unnamed Bacteroidetes, and/or Wotbachia could have been the causative agents of patho-
genesis. Quantitative PCR could allow rapid quantification of symbiont density under
different environmental conditions and a correlation with *disease’ symptoms.
Acarologists wanting to understand the roles symbionts play in their acarine hosts have
significant challenges to meet. However, we could use, in part, the inforrmation and meth-
odology developed for The Human Microbiome Project, which has been organized to
understand the diversity and evolution of microorganisms associated with the human skin,
reproductive tract, digestive tract and mouth (Dethlefsen et al. 2007; Tumbaugh et al.
2007). It is becoming clear that the microbial communities of humans are characteristic and
complex mixtures of many microorganisms that have co-evolved with humans. These
microorganisms affect the nutrient or energetic value of food, the metabolism of xenobiot-
ics, are involved in the renewal of gut epithelial cells, and the development and activity of
the human immune system. In animal models, even the size of the heart and the behavior of
the animal are affected by the lack of their norrmal gut fauna (Turnbaugh et al. 2007). The
human microbial communities and their interactions with their human hosts have only
begun to be described, as they have with arthropod-microbial consortia. It is recognized
that "Only with an integrated approach will it be possible to comprehend the complex ecol-
ogy of human health and the many ways in which interactions between humans and micro-
organisms can go awry”(Dethlefsen et al. 2007). The first step is to describe the microbial
community composition, determine how this varies over time and among individuals, and
with respect to changes in diet, host genotype, and health. This will require studies of
model systems other than that of humans for technical and ethical reasons.
Experimental models using simple consortia,such as those seen in many invertebrate-
microbe communities (including mites or ticks),will facilitate the molecular dissection of
interactions in intact natural settings. The genetic tools available for some invertebrate
model hosts will allow the identification of genes and proteins that control arthropod host
responses and manage the consortia. The Human Microbiome project will attempt to
"move beyond comparative genomics to an integrated ‘systems metagenomics’ approach
that accounts for microbial community structure (the microbiota), gene content (the
lism (the ^meta-metabolome')." Tools to achieve this will require the development of func-
tional gene arrays to determine the relative abundance of specific genes or transcripts in
microbiomes. The construction and sequencing of complementary DNA libraries, or
expressed sequence tag analysis (EST) form an alternative approach (Nagaraj et al. 2006),
344
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
(Tumbaugh et al. 2007). It is possible that the relatively simple consortium of microbial
associates of M. occidentalis could contribute to an understanding of the broader questions
regarding the role(s) of microbiomes in the biology of their hosts.
It may also be true that arthropod-symbiont associations will have to be studied over
time to understand that fine-scale evolutionary processes occur between the host and sym-
biont genomes (Riegler and O'Neill 2007). Recent papers reviewed in this article indicate
that the host-symbiont relationship is more dynamic than appreciated, with some insect
sex ratio due to Wolbachia was shown to have evolved a resistance to the sex-ratio modify-
ing ability of the Wolbachia over a period of a few years. This dynamism indicates that
comparing symbiont effects on different populations of M. occidentalis at different times
may yield different conclusions due either to the evolution of the host or of the symbiont.
Dillon and Dillon (2004) noted "A comprehensive understanding of the biology of
insects requires that they be studied in an ecological context with microorganisms as an
important component of the system." The same conclusion can be reached that a compre-
their microbial associates under both laboratory and field conditions.
Acknowledgments We are grateful for the invitation to participate in this special edition of Experimentat
o au  sirs sd  ss nia  i e p 
uted to the senior author's work with M. occidentatis, although much remains to be learned about the basic
biology,ecology and genetics of this irmportant natural enemy.The work was supported in part by the Davies,
Fischer and Eckes Endowmentin Biological Control to M.A. Hoy
References
templates.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:2216-2220
Becnel J1, Jeyaprakash A, Hoy MA, Shapiro A (2002) Morphological and molecular characterization of a
new microsporidian species from the predatory mite Metaseiuius occidentatis (Nesbit) (Acari, Phyto-
seiidae). J lnvertebr Pathol 79: 163- 172
Beerling EAM, van der Geest LPS (1991) Microsporidiosis in mass-rearings of the predatory mites
Ambtyseius cucumeris and A. barkeri (Acarina: Phytoseiidae). Proc Exp Appl Entomol NEV Amster-
dam 2: 157-162
Bjornson S, Steiner MY, Keddie BA (1996) Ultrastructure and pathology of Microsporidium phytoseiuti n.
sp. infecting the predatory mite, Phytoseiulus persimilis Athias-Henriot (Acari: Phytoseidae). J Inver-
tebr Pathol 68:223-230
Bjornson S, Steiner MY, Keddie BA (1997) Birefringent crystals and abdominal discoloration in the preda-
Boore JL (1999) Animal mitochondrial genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 27: 1767-1780
Bourizis K, Miller TA (eds) (2006) Insect symbiosis, vol 2. CRC Press, Boca Raton
symbiote of the apple maggot. 1 Econ Entomol 60:918-920
Dale C, Moran NA (2006) Molecular interactions between bacterial symbionts and their hosts. Cell 126:
453-465
Dean FB, Hosono S, Fang L, Wu X, Faruqi AF, Bray-Ward P, Sun Z, Zong Q, Du Y, Du J, Driscoll M, Song
multiple displacement amplification. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:5261-5266
microbe mutualism and disease. Nature 449:8 11-8 18
Dillon RJ, Dillon VM (2004) The gut bacteria of insects: nonpathogenic interactions. Annu Rev Entomol
49:7192
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
345
Douglas AE (1994) Symbiotic interactions. Oxford Uni versity Press, UK
Enigl M, Schausberger P (2007) Incidence of the endosy mbionts Wotbachia, Cardinium and Spiroptasma in
phytoseid mites and associated prey. Exp Appl Acarol 42:75-85
Felsot AS (1989) Enhanced biodegration of insecticides in soil: implications for agroecosystems. Annu Rev
Entomol 34:453-476
Feld RP(1978) Control of the two-spotted mite in a Victorian peach orchard with an introduced predaceous
mite Typhtodromus occidentatis Nesbitt. Aust J Zool 26:5 18-519
Feld RP, Hoy MA (1985) Diapause behavior of genetically-irmproved strains of the spider mite predator
Valley vineyards. l. Role of Metaseiutus occidentatis. ll. Influence of dispersion patterns of
Metaseiutus occidentalis.Hilgardia 40(10):267-330
Gols R, Schutte C, Stouthamer R,Dicke M (2007) PCR-based identification of the pathogenic bacterium,
Acaricomes phytoseiuti, in the biological control agent Phytoseiutus persimitis (Acari: Phytoseidae).
Biol Control 42:316-325
Gruwell ME, Morse GE, Normark BB (2007) Phylogenetic congruence of armored scale insects (Hemiptera:
Diaspididae) and their primary endosy mbionts from the phylum Bacteroidetes. Mol Phylogenet Evo]
44:267280
Biol Rev 68:669-685
Hess RT, Hoy MA (1982) Microorganisms associated with the spider mite predator Metaseiutus
(=Typhtodromus) occidentatis:electron microscope observations.J lnvertebr Pathol 40:98-106
ity in Drosophila simulans.Genetics 126:933-948
Hotopp JCD, Clark ME, Oliveira DCSG, Foster JM, Fischer P, Torres MCM, Giebel JD, Kumar N, lshmael
         s         
Tettelin H, Werren JH (2007) Widespread lateral gene transfer from intracellular bacteria to multicellu-
lar eukaryotes. Science 317: 1753-1756
Hoy MA (1979) Parahaploidy of the "arrhenotokous" predator, Metaseiulus occidentalis(Acarina: Phytosei-
dae) demonstrated by X-irradiation of males. Entomol Exp Appl 26:97-104
Metaseiutus occidentalis.Entomol Exp Appl 32:205-212
Hoy MA (1985a) Almonds: integrated mite management for Califormia almond orchards. In:Helle W,
Sabelis MW (eds) Spider mites, their biology, natural enemies, and control, vol 1B.Elsevier, Amsterdam,
pp 299-310
mol 30:345-370
Hoy MA (1990) Pesticide resistance in arthropod natural enemies: variability and selection responses. In: Roush
RT, Tabashnik B (eds) Pesticide resistance in arthropods. Chapman and Hall, New York,pp 203-236
24:463-495
Hoy MA, Cave FE (1985) Mating behaviorin four strains of Metaseiutus occidentatis (Acari: Phytoseiidae)
Ann Entomol Soc Am 78:588-593
Hoy MA, Cave FE (1988) Premaing and postmaing isolation among populations of Metaseiutus occidentalis
(Nesbitt) (Acarina: Phytoseidae). Hilgardia 56(6): 120
Hoy MA, Jeyaprakash A (2005) Microbial diversity in the predatory mite Metaseiutus occidentalis (Acari:
Ph ytoseidae) and its prey, Tetranychus urticae (Acari: Tetran ychidae). Biol Control 32:427-44 1
cide-resistant Metaseiutus occidentatis in California almond orchards. Entomol Exp Appl 37:17-31
Hoyt SC (1969) Integrated chemical control ofinsects and biological control of mites on apple in Washington.
1 Econ Entomol 62:7486
Hunter MS, Perlman SJ, Kelly SE (2003) A bacterial symbiont in the Bacteroidetes induces cytoplasmic
incompatibility in the parasitoid wasp Encarsia pergandietla. Proc R Soc Lond B 270:2185-2190
Hurst GDD, Harmmarton TC, Bandi C, Majerus TMO, Bertrand D, Majerus MEN (1997) The diversity of
member of the Flavobacteria. Genet Res 70:1-6
eyaprakash A, Hoy MA (2000) Long PCR improves Wotbachia DNA amplification: wsp sequences found
in 76% of 63 arthropod species. Insect Mol Biol 9:393-405
346
J. Bruin & L. P. S. van der Geest (eds.)
Jeyaprakash A, Hoy MA (2004) Multiple displacement amplification in combination with high-fidelity PCR
Phytoseidae). J lnvertebr Pathol 86: 11 1-116
Jeyaprakash A, Hoy MA (2007) The mitochondrial genome of the predatory mite Metaseiutus occidentalis
features.Gene 391:264274
Johanowicz Dl, Hoy MA (1996) Wotbachia in a predator-prey system: 16S ribosomal DNA analysis of
two phytoseiids (Acari: Phytoseidae) and their prey (Acari: Tetranychidae). Ann Entomol Soc Am
89:435441
ymbionts. Fla Entomol 81:310-317
incompatibilities in a parahaploid mite. Entomol Exp Appl 87:51-58
Johanowicz DL, Hoy MA (1999) Wotbachia infection dynamics in experimental laboratory populations of
Metaseiutus occidentalis.Entomol Exp Appl 93:259-268
bibliography. Monograph 17, lnstitute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gaines-
ville 355 pp
Lighthart B, Sewall D, Thormas DR (1988) Effect of several stress factors on the susceptibility of the predatory
mite, Metaseiutus ocidentalis (Acari: Phytoseidae),to the weak bacterial pathogen Serratia marcescens.
J lnvertebr Pathol 52:33-42
Maekawa K, Park YC, Lo N (2005) Phylogeny of endosymbiont bacteria harbored by the woodroach
Cryptocercus spp. (Cryptocercidae: Blattaria): molecular clock evidence for a late Cretaceous—eatly
McCutcheon JP, Moran NA (2007) Parallel genomic evoluion and metabolic interdependence in an ancient
symbiosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:19392-19397
McMurry JA (1982) The use of phytoseids for biological control: progress and future prospects.In: Hoy
MA (ed) Recent advances in knowledge of the Phytoseidae. Univ Calif Div Agric Sci Publ, 3284,
Berkeley, Pp 23-48
McMurtry JA, Huffaker CB, van de Vrie M (1970) 1. Tetranychid enermies: their biological characters and the
impact of spray practices. Hilgardia 40( 11):33 1-390
Brief Bioinform 8:6-21
Nelson-Rees WA, Hoy MA, Roush RT (1980) Heterochromatinization, chromatin elimination and haploidi-
zation in the parahaploid mite Metaseiutus occidentalis (Nesbitt) (Acarina: Phytoseidae). Chromosoma
77:263-276
Olson LE, Hoy MA (2002) Heat curing Metaseiutus occidentalis (Nesbitt) (Acari, Phytoseidae) of a fitness-
reducing microsporidium.J lnvertebrPathol 79:173-178
Perlman SJ, Hunter MS,Zchori-Fein E (2006) The emerging diversity of Rickettsia. Proc R Soc B
273:2097-2106
Poinar G Jr, Poinar R (1998) Parasites and pathogens of mites. Annu Rev Entomol 43:449-469
Presnail JK, Hoy MA (1992) Stable genetic transformation of a beneficial arthropod, Metaseiutus occidentatis
(Acari: Phytoseiidae), by a microinjection technique. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89:7732-7736
Readshaw JL (1975) Biological control of orchard mites in Australia using an insecticide-resistant predator.
J Aust lnst Agric Sci 41:213-214
22:625-627
Tanigoshi LK (1982) Advances in knowledge of the biology of the Phytoseidae. In: Hoy MA (ed) Recent
advances in knowledge of the Phytoseiidae. Univ Calif Div Agric Sci Publ, 3284,pp 1-22
Tumbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Hamady M, Fraser-Liggett CM, Knight R, Gordon J1l (2007) The human microbiome
project. Nature 449:804-810
Weeks AR, Stouthamer R (2003) Increased fecundity associated with infection by a Cytophaga-like
intracellular bacteriumin the predatory rmite, Metaseiutus occidentalis.Proc R Soc Biol Lett 271(Suppl 4):
193-195 May 7, 2004
Wolstenholme DR (1992) Animal mitochondrial DNA: structure and evolution. Int Rev Cytol 141: 172-216
Woyke T, Teeling H, lvanova NN, Huntemann M, Richter M, Gloeck ner FO, Boffelli D, Anderson ll, Barry
Dubilier N (2006) Symbiosis insights through metagenormic analysis of a rmicrobial consortium. Nature
443:950955
Diseases of Mites and Ticks
347
Zchori-Fein E, Perlman SJ (2004) Distribution of the bacterial symbiont Cardinium in arthropods. Mol Eco]
13:2009-2016
Zchori-Fein E, Perlman SJ, Kelly SE, Katzir N,Hunter MS (2004) Characterization of a “Bacteroidetes'sym-
biont in Encarsia wasps (Hymenoptera: Aphelinidae): proposal of *Candidatus Cardinium hertigi'. Int
J Syst Evol Microbiol 54:961-968