Thomas
Gough
AlexGough·Alison Thomas
Breed Predispositions to
Breed
Predispositions
SECOND EDITION
to Disease
in Dogs and Cats
SECOND EDITION
MWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http:/ttahc.taobao.com
CONTENTS
FOREWORD
INTRODUCTION
BASIC GENETICS
PART I: DOGS
ABERDEEN TERRIER
AFFENPINSCHER
AFGHAN HOUND
AIREDALETERRIER
AKITA
ALASKANKLEEKAI
ALASKANMALAMUTE
AMERICANBULLDOG
AMERICAN PIT BULL TERRIER
AMERICAN STAFFORDSHIRE TERRIER
AMERICANWATER SPANIEL
ANATOLIAN SHEPHERD DOG
2
AUSTRALIAN CATTLE DOG
AUSTRALIAN KELPIE
AUSTRALIAN SHEPHERD DOG
AUSTRALIAN SILKY TERRIER
AUSTRALIANTERRIER
BASENJI
BASSET HOUND
BEAGLE
BEARDED COLLIE
BEAUCERON
BEDLINGTON TERRIER
BELGIAN SHEPHERD DOG
BELGIAN TERVUREN
BERNESE MOUNTAIN DOG
BICHON FRISE
BLOODHOUND
BOLOGNESE
3
BOERBOEL
BORDER COLLIE
BORDER TERRIER
BORZOI
BOSTON TERRIER
BOUVIERDESFLANDRES
BOXER
BOYKINSPANIEL
BRIARD
BRITTANY SPANIEL
BRUSSELS GRIFFON
BULLDOG (ENGLISH)
BULLMASTIFF
BULL TERRIER
CAIRN TERRIER
CAVALIERKINGCHARLESSPANIEL
CHESAPEAKEBAYRETRIEVER
4
CHIHUAHUA
CHIN
CHINESE CRESTED DOG
CHINESE SHAR PEI
CHOW CHOW
CLUMBER SPANIEL
COCKERSPANIEL
COLLIES (ROUGH AND SMOOTH)
COONHOUND
COTON DE TULEAR
CURLY COATED RETRIEVER
DACHSHUND
DALMATIAN
DANDIEDINMONTTERRIER
DANISH/SWEDISHFARMDOG
DEERHOUND
DOBERMAN PINSCHER (DOBERMANN)
DOGO ARGENTINO
DOGUE DE BORDEAUX (FRENCH MASTIFF)
DRENTSE PARTRIJSHOND
DUTCH KOOIKER (KOOIKERHONDJE)
ENGLISHSETTER
ENGLISHSHEPHERD
ENGLISHTOYSPANIEL
ESKIMO DOG
ENTLEBUCHER MOUNTAIN DOG
FIELD SPANIEL
FINNISHLAPPHUND
FINNISH SPITZ
FLAT-COATEDRETRIEVER
FOXHOUND
FOX TERRIER
FRENCH BULLDOG
FRENCHSPANIEL
6
GAMMEL DANSK HONSEHUND
GERMAN PINSCHER
GERMAN SHEPHERD DOG (GSD OR ALSATIAN)
GLEN OF IMAAL TERRIER
GOLDENRETRIEVER
GORDONSETTER
GREAT DANE
GREATPYRENEES
GREATERSWISSMOUNTAINDOG
GREENLAND DOG
GREYHOUND
GRIFFON BRUXELLOIS (BRUSSELS GRIFFON)
HAVANESE
HOVAWART
HUNGARIAN KUVASZ
HUNGARIANPULI
HUNGARIANVISZLA
IBIZAN HOUND
IRISHREDANDWHITESETTER
IRISHSETTER
IRISH TERRIER
IRISHWATERSPANIEL
IRISHWOLFHOUND
ITALIANGREYHOUND
ITALIAN SPINONE (SPINONE ITALIANO)
JACKRUSSELLTERRIER
JAPANESE AKITA
JAPANESE CHIN
JAPANESE SHIBA INU
JAPANESE TOSA
KEESHOND
KERRY BLUE TERRIER
KING CHARLES SPANIEL (ENGLISH TOY SPANIEL)
KOMONDOR
8
KUVASZ (HUNGARIAN KUVASZ)
LABRADORRETRIEVER
LAKELAND TERRIER
LANCASHIRE HEELER
LAPLAND DOG
LEONBERGER
LHASA APSO
LOWCHEN
LUNDEHUND (NORWEGIAN LUNDEHUND)
MCNAB SHEPHERD
MALTESE
MANCHESTER TERRIER
MASTIFF (OLD ENGLISH MASTIFF)
MEXICAN HAIRLESS
MINIATURE BULL TERRIER
MINIATUREPINSCHER
MUNSTERLANDER
NEAPOLITAN MASTIFF
NEWFOUNDLAND
NEWZEALANDHUNTAWAY
NORFOLK TERRIER
NORWEGIANBUHUND
NORWEGIANELKHOUND
NORWEGIAN LUNDEHUND
NORWICHTERRIER
NOVA SCOTIA DUCK TOLLING RETRIEVER
OLD ENGLISH SHEEPDOG
OTTERHOUND
PAPILLON
PARSONRUSSELL,TERRIER
PEKINGESE
PETIT BASSET GRIFFONVENDEEN
POINTERS
POLISH
LOWLAND
SHEEPDOG
(POLSKI
OWCZAREK NIZINNY)
10
POMERANIAN
POODLE
PORTUGUESEWATER DOG
PRESA CANARIO (PERRO DE PRESA CANARIO OR
DOGO CANARIO)
PUG
PULI
PYRENEAN MOUNTAIN DOG (GREAT PYRENEES)
RED KELPIE (AUSTRALIAN KELPIE)
RHODESIANRIDGEBACK
ROTTWEILER
RUSSIANBLACK TERRIER
ST BERNARD
SALUKI
SAMOYED
SCHIPPERKE
SCHNAUZER
SCOTTISH DEERHOUND (DEERHOUND)
11
SCOTTISH TERRIER
SEALYHAM TERRIER
SHAR PEI (CHINESE SHARPEI)
SHETLAND SHEEPDOG
SHIBA INU (JAPANESE SHIBA INU)
SHIH TZU
SIBERIAN HUSKY
SILKENWINDHOUND
SILKY TERRIER (AUSTRALIAN SILKY TERRIER)
SKYE TERRIER
SLOUGHI
SOFT-COATED WHEATEN TERRIER
SPANISHWATERDOG
SPINONE ITALIANO
SPRINGER SPANIEL
STAFFORDSHIRE BULL TERRIER
SUSSEXSPANIEL
12
SWEDISH ELKHOUND
SWEDISHLAPLAND
TIBETANMASTIFF
TIBETAN SPANIEL
TIBETANTERRIER
VISZLA
WACHTELHUND
WEIMARANER
WELSH CORGI
WELSH TERRIER
WEST HIGHLANDWHITE TERRIER
WHIPPET
YORKSHIRE TERRIER
PART II: CATS
ABYSSINIAN
AMERICAN SHORTHAIR
ASIAN
13
AUSTRALIAN MIST
BALINESE
BENGAL
BIRMAN
BRITISHSHORTHAIR
BURMESE
CHARTREAUX
CORNISHANDDEVONREX
DOMESTICLONGHAIRED
DOMESTIC SHORTHAIRED
EGYPTIAN MAU
EXOTIC SHORTHAIR
FOREIGN SHORTHAIR
HAVANABROWN
HIMALAYAN
KORAT
MAINE COON
14
MANX
NORWEGIANFOREST
ORIENTAL
PERSIAN
RAGDOLL
RUSSIAN BLUE
SCOTTISH FOLD
SIAMESE
SOMALI
SPHYNX
TONKINESE
PART III: DISEASE SUMMARIES
CARDIOVASCULAR CONDITIONS
DERMATOLOGICALCONDITIONS
ENDOCRINECONDITIONS
GASTROINTESTINALCONDITIONS
HAEMATOLOGICAL/IMMUNOLOGICAL
CONDITIONS
15
INFECTIOUS CONDITIONS
MUSCULOSKELETAL CONDITIONS
NEOPLASTIC CONDITIONS
NEUROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
OCULARCONDITIONS
RENALANDURINARYCONDITIONS
REPRODUCTIVECONDITIONS
RESPIRATORYCONDITIONS
REFERENCES
APPENDIX:GENETICTESTPROVIDERS
A4
COLOUR
PLATE
SECTIONFALLS
BETWEEN
PAGES 158 AND 159
16
Breed Predispositions to
Disease in Dogs and Cats
SECOND EDITION
Alex Gough
MA VetMB CertSAM CertVC PGCert
MRCVS, Bath Veterinary Group, Bath, UK
and
Alison Thomas
BVSc CertSAM MRCVS, Blue Cross Animal Hospital
Victoria, London, UK
17
First edition published 2004
This edition first published 2010
First edition @ 2004 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
This edition @ 2010 by Alex Gough and Alison Thomas
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons
in February 2007. Blackwell's publishing programme has
been merged withWiley's global Scientific, Technical, and
Medical business to formWiley-Blackwell.
Registered office
JohnWiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate,
Chichester,West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom
Editorialoffices
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, United
Kingdom
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer
services and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book.
please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this
work has been asserted in accordance with the UK
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted
18
by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988,
without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic
formats. Some content that appears in print may not be
available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their
products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names
and product names used in this book are trade names,
service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their
respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any
product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication
is   designed   to   provide   accurate   and    authoritative
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is
sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged
in rendering professional services. If professional advice or
other expert assistance is required, the services of a
competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gough, Alex.
Breed predispositions to disease in dogs and cats / Alex
Gough and Alison Thomas. - 2nd ed.
p. ;cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ds  h  s ns s, 
information on breed-related diseases in a quick-reference
format. Breed-by-breed, in one section for dogs and one
for cats, both inherited and other prevalent disorders are
listed. The final section describes the disorders covered.
All  information  is drawn from high quality sources
19
including research jourmals and veterinary reference texts
with references provided, saving hours of searching
through scattered literature. This reference helps veterinary
professionals to advise clients on their choice of breed and
what problems to look out for"-Provided by publisher.
ISBN978-1-4051-8078-8(pbk.: alk. paper)
1
Dogs-Diseases. 2. Cats-Diseases. I. Thomas, Alison,
1964- II. Title.
[DNLM:  1. Dog
 Diseases-genetics.
2.
Cat
Diseases-genetics. 3. Genetic Predisposition to Disease.
SF 991 G692b 2010]
SF991.G67 2010
636.7'089607-dc22
2009048313
20
Alex Gough:
To loved ones, friends and colleagues, for their enormous
support over the last three years. Above all, to my daughter
Abigail for lighting up my life.
Alison Thomas:
To Richard, Tom and Harry for their patience and for
giving me the time to tackle this project.
21
Foreword
This new edition of Breed Predispositions to Disease in
Dogs and Cats provides an update on the previous edition,
with the aim of improving accuracy and usefulness to
animal health professionals. Through presentation of lists.
this book provides an easily accessed source of diagnostic
possibilities that is particularly helpful when dealing with
an unusual collection of clinical signs or with unfamiliar
breeds. Diagnostic errors are far more likely to arise from a
differential list that is too short than too long! The authors?
experiences in busy first opinion and referral practice have
no doubt provided the incentive to organize the book
appropriately for those who will have most wish to consult
it.
risks of selective breeding. There is considerable evidence
from studies in cheetahs (O'Brien et al. 1985) and wolves
(Lindberg et al. 1995) that high levels of inbreeding
increase the risk of disease. The creation of purebred pets
imposes similar genetic restrictions to those that occur in
wild species that have been reduced to tiny breeding
numbers after natural and man-made disasters. Generally,
registration with the Kennel Club of Great Britain requires
that a dog be purebred for at least six generations. This
degree of inbreeding is further exacerbated by the
frequency of overuse of specific sires (Calboli et al. 2008),
meaning that even breeds with thousands of individuals
often have very restricted effective population size (often
 ieu satd aonns uonendod e qons '(ot s mo s
randomly arising deleterious  genetic mutation in a
22
breeding animalwill spread rapidly  through subsequent
generations. Although not yet formally proven for a large
proportion  of  the diseases  of purebred  animals,
commonsense would suggest that the high prevalence of
          
consequence of inbreeding
There are considerable practical difficulties in assembling
diagnosis in veterinary medicine and the problem that data
are not inevitably collected and recorded from ALL
diseased animals. To minimize omissions, the authors have
understandably accepted  standards of evidence for an
‘increased risk' that might not be appropriate in a
systematic journal review article. Therefore, a wide range
of references are cited, including non peer-reviewed
sources. The authors have faced the problem that it is not
straightforward to determine whether a breed is genuinely
more ^at risk’ of developing specific conditions, or simply
that a specific condition “happens’ to have been reported in
a specific breed.Many reports do not specify the reference
population against which comparisons are made and,
where they are specified, they vary considerably between
reports; for instance versus the population of animals
referred to a specific hospital or versus insurance or breed
society data. All comparative populations carry implicit
sources of bias and, furthermore, the most useful
comparison might be against the incidence in mixed-breed
animals, for which there is very little data at all. While this
type of intrinsic bias is of little relevance to a practitioner
wishing to determine if, say, polyneuropathy has been
reported in Birman cats, it should be borme in mind when
23
planning academic studies or to inform selection of a
family pet.
The diseases to which specific breeds are predisposed can
be divided into two main groups: those that have arisen
accidentally or incidentally through  the process of
inbreeding to derive defined breeds and those that have
deliberately been introduced through selection for extreme
phenotypes as ‘desirable’ traits. The starting point to
reduce the incidence and severity of all conditions is their
recognition - for which this book is an invaluable aid - but
subsequent interventions to promote their elimination
would
 thendifferconsiderably.Fori
 instance,
brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome or entropion
arises through a deliberate strategy of breeding individuals
that are unfit for a healthy life but this is not equivalent to,
for instance, the increased risk that has arisen for
Fanconi's syndrome in Basenjis or soft tissue sarcomas in
Flat Coat Retrievers
         
breed-associated disorders, can provide an impetus
    a  
important area of companion animal welfare. There are
two simple first steps that would aid progress in this
respect: firstly, collaboration to collect hard evidence on
the prevalence of disorders associated with inbreeding and,
secondly, promotion of the considerable merits of
mixed-breed animals as healthy pets.
Nick Jeffery, BVSc PhD CertSAO DSAS (soft tissue)
DECVN DECVS FRCVS
RCVSRecognisedSpecialist inVeterinaryNeurology
24
Professor of Veterinary Clinical Studies,University of
Cambridge, UK
25
Introduction
It is well known that most breeds of dogs and cats have
diseases and disorders to which they are particularly prone.
Breed predispositions in dogs have been put under the
media spotlight in the UK recently, prompting the Dogs
Trust and Kennel Club to set up a review of the
registration, breeding and showing of dogs in the UK. The
aim of the review, chaired by Professor Bateson of
Cambridge  University,  is 
to
provide practical
recommendations   that   will 
　benefit
pedigree 
and
non-pedigree dogs. At the time of writing, the review panel
is collecting data from interested parties and experts on
dog breeding and showing.
Breed predispositions are often listed under specific
disease conditions
Sin the published literature and
textbooks. However, it is hard to find a source of
information that lists these conditions by breed. The first
edition of this book aimed to correct this deficiency, and
this second edition builds on, as well as updates, the
information provided in the first edition. It is intended to
be of use to prospective or current pet owners and breeders
who wish to be fully informed of the diseases to which
their chosen or favourite breeds may be prone. Its main
utility, though, will be to veterinary surgeons, and it is at
this group of people that the book is aimed. Much of the
language used is of necessity technical, and non-veterinary
readers wishing to use this book are urged to contact their
vets if they have any queries regarding the information.
Breeders wishing to institute programmes to select against
26
inherited diseases should also speak to their vet or a
suitably qualified professional.
For veterinary surgeons, this book should be useful in
several ways.Most importantly, it should assist in
after a history has been taken and physical examination
made, and allow the selection of the most appropriate tests
to achieve a diagnosis. It will also be important in advising
clients wishing to buy new pets, and owners of existing
pets can be warned of preventative measures to reduce the
risk of diseases, or to monitor closely for the onset of
clinical signs to allow early treatment to be instituted.
For the purposes of this book, a breed predisposition has
been defined as an increased risk for a condition in a
breed. This does not mean that breed predispositions are
necessarily inherited diseases (although many are). For
    s   a  ss a a
conditions to which it is prone. A Foxhound may be
predisposed to fox bites, but this does not mean that it
inherits them!
For this revised second edition, we have beenmuch stricter
as to what conditions should be included as breed
predispositions. We have attempted to include information,
where available, on modes of inheritance, risk of
developing the disease compared to the general population
(relative risk or odds ratio), how common a condition is in
the population (although this is often a subjective opinion,
pe xas Aue pue (uona [eoqdeoan on noafqns si pu
age predispositions, as well as show where only a small
number of cases have been reported. Importantly in
27
response to feedback on the first edition, we have
referenced every condition in every breed, and excluded
conditions we have not been able to reference.Most
references are in the formof papers in peer-reviewed
journals, but some references have been obtained from
conference  proceedings,
and
occasionally
from
well-regarded textbooks.
The data in this book have been categorized by body
systems affected as far as possible, although some diseases
[,       
conditions’ is intended to describe those abnormalities
specific to a breed which are non-pathological, or are
accepted as part of a breed standard.
Caution should be exercised when using the information in
predispositions are not in the text, and will also need to be
included in differential diagnosis lists. Also, some
predispositions are weak, with only a slightly increased
risk in the breed. The existence of a breed predisposition
should not lead the clinician to exclude other disease
possibilities, nor should the absence of a predisposition in
a breed be taken to mean that the breed cannot contract the
disease.
It may be noted that some breeds are absent from this book
- this is because the authors have not found any data on
any predispositions in these breeds.
Afinal limitation of the data presented in this book is that
of geographical variation. Some populations may exhibit
28
predispositions to diseases that others do not. Where
possible this has been indicated in the text.
We hope you find this updated and fully referenced
version of this book a useful addition to your library.
29
Basic Genetics
All mammalian life is based on the genetic code stored
within the nucleus of a cell. This genetic code is stored in a
long molecule called deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). DNA
is composed of four units, called bases, and these bases
attract each other—guanine to cytosine and adenine to
thymine. When attached together, they form the famous
double helix. The order in which these bases (or base pairs,
since they always match together) occur along the
molecule provides the code for the synthesis of proteins.
Proteins are then responsible for most of the functions of
the body, from the structure of tissues, to the biological
catalysts called enzymes, to the hormones which regulate
the body's metabolic processes.
       n   
called a gene. Long strings of genes, interspersed with
areas of DNA which do not code for proteins,make up
chromosomes. Each nucleus of a mammalian cell contains
a set number of chromosomes, except the sex cells
(gametes) - sperm and ova. For dogs this number is 78 and
for cats it is 38.
When a somatic (body) cell divides, the chromosomes
shorten and thickenwithin the nucleus, so they become
visible under a microscope. They then replicate, and one
copy of each chromosome separates into a new nucleus
before the cell splits. This process is called mitosis.
However, in the production of the gametes (the process of
meiosis), the chromosomes line themselves up in the
middle of the cell with a companion. This companion is
30
always the same, and two chromosomes that associate
together are called homologous pairs. These homologous
pairs separate, so the gametes have half the number of
chromosomes as normal cells. This means that when a
sperm and ova combine at fertilization, the newly formed
cell (the zygote) has the correct number of chromosomes.
Homologous pairs code for related genes, but are not
identical. The two genes, one on each chromosome,
interact in different ways. Sometimes one gene is dominant
to the other, the less dominant gene being termed
recessive, and the expression of the gene, that is, the
protein that is produced, will be determined by the
dominant gene. In other cases both genes will play a role
in the production of the protein, a situation called
co-dominance.
The exception to the homologous
Spairsaretwo
chromosomes called the sex chromosomes (all the other
chromosomes  are  called  the  atosomes). These
chromosomes determine the sex of an animal. A female's
cells are composed of two X chromosomes, a male's of an
X and a Y. At meiosis, the ova inherit a single X
chromosome from the mother, whereas the sperm inherit
either an X or a Y from the father. This has significance
for the inheritance of conditions carried on the X
chromosome, and means that some inherited diseases can
be more prevalent in one sex than another.
Although any one animal will carry only up to two
versions of a gene, many more can exist within a
population because of mutation and natural selection.
These different versions of the gene are called alleles.
31
In conditions and characteristics that are inherited in a
simple way, that is, the conditions are autosomal dominant
or recessive, then a system of genetics devised by the
monk Mendel (hence Mendelian genetics) can be used to
predict the likely offspring of two parents, if the parents?
genetic make-up is known. For example, the gene that
codes for Labrador coat colours is dominant for black and
recessive for brown. If a Labrador has two alleles for black
colour (call the allele B) it is described as being BB and
hence the coat will be black. If it has one allele for black
and one for brown (call the allele b), it will be described as
Bb but the coat colour will still be black since this colour
is dominant. However, if the dog possesses two alleles for
brown (bb), it will be brown. The genetic make-up is
called the genotype, whereas the physical expression of the
genes is called the phenotype.
The situation is slightly more complex when looking at
matings, and a matrix can be used to aid prediction of
offspring types. Take the example of a BB black male
crossed with a bb brown female. The BB male will
produce sperm each carrying a single B gene, and the
female will produce ova each carrying a single b gene.
These are then recombined at randomto produce offspring.
The matrix would therefore look like this:
Male
B
B
FemalebBb Bb
bBbBb
32
This means that all the offspring would be Bb. They all
carry the b gene for brown coat, but because this gene is
recessive, the coat colour is black. An animal with two
identical alleles (e.g. BB) is called a homozygote while an
animal with two different alleles (e.g. Bb) is called a
heterozygote. If a black Bb female was then crossed with a
black Bb male a different pattern would emerge:
Male
B
b
Female B BB Bb
bBbbb
On average three of the offspring would be black, one a
homozygote BB and two heterozygotes Bb. One would be
a homozygote for brown coat colour, and, since this gene
is not now being suppressed by the dominant gene, the
brown coat colour phenotype is expressed.
In fact, since the fertilization process is random, a litter of
four pups may not be borm in the exact 1:2:1 ratio, but if
this was repeated enough times the proportions of pups of
the various colours would be close to this.
Generally, the alleles separate randomly from each other,
so just because one condition is expressed in an offspring,
it does not mean that another shown by its parent will be.
However, some alleles that are closely positioned on a
chromosome have a tendency to be passed on together
Thus, two traits controlled by different genes may often be
found together in the same individual, and the presence of
33
one of these traits may act as a marker for the other. This
process is known as linkage.
When one allele is not
  dominant   over   another
co-dominance exists. For example, certain flowers that
have alleles for red flowers (R) and white flowers (W) will
be coloured red if homozygous for red (RR), white if
homozygous for white (Ww) but pink if heterozygous
(RW).
Some genes, even if dominant, do not always produce a
physical effect in the host. For example, the condition
polycystic kidney disease in cats is inherited as an
autosomal dominant trait, but not all cats with the genes
have cysts in the kidneys. This situation is called
incomplete penetrance.  Penetrance is the proportion of
individuals with a particular genotype that demonstrate the
characteristics normally expected with that genotype.
Some characteristics are carried on the X chromosome,
and this can lead to the phenomenon of sex linkage. For
example, there is a condition called X-linked muscular
dystrophy, to which Golden Retrievers are predisposed.
The allele formuscular dystrophy (call itM)is carried on
theXchromosome, as is the allele for a normal dog not
suffering from the condition (call it N).Mis recessive to N.
Therefore  a  female carrying  a.  single  affected   X
chromosome (genetic make-up XMxN) would not show
the effects of the disease. If this female was mated with a
normal male, (XNY) then the matrix for their offspring
would be as follows:
34
Male
XN
Y
Female
XM
XMXN
XMY
XN
XNXN
XNY
All of the females born to this cross will be clinically
unaffected by the disease but 50% of the females will be
carriers of the disease. These will not show the disease
since they have a normal gene on the other X chromosome
which suppresses the abnormal, recessive gene. However,
the males only possess a single X chromosome, so the 50%
not possess another X chromosome with a normal gene).
The 50% of males born XNY will not show the disease and
will not carry it.
Because of this process, sex-linked diseases usually affect
only males, and males cannot normally be asymptomatic
carriers. Females are often carriers but the only way they
can express the disease is if their mother was a carrier and
their father was affected. This situation is rare in nature,
especially for uncommon genes, but can occur in domestic
animals due to inbreeding.
Some disease inheritances are more complex still, because
more than one gene may determine the expression of a
disease, or the interaction of genes and environment can
      n  
this is hip dysplasia in dogs. More than one gene is
considered to be responsible, but the dog's nutrition,
35
exercise and otherfactors can also influence the severity of
the disease.
Finally, some diseases are not inherited through the DNA
of the nucleus at all, but through the DNA present within
the mitochondria (which are intracellular organelles
responsible for energy production).  Mitochondria are
entirely inherited from the mother, hence characteristics
and diseases caused by mitochondrial DNA can only be
passed down from the mother. Although conditions caused
by mitochondrial DNA are rare, some canine myopathies
are thought to be inherited this way.
In summary, an autosomal dominant trait is transmitted
from generation to generation without skipping. Each
affected offspring has at least one affected parent, unless
the disorder has arisen because of mutation. If the disorder
is lethal, then it will be very rare. An autosomal recessive
disorder may skip generations. If the two parents are
affected then all the offspring are affected. With an
X-linked dominant condition, affected malesmated to
normal females transmit the gene to their daughters, who
are all affected, but not their sons. Affected females then
and half of their daughters. In the population as a whole,
the incidence in females tends to be twice that of males.
With an X-linked recessive disorder, the condition may
skip generations. The incidence is more common in males.
Affected males do not transmit the disease when mated to
a normal female, but all female offspring will be carriers.
Females showing the disease who are mated with normal
males will pass the condition on to all their sons, and all
their daughters will be carriers
36
Clinical genetics
Genetic diseases are probably more frequently encountered
in domestic animals than in most wild populations. The
process of domestication involves selecting animals for
their most desirable traits from a human point of view.
Initially, these traits would have been practical: speed in a
horse, fertility andmilk production in a cow, herding
instincts in a sheepdog and so on.Over time, when animals
came to be kept for their companionship and aesthetic
appeal, the pressures of selection altered to produce breeds
that were poorly adapted to survive in the wild, but fitted
in well to the human environment, for example.
achondroplasia in many dog breeds. As breeding practices
were refined and the science of genetics was discovered,
inbreeding was used to create breeds that bred true with
respect to certain desired characteristics.
Unfortunately, inbreeding reduces the genetic variation
within a breed, and tends to accentuate the presence of
recessive genes which are often deleterious. Population
bottlenecks occur due to overuse of a desirable individual
such as a show champion (particularly males, which are
capable of producing many more offspring than a
female).Most of the recognized genetic diseases of the dog
are inherited as an autosomal recessive. This may be
because of inbreeding, but is also due to the difficulty in
identifying and eliminating recessive traits in breeding
programmes. The often repeated saying that crossbreed
dogs are healthier than pedigrees may have some basis in
truth because outbreeding tends to mask the effect of many
recessive genes. However, crossbreed dogs can still be
predisposed to the diseases of their parent breeds.
37
It should be noted that inbreeding of itself does not cause
genetic disease, and some degree of inbreeding is
necessary for the concentration of desirable genes. In fact,
some inbred strains of mice and rats are entirely
homozygous and yet are healthy. Inbreeding promotes
homozygosity, and thus deleterious recessive genes are
exposed. However, by exposing these genes it is possible
to eliminate them by further selective breeding
Data are currently sparse regarding the prevalence of
disease caused by new mutations, but studies of some
diseases suggest this is very rare. In those limited cases
studied, the mutation seems to be uniformwithin a breed.
This suggests that a ‘founder effect’ applies, that is, a
single  initialmutation  was propagated  throughout the
breed. In some cases, closely related breeds may have the
same mutation
causing  a disease,  for  example,
phosphofructokinase deficiency in English Springers and
American Cocker Spaniels, suggesting that a common
ancestor was responsible for the original mutation. Some
same gene (allelic heterogeneity).
When determining whether or not a disease is hereditary,
certain  typical  characteristics  increase  suspicion  of  a
genetic predisposition. Often the first thing to suggest that
a disease is inherited is that the disorder occurs with a
higher frequency in a group of related animals than in the
general population. This can help distinguish an inherited
disease from a breed predisposition. For example, Saint
Bermards are predisposed to osteosarcomas, but it was
possible this was merely a reflection of their large size: the
faster growth rate leading to more mistakes being made in
38
DNA replication, leading to cancer. However, analysis of
pedigrees shows that there is a familial clustering pattern
to cases of the disease, which suggests a specific gene or
group of genes being responsible. Second, a hereditary
defect often involves the same anatomic site in a group of
related animals. This is often seen in congenital heart
disease in dogs. Third, the disease is often seen to increase
in frequency with inbreeding. Fourth, hereditary diseases
often have an early onset, and those that do not often have
a consistent age of onset.
Genetic diseases usually affect a few individuals within a
litter, as opposed to intoxications and infectious diseases
which frequently affect them all. Some genetic diseases
will cause abortion or resorption, and these are often never
diagnosed. Similarly, some genetic disorders will cause a
failure to thrive, the ^fading kitten (or puppy) syndrome',
and again it can be hard to determine the cause in these
cases.
There is an extremely wide range of hereditary diseases.
from the relatively benign to the invariably fatal. Diagnosis
of a hereditary disease is usually based on history, clinical
signs, history of disease in related mdividuals, test matings
and specific tests for diseases.
Test matings are often suggested in order to identify
autosomal recessives but this does have problems. With
late onset defects, the results of the mating will be known
too late to be useful in selecting which individuals to use
for breeding. Test matings can be more useful for early
onset diseases, but the ethics of keeping a known affected
animal purely for test purposes, and what to do with
39
affected offspring, can be problematic. Furthermore, the
results of test matings may be unreliable. For example, a
mating of a suspected carrier (N?) to a known carrier (Nn)
which produced six normal puppies would only give an
82.2% certainty that the N? was not a carrier (NN).
However, a single abnormal pup would confirm carrier
status.
The results of random matings, if performed often enough
and with respect to a sufficiently prevalent gene, can
provide useful informationwithout the need to maintain a
carrier or affected animal, andwith less likelihood of
breeding unwanted affected individuals. It would require
central banks of information and more openness from
breeders and breed organizations for this approach to
work, however. Recent activity in the Kennel Club means
that moves towards this situation may be imminent.
Specific tests for diseases include ultrasonography and
histopathology for polycystic kidney disease, or von
Willebrand factor assay for von Willebrand's disease.
Some laboratories will test samples using enzymeand
immunological assays to detect disorders, and the
resultsmay indicatewhether an individual is a homozygote
or heterozygote. An example of this is testing for
haemophilia B. A defect in an affected protein's size.
function or amount allows the identification of carriers of a
disease in some cases, although there may be an overlap
with normal values. Also, compensatory rises in other
proteins, such as a related isoenzyme to pyruvate kinase in
pyruvate kinase deficiency, may reduce the accuracy of
this sort of test.
40
In some of the inherited diseases, the molecular defects
that cause them have been identified. Those identified on
the X chromosome include haemophilia B, severe
combined  X-linked  immunodeficiency  and   hereditary
nephropathy. Those autosomal recessive traits for which
the mutation has been identified include copper toxicosis
in Bedlington Terriers, progressive retinal atrophy in Irish
Setters, von Willebrand's disease in Scottish Terriers and
pyruvate kinase deficiency in Basenjis
Specific DNA tests currently available to identify genetic
diseases include linkage-based tests that look for a marker
gene, which is physically in close proximity to the gene of
interest. An example of a currently available test using this
methodis for copper
 toxicosis  in    Bedlington
Terriers.Mutation-based tests look for a specific mutation
causing a disease, but these tests must be used with
caution, since there may be more than one type of mutation
responsible for a disease, particularly between breeds.
DNA testing shows great promise for the identification and
elimination of genetic diseases in dogs and cats. The
inherited disorders can be identified before an animal is
bred, and affected animals can either be removed from the
breeding pool, or, in the case of recessive traits, bred only
to normal individuals, in order to preserve desirable
characteristics. This allows the genetic diversity of breeds
to be retained while inherited disorders are eliminated.
The limitations of DNA testing, such as limited availability
of tests, and its utility largely restricted to single gene
disorders,mean that there is still a vital role for screening
programmes to eliminate inherited disorders. Screening
41
programmes currently in operation in the UK include the
British  Veterinary  Association/Kennel Club programmes
for hip and elbow dysplasia and eye diseases, and the
Feline Advisory Bureau scheme for polycystic kidney
diseaseincats.
42
PART I: DOGS
ABERDEEN TERRIER
Reproductive conditions
Dystocia
· Breed predisposition to dystocia due to primary uterine inertia
(Johnson et al. 2001)
AFFENPINSCHER
Dermatological conditions
Canine follicular dysplasia/seasonal flank alopecia
·Presumed genetic basis
·Alopecia starts at 2-4 years of age and is restricted to the flank
in this breed
·May occur in autumn or spring
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
AFGHAN HOUND
Dermatological conditions
Generalized demodicosis (see figure 1)
·Afghans are in the ten breeds at highest statistical risk of this
disease in the Cornell, USA, population
· Common condition
· Younger dogs predisposed
43
·No sex predilection
·Susceptibility to generalized demodicosis may be inherited
· Incidence within breeds may vary depending on geographical
location
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001b)
Nasal depigmentation
*Also known as Dudley nose
·Cause unknown
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Testosterone-responsive dermatosis of male animals
·Rare
·Unknown cause
·Seen in castrated males
(Hubert & Olivry 1990)
Endocrine diseases
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
· May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
Neutered males and females at increased risk (Panciera 1994.
Greco 2002)
Figure 1 Demodex mite. Courtesy of A. Foster,University
of Bristol.
44
Musculoskeletal conditions
Panosteitis
· Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
· Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 1.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Perianal (hepatoid) gland adenomas
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age was 10.5 years
·Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
45
Neurological conditions
Afghan myelopathy
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suggested
·Age of clinical onset: 6-9 months
·  Rare condition
(Averill & Bronson 1977)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 4-24 months
· Localization: initially equatorial, later anterior and posterior
cortical. Rapid progression possible, leading to visual
impairment at 2-4 years
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Cormeal dystrophy
· Inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Corneal oedema (due to infection or vaccination with
canine adenovirus type 1)
·Increased
/seenwith
 the
development of canine adenovirus type 2 vaccines)
(Curtis & Barmett 1983)
46
Medial canthal pocket syndrome
·Breed predisposition due to head shape
(Rubin 1989)
Respiratory conditions
Chylothorax
·Usually idiopathic
· Uncommon condition
· Afghan hounds comprised 37.5% of dogs with idiopathic
chylothorax in one study
·  No sex predisposition noted
(Fossum, Birchard & Jacobs 1986)
Laryngeal paralysis
·  Idiopathic
· Common condition
·May be inherited by an autosomal dominant mode
(Burbidge 1995)
Lung-lobe torsion
·Rare
·May be associated with chylothorax in this breed
(Johnson & Feeney 1984)
AIREDALE TERRIER
Cardiovascular conditions
47
Dilated cardiomyopathy
·Increased prevalence with age
·Approximately twice as common in males as in females
· Thought to be familial or genetic
(Tidholm & Jonsson 1997)
Dermatological conditions
Canine follicular dysplasia/seasonal flank alopecia
·A marked predilection in this breed implies a genetic basis for
this group of diseases
·Hair loss begins at 2-4 years of age and occurs mainly on the
flank
(Miller & Dunstan 1993)
Generalized demodicosis
·Airedales are in the ten breeds at highest statistical risk of this
disease in the Cornell, USA, population
· Common condition
· Younger dogs predisposed
· No sex predilection
·Susceptibility to generalized demodicosis may be inherited
· Incidence within breeds may vary depending on geographical
location
(Scott Miller & Griffin 2001b)
Grass awn migration
·Common in the summer months
·Predisposed due to behaviour
48
(Brennan & Ihrke 1983)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Vascular naevus
·More common in older dogs
· Occur most commonly on the scrotum
(Scott Miller & Griffin 2001c)
Endocrine conditions
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
· May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3years)
· Neutered males and females at increased risk
(Milne & Hayes 1981)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia B
·Severe Factor IX deficiency in this breed
·Familial in this breed
·Genetic test available (HealthGene) - see Appendix
(Brooks 1999)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Hip dysplasia
49
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio in the breed 1.82 in one study, 3.9 (compared to
mixed breeds) in another study
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Witsberger et al. 2008)
Spondylosis deformans
·Usually clinically insignificant
·Common
·May be associated with type II intervertebral disc disease
(Levine et al. 2006)
Neoplastic conditions
Cutaneous haemangioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.7 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Cutaneous plasmacytoma
·Breed at risk
·Mean age: 9.2 years
Common sites: ear, lip and digit
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Melanoma - cutaneous
50
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Morris & Dobson 2001)
Nasal cavity tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·Median age: 9 years
·Males over-represented in most studies
(McEntree 2001)
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 6.6 years
· Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992,Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Toma & Noli 2005)
Ocular conditions
Cormeal dystrophy
·Sex-linked recessive inheritance has been suggested
·Lipid stromal dystrophy
· Age of onset: 9-1l months 
·Progressive with vision impairment at 3-4 years
(Rubin 1989, Cooley & Dice 1990, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Entropion
51
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989)
Reproductive conditions
Cystic
endometrial
 hyperplasia-pyometra
complex
(pyometra)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Common disease of older entire bitches (meanage: 7.25 years)
·Most cases present within 12 weeks of oestrus
(Chastain, Panciera &Waters 1999, Smith 2006)
AKITA
(See Japanese Akita)
ALASKAN KLEE KAI
Haematological/immunological conditions
Factor VII deficiency
· 6/18 client-owned dogs had this deficiency in one study
· Inherited condition
·Genetic test available (PennGen; VetGen) - see Appendix
(Kaae, Callan & Brooks 2007)
ALASKAN MALAMUTE
Dermatological conditions
52
Alopecia X
· Poorly understood disorder
· Occurs at 2-7 years of age
(Leone et al. 2005)
Follicular dysplasia
· May affect multiple dogs in a litter
· Clipped areas tend not to regrow
·Signs may not be seen until 3-4 years of age in this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Generalized demodicosis
·Malamutes are in the ten breeds at highest statistical risk of this
disease in the Cornell, USA, population
· Common condition
·Younger dogs predisposed
·  No sex predilection
· Susceptibility to generalized demodicosis may be inherited
· Incidence within breeds may vary depending on geographical
location
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001b)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
·Syndrome I affects malamutes
·Skin lesions develop despite adequate levels of zinc in the diet
· Malamutes have a genetic defect causing zinc malabsorption
53
(Cole 2002)
Haematological/immunological conditions
FactorVII deficiency
· Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait
(Littlewood 2000)
Haemophilia B
Factor IX deficiency
·Also known as Christmas disease
· Inherited as a sex-linked trait
· Less common than haemophilia A
·Can be severe in this breed
(Dodds 2005)
Stomatocytosis
· Uncommon condition
·Seen in a few cases of malamutes with chondrodysplasia
(Giger 2003)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Alaskan malamute chondrodysplasia
·Causes disproportionate dwarfism
·Haemolytic anaemia usually present
· May be zinc responsive
54
· Autosomal recessive inheritancewith complete penetrance and
variable expression
(Bingel, Sande &Wight 1985)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio in the breed 2.33
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Neoplastic conditions
Anal sac adenocarcinoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 10.2-10.8 years
· Some surveys suggest a predisposition for females
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Bennett et al. 2002)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland carcinomas
·Breed at risk in case series
· Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Sebaceous gland tumours
· Breed at risk of sebaceous adenoma and epithelioma in case
series
·Mean age: 10.9 years (adenoma) and 10.7 years (epithelioma)
·Common site: head and eyelids
55
(Scott & Anderson 1990, Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992,
Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Sweat gland tumour
·Breed at risk of apocrine adenoma in case series
·Mean age: 9.5 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Idiopathic epilepsy
·Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
· Common condition
(Bagley 2005)
Idiopathic polyneuropathy in Alaskan malamutes
·Uncommon
· Affects mature young adults
(Braund et al. 1997)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: l year
·Localization: posterior subcapsular, slowly progressive;
complete blindness is rare
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
56
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Cone degeneration (hemeralopia or day blindness)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Clinical onset (day blindness) at 48 weeks
· Uncommon condition
(Rubin 1989, Sidjanin et al. 2002, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Corneal dystrophy
· Inheritance suspected
· Lipid dystrophy
·Age of onset: 2 years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: >6 years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
AMERICAN BULLDOG
Ocular conditions
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Rare condition
57
· Genetic test available (VetGen; Orthopedic Foundation for
Animals) - see Appendix
(Awano et al. 2006)
Neurological conditions
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
· See under Ocular conditions
AMERICAN PIT BULL TERRIER
Gastrointestinal conditions
Parvovirus enteritis
·See under Infectious conditions
Infectious conditions
Babesiosis (Babesia gibsoni)
o Aiandaosns peaq ann e o anp s! siu j! umouyun) ueden
increased risk of exposure via ticks or possibly bites)
· Often subclinical
·Tickborne disease but possibly also transmitted by fighting
(Birkenheuer et al. 2005, Boozer & Macintire 2005,
Miyama et al. 2005, Jefferies et al. 2007)
Parvovirus enteritis
· Breed at increased risk in cases series
·Age 6 weeks to 6 months at higher risk
58
(Houston, Ribble & Head 1996, McCaw & Hoskins 2006)
Ocular conditions
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
· Inheritance suspected
·Cone-rod dystrophy
·  Ophthalmoscopic signs at 3-6 months
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - cystine
· Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Osborme & Finco 1995, Houston et al.
2004, Harnevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
AMERICAN STAFFORDSHIRE TERRIER
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
· Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have the highest probability
of an insurance claim for atopy
59
·Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
·This breed had a risk factor of 7.6 cases per 1000 dog years at
risk (if 1000 dogs were followed for 1l year, 7.6 would have an
insurance claim for atopy)
(Nodvedt et al. 2006)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Truncal solar dermatitis
·A combination of factors are required to cause this condition
· Flank and abdomen most severely affected (Scott, Miller &
Griffin 2001e)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture
·Common cause of hindlimb lameness
·  Neutered individuals are predisposed
· Older animals are predisposed
·Odds ratio in this breed 1.62
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
· Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 2.0 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
60
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 3.6 years (50% <2 years)
·Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Pastor 2002)
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Sweat gland tumour
·Breed at risk of apocrine ductal adenoma in case series
·Mean age: 9.1 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
61
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: l year
· Localization: suture lines progressing to nuclear and cortical
cataract. Complete blindness at 3 years
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Clinically evident at 1.5 years of age
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV)
· Congenital, inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Neurological conditions
Cerebellar cortical degeneration
·Recessive inheritance suspected
· Uncommon condition
62
·Late onset
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Henke et al. 2008)
Con genital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
AMERICANWATER SPANIEL
Dermatological conditions
Adult-onset growth hormone-responsive dermatosis
·See under Endocrine conditions
Pattern baldness
·Hair loss occurs at about 6 months of age
·Ventral neck, thighs and tail are affected
 d  eo a   q s  
breed clubs (Scott, Miller and Griffin 2001d)
Endocrine conditions
Adult-onset growth hormone-responsive dermatosis
·Males may be predisposed
· Clinical signs seen at any age but often 1-2 years
(Lothrup 1988)
Ocular conditions
63
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: <l year
· Localization: anterior sutures
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
ANATOLIAN SHEPHERD DOG
Musculoskeletal conditions
Ankyloglossia
·Rarely reported condition
·Involves 'tongue-tying'
·Young dogs affected
(Temizsoylu & Avki 2003)
Carpal laxity syndrome
· Reported in puppies
·Usually self-limiting
64
(Cetinkava, Yardimki & Saglam 2007)
Neurological conditions
Con genital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
AUSTRALIAN CATTLE DOG
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital portosystemic shunt
·Breed at risk in case series
· Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
· Large intrahepatic shunts often involving the right liver lobe
(Tisdall et al. 1994, Hunt 2004, Sargan 2004, Krotscheck
et al. 2007)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Mainly medial luxation observed
(Alam et al. 2007)
Neoplastic conditions
65
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Baker-Gabb, Hunt & France 2003)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Signs seen from birth
·Occurs most commonly in dogs with white pigment
·14.5% prevalence in this breed in one study
(Strain 2004)
Hereditary  polioencephalomyelopathy  of  the  Australian
Cattle dog
·Uncommon
·Thought to be due to an inherited biochemical defect
(Brenner et al. 1997)
Lysosomal storage disease - ceroid lipofuscinosis
·Suspected to be inherited
·Rare
(Bagley 2005)
Ocular conditions
66
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
(Gelatt & Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Progressive rod-cone degeneration
· Ophthalmoscopic signs at 3-5 years, blindness at 6 years. A
second earlier form may exist
·Mostly reported in the USA and Australia
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·Genetic test available (Optigen) -- seeAppendix
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetcis Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
· Males predisposed in one study
(Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
Lens luxation (primary)
· Inherited
·Reported in middle-aged dogs in Australia
· Genetic test available (Orthopedic Foundation for Animals) -
see Appendix
67
(Rubin 1989, Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - Cystine
·Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in
renal tubular transport of cystine and predisposes
to cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Osborme & Finco 1995, Houston et al.
2004, Harmevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
AUSTRALIAN KELPIE
Musculoskeletal conditions
Perineal herniation
· Intact male dogs predisposed
·Common condition
(Elkins 2004)
Neurological conditions
Cerebellar degeneration
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suggested
68
·Uncommon
·Signs seen at 6-12 weeks
(Thomas & Robertson 1989)
Ocular conditions
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Ophthalmoscopic signs visible at 1.5 years, progresses to
blindness by 4 years
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
AUSTRALIAN SHEPHERD DOG
Dermatological conditions
Mucocutaneous hypopigmentation
· Nasal formis a commonproblem in Australian Shepherd Dogs
·May have concurrent seasonal nasal hypopigmentation
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Nasal solar dermatitis
· Develops in dogs that are amelanotic
·Frequently affected breed
· Condition seen more frequently in sunny climates
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200le)
Drug reactions
69
Ivermectin and milbemycin
·High doses can cause tremors, ataxia, coma and death
·Associated with the mutant MDRl allele
· 16.6% of dogs of this breed tested had themutation
(Mealey, Munyard & Bentien 2005, Dowling 2006)
Endocrine conditions
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Median age: 10 years
(Wood et al. 2007)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia A
·Moderate Factor VIlI deficiency in this breed
· Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Pelger-Huet anomaly
· May not be clinically significant
(Giger 2003)
Selective malabsorption of cobalamin (vitamin B12)
· Causes a non-regenerative anaemia with poikilocytosis and
neutropenia
70
· Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease
· Uncommon condition
·Odds ratio 1.91 in one study (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Polydactyly/syndactyly
· Inherited, possibly as an X-linked gene
· Uncommon condition
·Reported in one family of Australian Shepherd dogs
(Sponenberg & Bowling 1985)
Neoplastic conditions
Pituitary tumour resulting in
hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series
· See under Endocrine conditions
(Wood et al. 2007)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
71
·Autosomal dominant inheritance suspected
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· This breed also gets congenital cataracts (see Multiple ocular
defects below)
· Genetic test available (AHT) - see Appendix
(Gelatt & Mackay 2005, Mellersch et al. 2006, AVCO
Genetics Committeee 2007)
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
· Breed at risk in case series, inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 4-7 years
· Prevalence and severity increase at higher altitude
(Chavkin et al. 1994)
Collie eye anomaly (choroidal hypoplasia and sometimes
optic nerve colobomas)
· Congenital condition, inheritance suspected
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Munyard
Sherry & Sherry 2007)
Coloboma (Iris, choroid or optic nerve)
· Congenital, inheritance suspected
·Where these defects are seen alone, it is not known if they are
related to the same conditions found associated with
microphthalmia and multiple ocular defects
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
72
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Progressive rod-cone degeneration
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Rubin 1989, Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetcis Committee
2007)
Multiple ocular defects
 Autosomal recessive inheritance with incomplete penetrance has
been suggested
·Defects seem to be associated with merles with predominantly
white coats
·Defects may include microphthalmia, microcornea, cataract,
persistent pupillary membranes, equatorial staphylomas,
colobomas and retinal dysplasia
(Gelatt, Powell & Huston 1981, Rubin 1989, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
Persistent hyaloid artery
· Congenital, inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Munyard, Sherry &
Sherry 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - cystine
· Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
73
(Case et al. 1992, Osborne & Finco 1995, Houston et al.
2004, Harnevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
AUSTRALIAN SILKY TERRIER
(See Silky Terrier)
AUSTRALIAN TERRIER
Endocrine Conditions
Diabetes mellitus
·Familial
·Usual age range 4-14 years, peak incidence 7-9 years
· Old entire females are predisposed (Fall et al. 2007)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 8.0 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Melanoma- cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
.Mean age: 8.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
74
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
· Males predisposed in one study
(Gelatt & Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
BASENJI
Gastrointestinal conditions
Immunoproliferative enteropathy (of Basenjis)
· Familial, possibly breed specific
·Usually presents before 3 years
(Ochoa, Breitschwerdt & Lincoln 1984, Sargan 2004)
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis
· Part of Immunoproliferative enteropathy (see above)
Haematological conditions
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
·Causes chronic, regenerative haemolytic
anaemia
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Genetic test available (PennGen; Optigen; VetGen; HealthGene)
 see Appendix
75
(Whitney & Lothrop 1995)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
·See Haematological conditions
Ocular conditions
Coloboma (optic nerve)
·  Congenital defect, inheritance suspected
· Has been associated with persistent pupillary membranes in this
breed
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Persistent pupillary membranes
· Inheritance suspected
·Widespread defect in this breed (40-90% prevalence reported)
·Severity and effect on vision varies
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Mason 1976, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Physiological conditions
Pelger-Huet anomaly
· Decreased segmentation of granulocyte nuclei is seen
· Does not appear to be clinically significant
(Day 2002)
76
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial renal disease (Fanconi syndrome)
· See Fanconi syndrome
Fanconi syndrome
· Familial, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· 10% Basenjis in the USA affected in one study
· Most dogs present at 1-5 years
· Genetic test available (Orthopedic Foundation for Animals) -
see Appendix
(Bovee et al. 1978, Noonan & Kay 1990, Sargan 2004)
Urolithiasis -- cystine
· Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Osborme & Finco 1995, Houston et al.
2004, Harmevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
Reproductive conditions
Variation in the interoestrus interval
·This breed normally cycles only once per year
(Feldman & Nelson 1996)
Respiratory conditions
77
Asthma
·Seen in Basenji-greyhound crosses
· Used as a model for the human disease
· Associated with airway hyper-reactivity
(Peters, Hirshman & Malley 1982)
BASSET HOUND
Cardiovascular conditions
Ventricular septal defect
·Marked risk in this breed (relative risk >5)
·  No sex predilection
·Congenital
(Buchanan 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Black hair follicular dysplasia
·Rare
·Early onset
· Suspected autosomal recessive mode of inheritance
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Congenital hypotrichosis
·Familial
·Thought to be autoimmune
(Chastain & Swayne 1985)
78
Intertrigo
·Body fold intertrigo occurs in Bassets occasionally
· Obesity predisposes
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200le)
Malassezia dermatitis
·Affects adults of any age or sex
·May be seasonal
· Predisposition in this breed to overcolonization with yeast
thought to be due to a primary keratinization defect and/or the
presence of deep skin folds
(Guillot et al. 2003)
Pododermatitis
·Can affect any age or sex
·  Males predisposed
· Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Primary seborrhoea
· Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Signs first appear at an early age and get worse
· In this breed, otitis, greasy seborrhoea and dermatitis are seen,
often in the body folds
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Skin tumours
·See under Neoplastic conditions
79
Gastrointestinal conditions
Mycobacterium avium complex infection
·Breed at risk of gastrointestinal infection with the avian form of
tuberculosis
· See under Infectious conditions
Haematological conditions
Hereditary thrombopathy
·Aka Basset Hound thrombopathia
·Autosomally inherited
·Genetic test available (Auburn University) -- see Appendix
(Patterson et al. 1989)
Severe combined immunodeficiency
· Inherited as an X-linked recessive trait
· Thymic hypoplasia and lymphopaenia seen
· Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Infectious conditions
Infectious skin diseases
·See under Dermatological conditions
Mycobacterium avium complex
· Rare condition seen relatively more frequently in this breed
·Possibly due to an inherited immunological defect
80
(Carpenter et al. 1988)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Elbow dysplasia
· Ununited anconeal process (odds ratio 2.7 compared to mixed
breeds) and fragmented coronoid process (odds ratio of 19.5)
seen in this breed
·Common cause of forelimb lameness
· In this breed, ununited anconeal process is secondary to
non-traumatic premature closure of the distal ulnar growth plate
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Schulz 2002)
Panosteitis
· Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 3.5 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 2.0 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Anal sac adenocarcinoma
·Breed at risk in case series
81
·Mean age: 10.2-10.8 years
· Some surveys suggest a predisposition for females
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Myxosarcoma
·Breed at risk in case series
. Mean age: 9.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Nasal cavity tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·Median age: 9 years
· Males over-represented in most studies (McEntree 2001)
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 6.6 years
· Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Toma & Noli 2005)
Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 10.2 years
·Dogs which *sunbathe’ may be predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Trichoepithelioma
82
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.6 years
· Uncommon tumour
· Predilection sites: limbs, back and trunk
(Scott and Anderson 1991, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Neurological conditions
Cervical vertebral malformation (wobbler syndrome)
· Common condition in large and giant breeds
·Seen occasionally in this breed
· Heritability, nutrition and growth rate, body conformation and
trauma are possible causes
(Olby 2003)
Intervertebral disc disease
·Common
·Adults affected
· This breed typically has its first episode of this disease at a
 greater age than other breeds
(Mayhew et al. 2004)
Lafora's disease
·Aka progressive myoclonic epilepsy
· Suspected to be inherited
·Alpha-glucosidase deficiency in lysosomal storage disease
·Rare
·Forebrain disease usually seen in first age of life
(Kaiser, Krauser & Scwartz-Porsche 1991)
83
Ocular conditions
Ectropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Associated with macroblepharon
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Associated with macroblepharon
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating membrane
·Inheritance suspected
·Usually occurs in young dogs
(Rubin 1989)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
·Prevalence increases with age (mean age of onset
6.3 years)
·  Females predisposed in one study
·Goniodysgenesis may be present
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
84
Macroblepharon ('diamond eye')
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Persistent hyaloid artery
·Congenital, inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Physiological conditions
Osteochondrodysplasia
·Accepted as breed standard
·Short, bowed legs but normal skulls seen
(Martinez et al. 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - cystine
· Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Osborme et al. 1999)
BEAGLE
85
Note: Because of the beagle's extensive use in research
settings, a large number of conditions are described in the
breed that are not described in detail in other breeds.
However, these
may
not represent
ttruebreed
predispositions. This may be because the beagle is the only
breed in which a condition has been studied in detail, the
study being carried out to assist in human medical
research. The conditions listed below are likely to
represent true breed predispositions inthe beagle.
Cardiovascular conditions
Canine juvenile polyarteritis syndrome
·  Causes a pain syndrome
·Reported in the USA, France and the UK
(Snyder et al. 1995)
Pulmonic stenosis
· Thirdmost frequent cause of canine congenital heart disease
·Polygenic mode of inheritance shown in this breed
(Darke 1989)
Dermatological conditions
Black hair follicular dysplasia
·Rare
·Early onset
·Familial
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
86
Familial vasculopathy
· Necrotising vasculitis of small- and mediumsized arteries
·Early onset of signs (4-10 months)
·No sex predilection noted
(Scott-Moncrieff et al. 1992)
Skin tumours
·See Neoplastic conditions
Truncal solar dermatitis
·A combination of factors are required to cause this condition
·Flank and abdomen most severely affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
· In beagles, occurs in puppies fed zinc-deficient diets
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001 g)
Endocrine conditions
Diabetes mellitus
·Familial
·Usual age range 4-14 years, peak incidence 7-9 years
·Most cases female in this breed
(Fall et al. 2007)
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
87
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Median age: 10 years
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Wood et al. 2007)
Thyroid neoplasia (may be associated with hyper- or
hypothyroidism, but most are euthyroid)
· Breed at increased risk according to some studies
·Average age: 10 years
(Brodey & Kelly 1968, Mitchell, Hurov & Troy 1979.
Harari, Patterson & Rosenthal 1986)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Selective malabsorption of cobalamin (vitamin B12)
·Rare condition
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· See also under Haematological conditions
(Fyfe et al. 1991, Fordyce, Callan & Giger 2000,
Battersby, Giger & Hall 2005)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Factor VII deficiency
· Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait
·Genetic test available (PennGen; AHT; VetGen) - see Appendix
(Littlewood 2000)
Haemophilia A
88
· Moderate Factor VIlI deficiency in this breed
·Sporadic in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Non-spherocytic haemolytic anaemia
· Inherited condition
·Causes increased osmotic fragility of red cells
(Pekow et al. 1992)
Pyruvatekinase deficiency
·Causes chronic, regenerative haemolytic anaemia
· Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Selective IgA deficiency
· Often asymptomatic
· May be increased susceptibility to enteric infection
(Giger 2003)
Selective malabsorption of cobalamin (vitamin B12)
· Causes a non-regenerative anaemia with poikilocytosis and
neutropenia
· See also under Gastrointestinal conditions
(Giger 2003)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Brachyury
89
· Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait
· May becomemore commonincountrieswhere docking is illegal
(Indrebo et al. 2008)
Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· Uncommon condition
(Rasmussen 1971)
Neoplastic conditions 
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 3.6 years (50% <2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
90
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland adenomas
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age was 10.5 years
·Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt &Mcmanus
2000)
Pituitary tumour resulting in hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series
· See under Endocrine conditions
(Wood et al. 2007)
Sebaceous gland tumours
·Breed at risk of nodular sebaceous hyperplasia in case series
·Mean age: 9.1years
· Females may be predisposed
·Common site: limbs, trunk, eyelids
(Scott & Anderson 1990, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Thyroid neoplasia
·See under Endocrine conditions
Neurological conditions
Cerebellar degeneration
91
·Reported in Japan and the USA
·Signs seen at 3 weeks
· Rare condition
· Suspected autosomal recessive trait
(Yasuba et al. 1988)
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Congenital vestibular disease
·Signs seen <3 months
· May be seen with congenital deafness
·Often bilateral in this breed
(Bagley 2005)
Hound ataxia
·Reported in the UK
·Age of onset: 2-7 years
· Nutritional disease in dogs fed ruminant stomachs
(Palmer, Medd &Wilkinson 1984)
Idiopathic epilepsy
· Inherited in this breed
*Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
(Thomas 2003)
92
Intervertebral disc disease
·Common
·Adults affected
(Mayhew et al. 2004)
Lysosomal storage disease - neuronal glycoproteinosis
(Lafora’s disease)
·Suspected to be inherited
·Rare
· Signs seen at 5-12 months
(Bagley 2005)
Meningitis and polyarteritis
·Uncommon disease
·Age of onset: <l year
· Aetiology unknown, but possibly infectious or environmental in
origin
(Tipold 2002)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Inheritance suspected
- Congenital anterior capsular cataracts; unilateral; rarely affect
vision
Posterior cortical cataracts affect mature dogs, are usually
bilateral and progress slowly
· Congenital cataract also seen with microphthalmia
(see below)
93
Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Peiffer &
Petersen-Jones 2009)
Congenital cataract with microphthalmia
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetcis Committee 2007)
Cormeal dystrophy
·Inheritance suspected
· Oval lipid dystrophy
· One report found 15% beagles examined were affected
·Progressive but rarely affects vision
(Roth et al. 1981, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Glaucoma (primary, open angle)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Develops from 6 months
(Gelatt & Gum 1981, Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay
2004a, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Lens luxation
·Usually seen secondary to glaucoma
94
(Rubin 1989)
Micropapilla
· Congenital condition
·Seen occasionally
(Rubin 1989)
Microphthalmia-microphakia-persistent
pupillary
membrane (PPM) syndrome
·  Congenital, dominant inheritance suspected
· Heterozygotes have PPM and congenital cataract/microphakic
lens
· Homozygotes are microphthalmic, have multiple ocular defects
and are blind
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Multifocal chorioretinitis
· Inheritance suspected
(Von Landenberg et al. 1990, Gelatt 2007)
Multiple ocular defects of the posterior segment
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Defects include
 retention
of
thehyaloid
1 system,
excessivemyelination of the optic disc and neovascularization of
the retina, with a tendency for intraocular haemorrhage. May be
unilateral or bilateral
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
95
Prolapse of the gland of the nictitating membrane ('cherry
eye')
·Breed at increased risk
·Usually presents in the first 1-2 years of life
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
· Congenital condition, inheritance suspected
·ScheduleBof theBVA/KC/ISDSEyeScheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetcis Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Tapetal degeneration
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Associatedwith lightly pigmented iridal tissues
·Minor condition with no effect on vision
(Burns et al. 1988, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Physiological conditions
Hypochondroplasia
·Accepted as breed standard
·Short, bowed legs but normal skulls seen
(Martinez, Valdes & Alonso 2000)
Renal and urinary conditions
Renal amyloidosis
96
·Breed at risk in case series
· Most cases >6 years at diagnosis
· Females predisposed in one study
·Amyloid is mostly glomerular, dogs present with proteinuria
and renal failure
(DiBartola et al. 1989, Bowles & Mosier 1992, Osborne &
Finco 1995)
Unilateral renal agenesis
· Uncommon condition
· High prevalence reported in some families of beagles
(Robbins 1965, Osbome & Finco 1995)
BEARDED COLLIE
Dermatological conditions
Black hair follicular dysplasia
·Uncommon
·Changes usually seen by 4 weeks of age
· Thought to be inherited as an autsomal recessive trait
(Schmutz et al. 1998)
Pemphigus foliaceous
·Uncommon
· Mean age of onset 4.2 years
(Ihrke et al. 1985)
97
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine conditions
Hypoadrenocorticism
· Inherited, mode unknown
·Mean age 4.6 years in one case series of all breeds
· Females may be predisposed
· Uncommon condition
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Oberbauer et al. 2002)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
·Radial head luxation seen in this breed
·Occurs at 4-5 months of age
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 3.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
98
Basal cell tumour (many cases are now reclassified as
trichoblastoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 7.9 years
· Mostly found on head and neck
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Fibrosarcoma - cutaneous
· Breed at increased risk in case series
- Females may be predisposed
·Mean age: 8.6 years in one study
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
· Mean age: 6.6 years
· Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Toma & Noli 2005)
Ocular conditions
99
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 2-5 years
· Localization: anterior polar subcapsular
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, AVCO Genetics
Committee 2007)
BEAUCERON
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
· Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between l and 2 years of age have highest probability of
 an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa
· Rare condition
· Lesions at mucocutaneous junctions, pressure points and claws
· Tooth enamel defects, retarded growth and abnormal stance also
seen
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Familial canine dermatomyositis
· Inherited, idiopathic inflammatory condition
100
·Lesions usually occur before 6 months of age
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Junctional epidermolysis bullosa
·Rare condition
· Genital and mucocutaneous lesions at 6 weeks of age
·Probably autosomal recessive inheritance
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
BEDLINGTON TERRIER
Dermatological conditions
Melanotrichia
· Often follows healing of deep inflammation
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Skin tumours
·See under Neoplastic conditions
Gastrointestinal conditions
Chronic hepatitis (copper storage hepatopathy, copper
toxicosis)
· Chronic hepatitis results from a primary defect in copper
excretion and abnormal copper retention in the hepatocytes.
This defect is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· Clinical onset seen in young to middle-aged dogs
·High prevalence worldwide, up to 66% of the breed affected in
the USA
101
· Genetic test available (AHT; VetGen) - see Appendix
(Twedt, Sternlieb & Gilbertson 1979, Johnson et al. 1980.
Watson 2004)
Neoplastic conditions
Cutaneous haemangioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.7 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 6.6 years
·Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Toma & Noli 2005)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
102
Age of onset: one type occurs by 3 months of age, another at 2
years
· Localization: posterior subcapsular. May progress
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Affects outer lower lid
(Rubin 1989)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Clinically evident at I-2 years of age
(Rubin 1989)
Lacrimal punctal atresia
· Congenital
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
·  Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
103
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - total (with retinal detachment)
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance
·Pups are blind from birth
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
BELGIAN SHEPHERD DOG
Gastrointestinal conditions
Gastric carcinoma
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Neoplastic conditions
Gastric carcinoma
·Rare condition seen relatively more frequently in this breeed
· Male dogs more commonly affected in case series
· Mean age of occurrence: 8-10 years
(Fonda, Gualtieri & Scanziani 1989, Gualtieri, Monzeglio
& Scanziani 1999)
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
· Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
104
Neurological conditions
Canine X-linked muscular dystrophy
·Reported in one litter of this breed
·Males only affected
(van Ham et al. 1993)
Idiopathic epilepsy
·Common in the Danish population of this breed
· Late onset in this breed increases prevalence due to dogs already
being used for breeding by the time they first show signs
(Berendt et al. 2008)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
· Localization: posterior cortex,non-progressive
·Schedule Aof theBVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
· Breed at risk in case series, inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 4-7 years
· Prevalence and severity increase at higher altitude
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
105
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
(Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Micropapilla
· Congenital
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Plasma cell
1  infiltration of  the nictitating membrane
(plasmoma)
·Breed at increased risk
· May be associated with pannus
(Rubin 1989)
BELGIAN TERVUREN
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
· Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between l and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis
·Affects young to middle-aged dogs
·Uncommon
106
· No apparent sex predilection
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001i)
Hypopigmentary disorders
.Various causes
·Suspected to be hereditary in this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Vitiligo
·Presumed to be hereditary
· Antimelanocyte antibodies found in all 17 affected Belgian
Tervurens tested and none of the ll normal Belgian Tervurens
tested in one study
(Mahaffey, Yarbrough & Munnell 1978)
Neurological conditions
Idiopathic epilepsy
·Highly heritable in this breed, with a polygenic mode of
inheritance
·Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
· Common condition
(Cunningham & Farnbach 1988)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Localization: posterior cortex,non-progressive
107
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
·Breed at risk in case series, inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 4-7 years
· Prevalence and severity increase at higher altitude
(Rubin 1989, Chavkin et al. 1994, Gionfriddo & Powell
2005, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of clinical onset: 4-5 years
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Micropapilla
· Congenital condition
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Physiological conditions
Leucopaenia
·Six out of 9 healthy Belgian Tervurens sampled had white blood
cell counts in the range 2.4-5.4 ± 10°/1
(Greenfield et al. 1999)
BERNESE MOUNTAIN DOG
Dermatological conditions
108
Seasonal nasal hypopigmentation
· Common condition
·Also known as snow nose
·Usually occurs in winter
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Haematological/immunological conditions
Factor I deficiency
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive
·Severe signs in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Factor VII deficiency
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive
·Mild signs in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Elbow dysplasia
· Ununited anconeal process (odds ratio 5.1 compared to mixed
breeds) and fragmented coronoid process (odds ratio of 1.40)
seen in this breed
·Common cause of forelimb lameness
109
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Robins & Innes 2006)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
· Odds ratio in the breed 7.2 in one study (compared to mixed
breeds)
study
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Genevois et al. 2008)
Panosteitis
· Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 2.8 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 47.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(Rudd,Whitehair & Margolis 1990, LaFond, Breur &
Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Histiocytosis - localized and disseminated
110
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Affects older dogs (7-8 years)
·More common in males
(Moore & Rosin 1986, Padgett et al. 1995, Affolter &
Moore 2002, Moore, Affloter & Vernau 2006)
Histiocytosis - systemic
· Rare condition, not strictly neoplastic
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Affects younger dogs (3-4 years)
(Moore 1984, Padgett et al. 1995)
Sweat gland tumour
· Breed at risk of apocrine ductal adenoma in case series
·Mean age: 9.1 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Hypomyelination of the central nervous system
·  Rare condition
·Suspected to be autosomal recessive inheritance
·Signs seen at 2-8 weeks
(Palmer et al. 1987)
Idiopathic epilepsy
· Common condition
·Usual age of onset 6 months to 6 years
111
· Polygenic mode of inheritance in this breed
(Kathmann et al. 1999)
Meningitis and polyarteritis
· Uncommon disease
·Age of onset: <l year
origin
(Tipold 2002)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 1 year; may progress and affect vision
· Localization: posterior subcapsular cortex
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Entropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Familial, inheritance suspected
 paaa s u a aa sr  s i e
France
112
(Rubin 1989, Chaudieu & Molon-Noblot 2004, ACVO
Genetcis Committee 2007)
Systemic histiocytosis (ocular signs may include uveitis,
chemosis and scleritis)
·See under Neoplastic conditions
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial
renal
disease
(membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis and interstitial nephritis)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Affected dogs present at 2-5 years with renal failure and
marked proteinuria
· Most of the dogs studied had a high titre to Borrelia burgdorferi
Suggesting that it may have had a role in the development of the
condition
(Minkus et al. 1994, Reusch et al. 1994, Osborne & Finco
1995)
Reproductive conditions
Cystic
  endometrial
hyperplasia-pyometra 
 complex
(pyometra)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Common disease of older entire bitches (mean age 7.25 years)
·Most cases present within 12 weeks of oestrus
(Egenvall et al. 2001, Smith 2006)
Respiratory conditions
113
Malignant histiocytosis
· See under Neoplastic condition
BICHON FRISE
Cardiovascular conditions
Patent ductus arteriosus
·Common congenital abnormality
·Relative risk 5.5
· Females predisposed
· Mode of inheritance is polygenic
(Buchanan 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Bichon Frise 25
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital portosystemic shunt
·Breed at risk in case series
· Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
· More common in females than males
·Usually extrahepatic
(Hunt 2004, Sargan 2004)
114
Haematological/immunological conditions
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
·Common disease
·Usually affects young adult and middle-aged animals
· May be more common in bitches
·May be seasonal variations
(Miller, Hohenhaus & Hale 2004)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 4.8 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Basal cell tumour (many cases are now reclassified as
trichoblastoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 7.9 years
· Mostly found on head and neck
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992. Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 7.3 years
115
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 6.6 years
· Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Toma & Noli 2005)
Trichoblastoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually older than 5 years
·Common
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Cataract (see plate 1 in the colour plate
section)
116
Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected. High incidence in
this breed (11.45% in one study)
·Age of onset: 2-8 years
· Localization: anterior and posterior cortices, some progress to
completion
· Retinal detachment may be associated
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt et al. 2003, Adkins & Hendrix 2005,
Gelatt & Mackay 2005,Wallace et al. 2005, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
Congenital, subepithelial, geographic corneal dystrophy
(infantile cormeal dystrophy)
· Congenital
·  Occurs in young puppies (<10 weeks); transient condition
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt 2007)
Cormeal dystrophy
· Inheritance suspected
·Paracentral, lipid dystrophy
·Age of onset: 2 years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Glaucoma (secondary)
· Secondary to cataract
· Primary glaucoma may also be seen
(Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, b, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
117
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate
·Breed at risk in case series
· Average age at diagnosis in one large study: males 8.l years,
females 8.4 years
·Males predisposed (3:1 in one large study)
(Osborme & Finco 1995, Lulich et al. 1999, Osborme et al.
1999, Houston et al. 2004)
Urolithiasis -- cystine
· Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Osborne & Finco 1995, Houston et al
2004, Harmevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
·Breed at risk in case series
'ss 0g sae ps sel ao un siso 1e se say .
females 5.7 years
·Females predisposed (16:1 in one large study)
(Osborne et al. 1999, Houston et al. 2004)
Respiratory conditions
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
118
· Inherited defect
·Usually signs seen within first few weeks of life
(Vaden et al. 1991)
BLOODHOUND
Cardiovascular conditions
Aortic stenosis
· Common congenital disease
·Relative risk >5.0
·No sex predilection
·Inheritance possibly autosomal dominantwith modifying genes,
or polygenic
(Buchanan 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Affects any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Skin tumours
·See under Neoplastic conditions
Gastrointestinal conditions
Gastric dilatation/volvulus
119
·Breed at risk in case series
(Sargan 2004)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
· Odds ratio 4.5 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Cutaneous haemangioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.7 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Fibrosarcoma-cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Females may be predisposed
·Mean age: 8.6 years in one study
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992.
Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin
·Breed at risk in case series
120
·Mean age: 10.2 years
pasodsipad aq Aeu auequns, youm saoa -
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Ocular conditions
Ectropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Associated with macroblepharon
(Bedford 1988, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
Entropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
·High prevalence
·Associated with
 macroblepharon.
Affectsupper
reyelids
resulting in trichiasis
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating membrane
- Inheritance suspected
· Usually occurs in young dogs
(Rubin 1989)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
·Breed at increased risk
(Kaswan & Salisbury 1990)
121
Macroblepharon ('diamond eye')
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Multiple ocular defects
· Congenital
·ScheduleBof theBVA/KC/ISDSEyeScheme
(der Lugt et al. 1996)
Prolapse of the gland of the nictitating membrane (^cherry
eye')
·Breed at increased risk
·Usually presents in the first 1-2 years of life
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
BOLOGNESE
Ocular conditions
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
BOERBOEL
Musculoskeletal conditions
Elbow dysplasia
122
· Common in this breed in South Africa
·>38% incidence
·  Males predisposed
(Kirberger & Stander 2007)
Neurological conditions
Cervical spondylomyelopathy
·Aka wobbler syndrome
·Seen in first 2 years of life in this breed
(Gray, Kirberger, Spotswood 2003)
BORDER COLLIE
Dermatological conditions
Black hair follicular dysplasia
·Uncommon
·Changes usually seen by 4 weeks of age
·Thought to be inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
(Schmutz et al. 1998)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital portosystemic shunt
·Breed at risk in case series
123
·Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <1 year
(Hunt 2004)
Selective malabsorption of cobalamin (vitamin B12)
·Rare condition
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· See also under Haematological conditions
(Fordyce, Callan & Giger 2000, Battersby, Giger & Hall
2005)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Selective malabsorption of cobalamin (vitamin B12)
· Causes a non-regenerative anaemia with poikilocytosis and
neutropenia
·See also under Gastrointestinal conditions
(Giger 2003)
Trapped neutrophil syndrome
·Suspected autsomal recessive inheritance
· Neutropenia results from failure of the neutrophils to escape
from the bone marrow
· Genetic test available (University of NSW) - see Appendix
(Allan et al. 1996, Sharman & Wilton 2007)
Infectious conditions
Cryptococcosis
·Breed at increased risk in case series
124
· Usually seen in dogs under 4 years
· Living outdoors and exposure to bird droppings are risk factors
(O'Brien et al. 2004)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Central tarsal bone fracture
· Reported in six border collies
· May have the radiographic appearance of a luxation
(Guillard 2007)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
·  Neutered male dogs predisposed
· Odds ratio 2.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
· Odds ratio 15.0 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
125
·Mean age: 6.6 years
· Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Testicular neoplasia
·See under Reproductive conditions
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Lysosomal storage disease - ceroid lipofuscinosis
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
· Signs seen at 1-2 years
· Genetic test available (Optigen; AHT) -- see Appendix
(Bagley 2005)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 4-6 years
·Localization: anterior subcapsular cortex. Progress slowly
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
126
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
· Breed at risk in case series, inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 4-7 years
· Prevalence and severity increase at higher altitude
(Chavkin et al. 1994)
Collie eye anomaly
·  Congenital disorder, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Bedford 1982a, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·An X-linked form of PRA has been identified in this breed
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Vilboux
et al. 2008)
Lens luxation
·Simple autosomal recessive inheritance suggested
·Age of onset: 3-5 years (mean 4.7 years)
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Foster et al. 1986, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Multiple ocular defects
127
· Congenital condition, seen in homozygous merles (the result of
merle to merle breeding) with predominantly white coats
·Defects may include microphthalmia, microcornea, cataract,
equatorial staphylomas and coloboma
(Rubin 1989)
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Rare condition
· Genetic test available (Optigen; AHT) - see Appendix
· See also under Neurological conditions
(Melville et al. 2005)
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED), also known
as central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA)
·Mode of inheritance unknown
·Age of clinical onset: 1-2 years
· More prevalent in the UK than in the USA. Becoming less
prevalent following the introduction of control schemes
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Bedford 2001, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Reproductive conditions
Testicular neoplasia
·Breed at increased risk of sertoli cell tumour in case series
· Common tumour in male dog
·Mean age: 9-11 years
(Weaver 1983)
128
BORDER TERRIER
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 3-5 years
· Localization: posterior subcapsular cortex. Slowly progressive
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Reproductive conditions
Dystocia
· Breed predisposition to dystocia due to primary uterine inertia
(Johnson et al. 2001)
BORZOI
Dermatological conditions
Primary lymphoedema
·  No apparent sex predisposition
·Usually occurs within first 12 weeks of life
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Gastric dilatation-volvulus
129
·Breed at increased risk
(Burrows & Ignaszewski 1990)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Factor I deficiency
· Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive
· Mild signs in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Neurological conditions
Cervical vertebral malformation (wobbler syndrome)
· Common condition in large and giant breeds
·Seen occasionally in this breed
· Heritability, nutrition and growth rate, body conformation and
trauma are possible causes
· Evidence of autsomal recessive inheritance in this breed
(Olby 2003)
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Micropapilla
130
· Congenital condition
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Multifocal chorioretinitis (Borzoi chorioretinopathy)
· Inheritance suspected
· Reported in dogs age 7 months to 7 years
· Some reports suggest a male predisposition
(Storey et al. 2005, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007,
Gelatt 2007)
Multiple ocular defects
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
·Defectsmay include microphthalmia, cataract, multifocal retinal
dysplasia and PPMs
(Rubin 1989)
Optic nerve hypoplasia
·  Congenital; not known if inherited
· Uncommon condition seen occasionally in this breed
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Plasma
1  cell
1infiltration of the nictitating membrane
(plasmoma)
·Breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989)
BOSTON TERRIER
131
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
 an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Calcinosis circumscripta
· Uncommon condition
·  No sex predisposition
·Usually affects younger dogs (<2 years)
·This breed is predisposed to lesions on the cheek and at the base
of the pinna
(Scott & Buerger 1988)
Generalized demodicosis
·Boston terriers are in the ten breeds at highest statistical risk of
this disease in the Cornell, USA, population
· Common condition
· Younger dogs predisposed
·No sex predilection
·Susceptibility to generalized demodicosis may be inherited
· Incidence within breeds may vary depending on geographical
location
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001b)
132
Intertrigo
·Tail fold intertrigo results from corkscrew tails
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Pattern baldness
·Usually affects females in this breed
·Gradual hair loss from 6 months of age
·Affects mainly the ventrum and caudomedial thighs
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine conditions
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Median age: 10 years
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Wood et al. 2007)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Antral pyloric hypertrophy (pyloric stenosis)
·Congenital condition in this breed
· Clinical presentation shortly after weaning or within first 6-12
months
(Hall 2000)
133
Cleft palate
· Congenital
·Probable autosomal recessive inheritance
(Edmonds, Stewart & Selby 1972, Sargan 2004)
Vascular ring anomaly
· Clinical presentation at time of weaning
(Van Grundy 1989)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
·Humeroulnar luxation seen in this breed
· Occurs in first 3 months of life
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Hemivertebrae
· See under Neurological conditions
Patellar luxation
·Common condition
·Odds ratio 4.2 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Perineal hernia
· Intact males predisposed
134
· Common condition
(Robertson 1984)
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis
·See under Neurological conditions
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
·Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Chemodectoma
·Breed at increased risk
· Older male dogs predisposed
(Owen, Bruvette & Lavton 1996)
Fibroma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk
·Mean age: 8.4 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995)
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
135
· May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Peters 1969, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Melanoma - cutaneous
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.9 years
(Morris & Dobson 2001)
Pituitary tumour resulting in
hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series
·See under Endocrine conditions
(Wood et al. 2007)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Hemivertebrae
· Congenital
·Uncommon
(Dewey 2003b)
136
Hydrocephalus
· Congenital
·Relatively common
· Genetic and environmental factors suspected
· Onset of signs: <3 months
(Inzana 2002)
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis
· Congenital
·Uncommon
(Srenk 2002)
Ocular conditions
Caruncular trichiasis
·Occurs with exophthalmos
(Rubin 1989)
Cataract - early onset
·Autosomal recessive inheritance. High overall incidence of
cataracts in this breed (11.11% in one study)
·Age of onset: 8-10 weeks
 Localization: posterior suture lines and nucleus. Bilateral and
rapidly progressive to completion by 2 years
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Genetic test available (AHT; VetGen) - see Appendix
137
(Rubin 1989, Adkins & Hendrix 2005, Gelatt & Mackay
2005, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Mellersch et al.
2007)
Cataract -- late onset
· Inheritance suspected. High overall incidence of cataracts in this
breed (11.11% in one study)
·Age of onset: 4-5 years
· Localization: equator and anterior cortex. Progression variable
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Adkins & Henderix 2005, Gelatt & Mackay
2005, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Mellersch et al.
2007)
Corneal dystrophy
· Inheritance suspected
· Endothelial dystrophywith progressive corneal oedema
·Age of onset: 5-9 years
(Rubin 1989, Cooley & Dice 1990, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
· Glaucoma secondary to cataracts and vitreal syneresis also seen
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007,Gelatt 2007)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
·Breed at increased risk
138
(Kaswan & Salisbury 1990)
Prolapse of the gland of the nictitating membrane (^cherry
eye')
·Breed at increased risk
·Usually presents in the first 1-2 years of life
(Rubin 1989)
Spontaneous chronic corneal epithelial defects (refractory
corneal ulceration, indolent ulcers)
·Breed at increased risk
·Age of onset: 6-8 years
(Rubin 1989)
Uveal cysts (see plate 2 in the colour plate section)
·Breed at increased risk
·Mean age: 6.8 years in one study
(Rubin 1989, Corcoran & Koch 1993)
Vitreal syneresis
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen from 3 years of age
·Vitreal degeneration results in strands of vitreous extending into
the anterior chamber predisposing to glaucoma and cataracts
(Rubin 1989)
Physiological conditions
139
Pelger-Huet anomaly
· Decreased segmentation of granulocyte nuclei is seen
·Does not appear to be clinically significant
(Day 2002)
Renal and urinary conditions
Hypospadias
·Rare congenital defect with a higher incidence in this breed
suggesting a possible genetic basis
·Predominantly affects male dogs
(Hayes &Wilson 1986)
Urethral prolapse
·Rare condition seen relatively more frequently in this breed
·Generally seen in male dogs at 4 months to 5 years of age
(Osborme & Finco 1995)
Reproductive conditions
Dystocia
·Breedpredispositionto obstructive dystocia dueto
with large heads
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Eneroth et al. 1999, Johnson et
al. 2001)
Hypospadias
140
· See under Renal and urinary conditions
Urethral prolapse
·See under Renal and urinary conditions
Respiratory conditions
Brachycephalic upper airway syndrome
·Complex of anatomical deformities
· Common in this breed
·Hypoplastic trachea common in this breed
characteristics
· Most commonly present with clinical signs aged 1-4 years
(Seim 2001, Riecks, Birchard & Stephens 2007)
BOUVIER DES FLANDRES
Dermatological conditions
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Gastrointestinal conditions
Muscular  dystrophy  of pharyngeal and oesophageal
muscles causing dysphagia
·Familial
·See also Musculoskeletal conditions
(Peeters & Ubbink 1994, Sargan 2004)
141
Musculoskeletal conditions
Elbow dysplasia
· Fragmented coronoid process (odds ratio of 19.5 compared to
mixed breeds) seen in this breed
· Common cause of forelimb lameness
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Hip dysplasia
* Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 4.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Muscular dystrophy
·Primary myopathy affecting the muscles of swallowing
·Limb muscles not affected
·Uncommon condition
· See also under Gastrointestinal conditions
(Peeters & Ubbink 1994)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 12.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(Rudd,Whitehair & Margolis 1990, LaFond, Breur &
Austin 2002)
142
Neoplastic conditions
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 6.6 years
· Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Toma & Noli 2005)
Prostatic carcinoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Older dogs affected
·Some studies suggest an increased risk in castrated dogs
(Teske et al. 2002a)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
· Posterior cortical cataracts have been seen in dogs aged 3
months to 1 year
· Posterior subcapsular cataracts have been seen in older dogs (5
years)
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Severe, affecting entire lower lid
143
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
· Goniodysgenesis common
(van der Linde-Sipman 1987, Rubin 1989, Gelatt &
Mackay 2004a, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
(PHPV)
· Congenital, inheritance suspected
·Associated with retinal dysplasia, optic nerve hypoplasia,
lenticonus, cataract and congenital blindness in this breed
(Van Rensberg, Van der Lagt & Smit 1992, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
Reproductive conditions
Prostatic carcinoma
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Respiratory conditions
Laryngeal paralysis
·Neurogenic and hereditary in this breed
(Harvey 1989, 0'Brien 1975)
144
BOXER
Cardiovascular conditions
Aortic stenosis
· Common congenital disease
·Relative risk 9.3
· Males strongly predisposed in this breed
·Particular prevalence in this breed in Scotland
· Inheritance possibly autosomal dominantwith modifying genes,
or polygenic
(Darke 1989, Chetboul et al. 2006)
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (see
figure 2)
·Aka boxer cardiomyopathy
·Common in this breed
·Familial and thought to be inherited
·Associated with ventricular arrhythmias and sudden death
·Genetic test available (Washington State University) - see
Appendix
(Basso et al. 2004)
Figure 2 ECG showing paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia
due to arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy in
a Boxer.
145
Atrial septal defect
·  More common than previously recognized
· Congenital
·Not yet proven to be inherited
·Relative risk 25.0
(Chetboul et al. 2006)
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Prevalence of 3.4% in this breed compared to 0.16% in mixed
breeds and 0.65% in pure breeds
·Increased prevalence with age
·Approximately twice as common in males as females
· Thought to be familial or genetic
 ,  a   
type, or the ‘attenuated
1wavy
fibre’type of dilated
cardiomyopathy (DCM)
146
(Tidholm et al. 2001)
Mitral valve dysplasia
· Congenital
·Uncommon
· More common than previously recognized in this breed
(Chetboul et al. 2006)
Pericardial effusion
·Relative risk only 1.5
·Usually affects middle-aged dogs
· Often due to heart base tumours in this breed
(Buchanan 1999, Sisson 2002)
Pulmonic stenosis
· Congenital
·Relatively uncommon
(Matic 1988)
Sick sinus syndrome
·Middle-aged to old dogs
·Relative risk 2.6 in this breed
· No sex predisposition in this breed
(Buchanan 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
147
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between l and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
·This breed had a risk factor of 8.4 cases per 1000 dog years at
 5 1 t  1 g og   l  1
insurance claim for atopy)
(Nodtvedt et al. 2006)
Calcinosis circumscripta
· Uncommon condition
· No sex predisposition
·Usually affects younger dogs (<2 years)
· This breed is predisposed to lesions on the cheek and at the base
of the pinna
(Scott & Buerger 1988)
Callus dermatitis/pyoderma
· Common condition
·Sternal calluses often become infected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Canine follicular dysplasia/seasonal flank alopecia
·Presumed genetic basis
·Alopecia starts at 2-4 years of age and is restricted to the flank
in this breed
·May occur in autumn or spring
(Miller & Dunstan 1993)
148
Dermoid cyst
·Rare developmental abnormalities
· Often congenital and hereditary
·Solitary or multiple
· Occur on the dorsal midline
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001c)
Follicular cyst
· No age or sex predisposition noted
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001c)
Idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
·Uncommon
·  No age or sex predisposition
·This breed over-represented in one study
(Panich, Scott & Miller 1991)
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Muzzle folliculitis/furunculosis
· Common condition
·Also known as canine acne
· Local trauma, hormones and geneticsmay play a role in
pathogenesis
149
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Oestrogen-responsive dermatosis
·Rare condition
· Usually occurs in the young adult
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001j)
Pododermatitis
·Can affect any age or sex
·Males predisposed
·Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Skin tumours
·See under Neoplastic conditions
Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy
·Age range of dogs affected 3-8 years
·No sex predilection
(Rosychuk 2002)
Truncal solar dermatitis
· A combination of factors are required to cause this condition
·White boxers affected
· Flank and abdomen most severely affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Drug reactions
150
Acepromazine and other phenothiazines
·This breed may be more sensitive to the hypotensive effects of
these drugs than other breeds
(Hellyer 2005)
Endocrine conditions
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Median age: 10 years
(Ling et al. 1979, Feldman & Nelson 1996, Alenza et al.
2006)
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
- May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
· Neutered males and females at increased risk
(Nesbitt et al. 1980, Greco 2002)
Insulinoma
·Breed at increased risk
·Middle-aged/older dogs affected
·Uncommon
(Caywood et al. 1988, Feldman & Nelson 1996, Lorenz
2002)
Thyroid neoplasia (may be associated with hyper- or
hypothyroidism, but most are euthyroid)
151
· Breed at increased risk according to some studies
·Average age: 10 years
(Brodey & Kelly 1968, Mitchell, Hurov & Troy 1979)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Antral pyloric hypertrophy (pyloric stenosis)
· Congenital condition in this breed
· Clinical presentation shortly after weaning or within first 6-12
months
(Lorenz & Melendez 2002)
Cleft palate
· Congenital
·Probable autosomal recessive inheritance
(Nielen et al. 2001, Sargan 2004)
Gingival and oropharyngeal neoplasia
·Breed at risk in case series
(Dorn & Priester 1976)
Histiocytic ulcerative colitis
·Breed at risk in case series
(Churcher &Watson 1997, German et al. 2000a)
Pancreatitis
152
·Breed at risk of chronic pancreatitis in case series of
post-mortem dogs
(Watson et al. 2007)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Factor II deficiency
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive
·Variably severe signs in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Haemophlia A
·Severe Factor VIlI deficiency in this breed
·Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Infectious conditions
Cryptococcosis
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Usually seen in dogs under 4 years
·Living outdoors and exposure to bird droppings are risk factors
(O'Brien et al. 2004)
Infectious skin disease
· See under Dermatological conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
153
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
· Radial head luxation seen in this breed
·Occurs at 4-5 months of age
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture
· Common cause of hindlimb lameness
·  Neutered individuals are predisposed
· Older animals are predisposed
·Odds ratio in this breed 2.14
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Metaphyseal osteopathy
· Aka hypertrophic osteodystrophy
·Uncommon
·Affects dogs aged 2-6months
· Males possibly predisposed
·Aetiology unknown
·Odds ratio 18.4 (compared to mixed breeds)
(Nieves 2002, LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
· Odds ratio 1.8 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
154
Perineal hernia
· Intact males predisposed
· Common condition
(Robertson 1984)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 2.2 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Spondylosis deformans
· Usually clinically insignificant
· 84% of boxers had spondylosis lesions in one study
(Canier et al. 2004)
Stifle osteochondrosis
· Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 5-12 months, but may be earlier
·Odds ratio 56.3 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
· Breed at increased risk in case series
155
·Mean age: 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Chemodectoma
·Breed at increased risk
· Older male dogs predisposed
(Owen, Bruvette & Lavton 1996)
Cutaneous haemangioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.7 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
(Pastor 2002)
Fibroma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk
·Mean age: 8.4 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Fibromatous epulis
156
· Predisposed to the development of multiple tumours
·Seen in middle-aged/older dogs
(Morris & Dobson 2001)
Gingival and oropharyngeal neoplasia
·See under Gastrointestinal conditions
Haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk
· Mean age reported as 10 years
(Brown, Patnaik & MacEwen 1985, Pastor 2002)
Insulinoma
·See under Endocrine conditions
Lymphoma
·Breed at increased risk
·Most cases are seen in middle-aged dogs (mean 6-7 years)
(Edwards et al. 2003, Lurie et al. 2004)
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Peters 1969, Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt &
Mcmanus 2000, Baker-Gabb, Hunt & France 2003)
157
Melanoma-cutaneous
· Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.9 years
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 1995)
Osteosarcoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Males over-represented
·Seen in older dogs
(Misdrop & Hart 1979)
Pituitary tumour resulting in hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series
· See under Endocrine conditions
(Alenza et al. 2006)
Primary brain tumour
·See under Neurological conditions
Testicular neoplasia
·See under Reproductive conditions
Thyroid neoplasia
·See under Endocrine conditions
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
158
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Discospondylitis (see figure 3)
·Uncommon
· Young/middle-aged dogs affected
·Males twice as likely to be affected as females
·Odds ratio in this breed 3.0
(Burkert et al. 2005)
Meningitis and polyarteritis
· Uncommon disease
·Age of onset: <l year
·Aetiology unknown, but possibly infectious or environmental in
origin
(Tipold 2002)
Primary brain tumour (see figures 4a and 4b)
·Higher incidence noted in this breed
· Older dogs affected
· 16/18 dogs of this breed with brain tumours had gliomas in one
study
(Snyder et al. 2006)
Sensory neuropathy of Boxers (progressive axonopathy)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
·Age of clinical onset: 2 months
159
(Cuddon 2002a)
Ocular conditions
Corneal dystrophy
·Epithelial/stromal dystrophy
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Distichiasis
·Common condition, breed at increased risk
(Lawson 1973, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Ectopic cilia
·Uncommon condition,breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Ectropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Spontaneous chronic cormeal epithelial defects (refractory
cormeal ulceration, indolent ulcers)
·Breed at increased risk
160
Figure 3 Lateral radiograph of the thoracolumbar spine of
a dog demonstrating discospondylitis. Courtesy of Andy
Moores.
Figure 4 (a) T2-weighted transverse MRI scan of the brain
of a boxer showing a hyperintense mass consistent with a
glioma. (b) T2-weighted transverse MRI scan of the same
boxer as in (a) following radiotherapy.
(a)
(b)
161
·Age of onset: 7-9 years
(Rubin 1989, Bentley 2005, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
Physiological conditions
Vertebral heart score
   e     s    as
·Normal range for this breed is 10.3-12.6
(Smith 2004)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urethral  sphincter mechanism  incompetence (causing
urinary incontinence)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Spayed females predisposed
(Amold 1997)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism
· Congenital defect believed to be inherited as a sex-limited,
autosomal recessive trait
·Breed at risk in case series
(Hayes et al. 1985, Romagnoli 1991, Yates et al. 2003)
Testicular neoplasia
162
·Breed at increased risk
· Common tumour in male dogs
·Seen at earlier age than other breeds (mean age 7.2 years in one
study)
· One study suggests increased risk to sertoli cell tumours
(Lipowitz et al. 1973, Hayes & Pendergrass 1976,Weaver
1983)
Vaginal hyperplasia/vaginal prolapse
·Usually seen in young entire bitches during proestrus of the first
to third oestrus cycle
(Post, Van Haaften & Okkens 1991, Feldman and Nelson
1996)
Respiratory conditions
Brachycephalic upper airway syndrome
· Complex of anatomical deformities
· Common in this breed
    s     
characteristics
· Most commonly present with clinical signs aged 1-4 years
(Seim 2001)
BOYKIN SPANIEL
Cardiovascular conditions
Pulmonic stenosis
·Thirdmost frequent cause of canine congenital heart disease
163
·May be familial in this breed
·May be a polygenic mode of inheritance
(Jacobs,Mahaffey & Rawlings 1990)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia A
·Severe Factor VIlI deficiency in this breed
·Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Ocular conditions
Collie eye anomaly
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Sargan 2004)
Distichiasis
·Common condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Persistent hyaloid artery
·Congenital, inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
BRIARD
164
Neoplastic conditions
Cutaneous haemangioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.7 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Cutaneous lymphoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 6.6 years
· Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Toma & Noli 2005)
Ocular conditions
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
165
·- Progressive rod-cone degeneration
· Ophthalmoscopic signs at 4 years
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Hereditary retinal dystrophy of Briards
(congenital stationary night blindness)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance with variable expression
· Genetic test available (Optigen; AHT; Health- Gene) - see
Appendix
Rubin
1989,  Narfstrom  1999a,  Sargan
2004,
ACVOGenetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED), also known
as central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance has been sugggested
·Age of onset varies
· More prevalent in the UK than in the USA. Becoming less
 prevalent following the introduction of control schemes
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Lightfoot et al. 1996, Bedford 2001, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
BRITTANY SPANIEL
Dermatological conditions
Discoid lupus erythematosus
· Uncommon
·  No age or sex predisposition recognized
166
(Werner 1999)
Grass awn migration
· Common in the summer months
·Predisposition due to behaviour
(Brennan & Ihrke 1983)
Histoplasmosis
· See under Infectious conditions
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Gastrointestinal conditions
Cleft palate
· Congenital
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
(Richtsmeier et al. 1994, Sargan 2004)
Haematological conditions
Deficiency of third component of complement
·Discovered in a colony of Brittany Spaniels with inherited
spinal muscular atrophy
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive
·Inherited separately from the spinal atrophy gene
(Giger 2003)
167
Infectious conditions
Histoplasmosis
·Breed at increased risk
· Most dogs are less than 2 years, males predisposed
·Mostly seen in the Americas, India and Southeast Asia
(Clinkenbeard et al. 1989)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
·  Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 1.7 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Spinal muscular atrophy
· See under Neurological conditions
Neoplastic conditions
Fibroma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk
·Mean age: 8.4 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Fibrosarcoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
168
·Females may be predisposed
·Mean age 8.6 years in one study
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Melanoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland adenomas
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age was 10.5 years
· Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt &Mcmanus
2000)
Neurological conditions
Spinal muscular atrophy
·Autosomal dominant inheritance
·Rare
·Age of clinical onset: <l year
(Cork et al. 1990)
Spinocerebellar degeneration (late onset)
·Rare
· Signs seen at 7-13 years
169
·Familial
(Higgins et al. 1998)
Ocular conditions
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
· May also be seen secondary to lens luxation and vitreal
syneresis
(Gelatt 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Seen with abnormal vitreous
(Rubin 1989)
BRUSSELS GRIFFON
(See Griffon Bruxellois)
BULLDOG (ENGLISH)
Cardiovascular conditions
Aortic stenosis
· Common congenital disease
·Relative risk >5.0
·No sex predilection
· Inheritance possibly autosomal dominantwith modifying genes,
or polygenic
170
(Fuentes 2003)
Pulmonic stenosis
· Thirdmost frequent cause of canine congenital heart disease
· May be polygenic mode of inheritance
·Relative risk 12.9
·May be associated with anomalous coronary artery development
in this breed
(Darke 1989)
Tetralogy of Fallot
·Uncommon
· Congenital
(Darke 1989)
Ventricular septal defect
·Marked risk in this breed (relative risk 5.0)
·No sex predilection
(Buchanan 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Canine follicular dysplasia/seasonal flank alopecia
· Presumed genetic basis
·Alopecia starts at 2-4 years of age and is restricted to the flank
in this breed
·May occur in autumn or spring
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
171
Generalized demodicosis
 English bulldogs are in the ten breeds at highest statistical risk
of this disease in the Cornell, USA, population
· Common condition
·Younger dogs predisposed
· No sex predilection
·Susceptibility to generalized demodicosis may be inherited
· Incidence within breeds may vary depending on geographical
location
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001b)
Hyperoestrogenism
·Rare
·Affects older, intact females
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001j) Intertrigo
· Tail fold intertrigo results from corkscrew tails
·Facial fold intertrigo also occurs in this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200le)
Muzzle folliculitis/furunculosis
· Common condition
·Also known as canine acne
· Local trauma, hormones and geneticsmay play a role in
pathogenesis
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Pododermatitis
·Can affect any age or sex
172
·  Males predisposed
·Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Primary lymphoedema
·No apparent sex predisposition
· Only seen in certain populations
(Ladds, Dennis & Leipold 1971)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine diseases
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
· May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
·Neutered males and females at increased risk
(Greco 2002)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Cleft palate
·Congenital
·Probable autosomal recessive inheritance
(Mulvihill, Mulvihill & Priester 1980, Sargan 2004)
Haematological/immunological conditions
173
Haemophilia A
·Severe Factor VllI deficiency in this breed
·Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
· Radial head luxation and humeroulnar luxation seen in this
breed
·Radial head luxation occurs at 4-5 months of age
·Humeroulnar luxation occurs in first 3 months of life
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture
·Common cause of hindlimb lameness
· Neutered individuals are predisposed
· Older animals are predisposed
·Odds ratio in this breed 2.17
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Hemivertebrae
·See under Neurological conditions
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio in the breed 1.27
174
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
· Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 1.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
*Odds ratio 6.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Stifle osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 5-12 months, but may be earlier
·Odds ratio 44.2 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
175
Chemodectoma
·Breed at increased risk
· Older male dogs predisposed
(Owen, Bruvette & Lavton 1996)
Cutaneous lymphoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Lymphoma
·Breed at increased risk
·Most cases are seen in middle-aged dogs (mean 6-7 years)
(Edwards et al. 2003)
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
 ( s  o)    s  *
seen in older animals
·Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Peters 1969)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not knownn
· Suspected to be inherited
176
(Strain 2004)
Discospondylitis
·Uncommon
·Young/middle-aged dogs affected
·Males twice as likely to be affected as females
·Odds ratio in this breed 3.0
(Burkert et al. 2005)
Hemivertebrae
· Congenital
·Uncommon
(Dewey 2003b)
Spina bifida
· Congenital
· Uncommon condition
(Sturges 2003a)
Ocular conditions
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007,Gelatt2007)
Ectopic cilia
177
· Uncommon condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, D'Anna et al. 2007.
Gelatt 2007)
Ectropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Associated with macroblepharon
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Affects the lower lid, but also seen associated with
macroblepharon
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
·Breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, Kaswan & Salisbury 1990, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Macroblepharon ('diamond eye′)
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Prolapse of the gland of the nictitating membrane ('cherry
eye') (see plate 3 in the colour plate section)
178
·Breed at increased risk
· Usually presents in the first 1-2 years of life
(Rubin 1989, Morgan, Duddy & McClurg 1993, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
·  Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Physiological conditions
Achondroplasia
·Genetic dwarfism
·Skull and limbs affected
·Accepted as a breed standard
(Martinez, Valdes & Alonso 2000)
Renal and urinary conditions
Ectopic ureters
· Uncommon congenital anomaly
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually presents <l year of age
· More commonly diagnosed in females
(Hayes 1984)
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis (causing urinary incontinence)
· Congenital
179
· Occasionally reported
Urethral prolapse
·Rare condition seen relatively more frequently in this breed
·Generally seen in male dogs at 4 months to 5 years of age
(Osborme & Finco 1995, Kirsch, Hauptman &Walshaw
2002)
Urethrorectal fistula
·Rare congenital condition seen relatively more frequently in this
breed
·Males more commonly affected than females
(Osborme & Finco 1995, Chandler & MacPhail 2001,
Ralphs & Kramek 2003)
Urolithiasis - cystine
· Cystinuria results from an inherited defect (probably autosomal
recessive) inrenal tubular transport of cystine and predisposes to
cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Bartges et al. 1994, Osborne & Finco
1995, Osborne et al. 1999, Houston et al. 2004, Sargan
2004,Harnevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
Urolithiasis - urate
·Breed at risk in case series
Average age at diagnosis in one large study: males 5.5 years,
females 4.6 years
180
·Males are predisposed
· Genetic test available (AHT; Veterinary Genetics UC Davis) -
see Appendix
(Bartges et al. 1994, Osborne & Finco 1995, Osborme et al.
1999, Houston et al. 2004)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism
· Congenital defect believed to be inherited as a sex-limited,
autosomal recessive trait
·Breed at risk in case series
(Hayes et al. 1985, Romagnoli 1991)
Dystocia
· Breed predisposition to obstructive dystocia due to a narrow
maternal pelvic canal and foetuses with large heads
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Johnson et al. 2001)
Urethral prolapse
· See under Renal and urinary conditions
Vaginal hyperplasia/vaginal prolapse
·Usually seen in young entire bitches during proestrus of the first
to third oestrus cycle
(Post, Van Haaften & Okkens 1991, Feldman and Nelson
1996)
Respiratory conditions
181
Hypoplastic trachea
· Common condition
· This breed accounts for 55% of cases
(Harvey 1989)
Brachycephalic upper airway syndrome
·Complex of anatomical deformities
· Common in this breed
      e    a
facial characteristics
·May be associated with non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema in
this breed
 Aerophagia associated with this condition may lead to excessive
flatulence
(Hedlund 2003)
BULLMASTIFF
Cardiovascular conditions
Pulmonic stenosis
· Thirdmost frequent cause of canine congenital heart disease
·May be polygenic mode of inheritance
(Hogan 2002)
Dermatological conditions
Muzzle folliculitis/furunculosis
· Common condition
182
·Also known as canine acne
· Local trauma, hormones and geneticsmay play a role in
pathogenesis
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Pododermatitis
·Can affect any age or sex
·  Males predisposed
·Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
· Radial head luxation seen in this breed
· Occurs at 4-5 months of age
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Elbow dysplasia
· Fragmented coronoid process (odds ratio of 38.9 compared to
mixed breeds) seen in this breed
· Common cause of forelimb lameness
(LaFond,Breur & Austin 2002)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 3.5 (compared to mixed breeds)
183
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Hock osteochondritis dissecans
·Affects dogs 5-9 months of age
·Relatively common cause of lameness
·Odds ratio 85.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 6.7 (compared to mixed breeds)
(Rudd,Whitehair & Margolis 1990, LaFond, Breur &
Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Lymphoma
·Familial
(Onions 1984, Edwards et al. 2003)
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
· May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
184
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Trichoepithelioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.6 years
·Uncommon tumour
·Predilection sites: limbs, back and trunk
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Cerebellar degeneration
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suggested
·Rare
·Signs seen at 4-9 weeks 
· May be seen with hydrocephalus
(Johnson et al. 2001)
Leukodystrophy
·Rare
· Grey matter primarily affected in this breed
· Clinical signs at 3-6 months
(Dewey 2003a)
Ocular conditions
Ectropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
185
·Associated with macroblepharon
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Associated with macroblepharon
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Read &
Broun 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal dominant inheritance suspected (may be more than
one genetic form)
· Ophthalmoscopic signs at 4 months to 3 years
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Kijas et al. 2003, Sargan 2004, Gelatt 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Macroblepharon (diamond eye’)
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Optic nerve hypoplasia
·Congenital; not known if inherited
·Uncommoncondition seen occasionally in this breed
186
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Persistent pupillary membranes (PPMs)
· Inheritance suspected
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
·  Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis -- cystine
· Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Osborme & Finco 1995, Houston et al.
2004, Harmevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
Reproductive conditions
Vaginal hyperplasia/vaginal prolapse
· Usually seen in young entire bitches during proestrus of the first
to third oestrus cycle
187
(Post, Van Haaften & Okkens 1991, Feldman and Nelson
1996)
Respiratory conditions
Brachycephalic upper airway syndrome
·Complex of anatomical deformities
·Common in this breed
· Likely a consequence of selective breeding for certain facial
characteristics
· Most commonly present with clinical signs aged 1-4 years
(Seim 2001, Riecks, Birchard & Stephens 2007)
BULL TERRIER
Cardiovascular conditions
Aortic stenosis
· Common congenital disease
· Inheritance possibly autosomal dominantwith modifying genes,
or polygenic
· May be acquired in this breed
·Mean age of onset for acquired disease 7.6 years
(Oyama et al. 2003)
Mitral dysplasia
· Congenital
· Genetic basis suspected
(Del Palacio 2002)
188
Dermatological conditions
Acrodermatitis
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· Low IgA levels may predispose to infection
(McEwan, Huang & Mellor 2003)
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
·Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
· This breed had a risk factor of 2l cases per 1000 dog years at
risk (if 1000 dogs were followed for 1 year, 21 would have an
insurance claim for atopy)
(Nodtvedt et al. 2006)
Nasal folliculitis and furunculosis
·Uncommon
·Unknown cause, but may start after local trauma
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Pododermatitis
·Can affect any age or sex
·Males predisposed
·  Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
189
Truncal solar dermatitis
·A combination of factors are required to cause this condition
·White bull terriers affected
·Flank and abdomen most severely affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
· In bull terriers, occurs in puppies fed zincdeficient diets
·This breed affected by Syndrome I
· Family history often lacking, but genetic basis suspected
(Cole 2002)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Acrodermatitis
·See Dermatological conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
·Radial head luxation seen in this breed
· Occurs at 4-5 months of age
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Hock osteochondritis dissecans
190
·Affects dogs 5-9 months of age
·Relatively common cause of lameness
·Most commonly affects themedial ridge of the talus in this breed
(Miller & Hulse 2006)
Panosteitis
· Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 1.6 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Mainly medial luxation observed
(Alam et al. 2007)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 3.6 years (50% <2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
191
· May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 1995)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Signs seen from birth
· Occurs most commonly in dogs with white pigment
·11.0% prevalence in this breed in one study
(Strain 2004)
Tail chasing
·Suspected to be due to partial complex seizures
(Moon-Fanelli & Dodman 1998)
Ocular conditions
Ectropion
*Mild, usually disappears with maturity
(Rubin 1989)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
·Breed at increased risk
(Sargan 2004)
Lens luxation
192
· Inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Microblepharon (blepharophimosis)
· Inheritance suspected
(Gelatt 2007)
Prolapse of the gland of the nictitating membrane (^cherry
eye')
·Breed at increased risk
·Usually presents in the first 1-2 years of life
(Rubin 1989)
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial renal disease (glomerular  basement membrane
disorder)
·Autosomal dominant inheritance
·Condition believed to be similar to Alport syndrome in humans
·Proteinuria may be an early indicator with cases progressing to
renal failure at l-8 years of age
· Most reports of the condition come from Australia
·May be seen concurrently with polycystic kidney disease
(Osborne & Finco 1995, Hood et al. 2002a, O'Leary &
Atwell 2003)
Familial renal disease (polycystic kidney disease)
·See Polycystic kidney disease
193
Polycystic kidney disease (PKD)
· Autosomal dominant inheritance
·Bilateral cysts (l-25mm) found in cortex and medulla
· May be seen concurrently with hereditary nephritis (see Familial
renal disease)
· Dogs with PKD had an increased risk of mitral valve disease
and left ventricular outflow obstruction
(O'Leary et al. 1999, O'Leary, Ghoddusi & Huxtable
2002, O'Leary et al. 2005)
CAIRN TERRIER
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between l and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Endocrine conditions
194
Diabetes mellitus
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Usual age range: 4-14 years; peak incidence: 7-9 years
· Old, entire females are predisposed
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Catchpole et al. 2005)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital portosystemic shunt (see figure5)
·Breed at risk in case series
· Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
·Usually extrahepatic
(Sargan 2004, van Straten et al. 2005)
Microvascular portal dysplasia
·  Congenital, autosomal inheritance suggested
· May be subclinical
(Center 1996, van Straten et al. 2005)
Polycystic liver and kidney disease
·Probable autosomal recessive inheritance
·Liver failure seen by 5 weeks
(McKenna & Carpenter 1980, Sargan 2004)
Haematological conditions
Haemophilia B
195
Factor IX deficiency
·Also known as Christmas disease
· Inherited as a sex-linked trait
·Less common than haemophilia A
·Mild to moderate in this breed
(Dodds 2005)
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Von Willebrand's disease
· Common condition
· Mainly type I in this breed
(Giger 2003)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease
· Uncommon condition
Figure 5 Radiograph of an  intraoperative mesenteric
portovenogram,  demonstrating  a  portosystemic  shunt.
Courtesy of Bath Veterinary Referrals.
196
· Odds ratio 17.9 in one study (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 1.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Melanoma -- cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Sebaceous gland tumours
197
·Breed at risk of sebaceous adenoma in case series
·Mean age: 10.9 years
·Common site: head
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Testicular neoplasia
·See under Reproductive conditions
Neurological conditions
Lysosomal storage disease - globoid cell leukodystrophy
(Krabbe's disease)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
· Signs seen at 6-12 months
· Genetic test available (HealthGene) - see Appendix
(Bagley 2005)
Progressive neuronopathy
·Rare
·Affects young dogs
· Causes an exercise-induced deterioration of neurological signs
(Zaal, van den Ingh, Goedegebuure et al. 1997)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
· Posterior cortical cataracts have been seen in young dogs (2-3
years)
198
·Anterior cortical cataracts occur in older dogs (6-8 years)
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005,
ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Ectopic cilia
·Uncommon condition, breed at increased risk
(D'Anna et al. 2007)
Glaucoma (secondary to ocular melanosis)
·See below
Lens luxation
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 4-7 years
(Rubin 1989)
Ocular melanosis (abnormal pigment deposition)
· Familial, autosomal dominant inheritance suspected
·  Predisposes to glaucoma
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin
1989,ACVOgenetics
Committee
2007,
Petersen-Jones, Forcier & Mentzer et al. 2007)
Persistent hyaloid artery
·Congenital, inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
199
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial renal disease (polycystic kidney disease)
·See Polycystic liver and kidney disease
Polycystic liver and kidney disease
· Probable autosomal recessive inheritance
·Liver failure seen by 5 weeks
(McKenna & Carpenter 1980, Sargan 2004)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism
· Congenital defect believed to be inherited as a sex-limited,
autosomal recessive trait
·Breed at risk in case series
(Hayes et al. 1985, Romagnoli 1991)
Testicular neoplasia
·Breed at increased risk of sertoli cell tumour in case series
·Common tumour in male dog
·Mean age: 9-1l years
(Weaver 1983)
Respiratory conditions
Congenital bronchoesophageal fistula
·Rare
200
· Congenital
(Washabau 2004)
Pulmonary interstitial fibrosis
·Aetiology unknown
·Affects older dogs
·  No sex predisposition
(Hawkins 2006)
CAVALIER KING CHARLES SPANIEL
Cardiovascular conditions
Femoral artery occlusion
· 2.3% of dogs of this breed had an undetectable right or left
femoral pulse in one study
·A further 4.2% had a weak right or left femoral pulse
· Probably clinically insignificant due to collateral circulation
· Possible genetic predisposition
(Buchanan, Beardow & Sammarco 1997)
Myxomatous degeneration of the mitral
valve (see figure 6)
·Also known as chronic valvular disease, endocardiosis
·Relative risk very high (20.1)
·In the UK, 59%ofCavaliers over 4 years of age had a heart
murmur
· Increased prevalence with age
·Aetiology unknown but likely genetic basis
201
(Beardow & Buchanan 1993)
Dermatological conditions
Black hair follicular dysplasia
·Rare
·Early onset
·Familial
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Ichthyosis
·Rare
· Congenital and probably hereditary
· Often associated with keratoconjunctivitis sicca in this breed
(Barnett 2006)
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
Figure 6 Ultrasound scan (parasternal short axis view at
the level of the aortic valve) showing severe left atrial
enlargement in a Cavalier King Charles Spaniel with
myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve.
202
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Persistent scratching in Cavalier King Charles spaniels
·See Syringomyelia, under Neurological conditions
Gastrointestinal conditions
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
·Breed at risk in case series
· Typical age of onset: 72 months
(Batchelor et al. 2007)
Pancreatitis
203
·Breed at risk of chronic pancreatitis in case series of
post-mortem dogs
(Watson et al. 2007)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Immunoglobulin deficiency
· Uncommon condition
· Causes a protozoal pneumonia (Pneumocystis carinii)
·Associated with low IgG levels
· Inheritance uncertain
(Watson et al. 2006)
Infectious conditions
Pneumocystis carinii infection
· Uncommon condition, increased susceptibility in this breed due
to immunodeficiency
·Young adults affected
· See Immunoglobulin
 deficiency
under   Haematological/
immunological conditions
(Watson et al. 2006)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Patellar luxation
·May be inherited as anautosomal recessive trait
· Medial luxation more common in this breed
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 9.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
204
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Arthurs & Langley-Hobbs
2006)
Temporomandibular joint dysplasia
· Common condition
·  Usually asymptomatic
(Dickie, Schwarz & Sullivan 2002)
Neurological conditions
Atypical masticatory myositis
·Rare
·Reported recently in three out of four littermates
· Young dogs were affected
(Pitcher & Hahn 2007)
Cerebrovascular disease
· This breed appears to have an increased tendency to infarction
of the rostral cerebellar artery
· Uncommon condition
· May be related to platelet, arterial and mitral valve disease in
this breed
(Rusbridge 2005)
Chiari malformation/syringomelia (see figures7a and 7b)
·  Aka caudal  occipital  malformation  syndrome;  persistent
scratching
· Recently recognized to be very common in this breed
205
· Clinical signs usually recognized from 5 months to 3 years of
age
(Rusbridge 2005)
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Episodic falling
· Seen in the UK
·Age of clinical onset: 3-4 months
·Uncommon condition
(Rusbridge 2005)
Fly catching
·Uncommon
·Aetiology unknown
(Rusbridge 2005)
Head/foot irritation syndrome
·Recently recognized disease
· Uncommon
·Age of onset: <l year
(Rusbridge 2005)
Hydrocephalus
206
· May be secondary to occipital bone hypoplasia in this breed
[ a go os r  i-  (  i
spinal cord of a Cavalier King Charles Spaniel showing
Chiari malformation and syringomyelia. (b) Tl -weighted
transverse MRI scan of the cervical spinal cord of a
Cavalier   King   Charles  Spaniel    showing
a large
syringomyelia.
(a)
(b)
· Not uncommon in this breed
(Rusbridge 2005)
Idiopathic epilepsy
· Inherited in this breed
· Common condition
·Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
·All coat colours affected, but more common in lines originating
from whole colour ancestors from the late 1960s
(Rusbridge 2005)
Intervertebral disc disease
207
· Common condition
·  This breed prone to Hansen type I disc disease
·Tends to affect older dogs
(Rusbridge 2005)
Primary secretory otitis media
·Common in this breed
·Causes head and neck pain and/or neurological signs
(Sterm-Bertholtz, Sjostrom & Hakanson 2003)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
· Age of onset: <6 months old with rapid progression to blindness
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·Cataracts are also seen
nas a congenital defect with
microphthalmia (see below)
(Gelatt &Mackay 2005,ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
Corneal dystrophy
· Inheritance suspected
·Crystalline stromal lipid dystrophy
·Age of onset: 2-4 years
(Crispin 1988, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
208
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Ectopic cilia
·Uncommon condition, breed at increased risk
(Gelatt 2007)
Entropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Affects medial lids
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
·Breed at increased risk
· One study suggested a predisposition formales
· Congenital condition due to lacrimal gland aplasia seen in this
breed
(Kaswan & Salisbury 1990, Barnett 2006, Sanchez et al.
2007)
Multiple ocular defects
·Congenital, inheritance suspected
· Defects may include microphthalmia, posterior lenticonus and
congenital cataract
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
209
(Narfstrom & Dubielzig
1984, Rubin 1989, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - geographic
· Inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
·  Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Physiological conditions
Giant platelets and thrombocytopaenia
·Affects around 50% of Cavaliers
· Giant platelets may lead to reduced count of platelets if using
automated methods
· Plateletcrit gives a more accurate picture of the platelet mass
than other automated techniques
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· Appears to be clinically insignificant
(Cowan, Bartges Gompf 2004)
Vertebral heart score
· The healthy dog has a higher mean score than most other breeds
·Normal range for this breed is 9.9-11.7
(Smith 2004)
210
Reproductive conditions
Cystic
 endometrial
 hyperplasia-pyometra
complex
(pyometra)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Common disease of older entire bitches (mean age 7.25 years)
· Most cases present within 12 weeks of oestrus
(Chastain, Panciera &Waters 1999, Egenvall et al. 2001.
Smith 2006)
Respiratory conditions
Brachycephalic upper airway syndrome
·Complex of anatomical deformities
·Common in this breed
·A likely consequence of selective breeding for certain facial
characteristics
(Torrez & Hunt 2006)
Pneumonia due to Pneumocystis carinii infection
·See Immunoglobulin deficiency
(Immunological conditions)
CHESAPEAKEBAYRETRIEVER
Dermatological conditions
Adult-onset hair loss
·Age of onset: 5 months to 4 years
211
· Mode of inheritance unknown
(Cerundolo et al. 2005)
Haematological conditions
Von Willebrand's disease
·This breed is affected by type Ill disease
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
(Giger 2003)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture
·Common cause of hindlimb lameness
·Neutered individuals may be predisposed
(Duval et al. 1999)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 4.4 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Panosteitis
· Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 1.8 (compared to mixed breeds)
212
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 7.7 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Melanoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·- Dominant mode of inheritance with incomplete penetration has
been suggested
·Age of onset: young adult (6months to 2 years), may progress
· Localization: equator, posterior pole and lens sutures
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Gelatt et al. 1979, Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2005,
ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
213
·Affects lateral (occasionally entire) lower lids
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Progressive rod-cone degeneration
· Early onset (ophthalmoscopically detectable at 8-12 months)
and late onset (ophthalmoscopically detectable at 4-7 years)
cases have been seen
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Multifocal retinal dysplasia
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989)
Uveal cysts
·Breed at increased risk
·Age of clinical onset: 46 years
(Rubin 1989)
CHIHUAHUA
Cardiovascular conditions
Myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve
·Also known as chronic valvular disease, endocardiosis
214
·Relative risk high (5.5)
· Increased prevalence with age
·Aetiology unknown but genetic basis likely
(Fuentes 2003)
Pulmonic stenosis
· Thirdmost frequent cause of canine congenital heart disease
· Possibly inherited as a polygenic trait
·Relative risk 3.7
(Darke 1989)
Dermatological conditions
Anal sac disease
·  No age or sex predispostition
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001k)
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
215
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Pattern baldness
·Usually affects females in this breed
·Gradual hair loss from 6 months of age
· Affects mainly the ventrum and caudomedial thighs
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
Atlantoaxial subluxation
·See under Neurological conditions
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
·Humeroulnar luxation seen in this breed
·Occurs in first 3 months of life
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Delaved/non-union of fractures of the distal third of the
radius and ulna in Miniature and Toy breeds
Coaptation of fractures of the distal third of the antebrachium is
a very common cause of this condition
(Palmer 2005)
216
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease
· Uncommon condition
·Odds ratio 26.8 in one study (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Patellar luxation
* Common condition
·Mainly medial luxation observed
·Odds ratio 8.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Alam et al. 2007)
Neoplastic conditions
Melanoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.9 years
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 1995)
Neurological conditions
Acquired myasthenia gravis
· Uncommon
· Bimodal age presentation of 4 months to 4 years and 9 years to
13 years
(Penderis 2003)
Atlantoaxial subluxation
217
·Congenital
·Mean age of presentation 2.7 years
(Havig et al. 2005)
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
· Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Hydrocephalus
· Congenital
·Relatively common
· Genetic and environmental factors suspected
· Onset of signs: <3 months
(Inzana 2002)
Lysosomal storage disease - ceroid
lipofuscinosis
· Inheritance suspected
·Rare
· Signs seen at 6-12 months
(Bagley 2005)
Necrotizing meningoencephalitis
· Recently reported in five dogs of this breed
· Rare condition
(Higgins et al. 2008)
218
Ocular conditions
Corneal dystrophy
· Inheritance suspected
· Endothelial dystrophywith progressive corneal oedema
·Age of onset: 5-9 years
(Rubin 1989, Cooley & Dice 1990, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
· May be associated with goniodysgenesis in this breed
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt 2007)
Lens luxation
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 4-7 years
(Rubin 1989)
Senile iris atrophy
·Breed at increased risk
(Gelatt 2007)
Vitreal syneresis
·Breed at increased risk
·5.7% of this breed affected (CERF 2000-2005)
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
219
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis -- cystine
· Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Osborne & Finco 1995, Houston et al.
2004, Harmevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism
· Congenital defect believed to be inherited as a sex-limited
autosomal recessive trait
·Breed at risk in case series
(Hayes et al. 1985, Romagnoli 1991, Yates et al. 2003)
Dystocia
·Breed predisposition
(Gaudet 1985, Johnson et al. 2001, Bergstrom et al. 2006)
Eclampsia (puerperal tetany)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually seen in first 6 weeks postpartum
(Chastain, Panciera &Waters 2001)
220
Respiratory conditions
Tracheal collapse
· Relatively common condition
·Lesion due to a deficiency in tracheal cartilage
· Usually acquired in older dogs but can be congenital
(Payne, Mehler &Weisse 2006)
CHIN
(See Japanese Chin)
CHINESE CRESTED DOG
Dermatological conditions
Alopecia
·Chinese Crested is a hairless breed
· The breed is produced by a dominant gene for hypotrichosis
being combined with the gene for long hair
· Homozygotes (HH) for hypotrichosis die prenatally
·All Cresteds are Hh if hairless
·hh are coated (called 'powder puffs')
(Robinson 1985)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
221
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 3.6 years (50% <2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Canine multiple system degeneration
·Presents as a movement disorder
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
(O'Brien et al. 2005)
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·  Progressive rod-cone degeneration
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetcis Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Vitreal syneresis
·Breed at increased risk
222
·7.6% dogs affected (CERF 2000-2005)
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
CHINESE SHAR PEI
(See Shar Pei)
CHOW CHOW
Dermatological conditions
Adult-onset growth hormone-responsive dermatosis
· See under Endocrine conditions
Canine uveodermatological syndrome
·Also known as Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome
·(Beale 2006)
Castration-responsive alopecia
·Also known as alopecia X
· Poorly understood condition
·Rare
· May have symmetrically small or normal testes
(Scott & Paradis 1990)
Flea-bite hypersensitivity
· Most studies showno breed predisposition, but one French study
showed this breed was predisposed
(Prelaud & Guaguere 1998)
223
Pemphigus foliaceous
· Uncommon condition
· No age or sex predispositions noted
·Odds ratio 12.3 for this breed
(Kuhl, Shofer & Goldschmidt 1994, Gomez et al. 2004)
Post-clipping alopecia
·Variously described as commonor uncommon
·Hairs may not regrow for 12-24 months
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 20011)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Tyrosinase deficiency
·Extremely rare
· Causes dramatic depigmentation in puppies
(Engstrom 1966)
Endocrine conditions
Adult-onset growth hormone-responsive dermatosis
· Males may be predisposed
·Clinical signs seen at any age but often 1-2 years
(Lothrup 1988)
Hypothyroidism
224
·Breed at increased risk
· May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
·Neutered males and females at increased risk
(Greco 2002)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
·Breed at risk in case series
·Typical age of onset: 16 months
(Batchelor et al. 2007)
Melanoma - oral
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture
· Common cause of hindlimb lameness
·Neutered individuals are predisposed
· Older animals are predisposed
·Odds ratio in this breed 1.73
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Elbow dysplasia
Fragmented coronoid process (odds ratio of 16.6 compared
tomixed breeds), ununited anconeal process (odds ratio of 13.3)
seen in this breed
·Common cause of forelimb lameness
225
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Robins & Innes 2006)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
·Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio in the breed 1.90
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Myotonia
· Inherited condition
· Onset of signs at around 2 months of age
(Shelton 1999)
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
· Odds ratio 1.7 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
· Odds ratio 6.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Melanoma - cutaneous
226
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.9 years
(Schultheiss 2006)
Melanoma -- oral (see plate 4 in the colour plate section)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Average age 1l.4 years
(Ramos-Vara et al. 2000)
Sweat gland tumour
· Breed at risk of apocrine adenoma and adenocarcinoma in case
series
·Mean age: 9.5 years (apocrine adenoma) and 10.5 years
(adenocarcinoma)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Neurological conditions
Cerebellar hypoplasia
· Congenital
·Rare
· Signs noted from 2 to 3 weeks
· Possibly inherited
(Thomas 2002)
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
· Suspected to be inherited
227
(Strain 2004)
Dysmyelination of the central nervous system
·Tremors present from birth
·Reported in five Chows from three different litters
· Not reported recently
(Vandevelde et al. 1978)
Hydrocephalus
· Congenital
·Relatively common
·Genetic and environmental factors suspected
· Onset of signs: <3 months
(Inzana 2002)
Myotonia
· See under Musculoskeletal conditions
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Familial, congenital
·May be seen with other ocular anomalies but relationship
unclear
(Collins et al. 1992, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Ectropion
·Polygenic inheritance likely
228
(Rubin 1989)
Entropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
·High prevalence
·May present early (2-6 weeks)
· Severe, affecting entire lower lid, may also affect upper lid
resulting in trichiasis
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 3-6 years
· Associated with goniodysgenesis
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Microblepharon (blepharophimosis)
· Inheritance suspected
(Gelatt 2007)
Persistent pupillary membranes
· Inheritance suspected
·Common condition, relatively high frequency in this breed
·May be severe in this breed
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
229
CLUMBER SPANIEL
Musculoskeletal conditions
Mitochondrial myopathy
·Rare
·Primary defect is in mitochondrial function
·Can cause sudden death
(Shelton 1999)
Pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase 1 deficiency
·Causes severe exercise intolerance
· 20% of current Clumber and Sussex Spaniel population are
carriers for the affected gene
· Genetic test available (AHT; VetGen) -- see Appendix
(Cameron et al. 2007)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
(Gelatt & Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Ectropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Associated with macroblepharon
230
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Associated with macroblepharon
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
·Breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Macroblepharon ('diamond eye')
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
COCKER SPANIEL
Cardiovascular conditions
Patent ductus arteriosus
·Congenital
·Relative risk 2.6
(Matic 1988)
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
· DCM in this breed is often related to taurine deficiency
231
· May respond to taurine and L-carnitine supplementation
· Increased prevalence with age
·Approximately twice as common in males as females
· Thought to be familial or genetic
(Tidholm & Jonsson 1997, Tidholm et al. 2001)
Myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve
·Also known as chronic valvular disease, endocardiosis
· Increased prevalence with age
·Aetiology unknown but a genetic basis is likely
(Fuentes 2003)
Sick sinus syndrome
· Middle-aged to old dogs
·Relative risk 1.7
·No sex predisposition in this breed
(Buchanan 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Anal sac disease
·No age or sex predispostition
·Often associated with seborrhoea in this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001k)
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
· Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
232
· Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
·Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Black hair follicular dysplasia (American Cocker Spaniels)
·Familial
· Normal at birth; changes develop in the first month
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Cryptococcosis
· See under Infectious conditions
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Onychodystrophy
· May be related to seborrhoea in this breed
(Rosychuk 2002)
Primary seborrhoea
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive
trait
233
·Signs first appear at an early age and get worse
·In this breed, otitis, greasy seborrhoea and dermatitis are seen
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Tail-dock neuroma
· Rare sequel to cosmetic or therapeutic cordectomy
· Predisposition suspected in this breed
(Scott, Miller & Kirk 2001c)
Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis
·Uncommon condition
· Medically refractory seborrhoeic skin condition seen
(Scott 1986)
Endocrine conditions
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Median age: 10 years
(Wood et al. 2007)
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
·May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
· Neutered males and females at increased risk
234
(Milne & Hayes 1981)
Gastrointestinal diseases
Alpha-1 antitrypsin-related hepatitis
· Breed predisposition, inheritance suspected
(Sevelius, Andersson & Jonsson 1994,Watson 2004)
Chronic hepatitis (American and English
Cocker Spaniels)
·Breed at increased risk
· Males predisposed
· Some cases may be associated with hepatic accumulation of
alpha-1 antitrypsin
(Sevelius, Andersson & Jonsson 1994,Watson 2004)
Oropharyngeal neoplasia
·Breed at risk in case series
(Dorn & Priester 1976)
Pancreatitis
·Breed at risk of acute and chronic pancreatitis in case series of
post-mortem dogs
(Watson et al. 2007)
Haematological/immunological conditions
235
Factor II deficiency
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive
·Severe signs in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Factor X deficiency
·Familial
· May be inherited as anautosomal recessive trait
·Severe signs in this breed
(Brooks 1999, Littlew0od 2000, Giger 2003)
Haemophilia A
·Moderate to severe Factor VIHI deficiency in this breed
·Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Haemophilia B (American Cocker Spaniels) Factor IX
deficiency
·Also known as Christmas disease
· Inherited as a sex-linked trait
· Less common than haemophilia A
·Mild to moderate in this breed
(Dodds 2005)
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (see plate 5 in the
colour plate section)
· Common disease
236
·Usually affects young adult and middle-aged animals
· May be more common in bitches
·May be seasonal variations
(Mackin 2002, Miller, Hohenhaus & Hale 2004)
Immune-mediated thrombocytopaenia
·Common
· Familial in this breed; likely inherited
·Females more commonly affected than males
(Lewis 2000)
Platelet  storage-pool   deficiency
(American
Cocker
Spaniels)
·May cause severe haemorrhage
(Giger 2003)
Infectious conditions
Cryptococcosis (American Cocker Spaniel)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Usually seen in dogs under 4 years
· Living outdoors and exposure to bird droppings are risk factors
(Berthelin et al. 1994)
Infectious skin disease
·See under Dermatological conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
237
Brachyury
· Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait
· May becomemore commonincountrieswhere docking is illegal
(Indrebo et al. 2008)
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
·Humeroulnar luxation seen in this breed
·Occurs in first 3 months of life
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Hypochondrodysplasia
·Uncommon
·Causes dwarfism
(Beachley & Graham 1973)
Incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle
· Cause unknown
· Polygenic recessive mode of inheritance
·  Males predisposed
(Marcellin-Little et al. 1994)
Patellar luxation
· May be inherited as anautosomal recessive trait
· Lateral luxation more common in this breed
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 2.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
238
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Arthurs & Langley-Hobbs
2006)
Spondylosis deformans
· Usually clinically insignificant
·Common
· May be associated with type II intervertebral disc disease (see
figure 8)
(Levine et al. 2006)
Temporomandibular
dysplasia
(American
Cocker
Spaniels)
·Congenital
·Usually affects dogs from 6 months of age
(Hoppe & Svalastoga 1980)
Neoplastic conditions
Anal sac adenocarcinoma (English Cocker Spaniels)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 10.2-10.8 years
Figure 8 Myelogram of a 9-year-old male Cocker Spaniel
with a disc herniation at C5-C6. There is a narrowed
intervertebral space, compression of the spinal cord and
evidence of disc material in the spinal canal at this site.
239
· Some surveys suggest a predisposition for females
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Bennett et al. 2002)
Basal cell tumour (many cases are now reclassified as
trichoblastoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 7.9 years
·Mostly found on head and neck
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 3.6 years (50% <2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Ceruminous gland tumours
240
·Breed at risk of ceruminous adenoma and carcinoma in case
series
·Mean age: 9.8 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Cutaneous lymphoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Cutaneous papillomas (not virally associated)
·Breed at risk
· Seen in older dogs
· More common in males
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 1995)
Cutaneous plasmacytoma
·Breed at risk
·Mean age: 9.2 years
· Common sites: ear, lip and digit
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995)
Fibrosarcoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Females may be predisposed
·Mean age: 8.6 years in one study
241
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 1995)
Melanoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.9 years
(Morris & Dobson 2001, Schultheiss 2006)
Oropharyngeal neoplasia
· See under Gastrointestinal conditions
Perianal (hepatoid) gland adenomas
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age was 10.5 years
· Both sexes at risk in this breed
(Hayes &Wilson 1977, Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992,
Goldschmidt &Mcmanus 2000)
Pituitary tumour resulting in hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series
· See under Endocrine conditions
(Wood et al. 2007)
Sebaceous gland tumours
·Breed at risk of nodular sebaceous hyperplasia and sebaceous
adenoma in case series
· Mean age: 9.1 years (hyperplasia) and 10.9 years (adenoma)
·Females may be predisposed to nodular sebaceous hyperplasia
· Common site: limbs, trunk, eyelids (hyperplasia) and head
(adenoma)
242
(Scott & Anderson 1990, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Sweat gland tumour
·Breed at risk of adenocarcinoma in case series
·Mean age: 10.5 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Trichoblastoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually older than 5 years
·Common
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Signs seen from birth
· Occurs most commonly in dogs with white pigment
·6.9% prevalence in this breed in one study
(Strain 2004)
Congenital vestibular disease (English Cocker Spaniels)
·Signs seen <3 months
· Rare condition
(Bagley 2005)
Idiopathic epilepsy
243
· Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
· Common condition
(Bagley 2005)
Idiopathic facial paralysis
·Aetiology unknown
·Acute onset in adults
(Sturges 2003b)
Intervertebral disc disease (see figures9a and 9b)
· Common
·Adults affected
(Mayhew et al. 2004)
Leukodystrophy
·Rare
·Grey matter primarily affected in this breed
·Familial in this breed
·  Clinical signs at 3-6 months
(Dewey 2003a)
Lysosomal storage disease - ceroid lipofuscinosis
· Suspected to be inherited
·Rare
· Signs seen at 1-2 years
(Bagley 2005)
Multisystem neuronal degeneration
244
·  Familial and suspected inherited
·Rare
·Age of clinical onset: 10-14 months
(Jaggy & Vandevelde 1988)
Rage syndrome
·Seen in young to middle-aged dogs
· May be a formof dominance aggression ormay be a
psychomotor epilepsy
(Manteca 2002)
Ocular conditions
Cataract (American Cocker Spaniels)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 1-5 years; progression is variable (may be rapid
in younger dogs). Often associatedwithlens-induced
inflammation resulting in secondary uveitis and glaucoma
· Localization: posterior and anterior cortices
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
Figure 9 (a) Tl-weighted sagittal MRI scan showing
 intervertebral disc herniation. Courtesy of Bath Veterinary
Referrals. (b) Tl-weighted transverse MRI scan showing
intervertebral disc herniation. Courtesy of Bath Veterinary
Referrals.
245
(a)
(b)
·Relatively common condition in this breed (8.77% in one
study), possibly higher incidence in females
(Rubin 1989, Adkins & Hendrix 2005, Gelatt & Mackay
2005, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Cataract (English Cocker Spaniels)
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset bimodal: 1.5-3 years and 8-9 years
· Localization: posterior suture lines
· Females appear to be predisposed to later onset cataracts
·Nuclear cataracts also occur (at 2 years)
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Coloboma (optic nerve) (American Cocker Spaniels)
·Congenital.Hereditary implications unknown
·No effect on vision in this breed
(Rubin 1989)
246
Corneal dystrophy (American Cocker Spaniels)
· Inheritance suspected
· Posterior polymorphous dystrophy
· Age of onset: 1-7 years
·Usually no effect on vision
·Also suffer from lipid dystrophy (Rubin 1989, Cooley & Dice
1990, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Distichiasis (American and English Cocker Spaniels)
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
·High incidence in this breed
(Lawson 1973, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
Ectropion (American and English Cocker Spaniels)
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Usually lower eyelids
(Bedford 1988, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Entropion (American and English Cocker Spaniels)
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Seen in older dogs
· Affects upper eyelids, often results in trichiasis
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Generalized
 progressive
retinal
atrophy
(GPRA)
(American Cocker Spaniels)
247
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Progressive rod-cone degeneration
·Clinically evident at 2-3 years
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA) (English
Cocker Spaniels)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Progressive rod-cone degeneration
· Ophthalmoscopic signs are visible by 4-8 years
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Glaucoma (primary) (American Cocker Spaniels)
· Inheritance suspected
·Mean age of onset: 6.72 years
· Predisposition for females suggested
· May be associated with goniodysgenesis
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Glaucoma secondary to cataracts also seen
Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, b, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Glaucoma (primary) (English Cocker Spaniels)
· Inheritance suspected
248
·Mean age 0f onset: 6.83 years
·Predisposition for females suggested
· Associated with goniodysgenesis
·Mainly in the UK (less common in the USA)
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (American and English Cocker
Spaniels)
·Breed at increased risk
· One study suggested a female predisposition in English Cocker
Spaniels
(Kaswan & Salisbury 1990, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Sanchez et al. 2007)
Lacrimal punctal atresia (American and English Cocker
Spaniels)
·Congenital
(Barnett 1979, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Multiple ocular defects (English Cocker Spaniels)
·Mode of inheritance unknown
· Defects may include microphthalmia, PPMs and congenital
cataract
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Olesen et al. 1974, Rubin 1989)
249
Persistent pupillary membranes (English Cocker Spaniels)
· Inheritance suspected
· May be severe in this breed
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989)
Prolapse of the gland of the nictitating membrane (^cherry
eye') (American Cocker Spaniels)
·Breed at increased risk
·Usually presents in the first 1-2 years of life
(Morgan, Duddy & McClurg 1993, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007,
Gelatt 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal (American Cocker Spaniels)
·  Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(MacMillan & Lipton 1978, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetcis
Committee 2007)
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED), also known
as central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA) (English
Cocker Spaniels)
· Inheritance suspected
· More prevalent in the UK than in the USA. Becoming less
prevalent following the introduction of control schemes
· May be related to vitamin E deficiency due to an underlying
metabolic abnormality in this breed
250
·ScheduleAof theBVA/KC/ISDSEye Scheme
Committee 2007)
Physiological conditions
Pelger-Huet anomaly
· Decreased segmentation of granuloc yte nuclei is seen
· Does not appear to be clinically significant
(Day 2002)
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial renal  disease (glomerular  basement membrane
disorder) (English Cocker Spaniels)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suggested
· The condition is believed to be similar to Alport syndrome in
humans
· Cases present at between 6 months and 2 years of age with
 proteinuria and chronic renal failure
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Osborme & Finco 1995, Lees et al. 1998, Davidson et al.
2007)
Urolithiasis -- silica
·Breed at risk in case series
· Mean age at diagnosis 5.8 years
·Males predisposed
(Osbome et al. 1999)
251
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
·Breed at risk in case series
females 5.7 years
·  Females predisposed (16:1 in one large study)
(Osborme & Finco 1995, Osbormne et al. 1999, Houston et
al. 2004)
Reproductive conditions
Cystic
endometrial
 hyperplasia-pyometra
 complex
(pyometra) (English
Cocker Spaniels)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Common disease of older entire bitches (mean age 7.25 years)
·Most cases present within 12 weeks of oestrus
(Egenvall et al. 2001)
Dystocia
·Breed predisposition to dystocia due to failure to develop
maternal instincts in nervous primagravid bitches (Johnston,
Root Kustritz & Olson 2001)
Persistent penile frenulum
·Congenital
· Rare condition diagnosed relatively more frequently in this
breed
(Johnston, Root Kustritz & Olson 2001)
252
XX sex reversal (American Cocker Spaniels)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
(Meyers-Wallen & Patterson 1988, Pujar et al. 2005)
Respiratory conditions
Bronchiectasis (American Cocker Spaniels)
· Uncommon condition
·Usually affects middle-aged to older dogs
· Usually occurs secondary to chronic pulmonary disease
(Hawkins et al. 2003)
Brachycephalic airway syndrome
· Common condition
·Affects young dogs
·This breed less affected than the more severely brachycephalic
breeds
(Harvey 1989)
COLLIES (ROUGH AND SMOOTH)
Cardiovascular conditions
Parent ductus arteriosus
·Uncommon
·Congenital
·  Females predisposed
· Inherited in this breed
253
(Matic 1988)
Dermatological conditions
Cutaneous histiocytosis
· No apparent age or sex predisposition
·Cause unknown
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001c)
Discoid lupus erythematosus
·Uncommon
· No age or sex predisposition recognized
(Wermer 1999)
Familial canine dermatomyositis
·Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with incomplete
penetrance
· No predispositions for sex, coat colour or coat length
(Haupt et al. 1985)
Idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
·Uncommon
· No age or sex predisposition
· This breed over-represented in one study
(Panich, Scott & Miller 1991)
Idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis in Shetland Sheepdogs
and Collies
254
·Unknown cause
· No sex predisposition
·Affects middle-aged to older dogs
(Moriello 2004)
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Pemphigus erythematosus
·  No age or sex predisposition
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
Pemphigus foliaceous
· Uncommon condition
·Odds ratio 3.9 for this breed
(Kuhl, Shofer & Goldschmidt 1994)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Systemic lupus erythematosus
· Uncommon (incidence approximately 0.03% of general canine
population)
·Males may be over-represented
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
255
Drug reactions
Ivermectin and milbemycin
·High doses can cause tremors, ataxia, coma and death
·Associated with the mutant MDRl allele
· 30% of this breed are homozygous and 40% heterozygous for
the mutation
(Mealey, Munyard & Bentien 2005, Dowling 2006)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (Rough Collies)
· Breed at risk in case series, inheritance suspected
· Typical age of onset: 36 months
(Wiberg, Saari &Westermarck 1999, Batchelor et al. 2007)
Gastric carcinoma (Rough Collies)
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Gastric dilatation/volvulus
·Breed at risk in case series
(Sargan 2004)
Pancreatitis
·Breed at risk of chronic pancreatitis in case series of
post-mortem dogs
(Watson et al. 2007)
256
Haematological/immunological conditions
Cyclic neutropenia (cyclic haematopoesis)
·Seen in grey collies
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Genetic test available (Healthgene) - see Appendix
(Yang 1987)
Factor I deficiency
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive
·Mild signs in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Haemophilia A (Rough collie)
· Moderate Factor VIII deficiency in this breed
· Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Infectious conditions
Infectious skin diseases
· See under Dermatological conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
Carpal hyperextension syndrome
·Seen in young dogs less than 6 months
·Environmental factors contribute
257
(Kerwin 2004)
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
·Radial head luxation seen in this breed
· Occurs at 4-5 months of age
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Perineal hernia
·Older, intact males predisposed
·Common condition
(Robertson 1984)
Neoplastic conditions
Gastric carcinoma (Rough Collies)
· Rare condition seen relatively more frequently in this breeed
· Male dogs more commonly affected in case series
· Mean age of occurrence: 8-10 years
(Sullivan et al. 1987, Gualtieri, Monzeglio & Scanziani
1999)
Maliganant cutaneous  peripheral  nerve sheath  tumour
(malignant schwannoma, neurofibroma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 9.3 years
·Predilection site: forelimb
258
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Nasal cavity tumours
· Breed at increased risk
·Median age: 9 years
· Males over-represented in most studies
(Hayes,Wilson & Fraumeni 1982, Patnaik 1989, McEntree
2001)
Sweat gland tumour
· Breed at risk of apocrine adenoma in case series
·Mean age: 9.5 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Neurological conditions
Cerebellar degeneration (Rough Collies)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
· Signs seen at 1-2 months
(LeCouteur 2002)
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
259
Idiopathic epilepsy
· Inherited in this breed
·Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
· Common condition
(Thomas 2003)
Ocular conditions
Collie eye anomaly (Rough and Smooth Collies) (see plate
6 in the colour plate section)
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected. Some
authors suggest polygenic inheritance
· High incidence in this breed throughout the world (50-90% has
been reported), now reduced through selective breeding
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rough and Smooth Collies)
- Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix (Rough and
Smooth Collies)
(Bedford
1982b,
 Rubin
1989, Wallin-Hakanson,
Wallin-Hakanson & Hedhammar 2000, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Coloboma (iris, choroid, optic nerve)
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
·Seen as part of Collie eye anomaly and other ocular conditions
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
260
Congenital, subepithelial, geographic corneal dystrophy
(infantile corneal dystrophy)
· Congenital
· Occurs in young puppies (<10 weeks); transient condition
(Gelatt 2007)
Cormeal dystrophy (Rough Collies) (see plate 7 in the
colour plate section)
·Inheritance suspected
·Crystalline lipid stromal dystrophy
·Age of onset: 1-4 years
·May or may not be related to Collie eye anomaly
(Crispin 1988, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
Entropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Affects lower lids. May be associated with microblepharon
(Rubin 1989)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Rod-cone dysplasia type 2
· Night blindness at 6weeks; endstage and blindness reached at
approximately 1 year
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme (Rough Collies)
•Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix (Rough and
Smooth Collies)
261
blind by5years
(Rubin 1989, Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Medial canthal pocket syndrome
· Breed predisposition due to head shape
(Rubin 1989)
Microblepharon (blepharophimosis)
·Inheritance suspected
(Gelatt 2007)
Multiple ocular defects
· Congenital condition, seen in homozygous merles (the result of
merle to merle breeding) with predominantly white coats
· Defects may include microphthalmia, microcornea, congenital
cataract and defects of the retina. Affected animals are also
usually deaf
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme (Rough Collies)
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis
·Usually presents at 2-5 years
(Rubin 1989, Dugan et al. 1993, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Optic nerve hypoplasia
262
·  Congenital; not known if inherited
· Uncommoncondition seen occasionally in this breed
(Rubin 1989)
Retinal dysplasia - mulitfocal
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rough Collies)
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED), also known
as central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA) (Rough and
Smooth Collies)
· Inheritance unknown but autosomal dominantwith incomplete
 penetrance has been suggested
· More prevalent in the UK than in the USA. Becoming less
prevalent following the introduction of control schemes
· Opthalmoscopic signs seen from2 years of age; visual problems
noticed at 4-5 years 
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rough and Smooth Collies)
(Rubin 1989, Bedford 2001, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Renal amyloidosis
·Breed at increased risk in case series
263
· Most cases >6 years at diagnosis
·Females predisposed in one study
· Amyloid ismostly glomerular and dogs present with proteinuria
and renal failure
· Renal amyloidosis may be seen secondary to dermatomyositis in
this breed
(DiBartola et al. 1989, Osborme & Finco 1995)
Reproductive conditions
Cystic
 endometrial
hyperplasia-pyometra
complex
(pyometra) (Rough Collie)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Common disease of older entire bitches (mean age 7.25 years)
·Most cases present within 12 weeks of oestrus
(Chastain, Panciera &Waters 1999, Egenvall et al. 2001,
Smith 2006)
264
COONHOUND
Dermatological conditions
Blastomycosis
· See under Infectious conditions
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Haematological conditions
Haemophilia B (Black and Tan Coonhounds)
·Factor IX deficiency
·Also known as Christmas disease
· Inherited as a sex-linked trait
· Less common than haemophilia A
·Can be severe in this breed
(Dodds 2005)
Infectious conditions
Blastomycosis
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Young (2-4 years) entire males predisposed
·Geographic distribution: mainly North America
(Mississippi, Missouri, Ohio River valleys, mid-Atlantic
States, Quebec, Manitoba and Ontario)
·Proximity to a body of water is a risk factor in endemic areas
265
(Rudmann et al. 1992, Arceneaux, Taboada & Hosgood
1998)
Musculoskeletal condtions
Hip dysplasia (Tree Walking Coonhound)
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 3.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Perianal
(hepatoid)
 gland   adenomas
(BlueTick
Coonhound)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age was 10.5 years
· Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Sweat gland tumour (Treeing Walking Coonhound)
·Breed at risk of adenocarcinoma in case series
· Mean age: 10.5 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Renal and urinary conditions
Renal amyloidosis (Treeing Walker Coonhounds)
266
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Most cases >6 years at diagnosis
· Females predisposed in one study
· Amyloid ismostly glomerular and dogs present with proteinuria
and renal failure
(DiBartola et al. 1989, Osborme & Finco 1995)
Neurological conditions
Polyradiculoneuritis
·Racoon saliva is a possible aetiology
(Cuddon 2002b)
COTON DE TULEAR
Neurological conditions
Neonatal cerebellar ataxia
· Found in 7/32 pups from five litters
·Ataxia started at 2 weeks of age
(Coates et al. 2002)
Opthalmological conditions
Multifocal retinopathy
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Develops from ll weeks of age
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Grahn, Sandmeyer & Breaux 2006)
267
CURLY COATED RETRIEVER
Dermatological conditions
Canine follicular dysplasia
this group of diseases
· Hair loss begins at 2-4 years of age and occurs mainly on the
flanks
·Hair loss is due to fracture of the hair in this breed
·Eventually the whole of the trunk is involved
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Glycogen storage disease type IHI
·Also known as Cori's disease
· Females predisposed
·Signs first seen at 2 months of age
·Rare disease
· Causes stunted growth
        
Appendix
(Gregory et al. 2007)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
· Anterior cortical subcapsular cataracts occur at 5-8 years and
are slowly progressive
268
· Posterior subcapsular cataracts occur at 2-4 years and are
slowly progressive
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
· Lateral (occasionally entire) lower lids affected
(Rubin 1989)
Distichiasis
·Common condition, breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Detected at 3-5 years; end stage by 6-7 years
(Rubin 1989)
DACHSHUND
Cardiovascular conditions
Mitral valve disease
· Mitral valve prolapse is common in this breed
·Polygenic mode of inheritance suspected
(Olsen, Fredholm & Pedersen 1999)
Dermatological conditions
269
Alopecia areata
·Uncommon
· No age or sex predisposition
·This breed may be over-represented
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
Black hair follicular dysplasia
·Rare
·Early onset
·Familial
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Callus dermatitis/pyoderma
· Common condition
·Sternal calluses often become infected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Canine ear margin dermatosis
· Sleeping next to a forced air duct orwood stove worsens severity
of disease
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001n)
Canine juvenile cellulitis
·Familial; possibly inherited
· Usually l-4 months of age at onset
(Lemarie 2003)
270
Canine linear IgA pustular dermatosis
.Very rare
·Idiopathic
·Affects adults of either sex
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
Canine pinnal alopecia (pattern baldness)
· Onset from 6 to 9 months of age
·Males more commonly affected than females in this breed
·Alopecia of the pinnae is usually complete by 8-9 years of age
(Cole 2002)
Colour dilution alopecia
·  Coat-colour genes are involved in the pathogenesis
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
(Beco et al. 1996)
Idiopathic chronic ulcerative blepharitis
· Localized to the medial canthal region
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001k)
Idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis
·Multiple lesions seen
·Females predisposed
· No age predisposition
(Schwassmann 2005)
271
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Oestrogen-responsive dermatosis
· Rare condition
·Usually occurs in the young adult
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001j)
Onychodystrophy
· Idiopathic, symmetric disease in this breed
· Occurs from 2 to 6 years of age
(Rosychuk 2002)
Pattern baldness
·Usually affects females in this breed
· Gradual hair loss from 6 months of age
·Affects mainly the ventrum and caudomedial thighs
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Pemphigus foliaceous
·Uncommon disease
· No sex predisposition
·Mean age of onset 4 years
(Messinger 2004)
272
Pododermatitis
·Can affect any age or sex
·Males predisposed
·Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Primary seborrhoea
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Signs occur early and worsen with age
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Primary acanthosis nigricans
·Uncommon
·Probably inherited
·Affects either sex, usually beginning at less than 1 year of age
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Skin tumours
·See Neoplastic conditions
Vasculitis
· Uncommon
·Usually type III hypersensitivity reaction
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
Endocrine conditions
Diabetes mellitus
273
·Breed at increased risk
·Usual age range: 4-14 years; peak incidence: 7-9 years
· Old entire females are predisposed
(Feldman & Nelson 1996)
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Median age: 10 years
(Ling et al. 1979, Feldman & Nelson 1996, Peterson
2007,Wood et al. 2007, Zeugswetter 2008)
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
·May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
· Neutered males and females at increased risk
(Milne & Hayes 1981)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
·Breed at increased risk
· Middle aged
(Guilford & Strombeck 1996a, Hall 2000)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia A (Miniature Dachshunds)
· Moderate Factor VIlI deficiency in this breed
274
· Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Immune-mediated
thrombocytopaenia
(Long-haired
Dachshunds)
·Common
· Familial in this breed; likely inherited
·Females more commonly affected than males
(Lewis 2000)
Immunoglobulin deficiency
- Uncommon condition
·Causes a protozoal pneumonia (Pneumocystis carinii)
·Associated with low IgG levels
·Inheritance uncertain
(Watson et al. 2006)
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
·Causes chronic, regenerative haemolytic anaemia
(Giger 2003)
Infectious conditions
Pneumocystis carinii infection
·Uncommon condition, increased susceptibility in this breed due
to immunodeficiency
Age affected: <l year
See  Immunoglobulin
deficiency
under Haematological/
immunological conditions
275
(Lobetti, Leisewitz & Spencer 1996, Lobetti 2001)
Infectious skin conditions
· See under Dermatological conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease
· Uncommon condition
· Odds ratio 4.8 in one study (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Osteogenesis imperfecta
·Rare condition
·Reported in two litters of Dachshunds
(Seeliger et al. 2003)
Perineal herniation
· Intact male dogs predisposed
· Common condition
(Elkins 2004)
Pes varus
·A distal tibial deformity
·Seen from 5 to 6 months of age
·Possible autosomal recessive inheritance
(Radasch et al. 2008)
276
Neoplastic conditions
Adrenocortical tumour resulting in hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk
·Females slightly over-represented
·See under Endocrine diseases
(Reusch & Feldman 1991)
Anal sac adenocarcinoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 10.2-10.8 years
· Some surveys suggest a predisposition for females
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Bennett et al. 2002)
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 3.6 years (50% <2 years)
·Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 1995)
Ceruminous gland tumours
·Breed at risk of ceruminous adenoma in case series
·Mean age: 9.8 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Mast cell tumours
277
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 1995)
Pituitary tumour resulting in hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series. Someevidence of familial
Occurrence inWire-haired Dachshunds
·See under Endocrine diseases
(Peterson 2007,Wood et al. 2007, Stritzel et al. 2008)
Sebaceous gland tumours
·Breed at risk of sebaceous adenoma in case series
·Mean age: 10.9 years
· Common site: head
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Squamous cell carcinoma of the digit
·Breed at risk in case series
·Middle-aged to older dogs
(Henry et al. 2005)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness (dappled Dachshunds)
·Prevalence in this breed not known
· Suspected to be inherited
278
(Strain 2004)
Congenital myasthenia gravis
· Familial, suspected recessive inheritance
·Rare
·Age of clinical onset: 68 weeks
(Dickinson et al. 2005)
Idiopathic epilepsy
· Inherited
*Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
· Common condition
(Cunningham & Farmbach 1988)
Intervertebral disc disease
·Common
·Adults affected
(Mayhew et al. 2004)
Lysosomal storage disease - ceroid lipofuscinosis
·Suspected to be inherited
·Rare
·Signs seen at 3-7 years in this breed
(Bagley 2005)
Narcolepsy-cataplexy
·Familial
279
· Age of clinical onset: <l year
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - see Appendix
(Tonokura, Fujita & Nishina 2007)
Sensory neuropathy (Long-haired Dachschunds)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Rare
·Signs seen at 8-12 weeks
(Cuddon 2002a)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
· Breed at risk in case series; autosomal recessive inheritance
suspected
·Age of onset: 2-4 years
·Prevalence and severity increase at higher altitude
(Rubin 1989, Sargan 2004, Gionfriddo & Powell 2005,
ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Coloboma (iris, optic nerve)
·Congenital, inheritance suspected
·May be related to microphthalmia and multiple ocular defects
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
280
Corneal dystrophy
· Inheritance suspected
· Endothelial dystrophywith progressive corneal oedema
·Age of onset: 9-1l years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Dermoid
·  Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Distichiasis (Long-haired Dachshund)
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Ectopic cilia
· Uncommon condition, breed at increased risk
(D'Anna et al. 2007)
Generalized
progressive
retinal
atrophy
(GPRA)
(Miniature Long-haired)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Cone-rod dystrophy
·  Onset and progression variable
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·Genetic test available (AHT; VetGen) - see Appendix
281
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007, Turney et
al. 2007)
Generalized
progressive
retinal
atrophy
(GPRA)
(Miniature Smooth-haired)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Early onset cone-rod dystrophy
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Genetic test available (AHT; VetGen) - see Appendix
(Gelatt 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA) (Standard
wire-haired)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Early onset cone-rod dystrophy
(Ropstad et al. 2008)
Glaucoma (primary)
·Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt 2007)
Multiple ocular defects (associated with merling)
· Inherited;
defects
moresevereinhomozygous
than
heterozygous merles
·Defects include microphthalmia,microcornea, cataract and
colobomas
(Rubin 1989, Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
282
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Rare condition
· See also under Neurological conditions
(Katz et al. 2008)
Optic nerve hypoplasia
· Congenital; not known if inherited
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme (Miniature
Long-haired Dachshund)
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Persistent pupillary membranes (PPMs)
· Inheritance suspected
·Common condition, relatively high frequency in this breed
·ScheduleBof
 the
BVA/KC/ISDS
EyeScheme
(Miniature Wire-haired)
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal detachment with abnormal vitreous
· Occurs from 8 months
(Rubin 1989)
Superficial punctate keratitis (Long-haired Dachshunds)
·Breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
283
Physiological conditions
Hypochondroplasia
· Accepted as breed standard
· Short, bowed legs, but normal skulls seen
(Martinez, Valdes & Alonso 2000)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis -- cystine
· Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Osborne & Finco 1995, Houston et al.
2004, Harnevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism (Miniature Dachshund)
· Congenital defect believed to be inherited as a sex-limited,
autosomal recessive trait
·Breed at risk in case series
(Hayes et al. 1985, Romagnoli 1991)
Dystocia
· Breed predisposition to obstructive dystocia due to a narrow
maternal pelvic canal and also to dystocia due to uterine inertia
284
(Gaudet 1985, Johnson et al. 2001)
Respiratory conditions
Nasopharyngeal stenosis
· Reported in seven Smooth-haired Dachshunds
·Mean age at presentation 3 years
(Kirberger et al. 2006)
Pneumonia due to Pneumocystis carinii infection
· See Immunoglobulin deficiency (lmmunological conditions)
DALMATIAN
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
·This breed had a risk factor of 5.4 cases per 1000 dog years at
risk (if 1000 dogs were followed for 1 year, 5.4 would have an
insurance claim for atopy)
(Nodtvedt et al. 2006)
Pododermatitis
·Can affect any age or sex
285
·  Males predisposed
·Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Skin tumours
·See under Neoplastic conditions
Truncal solar dermatitis
·A combination of factors are required to cause this condition
· Flank and abdomen most severely affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Chronic hepatitis
·Breed at increased risk of copper-associated hepatitis
·Suspected to be a primary defect in hepatic copper metabolism
as in Bedlington terriers
(Webb, Twedt & Meyer 2002, Watson 2004)
Infectious conditions
Cryptococcosis
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Usually seen in dogs under 4 years
· Living outdoors and exposure to bird droppings are risk factors
(O'Brien et al. 2004)
Musculoskeletal conditions
286
Panosteitis
· Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 2.5 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 3.1 (compared to mixed breeds) (LaFond, Breur &
Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 3.6 years (50% <2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
(Pastor 2002)
Fibroma - cutaneous
Breed at increased risk
287
·Mean age: 8.4 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Signs seen from birth
· Occurs most commonly in dogs with white pigment
·29.9% prevalence in this breed in one study
(Strain 2004)
Laryngeal paralysis-polyneuropathy sydrome
·See under Respiratory conditions
Leukodystrophy
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suggested
·Rare
·White matter primarily affected in this breed
·  Clinical signs at 3-6 months
(Dewey 2003a)
Lysosomal storage disease - ceroid
lipofuscinosis
·Suspected to be inherited
·Rare
·Signs seen at 1-2 years
(Bagley 2005)
288
Ocular conditions
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
· Breed at risk in case series, inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 2-3 years
· Prevalence and severity increase at higher altitude
(Rubin 1989, Gionfriddo & Powell 2005)
Dermoid
· Congenital, inheritance suspected
·Lesion can be extensive in this breed
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
· Lateral (occasionally entire) lower lid affected
(Rubin 1989)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Rare condition
· See also under Neurological conditions
289
(Goebel et al. 1988)
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial renal  disease (glomerular  basement membrane
disorder)
·Autosomal dominant inheritance
· Condition believed to be similar to Alport syndrome in humans
·Renal failure seen at amedian age of 18 months
(Hood et al. 2002b)
Urolithiasis - urate
    is   
predisposes to urate urolithiasis
Average age at diagnosis in one large study: males 5.5 years,
females 4.6 years
· Males are predisposed (50:1 in one large study)
· Genetic test available (AHT; Veterinary Genetics, UC Davis) -
see Appendix
(Bartges et al. 1994, Osborne & Finco 1995, Osborne et al.
1999, Bannasch et al. 2004, 2008, Houston et al. 2004)
Respiratory conditions
Laryngeal paralysis-polyneuropathy sydrome
·Associated with a polyneuropathy in this breed
·Believed to be inherited
(Braund et al. 1994)
290
Respiratory distress syndrome
·Rare condition
· Possibly inherited as an autosomal recessive
· Reported in ll young related Dalmatians
(Jarvinen et al. 1995)
DANDIE DINMONT TERRIER
Endocrine conditions
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk, possibly familial
·Median age: 10 years
(Scholten-Sloof et al. 1992)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital portosystemic shunt
·Breed at risk in case series
·Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
(Tobias & Rohrbach 2003, Sargan 2004)
Ocular conditions
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 6 years and older
· May be associated with goniodysgenesis
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
291
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt 2007)
DANISH/SWEDISHFARMDOG
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
·This breed had a risk factor of 3.6 cases per 1000 dog years at
insurance claim for atopy)
(Nodtvedt et al. 2006)
Musculoskeletal conditions
X-linked spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda
· Reported in three out of four male dogs in two litters from the
same parents
· Signs of pain on moving
(Armbjerg, Jensen & Olesen 2007)
DEERHOUND
(See Scottish Deerhound)
DOBERMAN PINSCHER (DOBERMANN)
292
Cardiovascular conditions
Atrial septal defect
· Uncommon disease
·Congenital
· Familial but not proven inherited
· Some studies do not demonstrate a predisposition for this
condition in this breed
(Lee et al. 2007)
Dilated cardiomyopathy (see figure 10)
·Very common in this breed (relative risk 33.7, prevalance 5.8%)
·In some studies, this breed accounts for 50% of cases of this
condition
Increased prevalence with age
·Approximately twice as common in males as females
Figure 10 Lateral and dorsoventral thoracic radiographs of
dogshowing
a
cardiomegaly
due  to 
dilated
cardiomyopathy.
(a)
(b)
293
·Thought to be familial, possibly inherited
· Some cases in this breed exhibit bradydysrhythmias and
syncope
·This breed may exhibit the ‘fatty infiltration-degenerative” type,
or the ‘attenuated wavy fibre′ type of DCM
(Tidholm & Jonsson 1997, Tidholm et al. 2001, Borgarelli
et al. 2006)
Dermatological conditions
Acral lick dermatitis (see plate 8 in the colour plate
section)
· Occurs in malesmore commonly than females
· Can occur at any age, but usually over 5 years
(Virga 2004)
Blastomycosis
·See under Infectious conditions
Bullous pemphigoid
.Very rare
· No age or sex predispositions
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
Callus dermatitis/pyoderma
· Common condition
·Sternal calluses often become infected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
294
Colour dilution alopecia
·Reported in blue or fawn Dobermanns and Miniature Pinschers
· Coat-colour genes play a role in the inheritance of this condition
%s pue sanq u! %t6 se yay se aq Aeu aseasip jo Aouanbaiy ·
infawns
(Miller 1990a)
Cryptococcosis
· See under Infectious conditions
Flank sucking
·Related to blanket sucking
·  Compulsive disorder
·Dogs with flank sucking have a higher incidence of pica than
the normal population
(Moon-Fanelli, Dodman & Cottam 2007)
Follicular cyst
· No age or sex predisposition noted
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001c)
Follicular dysplasia
·Affects black or red Dobermanns
·Age of onset: 1-4 years
·Affects caudal dorsum and flanks
(Miller 1990b)
Generalized demodicosis
295
· Common condition
· Younger dogs predisposed
· No sex predilection
· Susceptibility to generalized demodicosis may be inherited
· 23% of cases in a study in India were reported as Dobermanns
(Nayak et al. 1997)
Hypopigmentary disorders
·Suspected to be inherited
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Mucocutaneous hypopigmentation
·Congenital in this breed
·Affects the lips and nose
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Muzzle folliculitis/furunculosis
· Common condition
·Alsoknown as canine acne
· Local trauma, hormones and geneticsmay play a role in
pathogenesis
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Nasal depigmentation/nasal hypopigmentation
·Also known as Dudley nose
·Cause unknown
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
296
Pemphigus foliaceous
· Uncommon disease
· No sex predisposition
·Mean age of onset 4 years
foliaceous
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m, Messinger 2004)
Primary seborrhoea
· Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Signs first appear at an early age and get worse
·In this breed, dry flaky skin is seen
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Vitiligo
·Presumed to be inherited
(Beale 2006)
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
·In this breed,
1,  occurs  in  rapidly   growing  puppies  fed
zinc-deficient diets
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001 g)
Drug reactions
297
Sulphonamides
This breed has been known to suffer cutaneous reactions and
polyarthropathy following the use of this drug
(Affolter 2004)
Endocrine conditions
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
·May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
·Neutered males and females at increased risk
(Milne & Hayes 1981, Panciera 1994)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Chronic hepatitis
· Genetic basis suspected
·Predominantly seen in middle-aged females
· Very aggressive form of hepatitis, sometimes referred to as
chronic active hepatitis in this breed
· Increased hepatocellular copper is seen and may be secondary to
cholestasis rather than a primary defect in hepatic copper
metabolism, but this is debated
·An autoimmune pathogenesis has been proposed
(Crawford et al. 1985, Speeti et al. 2003, Mandigers et al.
2004)
Gastric dilatation-volvulus
· Breed at increased risk
298
(Burrows & Ignaszewski 1990)
Parvovirus enteritis
·See under Infectious Conditions
Haematological/immunological conditions
Neutrophil defect
· Causes chronic rhinitis and pneumonia
·Reported in eight related Dobermanns in a single report
(Giger 2003)
Von Willebrand's disease
· Possibly inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Common in this breed in both the USA and UK
·Mainly type I disease in this breed
· Most Dobermanns with clinical signs of bleeding have vWF
<35%
·Most severe haemorrhage associatedwith vWF <20%
·Not all at-risk dogs will bleed
·Genetic test available (VetGen) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Infectious conditions
Blastomycosis
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Young (2-4 years) entire males predisposed
·Geographic distribution: mainly North America
299
(Mississippi, Missouri, Ohio River valleys, mid-Atlantic
States, Quebec, Manitoba and Ontario)
·Proximity to a body of water is a risk factor in endemic areas
(Rudmann et al. 1992, Arceneaux, Taboada & Hosgood
1998, Kerl 2003)
Cryptococcosis
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Usually seen in dogs under 4 years
· Living outdoors and exposure to bird droppings are risk factors
(O'Brien et al. 2004, Malik et al. 1995)
Parvovirus enteritis
·Breed at increased risk in cases series
·Age 6 weeks to 6 months at higher risk
(Glickman et al. 1985, Houston, Ribble & Head 1996.
McCaw & Hoskins 2006)
Infectious skin diseases
· See under Dermatological conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
Carpal laxity syndrome
· Reported in puppies
·Usually self-limiting
· May be hereditary in this breed
(Cetinkava, Yardimki & Saglam 2007)
300
Gastrocnemius tendon avulsion
·May lead to rupture and subsequent hyperflexion of the hock
and digits
· Uncommon condition
(Beale 2008)
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 1.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Von    Willebrand   heterotopic
Costeochondrofibrosis
1n
Dobermann Pinschers
· Uncommon condition
· Young to middle-aged dogs affected
· Suspected that low levels of von Willebrand factor lead to
microvascular bleeding which initiates the condition
(Dueland, Wagner & Parker 1990)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma (see plate 9 in the colour
plate section)
· Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
301
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995)
Fibroma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk
·Mean age: 8.4 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Fibrosarcoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Females may be predisposed
· Mean age: 8.6 years in one study
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Lipoma (see plate 10 in the colour plate section)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Most common in middle-aged, obese female dogs
· This breed predisposed to infiltrative lipomas
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Melanoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Myxosarcoma
302
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 9.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Primary brain tumour
· See under Neurological conditions
Neurological conditions
Cervical vertebral malformation (wobbler syndrome)
·Seen commonly in this breed
· Heritability, nutrition and growth rate, body conformation and
trauma are possible causes
(Olby 2003)
Congenital deafness
·Prevalencein thisbreed notknown
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Congenital vestibular disease
·Rare condition
·Signs seen <3 months
· May be associated with lymphocytic labyrinthitis in this breed
(Bagley 2005)
Dancing Dobermann disease
303
·Seen occasionally
·Age of clinical onset: 6 months to 7 years
(Cuddon 2002a)
Discospondylitis
·Uncommon
· Young/middle-aged dogs affected
·Males twice as likely to be affected as females
·Odds ratio in this breed 2.3
(Burkert et al. 2005)
Narcolepsy-cataplexy
·Familial
·Age of clinical onset: <l year
·Genetic test available (Optigen;HealthGene) -- see Appendix
(Tonokura, Fujita & Nishina 2007)
Primary brain tumour
·Higher incidence noted in this breed
· Older dogs affected
(Snyder et al. 2006)
Ocular conditions
Medial canthal pocket syndrome
· Breed predisposition due to head shape
(Rubin 1989)
304
Multiple ocular defects
·  Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·May include microphthalmia, anterior segment dysgenesis,
congenital cataract and retinal dysplasia
· Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Bergsjo et al. 1984, Rubin 1989, Sargan 2004, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
Persistent  hyperplastic  tunica    vasculosa
 lentis   and
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
· Congenital, dominant inheritance with incomplete penetration
suggested
·Reportedwidely in Europe, but rare in theUSA
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
Boevé, Van Der Linde-Sipman & Stades 1988, Rubin
1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Plasma cell
1 infiltration of the nictitating membrane
(plasmoma)
·Breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989)
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial renal disease
(membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis)
· Mode of inheritance unknown
305
· The condition is believed to be a glomerular basement
membrane disorder which may progress to glomerulonephritis
· The disease presents at 1-6 years with proteinuria and chronic
renal failure
(Wilcock & Patterson 1979, Chew et al. 1983, Osborne &
Finco 1995)
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence
(causing urinary incontinence)
· Breed at risk in case series
·Spayed females predisposed
(Holt & Thrusfield 1993, Armold 1997)
DOGO ARGENTINO
Neurological signs
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
DOGUE DE BORDEAUX (FRENCH MASTIFF)
Cardiovascular conditions
Aortic stenosis
· Recently reported to be highly predisposed to this condition
306
· Healthy and affected dogs had a smaller aortic annulus than in
other breeds
(Hollmer et al. 2008)
Dilated cardiomyopathy
· Common condition
·Males predisposed
· Median age of onset 5 years
·3% of cases in one study were of this breed
(Borgarelli et al. 2006)
Dermatological conditions
Footpad hyperkeratosis
·Familial in this breed
· Lesions appear by 6 months of age
(Lachaume et al. 1998)
Ocular conditions
Ectropion
· Polygenic inheritance likely
·Developmental lesion
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
DRENTSE PARTRIJSHOND
Gastrointestinal conditions
307
Stomatocytosis-hypertrophic gastritis
·Probable autosomal recessive inheritance
· Seen in young dogs
(Slappendell et al. 1991, Sargan 2004)
DUTCH KOOIKER (KOOIKERHONDJE)
Haematological conditions
Von Willebrand's disease
·Type IlI disease is seen in this breed
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·  Precise genetic defect responsible identified
·Genetic test available (VetGen) - see Appendix
(Slappendel, Beijer & van Leeuwen 1998)
Neurological conditions
Hereditary necrotizing myelopathy
· Clinical signs begin at 3-12 months age
· No sex predisposition
(Mandigers et al. 1993)
ENGLISH SETTER
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
308
· Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
·Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Canine benign familial chronic pemphigus
· Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait
·Also affects English Setter crosses
(Sueky et al. 1997)
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Elbow dysplasia
· Common cause of forelimb lameness
· Ununited anconeal process (odds ratio 3.7) is common in this
breed
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
·  Neutered male dogs predisposed
309
·Odds ratio in the breed 1.49
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 1.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 10.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Neurological conditions
310
Con genital deafness
·Signs seen from birth
· Occurs most commonly in dogs with white pigment
· 7.9% prevalence in this breed in one study
(Strain 2004)
Lysosomal storage disease - ceroid lipofuscinosis
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
·Signs seen at 1-2 years
· Genetic test available (VetGen) - Appendix
(Bagley 2005)
Ocular conditions
Ectropion
· Polygenic inheritance likely
·Developmental lesion
(Rubin 1989)
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating membrane
· Inheritance suspected
·Usually occurs in young dogs
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
311
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
·Genetic test available (VetGen) - see Appendix
·See also under Neurological conditions
(Lingaas et al. 1998)
ENGLISH SHEPHERD
Drug reactions
Ivermectin and milbemycin
·High doses can cause tremors, ataxia, coma and death
·Associated with the mutant MDRl allele
(Dowling 2006)
ENGLISH TOY SPANIEL
(See King Charles Spaniel)
ESKIMO DOG
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
312
(Gelatt & Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Generalized
progressive
retinal
atrophy
(GPRA)
(American Eskimo Dog)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Progressive rod-cone degeneration
·Age of onset: 3-5 years
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
ENTLEBUCHER MOUNTAIN DOG
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Age of onset: 1-2 years
· Localization: posterior pole. Non-progressive
(Speiss 1994, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Progressive rod-cone degeneration
·Age of onset: 2-3 years. Blindness at 6-8 years
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Sargan 2004, Heitmann et al. 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
FIELD SPANIEL
313
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Focal cortical cataracts
·Age of onset: 3 years. Slowly progressive, blindness rare
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Clinically apparent at 5 years
(Rubin 1989)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·May be seen with abnormal vitreous
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee)
FINNISH LAPPHUND
Ocular conditions
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
-  Progressive rod-cone degeneration
· Ophthalmoscopic signs at 4 years
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
314
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
FINNISH SPITZ
Dermatological conditions
Pemphigus foliaceous
·Uncommon disease
· No sex predisposition
·Mean age of onset 4 years
(Messinger 2004)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
· Common disease
· Usually affects young adult and middle-aged animals
·May be more common in bitches
·May be seasonal variations
(Miller, Hohenhaus & Hale 2004)
Spitz dog thrombopathia
·Affects young dogs
·Causes chronic intermittent bleeding
·Genetic test available (Auburn University) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Neoplastic conditions
315
Anal sac adenocarcinoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 10.2-10.8 years
·Some surveys suggest a predisposition for females 
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Basal cell tumour (many cases are now reclassified as
trichoblastoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 7.9 years
· Mostly found on head and neck
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Neurological conditions
· Idiopathic epilepsy
·Focal epilepsy commonly observed in this breed
(Viitmaa et al. 2007)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
(Gelatt & Mackay 2005,ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
FLAT-COATED RETRIEVER
316
Musculoskeletal conditions
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 2.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 3.6 years (50% <2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Soft tissue sarcoma
·Breed at increased risk
Average age of onset for soft tissue sarcomas is 8-9 years, but
may be seen earlier in this breed
(Morris et al. 2002)
Ocular conditions
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
317
Ectopic cilia
· Uncommon condition, breed at increased risk
(D'Anna et al. 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Ectropion
·Mild, disappears with maturity
(Rubin 1989)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Lower lids affected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
·Associated with goniodysgenesis
·Mainly seen in the UK
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Wood, Lakhani & Read 1998, Gelatt 2007)
Micropapilla
· Congenital condition
(Rubin 1989)
FOXHOUND
Haematological conditions
318
Pelger-Huet anomaly (American Foxhound)
· May not be clinically significant
(Giger 2003)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Hound ataxia
·Reported in the UK
·Age of onset: 2-7 years
· Nutritional disease in dogs fed ruminant stomachs
(Palmer, Medd &Wilkinson 1984)
FOX TERRIER
Cardiovascular conditions
Tetralogy of Fallot
· Congenital
·Rare
· Relative risk 22.0, but this is based on 2 dogs out of 41 with
Tetralogy of Fallot in one study belonging to this breed
(Buchanan 1999)
319
Pulmonic stenosis
·Thirdmost frequent cause of canine congenital heart disease
·Polygenic mode of inheritance likely
·Relative risk 10.5
(Darke 1989)
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between l and 2 years of age have highest probability of
 an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Flea-bite hypersensitivity
·Most studies showno breed predisposition, but one French study
showed this breed was predisposed
(Prelaud & Guaguere 1998)
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Skin tumours
320
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine conditions
Congenital hypothyroidism (Toy Fox Terriers)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Genetic test available (PennGen; HealthGene) - see Appendix
(Fyfe et al. 2003)
Insulinoma
·Breed at increased risk
·Middle-aged/older dogs affected
·Uncommon
(Feldman & Nelson 1996)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital
megaoesophagus
(Wire-haired
and
Smooth-haired Fox Terrier)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Presumed secondary to myasthenia gravis (see Neurological
conditions)
(Jenkins, van Dyk & McDonald 1976, Miller et al. 1983,
Sargan 2004)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Myasthenia gravis
· See under Neurological conditions
321
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Odds ratios 12.8 (Toy Fox Terrier) and 2.2
(Wire-haired Fox Terrier) compared to mixed breeds
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Cutaneous haemangioma (Wire-haired fox terrier)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.7 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Fibroma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk
·Mean age: 8.4 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995)
Insulinoma
See under Endocrine conditions
Mast cell tumours (Smooth and Toy Fox terriers)
·Breed at increased risk
· May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
322
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland adenomas
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age was 10.5 years
·Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Cerebellar hypoplasia (Wire-haired fox terrier)
· Congenital
·Rare
·Signs noted from 2 to 3 weeks
·Possibly inherited
(Thomas 2002)
Congenital deafness
·Prevalencein thisbreed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Congenital myasthenia gravis (Smooth-haired Fox Terrier)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
·Age of clinical onset: 6-8 weeks
(Miller et al. 1984)
323
Hereditary ataxia (Smooth-haired Fox Terrier)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Reported in Sweden
·Rare
·Age of clinical onset: 2-6 months
(Dewey 2003b)
Idiopathic epilepsy (Wire-haired Fox Terrier)
·Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
· Common condition
(Bagley 2005)
Lissencephaly (Wire-haired Fox Terrier)
· Rare developmental disease
·Age of onset: <l year
(Inzana 2002)
Ocular conditions
Cataract (Smooth-haired Fox Terriers)
· Inheritance suspected
· Localization: posterior subcapsular cortex. Progressive
·One study showed a high prevalence in this breed (1 1.7%)
(Gelatt & Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Cataract (Wire-haired Fox Terriers)
324
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 3 years
·Localization: posterior
subcapsular cortex. Progresses  to
completion at 4-5 years
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (Smooth-haired
and Wire-haired Fox Terriers)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of clinical onset: 2 years
(Rubin 1989)
Glaucoma (primary) (Smooth-haired and Wire-haired Fox
Terriers)
· Inheritance suspected
·Glaucoma also seen secondary to lens luxation
(Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
Lens luxation 
(Smooth-haired and  Wire-haired Fox
Terriers)
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 4-7 years
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(smooth-haired and wire-haired)
(Curtis & Barnett 1980, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
325
Renal and urinary conditions
Ectopic ureters
· Uncommon congenital anomaly
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually presents <l year of age
·More commonly diagnosed in females
(Hayes 1974, Berent, Mayhew & Porat-Mosenco 2008)
FRENCH BULLDOG
Gastrointestinal conditions
Histiocytic ulcerative colitis
·Breed at risk in case series
(Tanaka, Nakayama & Takase 2003)
Haematological conditions
Haemophilia B
·Factor IX deficiency
·Alsoknown as Christmas disease
· Inherited as a sex-linked trait
· Less common than haemophilia A
·Mild to moderate in this breed
(Dodds 2005)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Hemivertebrae
326
· See under Neurological conditions
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Hemivertebrae
·Congenital
·Uncommon
(Dewey 2003b)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
· Age of onset: 6 months to 3 years; rapid progression to
completion
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Genetic test available (AHT; VetGen) - see Appendix
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Distichiasis (usually with entropion)
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
327
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
· Occurs with distichiasis in both upper and lower lids
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis -- cystine
· Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Osborme & Finco 1995, Houston et al.
2004, Harmevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
Reproductive conditions
Dystocia
·Breed
predisposition to  obstructive  dystocia  due to
narrowedmaternal pelvic canal and foetuses with large heads
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Johnson et al. 2001)
Respiratory conditions
Brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome
· Concurrent gastrointestinal lesions common in this breed
(Poncet et al. 2005)
FRENCH SPANIEL
328
Dermatological conditions
Acral mutilation and analgesia
·Newly recognized disorder
·Signs noted between 3.5 months and 12 months of age
(Paradis et al. 2005)
GAMMEL DANSK HONSEHUND
Neurological conditions
Myasthenia gravis
·Acetyl choline antibody receptors not detected in this breed
(Flagstad 1989)
GERMAN PINSCHER
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Reported in this breed in Finland
(Leppanen, Martenson & Maki 2001, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis (PHTVL)
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Reported in this breed in Finland
329
(Leppanen, Martenson & Maki 2001, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
GERMAN SHEPHERD DOG (GSD OR ALSATIAN)
Cardiovascular conditions
Aortic stenosis
·Congenital
·Relative risk 2.6
·No sex predilection
· Inheritance possibly autosomal dominantwith modifying genes,
or polygenic
(Darke 1989)
Mitral dysplasia
· Congenital
·Relative risk 2.7
·  Males predisposed
· Inheritance suspected
(Matic 1988)
Patent ductus arteriosus
·Uncommon
·Congenital
· 17/204 dogs were GSDs in one study
· Females predisposed
· Inherited in this breed
(Darke 1989, Goodrich et al. 2007)
330
Pericardial diaphragmatic hernia
·Uncommon
· Congenital
(Matic 1988)
Pericardial effusion
·Acquired
·Relative risk 2.3
· Haemangiosarcoma of the right atrium is a common cause in
this breed
(Sisson 2002)
Persistent left cranial vena cava
·Congenital
·Relatively common
· Only of clinical significance during thoracic surgery
(Buchanan 1963)
Persistent right aortic arch
· Congenital
·Uncommon
·Relative risk 4.5
· 16/45 dogs affected with this condition were German Shepherds
in one study
· See also Vascular ring anomaly under Gastrointestinal
conditions
(Buchanan 2004)
Tricuspid dysplasia
331
· Congenital
·Relative risk 3.1
·  Males predisposed
(Buchanan 1999, Tidholm 1997)
Ventricular ectopy
·Reported to be familial
· Genetic predisposition
· Seen in the USA and UK, but possibly geographically
widespread
(Gelzer, Moise & Koller 2005)
Dermatological conditions
Acral lick dermatitis
·Occurs in malesmore commonly than females
·Can occur at any age, but usually over 5 years
(Virga 2004)
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
·Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
·Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
·This breed had a risk factor of 5.0 cases per 1000 dog years at
insurance claim for atopy)
(Nodtvedt et al. 2006)
332
Contact hypersensitivity
·A Danish study showed that 50% of affected dogs were GSDs
(the general population of pedigree dogs was composed of 16%
GSDs)
· No age or sex predisposition
· Genuine contact hypersensitivity as opposed to irritant contact
dermatitis is thought to be rare
(Thomsen & Kristensen 1986)
Discoid lupus erythematosus
·Uncommon
·No age or sex predisposition recognized
(Wermer 1999)
Disorder of the footpads in German Shepherd Dogs
· Unknown cause
·Often familial
· No sex predisposition
· Usually early onset of symptoms
· May be related to familiar vasculopathy
(Weiret al. 1994)
Familial vasculopathy
·Occurs early in life, often triggered by first vaccination
· No sex predisposition
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
(Weiret al. 1994)
Fibropruritic nodule
333
·  Possible breed predisposition
·Usually older than 8 years at onset
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001c)
Focal metatarsal fistulation of German Shepherd Dogs
·Uncommon
·Most commonin dogs descended directly from German
ancestors
·Age of onset usually 2.5-4 years
(Kunkle et al. 1993)
Hypopigmentary disorders
·Possibly inherited
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Generalized demodicosis
· Common condition
· Younger dogs predisposed
·No sex predilection
· Susceptibility to generalized demodicosis may be inherited
·18% of cases in a study in India were reported as Alsatians
(Nayak et al. 1997)
German Shepherd Dog pyoderma
·Also known as German Shepherd Dog folliculitis, furunculosis
and cellulitis
·Familial
·Probably an inherited cell-mediated immunodeficiency
· May be inherited as anautosomal recessive trait
334
·Affects middle-aged dogs
·  No sex predisposition
·Relative risk for recurrent folliculitis/furunculosis in this breed
3.7
(Denerolle et al. 1998)
Greying
· May occur at a young age in this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Idiopathic chronic ulcerative blepharitis
· Localized to the medial canthal region
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001k)
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Mucocutaneous pyoderma
·  No age or sex predisposition
· This breed and crosses with this breed appear to be predisposed
(Bassett, Burton & Robson 2004)
Multiple collagenous naevi
·Age of onset: 3-5 years
335
·Aka nodular dermatofibrosis
· May be a cutaneous marker for renal cystadenocarcinomas or
uterine leiomyomas (see under Renal and urinary conditions)
·Probably autosomal dominant inheritance
(Moe & Lium 1997)
Nasal depigmentation
·Also known as Dudley nose
·Unknown cause
·Affects white German Shepherd Dogs
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Nasal folliculitis and furunculosis
·Uncommon
· Unknown cause, but may start after local trauma
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Pemphigus erythematosus
· No age or sex predisposition
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
Pododermatitis
·Can affect any age or sex
·  Males predisposed
· Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Primary lymphoedema
336
· No apparent sex predisposition
·Usually occurs within first 12 weeks of life
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Primary seborrhoea
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Signs first appear in young dogs and get worse with age
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Pyotraumatic folliculitis
· Common condition
· Young dogs predisposed
·Also known as hot spot; wet eczema
(Holm, Rest & Seewald 2004)
Pythiosis
· Most common in tropical and subtropical regions
·Young, male dogs more commonly affected
(Larsson 2002)
Skin tumours
· See Neoplastic conditions
Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy
· Age range of dogs affected 3-8 years
· No sex predilection
(Rosychuk 2002)
337
Systemic lupus erythematosus
· Uncommon (incidence approximately 0.03% of general canine
population)
· Affects mainly males in this breed
·Average age of 5 years
(Foumel et al. 1992)
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
·In this breed,
1, occurs in rapidly growing puppies fed
zinc-deficient diets
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001 g)
Drug reactions
Ivermectin and milbemycin (white German Shepherds)
· High doses can cause tremors, ataxia, coma and death
·Associated with the mutant MDRl allele
(Dowling 2006)
Endocrine conditions
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Median age: 10 years
(Feldman & Nelson 1996)
Insulinoma
·Breed at increased risk
338
·Middle-aged/older dogs affected
·Uncommon
(Caywood et al. 1988, Feldman & Nelson 1996, Lorenz
2002)
Pituitary dwarfism
· Autosomal recessive mode of inheritance suggested
· Clinical signs (failure to grow) seen at 2-3 months
·Rare
(Feldman and Nelson 1996, Kooistra et al. 2000)
Primary hypoparathyroidism
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Can occur at any age
·Uncommon
(Bruyette & Feldman 1988, Feldman & Nelson 1996,
Russell et al. 2006)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Acquired megaoesophagus
·Breed at increased risk
(Gaynor, Shofer &Washabau 1997)
Anal furunculosis (perianal fistula) (see plate ll in the
colour plate section)
·Breed at risk in case series (>80% reported cases). Inheritance
suspected
339
· Most common in middle-aged to older dogs
· Genetic test available (Canigen) -- see Appendix
(Houlton 1980, Kennedy et al. 2008)
Figure 1l  Lateral thoracic radiograph of a 3-year-old
German Shepherd dog with idiopathic megaoesophagus.
The dilated oesophagus may be seen dorsal to the heart
(arrows).  Congenital  idiopathic  megaoesophagus 
(see
figure 11)
·Breed at increased risk
(Washabau 2001, Dupla 2002)
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis, enteritis and enterocolitis
·Most common in dogs 5 years and younger
340
(Guilford & Strombeck 1996b)
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Typical age of onset: 36 months
(Wiberg, Saari &Westermarck 1999, Moeller et al. 2002,
Batchelor et al. 2007)
Gastric dilatation/volvulus
·Breed at risk in case series
(Brockman,Washabau & Drobatz 1995, Sargan 2004)
Gastro-oesophageal intussusception
·Rare condition seen relatively more frequently in this breed
·Usually seen in dogs <3 months old
·Higher incidence in males
(Roach & Hecht 2007)
Hepatic/splenic haemangiosarcoma
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis
· Often associated with small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and
IgA  deficiency (see under Haematological/immunological
conditions)
(Batt & Hall 1989, Sargan 2004)
Parvovirus enteritis
341
·See under Infectious conditions
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO)
·Breed at risk in case series
· May be associated with IgA deficiency in this breed (see under
Haematological/immunological conditions)
(Batt et al. 1991, German et al. 2000b)
Small intestinal volvulus
·Breed at increased risk
·Usually associated with chronic intestinal disorders
(Cairo et al. 1999)
Vascular ring anomaly
·Clinical presentation at time of weaning
(Patterson 1989, Van Grundy 1989, Gunby, Hardie &
Bjorling 2004)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia A
e  s un s a e s  as
survival to adulthood
·Inherited
(Parry et al. 1988)
Haemophilia B
·Factor IX deficiency
342
·Also known as Christmas disease
· Inherited as a sex-linked trait
· Less common than haemophilia A
· Can be severe in this breed
·Reported in a family of German Shepherd Dog pups
(Dodds 2005)
Selective IgA deficiency
· Often asymptomatic
· May be increased susceptibility to enteric infection
(Giger 2003)
Von Willebrand's disease
· Possibly inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
(Hohenhaus 2008)
Infectious conditions
Cryptococcosis
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Usually seen in dogs under 4 years
· Living outdoors and exposure to bird droppings are risk factors
(O'Brien et al. 2004)
Disseminated aspergillosis
·Age: 2-8 years
· Most cases have been reported from Australia and California
(Day 2006b)
343
Infectious skin disease
· See Dermatological conditions
Parvovirus enteritis
· Breed at increased risk in cases series
·Age 6 weeks to 6 months at higher risk
(Houston, Ribble & Head 1996, McCaw & Hoskins 2006)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Canine idiopathic polyarthritis
·Usually affects dogs at 1-3 years, but any age can be affected
·Predisposition seen in this breed in some studies
(Clements et al. 2004)
Elbow dysplasia
· Common cause of forelimb lameness
·Genetically determined in this breed
·Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process (odds ratio 43.7
compared to mixed breeds) and ununited anconeal process (odds
ratio 8.2) are common in this breed
(Schulz 2002, LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Fibrotic myopathy of semitendinosus
·Dogs affected age 2-7 years
(Taylor & Tangner 2007)
Glycogen storage disease type IHI
344
·Also known as Cori's disease
· Females predisposed
· Signs first seen at 2 months of age
·Rare disease
· Causes stunted growth
(Gregory et al. 2007)
Gracilis contracture
·Especially occurs in athletic individuals
· Uncommon condition
·Affects dogs aged 3-7 years
(Lewis et al. 1997)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio in the breed 3.61
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Lumbosacral disease
· See under Neurological conditions
Masticatory myopathy
·Also known as eosinophilic myositis
·Common muscle disease
(Podell 2002)
Metaphyseal osteopathy
345
·Aka hypertrophic osteodystrophy
·Uncommon
·Affects dogs aged 2-6months
·  Males possibly predisposed
·Aetiology unknown
· Odds ratio 9.6 compared to mixed breeds
(Nieves 2002, LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Panosteitis
· Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 13.46 (compared to mixed breeds)
(Koper & Habil 1988, LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 2.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Spondylosis deformans
·Usually clinically insignificant
·Common
·May be associated with type II intervertebral disc disease
(Levine et al. 2006)
Stifle osteochondrosis
346
·  Males predisposed
· Age of onset usually 5-12 months, but may be earlier
·Odds ratio 17.5 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Transitional lumbosacral vertebra
· See under Neurological conditions
Neoplastic conditions
Adrenocortical tumour resulting in hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series
· Females slightly over-represented
· See under Endocrine conditions
(Reusch & Feldman 1991)
Anal sac adenocarcinoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 10.2-10.8 years
·Some surveys suggest a predisposition for females
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Bennett et al. 2002)
Ceruminous gland tumours
·Breed at risk of ceruminous carcinoma in case series
·Mean age: 9.8 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Cutaneous haemangioma
347
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.7 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Fibroma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk
·Mean age: 8.4 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Haemangiosarcoma (many sites, e.g. spleen, soft tissues,
liver, heart or lung) (see plate 12 in the colour plate
section)
· Reported as being at the highest risk of all breeds
·Mean age reported as 10 years
(Brown, Patnaik & MacEwen 1985, Ng & Mills 1985
Prymak et al. 1988, Pastor 2002)
Insulinoma
·See under Endocrine conditions
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
348
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Melanoma - limbal
·Breed at increased risk
(Donaldson et al. 2006, Gelatt 2007)
Myxosarcoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 9.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Nasal cavity tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·Median age: 9 years
·Males over-represented in most studies
(Patnaik 1989)
Renal cystadenocarcinomas and uterine leiomyomas
·See under Renal and urinary conditions
Sweat gland tumour
·Breed at risk of adenoma and adenocarcinoma in case series
·Mean age 9.5 years (adenoma) 10.5 years (adenocarcinoma)
349
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Testicular neoplasia
·See under Reproductive conditions
Thymoma
·Uncommon tumour
·Breed at risk in case series
· Middle-aged and older dogs affected
(Aronsohn 1985, Day 1997)
Trichoepithelioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age: 8.6 years
· Uncommon tumour
· Predilection sites: limbs, back and trunk
(Scott & Anderson 1991, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Congenital vestibular disease
·Rare condition
350
·Signs seen <3 months
(Bagley 2005)
Degenerative myelopathy
·Common in this breed
·Age of clinical onset: >5 years
·Genetic test available (Orthopedic Foundation for Animals) -
see Appendix
(Clemmons 1992)
Discospondylitis
·Uncommon
·Young/middle-aged dogs affected
·Males twice as likely to be affected as females
·Odds ratio in this breed 2.6
(Burkert et al. 2005)
Giant axonal neuropathy
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suggested
·Rare
·Age of clinical onset: 14-16 months
(Cuddon 2002a)
Glycogenosis (glycogen storage disease)
·Rare
·Age of clinical onset: <3 months
(Shelton 2002)
351
Idiopathic epilepsy
·Inherited
·Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
· Common condition
(Cunningham & Farmbach 1988)
Intervertebral disc disease
· Predisposition to thoracolumbar disc disease
·Relatively common condition
· This breed accounted for 7% of cases of intervertebral disc
disease in one study
·Age of clinical onset: 7-9 years
(Fluehmann, Doherr & Jaggy 2006)
Lumbosacral disease
·Affected by age and body weight
·Accounted for 26% of cases of lumbosacral stenosis in one
study
(Suwankong et al. 2008)
Transitional lumbosacral verterbra
·Thought to be inherited
·Present in 3.5% of screening radiographs of medium and large
breed dogs
(Damur-Djuric et al. 2006)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
352
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 8-12 weeks; no progression beyond 1-2 years of
age
· Localization: posterior cortex, progresses to Y sutures and
nucleus
· Seen in England
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·A non-progressive congenital cataract with suspected autosomal
dominant inheritance has also been reported
(Barnett 1986, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
·Recessive inheritance with variable expression has been
suggested. Highest incidence in this breed
·Age of onset: 1-6 years
·Where it is seen in younger dogs it is rapidly progressive and
more severe
·Prevalence and severity increase at higher altitude
(Stanley 1988, Rubin 1989, Chavkin et al. 1994,
Gionfriddo & Powell 2005, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Cormeal dystrophy
·Stromal lipid dystrophy
·Age of onset: 1-6 years
·May be associated with pannus
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating membrane
353
· Inheritance suspected
·Usually occurs in young dogs
(Rubin 1989)
Melanoma - limbal
·Breed at increased risk
(Donaldson et al. 2006, Gelatt 2007)
Micropapilla
· Congenital condition
·Seen occasionally in this breed
(Rubin 1989)
Plasma cell infiltration of the nictitating membrane
(plasmoma) (see plates 13-15 in the colour plate section)
·Breed at increased risk
·May be associated with pannus
(Barmett 1978, Rubin 1989)
Pseudopapilloedema
· Congenital
(Rubin 1989)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
· Congenital, inheritance suspected
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
354
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Physiological conditions
Pronounced eosinophilic response
· Exaggerated response to normal stimuli seen
·May be normal in this breed
· Individuals with eosinophilia should still be evaluated for
underlying causes of the condition
(Lilliehook et al. 2000)
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial renal disease (renal cystadenocarcinomas)
·See Renal cystadenocarcinomas
Renal cystadenocarcinomas
· Autosomal dominant inheritance suggested
·Mean age at diagnosis: 8.2 years
· Multiple, bilateral tumours are seen, with generalized nodular
dermatofibrosis and (in female
dogs) multiple uterine leiomyomas
·Genetic test available (VetGen) - see Appendix
(Lium & Moe 1985, Castellano et al. 2000)
Urolithiasis - silica
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age at diagnosis 5.8 years
·  Males predisposed
355
(Osborme, Hammer & Klausner 1981, Osborne & Finco
1995, Aldrich et al. 1997, Osborne et al. 1999)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism
· Congenital defect believed to be inherited as a sex-limited,
autosomal recessive trait
·Breed at risk in case series
(Romagnoli 1991, Yates et al. 2003)
Testicular neoplasia
·Breed at increased risk
· Common tumour in male dog
· Mean age 9-1l years
· One study suggests increased risk to seminoma
(Hayes & Pendergrass 1976, Sapierzynski et al. 2007)
Uterine
leiomyomas
(seen
with
renal
cystadenocarcinomas)
·See under Renal and urinary conditions
Variation in the interoestrus interval
·Fertile cycles may occur as often as every 45 months
(Feldman & Nelson 1996)
GLEN OF IMAAL TERRIER
Ocular conditions
356
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
· Inheritance suspected
· Late onset cone-rod dystrophy
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
GOLDEN RETRIEVER
Cardiovascular conditions
Aortic stenosis
· Congenital
·Relative risk 6.8
· No sex predilection
· Inheritance possibly autosomal dominantwith modifying genes,
or polygenic
(Darke 1989)
Duchenne's X-linked muscular dystrophy cardiomyopathy
·Also known asGolden Retrievermuscular dystrophy
·Rare
·Genetically determined (X-linked)
(Cooper et al. 1988)
Mitral valve dysplasia
· Congenital
·Uncommon
·  Possible predisposition
357
(Tidholm 1997)
Pericardial effusion (see figure 12)
·Acquired
Figure 12 Lateral thoracic radiograph of a Golden
Retriever with periodical effusion.
·Relative risk 7.4
· Haemangiosarcoma of the right atrium common in this breed
(Sisson 2002)
Taurine-deficient dilated cardiomyopathy
·Reported in five Golden Retrievers in Canada
·Responded to taurine therapy
(Belanger et al. 2005)
358
Dermatological conditions
Acral lick dermatitis
· Occurs in malesmore commonly than females
·Can occur at any age, but usually over 5 years
(Werner 2004)
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between l and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
·Signs may begin as early as 2 months of age in this breed
·Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Canine juvenile cellulitis
·  Familial; possibly inherited
·Usually 1-4 months of age at onset
(Lemarie 2003)
Grass awn migration
· Common in the summer months
·Predisposed due to behaviour
(Brennan & Ihrke 1983)
Greying
359
· May occur at a young age in this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Ichthyosis
· Rare condition
·Affects young Golden Retrievers
·  No sex predilection
·Pedigree analysis suggestive of autosomal recessive inheritance,
but incomplete dominance could not be ruled out
(Mauldin et al. 2008)
Idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
·Uncommon
·  No age or sex predisposition
·This breed over-represented in one study
(Panich, Scott & Miller 1991)
Mucocutaneous hypopigmentation
· May have concurrent seasonal nasal hypopigmentation
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Nasal depigmentation
·Also known as Dudley nose
·Unknown cause
· Seasonal depigmentation (snow nose) also seen in this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Pododermatitis
360
·Can affect any age or sex
·  Males predisposed
·Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Pyotraumatic folliculitis
· Common condition
·Relative risk 2.3
·Young dogs predisposed
·Alsoknown as hot spot; wet eczema
(Holm, Rest & Seewald 2004)
Skin tumours
· See Neoplastic conditions
Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy
·Age range of dogs affected 3-8 years
·No sex predilection
(Rosychuk 2002)
Endocrine diseases
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
· May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
· Neutered males and females at increased risk
(Milne & Hayes 1981, Panciera 1994, Greco 2002)
Insulinoma
361
·Breed at increased risk
·  Middle-aged/older dogs affected
·Uncommon
(Lorenz 2002)
Thyroid neoplasia (may be associated with hyper- or
hypothyroidism, but most are euthyroid)
· Breed at increased risk according to some studies
·Average age 10 years
(Brodey & Kelly 1968, Mitchell, Hurov & Troy 1979)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Acquired megaoesophagus
·Breed at increased risk
(Gaynor, Shofer &Washabau 1997)
Congenital portosystemic shunt
· Breed at risk in case series
· Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
·Usually intrahepatic
(Tobias & Rohrbach 2003, Sargan 2004)
Cricopharyngeal dysfunction
· Inheritance suspected
(Davidson et al. 2004, Sargan 2004)
Melanoma -- oral
362
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Oropharyngeal neoplasia
·Breed at risk in case series
(Dorm & Priester 1976)
Infectious conditions
Blastomycosis
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Young (2-4 years) entire males predisposed
· Geographic distribution: mainly North America (Mississippi,
Missouri,
Ohio
River
valleys,
mid-Atlantic
States,Quebec,Manitoba and Ontario)
·Proximity to a body of water is a risk factor in endemic areas
(Rudmann et al. 1992, Arceneaux, Taboada & Hosgood
1998, Kerl 2003, Crews et al. 2008)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia A
·Mild Factor VIII deficiency in this breed
·Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Hereditary spectrin deficiency
· Causes spherocytosis and erythrocyte fragility
          
incidence)
363
· Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait (Slappendel et al.
2005)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Elbow dysplasia
· Common cause of forelimb lameness in young dogs
· Medial coronoid process disease and fragmentation of the
medial coronoid process are both common in this breed
· Osteochondritis dissecans and fragmented coronoid processes
are inherited independently as polygenic traits in this breed
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Hip dysplasia
·Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio in the breed 2.70
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Metaphyseal osteopathy
·Aka hypertrophic osteodystrophy
·Uncommon
·Affects dogs aged 2-6months
·  Males possibly predisposed
·Aetiology unknown
· Odds ratio 5.4 compared to mixed breeds
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Muscular dystrophy
·X-linked recessive inheritance in this breed
364
·Similar to Duchenne's muscular dystrophy in man
· Genetic test available (HealthGene) - see Appendix
(Cooper et al. 1988)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·Male:female ratio 2.24:1
· 50% bilateral
·Age of onset usually 47 months but can be older
·Odds ratio 12.6 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Butterworth & Cook
2006)
Stifle osteochondrosis
· Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 5-12 months, but may be earlier
·Odds ratio 3.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Chondrosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mostly occur in flat bones (nasal cavity, pelvis, skull)
(Popovitch et al. 1994)
Cutaneous haemangioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 8.7 years
365
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
· Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Cutaneous lymphoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Fibroma-cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk
·Mean age 8.4 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Fibrosarcoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Females may be predisposed
· Mean age 8.6 years in one study
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Fibrosarcoma - oral
366
·Breed at risk in case series
· Males may be predisposed
·Mean age of onset is 7.5 years but up to 25% of cases have been
seen <5 years
(Ciekot et al. 1994, Morris & Dobson 2001)
Haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk
· Mean age reported as 10 years
(Brown, Patnaik & MacEwen 1985, Pastor 2002)
Histiocytosis - localized and disseminated
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Age of onset: >5 years
(Affolter & Moore 2002, Moore, Affloter & Vernau 2006
Naranjo, Dubielzig & Friedrichs 2007, Schultz et al. 2007)
Insulinoma
· See under Endocrine conditions
Lymphoma
·Breed at increased risk
·Most cases are seen in middle-aged dogs (mean 6-7 years)
(Duncan et al. 2008)
Maliganant  cutaneous  peripheral  nerve  sheath  tumour
(malignant schwannoma, neurofibroma)
·Breed at risk in case series
367
·Mean age 9.3 years
·Predilection site: forelimb
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Mast cell tumours (see plates 16 and 17 in the colour plate
section)
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Melanoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Mean age 8.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Melanoma - ocular (limbal and canine anterior uveal
melanoma)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Mean age 6.2 years (with bimodal distribution 3-4 years and
7-10 years)
(Donaldson et al. 2006)
Melanoma -- oral
·Breed at increased risk in case series
368
·Average age ll.4 years
(Ramos-Vara et al. 2000)
Oropharyngeal neoplasia
·See under Gastrointestinal conditions
Primary brain tumour
·See under Neurological conditions
Sweat gland tumour
·Breed at risk of apocrine ductal adenoma in case series
·Mean age 9.1 years
(Kalaher, Anderson & Scott 1990, Goldschmidt
：&
Mcmanus 2000)
Thyroid neoplasia
· See under Endocrine conditions
Trichoepithelioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 8.6 years
·Uncommon tumour
·Predilection sites: limbs, back and trunk
(Scott & Anderson 1991, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Horner's syndrome
369
·Idiopathic
(Boydell 1995)
Idiopathic epilepsy
· Inherited in this breed
·Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
· Common condition
(Thomas 2003)
Primary brain tumour
·Higher incidence noted in this breed
· Older dogs affected
(Snyder et al. 2006)
Sensory ataxic neuropathy
·Reported recently in Swedish Golden Retrievers
· Insidious onset between 2 and 8months of age
· Suspected to be inherited
(Jaderlund et al. 2007)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Dominant inheritance with incomplete penetration suggested
· Localization: posterior subcapsular cortex
·Age of onset: 6-18 months; slowly or nonprogressive
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
370
(Curtis & Barnett 1989, Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay
2005, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Congenital hereditary cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
Ectropion
· Mild, usually disappears with maturity
(Rubin 1989)
Entropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
· Lateral (occasionally entire) lower lids affected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Distichiasis
·Common condition, breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· There may be two types, one occurring in the first 2 years, the
other later at 5-7 years
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Rubin 1989, Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
371
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Glaucoma also be seen secondary to uveal cysts and pigmentary
uveitis
(Deehr 1998, Sapienza, Sim6 & Prades-Sapienza 2000,
ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Lacrimal punctal atresia
·Congenital
(Barnett 1979, Gelatt 2007)
Medial canthal pocket syndrome
· Breed predisposition due to head shape
(Rubin 1989)
Melanoma - ocular (limbal and canine uveal anterior uveal
melanoma)
· Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 6.2 years (with bimodal distribution 3-4 years and
7-10 years)
(Donaldson et al. 2006)
Multiple ocular defects
· Congenital, inheritance suspected
·Defects
may
include cataract,
  retinal  detachment 
and
microphthalmia
·Schedule Bof the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
372
(Rubin 1989)
Pigmentary uveitis
·Breed at increased risk
·May be associated with uveal cysts
(Sapienza,  Simo &Prades-Sapienza
2000, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Pseudopapilloedema
· Congenital
(Rubin 1989)
Retinal dysplasia - geographic
· Inheritance suspected
(Holle et al. 1999, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
·  Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Long & Crispin 1999, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED), also known
as central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA)
· Inheritance unknown but autosomal dominantwith incomplete
 penetrance has been suggested
More prevalent in the UK than in the USA. Becoming less
 prevalent following the introduction of control schemes
373
· Dogs affected from 3 years of age; visual problems noticed at
5-7 years
· Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Bedford 2001, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Uveal cysts
·Breed at increased risk
·Mean age 7 years in one study
·May be associated with anterior uveitis and secondary glaucoma
in this breed
(Rubin 1989, Corcoran & Koch 1993, Deehr 1998,
Sapienza, Simo & Prades-Sapienza 2000)
Renal and urinary conditions
Ectopic ureters
· Uncommon congenital anomaly
·Breed at risk in case series
· Usually presents <l year of age
·  More commonly diagnosed in females
(Holt & Moore 1995, Cannizz0 et al. 2003, Berent,
Mayhew & Porat-Mosenco 2008)
Familial renal disease (renal dysplasia)
· Reported in young dogs <3 years
·Cases present in renal failure
(Kerlin & VanWinkle 1995, de Morais, DiBartola & Chew
1996)
374
Urolithiasis - silica
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age at diagnosis 5.8 years
· Males predisposed
(Osborne et al. 1999)
Reproductive conditions
Cystic
endometrial
hyperplasia-pyometra
complex
(pyometra)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Common disease of older entire bitches (mean age 7.25 years)
·Most cases present within 12 weeks of oestrus
(Chastain, Panciera &Waters 1999, Egenvall et al. 2001,
Smith 2006)
Respiratory conditions
Nasal dermoid sinus cyst
·Rare condition
·Congenital
·3/6 dogs in one study were Golden Retrievers
(Anderson &White 2002)
GORDON SETTER
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
375
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between l and 2 years of age have highest probability of
 an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Black hair follicular dysplasia
·Rare
·Early onset
·Familial
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Callus dermatitis/pyoderma
· Common condition
·Sternal calluses often become infected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Canine juvenile cellulitis
· Familial; possibly inherited
· Usually 1-4 months of age at onset
(Lemarie 2003)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Symmetrical onychodystrophy and black hair  follicular
dysplasia
376
·Antinuclear antibodies present in some of these cases
· Some dogs of this breed affected with these conditions
currently, some separately
(Ovrebo Bohnhorst, Hanssen & Moen 2001)
Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis
 e  an r s  fo   e
condition
·In this breed, the condition presents with pruritus rather than
seborrhoea
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001n)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Gastric dilatation/volvulus
·Breed at risk in case series
(Glickman et al. 1994, Sargan 2004)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Elbow dysplasia
·Common cause of forelimb lameness
· Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process (odds ratio 19.8
compared to mixed breeds) is common in this breed
(Schulz 2002, LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Hip dysplasia
·Common condition
377
· Decreasing prevalence seen in this breed in a recent French
study
(Genevois et al. 2008)
Neoplastic conditions
Cutaneous haemangioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 8.7 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Fibrosarcoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Females may be predisposed
·Mean age 8.6 years in one study
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Trichoepithelioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·.Mean age 8.6 years
· Uncommon tumour
·Predilection sites: limbs, back and trunk
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Cerebellar degeneration
378
·Rare
· Signs seen at 6-24 months of age
(LeCouteur 2002)
Lethal astrocytosis
·Onset at 3-4 weeks
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
(Yaeger et al. 2000)
Ocular conditions
Medial canthal pocket syndrome
· Breed predisposition due to head shape
(Rubin 1989)
Micropapilla
·Congenital
·Seen occasionally in this breed
(Rubin 1989)
GREAT DANE
Cardiovascular conditions
Aortic stenosis
· Congenital
·Relatively common
· No sex predilection
379
· Inheritance possibly autosomal dominantwith modifying genes,
 or polygenic
(Harpster 2002)
Dilated cardiomyopathy (see figure 13)
· Common condition
·Males predisposed
· Median age of onset 5 years
· 46% of cases in one study were of this breed
·Probably X-linked inheritance in this breed
(Meurs, Miller &Wright 2001, Borgarelli et al. 2006)
Mitral valve dysplasia
· Congenital
(Matic 1988)
Persistent right aortic arch
· Congenital
·Uncommon
(Buchanan 1999)
Tricuspid dysplasia (see plate 18 in the colour plate
section)
·Congenital
·  Males predisposed
(Buchanan 1999)
Dermatological conditions
380
Acral lick dermatitis
Occurs in malesmore commonly than females
 g rao s iq 'a u  1o u
(Virga 2004)
Figure 13 Ultrasound scan (M-mode through left ventricle,
short axis view at the level of the chordae tendineae)
showing reduced fractional shortening due  to  dilated
cardiomyopathy.
381
Callus dermatitis/pyoderma
· Common condition
· Most common over hock and elbow joints of this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Cryptococcosis
·See under Infectious conditions
Generalized demodicosis
· Great Danes are in the ten breeds at highest statistical risk of
this disease in the Cornell, USA, population
· Common condition
· Younger dogs predisposed
·No sex predilection
·Susceptibility to generalized demodicosis may be inherited
· Incidence within breeds may vary depending on geographical
location
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001b)
Idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
·Uncommon
· No age or sex predisposition
· This breed over-represented in one study
(Panich, Scott & Miller 1991)
Muzzle folliculitis/furunculosis
· Common condition
·Also known as canine acne
382
·Local trauma, hormones and geneticsmay play a role in
pathogenesis
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Pododermatitis
·Can affect any age or sex
·  Males predisposed
·Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Primary lymphoedema
·-  No apparent sex predisposition
·Usually occurs within first 12 weeks of life
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
pay saiddnd suimoe Aipiden u! snooo peua su ul .
zinc-deficient diets
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001 g)
Endocrine conditions
Hypoadrenocorticism
· Mean age 4.6 years in one case series of all breeds
·Females may be predisposed
383
· Uncommon condition
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Peterson, Kintzer & Kass 1996)
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
·May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
·Neutered males and females at increased risk
(Nesbitt et al. 1980, Greco 2002)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital idiopathic megaoesophagus
·Breed at increased risk
(Washabau 2001, Dupla 2002)
Gastric dilatation/volvulus
·Breed at risk in case series
(Glickman et al. 1994, Brockman, Washabau & Drobatz
1995, Sargan 2004)
Infectious conditions
Cryptococcosis
· Breed at increased risk in case series
·Usually seen in dogs under 4 years
· Living outdoors and exposure to bird droppings are risk factors
(Malik et al. 1995, O'Brien et al. 2004)
384
Infectious skin conditions
·See under Dermatological conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 1.6 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Inherited myopathy of Great Danes
·Previously known as central core myopathy
·Rare condition
· Affects dogs less than I year of age
·Autosomal recessive inheritance likely
(Pascual et al. 2006)
Metaphyseal osteopathy
· Aka hypertrophic osteodystrophy
· Uncommon
·Affects dogs aged 2-6months
· Males possibly predisposed
· Aetiology unknown
·Odds ratio 1.90 compared to mixed breeds
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Nieves 2002)
Panosteitis
385
· Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 2.3 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 32.8 (compared to mixed breeds)
(Rudd,Whitehair & Margolis 1990, LaFond, Breur &
Austin 2002)
Stifle osteochondrosis
·Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 5-12 months, but may be earlier
·Odds ratio 30.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
· Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
·Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 1995)
Fibroma - cutaneous
386
·Breed at increased risk
·Mean age 8.4 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Osteosarcoma (see figure 14)
·Breed at risk in case series
·  Males over-represented
· Seen in older dogs
(Misdrop & Hart 1979, Rosenberger, Pablo & Crawford
2007)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Cervical vertebral malformation
(wobbler syndrome)
·  Common condition in large and giant breeds 
· Heritability, nutrition and growth rate, body conformation and
trauma are possible causes
(Olby 2003)
Discospondylitis
·Uncommon
387
·Young/middle-aged dogs affected
·Males twice as likely to be affected as females
·Odds ratio in this breed 7.3
(Burkert et al. 2005)
Primaryorthostatic tremor
· Uncommon condition
(Garosi et al. 2005)
Figure 14 Radiograph of a dog with osteosarcoma. Photo
courtesy of Andy Moores.
388
Ocular conditions
Ectropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
Associated with macroblepharon
389
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
· Associated with macroblepharon
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating
membrane
·Inheritance suspected
·Usually occurs in young dogs
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
·Associated with goniodysgenesis
·Age of onset: 1-9 years
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Glaucoma also seen secondary to uveal cysts
(Speiss et al. 1998,Wood et al. 2001, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Macroblepharon (diamond eye')
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
390
Medial canthal pocket syndrome
· Breed predisposition due to head shape
(Rubin 1989)
Multiple ocular defects
· Congenital, autosomal dominant  inheritance with  variable
expression has been suggested
· Seen inhomozygous merles (the result of merle to merle
breeding) with predominantly white coats
·Defects may include microphthalmia, microcornea, cataract,
equatorial staphylomas and retinal dysplasia. These dogs may
also be deaf
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Uveal cysts
· Breed at increased risk, inheritance suspected
·May be associated with secondary glaucoma in this breed
(Speiss et al. 1998)
GREATPYRENEES
(See Pyrenean Mountain Dog)
GREATER SWISS MOUNTAIN DOG
Ocular conditions
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
391
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
GREENLAND DOG
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Schedule B BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
GREYHOUND
Dermatological conditions
Idiopathic cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy
· Uncommon condition
·Seen in kenneled and racing Greyhounds
·No age or sex predilection
(Cowan et al. 1997)
Pattern baldness
·Two syndromes recognized in this breed
· First syndrome involves hair loss fromthe caudal thighs
·Second syndrome affects females almost exclusively
·Second syndrome involves gradual hair loss from 6 months of
age and affects mainly the ventrum and caudomedial thighs
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Skin tumours
·See under Neoplastic conditions
392
Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy
·Age range of dogs affected 3-8 years
·  No sex predilection
(Rosychuk 2002)
Ventral comedone syndrome
· Common
(Burkett 2000)
Drug reactions
Thiopentone
·Prolonged recovery times seen
· Use of this drug is not recommended in this breed
(Robinson, Sams & Muir 1986)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Vascular ring anomaly
· Clinical presentation at time of weaning
(Gunby, Hardie & Bjorling 2004)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Post-operative bleeding
· Noted frequently in retired Greyhounds
393
· Primary or secondary haemostatic defects not detected
·Possibly related to altered fibrinolysis
(Lara-Garcia, Couto & Iazbik 2008)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Avulsion of tibial tuberosity (see figure15)
· Growth plate fracture
·May be hereditary
(Skelly, McA1lister & Donnelly 1997)
Bipartite/tripartite sesamoids
· Common
· Usually clinically silent
(Eaton-Wells 2006)
Distal limb fractures and dislocations
Common in this breed due to counterclockwise direction of
racing and the repetitive nature of racing
·[nclude spontaneous tibial fracture, accessory carpal bone
fracture, calcaneoquartal subluxation due to plantar tarsal
and superficial digital flexor tendon luxation (Anderson et al.
1995a, b, Johnson 1987)
Medial displacement of biceps brachii tendon
·Uncommon
· Secondary to rupture of the transverse humeral ligament
(Boerno & Eaton-Wells 1995)
394
Polyarthritis of Greyhounds
·Affects animals aged 3-30 months
·Uncommon
Figure 15 Lateral radiograph of the left stifle of an
8-month-old male dog with avulsion of the tibial crest.
·Idiopathic
(Huxtable & Davis 1976)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
395
Cutaneous haemangioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 8.7 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Osteosarcoma
·Breed at risk in case series
· Males over-represented
·Seen in older dogs
(Rosenberger, Pablo & Crawford 2007)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
· Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Non-suppurative meningoencephalitis
· Described in a number of Greyhounds in Ireland
·Affected at 4-18 months
(Callanan et al. 2002)
396
Ocular conditions
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
·Breed at risk in case series, inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 2 years
· Prevalence and severity increase at higher altitude
(Rubin 1989, Chavkin et al. 1994, Gionfriddo & Powell
2005, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Lynch 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Condition occurs as early as l year and may progress to
blindness by 2 years
· Night blindness not an early finding in this breed
(Slatter, Blogg & Constable 1980, Rubin 1989, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
Lens luxation
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 3-5 years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Physiological conditions
Cardiac hypertrophy
· Left ventricular posterior wall consistently thicker than expected
for the size of dog
·Cardiac output is higher and total peripheral resistance is lower
 in this breed than others
397
·Blood volume is also higher than in other breeds
(Page, Edmunds & Atwell 1993)
Haematological differences
       
Greyhounds compared to other breeds
·Higher haematocrit, haemoglobin and red cell counts
·Erythrocytes are larger in this breed than in others
·Mean cellular haemoglobin concentration and mean cell volume
is higher than for other breeds
·All platelet counts in one study were below or in the lower half
of the reference range of nonbreed specific ranges
· Macrocytosis has been reported in this breed
(Shiel, Brennan & O'Rourke 2007b)
Heart murmur
·Seen commonly in retired Greyhounds
·Slightly increased aortic velocities noted
·Thought to be clinically insignificant
(Fabrizio et al. 2006)
Hypertension
· Greyhounds have higher blood pressures than other breeds, even
if not trained for racing
(Cox, Peterson & Detweiler 1976)
Supernumerary teeth
·Present in 36.4% of Greyhounds surveyed
·Usually first premolar
398
· Usually occurs in the upper arcade
(Dole & Spurgeon 1998)
Thyroid hormones
·T4 and free T4 are lower in healthy Greyhounds than other
breeds
·Mean cTSH is the same as for other breeds
(Shiel, Brennan &
Omodo-Eluk 2007a)
Reproductive conditions
Dystocia
·Breed predisposition due to higher risk of foetal death
(Johnston, Root Kustritz &
Olson 2001)
Respiratory conditions
Asthma
·Seen in Basenji-greyhound crosses
·Used as a model for the human disease
· Associated with airway hyper-reactivity
(Peters, Hirshman & Malley 1982)
GRIFFON BRUXELLOIS (BRUSSELS GRIFFON)
399
Neurological conditions
Syringomyelia/Chiari-like malformation
· 61 % of dogs of the breed examined had Chiari malformation
·Syringomyelia occurred with and without
Chiari malformation
(Rusbridge et al. 2009)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
· One study suggests increased incidence in males
·Schedule B BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Persistent hyaloid artery
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Vitreal syneresis
·Breed at increased risk
·14% dogs affected (CERF 2000-2005)
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
HAVANESE
400
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital portosystemic shunt
·Breed at risk in case series
·Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
· Usually extrahepatic
(Tobias&Rohrbach 2003,Sargan 2004)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Osteochondrodysplasia
· Moderately heritable
(Starr et al. 2007)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Breed at risk in case series (11.57% of breed affected in one
study)
(Gelatt & Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
401
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
HOVAWART
Endocrine conditions
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
·High levels of autoantibodies to thryoglobulin found in a high
percentage (12.6%) of this breed, predisposing to autoimmune
lymphocytic thyroiditis
(Ferm et al. 2009)
HUNGARIAN KUVASZ
(See Kuvasz)
HUNGARIAN PULI
Endocrine diseases
Diabetes mellitus
·Breed at increased risk
·Usual age range: 4-14 years; peak incidence: 7-9 years
· Old entire females are predisposed
(Feldman & Nelson 1996)
Neoplastic conditions
402
Basal cell tumour (many cases are now
reclassified as trichoblastoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.9 years
·Mostly found on head and neck
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992,
Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 6.6 years
·Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Trichoblastoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually older than 5 years
·Common
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
· Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
403
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
· Localization: posterior sutures and cortex; progression likely
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Micropapilla
·Congenital
· Seen occasionally in this breed
(Rubin 1989)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
HUNGARIANVISZLA
Dermatological conditions
Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis
·  No apparent sex predisposition
·Affects young to middle-aged dogs
·Uncommon
·No apparent sex predilection
· Annular scaling and alopecia occurs in this breed
Skin tumours
404
· See under Neoplastic conditions
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001i)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Factor I deficiency
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive
·Mild signs in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Haemophilia A
·Severe Factor VIlI deficiency in this breed
·Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Immune-mediated thrombocytopaenia
·Common
·Familial in this breed; likely inherited
·Females more commonly affected than males
(Lewis 2000)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
·Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
405
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Melanoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 8.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland adenomas
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age was 10.5 years
· Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Neurological conditions
Idiopathic epilepsy
·Partial onset seizure disorder
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive in this breed
(Patterson et al. 2003)
Ocular conditions
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
406
· Lateral lower lids affected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Clinically apparent by 3 years
(Rubin 1989)
IBIZAN HOUND
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: young
· Localization: posterior polar subcapsular cortex. Rapidly
progressive to visual deficits at 8 months of age
·Nuclear fibrillar cataract occurs in older dogs (5-8 years) with
little effect on vision
407
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Medial canthal pocket syndrome
· Breed predisposition due to head shape
(Rubin 1989)
IRISHREDANDWHITE SETTER
Haematological/immunological conditions
Canine leucocyte adhesion deficiency (CLAD)
·Seen in the UK and Sweden
· Genetic test available (Optigen; AHT) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance suspected
·Slowly or non-progressive
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Sargan 2004)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·  Rod-cone dysplasia type [
· Early onset, most dogs are blind at 6 months old
408
·Genetic test available (Optigen; AHT) -- see Appendix
(Gelatt 2007)
IRISH SETTER
Cardiovascular conditions
Patent ductus arteriosus
·Uncommon
·Congenital
·Inherited
·Females predisposed
(Darke 1989)
Vascular ring anomalies
·Congenital
· Not all studies confirm predisposition in this breed
conditions
(Matic 1988)
Dermatological conditions
Acral lick dermatitis
·Occurs in malesmore commonly than females
·Can occur at any age, but usually over 5 years
(Werner 2004)
Atopy
409
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between l and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Callus dermatitis/pyoderma
· Common condition
·Sternal calluses often become infected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Greying
· May occur at a young age in this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Nasal depigmentation
·Also known as Dudley nose
·Cause unknown
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Pododermatitis
·Can affect any age or sex
·  Males predisposed
·Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
410
Primary seborrhoea
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Signs first appear at an early age and get worse
· In this breed, dry greasy skin is seen
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine conditions
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
·May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
· Neutered males and females at increased risk
(Nesbitt et al. 1980, Milne & Hayes 1981, Greco 2002)
Insulinoma
·Breed at increased risk
· Middle-aged/older dogs affected
·Uncommon
(Caywood et al. 1988, Feldman & Nelson 1996)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Acquired megaoesophagus
·Breed at increased risk
(Gaynor, Shofer &Washabau 1997)
411
Congenital idiopathic megaoesophagus
·Breed at increased risk
(Washabau 2001, Dupla 2002)
Gastric dilatation/volvulus
·Breed at risk in case series
(Sargan 2004)
Gluten-sensitive enteropathy
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Clinical signs develop at 4-7 months
(Batt, Carter & McClean 1984, Garden et al. 2000)
Vascular ring anomaly
·Clinical presentation at time of weaning
(Patterson 1989, Van Grundy 1989,
Gunby, Hardie & Bjorling 2004)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Canine leucocyte adhesion deficiency (CLAD)
·Seen in the UK and Sweden
· Genetic test available (Optigen; AHT; Health-Gene) - see
Appendix
(Giger 2003)
412
Musculoskeletal conditions
Irish Setter hypochondroplasia
·Mildly short limbs seen
·Inherited as autosomal recessive
(Langely-Hobbs 2006b)
Metaphyseal osteopathy
· Aka hypertrophic osteodystrophy
·Uncommon
·Affects dogs aged 2-6months
·  Males possibly predisposed
·Aetiology unknown
· Odds ratio 14.3 compared to mixed breeds
(Nieves 2002, LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Hemangiopericytoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 10 years
·Predilection site: limbs
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Insulinoma
· See under Endocrine conditions
Melanoma - cutaneous
413
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 8.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Osteosarcoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Males over-represented
· Seen in older dogs
(Sargan 2004)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland adenomas
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age was 10.5 years
·Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Sebaceous gland tumours
· Breed at risk of sebaceous epithelioma in case series
·Mean age 10.7 years
·Common site: head and eyelids
(Scott & Anderson 1990)
Sweat gland tumour
·Breed at risk of apocrine adenoma in case series
·Mean age 9.5years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Trichoepithelioma
414
·Breed at risk in case series
· Mean age 8.6 years
· Uncommon tumour
· Predilection sites: limbs, back and trunk
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Ambylopia and quadriplegia
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
 Congenital paralysis and blindnesswith no visible ocular cause
(ambylopia)
·Rare condition
(Sakai, Harashima & Yamamura 1994)
Cerebellar hypoplasia
· Congenital
·Rare
· Signs noted from 2 to 3 weeks
·Possibly inherited
(Thomas 2002)
Globoid cell leukodystrophy
·Rare condition
·Autosomal recessive inheritiance
(McGraw & Carmichael 2006)
Idiopathic epilepsy
· Inherited in this breed
415
·Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
· Common condition
(Bagley 2005)
Lissencephaly
·Rare developmental disease
·Age of onset: <l year
(Inzana 2002)
Ocular conditions
Amblyopia (seen with quadriplegia)
·  Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance
·See also under Neurological conditions
(Palmer, Payne & Lallace 1973, Rubin 1989)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Lower lids affected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating
membrane
· Inheritance suspected
·Usually occurs in young dogs
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
416
Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance
·  Rod-cone dysplasia type I
· Early onset, most dogs are blind at 6 months old
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Genetic test available (Optigen; AHT; VetGen; HealthGene) -
see Appendix
·A second form of PRA, occurring at 45 years, may be seen in
this breed
(Aguirre & Rubin 1975, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Micropapilla
· Congenital
· Seen occasionally in this breed
(Rubin 1989)
 Persistent hyaloid artery
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence (causing
urinary incontinence)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Spayed females predisposed
417
(Holt & Thrusfield 1993)
Respiratory conditions
Largyngeal paralysis
· Idiopathic
· Common condition
·May be inherited by an autosomal dominant mode
(Burbidge 1995)
IRISH TERRIER
Dermatological conditions
Footpad hyperkeratosis
·Affects animals around 6 months
·Thought to be autosomal recessive inheritance
(Binder et al. 2000)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
Muscular dystrophy
·Rare condition
· X-linked degenerative myopathy described in a litter of Irish
Terrier puppies
(Wentink et al. 1972)
418
Neoplastic conditions
Melanoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 8.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Ocular conditions
Multiple ocular defects
·Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Defectsmay include microphthalmia, cataract, PPMs and retinal
dysplasia
(Rubin 1989)
Reproductive conditions
Cystic
endometrial
 hyperplasia-pyometra
complex
(pyometra)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Common disease of older entire bitches (mean age 7.25 years)
· Most cases present within 12 weeks of oestrus
(Chastain, Panciera &Waters 1999, Smith 2006)
IRISH WATER SPANIEL
Dermatological conditions
Pattern baldness/follicular dysplasia
419
·A marked predilection in this breed implies a genetic basis for
this group of diseases
· Dietary factorsmay also play a role
· Hair loss begins at 2-4 years of age, and occurs mainly on the
flanks
·Hair loss is due to fracture of the hair in this breed
·Eventually the whole of the trunk is involved
(Cerundolo et al. 2000)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 5 years
Figure 16 Atrial fibrillation (Lead II trace, 10 mm/mV, 25
mm/s).
Atrial fibrillation (Lead II trace, 10 mm/mV, 25 mm/s)
· Localization: posterior subcapsular cortex; slowly progressive,
no visual deficits
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
420
IRISH WOLFHOUND
Cardiovascular conditions
Atrial fibrillation (see figure 16)
·High frequency (10.5%) in this breed
· Often asymptomatic
·Often associated with dilated cardiomyopathy, but in one study.
rhythm
disturbances   without
evidenceofdilated
cardiomyopathy were found in 48/500 dogs
· Ventricular premature complexes may also be seen in this breed
(Vollmar 2000)
Dilated cardiomyopathy (see figure 17)
·Prevalence of 5.6% in this breed compared to 0.16% in mixed
breeds and 0.65% in pure breeds
· Increased prevalence with age
·Approximately twice as common in males as females
·  Thought to be familial or genetic
(Vollmar 2000)
Dermatological conditions
Callus dermatitis/pyoderma
· Common condition
· Most common over hock and elbow joints of this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Figure 17 Dorsoventral thoracic radiograph showing an
enlarged cardiac silhouette due to dilated cardiomyopathy
421
Endocrine conditions
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
· May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
·Neutered males and females at increased risk
422
(Greco 2002)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital portosystemic shunt
· Breed at risk in case series, polygenic inheritance suspected
·Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
·Usually intrahepatic
(Meyer et al. 1995, Hunt 2004, Sargan 2004)
Gastric dilatation/volvulus
·Breed at risk in case series
(Sargan 2004)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Immunodeficiency syndrome of Irish Wolfhounds
·Seen in Europe and North America
·Uncommon
·May be hereditary
·Selective reduction in serumIgAconcentration
· Causes chronic rhinitis and/or bronchitis
(Day 2006a)
Von Willebrand's disease
·Possibly inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· Common in this breed in the UK
(Urfer, Gaillard & Steiger 2007)
423
Musculoskeletal conditions
Elbow dysplasia
·Common cause of forelimb lameness
· Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process (odds ratio 93.4
compared to mixed breeds) is common in this breed
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Metaphyseal osteopathy
· Aka hypertrophic osteodystrophy
·Uncommon
·Affects dogs aged 2-6months
·  Males possibly predisposed
·Aetiology unknown
(Nieves 2002)
Panosteitis
· Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 2.3 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 52.4 (compared to mixed breeds)
424
(Rudd,Whitehair & Margolis 1990, LaFond, Breur &
Austin 2002)
Stifle osteochondrosis
· Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 5-12 months, but may be earlier
·Odds ratio 56.3 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Fibrosarcoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Females may be predisposed
·Mean age 8.6 years in one study
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Osteosarcoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·  Males over-represented
· Seen in older dogs
(Egenvall, Nodtvedt & von Euler 2007)
425
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 6.6 years
· Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Toma & Noli 2005)
Neurological conditions
Cervical vertebral malformation (wobbler syndrome)
· Congenital bony stenosis of cervical vertebrae seen occasionally
·Age of clinical onset: <2 years
(Dewey 2003b)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 1-2 years (with rapid progression), or 5-7 years
(with slower progression)
· Localization: posterior subcapsular cortex
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
· Lateral lower lids affected
(Rubin 1989)
426
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating membrane
· Inheritance suspected
·Usually occurs in young dogs
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Early onset. Blindness at 2-3 years of age
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Micropapilla
· Congenital condition
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Seen with abnormal vitreous
(Rubin 1989)
Respiratory conditions
Rhinitis/bronchopneumonia syndrome
· See Immunodeficiency syndrome, under Haematological/
immunological conditions
ITALIAN GREYHOUND
427
Dermatological conditions
Pattern baldness
·Usually affects females in this breed
·Gradual hair loss from 6 months of age
·Affects mainly the ventrum and caudomedial thighs
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Drug reactions
Thiopentone
·This breed has a greatly increased susceptibility to thiopentone
· Use of this drug is not recommended in this breed
(Robinson, Sams & Muir 1986)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
428
·Mean age 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
· Localization: posterior subcapsular cortex
·Age of onset: 2-3 years; 50% of affected cases suffer vision loss
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Glaucoma
· Most cases are secondary to vitreal degeneration
·Age of onset: from 2 years
(Rubin 1989)
Optic nerve hypoplasia
·Congenital; not known if inherited
· Uncommoncondition seen occasionally in this breed
429
(Rubin 1989)
Vitreal Syneresis
·Breed at increased risk, familial
·22% dogs affected (CERF 2000-2005)
· May result in anterior displacement of vitreous and glaucoma
·Dogs may be affected from 2 years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
ITALIAN SPINONE (SPINONE ITALIANO)
Ocular conditions
Entropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
JACK RUSSELL TERRIER
Dermatological conditions
Black hair follicular dysplasia
· Uncommon
·Changes usually seen by 4 weeks of age
· Thought to be inherited as an autsomal recessive trait
(Schmutz et al. 1998)
Dermatophytosis
·  Common fungal infection
430
· No sex predisposition
(Sparkes et al. 1993)
Malassezia dermatitis
·Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Vasculitis
·Uncommon
·Possible predisposition in this breed
(Parker & Foster 1996)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine conditions
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Median age 10
(Peterson 2007)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital portosystemic shunt
·Breed at risk in case series
431
·Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
· Usually extrahepatic
(Sargan 2004, Hunt 2004)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Factor X deficiency
· Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive
·Severe signs in this breed
(Brooks 1999, Littlew0od 2000)
Severe combined immunodeficiency
·Inherited as autosomal recessive
· Excessive mortality reported in young puppies from a single
breeding pair
(Giger 2003)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Congenital myasthenia gravis
· See under Neurological conditions
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
·Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
432
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Pituitary tumour resulting in hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series
· See under Endocrine conditions
(Peterson 2007)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Congenital myasthenia gravis
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Rare
·Age of clinical onset: 2-6 months
(Wallace & Palmer 1984)
Hereditary ataxia
· Reported in Britain
· Age of clinical onset: 2-6 months
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
(Dewey 2003b)
Ocular conditions
433
Cataract
· Inherited, mode unknown
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Oberbauer et al. 2008)
Ectopic cilia
·Uncommon condition,breed at increased risk
(Gelatt 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
·May also be seen secondary to lens luxation
(Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, Gelatt 2007)
Lens luxation (primary)
·Inherited
·Age of onset: 3-6 years
· Genetic test available (Orthopedic Foundation for Animals) -
see Appendix
Rubin
1989,
ACVO
Genetics
Committee
2007,
Oberbauer et al. 2008)
Respiratory conditions
Pulmonary interstitial fibrosis
·Aetiology unknown
·Affects older dogs
· No sex predisposition
434
(Hawkins 2006)
JAPANESE AKITA
Cardiovascular conditions
Pericardial effusion
·Relative risk 6.5
·Usually affects middle-aged dogs
(Buchanan 1999)
Ventricular septal defect
·Relative risk 4.1
· No sex predilection
(Buchanan 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Canine uveodermatological syndrome
·Also known as Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome
·See alsounder Ocular conditions
(Beale 2006)
Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis
·Young to middle-aged dogs affected
·Autosomal recessive mode of inheritance suspected
·Uncommon
·  No apparent sex predisposition
·Tends to involve generalized, greasy changes in Akitas
435
·Some animals may show systemic signs
· Mean age at diagnosis 4.8 years
·10/104 cases were Akitas in a Swedish study
(Tevell, Bergvall and Egenvall 2008)
Pemphigus foliaceous
· Uncommon
· No sex predisposition
·Mean age of onset 4.2 years
·Odds ratio of 37.8 in this breed
(Ihrke et al. 1985, Kuhl, Shofer & Goldschmidt 1994)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Gastric dilatation/volvulus
·Breed at risk in case series
(Sargan 2004)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia A
·Moderate Factor VIlI deficiency in this breed
· Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture (see figure1 8)
436
·Common cause ofhindlimblameness
·Neutered individuals may be predisposed
(Duval et al. 1999)
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
· Young males predisposed
Figure 18 Lateral radiograph of a stifle demonstrating
cranial cruciate ligament disease. Courtesy of Andy
Moores.
437
·Odds ratio 1.8 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
°Odds ratio 6.7 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neurological conditions
438
Acquired myasthenia gravis
·Uncommon
· Bimodal age presentation of 4 months to 4 years and 9 years to
13 years
(Penderis 2003)
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Congenital vestibular disease
·Signs seen <3 months
·May be seen with congenital deafness
· Often bilateral in this breed
(Bagley 2005)
Glycogenosis (glycogen storage disease)
·Rare
· Age of clinical onset: <3 months
(Shelton 2002)
Ocular conditions
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
439
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Night blindness is present at 1-3 years, complete blindness at
3-5years
·Schedule B BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 2-4 years
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, Gelatt 2007)
Multiple ocular defects
· Congenital defects; autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· May include microphthalmia, cataract, posterior lenticonus and
retinal dysplasia
(Laratta et al. 1985, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Uveodermatologic
syndrome
(also
known
as
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk
·Young adults (1.5-4 years) affected
Morgan 1989, Rubin 1989, Angles, Famula & Pedersen
2005, ACVO Genetcis Committee 2007)
440
Physiological conditions
Red blood cell microcytosis
·Red blood cellsmay be small in this breedwithout disease
·MCVmay be as lowas 55-64 fl (normal 85-95)
· Red blood cells contain more potassium than other breeds;
therefore haemolysis can cause false findings of hyperkalaemia
(Degen 1987)
JAPANESE CHIN
Musculoskeletal conditions
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 4.8 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neurological conditions
Atlantoaxial subluxation
· Congenital
·Relatively common in this breed
·Age of clinical onset: <l year
(Axlund 2004)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
441
·Breed at risk in case series
·May be seen with progressive retinal atrophy and retinal
detachment
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Entropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
· Upper lid affected resulting in trichiasis
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Persistent hyaloid artery
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Pigmentary  keratitis/chronic  keratitis
(resulting
from
exposure keratopathy)
·Breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
JAPANESE SHIBA INU
(See Shiba Inu)
JAPANESE TOSA
Infectious conditions
Babesiosis (Babesia gibsoni)
442
· High incidence reported in this breed in Japan (unknown if this
is due to a true breed susceptibility or increased risk of exposure
via ticks or possibly bites)
· Often subclinical
·Tickborne disease but possibly also transmitted by fighting
(Miyama et al. 2005)
KEESHOND
Cardiovascular conditions
Patent ductus arteriosus
· Common congenital abnormality
·Relative risk 5.9
· Females predisposed
·Mode of inheritance is polygenic
(Matic 1988)
Tetralogy of Fallot
· Congenital
·Uncommon
(Darke 1989)
Ventricular septal defect
· Congenital
·Uncommon
(Matic 1988)
Dermatological conditions
443
Adult-onset growth hormone-responsive dermatosis
· See under Endocrine conditions
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine conditions
Adult-onset growth hormone-responsive dermatosis
·Males may be predisposed
·Clinical signs seen at any age but often 1-2 years
(Lothrup 1988)
Diabetes mellitus
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Insulin-dependant diabetesmellitus due to hypoplasia of the
cells of the Islet of Langerhans
· Onset before 6 months
(Kramer et al. 1988)
Primary hyperparathyroidism
· Autosomal dominant inheritance
· Older dogs affected
· Genetic test available (Goldstein molecular and Genetics
Laboratory) - see Appendix
(Berger & Feldman 1987, Goldstein et al. 2007)
Musculoskeletal conditions
444
Hip dysplasia (see figure 19)
· Common condition
 Neutered male dogs predisposed
Figure 19 Ventrodorsal radiograph of a dog showing
dysplastic hips. Courtesy of Andy Moores.
445
· Odds ratio 1.8 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 4.4 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Intracutaneous cormifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Parathyroid
tumours
(resulting
in
primary
hyperparathyroidism)
· See under Endocrine conditions
Neurological conditions
Idiopathic epilepsy
·Inherited
·Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
· Common condition
(Cunningham & Farmbach 1988)
Ocular conditions
446
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
· Three types: rapidly progressive posterior cortical cataracts are
seen in young dogs (5 months); slowly progressive posterior
cortical cataracts seen at 6-24 months; slowly progressive
anterior cortical cataracts seen at 6 years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Ectopic cilia
· Uncommon condition, breed at increased risk
(D'Anna et al. 2007)
KERRY BLUE TERRIER
Dermatological conditions
Dermoid cyst
·Rare developmental abnormalities
· Often congenital and hereditary
· Solitary or multiple
· Occur on the dorsal midline
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001c)
Footpad hyperkeratosis
·Reported in several related Kerry Blues
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Spiculosis
447
·Rare
·Affects young, entire male Kerry Blues
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Vascular naevus
· More common in older dogs
· Occur most commonly on the scrotum
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001c)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Haematological/immunological conditions
Factor XI deficiency
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Heterozygotes asymptomatic
· Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
(Brooks 1999, Littlew00d 2000, Giger 2003,)
Neoplastic conditions
Basal cell tumour (many cases are now reclassified as
trichoblastoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.9 years
· Mostly found on head and neck
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
448
Cutaneous papillomas (not virally associated)
·Breed at risk
· Seen in older dogs
· More common in males
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 1995)
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 6.6 years
· Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Toma & Noli 2005)
Trichoblastoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually older than 5 years
·Common
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 200
Neurological conditions
Cerebellar degeneration
449
·Rare
· Signs seen at 9-16 weeks of age and progress until unable to
stand at 10-12 months
(LeCouteur 2002)
Canine multiple system degeneration
·Presents as a movement disorder
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Occurs at 3-6 months of age
(O'Brien et al. 2005)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset; early. Progress rapidly to cause visual difficulties
at 2 years
· Localization: posterior cortex
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
· Lower lids affected.May be associatedwith microblepharon
(Rubin 1989)
Microblepharon (blepharophimosis)
· Inheritance suspected
450
(Gelatt 2007)
Optic nerve hypoplasia
· Congenital; not known if inherited
·Uncommoncondition seen occasionally in this breed
(Rubin 1989)
KING CHARLES SPANIEL (ENGLISH TOY SPANIEL)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
·Breed at increased risk
· Middle aged
(Guilford & Strombeck 1996a)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
· Localization: posterior cortex and nucleus
· Age of onset: 6 months; rapidly progressive to completion and
blindness
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Corneal dystrophy
· Inheritance suspected
· Stromal lipid dystrophy
·Age of onset: 2-5 years
451
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Microphthalmia
·Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· May be accompanied by cataract
(Rubin 1989)
Persistence of the hyaloid system and posterior lenticonus
·Congenital, inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Pigmentary
keratitis/chronic keratitis (resulting
from
exposure keratopathy)
·Breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Pseudopapilloedema
452
· Congenital
(Rubin 1989)
KOMONDOR
Neoplastic conditions
Trichoepithelioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 8.6 years
·Uncommon tumour
·Predilection sites: limbs, back and trunk
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Localization: anterior cortex
·Age of onset: <4 years; slowly progressive
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
KUVASZ (HUNGARIAN KUVASZ)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 10.2 (compared to mixed breeds)
453
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
· Odds ratio 29.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(Rudd,Whitehair & Margolis 1990, LaFond, Breur &
Austin 2002)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
· Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Progressive rod-cone degeneration
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
LABRADOR RETRIEVER
Cardiovascular conditions
454
Bypass tract macro re-entrant tachycardia in  Labrador
Retrievers
·Abnormal conduction leading to dysrhythmia
·Rare condition
(Moise 1999)
Pericardial effusion
·Acquired
·Relatively common
· No sex predisposition
·Relative risk 2.2
·14/87 dogs with this condition were Labradors or Labrador
crosses in one study
(Tobias et al. 2002)
Tricuspid dysplasia
·Congenital
·Uncommon
·  Males predisposed
·Marked risk in this breed (relative risk >5)
(Tidholm 1997, Buchanan 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Acral lick dermatitis
·Occurs in malesmore commonly than females
· Can occur at any age, but usually over 5 years
(Virga 2004)
455
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
· Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
-This breed had a risk factor of 2.8 cases per 1000 dog years at
insurance claim for atopy)
(Nodtvedt et al. 2006)
Blastomycosis
·See under Infectious conditions
Canine juvenile cellulitis
· Familial; possibly inherited
· Usually 1-4 months of age at onset
(Lemarie 2003)
Contact hypersensitivity
·  Rare condition
· One study found 20% of cases occurred in yellow
Labradors
(Walton 1977)
Cyclic follicular dysplasia
456
· Seems to be a particular problem in Alaska, so duration of
daylight exposure may be important
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 20011)
Eosinophilic dermatitis and oedema
· Hypersensitivity reaction suspected
·Four out of 9 dogs in a case series were Labrador Retrievers
·Rare
(Holm et al. 1999)
Greying
· May occur at a young age in this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Hereditary nasal parakeratosis in Labrador Retrievers
·Newly described disease
·Affects Labradors and their crosses
·Age of onset: 6-12 months
·Mode of inheritance unknown
(Page et al. 2003)
Mucocutaneous hypopigmentation
·May have concurrent seasonal nasal hypopigmentation
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Nasal depigmentation
·Affects yellow Labradors
457
·Also known as Dudley nose
·Cause unknown
· Seasonal depigmentation also seen in this breed; also known as
snow nose
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Pemphigus foliaceous
srduad panunp on asodsad aq e paa su e
foliaceous
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
Pododermatitis
·Can affect any age or sex
·Males predisposed
· Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Primary lymphoedema
·  No apparent sex predisposition
·Usually occurs within first 12 weeks of life
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Primary seborrhoea
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Signs first appear at an early age and get worse
· In this breed, otitis, greasy seborrhoea and dermatitis are seen 
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
458
Pyotraumatic folliculitis
·Young dogs predisposed
·Also known as hot spot, wet eczema
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy
·Age range of dogs affected 3-8 years
·No sex predilection
(Rosychuk 2002)
Vascular naevus
· More common in older dogs
· Occur most commonly on the scrotum
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001c)
Waterline disease ofblack Labrador Retrievers
·Affects either sex
·May be due to Malassezia infection and may not represent a
distinct disease
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001i)
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
·In this breed, occurs in rapidly growing puppies fed
zinc-deficient diets
459
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001 g)
Endocrine conditions
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Median age 10
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Wood et al. 2007)
Insulinoma
·Breed at increased risk
·Middle-aged/older dogs affected
·Uncommon
(Caywood et al. 1988, Lorenz 2002)
Primary hypoparathyroidism
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Can occur at any age
·Uncommon
(Bruyette & Feldman 1988, Feldman & Nelson 1996)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Chronic hepatitis
·Breed at increased risk
·Middle-aged females predisposed
· Often associated with increased hepatic copper, an underlying
inherited copper storage defect has been proposed
460
(Hoffmann et al. 2006, Shih et al. 2007)
Congenital idiopathic megaoesophagus
·Breed at increased risk
(Washabau 2001, Dupla 2002)
Congenital portosystemic shunt
·Breed at risk in case series
·Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
(Tobias & Rohrbach 2003, Sargan 2004)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia A
· Moderate to severe Factor VllI deficiency in this breed
·Familial and sporadic in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Haemophilia B
·Factor IX defiency
·Also known as Christmas disease
· Inherited as a sex-linked trait
·Less common than haemophilia A
(Giger 2008)
Infectious conditions
Blastomycosis
461
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Young (2-4 years) entire males predisposed
·Geographic distribution: mainly North America
(Mississippi, Missouri, Ohio River valleys, mid-Atlantic
States, Quebec, Manitoba and Ontario)
·Proximity to a body of water is a risk factor in endemic areas
(Rudmann et al. 1992, Arceneaux, Taboada & Hosgood
1998, Kerl 2003, Crews et al. 2008)
Infectious skin disease
· See under Dermatological conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
Canine idiopathic polyarthritis
·Usually affects dogs at 1-3 years, but any age can be affected
· Predisposition seen in this breed in some studies
(Clements et al. 2004)
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture
· Common cause of hindlimb lameness
· Neutered individuals may be predisposed
(Duval et al. 1999)
Congenital elbow luxation
· Uncommon
·Radial head luxation seen in this breed
· Occurs at 4-5 months of age
462
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Elbow dysplasia
·Common cause of forelimb lameness
· Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process (odds ratio 20.5
compared to mixed breeds) and ununited anconeal process (odds
ratio 8.5) is common in this breed
· Osteochondritis dissecans and fragmented coronoid processes
are inherited independently as polygenic traits in this breed
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Robins & Innes 2006)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio in the breed 2.34
· One study estimated the prevalence in this breed as 12.6%
(Morgan,Wind & Davidson 1999, Witsberger et al. 2008)
Hock osteochondritis dissecans
·Affects dogs 5-9 months of age
· Relatively common cause of lameness
· Most commonly affects themedial ridge of the talus in this breed
·Odds ratio 45.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Miller & Hulse 2006)
Labrador Retriever myopathy (centronuclear myopathy)
· Relatively common in the UK
*Autosomal recessive inheritance
463
·Genetic test available (AHT; VetGen) - see Appendix
(Bley et al. 2002)
Metaphyseal osteopathy
· Aka hypertrophic osteodystrophy
· Uncommon
· Affects dogs aged 2-6months
·  Males possibly predisposed
·Aetiology unknown
·Odds ratio 5.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(Nieves 2002, LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Ocular-skeletal dysplasia
·Defect of growth of tubular bone
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
· See also retinal dysplasia with skeletal abnormalities under
Ocular conditions
(Zhu et al. 1992)
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
· Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 1.6 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
· Mainly medial luxation observed
464
(Arthurs & Langley-Hobbs 2006, Alam et al. 2007)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
· Odds ratio 13.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(Rudd,Whitehair & Margolis 1990, LaFond, Breur &
Austin 2002)
Stifle osteochondrosis
· Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 5-12 months, but may beearlier
· Odds ratio 27.6 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Transitional vertebral segments
· Females are predisposed
· Thought to be inherited
(Morgan,Wind & Davidson 1999)
Neoplastic conditions
Adrenocortical tumour resulting in
hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series
· Females slightly over-represented
· See under Endocrine conditions
465
(Reusch & Feldman 1991, Kyles et al. 2003)
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
·Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk
· Mean age reported as 10 years
(Brown, Patnaik & MacEwen 1985, Pastor 2002)
Histiocytosis - localized and disseminated
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Age of onset: > 5 years
(Affolter & Moore 2002, Moore, Affloter & Vernau 2006,
Naranjo, Dubielzig & Friedrichs 2007, Schultz et al. 2007)
Insulinoma
· See under Endocrine conditions
Lipoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Most common in middle-aged, obese female dogs
·  This breed predisposed to infiltrative lipomas
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Bergman et al. 1994)
466
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Melanoma - ocular (limbal and canine uveal anterior uveal
melanoma)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Mean age 6.2 years (with bimodal distribution 3-4 years and
7-10 years)
(Donaldson et al. 2006)
Myxosarcoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 9.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Pituitary tumour resulting in hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series
· See under Endocrine conditions
(Wood et al. 2007)
Squamous cell carcinoma of the digit
·Breed at risk in case series
·Middle-aged to older dogs
467
· Dogs with black coats seem to be more frequently affected
(O'Brien, Berg & Engler 1992, Henry et al. 2005)
Thymoma
· Uncommon tumour
·Breed at risk in case series
·Middle-aged and older dogs affected
(Day 1997)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
· Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Exercise-induced collapse of Labrador Retrievers
· Uncommon condition
·Occurs at 7 months to 2 years of age
·Cause unknown
· Genetic test available (University of Minnesota) -- see Appendix
(Platt 2008)
Idiopathic epilepsy
· Inherited in this breed
·Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
· Common condition
(Thomas 2003)
468
Labrador Retriever central axonopathy
·Rare condition
·Signs seen when puppies could first walk
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
(De Lahunta et al. 1994)
Leukodystrophy
·Rare
· White matter primarily affected in this breed
· Clinical signs at 3-6 months
(Dewey 2003a)
Narcolepsy-cataplexy
·Familial
·Age of clinical onset: <l year
· Genetic test available (Optigen;HealthGene) - see Appendix
(Tonokura, Fujita & Nishina 2007)
Ocular conditions
Abnormal pigment deposition
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Van de Sandt et al. 2003)
Cataract
· Dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance suggested
· Age of onset: 6-18 months
469
· Localization: posterior polar subcapsular; slowly progressive;
rarely proceeds to blindness
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Other types have been reported less commonly
(Curtis & Barmett 1989, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Ectropion
·Mild, usually disappears with maturity
(Rubin 1989)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Lateral lower lids affected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007, Read & Broun 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
(GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Progressive rod-cone degeneration
·Late onset. Night blindness at 4-6 years, severe visual
impairment at 6-8 years
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Rubin 1989, Kommonen & Karhunen 1990, Sargan 2004,
ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
470
Glaucoma
·Secondary to cataracts (Gelatt & Mackay 2004b)
Medial canthal pocket syndrome
·Breed predisposition due to head shape
(Rubin 1989)
Melanoma - ocular (limbal and canine uveal anterior uveal
melanoma)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 6.2 years (with bimodal distribution 3-4 years and
7-10 years)
(Donaldson et al. 2006)
Micropapilla
· Congenital
·Seen occasionally in this breed
(Rubin 1989)
Pseudopapilloedema
·Congenital
(Rubin 1989)
Retinal dysplasia -- geographic
· Inheritance suspected
·Retinal dysplasia without skeletal deformity is seen more
commonly in Europe than the USA
471
(Holle et al. 1999, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Retinal dysplasia without skeletal deformity is seen more
commonly in Europe than the USA
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - total, with retinal detachment
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Retinal dysplasia without skeletal deformity is seen more
commonly in Europe than the USA
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal dysplasia with skeletal abnormalities (oculoskeletal
dysplasia)
· Dogs may be affected with retinal dysplasias (total, geographic
or multifocal) and varying degrees of developmental skeletal
abnormalities (short-limbed dwarfism)
autosomal gene which has recessive effects on the skeleton and
incomplete dominant effects on the eye
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
·See also under musculoskeletalconditions
(Carrig et al. 1988, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
472
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED), also known
as central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA)
       
suggested
· More prevalent in the UK than in the USA. Becoming less
prevalent following the introduction of control schemes
· Ophthalmoscopic signs seen at 2-3 years of age; visual
problems noticed at 5-7 years
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Bedford 2001, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Uveal cysts
·Breed at increased risk
·Mean age 9.l years in one study
(Rubin 1989, Corcoran & Koch 1993)
Physiological conditions
Vertebral heart score
·The healthy Labrador has a higher mean score than most other
breeds
·Normal range for this breed is 9.7-11.7
(Smith 2004)
Renal and urinary conditions
Ectopic ureters
·Uncommon congenital anomaly
473
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually presents <l year of age
·More commonly diagnosed in females
(Holt & Moore 1995, Lamb & Gregory 1998, Cannizz0 et
al. 2003, Berent, Mayhew & Porat-Mosenco 2008)
Urolithiasis - silica
·Breed at risk in case series
· Mean age at diagnosis 5.8 years
· Males predisposed
(Osborme et al. 1999)
Respiratory conditions
Largyngeal paralysis
· Idiopathic
· Common condition
·May be inherited by an autosomal dominant mode
(Burbidge 1995)
Tracheal hypoplasia and collapse
· Uncommon condition
· Most affected dogs have a common ancestry
·Affects Black Labradors
(Harvey 1989)
LAKELAND TERRIER
Cardiovascular conditions
474
Ventricular septal defect
· No sex predilection
·Congenital
(Buchanan 1999)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 1-3 years; slowly progressive
· Localization: posterior subcapsular cortex
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2005)
Lens luxation
· Inheritance suspected
(Curtis & Barnett 1980)
Microphthalmia and persistent papillary membranes
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·May be seen with cataract formation and focal retinal dysplasia
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
475
LANCASHIRE HEELER
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Inheritance suspected
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
Collie eye anomaly
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Bedford 1998, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Lens luxation (primary)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: >3 years
· Genetic test available (Orthopedic Foundation for Animals) -
see Appendix
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Sargan 2004, Sargan et al. 2007)
Persistent pupillary membranes
· Inheritance suspected
· Common condition, relatively high frequency in this breed
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
LAPLAND DOG
476
Musculoskeletal conditions
Glycogen storage disease type II
·Also known as Pompe's disease
·Rare condition
· Seen in four related Lapland dogs
·Age of onset from 6 months
(Walvoort 1985)
LEONBERGER
Neoplastic conditions
Osteosarcoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·  Males over-represented
· Seen in older dogs
(Egenvall, Nodtvedt & von Euler 2007)
Neurological conditions
Inherited polyneuropathy
·X-linked inheritance suspected
·Age of onset between 1 and 9 years of age
(Shelton et al. 2003)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
477
· Inheritance suspected
· Localization: posterior polar subcapsular
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·Several other types of cataract have been described but it is not
known whether they are inherited
(Heinrich et al. 2006, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Ectropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Associated with macroblepharon
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Entropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Associated with macroblepharon
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating membrane
· Inheritance suspected
· Usually occurs in young dogs
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Macroblepharon ('diamond eye')
· Inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Reproductive conditions
478
Cystic
 endometrial
 hyperplasia-pyometra
 complex
(pyometra)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Common disease of older entire bitches (mean age 7.25 years)
·Most cases present within 12 weeks of oestrus
(Chastain, Panciera &Waters 1999)
LHASA APSO
Cardiovascular conditions
Myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve
·Also known as chronic valvular disease
·Relative risk 2.4 (not statistically significant) in one study
· Increased prevalence with age
·Aetiology unknown but likely genetic basis
(Buchanan 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
·Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Generalized demodicosis
479
· Common condition
· Younger dogs predisposed
· No sex predilection
-Susceptibility to generalized demodicosis may be inherited
· 47% of cases in a study in India were reported as Tibetan Apsos
(Nayak et al. 1997)
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Skin tumours
·See under Neoplastic conditions
Gastrointestinal conditions
Antral pyloric hypertrophy (pyloric stenosis)
·Breed predisposition to adult-onset pyloric hypertrophy
syndrome
·Males may be predisposed
(Hall 2000)
Haematological/immunological conditions
·Haemophilia A
·Severe Factor VllI deficiency in this breed
·Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
480
Haemophilia B
·Factor IX deficiency
·Also known as Christmas disease
·Reported in a colony of this breed
·Genetic test available
(Mauser et al. 1996)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease
·Uncommon condition
*Odds ratio 6.7 in one study (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 3.4 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland adenomas
481
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age was 10.5 years
·Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt &Mcmanus
2000)
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 6.6 years
· Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Sebaceous gland tumours
·Breed at risk of sebaceous epithelioma in case series
·Mean age 10.7 years
·Common site: head and eyelids
(Scott & Anderson 1990)
Sweat gland tumour
· Breed at risk of apocrine adenoma in case series
·Mean age 9.5 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Atlantoaxial subluxation
· Congenital spinal anomaly
·Age of onset: <l year
482
(Bagley 2005)
Hydrocephalus
· Congenital
·Relatively common
· Genetic and environmental factors suspected
· Onset of signs: <3 months
(Inzana 2002)
Intervertebral disc disease
·Common condition
·Age of onset often around 3-6 years
(Sturges 2006)
Lissencephaly
· Rare developmental disease
·Age of onset: <l year
(Saito et al. 2002)
Ocular conditions
Caruncular trichiasis
·Occurs with exophthalmos
(Gelatt 2007, Peiffer & Petersen-Jones 2009)
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
483
·Age of onset: 3-6 years
· Localization: posterior subcapsular cortex. Progressive
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Ectopic cilia
·Uncommon condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, D'Anna et al. 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Clinically detected at 3 years
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
· May also be seen secondary to vitreal syneresis
(Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, Gelatt 2007)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (see plate 19 in the colour plate
section)
·Breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, Kaswan & Salisbury 1990, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Lacrimal punctal atresia
484
· Congenital
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Macroblepharon (leading to exposure keratopathy)
·Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Nasal fold trichiasis
(Gelatt 2007)
Pigmentary
 keratitis/chronic keratitis (resulting  from
exposure keratopathy)
·Breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Prolapse of the gland of the nictitating membrane ('cherry
eye')
·Breed at increased risk
· Usually presents in the first 1-2 years of life
(Rubin 1989, Morgan, Duddy & McClurg 1993, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Vitreal syneresis
· Breed predisposition
·Age of onset: 2 years and older
· May result in glaucoma
(Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, Gelatt 2007)
485
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial renal disease (renal dysplasia)
· Mode of inheritance unknown
·Cases present with chronic renal failure from a few months of
age
(O'Brien et al. 1982, Osborme & Finco 1995)
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age at diagnosis in one large study: males 8.l years,
females 8.4 years
·Males predisposed (3:1 in one large study)
(Osborme & Finco 1995, Lulich et al. 1999, Osborme et al.
1999, Houston et al. 2004)
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age at diagnosis in one large study: males 6.0 years,
females 5.7 years
·  Females predisposed (16:1 in one large study)
(Osborme et al. 1999, Houston et al. 2004)
LOWCHEN
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
486
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
LUNDEHUND (NORWEGIAN LUNDEHUND)
Gastrointestinal conditions
·Breed at increased risk
· Specific syndrome in this breed associatedwith gastritis, gastric
neoplasia and lymphocyticplasmacytic enteritis
(Landsverk & Gamlem 1984, Kolbjornsen Press &
Landsverk 1994)
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis
·Associated with lymphangiectasia (see above)
MCNAB SHEPHERD
Drug reactions
Ivermectin and milbemycin
· High doses can cause tremors, ataxia, coma and death
·Associated with the mutant MDR1 allele
(Dowling 2006)
MALTESE
Cardiovascular conditions
487
Myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve
·Also known as chronic valvular disease, endocardiosis
·Relative risk 4.2
· Increased prevalence with age
· Aetiology unknown but likely genetic basis
(Fuentes 2003)
Patent ductus arteriosus
·Common congenital abnormality
·Females predisposed
·Relative risk 12.4
(Hogan 2002)
Dermatological conditions
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Rabies vaccine-associated vasculitis and alopecia
·Lesions appear at the site of the vaccine, 3-6 months after
administration
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
Skin tumours
·See under Neoplastic conditions
488
Gastrointestinal conditions
Antral pyloric hypertrophy (pyloric stenosis)
·Breed predispositionto adult-onset pyloric hypertrophy
syndrome
· Males may be predisposed
(Bellinger et al. 1990, Hall 2000)
Congenital portosystemic shunt
·Breed at risk in case series
·Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
· Usually extrahepatic
(Tisdall et al. 1994, Tobias & Rohrbach 2003, Hunt 2004,
Sargan 2004)
Haematological/immunological conditions
·Haemophilia B
·Severe Factor IX deficiency in this breed
· Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Mainly medial luxation observed
·Odds ratio 6.5 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Alam et al. 2007)
489
Neoplastic conditions
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 6.6 years
· Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
· Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Hydrocephalus
·Congenital
·Relatively common
· Genetic and environmental factors suspected
· Onset of signs: <3 months
(Inzana 2002)
Necrotizing meningoencephalitis
· Uncommon condition
(Higgins et al. 2008)
Shaker dog disease
490
·  Idiopathic
·Age of clinical onset <5 years
·Uncommon
(Bagley 2005)
Ocular conditions
Caruncular trichiasis
(Rubin 1989)
Cataract
·Breed at risk in case series
(Gelatt & Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Ectopic cilia
·Uncommon condition, breed at increased risk
(D'Anna et al. 2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Clinically detected at 4-7 years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
491
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 6-16 years
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt 2007)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism
· Congenital defect believed to be inherited as a sex-limited,
autosomal recessive trait
·Breed at risk in case series
(Hayes et al. 1985, Romagnoli 1991)
MANCHESTERTERRIER
Dermatological conditions
Pattern baldness
·Usually affects females in this breed
·Gradual hair loss from 6 months of age
· Affects mainly the ventrum and caudomedial thighs
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Haematological/immunological conditions
Von Willebrand's disease
492
·Possibly inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· Common in this breed in both the USA and UK
·Mainly type I disease seen in this breed
·Genetic test available (VetGen) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Musculoskeletal conditions
· Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease
*Age of onset: 4-12 months
·Shown to be highly heritable in this breed
(Vasseur et al. 1989)
Neoplastic conditions
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
·Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Melanoma-cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 8.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
493
·Breed at risk in case series
·Age of onset: 5 years
· Localization: posterior subcapsular cortex; progression and
visual deficiencies likely
·Some cataracts occur concurrently with PRA
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2005)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Clinically detected at 5-6 years
(Rubin 1989)
Lens luxation and glaucoma
·Breed at increased risk
·Age of onset: 2-4 years
·Lens luxation may be primary or secondary to glaucoma
(Rubin 1989)
MASTIFF (OLD ENGLISH MASTIFF)
Cardiovascular conditions
Mitral dysplasia
·Congenital
·  Males predisposed
·Genetic basis suspected
(Del Palacio 2002)
Pulmonic stenosis
494
· Third most frequent type of canine congenital heart disease
· May be polygenic mode of inheritance
(Hogan 2002)
Dermatological conditions
Muzzle folliculitis/furunculosis
*Common condition
·Also known as canine acne
· Local trauma, hormones and geneticsmay play a role in
pathogenesis
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Pododermatitis
·Can affect any age or sex
· Males predisposed
·Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture
·Common cause of hindlimb lameness
·  Neutered individuals are predisposed
· Older animals are predisposed
·Odds ratio in this breed 2.56
495
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Elbow dysplasia
·Common cause of forelimb lameness
· Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process (odds ratio 48.4
compared to mixed breeds) and ununited anconeal process (odds
ratio 20.2) is common in this breed
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 3.5 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Panosteitis
· Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
· Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 3.5 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 47 months, but can be older
· Common condition
· Odds ratio 11.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
496
Stifle osteochondrosis
· Males predisposed
· Age of onset usually 5-12 months, but may be earlier
· Odds ratio 1007 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
·Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Trichoepithelioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 8.6 years
·Uncommon tumour
·Predilection sites: limbs, back and trunk
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Ocular conditions
Ectropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Associated with macroblepharon
(Bedford 1988, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
497
Entropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Severe and may be associated with macroblepharon
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
· Autosomal dominant inheritance suspected
·Ophthalmoscopic signs at 4 months - 3 years
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Kijas et al. 2003, Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Macroblepharon (diamond eye’)
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Persistent pupillary membranes and microphthalmia
· Recessive inheritance suspected
· Multifocal retinal dysplasia may be present
· Risk of vision impairment
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - cystine
· Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
498
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Osborne & Finco 1995, Houston et al.
2004, Harnevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
Reproductive conditions
Vaginal hyperplasia/vaginal prolapse (see plate 20 in the
colour plate section)
· Usually seen in young entire bitches during proestrus of the Ist
to 3rd oestrus cycle
(Post, Van Haaften & Okkens 1991, Feldman and Nelson
1996)
MEXICANHAIRLESS
Dermatological conditions
Acne
· Comedones commonly occur spontaneously in this breed
(Kimura & Doi 1996)
Perinatal mortality
·Hairless pups have a markedly lower survival rate than haired
pups
 Raising the temperature of cages to a minimum of 25°C
improved survival rates
Autosomal dominant monogenic mode of inheritance for
hairless characteristics
499
(Kimura, Ohshima & Doi 1993)
MINIATURE BULL TERRIER
Ocular conditions
Entropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
· Lateral (occasionally entire) lower lids affected
(Rubin 1989)
Lens luxation (primary)
·Inherited
·Age of onset: >3 years
·Genetic test available (Orthopedic Foundation for Animals) -
see Appendix
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Curtis, Barmett & Startup 1983, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Sargan et al. 2007)
MINIATURE PINSCHER
Dermatological conditions
Colour dilution alopecia
· Reported in blue or fawn Dobermanns and Miniature Pinschers
· Coat-colour genes play a role in the inheritance of this condition
%s pue sanq u! %t6 se yay se aq Aeu aseasip jo Aouanbaiy ·
in fawns
(Miller 1990a)
500
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine conditions
Diabetes mellitus
·Breed at increased risk
·Usual age range 4-14 years; peak incidence: 7-9 years 
· Old entire females are predisposed
(Feldman & Nelson 1996)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
·Common disease
· Usually affects young adult and middle-aged animals
· May be more common in bitches
·May be seasonal variations
(Miller, Hohenhaus & Hale 2004)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
·Humeroulnar luxation seen in this breed
·Occurs in first 3 months of life
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease
501
·Aka avascular necrosis of the femoral head
· Uncommon condition
·Odds ratio 71.5 in one study (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 14.4 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
· Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
502
·Breed at risk in case series
·Age of onset: 1.5-3 years
·Localization: cortex
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Corneal dystrophy
·Inheritance suspected
·Subepithelial lipid dystrophy
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of clinical onset: 7 years onwards
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Microblepharon (blepharophimosis)
· Inheritance suspected
(Gelatt 2007)
Optic nerve hypoplasia
· Congenital; not known if inherited
· Uncommoncondition seen occasionally in this breed
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Reproductive conditions
503
Eclampsia (puerperal tetany)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually seen in first 6 weeks postpartum
(Chastain, Panciera &Waters 2001)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis -- cystine
· Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Osborne & Finco 1995, Houston et al.
2004, Harnevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
MUNSTERLANDER
Dermatological conditions
Black hair follicular dysplasia
·Grey and white fur is noted at birth
·Grey hair falls out over first few months of life
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Genetic test available (HealthGene) - see Appendix
(Von Bomhard et al. 2006)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Shoulder osteochondrosis
504
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 47 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 83.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Ocular conditions
Cataract (Large Munsterlander)
· Inheritance suspected
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Sargan 2004)
NEAPOLITAN MASTIFF
Cardiovascular conditions
Dilated cardiomyopathy
· Common condition
·  Males predisposed
·Median age of onset 5 years
·5% of cases in one study were of this breed
(Borgarelli et al. 2006)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture
· Common cause of hindlimb lameness
·Neutered individuals may be predisposed
505
(Duval et al. 1999)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 4.7 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
· Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 2.0 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Ectropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·High prevalence
·Associated with macroblepharon
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
506
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
·High prevalence
·Associated with macroblepharon
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Macroblepharon ('diamond eye’)
·Inheritance suspected
·High prevalence
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Reproductive conditions
Vaginal hyperplasia/vaginal prolapse
· Usually seen in young entire bitches during proestrus of the Ist
to 3rd oestrus cycle
(Post, Van Haaften & Okkens 1991, Feldman and Nelson
1996)
NEWFOUNDLAND
Cardiovascular conditions
Aortic stenosis
· Common congenital disease
·Relative risk 88 in one study
· Males strongly predisposed in this breed
· Inheritance possibly autosomal dominantwith modifying genes
or polygenic
(Darke 1989, Kienle, Thomas & Pion 1994)
507
Dilated cardiomyopathy
· Common condition
· Males predisposed
· Median age of onset 5 years
· 10% of cases in one study were of this breed
· May be associated with taurine deficiency in this breed, despite
adequate diet
(Tidholm & Jonsson 1996, Borgarelli et al. 2006)
Dermatological conditions
Acquired depigmentation
·Affects normal black Newfoundlands around 18 months of age
· Depigmenatation affects the nose, lips and eyelids and may
 progress to affect hair colour
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between l and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
·This breed had a risk factor of 3.8 cases per 1000 dog years at
risk (if 1000 dogs were followed for 1 year, 3.8 would have an
insurance claim for atopy)
(Nodtvedt et al. 2006)
Callus dermatitis/pyoderma
508
· Common condition
· Most common over hock and elbow joints of this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200le)
Pemphigus foliaceous
·Uncommon
·  No sex predisposition
·Mean age of onset 4.2 years
(Ihrke et al. 1985)
Endocrine diseases
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
· May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
·Neutered males and females at increased risk
(Greco 2002)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital idiopathic megaoesophagus
·Breed at increased risk
(Washabau 2001, Dupla 2002)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture
· Common cause of hindlimb lameness
509
· Neutered individuals are predisposed
· Older animals are predisposed
·Odds ratio in this breed 3.77
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Elbow dysplasia
·Common cause of forelimb lameness
·Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process (odds ratio 10.9
compared to mixed breeds) and ununited anconeal process (odds
ratio 13.8) is common in this breed
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Robins & Innes 2006)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio in the breed 5.77
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Myasthenia gravis
· See under neurological conditions
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 1.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
510
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 18.7 (compared to mixed breeds)
(Rudd,Whitehair & Margolis 1990, LaFond, Breur &
Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Osteosarcoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Males over-represented
· Seen in older dogs
(Sargan 2004)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland adenomas
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age was 10.5 years
·Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
·Myasthenia gravis
· Generally low incidence in this breed, but has been reported in
related dogs from two separate lineages
(Lipsitz, Berry & Shelton 1999)
Ocular conditions
511
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Ectropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
 Associated with macroblepharon
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·May be associated with macroblepharon
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating membrane
· Inheritance suspected
·Usually occurs in young dogs
(Rubin 1989)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
· Associated with goniodysgenesis
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Macroblepharon (diamond eye′)
512
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Medial canthal pocket syndrome
· Breed predisposition due to head shape
(Rubin 1989)
Prolapse of the gland of the nictitating membrane (^cherry
eye')
·Breed at increased risk
·Usually presents in the first 1-2 years of life
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Ectopic ureters
· Uncommon congenital anomaly
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually presents <l year of age
·  More commonly diagnosed in females
(Hayes 1984, Berent, Mayhew & Porat-Mosenco 2008)
Urolithiasis - cystine
·Cystinuria results froman inherited defect (autosomal recessive)
in renal tubular transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine
urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Males and females both affected in this breed
513
Genetic
testavailable
(PennGen;Optigen;
Vet-Gen;
HealthGene) - see Appendix
(Case et al. 1992, Casal et al. 1995, Osborne & Finco
1995, Houston et al. 2004, Harnevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist
2006)
Respiratory conditions
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
·  Rare condition
·Affects dogs at an early age
· Thought to be inherited as a monogenic autosomal recessive
trait in this breed
(Watson et al. 1999)
NEW ZEALAND HUNTAWAY
Cardiovascular conditions
Dilated cardiomyopathy
· In one study, a statistically significant predisposition to this
disease was observed
·However, only small numbers were observed
· All dogs of this breed observedwith this disease were male
·Average age at diagnosis was 4 years
(Munday et al. 2006)
Neurological conditions
Mucopolysaccharidosos type IIIA
514
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Causes severe progressive CNS disease
(Yogalingam et al. 2002)
NORFOLK TERRIER
Dermatological conditions
Epidermal hyperkeratosis in Norfolk Terriers
·Newly described condition
·Autosomal recessive mode of inheritance
·  Clinical signs noted at birth
(Barmhart et al. 2004)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 5 years
· Localization: posterior polar subcapsular; usually progressive
with visual deficiencies likely
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Coloboma (optic nerve)
· Congenital defect, inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Lens luxation
515
· Inheritance suspected
(Curtis & Barnett 1980, Rubin 1989)
Micropapilla
· Congenital
·Seen occasionally in this breed
(Rubin 1989)
Optic nerve hypoplasia
·Congenital; not known if inherited
· Uncommoncondition seen occasionally in this breed
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
NORWEGIAN BUHUND
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Autosomal dominant inheritance
·Age of onset: 6 weeks
· Localization: starts as small dots and progresses to involve the
whole foetal nucleus at 45 years. Pulverulant ('candyfloss")
appearance
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Bjerkas & Haaland 1995, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
NORWEGIAN ELKHOUND
516
Musculoskeletal conditions
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 2.3 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Norwegian Elkhound chondrodysplasia
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Shortened body and disproportionately short limbs
·May be associated with glucosuria
(Bingel & Sande 1982)
Neoplastic conditions
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.3 years
·  Predisposed to generalized form
(Stannard & Pulley 1975, Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992.
Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Sweat gland tumour
·Breed at risk of adenocarcinoma in case series
·Mean age 10.5 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
517
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 1-3 years
· Localization: posterior sutures and cortex; slowly progressive
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Lower lids affected
(Rubin 1989)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Early retinal degeneration
· Night blindness at 6 weeks followed by total vision loss at
12-18 months
·A recessively inherited rod dysplasia used to be seen in this
breed
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·Genetic test available (rod-cone degeneration) (Optigen) - see
Appendix
(Acland & Aguirre 1987, Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
518
· Most primary cases appear to be open angle; however, cases
with a narrow iridocorneal filtration angle have been seen
·Age of onset: 4-7 years
·May also occur secondary to lens luxation
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, Oshima, Bjerkas &
Peiffer 2004 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007.
Gelatt 2007)
Lens luxation (seen with glaucoma)
·Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 2-6 years
·Lens luxation may be primary or secondary to glaucoma
(Rubin 1989)
Multifocal retinal dysplasia
· Congenital, inheritance suspected
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial renal disease  (Periglomerular and  interstitial
fibrosis)
· Mode of inheritance unknown
·Dogs may present in renal failure from a few months to 5 years
of age. Primary renal glycosuria is present in some cases
(Finco et al. 1977, Osborme & Finco 1995)
NORWEGIANLUNDEHUND
519
(See Lundehund)
NORWICH TERRIER
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 6 months to 2 years
· Localization: posterior
r   polar;
progression
pue
visual
deficiencies likely
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Lens luxation
·Inheritance suspected
(Curtis & Barnett 1980, Rubin 1989)
NOVA SCOTIA DUCK TOLLING RETRIEVER
Endocrine diseases
Hypoadrenocorticism
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Early onset (mean age 2.35 years) in this breed
· Females may be predisposed
· Uncommon condition
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Hughes et al. 2007)
Neurological conditions
520
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·  Progressive rod-cone degeneration
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
OLD ENGLISH SHEEPDOG
Cardiovascular conditions
Dilated cardiomyopathy
· Prevalence of 0.9% in this breed compared to 0.16% in mixed
breeds and 0.65% in pure breeds
· Increased prevalence with age
·Approximately twice as common in males as females
· Thought to be familial or genetic
521
(Fuentes 2003)
Dermatological conditions
Demodicosis
·Lesions may be confined to the paws in Old English Sheepdogs
(Scott & Paradis 1990)
Melanotrichia
·Often following healing of deep inflammation
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Primary lymphoedema
·  No apparent sex predisposition
·Usually occurs within first 12 weeks of life
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Drug reactions
Ivermectin and milbemycin
· High doses can cause tremors, ataxia, coma and death
·3.6% of dogs tested had this mutation
(Estrada 2002, Dowling 2006)
Gastrointestinal conditions
522
Congenital portosystemic shunt
·Breed at risk in case series
·Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <1 year
· Usually large intrahepatic shunts involving right liver lobe
(Sargan 2004, Hunt 2004)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia B
·Factor IX deficiency
·Also known as Christmas disease
· Inherited as a sex-linked trait
· Less common than haemophilia A
·Can be severe in this breed
(Dodds 2005)
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
· Common disease
·Usually affects young adult and middle-aged animals
· May be more common in bitches
·May be seasonal variations
(Mackin 2002)
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
·Common
·Inheritance likely
· Females more commonly affected than males
(Lewis 2000)
523
Musculoskeletal conditions
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
·Radial head luxation seen in this breed
·Occurs at 4-5 months of age
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
·  Neutered male dogs predisposed
· Odds ratio in the breed 3.46
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Perineal herniation
· Intact male dogs predisposed
· Common condition
(Elkins 2004)
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis
· See under Neurological conditions
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 7.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
524
Neoplastic conditions
Cutaneous haemangioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 8.7 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Nasal cavity tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·Median age: 9 years
·  Males over-represented in most studies
(McEntree 2001)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland carcinomas
·Breed at risk in case series
· Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 6.6 years
·Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
525
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Toma & Noli 2005)
Primary brain tumours
·See under Neurological conditions
Sweat gland tumour
· Breed at risk of apocrine adenoma, apocrine ductal adenoma
and adenocarcinoma in case series
· Mean age 9.5 years (apocrine adenoma), 9.1 years (apocrine
ductal adenoma) and 10.5 years (adenocarcinoma)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Neurological conditions
Cerebellar degeneration
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Late onset
·Slowly progressive
(Steinberg et al. 2000)
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Primary brain tumour
·Higher incidence noted in this breed
526
· Older dogs affected
(Snyder et al. 2006)
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis
· Congenital
·Uncommon
(Srenk 2002)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of onset and localization variable
· May be seen with retinal detachment
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Koch 1972, Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2005, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
Coloboma (iris, choroids, optic nerve)
·Congenital defect, inheritance suspected
· Defectsmay be seen alone, unclear if related to same defects
seen with micophthalmia
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Congenital cataract
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·ScheduleBof theBVA/KC/ISDS EyeScheme
527
(Koch 1972, Rubin 1989, Sargan 2004, Gelatt & Mackay
2005, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Clinical onset at 4 years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Micropapilla
·Congenital
·Seen occasionally in this breed
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Multiple ocular defects
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
· Defects may include congenital cataract, retinal defects and
microphthalmia
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Optic nerve hypoplasia
· Congenital; not known if inherited
· Uncommoncondition seen occasionally in this breed
(Rubin 1989)
Renal and urinary conditions
528
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence (causing
urinary incontinence)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Spayed females predisposed
(Holt & Thrusfield 1993)
Urolithiasis -- silica
·Breed at risk in case series
·  Males predisposed
(Aldrich et al. 1997)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism
· Congenital defect believed to be inherited as a sex-limited
autosomal recessive trait
·Breed at risk in case series
(Hayes et al. 1985, Romagnoli 1991)
OTTERHOUND
Haematological conditions
Glanzmann's thrombasthenia
·Due to a genetic platelet defect
·Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Genetic test available (Auburn University) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
529
PAPILLON
Dermatological conditions
Black hair follicular dysplasia
·Rare
·Early onset
·Familial
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
· Mainly medial luxation observed
·Odds ratio 8.4 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Alam et al. 2007)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
·Several reports of this condition
·Familial
530
· Onset at 14 weeks, with euthanasia being necessary by 19
weeks
(Franklin, Jeffery & Ramsey 1995)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 1.5-3 years
· Localization: nuclear and posterior cortical; slowly progressive;
visual deficiencies rare
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Late onset, with night blindness found in middle-aged dogs;
blindness is not usually present until 7-8 years
·Schedule B BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Narfstrom  &Wrigstad 1999, Sargan
2004,ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Micropapilla
· Congenital condition
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
PARSON RUSSELL TERRIER
Ocular conditions
Lens luxation (primary)
531
·Inherited
· Often followed by glaucoma
· Genetic test available (Orthopedic Foundation for Animals) -
see Appendix
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Johnsen, Maggs & Kass 2006)
PEKINGESE
Cardiovascular conditions
Myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve
·Also known as chronic valvular disease, endocardiosis
·Relative risk 4.1
· In one study from Slovenia, 9/195 dogs with this condtion were
Pekineses
·Increased prevalence with age
· Aetiology unknown but likely genetic basis
(Firm 2002)
Dermatological conditions
Flea-bite hypersensitivity
·Most studies showno breed predisposition, but one French study
showed this breed was predisposed
(Prelaud & Guaguere 1998)
Intertrigo
· Common condition
·Facial fold intertrigo common in this breed
532
·May lead to corneal ulceration
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Pododermatitis
·Can affect any age or sex
·  Males predisposed
·Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Rabies vaccine-associated vasculitis and alopecia
·Lesions appear at the site of the vaccine, 3-6 months after
administration
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Gastrointestinal conditions
Antral pyloric hypertrophy (pyloric stenosis)
syndrome
·Males may be predisposed
(Hall 2000)
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
·Breed at increased risk
· Middle aged
533
(Guilford & Strombeck 1996a)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Atlantoaxial subluxation
· See under Neurological conditions
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
 n s    x r  
breed
·Radial head luxation occurs at 4-5 months of age
· Humeroulnar luxation occurs in first 3 months of life
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 3.4 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Perineal hernia
· Intact males predisposed
· Common condition
(Robertson 1984)
Neoplastic conditions
Ceruminous gland tumours
534
· Breed at risk of ceruminous adenoma and carcinoma in case
series
·Mean age 9.8 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland adenomas
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age was 10.5 years
· Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt &Mcmanus
2000)
Testicular neoplasia
· See under Reproductive conditions
Neurological conditions
Atlantoaxial subluxation
·Congenital
·Mean age of presentation 2.7 years
(Havig et al. 2005)
Intervertebral disc disease
535
· Common condition
·Age of clinical onset: 3-76 years
(Sturges 2006)
Ocular conditions
Caruncular trichiasis
·Occurs with exophthalmos
(Gelatt 2007, Peiffer & Petersen-Jones 2009)
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
(Gelatt & Mackay 2005, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
Distichiasis
Common condition, breed at increased risk
(Lawson 1973, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Ectopic cilia
·Uncommon condition,breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, D'Anna et al. 2007,
Gelatt 2007)
Entropion
536
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Medial lids affected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Clinically apparent at 8 years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
(Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, Gelatt 2007)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
·Breed at increased risk
(Kaswan & Salisbury 1990, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Macroblepharon (leading to exposure keratopathy)
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Nasal fold trichiasis
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt 2007)
Pigmentary
keratitis/chronic keratitis (resulting from
exposure keratopathy)
537
·Breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Prolapse of the gland of the nictitating membrane (^cherry
eye')
·Breed at increased risk
·Usually presents in the first 1—2 years of life
(Gelatt 2007)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism
Congenital defect believed to be inherited as a sex-limited
autosomal recessive trait
·Breed at risk in case series
(Hayes et al. 1985, Romagnoli 1991)
Dystocia
·Breed predisposition
(Gaudet 1985, Johnston, Root Kustritz & Olson 2001)
Testicular neoplasia
· Breed at increased risk of sertoli cell tumour in case series
· Common tumour in male dog
· Mean age 9-ll years
(Weaver 1983)
Respiratory conditions
538
Brachycephalic upper airway syndrome
·Complex of anatomical deformities
·Common in this breed
  g  sos go  e e a
characteristics
· Most commonly present with clinical signs aged 1-4 years
(Seim 2001)
PETIT BASSET GRIFFON VENDEEN
Neoplastic conditions
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seenin older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Ocular conditions
Persistent pupillary membranes
· Inheritance suspected
·Common condition, relatively high frequency in this breed
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
POINTERS
Cardiovascular conditions
539
Aortic stenosis
· Congenital
· No sex predilection
·Mode of inheritance may be autosomal dominant with
 modifying genes or polygenic
(Matic 1988)
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
·Rare
· Inherited in this breed
(Sisson 1990)
Dermatological conditions
Acral mutilation syndrome
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·  No sex predisposition
·Age of onset: 3-5 months
·See also Sensory neuropathy under Neurological conditions
(Cummings et al. 1983)
Black hair follicular dysplasia
·Rare
·Early onset
·Familial
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Blastomycosis
540
· See under Infectious conditions
Discoid
lupus  erythematosus
(German
 Short-haired
Pointers)
· Uncommon
· No age or sex predisposition recognized
(Werner 1999)
Hereditary  lupoid  dermatosis  of  German   Short-haired
Pointers
Also known as exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus of
German Short-haired Pointers
·Unique to this breed
·Rare
· No sex predisposition
·Familial
·Cause unknown
·Age of onset: 6 months
(Vroom et al. 1995, Bryden et al. 2005)
Histoplasmosis
·See under Infectious conditions
Muzzle
folliculitis/furunculosis
(German
Short-haired
Pointers)
· Common condition
·Alsoknown as canine acne
· Local trauma, hormones and geneticsmay play a role in
pathogenesis
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
541
Nasal depigmentation
·Also known as Dudley nose
·Cause unknown
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Nasal folliculitis and furunculosis
*Uncommon
· Unknown cause, but may start after local trauma
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Pododermatitis (German Short-haired Pointers)
·Can affect any age or sex
· Males predisposed
·Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Skin tumours
·See under Neoplastic conditions
Truncal solar dermatitis
*A combination of factors are required to cause this condition
·Flank and abdomen most severely affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Zinc-responsive
dermatosis
(German
Short-haired
Pointers)
542
zinc-deficient diets
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001 g)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Oropharyngeal neoplasia (German Short-haired Pointers)
·Breed at risk in case series
(Dorn & Priester 1976)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia A (German Short-haired Pointer)
·Moderate Factor VIlI deficiency in this breed
· Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Haemophilia B (German Wire-haired Pointer)
·Mild Factor IX deficiency in this breed
·Familial in this breed
· Genetic test available (CornellUniversity) - see Appendix
(Brooks 1999)
Von Willebrand's disease
·Rare condition
· Affects German Short-haired and German Wire-haired Pointers
· This breed is predisposed to type II disease
·Genetic test available (VetGen) - see Appendix
543
(Giger 2003)
Infectious conditions
Blastomycosis
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Young (2-4 years) entire males predisposed
·Geographic distribution: mainly North America
(Mississippi, Missouri, Ohio River valleys, mid-Atlantic
States, Quebec, Manitoba and Ontario)
·Proximity to a body of water is a risk factor in endemic areas
(Rudmann et al. 1992, Arceneaux, Taboada & Hosgood
1998)
Histoplasmosis
·Breed at increased risk
· Most dogs are less than 2 years, males predisposed
·Mostly seen in the Americas, India and Southeast Asia
(Clinkenbeard et al. 1989)
Infectious skin diseases
· See under Dermatological conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
English Pointer enchondrodystrophy
·Uncommon
·Short limbs
544
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
(Langley-Hobbs 2006b)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 7.1 in GermanWire-haired Pointer (compared to
mixed breeds), 2.4 in other Pointers
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Panosteitis (German Short-haired Pointers)
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 1.6 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratios 5.5 (German Short-haired Pointer) and 38.8
(German Wire-haired Pointer) compared to mixed breeds
(Rudd,Whitehair & Margolis 1990, LaFond, Breur &
Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
545
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Fibrosarcoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Females may be predisposed
· Mean age 8.6 years in one study
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk
· Mean age reported as 10 years
(Brown, Patnaik & MacEwen 1985, Pastor 2002)
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
 ( s  o)    s  *
seen in older animals
·Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Nasal cavity tumours (German Short-haired Pointers)
·Breed at increased risk
·Median age: 9 years
·Males over-represented in most studies
(McEntree 2001)
546
Oropharyngeal neoplasia (German Short-haired Pointers)
· See under Gastrointestinal conditions
Neurological conditions
Acquired
myasthenia
gravis
(German
Short-haired
Pointers)
·Uncommon
· Bimodal age presentation of 4 months to 4 years and 9 years to
13 years
(Penderis 2003)
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
·Has been reported in a colony of dogs of this breed, bred
specifically for 'nervousness'
(Strain 2004)
Lysosomal storage disease - GM2 gangliosidosis (German
Short-haired Pointers)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
· Signs seen at 6-12 months
· Type I seen in this breed
(Bagley 2005)
Sensory neuropathy (English and German Short-haired
Pointers)
547
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
· Signs seen at 3-6 months
·May cause self-mutilation
(Cuddon 2002a)
Spinal cord vasculitis syndrome
· Uncommon condition
(Bagley 2005)
Spinal muscular atrophy (English Pointers)
· Inheritance suspected
·Reported in Japan
·Age of clinical onset: 5 months
(Shelton 1999)
Ocular conditions
Cataract (English Pointers)
·Autosomal dominant inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 2-3 years
· Localization: lens periphery; progression resulting in visual
deficiencies may occur
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Cataract (German Short-haired and German Wire-haired
Pointers)
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 6-18 months of age
548
· Localization: posterior subcapsular cortex; slowly progressive
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Cone
 degeneration (hemeralopia
or
dayblindness)
(German Short-haired Pointers)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Clinical onset (day blindness) at 8-12 weeks
· Uncommon condition
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Sidjanin et al. 2002, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007,
Gelatt 2007)
Corneal dystrophy (English Pointers)
· Inheritance suspected
· Lipid stromal dystrophy
·Age of onset: 6 years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
· Lateral lower lids affected
(Rubin 1989)
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating membrane
(German Short-haired Pointers)
· Recessive inheritance suggested
.Usually occurs in young dogs
549
(Martin 1970, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA) (German
Short-haired and English Pointers)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Persistent  hyperpalstic tunica vasculosa lentis/persistent
hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHTVL/PHPV) (German
Short-haired Pointers)
·Congenital, inheritance suspected
(Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Respiratory conditions
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
·Rare condition
·Signs usually seen early in life
·Affects English Pointers
(Morrison et al. 1987)
POLISH
LOWLAND
SHEEPDOG
(POLSKI
OWCZAREK NIZINNY)
Ocular conditions
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
550
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Rare condition
(Narfstrom et al. 2007)
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED), also known
as central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA)
· Inheritance suspected
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·May be related to vitamin E deficiency due to an underlying
metabolic abnormality in this breed
(Bedford 2001, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
POMERANIAN
Cardiovascular conditions
Patent ductus arteriosus
·Uncommon
· Congenital
·15/204 dogs were pomeranians in one study
· Females predisposed
·Inherited
(Darke 1989, Goodrich et al. 2007)
Sick sinus syndrome
·Middle-aged to old dogs
·Relative risk 3.5 in this breed
·  No sex predisposition in this breed
(Buchanan 1999)
551
Dermatological conditions
Adult-onset growth hormone-responsive dermatosis
· See under Endocrine conditions
Endocrine conditions
Adult-onset growth hormone-responsive dermatosis
· Males may be predisposed
·Clinical signs seen at any age but often l-2 years
(Lothrup 1988)
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
· May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
· Neutered males and females at increased risk
(Milne & Hayes 1981)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Atlantoaxial subluxation
· See under Neurological conditions
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
   x or  ox  r a
breed
·Radial head luxation occurs at 4-5 months of age
·Humeroulnar luxation occurs in first 3 months of life
552
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Elbow dysplasia
·Common cause of forelimb lameness
· Ununited anconeal process (odds ratio 3.7 compared to mixed
breeds) is common in this breed
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Robins & Innes 2006)
Patellar luxation
*Common condition
·Mainly medial luxation observed
·Odds ratio 18.6 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Alam et al. 2007)
Shoulder luxation
·Congenital
·Uncommon
(Millis & Loonam 2002)
Neurological conditions
Atlantoaxial subluxation
· Congenital
·Mean age of presentation 2.7 years
(Havig et al. 2005)
Hydrocephalus
553
· Congenital
·Relatively common
· Genetic and environmental factors suspected
· Onset of signs: <3 months
(Inzana 2002)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 4 years
· Localization: posterior cortical; may progress to completion
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism
· Congenital defect believed to be inherited as a sex-limited
autosomal recessive trait
·Breed at risk in case series
(Hayes et al. 1985, Romagnoli 1991)
Dystocia
· Breed predisposition
554
(Gaudet 1985, Johnston, Root Kustritz & Olson 2001,
Bergstrom et al. 2006)
Eclampsia (puerperal tetany)
· Breed at risk in case series
·Usually seen in first 6 weeks postpartum
(Chastain, Panciera &Waters 2001)
Respiratory conditions
Tracheal collapse
·Relatively common condition
· Lesion due to a deficiency in tracheal cartilage
· Usually acquired in older dogs but can be congenital
(Harvey 1989, Payne, Mehler & Weisse 2006)
POODLE
Cardiovascular conditions
Dilated cardiomyopathy
·Increased prevalence with age
· Approximately twice as common in males as females
· Thought to be familial or genetic
(Tidholm & Jonsson 1997)
Myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve
·Also known as endocardiosis, chronic valvular disease
·Relative risk 3.1 for Toy Poodles and 2.8 for Miniature Poodles
555
· In one Slovenian study, 64/195 dogs were Toy or ^medium
Poodles
· Increased prevalence with age
· Aetiology unknown but genetic basis likely
(Firm 2002)
Patent ductus arteriosus (Toy and Miniature Poodles)
·Uncommon
· Congenital
· 11/204 dogs were Toy or Miniature Poodles in one study
·  Females predisposed
· Mode of inheritance polygenic
(Darke 1989, Goodrich et al. 2007)
Pericardial diaphragmatic hernia
· Uncommon
· Congenital
(Matic 1988)
Dermatological conditions
Adult-onset growth hormone-responsive dermatosis (Toy
and Miniature Poodles)
· See under Endocrine conditions
Anal sac disease (Toy and Miniature Poodles)
· No age or sex predispostition
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001k)
556
Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis
· In Standard Poodles, inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
with variable expression
· In Standard Poodles, hyperkeratosis is followed by alopecia
·Affects the face and ears, progressing to the neck and dorsal
trunk
·Uncommon
· No apparent sex predilection
·Mean age at diagnosis 4.8 years
· 21/104 cases were Standard Poodles in a Swedish study
(Tevell, Bergvall and Egenvall 2008)
Idiopathic chronic ulcerative blepharitis
· Localized to the medial canthal region
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001k)
Idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis
· Multiple lesions seen
· Females predisposed
· No age predisposition
(Schwassmann 2005)
Malassezia dermatitis (Miniature Poodles)
* Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Melanotrichia
557
·Often following healing of deep inflammation
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Nasal depigmentation
·Also known as Dudley nose
·Cause unknown
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Post-injectional calcinosis circumscripta
·Uncommon
· Lesions usually occur within 5 months of injections
(Ginel et al. 1995)
Primary lymphoedema
· No apparent sex predisposition
·Usually occurs within first 12 weeks of life
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Rabies vaccine-associated vasculitis and alopecia
·Lesions appear at the site of the vaccine, 3-6 months after
administration
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Systemic lupus erythematosus
558
· Uncommon (incidence approximately 0.03% of general canine
population)
· Males may be over-represented
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
Zinc-responsive dermatosis (Standard Poodles)
·In this breed,
, occurs in rapidly growing puppies fed
zinc-deficient diets
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001 g)
Endocrine conditions
Adult-onset
growth
 hormone-responsive   dermatosis
(Miniature and Toy Poodles)
· Males may be predisposed
·Clinical signs seen at any age but often 1-2 years
(Lothrup 1988)
Diabetes mellitus (Miniature and Toy Poodles)
·Breed at increased rsk in case series
·Usual age range: 4-14 years; peak incidence: 7-9 years
· Old entire females are predisposed
(Hess, Kass &Ward 2000)
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Median age: 10 years
559
(Ling et al. 1979, Feldman & Nelson 1996, Alenza et al.
2006, Peterson 2007,Wood et al. 2007, Zeugswetter 2008)
Hypoadrenocorticism (Standard Poodles)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Mean age 4.6 years in one case series of all breeds
·Females may be predisposed
· Uncommon condition
(Shaker, Hurvitz & Peterson 1988, Feldman & Nelson
1996,Peterson, Kintzer & Kass 1996, Famula, Belanger &
Oberbauer 2003)
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
·May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
·Neutered males and females at increased risk
(Nesbitt et al. 1980, Greco 2002)
Insulinoma (Standard Poodles)
·Breed at increased risk
- Middle-aged/older dogs affected
·Uncommon
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Lorenz 2002)
Primary hypoparathyroidism (Toy Poodles)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Can occur at any age
· Uncommon
560
(Bruyette & Feldman 1988, Feldman & Nelson 1996)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Gastric dilatation/volvulus (Standard Poodles)
· Breed at risk in case series
(Brockman, Washabau & Drobatz 1995, Sargan 2004)
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis (Toy and Miniature Poodles)
·Breed at increased risk
·  Middle aged
(Guilford & Strombeck 1996a, Hall 2000)
Lobular dissecting hepatitis (Standard Poodles)
·Rare condition seen relatively more frequently in this breed
·Seen primarily in young dogs (7 months or younger)
(Bennett et al. 1983)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Factor XII deficiency (Miniature Poodles)
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive
· Mild or no clinical signs in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
·Common disease
561
·Usually affects young adult and middle-aged animals
·May be more common in bitches
·May be seasonal variations
(Mackin 2002)
Immune-mediated thrombocytopaenia (Miniature and Toy
Poodles)
· Common
·Inheritance likely
·Females more commonly affected than males
(Lewis 2000)
Non-spherocytic haemolytic anaemia (Miniature Poodles)
·Rare
· Reported in a family of Poodles
·Chronic haemolysis leads to myelofibrosis
(Randolph et al. 1986)
Von Willebrand's disease
·Possibly inherited as autosomal recessive
·Mainly type I disease is seen in this breed
· Genetic test available (VetGen) - see Appendix
(Giger 2008)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Avascular necrosis of the femoral head (Miniature and Toy
Poodles)
562
·Also known as Legg-Calve-Perthes disease
·Mean age of onset: 7 months
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
*Odds ratios 12.1 (Miniature Poodles) and 22.4
(Toy Poodles) compared to mixed breeds
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Lang, Martig & Gudel
2006)
Atlantoaxial subluxation (Toy and Miniature Poodles)
·See Neurological conditions
Congenital elbow luxation (Miniature Poodles)
·Uncommon
·Humeroulnar luxation seen in this breed
· Occurs in first 3 months of life
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Delayed/non-union of fractures of the distal third of the
radius and ulna in Miniature and Toy breeds (Toy and
Miniature Poodles)
·Coaptation of fractures of the distal third of the antebrachium is
a very common cause of this condition
(Palmer 2005)
Miniature Poodle pseudoachondroplasia
·  Poor growth and short bowed legs
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
(Langley-Hobbs 2006b)
563
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Mainly medial luxation observed
·Odds ratios 3.2 (Standard Poodles), 4.1 (Miniature Poodles) and
9.7 (Toy Poodles) compared to mixed breeds
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Alam et al. 2007)
Perineal hermiation
· Intact male dogs predisposed
· Common condition
(Elkins 2004)
Shoulder luxation
· Congenital
·Rare condition
(Butterworth & Cook 2006)
Neoplastic conditions
Adrenocortical tumour resulting in hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series
·Females slightly over-represented
· See under Endocrine conditions
(Reusch & Feldman 1991)
Basal cell tumour (many cases are now reclassified as
trichoblastoma) (Miniature and Toy Poodles)
564
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.9 years
·Mostly found on head and neck
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992,
Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Ceruminous gland tumours
·Breed at risk of ceruminous adenoma in case series
·Mean age 9.8 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Cutaneous plasmacytoma (Standard Poodles)
·Breed at risk
·Mean age 9.2 years
·  Common sites: ear, lip and digit
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk
· Mean age reported as 10 years
(Brown, Patnaik & MacEwen 1985, Pastor 2002)
Insulinoma (Standard Poodle)
·See under Endocrine conditions
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
(Standard Poodles)
565
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Pilomatrixoma (Miniature and Standard)
· Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 6.6 years
· Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms
in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Toma & Noli 2005)
Pituitary tumour resulting in hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series
·See under Endocrine conditions
(Alenza et al. 2006, Peterson 2007, Wood et al. 2007)
Sebaceous gland tumours
· Breed at risk of nodular sebaceous hyperplasia and sebaceous
adenoma in case series
·Mean age 9.1 years (hyperplasia) and 10.9 years (adenoma)
· Females may be predisposed to nodular sebaceous hyperplasia
· Common site: limbs, trunk, eyelids (hyperplasia) head
(adenoma)
(Scott & Anderson 1990, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Squamous cell carcinoma of the digit (Standard Poodles)
566
·Breed at risk in case series
·Middle-aged to older dogs
· Dogs with black coats seem to be more frequently affected
(O'Brien, Berg & Engler 1992, Henry et al. 2005)
Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin (Standard Poodles)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 10.2 years
·Dogs which ‘sunbathe’ may be predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Trichoblastoma (Miniature Poodles)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually older than 5 years
·Common
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Trichoepithelioma (Standard Poodles)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 8.6 years
·Uncommon tumour
·Predilection sites: limbs, back and trunk
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Atlantoaxial subluxation (Miniature and Toy Poodles)
·Congenital
567
·Mean age of presentation 2.7 years
(Havig et al. 2005)
Congenital deafness (Miniature and Toy Poodles)
·Prevalence in this breed not known
· Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME) (Miniature
and Toy Poodles)
· 30% of cases of this condition are seen in this breed
·Young to middle-aged dogs most commonly affected
(Bagley 2005)
Hydrocephalus (Toy Poodles)
· Congenital
·Relatively common
·Genetic and environmental factors suspected
·Onset of signs: <3 months
(Inzana 2002)
Idiopathic epilepsy
·Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
· Common condition
· Simple recessive autosomal inheritance suspected in Standard
Poodles
(Bagley 2005)
568
Intervertebral disc disease
· Breed predisposition
·  Relatively common condition
·Age of clinical onset: 3-7 years
(Levine et al. 2007)
Lysosomal storage disease - ceroid lipofuscinosis
·Suspected to be inherited
·Rare
(Bagley 2005)
Lysosomal storage  disease -  neuronal  glycoproteinosis
(Lafora’s disease)
· Suspected to be inherited
·Rare
· Signs seen at 5 months to 9 years
(Bagley 2005)
Lysosomal
storage
disease
sphingomyelinosis
(Niemann-Pick disease) (Miniature and Toy Poodles)
· Inheritance suspected
·Rare
· Signs seen at 2-4 months
(Bagley 2005)
Neonatal encephalopathy with seizures (Standard Poodles)
· Newly reported condition
569
·Causes seizures from birth
·No affected dogs have survived to 7 weeks of age
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive condition
· Genetic test available (VetGen; Orthopedic Foundation for
Animals) - see Appendix
(Chen et al. 2008)
Ocular conditions
Caruncular trichiasis
(Rubin 1989)
Cataract (Standard Poodles)
· Familial, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: <2 years
· Localization: equatorial progressing to involve the cortex
resulting in blindness
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Cataract (Toy and Miniature Poodles)
·Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 4-5 years
· Localization: anterior cortical and posterior polar subcapsular;
 progression is variable
·A generally high incidence of cataracts seen (prevalence
10.79% in Miniature and 10.21% in Toy Poodles in one study)
(Rubin 1989, Adkins & Hendrix 2005, Gelatt & Mackay
2005, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
570
Cone degeneration (Hemeralopia or day blindness)
(Miniature Poodles)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Clinical onset (day blindness) at 12 weeks
· Uncommon condition
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt 2007)
Congenital, subepithelial, geographic cormeal dystrophy
(infantile corneal dystrophy) (Miniature Poodles)
· Congenital condition; predisposed breed
· Occurs in young puppies (<10 weeks); transient condition
(Gelatt 2007)
Distichiasis (Toy and Miniature Poodles)
·Common condition, breed at increased risk
(Lawson 1973, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Ectopic cilia
· Uncommon condition, breed at increased risk
(Gelatt 2007)
Entropion (Miniature and Toy Poodles)
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Medial lids affected
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt 2007)
571
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA) (Toy and
Miniature Poodles)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Progressive rod-cone degeneration
is present at 3-5 years, total blindness at 5-7 years; may be
associated with cataract formation
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme (Toy and
Miniature Poodles)
·Genetic test available (Optigen) － seeAppendix (Toy and
Miniature Poodles)
(Rubin 1989, Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
Glaucoma
(primary) (Standard, Miniature and Toy
Poodles)
· Inheritance suspected
·  Most cases associated with goniodysgenesis
·Age of onset: 6-16 years
·Also seen secondary to cataracts
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2004a,b, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Lacrimal punctal atresia (Toy and Miniature Poodles)
· Congenital
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Medial canthal pocket syndrome (Standard Poodles)
572
·Breed predisposition due to head shape
(Rubin 1989)
Micropapilla (Miniature and Toy Poodles)
· Congenital
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Multiple ocular defects
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
·Defectsmay  include microphthalmia,  congenital
cataract,
 persistence of the hyaloid system and retinal defects
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Standard Poodles)
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Optic nerve hypoplasia (Miniature and Toy Poodles)
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
·Schedule B BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme (Miniature and Toy
Poodles)
(Kerm & Riis 1981, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Pseudopapilloedema (Miniature Poodles)
· Congenital
(Rubin 1989)
573
Senile iris atrophy (Miniature and Toy Poodles)
·Breed at increased risk
(Gelatt 2007)
Vitreal Syneresis (Miniature Poodles)
· May result in glaucomaand retinal detachment
·Dogs may be affected from 2 years of age
(Rubin 1989)
Physiological conditions
Red blood cell macrocytosis
· Occurs rarely in Toy and Miniature Poodles
· Does not require treatment
(Sellon 2005)
Renal and urinary conditions
Ectopic ureters (Toy and Miniature Poodles)
· Uncommon congenital anomaly
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually presents <l year of age
·More commonly diagnosed in females
(Hayes 1974, 1984, Berent, Mayhew & Porat-Mosenco
2008)
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate (Miniature Poodles)
574
·Breed at risk in case series
females 8.4 years
· Males predisposed (3:1 in one large study)
(Osborne & Finco 1995, Lulich et al. 1999, Osborne et al.
1999, Houston et al. 2004)
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
(Miniature Poodles)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age at diagnosis in one large study: males 6.0 years,
females 5.7 years
·  Females predisposed (16:1 in one large study)
(Osborme et al. 1999, Houston et al. 2004)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism (Toy and Miniature Poodles)
· Congenital defect believed to be inherited as a sex-limited,
autosomal recessive trait
·Breed at risk in case series
(Hayes et al. 1985, Romagnoli 1991)
Dystocia (Miniature Poodles)
· Breed predisposition
(Gaudet 1985, Johnston, Root Kustritz & Olson 2001)
Eclampsia (puerperal tetany) (Miniature Poodles)
· Breed at risk in case series
575
· Usually seen in first 6 weeks postpartum
(Chastain, Panciera &Waters 2001)
Respiratory conditions
Tracheal collapse (Miniature and Toy Poodles)
· Relatively common condition
· Lesion due to a deficiency in tracheal cartilage
· Usually acquired in older dogs but can be congenital
(Harvey 1989, Payne, Mehler & Weisse 2006)
PORTUGUESE WATER DOG
Cardiovascular conditions
Familial dilated cardiomyopathy
· Usually juvenile onset in this breed
·Age of death 2-32 weeks
· No sex predisposition
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· May be associated with taurine deficiency
· Genetic test available (PennGen) -- see Appendix
(Dambach et al. 1999, Alroy et al. 2000)
Dermatological conditions
Canine follicular dysplasia
·A marked predilection in this breed implies a genetic basis for
this group of diseases
576
· Hair loss begins at 2-4 years of age and occurs mainly on the
flank
·Hair loss is due to fracture of the hair in this breed
·Eventually the whole of the trunk is involved
(Miller & Scott 1995)
Pattern baldness
·Hair loss occurs at about 6 months of age
·Ventral neck, thighs and tail are affected
Aq waqond au yo uoooau Aq paonpau uaaq sey Aouanarg -
breed clubs
(Scott, Miller and Griffin 2001d)
Skin tumours
·See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine conditions
Hypoadrenocorticism
Autosomal recessive inheritance likely
·Mean age of onset of 4.6 years in one case series of all breeds -
later onset in this breed
· Females may be predisposed
·Uncommon condition
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Peterson, Kintzer & Kass 1996,
Chase et al. 2006, Oberbauer et al. 2006)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia A
577
·Severe Factor VllI deficiency in this breed
· Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Hip dysplasia
* Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 3.1 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neurological conditions
Lysosomal storage disease - GM1 gangliosidosis
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
· Signs seen at 5-6 months
· Genetic test available (HealthGene) - see Appendix
(Bagley 2005)
Ocular conditions
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
(GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Progressive rod-cone degeneration
·Age of clinical onset 3-5 years
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
578
(Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Multiple ocular defects
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
· Defects may include microphthalmia, PPMs, cataract and retinal
defects
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
PRESA CANARIO (PERRO DE PRESA CANARIO OR
DOGO CANARIO)
Cardiovascular conditions
Dilated Cardiomyopathy
·Age of onset usually 4-10 years
·This breed often has concurrent atrial fibrillation
(Morales, Ynaraja &Montoya 2001)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
· Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
PUG
Cardiovascular conditions
Hereditary stenosis of the bundle of His
579
· Reported in pedigrees and then studied in an experimental
breeding colony
· Little recent literature on this condition
(James et al. 1975)
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
·Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Intertrigo
· Tail fold intertrigo results from corkscrew tails
·Facial fold intertrigo also occurs in this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Lentiginosis profusa
·Uncommon
· Hereditary in pugs, probably inherited as an autosomal
dominant trait
(Van Rensburg & Briggs 1986)
Papilloma virus-associated pigmented lesions
·Also known as pigmented epidermal nevi
580
· May have a genetic basis
(Narama et al. 2005)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine conditions
Diabetes mellitus
·Breed at increased rsk in case series
·Usual age range: 4-14 years; peak incidence: 7-9 years
· Old entire females are predisposed
(Hess, Kass &Ward 2000)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital portosystemic shunt
·Breed at risk in case series
·Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
(Tobias & Rohrbach 2003.
Sargan 2004)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Avascular necrosis of the femoral head
·Aka Legg-Calve-Perthes disease
· Uncommon condition
· Odds ratio 65.6 in one study (compared to mixed breeds)
581
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
·Humeroulnar luxation seen in this breed
· Occurs in first 3 months of life
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 3.3 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992,Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
582
Neurological conditions
Pug encephalitis
·Aka necrotizing meningoencephalitis
· Uncommon condition
·Age of onset: 6 months to 7 years
(Cordy & Holliday 1989)
Ocular conditions
Caruncular trichiasis
·Occurs with exophthalmos
(Rubin 1989)
Cataract
·Breed at increased risk in case series
(Gelatt & Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Medial lower lids affected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
583
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
·Breed at increased risk
(Kaswan & Salisbury 1990)
Macroblepharon (leading to exposure keratopathy)
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Pigmentary  keratitis/chronic  keratitis  (resulting
from
exposure keratopathy)
·Breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Reproductive conditions
Dystocia
· Breed predisposition to obstructive dystocia due to a narrow
maternal pelvic canal and fetuses with large heads
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Bergstrom et al. 2006)
Respiratory conditions
Brachycephalic upper airway syndrome
·Complex of anatomical deformities
·Common in this breed
    s     
characteristics
·  Most commonly present with clinical signs aged 1-4 years
584
(Seim 2001, Riecks, Birchard & Stephens 2007)
Bronchiectasis
· Uncommon condition
·Usually affects middle-aged to older dogs
· Usually occurs secondary to chronic pulmonary disease
(Hawkins et al. 2003)
Lung lobe torsion
· Possible predisposition in young males of this breed
·Spontaneous
(Murphy & Brisson 2006)
Tracheal collapse
·Relatively common condition
·Lesion due to a deficiency in tracheal cartilage
·Usually acquired in older dogs but can be congenital
(Payne, Mehler &Weisse 2006)
PULI
(See Hungarian Puli)
PYRENEAN MOUNTAIN DOG (GREATPYRENEES)
Cardiovascular conditions
Tricuspid dysplasia
· Congenital
585
·Relative risk 43.6
·  Males predisposed
(Buchanan 1999)
Haematological conditions
Factor XI deficiency
· Autosomal inheritance, with homozygotes symptomatic
(Giger 2003, Littlew0od 2000)
Glanzmann's thrombasthenia
· Due to a genetic platelet defect
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Genetic test available (Auburn University) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 3.3 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
· Common
·Young males predisposed
586
·Odds ratio 5.3 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
· Odds ratio 64.0 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
· Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
·Common condition
·Odds ratio 42.7 (compared to mixed breeds)
Rudd,Whitehair & Margolis 1990, LaFond, Breur &
Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Sweat gland tumour
· Breed at risk of apocrine adenoma in case series
· Mean age 9.5 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Trichoblastoma
·Breed at risk in case series
· Usually older than 5 years
·Common
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
587
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Lateral lower lids affected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Medial canthal pocket syndrome
· Breed predisposition due to head shape
(Rubin 1989)
Micropapilla
·  Congenital condition
(Rubin 1989)
Multifocal retinopathy
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Develops from ll weeks of age
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Grahn et al. 1998, Gelatt 2007)
588
RED KELPIE (AUSTRALIAN KELPIE)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Perineal herniation
· Intact male dogs predisposed
·Common condition
(Elkins 2004)
RHODESIAN RIDGEBACK
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
· Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
·This breed had a risk factor of 5.0 cases per 1000 dog years at
insurance claim for atopy)
(Nodtvedt et al. 2006)
Coat-colour  dilution   and
1  cerebellar   degeneration  in
Rhodesian Ridgeback dogs
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Only reported in a single family
(Chieffo et al. 1994)
589
Dermoid cyst/sinus
·Rare developmental abnormalities
·Thought to be inherited as a simple recessive trait in this breed
·  Solitary or multiple
· Occur on the dorsal midline
· See also under Neurological conditions
(Hall 2005)
Onychodystrophy
·Idiopathic, symmetric disease in this breed
· Occurs from 2 to 6 years of age
(Rosychuk 2002)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
 snd m iden u so pa s ule
zinc-deficient diets
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001g)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Elbow dysplasia
·Common cause of forelimb lameness in young dogs
· Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process is common in this
breed
(Robins & Innes 2006)
590
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
*Odds ratio 2.0 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Fibroma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk
·Mean age 8.4 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
·Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Melanoma-cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 8.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Soft tissue sarcoma
591
·Breed at increased risk
(Baker-Gabb, Hunt & France 2003)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Dermoid sinus
· Congenital defect
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Neurological signs can occur at any age
·See also under Dermatological conditions
(Hall 2005)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 3 years
· Localization: posterior subcapsular cortex; progresses slowly;
visual deficiencies uncommon
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Lateral lower lids affected
592
(Rubin 1989)
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating
membrane
· Inheritance suspected
·Usually occurs in young dogs
(Rubin 1989)
ROTTWEILER
Cardiovascular conditions
Aortic stenosis
· Congenital
·Relative risk 19.3 in one study
· No sex predilection
· Mode of inheritance is possibly autosomal dominant with
 modifying genes, or polygenic
(Kienle, Thomas & Pion 1994)
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Common condition
·Males predisposed
·Median age of onset 5 years
· 3% of cases in one study were of this breed
(Borgarelli et al. 2006)
Dermatological conditions
593
Pyotraumatic folliculitis
· Common condition
·Relative risk 2.3
·Young dogs predisposed
·Also known as hot spot; wet eczema
(Holm, Rest & Seewald 2004)
Follicular lipidosis of Rottweilers
·Rare
· Suspected genetic predisposition
·Affects young dogs of either sex
(Gross et al. 1997)
Follicular parakeratosis
· Females predisposed
·Probable X-linked mode of inheritance
(Lewis et al. 1998)
Hypopigmentary disorders
·  Possibly inherited
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Mucocutaneous hypopigmentation
·Congenital in this breed
·Affects the lips and nose
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
594
Muzzle folliculitis/furunculosis
· Common condition
·Also known as canine acne
· Local trauma, hormones and geneticsmay play a role in
pathogenesis
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Vasculitis
·Uncommon
·Usually type III hypersensitivity reaction
(Affolter 2004)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy
·Age range of dogs affected 3-8 years
· No sex predilection
(Rosychuk 2002)
Vitiligo
·Presumed to be inherited
(Beale 2006)
Endocrine conditions
Hypoadrenocorticism
595
· Mean age 4.6 years in one case series of all breeds
· Females may be predisposed
·Uncommon condition
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Peterson, Kintzer & Kass 1996)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis, enteritis and
enterocolitis
· Most common in dogs 5 years and younger
(Guilford & Strombeck 1996b)
Parvovirus enteritis
·See under Infectious conditions
Haematological/Immunological conditions
Haemophilia B
·Moderate Factor IX deficiency in this breed
·Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Susceptibility to parvovirus
· See Infectious conditions
Infectious conditions
Infectious skin disease
596
· See under Dermatological conditions
Parvovirus enteritis
·Breed at increased risk in cases series
·Age 6 weeks to 6 months at higher risk
(Glickman et al. 1985, Houston, Ribble & Head 1996.
McCaw & Hoskins 2006)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Angular deformity of the tibia
·Uncommon
·Developmental disorder
(Jaeger, Marcellin-Little & Ferretti 2007)
Bipartite/tripartite sesamoids
· Common
· Usually clinically silent
(Eaton-Wells 2006)
Carpal hyperextension syndrome
· Seen in young dogs less than 6 months
·Environmental factors contribute
(Kerwin 2004)
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture
·Common cause of hindlimb lameness
· Neutered individuals are predisposed
597
· Older animals are predisposed
·Odds ratio in this breed 3.58
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Elbow dysplasia
·Common cause of forelimb lameness
· Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process (odds ratio 36.1
compared to mixed breeds) and ununited anconeal process (odds
ratio 27.4) is common in this breed
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Robins & Innes 2006)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
·  Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio in the breed 3.33
· Decreasing prevalence seen in this breed in a recent French
study
(Genevois et al. 2008,Witsberger et al. 2008)
Hock osteochondritis dissecans
·Affects dogs 5-9 months of age
·Relatively common cause of lameness
· Most commonly affects themedial ridge of the talus in this breed
· Odds ratio 206 compared to mixed breeds
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Miller & Hulse 2006)
Juvenile onset distal myopathy
·Rare
·Familial
598
·Inheritance unknown
· Localized to southern California
· Affected puppies 6-8 weeks of age
(Shelton 1999)
Metaphyseal osteopathy
· Aka hypertrophic osteodystrophy
·Uncommon
·Affects dogs aged 2-6months
· Males possibly predisposed
·Aetiology unknown
(Nieves 2002)
Osteosarcoma
·See Neoplastic conditions
Shoulder osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 22.8 (compared to mixed breeds)
(Rudd,Whitehair & Margolis 1990, LaFond, Breur &
Austin 2002)
Stifle osteochondrosis
·  Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 5-12 months, but may be earlier
*Odds ratio 66.3 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
599
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma (see plate 21 in the colour
plate section)
· Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
·Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Fibroma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk
·Mean age 8.4 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Histiocytosis - localized and disseminated
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Age of onset: >5 years
(Affolter & Moore 2002, Moore, Affloter & Vernau 2006.
Naranjo, Dubielzig & Friedrichs 2007, Schultz et al. 2007)
Lymphoma
·Breed at increased risk
·Most are middle aged (mean 6-7 years)
(Jagielski et al. 2002)
Melanoma - cutaneous
600
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 8.9 years
(Schultheiss 2006)
Osteosarcoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Males over-represented
· Seen in older dogs
(Misdrop & Hart 1979, Rosenberger, Pablo & Crawford
2007)
Squamous cell carcinoma of the digit
·Breed at risk in case series
·Middle-aged to older dogs
(Henry et al. 2005)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
· Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Discospondylitis
·Uncommon
·Young/middle-aged dogs affected
·Males twice as likely to be affected as females
·Odds ratio in this breed 3.1
601
(Burkert et al. 2005)
Laryngeal paralysis-polyneuropathy complex
·See under Respiratory conditions
Leukoencephalomyelopathy of Rottweilers
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Occasionally seen in the USA, UK,Netherlands and Australia
·Age of clinical onset: 1.5-4 years
(Davies & Irwin 2003)
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Rare
·Age of clinical onset: <l year
(Davies & Irwin 2003)
Rottweiler distal sensorimotor polyneuropathy
· Reported in the USA
·Age of clinical onset: >l year
(Cuddon 2002a)
Spinal arachnoid pseudocysts
·Mean age at presentation 3.5 years
·  Males predisposed
(Jurina & Grevel 2004)
Spinal muscular atrophy
602
· Inheritance suspected
·Rare
·Age of clinical onset: 4 weeks
(Shelton 1999)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Autosomal
dominant  inheritance  with partial penetrance
suspected
·Age of onset: <2 years
· Localization: posterior polar subcapsular; slow progression
(Rubin 1989, Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·May be severe, affecting entire lower lid
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007,Read & Broun 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Seen as an advanced condition at 3 years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Medial canthal pocket syndrome
·Breed predisposition due to head shape
603
(Rubin 1989)
Multiple ocular defects
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
Persistent pupillary membranes
· Inheritance suspected
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal detachment
·Seen at 2-3 years of age
·May be associated with vitreal abnormalities
(Rubin 1989)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
· Congenital, inheritance suspected
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Bedford 1982c, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Physiological conditions
Pronounced eosinophilic response
· Exaggerated response to normal stimuli seen
·May be normal in this breed
·  Individuals with eosinophilia should still be evaluated for
underlying causes of the condition
(Lilliehook et al. 2000)
604
Renal and urinary conditions
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence (causing
urinary incontinence)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Spayed females predisposed
(Holt & Thrusfield 1993)
Reproductive conditions
Cystic
endometrial
hyperplasia-pyometra
complex
(pyometra)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Common disease of older entire bitches (mean age 7.25 years)
· Most cases present within 12 weeks of oestrus
(Chastain, Panciera &Waters 1999, Egenvall et al. 2001,
Smith 2006)
Respiratory conditions
Laryngeal paralysis-polyneuropathy complex
·Uncommon
·Affects young dogs of this breed
(Mahoney, Knowles & Braund 1998)
RUSSIAN BLACK TERRIER
Renal and urinary conditions
605
Urolithiasis - urate (see plate 22 in the colour plate
section)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Genetic test available (AHT; Veterinary
Genetics, UC Davis) - see Appendix
(Bende & Németh 2004)
606
ST BERNARD
Cardiovascular conditions
Dilated cardiomyopathy
· Common condition
·  Males predisposed
·Median age of onset 5 years
· 10% of cases in one study were of this breed
(Tidholm & Jonsson 1997, Borgarelli et al. 2006)
Dermatological conditions
Callus dermatitis/pyoderma
· Common condition
· Most common over hock and elbow joints of this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Intertrigo
·  This breed predisposed to lip fold pyoderma
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Pyotraumatic folliculitis
·Young dogs predisposed
·Also known as hot spot, wet eczema
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Skin tumours
607
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrinological Conditions
 Primary hypoparathyroidism
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Can occur at any age
·Uncommon
(Russell et al. 2006)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Gastric dilatation/volvulus
·Breed at risk in case series
(Glickman et al. 1994, Sargan 2004)
Haematological conditions
Haemophilia B
·Factor IX deficiency
·Also known as Christmas disease
· Inherited as a sex-linked trait
·Less common than haemophilia A
·Can be severe in this breed
(Dodds 2005)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture
608
·Common cause ofhindlimb lameness
· Neutered individuals are predisposed
·Older animals are predisposed
· Odds ratio in this breed 1.42
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Elbow dysplasia
·Common cause of forelimb lameness
· Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process (odds ratio 53.4
compared to mixed breeds) and ununited anconeal process (odds
ratio 14.2) is common in this breed
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Robins & Innes 2006)
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio in the breed 4.87
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Metaphyseal osteopathy
· Aka hypertrophic osteodystrophy
· Uncommon
·Affects dogs aged 2-6months
·  Males possibly predisposed
·Aetiology unknown
(Nieves 2002)
Osteosarcoma
· See under Neoplastic conditions
609
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 2.5 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Shoulder osteochondrosis
· Males predisposed
·Age of onset usually 4-7 months, but can be older
· Common condition
· Odds ratio 12.2 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Osteosarcoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Males over-represented
· Seen in older dogs
(Egenvall, Nodtvedt & von Euler 2007)
Neurological conditions
610
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Idiopathic epilepsy
·Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
· Common condition
(Bagley 2005)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance unknown
· Posterior subcapsular cataracts occur at 6-18 months and are
slowly progressive
· Posterior cortical cataracts are seen at 7-8 years and are slowly
progressive
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Dermoid
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
· May be associated with lower eyelid coloboma in this breed
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Ectropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
611
·Associated with macroblepharon
(Bedford 1988, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
Entropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Associated with macroblepharon
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating membrane
· Inheritance suspected
·Usually occurs in young dogs
(Rubin 1989)
Macroblepharon (diamond eye')
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Multiple ocular defects
·Congenital; not known if inherited
· Defects include microphthalmia, collapsed anterior chamber and
detached dysplastic retinas
(Martin & Leipold 1974, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Prolapse of the gland of the nictitating membrane (^cherry
eye')
612
·Breed at increased risk
·Usually presents in the first 1-2 years of life
(Rubin 1989)
Reproductive conditions
Cystic
 endometrial
hyperplasia-pyometra
 complex
(pyometra)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Common disease of older entire bitches (mean age 7.25 years)
·Most cases present within 12 weeks of oestrus
(Chastain, Panciera &Waters 1999, Smith 2006)
Respiratory conditions
· Brachycephalic airway syndrome
· Common condition
· Affects young dogs
· This breed less affected than the more severely brachycephalic
breeds
(Harvey 1989)
SALUKI
Dermatological conditions
Black hair follicular dysplasia
· Uncommon
·Changes usually seen by 4 weeks of age
·Thought to be inherited as an autsomal recessive trait
613
(Schmutz et al. 1998)
Neurological conditions
Leukodystrophy
*Rare
·Grey matter primarily affected in this breed
· Clinical signs at 3-6 months
(Dewey 2003a)
Lysosomal storage disease - ceroid lipofuscinosis
· Inheritance suspected
·Rare
· Signs seen at 1-2 years
(Inzana 2002)
SAMOYED
Cardiovascular conditions
Aortic stenosis
· Common congenital disease
·Not all studies confirm a predisposition
(Harpster 2002)
Atrial septal defect
· Uncommon disease
·Congenital
· Familial but not proven inherited
614
· Some studies do not demonstrate a predisposition for this
condition in this breed
(Lee et al. 2007)
Pulmonic stenosis
·Thirdmost frequent cause of canine congenital heart disease
·Polygenic inheritance likely
·Relative risk 2.7
(Darke 1989)
Dermatological conditions
Adult-onset growth hormone-responsive dermatosis
· See under Endocrine conditions
Canine uveodermatological syndrome
·Also known as Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome
·See also under Ocular conditions
(Beale 2006)
Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis
·No apparent sex predisposition
· Uncommon condition
· Affects face and ears, progressing to the neck and dorsal trunk
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001i)
Nasal depigmentation
·Also known as Dudley nose
615
·Cause unknown
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine conditions
Adult-onset growth hormone-responsive dermatosis
·Males may be predisposed
· Clinical signs seen at any age but often I-2 years
(Lothrup 1988)
Diabetes mellitus
·Familial
·Usual age range: 4-14 years; peak incidence: 7-9 years
·  Old entire females are predisposed
(Hess, Kass &Ward 2000, Kimmel et al. 2002, Catchpole
et al. 2005, Fall et al. 2007)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio in the breed 2.70
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Ocular-skeletal dysplasia
616
·Short forelegs; domed forehead
· Also associatedwith cataracts and eosinophilia
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
·See also under Ocular conditions
(Ketring 2003)
Neoplastic conditions
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland adenomas
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age was 10.5 years
·Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt &Mcmanus
2000)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland carcinomas
·Breed at risk in case series
· Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Sebaceous gland tumours
617
·Breed at risk of sebaceous adenoma in case series
·Mean age 10.9 years
· Common site: head
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Hypomyelination of the central nervous system
·Sex-linked inheritance suspected
·Signs seen at 2-8 weeks
(Cummings et al. 1986)
Leukodystrophy
·Rare
·White matter primarily affected in this breed
· Clinical signs at 3-6 months
(Dewey 2003a)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: <2 years
618
· Localization: posterior cortex
(Rubin 1989, Sargan 2004, Gelatt & Mackay 2005, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance, possibly Xlinked
· Opthalmoscopic signs at 2-5 years, visual problems are not
usually seen until 5-7 years
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Dice 1980, Rubin 1989, Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
·  Most cases are associatedwith goniodysgenesis
· Mean age 6.16 years
·  Female predisposition suggested in one study
(Rubin 1989, Ekesten & Torrang 1995, Gelatt & Mackay
2004a, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
·Breed at increased risk
(Kaswan & Salisbury 1990)
Lacrimal punctal atresia
·Congenital
(Gelatt 2007)
619
Medial canthal pocket syndrome
· Breed predisposition due to head shape
(Rubin 1989)
Multiple ocular defects and dwarfism  (oculoskeletal
dysplasia)
· Possibly inherited in a similar way as the condition in Labrador
Retrievers, that is, the gene having recessive effects on the
skeleton and incomplete dominant effects on the eye
· Ocular defects may include retinal dysplasia and detachments,
cataracts, abnormal secondary vitreous and persistence of the
hyaloid system
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Meyers et al. 1983, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
·Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Also seen with skeletal and other ocular defects (see multiple
 ocular defects and dwarfism) as a separate condition
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Uveodermatological
 syndrome
(also
known
as
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk
·Young adults (1l.5-4 years) affected
(Morgan 1989, Rubin 1989, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
620
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial renal disease (Glomerular basement membrane
disorder)
· X-linked dominant inheritance suggested
·The condition is believed to be similar to Alport syndrome in
humans
·In males there is progressive glomerular disease. Dogs present
with proteinuria and isosthenuria at 2-3 months of age, renal
failure at 6-9 months of age and usually die by 12-16 months of
age. Affected dogs also suffer with hearing loss
·In carrier females the condition is milder and non-progressive.
Affected individuals may fail to attain normal adult body
weight, but do not progress to terminal renal failure
· Genetic test available (VetGen) - see Appendix
(Bermard & Valli 1977, Jansen et al. 1984, Osborme &
Finco 1995)
SCHIPPERKE
Dermatological conditions
Black hair follicular dysplasia
·Rare
·Early onset
·Suspected autosomal recessive mode of inheritance
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001 d)
Pemphigus foliaceous
· Uncommon
·  No sex predisposition
621
·Mean age of onset 4.2 years
(Ihrke et al. 1985)
Neurological conditions
Mucopolysaccharidosis IHIb
·Rare
· Reported to occur around 3 years of age
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
(Ellinwood et al. 2003)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 7 years
· Localization: anterior subcapsular; slowly progressive
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Respiratory conditions
Pulmonary interstitial fibrosis
·Aetiology unknown
·Affects older dogs
· No sex predisposition
(Hawkins 2006)
SCHNAUZER
622
Cardiovascular conditions
Myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve
·Also known as chronic valvular disease, endocardiosis
·Relative risk 4.4
· Increased prevalence with age
· Aetiology unknown but genetic basis likely
· Miniature Schnauzers predisposed
(Abbot 2003)
Patent ductus arteriosus
·  Common congenital abnormality
·Relative risk 2.2
· Females predisposed
·  Miniature Schnauzers predisposed
· Mode of inheritance is polygenic
(Darke 1989)
Pulmonic stenosis
·Thirdmost frequent cause of canine congenital heart disease
·  Polygenic inheritance possible
·Relative risk 4.7
· Miniature Schnauzers are predisposed
(Matic 1988)
Sick sinus syndrome
·Middle-aged to old dogs
·Relative risk 12.6 in one small study and 6.9 in a larger study
·Females predisposed in this breed, at a ratio of 3:1
623
·Miniature Schnauzers predisposed
(Jochman-Edwards, Tilley &
Lichtenberger 2002)
Dermatological conditions
Acquired aurotrichia in Miniature Schnauzers
·Uncommon
·Affects either sex
·Inheritance likely
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Atopy (Miniature Schnauzers)
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Canine subcormeal pustular dermatosis
·Miniature Schnauzers account for 40% of cases
·Very rare
· No age or sex predisposition
(McKeever & Dahl 1977)
Follicular cyst
624
· No age or sex predisposition noted
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001c)
Malassezia dermatitis (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Papilloma-virus-associated pigmented lesions
· May have a genetic basis
·Affects Miniature Schnauzers
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Schnauzer comedo syndrome
·Affects Miniature Schnauzers
·May be inherited
(Hall 2005)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis of Miniature
Schnauzers
·Associated with the use of shampoos
·  No sex predisposition
(Scott & Miller 1999)
625
Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy
(Miniature Schnauzers)
·Age range of dogs affected 3-8 years
·No sex predilection
(Rosychuk 2002)
Drug reactions
Azathioprine (Giant Schnauzers)
·Low levels of thiopurine methyltransferase predispose to
myelotoxicity with this drug
(Kidd et al. 2005)
Gold
· Can cause cutaneous reactions
(Scott & Miller 1999)
Shampoos
· Can cause superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis
(Scott & Miller 1999)
Sulphonamides
· Can cause cutaneous reactions
(Scott & Miller 1999)
Endocrine conditions
626
Diabetes mellitus (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Usual age range: 4-14 years; peak incidence: 7-9 years
·  Old entire females are predisposed
(Hess, Kass &Ward 2000)
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome) (Miniature
Schnauzers)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Median age: 10 years
(Wood et al. 2007)
Hypothyroidism (Miniature and Giant Schnauzers)
·Breed at increased risk
· May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
· Neutered males and females at increased risk
percentage (16.5%) of Giant Schnauzers, predisposing to
autoimmune lymphocytic thyroiditis. (Ferm et al. 2009)
(Nesbitt et al. 1980, Milne & Hayes 1981, Greco 2002)
Primary hypoparathyroidism (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Can occur at any age
·Uncommon
(Bruyette & Feldman 1988,Feldman & Nelson 1996)
Gastrointestinal conditions
627
Congenital   idiopathic 
C megaoesophagus
(Miniature
Schnauzers)
· Inheritance compatible with autosomal dominance or autosomal
recessive inheritance with 60% penetrance
·Seen in puppies, recovery at 4-6 months
(Cox et al. 1980)
Congenital portosystemic shunt (Miniature Schnauzer)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
(Tobias & Rohrbach 2003, Hunt 2004, Sargan 2004)
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Breed at increased risk
· Middle aged
(Guilford & Strombeck 1996a, Hall 2000)
Pancreatitis (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Breed at risk of acute necrotizing pancreatitis in case series
·May be associatedwith hyperlipoproteinaemia in this breed
(Jaeger et al. 2003, Bishop et al. 2004)
Selective malabsorption of cobalamin (vitamin B12) (Giant
Schnauzers)
·Rare condition
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Signs seen at 6-12 weeks
628
· Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
· See also under Haematological conditions
(Fyfe et al. 1991, Fordyce, Callan & Giger 2000,
Battersby, Giger & Hall 2005)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Factor VlI deficiency (Miniature Schnauzer)
· Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive
· Mild signs in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Haemophilia A (Miniature Schnauzer)
·Severe Factor VIlI deficiency in this breed
· Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Selective malabsorption of cobalamin (vitamin B12) (Giant
Schnauzers)
· Causes a non-regenerative anaemia with poikilocytosis and
neutropenia
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Stomatocytosis (Miniature Schnauzers)
· Uncommon condition
(Giger 2003)
629
Musculoskeletal conditions
Hip dysplasia (Giant Schnauzers)
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio 3.0 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Myotonia
·Affects Miniature Schnauzers
·Congenital in this breed
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· Genetic test available (PennGen; HealthGene) - see Appendix
(Shelton 1999)
Panosteitis (Giant Schnauzers)
· Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 3.4 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
630
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995)
Cutaneous haemangioma (Giant Schnauzer)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 8.7 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk
·Mean age reported as 10 years
(Brown,Patnaik & MacEwen 1985,Pastor 2002)
Lipoma (Miniature and Standard Schnauzers)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Most common in middle-aged, obese female dogs
·Standard Schnauzers are predisposed to infiltrative lipomas
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Melanoma - cutaneous (Miniature and Standard)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 8.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Pilomatrixoma (Standard and Miniature Schnauzers)
·Breed at risk in case series
. Mean age 6.6 years
631
·Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Toma & Noli 2005)
Pituitary  tumour resulting
 in   hyperadrenocorticism
(Miniature Schnauzer)
·Breed at risk in case series
·See under Endocrine conditions
(Wood et al. 2007)
Sebaceous gland tumours (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Breed at risk of nodular sebaceous hyperplasia in case series
·Mean age 9.1 years
· Females may be predisposed
·Common site: limbs, trunk, eyelids
(Scott & Anderson 1990)
Squamous cell carcinoma of the digit (Giant Schnauzers)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Middle-aged to older dogs
· Dogs with black coats seem to be more frequently affected
(Paradis, Scott & Breton 1989)
Trichoepithelioma (Standard and Miniature Schnauzers)
·Breed at risk in case series
· Mean age 8.6 years
· Uncommon tumour
·Predilection sites: limbs, back and trunk
632
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Cataract (Giant Schnauzers)
·Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: young puppy or 6-7 years; slowly progressive
· Localization: posterior subcapsular cortex
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Cataract (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Late onset
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·High incidence of cataracts seen in Miniature Schnauzers
(Rubin 1989,Adkins & Hendrix 2005,Gelatt & Mackay
2005, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Cataract (Standard Schnauzer)
· Inheritance suspected
633
· Posterior nuclear/cortical cataracts may be congenital and
progress slowly; associatedwith microcornea
·Posterior subcapsular cataractsmay be seen<l year and progress
to completion
· Posterior subcapsular cataracts seen at 6 years
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Congenital hereditary cataract (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Age of onset: <6 weeks
· Localization: nucleus and posterior cortex; may be associated
with microphthalmia
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Gelatt et al. 1983, Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2005,
ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating membrane
(Giant Schnauzers)
· Inheritance suspected
· Usually occurs in young dogs
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized
progressive
retinal
atrophy
(GPRA)
(Miniature Schnauzers)
Autosomal recessive inheritance. Two or three genetic forms
may exist. Type A has been defined so far
·Photoreceptor dysplasia
· Slow clinical progression; ophthalmoscopic signs not seen until
2-5 years
634
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Genetic test available (Type A PRA only) (Optigen) － see
Appendix
(Rubin 1989, Zhang et al. 1999, Sargan 2004, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Glaucoma (primary) (Giant and Miniature Schnauzers)
· Inheritance suspected
(Gelatt 2007)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Breed at increased risk
(Kaswan & Salisbury 1990, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Lens luxation (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suggested
·Age of onset: 3-6 years
(Rubin 1989)
Micropapilla (Miniature Schnauzers)
· Congenital
·Seen occasionally in this breed
(Rubin 1989)
Microphthalmia
 and(
 congenital
 cataract
(Miniature
Schnauzers)
635
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance
· Microphthalmia is usually mild
· In one study 19% of cases also had lenticonus
(Gelatt et al. 1983, ACVO Genetcis Committee 2007)
Persistent hyperplastic primary  vitreous (PHPV) and
retinal dysplasia (Miniature Schnauzers)
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance
(Grahn, Storey & McMillan 2004, ACVO Genetcis
Committee 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal (Giant Schnauzers)
·  Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Senile iris atrophy (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Breed at increased risk
(Gelatt 2007)
Physiologiological conditions
Idiopathic hypertriglyceridaemia
 sil     s  a
other breeds
· High levels of triglycerides predispose to pancreatitis
(Xenoulis et al. 2007)
636
Renal and urinary conditions
Urethral  sphincter mechanism  incompetence  (causing
urinary incontinence) (Giant Schnauzers)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Spayed females predisposed
(Amold 1997)
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age at diagnosis in one large study: males 8.1 years,
females 8.4 years
· Males predisposed (3:1 in one large study)
(Osborme & Finco 1995, Lulich et al. 1991, 1999, Osborme
et al. 1999, Houston et al. 2004)
Urolithiasis - silica (Miniature Schnauzer)
·Breed at risk in case series
· Mean age at diagnosis 5.8 years
·  Males predisposed
(Osborne et al. 1999)
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
(Miniature Schnauzers)
·Breed at risk in case series
Average age at diagnosis in one large study: males 6.0 years,
females 5.7 years
·  Females predisposed (16:1 in one large study)
637
(Osborne et al. 1999, Houston et al. 2004)
Urolithiasis - urate (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Breed at risk in case series
*Average age at diagnosis in one large study: males 5.5 years.
females 4.6 years
· Males are predisposed
(Osborme et al. 1999, Houston et al. 2004)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism (Miniature Schnauzers)
· Congenital defect believed to be inherited as a sex-limited,
autosomal recessive trait
·Breed at risk in case series
(Cox,Wallace & Jessen 1978, Hayes et al. 1985,
Romagnoli 1991)
Cystic
C endometrial hyperplasia-pyometra complex
(pyometra) (Miniature Schnauzers)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Common disease of older entire bitches (mean age 7.25 years)
·Most cases present within 12 weeks of oestrus
(Chastain, Panciera &Waters 1999, Smith 2006)
Male pseudohermaphroditism - persistent Mullerian Duct
Syndrome (Miniature Schnauzers)
· Congenital abnormality inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
638
·Affected dogs are XY with bilateral testes (often cryptorchid) an
oviduct, uterus and cranial vagina
(Marshall et al. 1982, Meyers-Wallen et al. 1989)
SCOTTISH DEERHOUND (DEERHOUND)
Cardiovascular conditions
Dilated cardiomyopathy
· Prevalence of 6.0% in this breed in a small population studied
compared to 0.16% in mixed breeds and 0.65% in pure breeds
· Increased prevalence with age
·Approximately twice as common in males as females
·  Thought to be familial or genetic
(Meurs 2003b)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital portosystemic shunt
·Breed at risk in case series, polygenic inheritance suspected
·Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
(Sargan 2004)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Arthrosis of cervical articular facet joints
·Described in nine dogs of this breed
(Kinzel et al. 2003)
639
Pseudoachondrodysplasia
·Rare condition
·Exercise intolerance seen at 4-5 weeks of age
·Causes retarded growth
·Later in life osteopaenia leads to severe deformity
(Breur et al. 1989)
Neoplastic conditions
Osteosarcoma
· Inheritance suspected (dominant gene)
·Males over-represented
·Seen in older dogs
(Phillips et al. 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - cystine
· Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Osborme & Finco 1995, Houston et al.
2004, Harmevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
SCOTTISH TERRIER
Cardiovascular conditions
640
Pulmonic stenosis
·Thirdmost frequent cause of canine congenital heart disease
· Polygenic inheritance possible
·Relative risk 12.6
(Buchanan 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between l and 2 years of age have highest probability of
 an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Familial vasculopathy
·Reported in five Scottish Terrier puppies
·Probably autosomal dominant inheritance
(Pedersen & Scott 1991)
Generalized demodicosis
  ii e sa  a i  r r 
of this disease in the Cornell, USA, population
· Common condition
·Younger dogs predisposed
·  No sex predilection
·Susceptibility to generalized demodicosis may be inherited
641
·Incidence within breeds may vary depending on geographical
location
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001b)
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Vascular naevus
· More common in older dogs
· Occur most commonly on the scrotum
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001c)
Endocrine conditions
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Median age: 10 years
(Zeugswetter 2008)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia A
642
·Moderate to severe Factor VIll deficiency in this breed
·Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Haemophilia B
·Factor IX deficiency
·Also known as Christmas disease
· Inherited as a sex-linked trait
·Less common than haemophilia A
·Mild to moderate in this breed
(Dodds 2005)
Immune-mediated thrombocytopaenia
·Common
· Familial in this breed; likely inherited
·Females more commonly affected than males
(Lewis 2000)
Von Willebrand's disease
· This breed is affected by type Ill disease
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Genetic test available(VetGen)-seeAppendix
(Giger 2003)
Infectious conditions
Infectious skin disease
· See under Dermatological conditions
643
Musculoskeletal conditions
Craniomandibular osteopathy
·May be inherited in this breed
·Usually affects dogs aged 3-8 months
(Langley-Hobbs 2006a)
Muscle cramping (Scottie cramp)
· See Neurological conditions
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995)
Cutaneous lymphoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Cutaneous plasmacytoma
·Breed at risk
·Mean age 9.2 years
· Common sites: ear,lip and digit
644
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Melanoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 8.9 years
(Morris & Dobson 2001)
Nasal cavity tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·Median age:9 years
·Males over-represented in most studies
(McEntree 2001)
Primary brain tumour
· See under Neurological conditions
Neurological conditions
Central axonopathy
litters
· Tremors 0ccur at 10-12 weeks
(Van Ham, Vandevelde Desmidt 1994)
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
645
Muscle cramping ('Scottie cramp')
·  Recessive inheritance suspected
· Age of clinical onset: <6 months
(Meyers et al. 1969)
Primary brain tumour
·Higher incidence noted in this breed
· Older dogs affected
(Snyder et al. 2006)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Inheritance unknown
·Age of onset: 5-7 years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Physiological conditions
Raised serum alkaline phosphatase
        o 
healthy dogs of this breed than in controls 
(Nestor et al. 2006)
Reproductive conditions
Dystocia
646
· Breed  predisposition to  obstructive  dystocia
due
to
dorsoventrally flattened maternal pelvic canal and large foetuses
with large heads
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Eneroth et al. 1999, Johnston,
Root Kustritz & Olson 2001, Bergstrom et al. 2006)
SEALYHAM TERRIER
Neurological conditions
Con genital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Glaucoma
· Inheritance suspected
·Seen with lens luxation, glaucoma may be the primary condition
in some cases
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, Gelatt 2007)
Lens luxation (primary)
· Inherited
647
·Age of onset: 4-6 years
· Genetic test available (Orthopedic Foundation for Animals) -
see Appendix
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Curtis & Barnett 1980, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - total, with retinal detachment
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Ashton, Barnett & Sachs 1968, Rubin 1989, ACVO
Genetcis Committee 2007)
Reproductive conditions
Dystocia
· Breed predisposition to obstructive dystocia due to narrow
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Johnston, Root Kustritz &
Olson 2001)
SHAR PEI (CHINESE SHARPEI)
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
648
·Signs may begin at 2 months of age in this breed
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Generalized demodicosis
· Shar Peis are in the ten breeds at highest statistical risk of this
disease in the Cornell, USA, population
· Common condition
·Younger dogs predisposed
·No sex predilection
· Susceptibility to generalized demodicosis may be inherited
· Incidence within breeds may vary depending on geographical
location
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001b)
Idiopathic cutaneous mucinosis
· Often a cosmetic problem only in this breed
(Zanna et al. 2008)
Intertrigo
·Common
·May occur due to intentional breeding for excessive skin folding
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Pemphigus foliaceous
·Uncommon condition
Odds ratio 7.9 for this breed
649
(Kuhl, Shofer & Goldschmidt 1994)
Primary seborrhoea
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Signs first appear at an early age and get worse
·In this breed, otitis, greasy seborrhoea, and dermatitis are seen,
often in the body folds
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Skin tumours
·See under Neoplastic conditions
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital idiopathic megaoesophagus
· Often associated with hiatal hernia
(Knowles, O'Brien & Amann 1990, Callan et al. 1993)
Hepatic amyloidosis
· Autosomal recessive inheritance proposed
·Usually part of a systemic disease (Shar Pei fever aka reactive
systemic amyloidosis or Familial Meditteranean fever)
·See also Renal amyloidosis under Renal and urinary conditions
(Loeven 1994, Flatland et al. 2007)
Hiatal hermia
· Congenital
(Callan et al. 1993)
650
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis
·Often associated with small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and
protein-losing enteropathy
(Tams 2001)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Amyloidosis
·SeeRenalamyloidosis underRenal and urinary
conditions
Factor XII deficiency
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive
·Mild or no clinical signs in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Haemophilia A
·Moderate Factor VIlI deficiency in this breed
·Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Selective IgA deficiency
·Found in two colonies of Shar Peis
· Led to chronic skin disease and recurrent respiratory disease
(Giger 2003)
Musculoskeletal conditions
651
Carpal laxity syndrome
· Reported in puppies
·Usually self-limiting
(Cetinkava, Yardimki & Saglam 2007)
Elbow dysplasia
·Common cause of forelimb lameness
· Ununited anconeal process (odds ratio 4.6 compared to mixed
breeds) is common in this breed
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Familial Mediterranean fever
·SeeRenalamyloidosis underRenal and urinary conditions
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
·21% prevalence in this breed in a Belgian study
(Coopman et al. 2008)
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 3.5 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Patellar luxation
652
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 11.4 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
· Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Mast cell tumours
· This breed is predisposed to developing mast cell tumours at
less than 2 years of age (5 out of 18 reported cases)
·Predilection sites are the inguinal and preputial regions
(Miller 1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Ocular conditions
Entropion
·  Polygenic inheritance suspected
·High prevalence
·May present early (2-6 weeks)
· Severe, affecting entire lower lid, may also affect upper lid
resulting in trichiasis. Related to excessive skin on face and
head
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007, Read & Broun 2007)
653
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
·Also seen with lens luxation where glaucoma may the primary
or secondary condition
(Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
Lens luxation
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 3-6 years
(Lazarus, Pickett & Champagne 1998, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Prolapse of the gland of the nictitating membrane (^cherry
eye')
·Breed at increased risk
·Usually presents in the first 1-2 years of life
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial renal disease (renal amyloidosis)
·See Renal amyloidosis
Renal
1amyloidosis(aspart of reactivesystemic
amyloidosis also known as Familial Mediterranean fever
or Shar Pei fever)
·Familial, probable autsomal recessive inheritance
654
·Age of clinical onset: 1.5-6 years
· In one report of 14 affected Shar Pei dogs, 10
were female and 4 male
· Most dogs have medullary deposition of amyloid; only 66%
have glomerular involvement. Amyloid deposits may be found
in many other organs including liver, spleen, gastrointestinal
u  a ssd aas   pn e n
failure at a young age, recurrent fever and joint swelling or
hepatomegaly, jaundice and, rarely, liver rupture
(DiBartola et al. 1990, Osborme & Finco 1995, Sargan
2004)
Respiratory conditions
Brachycephalic upper airway syndrome
·Complex of anatomical deformities
· Likely a consequence of selective breeding for certain facial
characteristics
· Most commonly present with clinical signs aged 1-4 years
(Hedlund 2003)
SHETLAND SHEEPDOG
Cardiovascular conditions
Patent ductus arteriosus
·Common congenital abnormality
·7/52 dogs were Shetland Sheepdogs in one study
·Mode of inheritance is polygenic
(Darke 1989, Bureau, Monet & Orton 2005)
655
Dermatological conditions
Canine uveodermatological syndrome
·Rare condition
·Possible breed predisposition: 2/14 reported cases were
Shetland Sheepdogs
· Also known as Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome
· See also under Ocular conditions
(Morgan 1989)
Cutaneous histiocytosis
· No apparent age or sex predisposition
·Cause unknown
(Scott, Miller & Kirk 2001c)
Discoid lupus erythematosus
·Uncommon
·  No age or sex predisposition recognized
(Werner 1999)
Familial canine dermatomyositis
·  Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with incomplete
penetrance
·  No predispositions for sex, coat colour or coat length
(Ferguson et al. 2000)
Idiopathic  ulcerative  dermatosis  in Shetland  Sheepdogs
and Collies
656
·Unknown cause
· No sex predisposition
·Affects middle-aged to older dogs
(Moriello 2004)
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Systemic lupus erythematosus
· Uncommon (incidence approximately 0.03% of general canine
population)
·Males may be over-represented
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
Drug reactions
Ivermectin and milbemycin
·High doses can cause tremors, ataxia, coma and death
·Associated with the mutant MDRl allele
·8.4% of dogs tested had this mutation
(Mealey, Munyard & Bentien 2005, Dowling 2006)
Endocrine conditions
657
Hypothyroidism
·Breed at increased risk
·May occur younger in breeds at risk (2-3 years)
· Neutered males and females at increased risk
(Milne & Hayes 1981, Greco 2002)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Gall bladder diseases
·Gallbladder mucocoele common
(Aguirre et al. 2007)
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
·Breed at increased risk
· Middle aged
(Guilford & Strombeck 1996a)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia B
·Factor IX deficiency
·Also known as Christmas disease
·Inherited as a sex-linked trait
· Less common than haemophilia A
·Mild to moderate in this breed
(Dodds 2005)
Von Willebrand's disease
658
·  This breed is affected by type IlI disease
· Inheritance possibly determined by twomutations in this breed
· Genetic test available (VetGen) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Angular deformity of the tibia
· Uncommon
· Developmental disorder
(Jaeger, Marcellin-Little & Ferretti 2007)
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
·Humeroulnar luxation seen in this breed
· Occurs in first 3 months of life
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Gastrocnemius tendon avulsion
· May lead to rupture and subsequent hyperflexion of the hock
and digits
· Uncommon condition
(Beale 2008)
Shoulder luxation
· Congenital
·Rare condition
(Butterworth & Cook 2006)
659
Superficial digital flexor tendon luxation
·Uncommon
·Usually lateral luxation
·Simple autosomal recessive inheritance
(Solanti, Laitinen & Atroshi 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Basal cell tumour (many cases are now reclassified as
trichoblastoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.9 years
·Mostly found on head and neck
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 1995)
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Nasal cavity tumours
660
·Breed at increased risk
· Median age: 9 years
· Males over-represented in most studies
(Hayes,Wilson & Fraumeni 1982, McEntree 2001)
Testicular neoplasia
·See under Reproductive conditions
Trichoblastoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually older than 5years
·Common
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Leukodystrophy
·Rare
·White matter primarily affected in this breed
· Clinical signs at 3-6 months
(Dewey 2003a)
Ocular conditions
661
Collie eye anomaly
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Higher incidence in this breed reported in the UK (72% in one
uapiou! %s') vsn au u! uey adong jo shed pue (pnis
suggested)
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Bedford 1982b, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
Coloboma (optic nerve)
· Congenital defect, inheritance suspected
·Where seen alone it is unclear if related to the same defect seen
with Collie eye anomaly
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Congenital, subepithelial, geographic corneal dystrophy
(infantile cormeal dystrophy)
·Congenital
· Occurs in young puppies (<10 weeks); transient condition
(Gelatt 2007)
Corneal dystrophy
· Inheritance suspected
· Epithelial dystrophy
·Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
(Dice 1984, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
662
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(Lawson 1973, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Gelatt 2007)
Ectopic cilia
· Uncommon condition, breed at increased risk
(D'Anna et al. 2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Associated with microblepharon
(Gelatt 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of clinical onset: 5 years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Microblepharon (blepharophimosis)
· Inheritance suspected
(Gelatt 2007)
Micropapilla
·  Congenital condition
663
(Rubin 1989)
Multiple ocular defects
- Congenital condition, seen in homozygous merles (the result of 
merle to merle breeding) with predominantly white coats
· Defects may include microphthalmia, microcornea, cataract,
equatorial staphylomas and retinal defects. These dogs may also
be deaf
(Rubin 1989)
Optic nerve hypoplasia
· Congenital; not known if inherited
· Uncommoncondition seen occasionally in this breed
(Rubin 1989)
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED), also known
as central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA)
· Inheritance suspected
· More prevalent in the UK than in the USA; becoming less
prevalent following the introduction of control schemes
·Age of onset: 2-3 years
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Bedford 2001)
Uveodermatological
 syndrome
(also
known
as
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk
·Young adults (l.5-4 years) affected
(Morgan 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
664
Physiological conditions
Schirmer tear test
· This breed has a lower average Schirmer tear test than others
·Average was 15.8/1.8
(Hamor et al. 2000)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism
· Congenital defect believed to be inherited as a sex-limited,
autosomal recessive trait
·Breed at risk in case series
(Hayes et al. 1985, Romagnoli 1991)
Testicular neoplasia
·Breed at increased risk of sertoli cell tumour in case series
· Common tumour in male dog
·Mean age 9-1l years
(Weaver 1983)
SHIBA INU (JAPANESE SHIBA INU)
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
665
· Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Ocular conditions
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
· Associated with goniodysgenesis
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Kato et al. 2006, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Physiological conditions
Microcytosis
·Red blood cellsmay be small in this breedwithout disease
(Sellon 2005)
SHIH TZU
Cardiovascular conditions
Myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve
·Also known as chronic valvular disease, endocardiosis
·Relative risk 3.0
·Increased prevalence with age
·Aetiology unknown but genetic basis likely
666
(Fuentes 2003)
Ventricular septal defect
· Congenital
·Uncommon
·Relative risk 3.3
(Buchanan 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
·Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Follicular cyst
· No age or sex predisposition noted
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001c)
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
667
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine Conditions
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Median age: 10 years
(Wood et al. 2007)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Antral pyloric hypertrophy (pyloric stenosis)
syndrome
·Males may be predisposed
(Bellinger et al. 1990, Hall 2000)
Congenital portosystemic shunt
·Breed at risk in case series
· Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
(Tobias & Rohrbach 2003, Hunt 2004, Sargan 2004)
Haematological/immunological
conditions
Haemophilia A
668
·Severe Factor VIlI deficiency in this breed
·Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Haemophilia B
·Moderate Factor IX deficiency in this breed
· Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 2.3 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Ceruminous gland tumours
· Breed at risk of ceruminous adenoma and carcinoma in case
series
·Mean age 9.8 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland adenomas
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age was 10.5 years
·Entire males were predisposed
699
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt &Mcmanus
2000)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland carcinomas
·Breed at risk in case series
· Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 6.6 years
· Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Pituitary tumour resulting in hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series
· See under Endocrine conditions
(Wood et al. 2007)
Sebaceous gland tumours
·Breed at risk of sebaceous epithelioma in case series
·Mean age 10.7 years
· Common site: head and eyelids
(Scott & Anderson 1990)
Sweat gland tumour
670
·Breed at risk of apocrine adenoma and adenocarcinoma in case
series
·Meanage
9.5
years  (apocrine adenoma)
10.5
years
(adenocarcinoma)
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Intervertebral disc disease
· Common condition
·Age of clinical onset: 3-6 years
(Sturges 2006)
Ocular conditions
Caruncular trichiasis
· Occurs with exophthalmos
(Gelatt 2007, Peiffer & Petersen-Jones 2009)
Cataract
·Breed at risk in case series
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
671
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Ectopic cilia
· Uncommon condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, D'Anna et al. 2007,
Gelatt 2007)
Entropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Medial lids affected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritancesuspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
· May also be seen secondary to vitreal syneresis
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, Kato et al. 2006
Gelatt 2007)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
672
·Breed at increased risk
·  One study suggested a predisposition formales
(Kaswan & Salisbury 1990, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007, Sanchez et al. 2007)
Macroblepharon (leading to exposure keratopathy)
· Inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Micropapilla
·  Congenital condition
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Nasal fold trichiasis
(Gelatt 2007)
Optic nerve hypoplasia
·Congenital; not known if inherited
· Uncommoncondition seen occasionally in this breed
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Pigmentary keratitis/chronic keratitis  (resulting
from
exposure keratopathy)
·Breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Vitreal syneresis
673
·Breed at increased risk
·7.3% dogs affected (CERF 2000-2005)
·Age of onset: 2-4 years
· Predisposes to retinal detachment and glaucoma
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetcis Committee 2007)
Reproductive conditions
Eclampsia (puerperal tetany)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually seen in first 6 weeks postpartum
(Chastain, Panciera &Waters 2001)
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial renal disease (renal dysplasia)
·Mode of inheritance unknown
·Cases present with chronic renal failure at a few months of age
(O'Brien et al. 1982, Hoppe et al. 1990, Osbome & Finco
1995)
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate
· Breed at risk in case series
·Average age at diagnosis in one large study: males 8.l years,
females 8.4 years
· Males predisposed (3:1 in one large study)
(Osborme & Finco 1995, Lulich et al. 1999, Osborme et al.
1999, Houston et al. 2004)
674
Urolithiasis - silica
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age at diagnosis 5.8 years
· Males predisposed
(Osborme et al. 1999)
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
·Breed at risk in case series
'ss 0g sae ps sel ao un siso 1e se say .
females 5.7 years
· Females predisposed (16: 1 in one large study)
(Osborme et al. 1999, Houston et al. 2004)
Urolithiasis - urate
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age at diagnosis in one large study: males 5.5 years,
females 4.6 years
·  Males are predisposed
(Osborme et al. 1999, Houston et al. 2004)
Respiratory conditions
Tracheal collapse
·Aetiology unknown
· Usually affects middle-aged to old dogs
(Johnson 2000)
SIBERIAN HUSKY
675
Cardiovascular conditions
Essential hypertension
·Reported in a single dog that was then used to breed an
experimental colony
· Middle-aged to older dogs affected
·Males may be predisposed
(Tipper et al. 1987)
Ventricular septal defect
·Uncommon
· Congenital
(Matic 1988)
Dermatological conditions
Canine eosinophilic granuloma
·Rare
· Idiopathic
·Young males predisposed
·Siberian Huskies account for 76% of cases
· Lesions often found in oral cavity but can be cutaneous
(Madewell et al. 1980)
Canine uveodermatological syndrome
·Also known as Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome
·See alsounderOcular conditions
(Beale 2006)
676
Discoid lupus erythematosus
·Uncommon
· No age or sex predisposition recognized
(Werner 1999)
Follicular dysplasia
· May affect multiple dogs in a litter
· Clipped areas tend not to regrow
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Mucocutaneous hypopigmentation
· May have concurrent seasonal nasal hypopigmentation
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Nasal depigmentation
*Also known as Dudley nose
·Cause unknown
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Onychodystrophy
· Idiopathic, symmetric disease in this breed
·Occurs from 2 to 6 years of age
(Rosychuk 2002)
Postclipping alopecia
·Variously described as commonor uncommon
677
· Hairs may not regrow for 12-24 months
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 20011)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
·In this breed, skin lesions develop despite adequate levels of
zinc in the diet
(White et al. 2001)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Oral eosinophilic granuloma
·Seen in young dogs
(Madewell et al. 1980)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia A
·Moderate Factor VllI deficiency in this breed
·Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Neoplastic conditions
Anal sac adenocarcinoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
678
·Mean age: 10.2-10.8 years
· Some surveys suggest a predisposition for females
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Basal cell tumour (many cases are now reclassified as
trichoblastoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.9 years
· Mostly found on head and neck
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Hemangiopericytoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 10 years
·Predilection site: limbs
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland adenomas
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age was 10.5 years
· Entire males were predisposed
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt &Mcmanus
2000)
Perianal (hepatoid) gland carcinomas
·Breed at risk in case series
· Entire males were predisposed
679
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Sebaceous gland tumours
·Breed at risk of sebaceous adenoma and epithelioma
in case series
· Mean age 10.9 years (adenoma) and 10.7 years (epithelioma)
·Common site: head and eyelids
(Scott & Anderson 1990, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Trichoblastoma
· Breed at risk in case series
·Usually older than 5years
·Common
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Idiopathic epilepsy
·Age of onset: 6 months to 6 years
· Common condition
(Bagley 2005)
Degenerative myelopathy
· Reported in three related dogs of this breed
·Adults affected
· Suspected to be inherited
(Bichsel et al. 1983)
680
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: < 1 year
· Localization: posterior subcapsular cortex. Progression varies
· Where progression is rapid may be associated with secondary
uveitis or glaucoma
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Sargan 2004, Gelatt & Mackay 2005, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
· Breed at risk in case series, inheritance suspected
· Age of onset: 1-2 years
· Prevalence and severity increase at higher altitude
(Rubin 1989, Chavkin et al. 1994, Gionfriddo & Powell
2005)
Cormeal dystrophy
·Recessive
inheritance with variable expression has been
suggested
· Crystalline, lipid stromal dystrophy
·Age of onset: 5 months onwards
681
·Progressive, vision loss may occur
(MacMillan et al. 1979, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·X-linked recessive inheritance
·Age of clinical onset: 2-4 years
·Males more frequently affected
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Rubin 1989, Acland et al. 1994, Sargan 2004, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
· Associated with goniodysgenesis
·Possible predisposition for females and blue irides
· Age of onset: 1-2 years
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Stanley & Blogg 1991, Gelatt & Mackay
2004a, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Microphthalmia
· Inheritance suspected
·Often associated with other ocular abnormalities, for example,
microcornea, cataract and retinal detachment (Rubin 1989)
Persistent pupillary membranes
·Inheritance suspected
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
682
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Uveodermatological
 syndrome
(also
known
as
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome)
· Breed predisposition
·Young adults (l.5-4 years) affected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetcis Committee 2007)
Physiological conditions
Benign familial hyperphosphatasemia
· Increased serum alkaline phosphatase levels seen in some dogs
of this breed
·Familial
(Lawler et al. 1996)
Hereditary cardiac hypertrophy
· May be an adaptation favouring endurance
·Heart size increases with training
(Hinchcliff 2002)
Increased platelet aggregation
· May be an adaptation favouring endurance
· Described in a colony of hypertensive Huskies
(Thomas et al. 1992)
Renal and urinary conditions
683
Ectopic ureters
· Uncommon congenital anomaly
·Breed at risk in case series
· Usually presents <l year of age
·More commonly diagnosed in females
(Hayes 1974, 1984, Dean, Bojrab & Constantinescu 1988,
Berent, Mayhew & Porat-Mosenco 2008)
Respiratory conditions
Bronchiectasis
· Uncommon condition
·Usually affects middle-aged to older dogs
·Usually occurs secondary to chronic pulmonary disease
(Hawkins et al. 2003)
Laryngeal paralysis
·Idiopathic
·Relatively common disease
· Congenital in this breed
(Harvey 1989, 0'Brien 1975)
Spontaneous pneumothorax
· This breed over-represented in a case series
(Puerto et al. 2002)
SILKEN WINDHOUND
684
Drug reactions
Ivermectin and milbemycin
·High doses can cause tremors, ataxia, coma and death
·Associated with the mutant MDRl allele
(Dowling 2006)
SILKY TERRIER (AUSTRALIAN SILKY TERRIER)
Dermatological conditions
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Melanotrichia
·Often follows healing of deep inflammation
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Rabies vaccine-associated vasculitis and alopecia
·Lesions appear at the site of the vaccine, 3-6 months after
administration
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
Short hair syndrome of Silky breeds
685
·Usual onset: 1-5 years
·Unknown cause
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 20011)
Skin Tumours
·See under Neoplastic conditions
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital portosystemic shunt
·Breed at risk in case series
·Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <l year
·Usually extrahepatic
(Sargan 2004, Hunt 2004)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·  Mainly medial luxation observed
·Odds ratio 16.0 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Alam et al. 2007)
Neoplastic conditions
Melanoma - cutaneous
· Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 8.9 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
686
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
· Posterior polar subcapsular cataracts occur in 4-5 year olds and
are slowly progressive leading to visual deficiencies at 7-11
years (possibly more rapidly progressive in Australia)
· Peripheral cortical cataracts occur in 4-5 year olds and are
slowly progressive
·High prevalence noted in one study (10.29%)
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of clinical onset: 5-1l years of age
· Often associated with extensive cataract formation
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix (Rubin 1989)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - cystine
· Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Osborme & Finco 1995, Houston et al.
2004, Harmevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
SKYE TERRIER
687
Gastrointestinal diseases
Chronic hepatitis
·Familial
·Chronic hepatitis may be seen with copper accumulation in this
breed Where it occurs, copper accumulation is believed to be
secondary to cholestasis
(Haywood, Rutgers & Christian 1988, McGrotty, Ramsey
& Knottenbelt 2003)
Ocular conditions
Glaucoma (primary)
·Inheritance suspected
(Gelatt 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Ectopic ureters
· Uncommon congenital anomaly
·Breed at risk in case series
· Usually presents <l year of age
· More commonly diagnosed in females
(Holt & Moore 1995)
SLOUGHI
Ocular conditions
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
688
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rod-cone dysplasia type la
· Genetic test available (Optigen; AHT) - see Appendix
(Dekomien et al. 2000, Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Physiological conditions
Reduced thyroxine levels
·Common in this breed
·Low T4 and free T4 noted
(Panakova et al. 2008)
SOFT-COATED WHEATEN TERRIER
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
·Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
·This breed had a risk factor of 3.3 cases per 1000 dog years at
insurance claim for atopy)
(Nodtvedt et al. 2006)
Malassezia dermatitis
689
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Skin Tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine conditions
Hypoadrenocorticism
·Mean age 4.6 years in one case series of all breeds
· Females may be predisposed
· Uncommon condition
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Peterson, Kintzer & Kass 1996)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Lymphangiectasia (resulting in protein-losing enteropathy)
·Familial
· Mean age at diagnosis 4.9 years
·Most cases were female in one study
· Inflammatory
bowel
disease
and
lipogranulomatous
lymphangitis often present
· May be associated with protein-losing nephropathy in this breed
(Littman & Giger 1990, Littman et al. 2000, Melzer &
Sellon 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
690
Basal cell tumour (many cases are now reclassified as
trichoblastoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.9 years
·Mostly found on head and neck
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Cutaneous haemangioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 8.7 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992)
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 6.6 years
° Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Toma & Noli 2005)
Trichoblastoma
·Breed at risk in case series
691
·Usually older than 5 years
·Common
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Trichoepithelioma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 8.6 years
·Uncommon tumour
·Predilection sites: limbs, back and trunk
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Micropapilla
· Congenital
·Seen commonly in this breed
(Rubin 1989)
Multiple ocular defects
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
· Defects may include microphthalmia, coloboma, cataract and
retinal dysplasia
692
(van derWoerdt et al. 1995, Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetcis
Committee 2007)
Persistent hyaloid artery
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial renal disease (protein-losing nephropathy)
· Mode of inheritance if any, unknown
· Underlying pathology is glomerulonephritis/glomerulosclerosis.
Condition may be related to protein-losing enteropathy seen in
this breed
·Seen in dogs >6 years
·Most were female in one study
(Littman et al. 2000)
Familial renal disease (renal dysplasia)
· Mode of inheritance unknown
· Cases typically presentwith renal failure before 12 months
(Eriksen & Grondalen 1984, Nash, Kelly & Gaskell 1984,
Osborne & Finco 1995)
SPANISH WATER DOG
Ocular conditions
693
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
·  Recessive inheritance suspected
·  Progressive rod-cone degeneration
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Sargan 2004)
Glaucoma (goniodysgenesis)
·Schedule Aof the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
SPINONE ITALIANO
(See Italian Spinone)
SPRINGER SPANIEL
Cardiovascular conditions
Patent ductus arteriosus
· Common congenital abnormality
·Relative risk 4.0
·  Females predisposed
· Mode of inheritance is polygenic
(Buchanan 1999)
Persistent atrial standstill
·Rare condition
· May be associated with scapulohumeral muscle wasting
(Liu & Fox 1999)
694
Ventricular septal defect
·Marked risk in this breed (relative risk 5.4)
·No sex predilection
· Familial in this breed; inheritance suspected
(Buchanan 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Acral mutilation syndrome
· Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· No sex predisposition
·Age of onset: 3-5 months
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Anal sac disease (English Springer Spaniel)
· No age or sex predispostition
· Often associated with seborrhoea in this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001k)
Atopy (Welsh Springer Spaniel)
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
· Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
·This breed had a risk factor of 2.9 cases per 1000 dog years at
insurance claim for atopy)
695
(Nodtvedt et al. 2006)
Grass awn migration
· Common in the summer months
·Predisposed due to behaviour
(Brennan & Ihrke 1983)
Idiopathic onychomadesis
· Possible breed predisposition
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001k)
Malassezia dermatitis
·Affects adults of any age or sex
·May be seasonal
(Carlotti 2001)
Pemphigus foliaceous (English Springer Spaniel)
· Uncommon condition
·Odds ratio 20.7 for this breed
(Kuhl, Shofer & Goldschmidt 1994)
Primary seborrhoea
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· Signs first appear at an early age and get worse
· In this breed, otitis, greasy seborrhoea and dermatitis are seen
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
696
Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis in  English Springer
Spaniels
·Rare
· Only affects English Springers
·Probably genetically determined
(Mason, Halliwell & McDougal 1986)
Sebaceous adenitis
·Uncommon
· No apparent sex predilection
·Mean age at diagnosis 4.8 years
·25/104 cases were Springer Spaniels in a Swedish study
(Tevell, Bergvall and Egenvall 2008)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Gastrointestinal conditions
Parvovirus enteritis (English Springer Spaniels)
·See under Infectious conditions
Haematological/immunological conditions
Factor XI deficiency
·Autosomal inheritance, with homozygotes symptomatic
(Giger 2003)
Haemophilia A
697
·Severe Factor VIlI deficiency in this breed
· Familial in this breed
(Brooks 1999)
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
·Common disease
· Usually affects young adult and middle-aged animals
·May be more common in bitches
·May be seasonal variations
(Mackin 2002)
Phosphofructokinase
deficiency
(English
Springer
Spaniels)
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· Uncommon condition
· Genetic test available (PennGen; Optigen; AHT; VetGen;
HealthGene) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Infectious conditions
Parvovirus enteritis (English Springer Spaniels)
· Breed at increased risk in cases series
(Glickman et al. 1985, McCaw & Hoskins 2006)
Infectious skin diseases
· See under Dermatological conditions
698
Musculoskeletal conditions
Congenital myasthenia gravis
· See under Neurological conditions
Hip dysplasia
· Common condition
· Neutered male dogs predisposed
·Odds ratio in the English Spinger 1.26
(Witsberger et al. 2008)
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 2.8 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Anal sac adenocarcinoma (English Springer Spaniels)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age: 10.2-10.8 years
· Some surveys suggest a predisposition for females
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Bennett et al. 2002)
Basal cell tumour (many cases are now reclassified as
trichoblastoma) (Welsh and English Springer Spaniels)
699
·Breed at risk in case series
. Mean age 7.9 years
· Mostly found on head and neck
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Canine
cutaneous
histiocytoma
(English
Springer
Spaniels)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
·Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995)
Cutaneous haemangioma (English Springer Spaniels)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 8.7 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992,
Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Melanoma - cutaneous
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 8.9 years
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 1995)
Sweat gland tumour (English Springer Spaniels)
· Breed at risk of apocrine ductal adenoma in case series
700
· Mean age 9.1 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Trichoblastoma (Welsh Springer Spaniels)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually older than 5 years
·Common
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Trichoepithelioma (English Springer Spaniels)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 8.6 years
·Uncommon tumour
·Predilection sites: limbs, back and trunk
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
· Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Congenital myasthenia gravis
·Rare
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of clinical onset: 68 weeks
701
(LeCouteur 2009)
Hypomyelination of the central nervous system
·X-linked recessive inheritance suggested
·Signs seen at 2-4 weeks
·Males affected
(Thomas 2002)
Lysosomal storage disease - fucosidosis
(English Springer Spaniels)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Seen in Australia,New Zealand, theUK,North America
·Signs seen at 6-12 months
·Males more commonly affected
· Genetic test available (PennGen; AHT) - see Appendix
(Bagley 2005)
Lysosomal storage disease - GM1 gangliosidosis (English
Springer Spaniels)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
·Signs seen at 3-6 months
· Type I disease seen in this breed
(Bagley 2005)
Rage syndrome
·Seen in young to middle-aged dogs
702
·May be a formof dominance aggression ormay be a
psychomotor epilepsy
(Manteca 2002)
Ocular conditions
Cataract (English Springer Spaniels)
·Familial, inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 1-3 years
· Localization: posterior polar subcapsular. Slowly progressive,
vision rarely affected
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Cataract (Welsh Springer Spaniels)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Age of onset: 8-12 weeks
· Localization: posterior cortex; rapidly progressive
to blindness at 1-2 years
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Barnett 1980, Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2005, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
Congenital,  subepithelial,  geographic  corneal  dystrophy
(Infantile corneal dystrophy) (English Springer Spaniels)
· Congenital
· Occurs in young puppies (<10 weeks); transient
condition
703
(Gelatt 2007)
Distichiasis (Welsh Springer Spaniels)
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion (English and Welsh Springer Spaniels)
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
· Lower lateral lids affected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA) (English
Springer Spaniels)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Age of clinical onset 2-7 years
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·Genetic test available (cord 1 - PRA) (AHT; VetGen) - see
Appendix
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt
2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA) (Welsh
Springer Spaniels)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Clinical onset at 5-7 years
(Rubin 1989, Sargan 2004, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
704
Glaucoma (primary) (English Springer Spaniels)
· Inheritance suspected
· May be associated with goniodysgenesis
· Also seen secondary to cataracts
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2004b, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Glaucoma (primary) (Welsh Springer Spaniels)
·Autosomal dominant inheritance suggested
· Associated with goniodysgenesis
·Age of onset: 10 weeks to 10 years
· Females seem predisposed
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Cottrell & Barmett 1988, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Microphthalmia (English Springer Spaniels)
·Recessive inheritance suspected
·Usually seen with other ocular abnormalities including
microcornea, cataract and retinal detachment
(Rubin 1989)
Plasma cell infiltration  of  the  nictitating membrane
(plasmoma) (English Springer Spaniels)
·Breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989)
705
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal (English Springer Spaniels)
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(O'Toole et al. 1983, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED), also known
as central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA) (English
Springer Spaniels)
· Inheritance suspected
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Bedford 2001)
Respiratory conditions
Bronchiectasis (English Springer Spaniels)
· Uncommon condition
·Usually affects middle-aged to older dogs
· Usually occurs secondary to chronic pulmonary disease
(Hawkins et al. 2003)
STAFFORDSHIRE BULL TERRIER
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
706
 Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
·This breed had a risk factor of 8.4 cases per 1000 dog years at
risk (if 1000 dogs were followed for 1 year, 8.4 would have an
insurance claim for atopy)
(Nodtvedt et al. 2006)
Canine follicular dysplasia/seasonal flank alopecia
· Presumed genetic basis
·Alopecia starts at 2-4 years of age and is restricted
to the flank in this breed
·May occur in autumn or spring
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine conditions
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Median age: 10 years
(Peterson 2007)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Gastric carcinoma
707
·See under Neoplastic conditions
Neoplastic conditions
Gastric carcinoma
·Rare condition seen relatively more frequently in this breeed
· Male dogs more commonly affected in case series
·Mean age of occurrence: 8-10 years
(Sullivan et al. 1987, Gualtieri, Monzeglio & Scanziani
1999)
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000, Baker-Gabb, Hunt &
France 2003)
Pituitary tumour resulting in hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series
· See under Endocrine conditions
(Peterson 2007)
Neurological conditions
Organic aciduria
·Inborn error of metabolism causing L-2-hydroxyglutaric
aciduria
·Neurological signs seen between 6 months and 7 years of age
708
·Genetic test available (AHT) - see Appendix (Abramson et al.
2003)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Age of onset: <l year
· Localization: nucleus and sutures; progresses to blindness at 3
years
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·Genetic test available (AHT; VetGen) - see Appendix
(Rubin 1989, Mellersch et al. 2006, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Distichiasis
· Common condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV)
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme (PHPV)
(Leon, Barnett & Curtis 1986, Rubin 1989, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis -- cystine
Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
709
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Osborne & Finco 1995, Houston et al.
2004, Harnevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
Respiratory conditions
Brachycephalic upper airway syndrome
·Complex of anatomical deformities
·Common in this breed
· Likely a consequence of selective breeding for certain facial
characteristics
· Most commonly present with clinical signs aged 1-4 years
(Torrez& Hunt 2006)
Pulmonary interstitial fibrosis
·Aetiology unknown
·Affects older dogs
· No sex predisposition
(Hawkins 2006)
SUSSEX SPANIEL
Musculoskeletal conditions
Mitochondrial myopathy
·Rare
· Primary defect is in mitochondrial function
· Can cause sudden death
710
(Shelton 1999)
Pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase 1 deficiency
·Causes severe exercise intolerance
 dod d xsse n q o g o a
carriers for the affected gene
·Genetic test available (AHT; VetGen) - see Appendix
(Cameron et al. 2007)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
· Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Ectropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Associated with macroblepharon
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
·Associated with macroblepharon
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
711
Macroblepharon ('diamond eye')
· Inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Persistent hyaloid artery
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
SWEDISH ELKHOUND
Endocrine Conditions
Diabetes mellitus
·Familial
·Usual age range 4-14 years, peak incidence 7-9 years
·Most cases female in this breed
(Fall et al. 2007)
SWEDISHLAPLAND
Endocrine Conditions
Diabetes mellitus
712
·Familial
·Usual age range 4-14 years, peak incidence 7-9 years
·Most cases female in this breed
(Fall et al. 2007)
Neurological conditions
Glycogenosis (glycogen storage disease type 2)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suggested
·Rare
·Age of clinical onset around 1.5 years
(Bagley 2005)
Spinal muscular atrophy
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suggested
·Rare
·Age of clinical onset: 5-6 weeks
(Shelton 1999)
TIBETANMASTIFF
Neurological conditions
Hypertrophic neuropathy
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Age of clinical onset: 7-10 weeks
(Cuddon 2002a)
TIBETAN SPANIEL
713
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Entropion
· Inheritance suspected
·Medial lower lid affected
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
· Ophthalmoscopic signs seen from 3-5 years. Rapid progression
to blindness within 1 year
·Schedule A BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Bjerkas & Narfstrom 1994, Sargan 2004,
ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Micropapilla
·  Congenital condition
(Rubin 1989)
Multiple ocular defects with microphthalmia
714
·  Congenital, inheritance suspected
(Rubin 1989)
TIBETAN TERRIER
Endocrine conditions
Diabetes mellitus
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Usual age range: 4-14 years; peak incidence: 7-9 years
· Old entire females are predisposed
(Catchpole et al. 2005)
Neoplastic conditions
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Lysosomal storage disease - ceroid lipofuscinosis
715
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
· Signs seen at 1-2 years
· See also under Ophthalmological conditions
(Bagley 2005)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: <l year
·Localization: posterior
r cortex; progress  to cause visual
deficiencies at 45 years
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Ketteritzsch et al. 2004, Gelatt & Mackay
2005, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Ophthalmoscopic changes and night blindness present at l year,
complete blindness as early as 2 years
· A second type of PRA may exist with night blindness at
2months but no ophthalmoscopic changes until 3-4 years of age
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Millichamp, Curtis & Barnet 1988, Rubin 1989, Sargan
2004, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
·May also be seen secondary to lens luxation
716
(Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, Gelatt 2007)
Lens luxation (primary)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suggested
·Age of onset: 3-6 years
·Genetic test available (Orthopedic Foundation for Animals) -
see Appendix
·Schedule A of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Willis et al. 1979, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· Rare condition
· See also under Neurological conditions
(Katz et al. 2005)
VISZLA
(See Hungarian Viszla)
WACHTELHUND
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
· Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
·Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
717
·Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
·This breed had a risk factor of 4.2 cases per 1000 dog years at
risk (if 1000 dogs were followed for 1 year, 4.2 would have an
insurance claim for atopy)
(Nodtvedt et al. 2006)
WEIMARANER
Cardiovascular conditions
Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia
·Accounts for 0.5% of congenital heart diseasebut may be
under-reported
(Hogan 2002)
Tricuspid dysplasia
· Congenital
·  Males predisposed
(Bonagura & Lehmkuhl 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Blastomycosis
·See under Infectious conditions
Generalized demodicosis
· Weimeraners are in the ten breeds at highest statistical risk of
this disease in the Cornell,USA,population
· Common condition
718
· Younger dogs predisposed
· No sex predilection
·Susceptibility to generalized demodicosis may be inherited
location
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001b)
Histoplasmosis
·See under Infectious conditions
Idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
·Uncommon
· No age or sex predisposition
·This breed over-represented in one study
(Panich, Scott & Miller 1991)
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Muzzle folliculitis/furunculosis
· Common condition
·Also known as canine acne
·Local trauma,
hormones and geneticsmay play a role in
pathogenesis
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
719
Pododermatitis
·Can affect any age or sex
·Males predisposed
·Front feet more commonly affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001f)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Gastrointestinal conditions
Gastric dilatation/volvulus
·Breed at risk in case series
(Glickman et al. 1994, Sargan 2004)
Oropharyngeal neoplasia
·Breed at risk in case series
(Dorn & Priester 1976)
Haematological/immunological conditions
·Recurrent infections
· Median age in one study of 4 months
·Low IgG concentrations found
· Neutrophil function also may be reduced
(Giger 2003)
Thymic abnormality and growth hormone deficiency
720
·Described in a colony ofWeimaraners in 1980
· Causes a wasting syndrome and increased susceptibility to
infection
(Giger 2003)
Vaccine-associated
vasculitis
with
hypertrophic
osteodystrophy
·Gastrointestinal signs may also be seen
(Harrus et al. 2002)
Infectious conditions
Blastomycosis
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Young (2-4 years) entire males predisposed
· Geographic distribution: mainly North America
(Mississippi, Missouri, Ohio River valleys, mid-Atlantic
States, Quebec, Manitoba and Ontario)
·Proximity to a body of water is a risk factor in endemic areas
(Rudmann et al. 1992, Arceneaux, Taboada & Hosgood
1998)
Histoplasmosis
·Breed at increased risk
·Most dogs are less than 2 years, males predisposed
·Mostly seen in the Americas, India and Southeast Asia
(Clinkenbeard et al. 1989)
721
Infectious skin disease
· See under Dermatological conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
· Metaphyseal osteopathy
· Aka hypertrophic osteodystrophy
·Uncommon
·Affects dogs aged 2-6months
·  Males possibly predisposed
·Aetiology unknown
·Odds ratio 21.4 (compared to mixed breeds)
·Possible link with vaccination suggested in this breed
(Crumlish et al. 2006, LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 1.9 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Neoplastic conditions
Mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·May be seen at any age (from 4 months onwards), but usually
seen in older animals
· Predilection sites include hindlimb, perineum and scrotum
722
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Oropharyngeal neoplasia
· See under Gastrointestinal conditions
Testicular neoplasia
·See under Reproductive conditions
Neurological conditions
Hypomyelination of the central nervous system
·Rare
·Signs seen at 2-8 weeks
· Inheritance uncertain
(Thomas 2002)
Spinal dysraphism
·Congenital; inherited
· Seen most commonly in this breed
·Signs seen at 3-4 weeks
(Axlund 2004)
Ocular conditions
Cormeal dystrophy
· Inheritance suspected
·Subepithelial, paracentral, lipid dystrophy
·Age of onset: 1-8 years
723
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Distichiasis
·Common condition, breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Entropion
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating membrane
· Inheritance suspected
·Usually occurs in young dogs
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Medial canthal pocket syndrome
· Breed predisposition due to head shape
(Rubin 1989)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urethral  sphincter  mechanism  incompetence  (causing
urinary incontinence)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Spayed females predisposed
724
(Holt & Thrusfield 1993)
Reproductive conditions
Testicular neoplasia
·Breed at increased risk
· Common tumour in male dog
·Mean age 9-11 years
· One study suggests increased risk to sertoli cell
tumours
(Hayes & Pendergrass 1976)
WELSH CORGI
Haematological/immunological
conditions
Severe combined immunodeficiency
·Inherited as an X-linked recessive trait
·Thymic hypoplasia and lymphopaenia seen
·Genetic test available (PennGen) - see
Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Von Willebrand's disease (Pembroke Welsh
Corgis)
725
·Possibly inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· Mainly type I disease seen in this breed
·Genetic test available (VetGen) - see Appendix
(Giger 2008)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Brachyury (Pembroke Welsh Corgi)
· Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait
· May becomemore commonincountrieswhere docking is illegal
· Homozygotes may be born with severe anatomical defects
(Indrebo et al. 2008)
Perineal herniation
· Intact male dogs predisposed
· Common condition
(Elkins 2004)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Degenerative myelopathy
·Similar toGerman ShepherdDog degenerative myelopathy
· Diagnosed on 18 post-mortem examinations in this breed
726
·Mean age was 12.7 years
(March et al. 2009)
Ocular conditions
Cataract (Cardigan Welsh Corgi)
· Inheritance suspected
(Gelatt & Mackay 2005, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007)
Cataract (Pembroke Welsh Corgis)
· Inheritance suspected
· Posterior cortical cataracts are seen at l year and are slowly
progressive
· Congenital cataracts have been reported
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA) (Cardigan
Welsh Corgis)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Rod-cone dysplasia type 3
·Clinically evident 6-8 weeks
·Schedule A of theBVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Genetic test available (Optigen; VetGen; HealthGene) - see
Appendix
(Rubin 1989, Petersen-Jones, Entz & Sargan 1999, ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007, Gelatt 2007)
727
Lens luxation (Pembroke and Cardigan Welsh Corgis)
· Inheritance suspected
·Reported mainly in the UK
(Rubin 1989)
Persistent pupillary membranes (Pembroke
and Cardigan Welsh Corgis)
· Familial condition; recessive inheritance has
been suggested
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal dysplasia - multifocal (Pembroke Welsh Corgis)
·Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
· A second severe form exists, with abnormality (liquefaction) of
the vitreous
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED), also known
as central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA) (Cardigan
Welsh Corgis)
·Inheritance suspected
· Reported mainly in the UK
·ScheduleAof theBVA/KC/ISDS EyeScheme
(Rubin 1989, Bedford 2001, ACVO Genetics Committee
2007)
728
Renal and urinary conditions
Familial renal disease (renal telangiectasia)
·See renal telangiectasia
Renal telangiectasia (Pembroke Welsh Corgis)
·Rare condition seen in this breed
·Affected dogs are 5-13 years of age
·Anomalous development of the blood vessels leads to marked
haematuria
(Moore & Thornton 1983)
Urolithiasis -- cystine
·Cystinuria results from an inherited defect in renal tubular
transport of cystine and predisposes to cystine urolithiasis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Young dogs affected (2-5 years)
·Almost all cases are male
(Case et al. 1992, Osborme & Finco 1995, Houston et al.
2004, Harnevik, Hoppe & Soderkvist 2006)
Reproductive conditions
Dystocia
· Breed predisposition to obstructive dystocia due to large
foetuses
(Johnston, Root Kustritz & Olson 2001)
WELSH TERRIER
729
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
·Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
This breed had a risk factor of 13.4 cases per 1000 dog years at
risk (if 1000 dogs were followed for 1 year, 13.4 would have an
insurance claim for atopy)
(Nodtvedt et al. 2006)
Ocular conditions
Glaucoma (primary)
· Inheritance suspected
·Associated with goniodysgenesis
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·Also seen with lens luxation, glaucomamay be the primary
condition in some cases
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2004a, Gelatt 2007)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
·Breed at increased risk
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Lens luxation (primary)
730
· Inherited
·Age of onset: 5-6 years
· Genetic test available (Orthopedic Foundation for Animals) -
see Appendix
(Curtis & Barmett 1980, Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
WEST HIGHLAND WHITE TERRIER
Cardiovascular conditions
Pulmonic stenosis
·Thirdmost frequent cause of canine congenital heart disease
· May be polygenic mode of inheritance
·Relative risk 4.2
(Del Palacio 2002)
Sick Sinus Syndrome
· Females predisposed
(Moneva-Jordan et al. 2001)
Tetralogy of Fallot
·Congenital
·Rare
·Relative risk 1.4, but this is based on 3 dogs out of 4l with
Tetralogy of Fallot in one study belonging to this breed
(Buchanan 1999)
Ventricular septal defect
731
·Marked risk in this breed (relative risk 1.3)
· No sex predilection
·Congenital
(Buchanan 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Atopy (see plate 23 in the colour plate section)
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
· Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
· Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
predisposed
·This breed had a risk factor of 8.4 cases per 1000 dog years at
risk (if 1000 dogs were followed for 1 year, 8.4 would have an
insurance claim for atopy)
(Nodtvedt et al. 2006)
Epidermal dysplasia in West Highland White Terriers
·Also known as ArmadilloWestie syndrome
·Uncommon
·Familial
· Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· Usually affects dogs aged 6-12 months
(Scott & Miller 1990)
Generalized demodicosis
s i e s     sa  n 
risk of this disease in the Cornell, USA, population
· Common condition
732
· Younger dogs predisposed
· No sex predilection
·Susceptibility to generalized demodicosis may be inherited
· Incidence within breeds may vary depending on geographical
location
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001b)
Malassezia dermatitis
· Common condition
·Any age
·May be seasonal
(Nesbitt 2002)
Primary seborrhoea
·Probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Signs first appear at an early age and get worse
· In this breed, otitis, greasy seborrhoea, and dermatitis are seen
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine conditions
Hypoadrenocorticism
·Mean age 4.6 years in one case series of all breeds
· Females may be predisposed
· Uncommon condition
(Feldman & Nelson 1996, Peterson, Kintzer & Kass 1996)
733
Gastrointestinal conditions
Chronic hepatitis
·Breed at increased risk
·Hepatitis both with and without increased hepatocellular copper
have been described in this breed, possibly representing two
different conditions. Inheritance of a copper storage defect is
suspectedwhere there is copper toxicosis
(Thornburg et al. 1986, 1996, Watson 2004)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
·Affected dogs have abnormal red blood cells with a lifespan of
about 20 days
· Genetic test available (PennGen; VetGen; HealthGene) - see
Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Aseptic (avascular) necrosis of the femoral
head (see figure 20)
·Also known as Legg-Calve-Perthes disease
·Mean age of onset: 7 months
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Odds ratio 33.2 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Lang, Martig & Gudel
2006)
734
Craniomandibular osteopathy (see figure21)
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait in this breed
· Usually affects dogs aged 3-8 months
(Langley-Hobbs 2006a)
Panosteitis
·Also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis
·Common
·Young males predisposed
·Odds ratio 1.7 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Odds ratio 1.8 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
· See haematological conditions
Neoplastic conditions
Basal cell tumour (many cases are now reclassified as
trichoblastoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.9 years
·Mostly found on head and neck
735
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
· Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Scott, Miller & Griffin
1995, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Pilomatrixoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 6.6 years
Figure 20 Ventrodorsal radiograph of a 10-month-old West
Highland White with aseptic necrosis of the femoral head
and neck -- Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. Courtesy of Andy
Moores.
736
10moWHWT
Figure 21  Lateral skull radiograph of an 18-month-old
neutered male West Highland White Terrier with
craniomandibular osteopathy. There is extensive new bone
formation along the ventral aspect of the mandible.
737
·Uncommon (1% of all cutaneous neoplasms in the dog)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000,Toma&Noli 2005)
Sebaceous gland tumours
·Breed at risk of sebaceous adenoma in case series
·Mean age 10.9 years
·Common site: head
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
738
(Strain 2004)
Lysosomal storage disease - globoid cell Leukodystrophy
(Krabbe's disease)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
· Signs seen at 2-5 months
·Genetic test available (HealthGene) - see Appendix
(Bagley 2005)
Shaker dog disease
· Idiopathic
·Age of clinical onset < 5 years
·Uncommon
(Bagley 2005)
Ocular conditions
Congenital cataract
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: < 6 months
·  Progresses to complete cataract
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
· Non-progressive cataracts in the posterior Y sutures are seen in
older dogs
· Congenital cataract is seen with microphthalmia
(see below)
(Narfstrom 1981, Rubin 1989, Gelatt & Mackay 2005.
ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
739
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
· Breed at increased risk - high prevalence in this breed
·Females predisposed
(Rubin 1989, Kaswan & Salisbury 1990, Sanchez et al.
2007)
Multiple ocular defects
· Congenital, autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Defects may include congenital cataract, retinal dysplasia,
PPMs and microphthalmia
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Persistent pupillary membranes
· Inheritance suspected
·Common condition, relatively high frequency in this breed
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Ectopic ureters
· Uncommon congenital anomaly
·Breed at risk in case series
·Usually presents <l year of age
·More commonly diagnosed in females
(Hayes 1974, 1984, Berent, Mayhew & Porat-Mosenco
2008)
740
Respiratory conditions
Pulmonary interstitial fibrosis
·Aetiology unknown
·Affects older dogs
(Corcoran et al. 1999)
WHIPPET
Dermatological conditions
Idiopathic onychomadesis
· Possible breed predisposition
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001k)
Pattern baldness
·Usually affects females in this breed
·Gradual hair loss from 6 months of age
·Affects mainly the ventrum and caudomedial thighs
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Skin tumours
·See under Neoplastic conditions
Truncal solar dermatitis
· A combination of factors are required to cause this condition
·Flank and abdomen most severely affected
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
741
Drug reactions
Ivermectin and milbemycin
· High doses can cause tremors, ataxia, coma and death
·Associated with the mutant MDRl allele
(Dowling 2006)
Neoplastic conditions
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 3.6 years (50% < 2 years)
· Mainly head, pinnae and limbs
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Mean age 9.6 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000, Pastor 2002)
Hemangiopericytoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 10 years
·Predilection site: limbs
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
742
Congenital deafness
·Prevalence in this breed not known
·Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
·Several types are seen
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Cormeal dystrophy
·Stromal lipid dystrophy
·Age of onset: 3-5 years
(Rubin 1989)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
·Automal recessive inheritance suspectd
·Clinical onset at 5 years
(Rubin 1989)
Micropapilla
· Congenital condition
(Rubin 1989)
743
Vitreal syneresis
·Breed at increased risk
·5.19% of dogs of this breed affected (CERF 2000-2005)
·Age of onset: 6 years
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Physiological conditions
Reduced thyroxine levels
·Common in this breed
(Panakova et al. 2008)
YORKSHIRE TERRIER
Cardiovascular conditions
Myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve
·Also known as endocardiosis, chronic valvular disease
·Relative risk 2.6
· Increased prevalence with age
·Aetiology unknown but genetic basis likely
(Bonagura 2001)
Patent ductus arteriosus
· Common congenital abnormality
·Relative risk 4.2
· Mode of inheritance is polygenic
744
(Hogan 2002)
Dermatological conditions
Atopy
· Common disease, affecting around 10% of canine population
· Birth in autumn or summer is a predisposing factor
·Dogs between 1 and 2 years of age have highest probability of
an insurance claim for atopy
· Some studies show no sex predilection, others show females
predisposed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001h)
Dermatophytosis
·  Common fungal infection
·  No sex predisposition
(Sparkes et al. 1993)
Melanoderma and alopecia in Yorkshire Terriers
·Probably genetic
·Usually affects dogs aged 6 months to 3 years
(Allen 1985)
Melanotrichia
·Often follows healing of deep inflammation
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Rabies vaccine-associated vasculitis and alopecia
745
·Lesions appear at the site of the vaccine, 3-6 months after
administration
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001m)
Short hair syndrome of Silky breeds
·Usual onset: 1-5 years
·Unknown cause
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 20011)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Endocrine Conditions
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Median age: 10 years
(Alenza et al. 2006, Peterson 2007, Zeugswetter 2008)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital portosystemic shunt
· Breed at risk in case series, inheritance suspected
· Clinical signs usually seen in young dogs <1 year
· Usually extrahepatic
(Tobias 2003, Tobias & Rohrbach 2003, Sargan 2004)
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
746
·Breed at increased risk
· Middle aged
(Hall 2000)
Hepatic lipidosis
· Seen in puppies
(van Toor et al. 1991)
Lymphangiectasia (resulting in protein-losing enteropathy)
·Breed at increased risk
(Kimmel,Waddell & Michel 2000, Melzer & Sellon 2002)
Microvascular portal dysplasia
·Breed at increased risk
·Often subclinical
(Center 1996)
Pancreatitis
· Breed at increased risk of acute pancreatitis
(Hess et al. 1992)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Aseptic necrosis of the femoral head
·Also known as Legg-Calve-Perthes disease
·Mean age of onset: 7 months
·Aetiology unknown
747
·One study showed 60% of cases of this condition were
YorkshireTerriers
· In another study, Odds ratio was 35.8 (compared to mixed
breeds)
(Piek et al. 1996, LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002)
Atlantoaxial subluxation
· See under Neurological conditions
Congenital elbow luxation
·Uncommon
· Radial head luxation and humeroulnar luxation seen in this
breed
·Radial head luxation occurs at 4-5 months of age
· Humeroulnar luxation occurs in first 3 months of life
(Robins & Innes 2006)
Delayed/non-union of fractures of the distal third of the
radius and ulna in Miniature and Toy breeds
·Coaptation of fractures of the distal third of the antebrachium is
a very common cause of this condition
(Palmer 2005)
Patellar luxation
· Common condition
·Mainly medial luxation observed
·Odds ratio 8.3 (compared to mixed breeds)
(LaFond, Breur & Austin 2002, Alam et al. 2007)
748
Neoplastic conditions
Intracutaneous cormifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Mean age 7.3 years
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992, Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Pituitary tumour resulting in hyperadrenocorticism
·Breed at risk in case series
· See under Endocrine conditions
(Alenza et al. 2006, Peterson 2007)
Sweat gland tumour
· Breed at risk of apocrine adenoma in case series
·Mean age 9.5 years
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Atlantoaxial subluxation
·Congenital
·Mean age of presentation 2.7 years
(Havig et al. 2005)
Congenital deafness
· Prevalence in this breed not known
749
· Suspected to be inherited
(Strain 2004)
Hydrocephalus
· Congenital
·Relatively common
·  Genetic and environmental factors suspected
·Onset of signs: <3 months
(Inzana 2002)
Necrotizing meningoencephalitis
·Rare condition
·Affects adult to aged dogs of this breed
(Kuwamura et al. 2002)
Ocular conditions
Cataract
· Inheritance suspected
· Progressive cortical cataracts; may result in vision loss by 5
years
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt &Mackay 2005, ACVO Genetics
Committee 2007)
Congenital
keratoconjunctivitis  sicca (lacrimal
gland
hypoplasia)
· Age at presentation 4 months to 5 years, females more common
750
· Usually unilateral
(Herrera et al. 2007)
Congenital, subepithelial, geographic cormeal dystrophy
(infantile cormeal dystrophy)
· Congenital
· Occurs in young puppies (<10 weeks); transient condition
(Rubin 1989, Gelatt 2007)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
· Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
48 months, the other at 6 years or later
·Schedule B of the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
·Genetic test available (Optigen) - seeAppendix
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
·Breed at increased risk
(Rubin 1989, ACVO Genetics Committee 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate
·Breed at risk in case series
'sas 1g sae ps sel ao un sisop 1e se say -
females 8.4 years
· Males predisposed (3:1 in one large study)
751
(Osborme & Finco 1995, Lulich et al. 1999, Osborme et al.
1999, Houston et al. 2004)
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
· Breed at risk in case series
·Average age at diagnosis in one large study: males 6.0 years,
females 5.7 years
· Females predisposed (16:1 in one large study)
(Osborne et al. 1999, Houston et al. 2004)
Urolithiasis - urate
·Breed at risk in case series
·Average age at diagnosis in one large study: males 5.5 years,
females 4.6 years
· Males are predisposed
(Osborme & Finco 1995, Osbome et al. 1999, Houston et
al. 2004)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism
· Congenital defect believed to be inherited as a sex-limited,
autosomal recessive trait
·Breed at risk in case series
(Hayes et al. 1985, Romagnoli 1991)
Dystocia
·  Breed predisposition
(Gaudet 1985, Johnston, Root Kustritz & Olson 2001)
752
Respiratory conditions
Tracheal collapse
·Relatively common condition
·Lesion due to a deficiency in tracheal cartilage
· Usually acquired in older dogs but can be congenital
(Harvey 1989, Payne, Mehler & Weisse 2006)
753
PART II: CATS
ABYSSINIAN
Cardiovascular conditions
Dilated cardiomyopathy
·Less common than in the past
· Taurine deficiency is an important aetiological factor
·Genetic factors may influence susceptibility to disease
·  Males predisposed
(Fox 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Blastomycosis
·See under Infectious conditions
Cryptococcosis
·See under Infectious conditions
Psychogenic alopecia
·Thought to be a result of anxiety
·Multifactorial in many cases
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200lo)
Shaft disorder of Abyssinian cats
·Rare
·Probably inherited
754
(Miller 2004)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Amyloidosis
· Familial, inheritance unknown
·May affect many body systems including theliver and kidneys
(DiBartola et al. 1986, DiBartola, Tarr & Benson 1986)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Increased osmotic fragility of erythrocytes
· Initial presentation in first few years of life
·Mode of inheritance unknown
(Giger 2003)
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Carriers are asymptomatic
·Causes severe anaemia
·Genetic test available (PennGen; Veterinary Genetics, UC
Davis; Diagnostic laboratories, Langford) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Infectious conditions
Bacterial urinary tract infections
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Increased risk >10 years of age
755
(Lekcharoensuk, Osborme & Lulich 2001)
Blastomycosis
·Rare condition
· Breed at risk in US case series
·Young males predisposed
(Davies & Troy 1996)
Cryptococcosis
·Breed at increased risk in US case series
· Young males predisposed
(Davies & Troy 1996)
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
· Breed at increased risk in US case series
·Susceptibility to FIP may be partially inheritedpolygenically as
Suggested in one study ofpurebred catteries in the USA
· Increased risk 3 months to 3 years
· Males and sexually intact cats predisposed
·Cats in multicat environment at increased risk
(Foley & Pedersen 1996, Pesteanu-Somogyi, Radzai &
Pressler 2006)
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare complex
·Rare
·Breed at increased risk in case series in Australia and the USA
·Some linesmay suffer fromfamilialimmunodeficiency which
predisposes them to infection
(Baral et al. 2006)
756
Musculoskeletal conditions
Myasthenia gravis
· See under Neurological conditions
Patellar luxation
·Usually apparent at an early age
·Suspected to be hereditary
(Volk 2006)
Neurological conditions
Acquired myasthenia gravis
·Rare
· Bimodal age presentation of 2-3 years and 9-10 years
(Penderis 2003)
Feline hyperaesthesia syndrome
·Unknown aetiology
· May be due to a myopathy
·Mainly affects cats aged 5-8
(Tuttle 1980)
Ocular conditions
Progressive retinal atrophy: rod-cone retinal degeneration
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·More common form of PRA in this breed
757
 Clinical onset at 1.5-2 years, progressing toblindness over 2-4
years
·Genetic test available (Veterinary Genetics,UCDavis) - see
Appendix
(Narfstrom 1985, Gelatt 2007)
Progressive retinal atrophy: rod-cone retinal dysplasia
·Autosomal dominant inheritance
·Rare
· Presents with retinal changes at 8-12 weeks and progresses
rapidly. Blindness at 1 year
(Curtis, Barnett & Le0n 1987, Gelatt 2007)
Physiological conditions
Blood group
· In an Australian study, 89% of this breed were type A, 11%were
type B and 0%were type AB
(Malik et al. 2005)
Renal and urinary conditions
Bacterial urinary tract infections
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Increased risk >10 years of age
(Lekcharoensuk, Osborne & Lulich 2001)
Renal amyloidosis (usually as part of reactive systemic
amyloidosis)
758
·Familial
· Clinical presentation is variable - only thosecats with moderate
or severe disease develop symptoms
·Renal amyloid de osits are found rinci ally in the medulla.
glomerular involvement is less common. Amyloid de osits may
also be found in adrenal and thyroid glands, s leen, stomach,
small intestine, heart, liver, ancreas and colon. These de osits
often do not contribute to the clinical signs which are rinci ally
due to chronic renal failure
(Boyce et al. 1984, DiBartola et al. 1986)
Reproductive conditions
Litter size
·Produced smaller litters in case series (mean 3.9 kittens)
·(Mean of 1056 litters from 14 breeds = 4.6 kittens)
(Sparkes et al. 2006)
Respiratory conditions
Nasopharyngeal polyps
· Common condition
·Usually diagnosed in young cats
·No sex predisposition
(Salisbury 2002)
AMERICAN SHORTHAIR
Cardiovascular conditions
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
759
·Common disease
· Middle-aged to older cats predisposed
·Males predisposed
· May be inherited as an autosomal dominanttrait in this breed
(Meurs 2003a)
Physiological conditions
Blood group
·In a USA study, all cats of this breed were group A
(Giger, Bucheler & Patterson 1991)
ASIAN
Reproductive conditions
Litter size
·Produced larger litters in case series (mean 6.5 kittens)
(Mean of 1056 litters from 14 breeds = 4.6 kittens)
(Sparkes et al. 2006)
AUSTRALIAN MIST
Infectious conditions
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
·Breed at increased risk in Australian case series
·Susceptibility to FIP may be partially inherited polygenically as
suggested in one study of purebred catteries in the USA
760
·Increased risk 3 months to 3 years
·  Males and sexually intact cats predisposed
· Cats in multicat environment at increased risk
·This breed predisposed to the effusive form
(Foley & Pedersen 1996, Norris et al. 2005)
BALINESE
Dermatological conditions
Feline acromelanism
· Temperature-dependent enzyme involved in pathogenesis
· Causes points to develop
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Neurological conditions
Lysosomal
storage
disease
sphingomyelinosis
一
(Niemann-Pick disease)
·Suspected to be inherited
·Rare
· Signs seen at 2-4 months
(Bagley 2005)
BENGAL
Infectious conditions
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
·Breed at increased risk in US case series
761
·Susceptibility to FIP may be partially inherited polygenically as
Suggested in one study of purebred catteries in the USA
·Increased risk 3 months to 3 years
· Males and sexually intact cats predisposed
· Cats in multicat environment at increased risk
(Foley & Pedersen 1996, Pesteanu-Somogyi, Radzai &
Pressler 2006)
Tritrichomonas foetus
·Breed at increased risk in UK study
·Cats <l-year-old predisposed
(Gunn-Moore et al. 2007)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Tritrichomonas foetus
· See under Infectious conditions
Neurological conditions
Distal polyneuropathy
·Present around 1 year of age
(Pettigrew et al. 2005)
BIRMAN
Dermatological conditions
Congenital hypotrichosis
762
·Rare condition
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait in this breed
· May be associated with thymic aplasia
(Casal, Straumann & Sigg 1994)
Tail-tip necrosis
·See under Haematological/immunological conditions
Haematological/immunological conditions
Tail-tip necrosis
·  Rare condition
· Thought to be due to neonatal isoerythrolysis
(Bridle & Littlewood 1998)
Thymic aplasia
·See Congenital hypotrichosis under Dermatological conditions
Infectious conditions
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
·Uncommon
·Breed at increased risk in US case series
· Susceptibility to FIPmay be partially inherited polygenically
Suggested in one study of purebred catteries in the USA
·Increased risk 3 months to 3 years
· Males and sexually intact cats predisposed
·Cats in multicat environment at increased risk
(Foley & Pedersen 1996, Pesteanu-Somogyi, Radzai &
Pressler 2006)
763
Neurological conditions
Distal polyneuropathy
· Suspected autosomal recessive
· Signs seen at 8-10 weeks of age
·Uncommon
(Cuddon 2002a)
Ocular conditions
Comeal dermoid
· Rare condition; familial incidence in this breed suspected
(Hendy-Ibbs 1985, Gelatt 2007)
Comeal sequestration
·Breed at increased risk
(Narfstrom 1999b)
Physiological conditions
Atypical granulation of neutrophils in Birman cats
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Common, with 46% of cats studied affected
·Neutrophils have prominent eosinophilic granules
· No clinical abnormalities of neutrophil function defects detected
(Hirsch & Cunningham 1984)
Blood group
764
· In a USA study, 82% were group A and 18% group B
(Giger, Bucheler & Patterson 1991)
Renal and urinary conditions
Azotaemia
· One study showed that 82% of healthy Birman cats under
6months of age had creatinine levels above the reference range
· The majority of cats did not go on to develop renal failure
(Gunn-Moore, Dodkin & Sparkes 2002)
Reproductive conditions
Litter size
·Produced smaller litters in case series (mean 3.6 kittens)
· (Mean of 1056 litters from 14 breeds = 4.6 kittens)
(Sparkes et al. 2006)
BRITISHSHORTHAIR
Cardiovascular conditions
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
· Common disease
·  Middle-aged to older cats predisposed
·  Males predisposed
·May be inherited in this breed
(Meurs 2003a)
765
Haematological/immunological conditions
Haemophilia B
·Factor IX deficiency
·Also known as Christmas disease
· Inherited as a sex-linked trait
· Less common than haemophilia A
(Littlewood 2000)
Infectious conditions
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
·Breed at increased risk in Australian case series
·Susceptibility to FIP may be partially inherited polygenically as
suggested in one study of purebred catteries in the USA
·Increased risk 3 months to 3 years
·  Males and sexually intact cats predisposed
· Cats in multicat environment at increased risk
(Foley & Pedersen 1996, Norris et al. 2005)
Physiological conditions
Blood group
· In an Australian study, 38% of this breed were type A, 62%were
type B and 0%were type AB
·In an English study, 40% of this breed were type A, 60%were
type B and 0%were type AB
· In a US study, 41% were group A and 59% group B
(Giger, Bucheler & Patterson 1991, Malik et al. 2005,
Forcada, Guitian & Gibson 2007)
766
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate
·Breed at risk in case series
·Males reported to be more at risk than female, neutered cats at.
greater risk than entire
·Tend to be older (mean age 7.5 years)
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000)
Reproductive conditions
Kitten birth weight
·Produced larger kittens in case series (mean 104.4 g)
·(Mean of 1056 litters from 14 breeds = 93.5 g)
·Kitten birth weight tends to be lower with larger litters and
 i  as  i l  
independent effect
(Sparkes et al. 2006)
BURMESE
Cardiovascular conditions
Dilated cardiomyopathy (see figures 22a and 22b)
·Less common than in the past
· Taurine deficiency is an important aetiological factor
·Genetic factors may influence susceptibility to disease
·Males predisposed
(Fox 1999)
767
Figure 22a Lateral thoracic radiograph of a 10-year-old
female Domestic Shorthaired cat with idiopathic dilated
cardiomyopathy.
(a)
Figure22b
 Dorsoventral  thoracic  radiograph   of   a
10-year-old  female Domestic Shorthaired  cat with
idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.
768
(b)
Endocardial fibroelastosis
·Age of onset: <6 months
· Thought to be inherited in this breed
(Darke 1989)
Dermatological conditions
Feline acromelanism
·Temperature-dependent enzyme involved in pathogenesis
· Causes points to develop
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Generalized demodicosis
·Rare in cats
· Possible predisposition in this breed
·Usually less severe in cats than in dogs
769
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001b)
Psychogenic alopecia
·Thought to be a result of anxiety
· Multifactorial in many cases
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200lo)
Endocrine conditions
Diabetes mellitus
· Breed at increased risk in Australia, New Zealand and the UK,
but not in the USA
· No sex predisposition in Burmese cats
· Older cats predisposed
·Common endocrinopathy (l:230 in wholepopulation of cats;
1:57 Burmese cats in one UK survey)
· In non-Burmese breeds being male, neutered, inactive and over
5 kg are risk factors
(Panciera et al. 1990, Rand et al. 1997, McCann et al.
2007)
Infectious conditions
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
·Breed at increased risk in Australian case series
·Susceptibility to FIP may be partially inherited polygenically as
suggested in one study of purebred catteries in the USA
· Increased risk 3 months to 3 years
·  Males and sexually intact cats predisposed
· Cats in multicat environment at increased risk
·This breed predisposed to the non-effusive form
770
(Foley & Pedersen 1996,Norris et al. 2005)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Burmese head defect
· Inherited as autosomal recessive
·Cats with shorter faces may be carriers
·Seen mainly in the USA
(Erdman 2005)
Flat-chested kittens
·Reported to affect 3-4% of Burmese kittens in the UK
(Sturgess et al. 1997)
Hypokalaemic polymyopathy
·Possibly inherited
· Signs occur from 4 to 12 months of age
(Mason 1988)
Neurological conditions
Congenital vestibular disease
· Signs seen <3 months
(Bagley 2005)
Feline hyperaesthesia syndrome
·Unknown aetiology
771
· May be due to a myopathy
·Mainly affects cats aged 5-8
(Tuttle 1980)
Feline orofacial pain syndrome
·  Possible male predisposition
·Can affect any age
· Uncommon condition
(Heath & Rusbridge 2007)
Meningoencephalocoele
·See Burmese head defect (Musculoskeletal conditions)
Ocular conditions
Coloboma -- eyelid
· Congenital
(Koch 1979)
Corneal dermoid
·Rare condition; familial incidence in this breed suspected
(Hendy-Ibbs 1985, Gelatt 2007)
Corneal sequestration
·Breed at increased risk
(Narfstr om 1999b)
772
Glaucoma
·  Possible predisposition to primary narrow angle glaucoma
(Hampson, Smith & Bermays 2002)
Lipaemia of the aqueous humour
·Young cats (5 months to 1 year)
·Seen in the UK, Australia and New Zealand
(Gunn-Moore & Crispin 1998)
Prolapse of the gland of the nictitating membrane
· Uncommon condition in the cat, reported most frequently in this
breed
· Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating membrane has
occurred concurrently in this breed
(Chahory et al. 2004, Gelatt 2007)
Physiological conditions
Blood group
·In an Australian study, 93% of were type A, 3% were type B
and 3% were type AB
· In an English study, 100% of this breed were type A
(Malik et al. 2005, Forcada, Guitian & Gibson 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis --- calcium oxalate
·Breed at risk in case series
773
· Males reported to be more at risk than female, neutered cats at
 greater risk than entire
·Tend to be older (mean age 7.5 years)
(Thumchai et al. 1996, Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000)
Reproductive conditions
Litter size
·Produced larger litters in case series (mean 5.7 kittens)
·(Mean of 1056 litters from 14 breeds = 4.6 kittens)
(Sparkes et al. 2006)
Respiratory conditions
Agenesis of the nares
·Congenital
·Inherited
·Lethal to neonates
·Associated with numerous other congenital anomalies
(Noden & Evans 1986)
CHARTREAUX
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
·Breed at risk in case series
· Females reported to bemore at risk thanmale, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
·Tend to be younger (mean age 5 years 9 months)
774
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000)
CORNISHANDDEVONREX
Cardiovascular conditions
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
·Common disease
·  Middle-aged to older cats predisposed
·  Males predisposed
· May be inherited in this breed
(Meurs 2003a)
Dermatological conditions
Malassezia dermatitis
·No age or sex predisposition
· Increased numbers of Malassezia organisms isolated in this
breed from both seborrhoeic and healthy cats, compared to
domestic shorthaired cats
(Ahman, Perrins & Bond 2007)
Urticaria pigmentosa
·Described in five cats of this breed
(Noli et al. 2004)
Haematological conditions
Vitamin K-dependent coagulopathy
775
·Prevalence unknown but may be uncommon
· Possibly inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
(Giger 2003)
Infectious conditions
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
· Breed at increased risk in USA case series (Devon and Cornish)
and Australian case series (Cornish only)
Susceptibility to FIP may be partially inherited polygenically as
suggested in one study of purebred catteries in the USA
· Increased risk 3 months to 3 years
· Males and sexually intact cats predisposed
· Cats in multicat environment at increased risk
(Foley&Pedersen1996，Norris
set al． 2005,
Pesteanu-Somogyi, Radzai & Pressler 2006)
Infectious skin disease
· See under Dermatological conditions
Musculoskeletal conditions
Hereditary myopathy of Devon Rex cats
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Rare
· Onset of signs at 1-6 months of age (Shelton 1999)
Patellar luxation
·Usually apparent at an early age
·Suspected to be hereditary
776
(Volk 2006)
Physiological conditions
Blood group
·In an Australian study, 45% of Devon Rexs were type A, 54%
were type B and 1% were type AB
(Malik et al. 2005)
Coat
·Rex cats have short, curly or absent whiskers
·May moult during oestrus or pregnancy
·  Coat quality is often poor
(Harvey 1998)
Reproductive conditions
Dystocia (Devon Rex)
·Breed at risk
(Gunn-Moore & Thrusfield 1995)
DOMESTIC LONGHAIRED
Cardiovascular conditions
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
· Common disease
· Middle-aged to older cats predisposed
· Males predisposed
777
(Fox 1999)
Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia
· Median age at presentation 54 months
(Reimer et al. 2004)
Dermatological conditions
Ehler-Danlos syndrome
·Also known as cutaneous asthenia
· Inherited group of diseases
· May be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait
·Probably lethal in homozygotes
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Skin tumours
·See under Neoplastic conditions
Neoplastic conditions
Basal cell tumour
·Breed at risk in some case series
·Risk increases with increasing age
(Diters &Walsh 1984,Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992,
Thomas & Fox 1998)
Fibrosarcoma - cutaneous
· Breed at increased risk in case series
778
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Lysosomal storage disease - α-mannosidosis
· Inheritance suspected
·Rare
· Signs seen at 6-12 months
(Dewey 2003a)
Physiological conditions
Blood group
·In an English study, 90% of this breed were type A, 10%were
type B and 0%were type AB
(Forcada, Guitian & Gibson 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate
·Breed at risk in case series
· Males reported to be more at risk than female, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
·Tend to be older (mean age 7.5 years)
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000, Cannon
et al. 2007)
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium
779
ammonium phosphate)
·Breed at risk in case series
· Females reported to bemore at risk thanmale, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
· Tend to be younger (mean age 5 years 9 months)
(Houston et al. 2003, Cannon et al. 2007)
DOMESTIC SHORTHAIRED
Cardiovascular conditions
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
·Common disease
· Middle-aged to older cats predisposed
·  Males predisposed
(Fox 1999)
Mucopolysaccharidosis I
·See Musculoskeletal conditions
Dermatological conditions
Ehler-Danlos syndrome
·Also known as cutaneous asthenia
· Inherited group of diseases
· May be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait
·Probably lethal in homozygotes
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
780
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Haematological/immunological conditions
Methaemoglobin reductase deficiency
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·Heterozygotes are asymptomatic
(Giger,Wang & Boyden 1999)
Pelger-Huet anomaly
· Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait
·Homozygous form is lethal
· Heterozygotes do not appear predisposed to infectious diseases
(Day 2002, Giger 2003)
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
· Carriers are asymptomatic
·Causes severe anaemia
· Genetic test available (PennGen; Veterinary Genetics, UC
Davis) - see Appendix
(Harvey 2006)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Mucopolysaccharidosis I
·Rare
· Skeletal, cardiac and ocular lesions seen
781
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·See also Lysosomal storage diseases under Ocular conditions
(Wang et al. 2005)
Mucopolysaccharidosis VI
·Rare
·Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
Neoplastic conditions
Ceruminous gland tumours
· Breed at risk of ceruminous gland carcinoma in case series
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Fibrosarcoma -- cutaneous
·Breed at risk in case series
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Squamous cell carcinoma
·Breed at risk in case series
·Older cats affected
· 80% tumours occur on the head
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Lysosomal storage disease - α-mannosidosis
·Suspected to be inherited
782
·Rare
· Signs seen around 7 months
·  Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
(Bagley 2005)
Lysosomal storage disease - ceroid lipofuscinosis
·  Suspected to be inherited
·Rare
(Bagley 2005)
Lysosomal storage disease - globoid cell leukodystrophy
(Krabbe's disease)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
· Signs seen at 6-12 months
(Bagley 2005)
Lysosomal storage disease - GM1 gangliosidosis
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
·Signs seen at 3-6 months
·Type l and type 2 disease seen in this breed
(Bagley 2005)
Lysosomal storage disease - mucolipidosis II
·Rare
·Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
(Bagley 2005)
783
Lysosomal
storage
disease
一
sphingomyelinosis
(Niemann-Pick disease)
·Suspected to be inherited
·Rare
· Signs seen at 2-4 months
(Bagley 2005)
Mucopolysaccharidosis I
·See Musculoskeletal conditions
Ocular conditions
Corneal dermoid
· Rare condition; familial incidence in this breed suspected
(Hendy-Ibbs 
61985, Gelatt 2007) Lysosomal storage
diseases
·Rare, inheritance suspected
· Types affecting ocular tissues: GM1 and GM2 gangliosidosis,
α-mannosidosis, mucopolysaccharidosis [
· See also under Neurological conditions
(Gelatt 2007)
Physiological conditions
Blood group
·In an English study, 65% of this breed were type A, 33%were
type B and 2%were type AB
(Forcada, Guitian & Gibson 2007)
784
Hereditary porphyria
·Not usually associated with anaemia in this breed
(Giger 2002)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
·Breed at risk in case series
·Females reported to bemore at risk thanmale, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
· Tend to be younger (mean age 5 years 9 months)
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000, Houston et al. 2003)
Respiratory conditions
Nasopharyngeal polyps
· Common condition
·Usually diagnosed in young cats
· No sex predisposition
·42/73 cats with this condition in one literature review were this
breed
(Salisbury 2002)
EGYPTIAN MAU
Neurological conditions
Leukodystrophy
·Rare
785
·White matter primarily affected in this breed
·Clinical signs at 7 weeks
(Dewey 2003a)
EXOTIC SHORTHAIR
Renal and urinary conditions
Polycystic kidney disease
·Autosomal dominant inheritance
·Affected cases may present with renal failure from 2 to 3 years
ofage
·Some cases have liver cysts
· Genetic test available (AHT; Veterinary Genetics, UC Davis;
Diagnostic laboratories, Langford) - see Appendix
(Cannon et al. 200l, Barthez, Rivier & Begon 2003,
Young et al. 2005)
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate
·Breed at risk in case series
· Males reported to be more at risk than female, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
·Tend to be older (mean age 7.5 years)
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000)
FOREIGN SHORTHAIR
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis -- calcium oxalate
786
·Breed at risk in case series
· Males reported to be more at risk than female, neutered cats at
 greater risk than entire
·Tend to be older (mean age 7.5 years)
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000)
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
· Breed at risk in case series
· Females reported to bemore at risk thanmale, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
·Tend to be younger (mean age 5 years 9 months)
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000)
HAVANA BROWN
Dermatological conditions
Blastomycosis
· See under Infectious conditions
Infectious conditions
Blastomycosis
· Rare condition
·Breed at risk in US case series
·Young males predisposed
(Davies & Troy 1996)
Renal and urinary conditions
787
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate
·Breed at risk in case series
·Males reported to be more at risk than female, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
Tend to be older (mean age 7.5 years)
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000)
HIMALAYAN
Cardiovascular conditions
Pericardial effusion
·Rare in cats
·This breed may be over-represented in case series
(Davidson et al. 2008)
Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia
· Median age at presentation 54 months
(Reimer et al. 2004)
Dermatological conditions
Cheyletiellosis
· Common condition
(Scott & Paradis 1990)
Dermatophytosis
788
·Common
· More commonly seen in cats less than l year
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001p)
Ehler-Danlos syndrome
·Also known as cutaneous asthenia
· Inherited group of diseases
· May be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait
·Probably lethal in homozygotes
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Facial fold intertrigo
· Occasionally seen in this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Feline acromelanism
·Temperature-dependent enzyme involved in pathogenesis
· Causes points to develop
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Idiopathic facial dermatitis in Persians and Himalayans
·Uncommon
·Unknown cause; possibly genetic basis
(Hnilica 2003)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
789
Endocrine conditions
Hyperthyroidism
·Breed at DECREASED risk in case series
· Common endocrinopathy in cats
(Kass et al. 1999)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital portosystemic shunt
·Males may be predisposed
· High rate of cryptorchidism in affected males (24%)
·Usually extrahepatic
(Tillson &Winkler 2002, Ellison 2004, Hunt 2004)
Infectious conditions
Cryptococcosis
·Uncommon
·Breed at increased risk in Australian case series
· Young males predisposed
(O'Brien et al. 2004)
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
·Breed at increased risk in US case series
·Susceptibility to FIP may be partially inherited polygenically as
suggested in one study of purebred catteries in the USA
· Increased risk 3 months to 3 years
· Males and sexually intact cats predisposed
790
· Cats in multicat environment at increased risk
(Foley & Pedersen 1996, Pesteanu-Somogyi, Radzai &
Pressler 2006)
Neoplastic conditions
Basal cell tumour
·Breed at risk in some case series
·Risk increases with increasing age
(Diters &Walsh 1984, Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992,
Thomas & Fox 1998)
Neurological conditions
Feline hyperaesthesia syndrome
·Unknown aetiology
· May be due to a myopathy
·Mainly affects cats aged 5-8
(Tuttle 1980)
Ocular conditions
Corneal sequestration (see plate 24 in the colour plate
section)
· Breed at increased risk
(Narfstrom 1999b)
Physiological conditions
791
Blood group
· In a US study, 80% were group A and 20% group B
(Giger, Bucheler & Patterson 1991)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate
·Breed at risk in case series
· Males reported to be more at risk than female, neutered cats at
 greater risk than entire
·Tend to be older (mean age 7.5 years)
(Thumchai et al. 1996, Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000,
Houston et al. 2003, Cannon et al. 2007)
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
·Breed at risk in case series
· Females reported to bemore at risk thanmale, neutered cats at
 greater risk than entire
· Tend to be younger (mean age 5 years 9 months)
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000)
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism
·Polygenic inheritance suspected
(Millis, Hauptman & Johnson 1992, Bruce 2001, Yates et
al. 2003)
792
Respiratory conditions
Brachycephalic upper airway syndrome
·Complex of anatomical deformities
·Likely a consequence of selective breeding for certain facial
characteristics
(Hedlund 2003)
Nasopharyngeal polyps
· Common condition
·Usually diagnosed in young cats
· No sex predisposition
· 5/73 cats with this condition in one literature review were this
breed
(Salisbury 2002)
KORAT
Neurological conditions
Lissencephaly
·Rare developmental disease
(Bagley 2005)
Lysosomal storage disease - GM1 and GM2 gangliosidosis
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
· Signs seen at 3-6 months
· Type 2 disease seen in this breed
793
(Bagley 2005)
Ocular conditions
Lysosomal storage diseases
·Rare, autosomal recessive inheritance
·  Types affecting ocular tissues: GM1 and GM2 gangliosidosis
· See also under Neurological conditions
(Gelatt 2007)
Reproductive conditions
Gestation length
·Shorter gestation length in case series (63 days)
·(Mean of 1056 litters from 14 breeds = 65.1 days)
·Gestation lengths are shorter with larger litters but breed seems
to exert an independent effect
(Sparkes et al. 2006)
Kitten birth weight
·Produced smaller kittens in case series (mean 72.7 g)
·(Mean of 1056 litters from 14 breeds = 93.5 g)
Kitten birth weight tends to be lower with larger litters and
 xa  s a  l  
independent effect
(Sparkes et al. 2006)
MAINE COON
Cardiovascular conditions
794
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
·Common disease
·Middle-aged to older cats predisposed
· Males predisposed
· Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait in this breed
·Genetic test available (Veterinary Genetics, UC Davis;
Diagnostic  laboratories,
Langford;
Washington
State
University) - see Appendix
(Meurs 2003a)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Hip dysplasia
· One study showed 2l% ofMaineCoon cats examined had
radiographic evidence of hip dysplasia
·Heritability not known in cats
(Keller et al. 1999)
Neoplastic conditions
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
· Older cats affected
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Reproductive conditions
Kitten birth weight
·Produced larger kittens in case series (mean 116.1 g)
795
·(Mean of 1056 litters from 14 breeds = 93.5 g)
·Kitten birth weight tends to be lower with larger litters and
  n    l  
independent effect (Sparkes et al. 2006)
MANX
Dermatological conditions
Intertrigo
·Predisposed to rump fold intertrigo
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Faecal incontinence (part of Manx syndrome - sacrocaudal
dysgenesis)
·Autosomal dominant inheritance of a mutant gene
· See also underMusculoskeletal conditions and Neurological
conditions
(Leipold et al. 1974, Deforest & Basrur 1979)
Megacolon and constipation (part of Manx syndrome -
sacrocaudal dysgenesis)
·Autosomal dominant inheritance of a mutant gene
· See also underMusculoskeletal conditions and Neurological
conditions
(Leipold et al. 1974, Deforest & Basrur 1979)
Rectal prolapse (part of Manx syndrome - sacrocaudal
dysgenesis)
796
·Autosomal dominant inheritance of a mutant gene
· See also underMusculoskeletal conditions and Neurological
conditions
(Leipold et al. 1974, Deforest & Basrur 1979)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis
· See under Neurological conditions
Neoplastic conditions
Cutaneous mast cell tumours
·Breed at increased risk in case series
·Predilection site: head
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis
· Congenital, autosomal dominant inheritance
·Relatively common in this breed
(Srenk 2002)
Spina bifida
· Congenital
(Sturges 2003a)
Ocular conditions
797
Corneal dystrophy
· Inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 4 months. Progressive (Bistner, Aguirre &
Shively 1976)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urinary  incontinence
(part of  Manxsyndrome
sacrocaudal dysgenesis)
·Autosomal dominant inheritance of a mutant gene
(Leipold et al. 1974, Deforest & Basrur 1979)
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
·Breed at risk in case series
· Females reported to bemore at risk thanmale, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
·Tend to be younger (mean age 5 years 9 months)
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000, Cannon et al. 2007)
NORWEGIAN FOREST
Neurological conditions
Glycogenosis (glycogen storage disease type 4)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance suspected
·Rare
·Age of clinical onset:<6 months
· Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
(Bagley 2005)
798
Physiological conditions
Blood group
·In a US study, 100% of this breed were group A
(Giger, Bucheler & Patterson 1991)
ORIENTAL
Neoplastic conditions
Cutaneous mast cell tumours (Oriental
Shorthair)
· Breed at increased risk in case series
·Predilection site: head
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
(Oriental Shorthair)
·Breed at risk in case series
· Females reported to bemore at risk thanmale, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
· Tend to be younger (mean age 5 years 9 months)
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000)
Reproductive conditions
Gestation length
799
· Longer gestation length in case series (66.2 days)
·(Mean of 1056 litters from 14 breeds = 65.1 days)
· Gestation lengths are shorter with larger litters but breed seems
to exert an independent effect
(Sparkes et al. 2006)
PERSIAN
Cardiovascular conditions
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
·Common disease
·  Middle-aged to older cats predisposed
·Males predisposed
· May be inherited in this breed
(Atkins 2002)
Pericardial effusion
·Rare in cats
·This breed may be over-represented in case series
(Davidson et al. 2008)
Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia
·Accounts for 0.5% of congenital heart disease but may be
under-reported
· Females may be predisposed
· May be inherited as anautosomal recessive trait in cats
(Bonagura & Lehmkuhl 1999)
Dermatological conditions
800
Dermatophytosis
·Common
· This breed may develop dermatophytic pseudomycetoma
characterized by one or more ulcerated and discharging nodules
Over the dorsal trunk or tail base
(Scott & Paradis 1990)
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome (Blue Smoke Persians only)
·See under Haematological conditions
Facial fold intertrigo
·Occasionally seen in this breed
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001e)
Idiopathic facial dermatitis in Persians and Himalayans
·Uncommon
· Unknown cause; possibly genetic basis
(Hnilica 2003)
Idiopathic periocular crusting
·May be associated with Malassezia or feline acne
·Uncommon
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001k)
Primary seborrhoea
·Rare in cats
·Autosomal recessive mode of inheritance
801
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Gastrointestinal conditions
Congenital portosystemic shunt
· Males may be predisposed
·High rate of cryptorchidism in affected males (24%)
·Usually extrahepatic
(Tillson &Winkler 2002, Ellison 2004, Hunt 2004)
Polycystic liver disease
·Autosomal dominant inheritance
· Associated with polycystic kidney disease (see under Renal and
urinary conditions)
(Eaton et al. 1997, Bosie, van den Ingh & van der
Linde-Sipman 1998)
Haematological/immunological conditions
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome (Blue Smoke Persians only)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Abnormal lysosomes and neutrophil granules seen
(Giger 2003)
Susceptibility to dermatophytosis
802
·See Dermatological conditions
Infectious conditions
Histoplasmosis
·Rare
·Breed at risk in US case series
(Davies & Troy 1996)
Neoplastic conditions
Basal cell tumour
·Breed at risk in some case series
·Risk increases with increasing age
· This breedmay also be at increased risk of basal cell carcinoma
(Diters &Walsh 1984, Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992,
Thomas & Fox 1998)
Sebaceous gland tumours
· Breed at risk of sebaceous adenoma in case series
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Neurological conditions
Lysosomal storage disease - α-mannosidosis
· Inheritance suspected
·Rare
·Signs seen at 2-4 months
· Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
803
(Bagley 2005)
Ocular conditions
Cataract (seen with Chédiak-Higashi syndrome)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
(Collier, Bryan & Prieur 1979)
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome (Blue Smoke Persians only)
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
's! pue snpuny jo uoeuauidodky apnou sugis ienoo -
nystagmus and cataracts
·See also under Haematological conditions
(Collier, Bryan & Prieur 1979)
Coloboma - eyelid
·Congenital
(Belhorn, Bamett & Henkind 1971)
Corneal sequestration
·Breed at increased risk
(Narfstrom 1999b, Featherstone & Sansom 2004)
Entropion
· Inheritance suspected
(Narfstrom 1999b)
804
Idiopathic epiphora
·Breed predisposition relating to head and eyelid shape
(Gelatt 2007)
Lysosomal storage diseases
·Rare, inheritance suspected
· Types affecting ocular tissues: α-mannosidosis
·See also under Neurological conditions
(Gelatt 2007)
Progressive
retinal
atrophy
-early
 onset 
retinal
degeneration
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Clinical signs at 2-3 weeks, blindness at 16 weeks
(Rah et al. 2005)
Physiological conditions
Blood group
· In Portugal, 86% of purebred Persian cats were group A and
14%were group B
· In an Australian study, 67% of this breed were type A, 22%
were type B and11 % were type AB
· In an English study, 80% of this breed were type A, 20%were
type B and 0%were type AB
(Silvestre-Ferreira et al. 2004, Malik et al. 2005, Forcada.
Guitian & Gibson 2007)
Spearing/lancing canines
805
· Maxillary teeth tipped rostrally by the mandibular canines
(Holmstom 2001)
Renal and urinary conditions
Feline idiopathic cystitis
·Breed at risk in case series
·Neutered males at greater risk
·Mean age 4 years 11 months
(Gunn-Moore 2003, Cameron et al. 2004)
Polycystic kidney disease (see plate 25 in the colour plate
section)
·Autosomal dominant inheritance
·Estimated 38% of Persian cats affected worldwide
·Affected cases may present with renal failure from 2 to 3 years
of age
·Some cases have liver cysts
·Genetic test available (AHT; Veterinary Genetics, UC Davis;
Diagnostic laboratories, Langford) - see Appendix
(Cannon et al. 2001, Barthez, Rivier & Begon 2003,
Young et al. 2005)
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate
·Breed at risk in case series
· Males reported to be more at risk than female, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
·Tend to be older (mean age 7.5 years)
(Thumchai et al. 1996, Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000,
Houston et al. 2003, Cannon et al. 2007)
806
Reproductive conditions
Cryptorchidism
· Polygenic inheritance suspected
(Millis, Hauptman & Johnson 1992, Bruce 2001, Yates et
al. 2003)
Dystocia
· Breed at increased risk in case series
(Ekstrand & Linde-Forsburg 1994, Gunn-Moore
&
Thrusfield 1995)
Litter size
·Produced smaller litters in case series (mean 3.8 kittens)
(Mean of 1056 litters from 14 breeds = 4.6 kittens)
(Sparkes et al. 2006)
Stillbirths and neonatal deaths
· Lower percentage of kittens born alive in case series (89.2%)
(Mean of 1056 litters from 14 breeds = 92.8%)
This breed also have a higher number of kitten deaths in the first
8 weeks
(Sparkes et al. 2006)
Respiratory conditions
807
Nasopharyngeal polyps
· Common condition
·Usually diagnosed in young cats
· No sex predisposition
· 7/73 cats with this condition in one literature review were this
breed
(Salisbury 2002)
RAGDOLL
Cardiovascular conditions
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
· Common disease
·Middle-aged to older cats predisposed
·Males predisposed
· May be inherited in this breed
·This breed may be affected severely and at a very young age
·Genetic test available (Veterinary Genetics, UC Davis;
Diagnostic
laboratories,
Langford;
Washington
State
University) - see Appendix
(Meurs 2003a)
Infectious conditions
Cryptococcosis
·Uncommon
· Breed at increased risk in Australian case series
·Young males predisposed
(O'Brien et al. 2004)
808
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
· Breed at increased risk in US case series
· Susceptibility to FIP may be partially inherited polygenically as
suggested in one study of purebred catteries in the USA
·Increased risk 3 months to 3 years
· Males and sexually intact cats predisposed
· Cats in multicat environment at increased risk
(Foley & Pedersen 1996, Pesteanu-Somogyi, Radzai &
Pressler 2006)
Neoplastic conditions
Basal cell tumour
·Breed at risk of basal cell carcinoma in case series
(Goldschmidt & McManus 2000)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate
·Breed at risk in case series
· Males reported to be more at risk than female, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
·Tend to be older (mean age 7.5 years)
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000)
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
(see plate 26 in the colour plate section)
·Breed at risk in case series
809
·Females reported to bemore at risk than males, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
· Tend to be younger (mean age 5 years 9 months)
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000)
RUSSIAN BLUE
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - urocystoliths
·Breed at risk in case series
·Type of urolith not specified
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000)
SCOTTISH FOLD
Musculoskeletal conditions
Arthropathy associated with Scottish Fold cats
· Autosomal incomplete dominant inheritance
· Causes osteochondrodysplasia
(Takanosu et al. 2008)
Physiological conditions
Blood group
·In a US study 85% reported as group A, 15% as group B
(Giger, Bucheler & Patterson 1991)
810
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate (see figure23)
·Breed at risk in case series
· Males reported to bemore at risk than females, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
·Tend to be older (mean age 7.5 years)
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000)
SIAMESE
Cardiovascular conditions
Dilated cardiomyopathy
·Less common than in the past
· Taurine deficiency is an important aetiological factor
· Genetic factors may influence susceptibility to disease
·  Males predisposed
(Fox 1999)
Endocardial fibroelastosis
·Age of onset: < 6 months
·May be familial in this breed
(Bonagura & Lehmkuhl 1999)
Persistent atrial standstill
· Uncommon disease
· Marked predisposition in this breed
811
(Liu & Fox 1999)
Dermatological conditions
Aguirre syndrome
·Unilateral periocular depigmentation
· May be associated with Horner's syndrome, corneal necrosis
and upper respiratory tract infection
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Blastomycosis
·See under Infectious conditions
Congenital hypotrichosis
·Rare
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Figure 23 Pneumocystogram of a 4-year-old neutered male
Domestic Shorthaired  cat  showing
thepresenceof
radiodense calcium oxalate calculi
812
Cryptococcosis
· See under Infectious conditions
Feline acromelanism
· Temperature-dependent enzyme involved in pathogenesis
· Causes points to develop
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001a)
Feline pinnal alopecia
·Cause unknown
· Uncommon condition
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001l)
Food hypersensitivity
813
· Siameses and Siamese crosses accounted for 30% of cases in
two studies
·Odds ratio 5.0
(Rothstein 2002)
Generalized demodicosis
·Rare in cats
·Possible predisposition in this breed
·Usually less severe in cats than in dogs
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001b)
Histoplasmosis
·Rare
Junctional epidermolysis bullosa
·Claw shedding noted
· Autosomal recessive inheritance likely
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001d)
Periocular leukotrichia
·Bilateral
· No age predilection
·More common in females
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Psychogenic alopecia
·Thought to be a result of anxiety
·Multifactorial in many cases
814
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 2001o)
Skin tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Tail sucking
·  Psychogenic disorder
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200lo)
Vitiligo
·Presumed to be hereditary
· Only reported in females in this breed
·Uncommon
(Scott, Miller & Griffin 200la)
Endocrine conditions
Hyperthyroidism
·Breed at DECREASED risk in case series
·Common endocrinopathy in cats
(Kass et al. 1999)
Gastrointestinal conditions
Amyloidosis
·Familial, inheritance suspected
·Age of onset: 1-7 years
815
· In this breed amyloid deposits are found primarily in the liver
Liver dysfunction or rupture resulting in haemorrhage may
occur
(Niewold et al. 1999, Beatty et al. 2002)
Cleft palate
·Congenital disorder; breed at increased risk
(Hoskins 1995)
Intestinal polyps
· Cats of Asian ancestry at increased risk
·Male neutered cats may be over-represented
(McDonald, Mullen & Moroff 1993)
Megaoesophagus and pyloric dysfunction
· Inheritance suspected
· Young cats < 6 months
(Bishop et al. 1979, Sherding 2001)
Pyloric dysfunction
· See Megaoesophagus and pyloric dysfunction
Small intestinal adenocarcinoma
·Breed at increased risk
·Seen in older cats, mean age 10.7 years
·Males may be predisposed
(Turk, Gallina & Russell 1981, Cribb 1988)
816
Tritrichomonas foetus
· See under Infectious conditions
Haematological conditions
Haemophilia B
·Factor IX deficiency
·Also known as Christmas disease
· Inherited as a sex-linked trait
· Less common than haemophilia A
(Littlewo0d 2000)
Hereditary porphyria
·Rare - reported in a single family
·May be anaemia with renal failure in this breed
(Giddens et al. 1975)
Infectious conditions
Blastomycosis
·Rare condition
· Frequently reported breed in literature review
·Young males predisposed
(Miller, Miller & Schoster 1990)
Cryptococcosis
·Uncommon
·Breed at increased risk in the USA and Australian case series
817
·Young males predisposed
(Davies & Troy 1996, O'Brien et al. 2004)
Infectious skin disease
·See under Dermatological conditions
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare complex
·Rare
·Breed at increased risk
(Baral et al. 2006)
Sporotrichosis
·Rare
·Breed at risk in US case series
·Young males predisposed
(Davies & Troy 1996)
Tritrichomonas foetus
·Breed at increased risk in UK study
·Cats < 1-year-old predisposed
(Gunn-Moore et al. 2007)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Cleft palate/lip
· See under Gastrointestinal conditions
Mucopolysaccharidosis VI
818
· Lysosomal storage disease
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
Causes dwarfism and multiple skeletal, neurological and retinal
deficits
·  Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
(Wang et al. 2005)
Neoplastic conditions
Anal sac adenocarcinoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Basal cell tumour
·Breed at risk in some case series
·Risk increases with increasing age
(Thomas & Fox 1998)
Cutaneous mast cell tumours
· Breed at increased risk in case series
· Histiocytic mast cell tumours, which are multicentric and
regress spontaneously, are found in young Siamese cats (<l
year old)
·Predilection site: head
(Chastain, Turk & O'Brien 1988, Miller et al. 1991,
Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Lipoma
·Breed at increased risk in case series
819
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000)
Lymphoma
·Breed at increased risk
·Males over-represented
· This breed has an increased risk of mediastinal lymphoma at a
young age
     
chemotherapy (survival and remission) in one study
(Gabor, Malik & Canfield 1998, Teske et al. 2002b,
Louwerens et al. 2005)
Mammary tumours
·Breed at increased risk
·Generally seen in older cats, but may occur at an earlier age in
this breed
· Primarily a disease of female cats, but occasionally seen in
males
(Hayes, Milne & Mandell 1981)
Nasal cavity tumours
· Breed at increased risk in case series. (Statistics may reflect
popularity of breed)
·Average age reported as 8-10 years
· A predisposition for neutered males has been suggested
(Cox et al. 1991, Mukaratirwa, van der Linde-Sipman &
Gruys 2001, Little, Patel & Goldschmidt 2007)
Small intestinal adenocarcinoma
820
·See under Gastrointestinal conditions
Sweat gland tumour
·Rare condition, seen relatively more frequently in this breed
·Older cats affected
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992,Goldschmidt & Mcmanus
2000)
Neurological conditions
Cerebellar degeneration
·Rare
(LeCouteur 2002)
Congenital vestibular disease
· Rare condition
·Signs seen < 3 months
(Bagley 2005)
Feline hyperaesthesia syndrome
·Unknown aetiology
· May be due to a myopathy
· Mainly affects cats aged 5-8
(Tuttle 1980)
Hydrocephalus
· Congenital
· May be inherited as anautosomal recessive trait
821
(Harrington, Bagley &Moore 1996)
Lysosomal storage disease - GM1 gangliosidosis
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
·Signs seen at 3-6 months
·Type 1 and type 2 disease seen in this breed
(Bagley 2005)
Lysosomal storage disease - ceroid lipofuscinosis
·Suspected to be inherited
·Rare
· Signs seen at 6-12 months
(Bagley 2005)
Lysosomal storage disease - mucopolysaccharidosis type
11
·Suspected inherited
·Rare
· Signs seen at 2-3 months
·Genetic test available (PennGen) - see Appendix
(Bagley 2005)
Lysosomal storage disease - mucopolysaccharidosis type
VI
· See under Musculoskeletal conditions
Lysosomal   storage
 disease
一
sphingomyelinosis
(Niemann-Pick disease)
822
·Autosomal recessive inheritance
·Rare
· Signs seen at 3-6 months
(Bagley 2005)
Ocular conditions
Convergent strabismus and nystagmus
· Congenital polygenic inheritance suspected
·Results from abnormal visual pathway development
(Johnson 1991)
Corneal sequestration
·Breed at increased risk
(Narfstrom 1999b)
Glaucoma
·Possible predisposition to primary open angle glaucoma
(Jacobi & Dubielzig 2008)
Lens luxation
·Breed at increased risk in case series
(Olivera et al. 1991)
Lysosomal storage diseases
·Rare, autosomal recessive inheritance
823
· Types affecting  ocular
 tissues: GM1 gangliosidosis,
mucopolysaccharidosis VI
· See also under Neurological conditions
(Gelatt 2007)
Progressive retinal atrophy - retinal degeneration
· Inheritance suspected
(Giuliano & Van DerWoerdt 1999)
Physiological conditions
Blood group
· In Portuguese, English, Australian and American studies, 100%
of purebred Siamese cats were group A
(Giger, Bucheler & Patterson 1991, Silvestre-Ferreira et al.
2004, Malik et al. 2005, Forcada, Guitian & Gibson 2007)
Renal and urinary conditions
Urolithiasis - calcium oxalate
·Breed at risk in one case series (Houston et al. 2003) but at
lower risk in another (Cannon et al. 2007)
· Males reported to be more at risk than female, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
·Tend to be older (mean age 7.5 years)
(Houston et al. 2003)
Urolithiasis - struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
·Breed at risk in case series
824
·Females reported to bemore at risk thanmale, neutered cats at
greater risk than entire
·Tend to be younger (mean age 5 years 9 months)
(Lekcharoensuk et al. 2000, Cannon et al. 2007)
Urolithiasis -urate
·Breed at risk in case series (Cannon et al. 2007)
Reproductive conditions
Dystocia
·Breed at risk
(Gunn-Moore & Thrusfield 1995)
Gestation length
· Longer gestation length in case series (66.1 days)
(Mean of 1056 litters from 14 breeds = 65.1 days)
·Gestation lengths are shorter with larger litters but breed seems
to exert an independent effect
(Sparkes et al. 2006)
Mammary tumours
· See under Neoplastic conditions
Priapism
· Uncommoncondition seenmore frequently in this breed
·Six out of seven cats in one case series were Siamese
825
(Gunn-Moore et al. 1995)
Respiratory conditions
Feline asthma
·Common
·Affects all ages
·Females slightly over-represented
(Adamama-Moraitou, Patsikas & Koutinas 2004)
Chylothorax
· No sex predisposition
·This breed over-represented in one study
(Fossum 1988)
SOMALI
Haematological/immunological conditions
Increased osmotic fragility of erythrocytes
· Initial presentation in first few years of life
·Mode of inheritance unknown
(Giger 2003)
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
· Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
·  Carriers are asymptomatic
·Causes severe anaemia
826
· Genetic test available (PennGen; Veterinary Genetics, UC
 Davis; Diagnostic laboratories, Langford) - see Appendix
(Giger 2003)
Infectious conditions
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare complex
·Rare
· Some linesmay suffer fromfamilialimmunodeficiency which
 predisposes them to infection
(Baral et al. 2006)
Musculoskeletal conditions
Myasthenia gravis
· See under Neurological conditions
Neurological conditions
Acquired myasthenia gravis
·Rare
· Bimodal age presentation of 2-3 years and 9-10 years
(Penderis 2003)
Physiological conditions
Blood group
· In the USA 78% reported as group A, 22% as group B
(Giger, Bucheler & Patterson 1991)
827
Reproductive conditions
Litter size
·Produced smaller litters in case series (mean 3.6 kittens)
· (Mean of 1056 litters from 14 breeds = 4.6 kittens)
(Sparkes et al. 2006)
SPHYNX
Dermatological conditions
Urticaria pigmentosa
·Described in three related cats of this breed
(Noli et al. 2004)
TONKINESE
Physiological conditions
Blood group
·In the USA 100% reported as group A
(Giger, Bucheler & Patterson 1991)
828
PART III: DISEASE SUMMARIES
CARDIOVASCULAR CONDITIONS
Aortic stenosis
This important condition accounts for up to a third of
reported cases of congenital canine heart disease. It
appears to be inherited, but not in a simple way, with more
than one gene thought to be involved. The lesion develops
in the first 3-8 weeks of life, and may be first detected as a
heart murmur at this age. If the condition ismild, clinical
signs are minimal, but more severely affected animals may
suffer from weakness, collapse and sudden death.
 s as  an a sd 
help decide which individuals should be bred from.
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
Aka Boxer cardiomyopathy, although the condition is also
seen in cats. Affected animals can present with syncope,
weakness or congestive heart failure.
Atrial fibrillation
This arrhythmia is usually seen in conjunction with severe
heart disease such as dilated cardiomyopathy. However,
some large-breed dogs can show an asymptomatic atrial
fibrillation.
Atrial septal defect
829
This congenital condition, involving a defect in the septum
between the atria, is uncommon, accounting for 14 out of
1000 cases in a survey of dogs with congenital heart
disease. Small defects may be asymptomatic, but larger
lesions can lead to congestive heart failure.
Bypass tract macrore-entrant  tachycardia  of  Labrador
Retrievers
This rare condition involves tachycardia caused by
abnormal conduction within the heart. The high heart rate
can induce acute pulmonary oedema
Canine juvenile polyarteritis syndrome
Young Beagles from various laboratories have been
reported to suffer from a pain syndrome caused by
systemic vasculitis.
Coronary artery vasculitis
     
been documented in up to 34% of young Beagles studied.
Dilated cardiomyopathy
This condition involves a dilation of the heart involving
larger chamber size, thinner heart walls and reduced
strength of the heartbeat. Purebred dogs suffer from this
condition at a prevalence rate of about 0.65% compared to
0.16% formixed breed dogs. It is thought that themajority
of cases are genetic or familial, but it is not certain that all
830
also contribute, and it is  possible that  viral and
immune-mediated causes may be involved in some cases.
Duchenne's X-linked muscular dystrophy cardiomyopathy
Also known as Golden Retriever muscular dystrophy. In
this rare, inherited condition, skeletal muscle signs
predominate, starting at about 8 weeks of age, but severe
cardiac involvement may develop later. Few dogs affected
with this condition survive past 5 years of age. See also
section on Musculoskeletal conditions.
Endocardial fibroelastosis
Severe thickening of the endocardium is seen in this
condition,  sometimes  involving   the  mitral  valve
leaflets.Heartmurmur, failure to thrive and congestive
heart failure are seen.
Essential hypertension
Increased blood pressure may be secondary or primary. In
Greyhounds, a higher blood pressure compared to other
breeds is a physiological condition, and the same may be
true of Siberian Huskies, where a hereditary essential
hypertension was reported in Husky crosses.
Familial cardiomyopathy
This is a form of dilated cardiomyopathy seen in English
Cockers and other breeds.
Femoral artery occlusion
831
Femoral pulses are found to be weak or absent in these
cases.
Hereditary stenosis of bundle of His
This  condition leads to  an atrioventricular  conduction
block.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
In  this  condition  a hypertrophied  ventricle causes
congestive heart failure and dysrhythmias. The incidence
is reported as being 1.6-5.2% in cats, but is rare in dogs. It
is likely that the condition is inherited, although modifying
factors may cause variable expression of the condition.
Mitral valve dysplasia
This is the commonest congenital heart disease of cats and
is thought to be inherited in some breeds of dog, although
this is not yet proven. The lesion consists of a
malformation of the mitral valve, the normal function of
which is to prevent blood flowing back from the left
ventricle to the left atrium.Many animals with this
condition do not show symptoms, and those that do usually
demonstrate exercise  intolerance and  congestive heart
failure.
Myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve
Also known as chronic degenerative valvular disease.
endocardiosis. This is the most common cause of heart
disease in the dog, with up to 75% of dogs with congestive
832
heart failure suffering from this condition. The heart valves
become deformed by a myxomatous degeneration leading
toregurgitation and congestive heart failure. This
condition is likely to be inherited, although other proposed
causes include stress, hypertension, hypoxia, infection and
endocrine abnormalities.
Patent ductus arteriosus
The ductus arteriosus carries blood from the pulmonary
artery to the aorta in the foetus to bypass the lung, which is
not in use. It normally closes within the firstweek after
birth. Failure of the vessel to close leads to a patent ductus
arteriosus. It is probably the commonest congenital heart
condition of dogs, but is less common in cats. Females are
at a higher risk of developing the condition than males.
Symptoms range from none, to congestive heart failure and
poor body condition, to weakness, collapse and seizures.
Pericardial effusion
This condition involves a build up of fluid between the
 s    d a  a 
  o  o     
(benign' or ‘idiopathic'pericardialeffusion).The
idiopathic form is poorly understood, and it is not known
whether it is inherited. However, it does tend to affect
large-breed and giant dogs. Symptoms are precipitated by
the inability of the heart to fill properly because of
restriction   caused by  the fluid-filled pericardial  sac.
Chronic cases exhibitweight loss, ascites and dyspnoea
resulting frompleural  effusion.Acute cases may  show
rapidly progressing weakness, collapse and death
833
Peritoneopericardial hernia
0.5% of cases of congenital heart disease. It involves a
continuation of the pericardium with the peritoneum, and
often abdominal viscera are foundwithin the pericardial
sac. Itmay be asymptomatic, ormay cause signs of
respiratory distress, vomiting and colic.
Persistent atrial standstill
This is a rare condition caused by an enlargement and
thinning of the atria. It is often associated with
scapulohumeral wasting in English Springers.
Persistent left cranial vena cava
The left cranial vena cava is normally present in the foetus,
but may persist abnormally after birth. This abnormality is
relatively common, but is of no significance to the animal
unless it is undergoing thoracic surgery.
Persistent right aortic arch
This is amalformation in the foetal development of the
vascular system, which leads to the oesophagus being
partially occluded. This leads to regurgitation once the
animal starts weaning. See also Vascular ring anomaly
under Gastrointestinal conditions.
Pulmonic stenosis
834
This is a common congenital condition, affecting 2o% of
dogs diagnosed   with congenital heart disease.  The
condition may be asymptomatic, or may cause signs of
syncope and right-sided congestive heart failure.
Sick sinus syndrome
This dysrhythmia often involves periods of bradycardia
and tachycardia, leading to syncope.
Tetralogy of Fallot
This condition accounts for approximately 4% of
congenital heart disease. Pulmonic stenosis, ventricular
septal defect, a dextrapositioned or overriding aorta and a
secondary right ventricular hypertrophy comprise the four
parts of this abnormality.
Tricuspid dysplasia
This is a malformation of the tricuspid valve, the
consequence of which is to allow blood to flow back from
the right ventricle into the right atrium. Affected dogs may
have other congenital heart lesions. In some cases the
animals are asymptomatic for many years, while others
show progressive heart failure leading to death.
Ventricular ectopy
Ventricular ectopic beats are abnormal beats of the heart
arising within the ventricles instead of the normal
pacemaker in the atria. They can have a number of causes,
  'iss    s  s 
835
also inherited in German Shepherd Dogs. If they occur
frequently they can cause symptoms of collapse, and the
rhythm can degenerate into fatal ventricular fibrillation.
Ventricular septal defect
This condition accounts for approximately 7%of canine
congenital heart disease. Defects vary in size but can be
defects can cause congestive heart failure, pulmonary
vascular disease and pulmonary hypertension.
DERMATOLOGICAL CONDITIONS
Acanthosis nigricans
This is an uncommonconditionwhich can be primary or
secondary  to intertrigo,  endocrine  disorders  or
hypersensitivities. It is characterized by bilateral axillary
seborrhoea.
Acquired aurotrichia
Silver or black hairs turn gold, especially on the dorsal
thorax and abdomen.
Acquired depigmentation
Affects dogs from about 18 months of age. There is loss of
pigment around the face and sometimes the coat.
Acral lick dermatitis
836
Also known as lick granuloma. This condition may be
psychogenic in origin, but underlying causes should be
considered.
Acral mutilation syndrome
This is an unusual neurological condition which results in
mutilation of the distal extremities. Pups are affected
between 3 and 5 months of age. Temperature and pain
sensation of the toes is lost. The prognosis is poor.
Acrodermatitis
Inherited condition of Bull Terriers causing coat, skin and
footpad    lesions.   There   may    be   respiratory   and
gastrointestinal signs, and the prognosis is poor. A defect
in zinc metabolism may be involved in the pathogenesis.
Aguirre syndrome
Unilateral periocular depigmentation. It may be associated
with Horner's syndrome, ocular and respiratory problems.
Alopecia areata
This condition is uncommon, leading to an asymptomatic.
non-inflammatory alopecia.
Alopecia X
This is a poorly understood cosmetic condition affecting
coat quality and colour in early adulthood. It is progressive
837
and  symmetrical but  nonpruritic.  Also known 
as
castration-responsive alopecia.
Anal sac disease
Infections and impactions of the anal  sacs are
common,causing self-traumato the perineal area and other
parts of the body.
Atopy
This is a common condition involving hypersensitivity
reactions to environmental allergens. It is thought to be
inherited but the exact mode of inheritance has not yet
been determined. Symptoms consist of pruritus, erythema
and selftrauma with secondary bacterial infection.
Black hair follicular dysplasia
A rare disorder causing alopecia in areas of black hair.
Blastomycosis
See under Infectious conditions.
Bullous pemphigoid
A rare autoimmune condition leading to ulceration of the
mucocutaneous junctions, skin and oral cavity.
Calcinosis circumscripta
838
An uncommon condition, usually of unknown cause,
although it may be associated with hyperadrenocorticism
Most affected dogs are of large breeds, and pressure points
are commonly involved.
Callus dermatitis/pyoderma
Calluses form in response to trauma. Secondary infection
occurs in chronic cases leading to ulceration.
Canine benign familial chronic pemphigus
In this condition lesions develop in response to trauma or
infection due to a genetic weakness in desmosomes.
Canine linear IgA dermatosis
A very rare condition characterized by a generalized
pustular dermatitis. It appears to affect adult Dachshunds
exclusively.
Canine ear margin dermatosis
This condition begins as amild seborrheoawhich can
progress to severe crusting and painful fissuring.
Canine eosinophilic granuloma
This condition is rare in dogs. It consists of nodules.
plaques, ulcers or vegetative masses of the skin or, more
commonly, the oral cavity. See also under Gastrointestinal
conditions.
839
Canine juvenile cellulitis
This condition is also known as juvenile pyoderma, puppy
strangles or juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and
lymphadenitis.  It is  an uncommon disorder causing
pustules on the face and pinnae of puppies. The
submandibular lymph nodes are often greatly enlarged.
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome
See  under Ocular  and  Haematological/immunological
conditions.
Coat-colour dilution and cerebellar degeneration  in
Rhodesian Ridgeback dogs
This condition has been reported in a family of Rhodesian
Ridgebacks. Pups were born with a bluish coat and
developed ataxia at 2 weeks of age. Most were euthanazed
at 4-6 weeks of age.
Collagenous naevus
A naevus is a developmental skin defect leading to skin
hyperplasia. Collagenous naevi can be solitary ormultiple
They may  be  associated
1 with  bilateral renal
cystadenocarcinomas andmultiple uterine leiomyomas.
Colour-dilution alopecia
Hypotrichosis and recurrent bacterial folliculitis occur in
colour dilute areas.
840
Congenital hypotrichosis
Animals affected with this condition are born without their
normal coats or lose them in the first few months of life.
Contact hypersensitivity
Also called allergic contact dermatitis, this condition is
rare, as opposed to irritant contact dermatitis which is quite
common. The paws and sparsely haired areas of skin are
usually affected. Plants,medications and home furmishings
are reported as sources of allergens.
Cryptococcosis
See under Infectious conditions.
Cutaneous histiocytosis
This benign proliferative condition is thought to be a
reactive histiocytosis. There may be generalized or
localized clusters of plaques or nodules.
Cutaneous tuberculosis
It is uncommon for dogs and cats to be affected.
Dermatological signs include ulcers, plaques, nodules and
abscesses.
Cyclic follicular dysplasia
A temporary pattern alopecia which usually affects the
trunk and especially the flank. It seems to be a problem in
841
Alaska, suggesting that duration of daylight may be
important.
Dermatophytosis
Also known as ringworm. This common condition is
particularly prevalent in long-haired cats.
Demodicosis, generalized
Generalized demodicosis is a severe skin disease caused
by the Demodex mite. It can lead to pyoderma and deep
folliculitis.
Dermoid cyst
A rare developmental abnormality. It can be solitary or
multiple, and occurs along the dorsal midline.
Dermoid sinus
See under Neurological conditions.
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Uncommon in dogs and very rare in cats, this condition is
an
immune-mediated dermatosis  with no  systemic
involvement.  Clinical  signs  include  depigmentation,
scaling, erosion and ulceration. The nose is primarily
affected, but the pinnae, limbs and genitalia can be
involved.
Disorder of the footpads in German Shepherd Dogs
842
Affected dogs show soft pads, depigmentation and
ulceration.
Ehler-Danlos syndrome
Also known as cutaneous asthenia, dermatopraxis. This
group
of 　diseases　 is 　 characterized　by　fragile,
hyperextensible, easily torm skin.
Eosinophilic dermatitis and oedema
This rare condition presents as acute onset erythematous
macules which progress to form plaques. Variable oedema
is seen.
Epidermal dysplasia in West Highland Whites
Also known as Armadillo Westie syndrome. Malassezia is
involved in the pathogenesis. The skin becomes inflamed,
greasy, itchy and, in advanced cases, lichenified.
Epidermal hyperkeratosis in Norfolk Terriers
A mild epidermolytic ichthyosis is seen in this breed
Adult dogs with the disease show generalized, pigmented
hyperkeratosis with epidermal fragility.
Epidermolysis bullosa, junctional and dystrophic
These are a group of inherited bullous diseases, involving
abnormal  keratin  production. Junctional  epidermolysis
bullosa causes bullae, vesicles and erosions in various
843
locations.   Dystrophic   epidermolysis
bullosashows
erosions in the mucocutaneous junctions.
Eyelid coloboma
This is a congenital discontinuity in the eyelid
Facial fold pyoderma/intertrigo
This condition arises due to friction in a facial skin fold.
Surface    bacteria
and
Malasseziacontribute to
inflammation.
Familial canine dermatomyositis
This is a hereditary disease causing skin lesions around the
face, ear tips and digits.
Familial vasculopathy
This is a rare group of conditions which can cause
dermatological and systemic signs. In some breeds the
disease is inherited.
Feline acromelanism
Coat-colour changes in some Oriental cat breeds with
environmental  and physiologically  induced temperature
variations. If the temperature change is addressed, the
colour changes may be reversible.
Feline pinnal alopecia
844
Bilateral spontaneous pinnal alopecia occurs in some
Siamese cats. There is usually spontaneous recovery after a
period of months.
Feline solar dermatitis
This is a chronic dermatitis involving white ears and
occasionally the eyelids, nose and lips. UVB in sunlight is
implicated in the pathogenesis.
Fibropruritic nodule
Multiple alopecic, firm or pedunculated lesions occur in
this
condition.Chronic  self-trauma orflea-bite
hypersensitivity is usually involved.
Flank sucking
This may be a formof psychomotor epilepsy, but primary
skin diseases should be eliminated by biopsy.
Flea-bite hypersensitivity
Severe inflammatory
 reactions  may  occur   due  to
hypersensitivity reactions to allergens in flea saliva.
Follicular cyst
These cysts occur in the dermis or subcutaneous region.
They are usually solitary and well circumscribed. Often
they do not cause problems, but if they rupture they can
cause foreign body reactions.
845
Follicular dysplasia
These are a group of conditions having alopecia and coat
changes in common. They are suspected to be inherited in
many breeds.
Follicular lipidosis of Rottweilers
This condition has been recently described and affects
young Rottweilers of either sex. A variable degree of
alopecia of the red-coloured points is seen. The condition
appears to be largely selflimiting.
Follicular parakeratosis
This disorder of cormification is congenital and hereditary.
All cases so far reported have been in females and it is
 e     a  o
Clinical signs include generalized seborrhoea that worsens
with age.
Food hypersensitivity
This is a pruritic skin disease associated with the ingestion
 n   sd    a o
hypersensitivity reactions are usually involved, although
type III and IV reactions are suspected.
Footpad hyperkeratosis
This condition is familial in some breeds. Signs of severe
hyperkeratosis are usually seen by 6 months of age.
846
German Shepherd Dog folliculitis, furunculosis and
cellulitis
This is an idiopathic deep pyoderma affecting German
Shepherd Dogs. Probably an inherited immunodeficiency
causes susceptibility to infection.
Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis
This condition is uncommon in dogs and rare in cats
Different breeds show different manifestations, including
scaling, alopecia, hyperkeratosis and occasional systemic
signs. Generally the disease is non-pruritic unless there is
secondary bacterial infection.
Grass awn migration
Grass awns are reported to comprise 61 %of foreign bodies
Predilection sites include ears, eyes, interdigital web and
nose.
Hereditary lupoid dermatosis
This is a familial disease of unknown cause. Scaling
begins on the head and progresses to become generalized.
Theremay be systemic signs.No consistently successful
treatment has been described
Hereditary nasal parakeratosis
Hyperkeratosis and depigmenation of the nasal planum are
seen in this condition. The dogs are otherwise healthy.
847
Histoplasmosis
See under Infectious conditions.
Hyperoestrogenism
This condition associated with polycystic ovaries in
middle-aged intact females can cause bilateral endocrine
alopecia.
Hypopigmentary disorders
There are a varietyof causes for loss of hair or skin
pigment. There may be a hereditary involvement in some
breeds.
Ichthyosis
Also known as fish scale disease. Extreme hyperkeratosis
is seen, and affected dogs are abnormal at birth. Scaling,
erythema and severe seborrhea are seen.
Idiopathic cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy
Lesions consist of purpura and ulceration. They are slow to
heal. Some dogs develop renal failure with accompanying
clinical signs.
Idiopathic cutaneous mucinosis
Clinical signs of mucinosis include a puffy skin, vesicles
and bullae. Shar Peis have large amounts of mucin in the
skin, leading to excessive skin folding.
848
Idiopathic facial dermatitis in Persians and Himalayans
This is an uncommon disease demonstrating crusting.
erythema and self-trauma to the head and neck. Secondary
bacteria and yeasts are common.
Idiopathic onychomadesis
Onychomadesis is a sloughing of the nail, usually
involving multiple nails. Abnormal mineral composition of
the affected nails has been documented, but the cause is
unknown.
Idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
Clinical signs of this disorder include papules, plaques and
nodules on the head, pinnae and paws.
Idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis
This condition can look like deep pyoderma. There are
often multiple skin lesions in predisposed breeds, and
systemic signs, such as lethargy and pyrexia, are often
present.
Idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis of Collies and Shetland
Sheepdogs
This condition may be related to dermatomyositis
Vesicles and bullae progress to ulcers, especially in the
inguinal and axillar regions and mucocutaneous junctions
Intertrigo
849
Inflammation and bacterial infection caused by the trauma
Lentigo simplex
In this condition, lesions start as small black spots that
gradually enlarge and become more numerous over time.
They are non-pruritic and are not premalignant.
Lentiginosa profusa
This is reported as a hereditary form of lentigo, but may
actually be a pigmented epidermal naevus.
Malassezia dermatitis
This yeast commonly causes pruritus and a greasy, scaly
skin disease.
Melanoderma and alopecia
In  this condition,  a  symmetrical alopecia and
hyperpigmentation is seen on the nasal planumand pinnae.
Melanotrichia
May occur after deep areas of inflammation heal. The hairs
darken in focal areas.
Mucocutaneous hypopigmentation
The cause of this condition is unknown, but it is generally
a cosmetic problem only.
850
Multiple epitrochial cysts
These lesions occur around the eyelids. The cysts are soft
and fluid filled and can be quite large. Both eyelids are
usually involved.
Muzzle folliculitis/furunculosis
Also known as canine acne. This is a chronic inflammation
of the chin and lips, affecting young dogs. The underlying
cause   is   unknown    and    bacterial  infections   are
secondary.Treatment options include shampoos, and, in
advanced cases, long courses of antibiotics. Scarring
commonly occurs.
Nasal depigmentation
Affected dogs are normal at birth, but over time the black
nasal planum slowly fades to a paler colour. The cause is
not known.
Nasal folliculitis/furunculosis
This is a painful but uncommon condition of the nose
whose cause is unknown. Clinical signs consist of papules
and pustules progressing to folliculitis and furunculosis.
Nasal hyperkeratosis
The nasal planumbecomes dry, rough and brown in this
presumed inherited condition.
Nasal solar dermatitis
851
This photodermatitis is seen more commonly in sunny
regions. Lesions, consisting of crusting and ulceration, are
mainly seen at the junction between haired and hairless
areas on the nose.
Oestrogen-responsive dermatosis
This is a rare condition of spayed female dogs causing a
bilaterally
/  symmetric   alopecia.
Theremay
accompanying juvenile genitalia.
Onychodystrophy
In this condition multiple claws are affected and no
underlying cause can be ascertained. It may cause pain,
pruritus and lameness, or may be asymptomatic.
Papilloma virus-associated pigmented lesions
This condition causes rough black-pigmented plaques to
appear in the groin, on the abdomen, ventral thorax and
neck. They do not regress and may transform into
squamous cell carcinomas.
Pattern baldness
This acquired baldness is probably genetic in origin.
Different syndromes of this condition affect different
breeds.
Pemphigus erythematosus
852
This autoimmune condition is probably a less aggressive
form of pemphigus foliaceous. Pustules and erythema are
seenonthe face andears, which progress to erosions, scales
and crusts.
Pemphigus foliaceous
This is probably the most common autoimmune skin
condition of dogs and cats. Clinical signs of crusting and
pustules usually start on the face and ears and progress to
become  multifocal  or  generalized.  Secondary  bacterial
infection is common.
Periocular leukotrichia
Goggles can appear around the eyes of Siamese cats after
various  precipitating
  factors  such  as pregnancy  and
systemic illness.
Persistent scratching in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels
See
Chiari-likemalformation/syringomyelia
under
Neurological conditions.
Pinnal alopecia
In this condition, the hair around the ears thins with age.
Occasionally, it may progress to complete alopecia of the
pinnae. Diagnosis is by exclusion of other diseases. There
is no known treatment.
Pododemodicosis
853
In this condition infection with the Demodex mite is
confined to the feet.
Pododermatitis
Various factors, such as foreign bodies or trauma, can
trigger folliculitis and furunculosis in the feet. Fungal,
parasitic  and  psychogenic  dermatitis  can  also  cause
pododermatitis.
Post-clipping alopecia
In this condition, hair fails to regrow for up to 24 months
after clipping. This has been variously described as
uncommon and relatively common. It may be caused by
vascular changes in the skin resulting from cutaneous
temperature changes.
Primary lymphoedema
Lymphoedema  is an abnormal lymph flow causing
swelling. Primary lymphoedema results from defects in the
lymphatic system. The hindlimbs are most commonly
affected.
Primary seborrhoea
This is an inherited disorder of keratinization and
cornification which has an early age of onset. Clinical
signs include flaking, scaling, crusting and greasy, smelly
skin. The claws may also be affected. Secondary bacterial
and fungal infections are common.
854
Protothecosis
The causal organisms of this condition, Prototheca, are
ubiquitous algae. Infection is rare. Gastrointestinal, ocular
and nervous signs are more common than dermatological
s1gns.
Psoriasiform-lichenoid  dermatosis  in  English  Springer
Spaniels
This is a rare condition causing plaques and papules on the
pinnae and inguinal region. In time, the disease can
become more generalized.
Psychogenic alopecia
Anxiety and stress can lead to overgrooming and alopecia
Elimination of underlying causes and examination of hair
shafts aids in diagnosis
Pyotraumatic folliculitis
This infection may be a complication of pyotraumatic
dermatitis (wet eczema) and involves a deeper infection
which may progress to furunculosis.
Pythiosis
The causal organism of this condition, Pythium, is an
aquatic  fungus  which  attacks  damaged  animal  tissue.
Lesions can be solitary or multiple and consist of ulcerated
nodules which progress to discharging tracts.
855
Rabies vaccine-associated vasculitis
Alopecia and hyperpigmentation are occasionally seen at
the sites of rabies vaccination.
Schnauzer comedo syndrome
In this condition, multiple comedos are seen along the
dorsum.
Seasonal flank alopecia
This is a localized cyclic follicular dysplasia causing a
symmetrical alopecia. Some dogs lose their hair in spring
and regrow it spontaneously in autumn, for others the
reverse occurs.
Seasonal nasal hypopigmentation
Also known as snow nose, this condition causes a decrease
in nasal pigment in the winter months.
Shaft disorder of Abyssinian cats
This is a rare disorder affecting the whiskers and primary
hairs. The coat is rough and lacking lustre, and hair
fracture occurs.
Short-hair syndrome of silky breeds
Some Yorkshire and Silky Terriers lose their long coat,
which is replaced by amuch shorter one.No other skin
lesions occur, and this is of cosmetic significance only.
856
Skin tumours
See under Neoplastic conditions.
Spiculosis
In this condition, multiple bone spicules are found,
particularly over the lateral hock.
Sporotrichosis
This is a rare fungal condition which can cause cutaneous
signs such as ulcerated nodules and skin necrosis, regional
lymphadenopathy and systemic signs such as depression,
anorexia and pyrexia.
Subcormeal pustular dermatosis
This is a very rare idiopathic condition which leads to a
generalized pustular or seborrhoea-like dermatitis. The
head and trunk are particularly affected. Pruritus is
variable.
Superficial bacterial folliculitis
In Collies and Shetland Sheepdogs, superficial bacterial
folliculitis can have a bilaterally symmetrical distribution,
mimicking endocrine alopecia.
Superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis of Miniature
Schnauzer
857
This is a drug reaction to certain shampoos. Cutaneous and
systemic signs usually occur within 3 days. Cutaneous
signs include papules, plaques and pustules, and systemic
signs include pyrexia and depression.
Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy
See Onychodystrophy.
Systemic lupus erythematosus
This
an
uncommon
autoimmunedisorder
affectingmultiple body systems.Various cutaneous signs
are seen including seborrhoea, vesicobullous disorders and
alopecia.
Systemic
manifestations
include
cardiorespiratory, neurological and musculoskeletal signs.
See also Haematological/immunological conditions.
Tail dock neuroma
This occurs rarely, following docking of tails. Transected
nerves occasionally proliferate in a disorganized manner.
Self-trauma to the lesion can cause a painful dermatosis.
Testosterone-responsive dermatosis
This is a rare dermatosis of castrated males, leading to a
bilaterally symmetric alopecia.
Truncal solar dermatitis
858
Sparse hair and poorly pigmented skin predispose to sun
damage to the skin in sunny climates. The area affected
can vary with the animal's sunbathing habits.
Tyrosinase deficiency
This extremely rare disease of Chow Chows causes colour
changes of the tongue and hair shafts.
Uveodermatological syndrome
See under Ocular conditions.
Vasculitis
This uncommoncondition causes various skin lesions such
aswheals, papules, oedema, ulceration and scarring.
Various cell types may be involved histologically, but the
classification is usually of a type Iff hypersensitivity
reaction.Various triggering factorsmay be involved, such
as vaccinations, arthropod bites and mast cell tumours.
Vascular naevus, scrotal
Single or multiple plaques are seen, usually on the
scrotum. Occasionally, the lesions bleed.
Ventral comedo syndrome
In this condition, comedos formbecause of pressure and
friction on the sternum. Secondary bacterial infection,
which may respond to topical antibiotic preparations, is
common.
859
Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis
This condition is characterized by a relatively refractory
seborrhoea. There is often a waxy otitis exterma. Vitamin A
supplementation can lead to complete resolution, but
therapy may need to be lifelong.
Vitiligo
This is thought to be an autoimmune disease causing
depigmentation of the face. The condition is usually seen
in young adults.
Waardenburg-Klein syndrome
This condition arises due to a lack ofmelanocytes in the
affected skin.Affected animals are also deaf.
Waterline disease of black Labradors
Severe pruritus, seborrhoea and alopecia of the legs and
ventrum are seen in this condition.
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
Two syndromes of this condition are recognized
Syndrome I occurs in diets with sufficient zinc. Erythema.
alopecia, crusting, scaling and suppuration are seen around
themouth, chin, eyes and ears. In syndrome II,
zinc-deficient diets can lead to hyperkeratotic plaques on
the footpads and nasal planum.
ENDOCRINE CONDITIONS
860
Adult onset growth hormone-responsive dermatosis
A poorly understood syndrome of unknown cause. Basal
growth hormone levels are low and unresponsive to
stimulation. Other pituitary functions seem normal. The
condition is characterized by bilaterally symmetrical areas
of alopecia and hyperpigmentation initially in the areas of
friction, for example, the neck.
Cushing's syndrome
See Hyperadrenocorticism
Diabetes mellitus
resulting from an absolute or relative lack of insulin. Where
the blood glucose level exceeds the renal threshold,
glycosuria results.
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
One of the most commonly diagnosed endocrinopathies in
the dog, but rare in the cat.Hyperadrenocorticism occurs
where there is a sustained and inappropriately elevated
secretion ofcortisol
fromtheadrenalcortex.
Hyperadrenocorticism may be pituitary dependent, where
there is excessive adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)
secretion   leading  to  adrenal  cortical  hyperplasia  and
increased cortisol secretion, or it may be adrenal dependent
where there is a functional adrenocortical tumour
Hyperthyroidism (cats)
861
Hyperthyroidism is a condition of excessive production of
thyroid hormone from one or both thyroid glands. It is a
common endocrinopathy in cats.Older cats (>8 years)
aremore commonly affected.No breed appears to be at
increased risk, but Siamese and Himalayan cats seem to be
at reduced risk. Use of cat litter and feeding of canned
   5       
Hypoadrenocorticism
Hypoadrenocorticism is a condition wherein there is
inadequate adrenocortical hormone production leading to a
deficiency  in  mineralocorticoids and/or  glucocorticoids.
Primary hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease) results
most commonly from immune-mediated destruction of the
adrenal   cortices    leading    to
deficienciesofall
suggested in some breeds. It is very rare in the cat.
Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism is a common endocrine disease in the dog
There is a deficiency in the secretion of thyroid hormone
either as a result of thyroid gland destruction (primary
thyroid stimulating
hormone (TSH)(secondary
hypothyroidism) or inadequate hypothalamic secretion of
thyrotropin releasing
hormone
(TRH)(tertiary
hypothyroidism).Many  breeds
seem predisposed
to
Pinschers and Golden Retrievers.
Insulinoma
862
Insulinomas are functional insulin-secreting tumours of the
pancreatic beta cells. Insulin secretion is independent of
the normal negative feedback control, resulting in
hypoglycaemia. These tumours are generally malignant
with a high metastatic potential.
Pituitary dwarfism
Pituitary dwarfism results from a failure of growth
hormone secretion in an immature animal. The most
striking abnormality is a failure to grow, animals
remaining of small stature. Theremay be concurrent failure
of other  pituitary  hormones (panhypopituitarism).  The
condition is most commonly seen in the German Shepherd
Dog but has been identified in several other breeds
including the Carnelian Bear dog, where it is also believed
to be inherited by an autosomal recessive mode.
Primary hypoparathyroidism
This is an uncommon condition, wherein lymphocytic
plasmacytic destruction of the parathyroid glands results in
a deficiency of parathyroid hormone and hypocalcaemia.
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Primary hyperparathyroidism is usually the result of a
functional parathyroid adenoma (see also Parathyroid
umours underNeoplastic conditions). The excess of
parathyroid  hormone  results  in  hypercalcaemia.  The
Keeshond seems particularly susceptible to the condition.
Thyroid neoplasia in dogs
863
Most thyroid tumours in the dog are invasive and
malignant  carcinomas presenting as readily detectable
masses in the neck. Adenomas do occur but are usually
small and rarely detected during life. Thyroid tumours in
the dog are generally non-functional, only 5-20% being
functional, producing clinical signs of hyperthyroidism.
Up to 30% of cases become hypothyroid as normal thyroid
tissue is destroyed by the tumour. The remainder are
euthyroid.
GASTROINTESTINAL CONDITIONS
Amyloidosis
Amyloidosis results from the deposition of an insoluble
fibrillar protein (amyloid) in a variety of organs, resulting
in organ dysfunction. Different species and breeds are
affected differently.
Anal furunculosis (perianal fistula)
Chronically infected and often deep tracts in the soft
tissues around the anus. An immunemediated basis is
suspected.
Antral pyloric hypertrophy syndrome (pyloric stenosis)
In this syndrome, gastric-outlet obstruction is caused by
antralmucosa or both, and results in persistent vomiting.
Congenital hypertrophy of the pyloricmuscle is seen in
young Boxers and Boston Terriers and may be referred to
as congenital pyloric stenosis
864
Adult onset antral pyloric hypertrophy syndrome is seen in
older (>6 years) small Oriental canine breeds. In these
cases, there may be antropyloric mucosal hyperplasia only
or a combination of mucosal and muscular hypertrophy.
Chronic hepatitis
Inflammatory liver disease which usually progresses to
cirrhosis.
There are many types of hepatitis, and classification
remains controversial, however certain breeds of dog may
be predisposed, and individual breeds may demonstrate
particular patterns of inflammation.
Copper storage hepatopathy in the Bedlington terrier
results from a defect in biliary copper excretion leading to
necrosis. Copper-associated hepatopathy occurs in other
breeds (Skye terrier, Dobermann, West Highland White
terrier, Labrador and Dalmatian); however, it is unclear
whether the accumulation of copper is primary or
secondary to biliary stasis in these breeds
Alpha-l-antitrypsin deficiency is a cause of hepatitis
inman. The deficiency results fromproduction of defective
alpha-1-antitrypsin
which  accumulates in the liver
resulting in chronic hepatitis. Hepatic accumulation of
alpha-1- antitrypsin has been proposed as a cause of
chronic hepatitis in the cocker spaniel.
Cleft palate
865
A congenital defect in the hard or soft palate allowing
abnormal communication between the oral cavity and the
nasal cavity/nasopharynx. Signs including failure to thrive
and reflux from the nose during suckling are present
froman early age.
Congenital portosystemic shunts
Failure of foetal venous shunts to close after birth leads to
persistent shunting of blood from the gastrointestinal tract
to the systemic circulation without hepatic metabolism.
Shunts may be single or multiple, intrahepatic or
extrahepatic. Large breeds of dog are more likely to have
intrahepatic shunts, small breeds and cats aremore likely to
have extrahepatic shunts.
Cricopharyngeal dysfunction
Difficulty in swallowing due to failure of the
cricopharyngeal
sphincter(the
　upper
 oesophageal
sphincter) to relax.
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis, enteritis and enterocolitis
Chronicinflammatory disease of the stomachand small
intestine, small intestine only, or small intestine and colon.
Eosinophilic infiltration is a predominant feature of the
inflammation  and  peripheral  eosinophiliamay  also  be
present.Clinical signs include a combination of vomiting.
small bowel and large bowel diarrhoea.
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
866
Inadequate production  of digestive enzymesleading  to
malabsorption  and chronic diarrhoea.  This  is most
commonly
dueto
pancreaticatrophyfollowing
lymphocytic pancreatitis (possibly immune-mediated). In
some cases it results from chronic pancreatitis or
pancreatic neoplasia.
Gastric carcinoma
(see plate 27 in the colour plate section)
A primary, malignant stomach tumour derived from
epithelial cells.
Gastric dilatation/volvulus
Gastric distension due to the rapid accumulation of food.
fluid or gas resulting in torsion of the stomach. Usually an
acute and severe condition which is rapidly fatal without
treatment. Large deep-chested dogs are predisposed.
Gastro-oesophageal intussusception
Invagination of the stomach into the thoracic oesophagus
A rare condition with high mortality
Gluten-sensitive enteropathy
An intolerance to gluten-containing foods, most commonly
seen in Irish Setters. Weight loss and chronic diarrhoea
due tomalabsorption are seen.
Haemangiosarcoma
867
See under Neoplastic conditions
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
An acute haemorrhagic vomiting and diarrhea syndrome of
unknown cause. Most commonly seen in middle-aged
small-breed dogs.
Hepatic amyloidosis
See Amyloidosis.
Hepatic lipidosis
A potentially severe liver disease wherein hepatocyte
function is compromised by extensive lipid accumulation.
Seenmost commonly in anorexic, obese female cats, but
also seen in puppies of Toy breeds, where it is associated
with fasting and hypoglycaemia.
Hiatal hernia (sliding)
Displacement of the abdominal segment of the oesophagus
and part of the stomach cranially through the oesophageal
hiatus inthe diaphragm. The condition may be congenital
or acquired.
Histiocytic colitis
Chronic inflammatory disease of the colon characterized
histologically by an inflammatory infiltrate with large
numbers of histiocytes. Ulceration of the mucosa may be a
868
prominent feature and the disease tends to be refractory to
treatment.
Immunoproliferative enteropathy of Basenjis
A specific disease of Basenjis of unknown cause. Several
forms of pathology may be identified in the
gastrointestinal  tract  including hypertrophic  gastritis.
lymphocytic plasmacytic enteritis and villous clubbing and
fusion resulting in chronic diarrhoea, anorexia and weight
loss.
Intestinal adenocarcinoma
A malignant tumour found most frequently in the colon of
dogs and the jejunum and ileum of cats. Most are locally
invasive and metastasize early to the lymph nodes and
liver.
Intestinal polyps
Benign growth of the intestinal mucosa.
Lobular dissecting hepatitis
A form of progressive hepatitis where there is a random
pattern of inflammation and fibrosis leading to weight loss
and ascites. Seen mostly in young dogs.
Lymphangiectasia (resulting in protein-losing enteropathy)
Distension of the lymphatic vessels in the intestinal
mucosa. It may be a primary congenital disease, or it may
869
be secondary to other disorders including inflammatory
bowel disorders, neoplasia, thoracic duct occlusion or
right-sided heart failure. The condition results
in
protein-losingenteropathyleading to weight
tloss,
diarrhoea and in some cases oedema and ascites.
Lymphocytic plasmacytic enteritis
A form of inflammatory bowel disease in which the
cellular infiltrate of the intestinal mucosa is mainly
composed of lymphocytes and plasma cells. Symptoms
include small intestinal diarrhoea and vomiting.
Manx syndrome
Malformation of the sacral and caudal spinal segments
(sacrocaudal dysgenesis)
resulting
 inneurological
abnormalities. Symptoms may include megacolon, faecal
   s
Megacolon
Dilation of the colon which results in constipation
Megaoesophagus
Oesophageal dilation and reduced motility resulting in
regurgitation. Megaoesophagus can be classified as
congenital idiopathic megaoesophagus, which presents
shortly after weaning, or acquired megaoesophagus which
occurs later in life and may be idiopathic or secondary to
another condition such as myasthenia gravis.
870
In  Siamese cats megaoesophagus may  occur  with
abnormal (heterotopic) gastric mucosa, pyloric dysfunction
and  delayed  gastric emptying. Affected   cats  may
regurgitate and projectile vomit.
Microvascular portal dysplasia
circulation resulting in  vascular shunting and hepatic
dysfunction. Cases are often subclinical, where they occur
symptoms are similar to those of portosystemic shunts but
occur later and are generally more mild.
Muscular  dystrophy  of  oesophageal  and  pharyngeal
muscles resulting in dysphagia
Atrophy of oesophageal and pharyngeal muscles resulting
in difficulty swallowing.
Oral eosinophilic granuloma of the Siberian Husky
Raised, ulcerative lesions usually seen on the lateral and
ventral areas of the tongue.
Oropharyngeal neoplasia
The most common canine oropharyngeal tumours are
squamous cell carcinomas, malignant melanomas, epulides
and fibrosarcomas. Themost commonfeline oropharyngeal
tumours are squamous cell carcinomas and fibrosarcomas.
See also Melanoma - oral under Neoplastic conditions
Pancreatitis
871
Inflammation of the pancreas whichmay be acute or
chronic and results in depression, abdominal pain and
vomiting. The inciting cause is often unknown, but it can
be associated with hyperlipoproteinaemia, certain drugs,
trauma, pancreatic ischaemia and may follow a high fat
meal.
Parvovirus enteritis
An infectious viral diseasewhichmost commonly causes a
severe gastroenteritis; however, may also manifest as acute
myocarditis or neonatal mortality
Polycystic liver disease
Fluid-filled cysts in the liver parenchyma. Liver function
may or may not be affected. Seen with Polycystic kidney
disease (see under Renal and urinary conditions).
Portosystemic shunts
See Congenital portosystemic shunts
Pyloric dysfunction
Delayed gastric emptying with no evidence of pyloric
stenosis. Seen in Siamese cats.
Pyloric stenosis
See Antral pyloric hypertrophy syndrome.
Rectal prolapse
872
Eversion of the rectum through the anus.
Selective malabsorption of cobalamin (vitamin B12)
Malabsorption of vitamin B12 (cobalamin) may occur as a
result of an absence of the appropriate receptors in the
ileum. Symptoms include inappetance, failure to grow,
non-regenerative anaemia and neutropaenia.The condition
resembles Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome in humans.
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
Increased numbers of bacteria in the upper small intestine
associatedwith chronic diarrhoea. Small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth (SIBO) is often a secondary condition;
however, in some cases it may be primary with no
evidence of other underlying gastrointestinal disease.
Small intestinal volvulus
A rare condition where the small intestine rotates about
itsmesenteric axis resulting in intestinal obstruction and
ischaemia. The condition is rapidly fatal. Large-breed dogs
are predisposed.
Stomatocytosis with hypertrophic gastritis
Abnormally shaped erythrocytes which have increased
osmotic fragility (stomatocytosis) seen with gastric
mucosal hypertrophy.
Tritrichomonas foetus infection
873
A protozoal infection which can cause intractable chronic
large bowel diarrhoea.
Mycobacterium avium complex infection
See under Infectious conditions.
Vascular ring anomaly
Congenital abnormalities of the major thoracic arteries
leading to entrapment of the oesophagus and clinical signs
of regurgitation at or after weaning. Persistent right aortic
arch is the most common vascular ring anomaly
HAEMATOLOGICAL/IMMUNOLOGICAL
CONDITIONS
Basset Hound thrombopathia
This condition is seen only in Bassets. Clinical signs
include prolonged haemorrhage, particularly at surgery and
oestrus. Aural haematomas and petechiae are also seen.
The  platelets demonstrate  defective aggregation and
retention. The underlying cause is unknown.
Blood groups
Canine blood groups are classified according to the dog
erythrocyte antigen (DEA). There are six main groups,
DEA 1.1, 1.2, 3, 4, 5 and 7. DEA 1.1 and 1.2 are alleles so
it is not possible to be positive for both. Since there are no
naturally occurring autoantibodies to these two groups, an
initial blood transfusion does not usually cause an acute
874
transfusion reaction. However, if the donor and recipient
are incompatible, an immune response will be mounted
after the first transfusion, so subsequent incompatible
transfusions are likely to cause a reaction. DEA 1.l is
inherited as an autosomal dominant. A DEA 1.1 negative
female bred with a DEA 1.1 positive male may therefore
have DEA 1.1 positive pups, and this can lead to neonatal
isoerythrolysis.
Feline blood groups are classified into A, B and AB. A is
dominant over B, but the inheritance of the rare AB blood
group is determined by a different gene. There are high
levels of naturally occurring antibodies against the other
groups,  so  there are no universal donors, and
crossmatching or typing is vital before transfusing.
C3 complement deficiency
The  complement  system  is important  in  neutrophil
function and in fighting bacterial infection. There are two
pathways, however, so a defect in one does not always
lead to immunodeficiency.
Canine leucocyte adhesion deficiency
An inherited defect in the ability of neutrophils to bind to
endothelial  cells causes severe and recurrent bacterial
infections. A molecular diagnostic test is available to
diagnose this condition
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome
875
In this condition, abnormal lysosomes and neutrophil
granules lead to neutrophil dysfunction. Platelet function is
also impaired, leading to bleeding. See also under Ocular
conditions.
Combined B- and T-cell immunodeficiency
This condition causes severe bacterial infections in young
dogs once maternal immunity wanes, from 8 to 16 weeks
of age.
Cyclic haematopoiesis
In this condition, neutrophil numbers decrease every 12
days. There may also be cyclic decreases in platelet,
monocyte and reticulocyte numbers.
Factor I deficiency
Deficiencies in Factor I (fibrinogen) prolong the
prothrombin time in tests.
Factor VII deficiency
This condition leads to a mild clotting disorder.
Prothrombin time (PT) is usually prolonged, but activated
partial thromboplastin time (APTT) is usually normal, as is
consistent with a disorder of the extrinsic pathway.
Factor X deficiency
Factor X is part of the common pathway, so PT and APTT
are both prolonged. A specific Factor X assay is used to
876
confirm the diagnosis. The severity of bleeding is variable
and some affected dogs may survive into adulthood.
Factor XI deficiency
Heterozygotes for this condition have about 25-50% of the
normal
activityofFactorXI and are
asymptomatic.Homozygotes have about 10% activity and
suffer from severe and often lethal bleeding.
Glanzmann's thrombasthenia
This condition affects platelets, leading to decreased
platelet retention and absent platelet aggregation. This
causes severe mucosal bleeding. Platelet count is usually
normal or possibly slightly decreased. The buccal mucosal
bleeding time is increased and clot retraction is abnormal.
It is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.
Haemophilia A
This deficiency of FactorVIHI can cause moderate to severe
bleeding. APTT is prolonged, but PT is normal. Many
cases may arise from new mutations. The condition is
inherited as a sex-linked recessive.
Haemophilia B
Also known as Christmas disease, this clotting deficiency
is caused by a deficiency in Factor IX. This is a sex-linked
condition, but because the size of the gene for Factor IX is
smaller than for Factor VIll, spontaneous mutations are
877
APTT is prolonged, but PT is normal.
Hereditary porphyria
This condition leads to anaemia in Siamese cats, but is also
seen in non-anaemic domestic short hairs. Affected
animals have a defect in haem synthesis. There may also
be photosensitization and red cell haemolysis.
Hereditary spectrin deficiency
Spectrin deficiency with increased erythrocyte osmotic
fragility is associated with hereditary spherocytosis and
haemolytic anaemia   in   people.   Although   spectrin
deficiency was found to be common in a population of
Golden Retrievers, it was unclear whether this was
associated with haemolytic anaemia in these animals.
Hereditary stomatocytosis
This condition may lead to a mild anaemia but is usually
clinically insignificant.
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
Mild to severe anaemia, chronic or acute, can be seen with
this condition. Haematology shows anaemia (with a
regenerative response if the anaemia is not too acute) and
spherocytosis.  Although  many  cases  respondwell  to
treatment, the potential for serious complications means
that the prognosis for this condition is guarded.
878
Immune-mediated thrombocytopaenia
This   is   a   common 
disorder,characterizedby
immune-mediated   destruction   of  platelets.   Epistaxis.
haematochezia and mucosal haemorrhage are often seen.
Immunodeficiency syndrome of Irish Wolfhounds
Respiratory conditions in related Irish Wolfhounds have
been attributed to an underlying immunodeficiency,
possibly in cell-mediated immunity or in IgA
Immunoglobulin
deficiency
(susceptibility
to
Pneumocystis carinii)
organism is suspected to be caused by an underlying
immunodeficiency, but the exact nature of this, and
inheritance of the condition is not known. However, IgG
levels are lower in affected dogs than control animals.
Increased osmotic fragility of erythrocytes
Extreme fragility of the erythrocytes can lead to recurrent
and severe anaemia,with splenomegaly and weight loss.
Prednisolone and blood transfusions may be helpful.
Lethal acrodermatitis
Clinical signs of this condition include dermatological and
respiratory problems and stunted growth. Plasma zinc
levels are low and tissue Tlymphocytes are depleted.
879
Methaemoglobin reductase deficiency
This condition causes dark brown mucous membranes and
cyanotic blood vessels. Severe methaemoglobinaemia is
seen whichmay be lifethreatening. Management is by
avoidance of oxidative agents such as onion, drugs and
certain food components.
Non-spherocytic haemolytic anaemia
This condition is due to a defect in the calcium pump
system. Chronic haemolysis may lead to myelofibrosis.
Neutrophil function defect
Defects in neutrophil function lead to recurrent and/or
severe bacterial infections. A pronounced left shift
neutrophilia may be present.
Pelger-Huet anomaly
This anomaly involves a decreased segmentation of
granulocyte nuclei. There does not seem to be an increased
predisposition to infection in these cases.
Phosphofructokinase deficiency
Haemolytic crises and exertional myopathy are seen with
this relatively common enzyme deficiency. Exercise
intolerance is often seen. A PCRbased DNA test is
available for affected dogs and carriers.
Platelet storage pool deficiency
880
This condition leads to moderate to severe haemorrhage.
Platelet counts are normal, but buccal mucosal bleeding
time is prolonged.
Postoperative bleeding
It has been noted that retired Greyhounds bleed
postoperatively more frequently than expected, and a
clotting disorder is suspected. However, a disorder of
primary or secondary haemostasis has not been identified.
Predisposition to tuberculosis
A report has shown five Bassets that developed systemic
tuberculosis. It is thought that an immune deficiency,
possibly in cell-mediated immunity, was responsible.
Primary idiopathic hyperlipidaemia
This  poorly   understood   familial  condition  can  cause
multisystemic signs such as abdominal pain, seizures and
pancreatitis.
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
In this condition of erythrocytes, the affected cells lose the
ability to retain their normal shape and have a reduced
affinity for oxygen and a shortened lifespan.
Selective IgA deficiency
This condition causes different clinical signs in different
breeds, including dermatological disease, respiratory
881
disease such as rhinitis, and gastrointestinal disease such as
SIBO and anal furunculosis.
Selective malabsorption of cobalamin (vitamin B12)
See under Gastrointestinal conditions.
Spitz dog thrombopathia
This condition is similar to BassetHound thrombopathia
Intermittent mucosal bleeding is seen.
Stomatocytosis
In this condition red blood cells are bowl shaped, and have
increased osmotic fragility.
Systemic lupus erythematosus
q       s  siso
of the presence of at least two signs of autoimmune
disease, together with high levels of antinuclear antibodies
(ANA) (although 10% of cases are ANA negative),
Clinical
maniffestations  include   polyarthritis,
mucocutaneous lesions, glomerular disease, autoimmune
haemolytic anaemia, autoimmune thrombocytopaenia and
neurological signs.
T-cell dysfunction
This condition ofWeimaraners is associated with growth
hormone deficiency, thymic aplasia and dysfunction of
T-cells.
882
Tail tip necrosis
This condition has been reported in Birman kittens and is
thought to be due to neonatal isoerythrolysis involving
cold agglutinins.
Thymic aplasia
This congenital condition causes signs of stunted growth,
wasting and suppurative pneumonia.
Transient hypogammaglobulinaemia
This condition can lead to a delay in developing active
immunity, leading to recurrent respiratory infections
However, most affected puppies are normal by 8 months
of age.
Vaccine-associated vasculitis
Routine vaccinations in Weimaraners occasionally cause
an acute systemic vasculitis, with gastrointestinal signs,
hypertrophic osteodystrophy and lameness.
Vitamin K-dependent coagulopathy
Clinical signs of this condition include prolonged bleeding
post surgery or trauma. It is thought that an autosomal
recessive defect in hepatic vitamin Kmetabolism leads to
reduced levels of factors II, VII, IX and X. Affected
animals can be detected by demonstrating a prolonged PT
and APTT.
883
Von Willebrand's disease
This is the commonest inherited disorder of haemostasis in
dogs, and is caused by a deficiency in Von Willebrand's
factor (vWF), which is vital for platelet function. There are
three recognized types: type I involves a quantitative
reduction in vWF, and the severity of the disease varies
with  breed. Someindividuals  respond  todesmopressin
 a      
quantitative reduction in vWF, but the condition is more
severe than type I, and there is no response to DDAVP;
vWF leading to themost severe clinical disease, again with
no response to DDAVP. Genetic tests are also available to
identify carriers of the gene to allow appropriate selection
of breeding stock.
INFECTIOUS CONDITIONS
Babesiosis
Babesiosis is a tickborme protozoal disease caused by
Babeisa species. Infection results primarily in haemolytic
anaemia; however, complications in multiple organs may
develop. Infection may be peracute, acute chronic or
subclinical. It has been proposed that the diseasemay also
be transmitted between dogs by biting
Blastomycosis
Blastomycosis is systemic fungal infection, caused by
Blastomyces dermatitidis seen primarily in North America.
The lungs are the site of initial infection and from there it
884
may spread to the lymphatics, skin, eyes and bones. Dogs
are more commonly infected than cats, young, male, large
sporting-breed dogs living close to water being at greatest
risk.
Cryptococcosis
Cryptococcosis is a systemic fungal infection, caused by
Cryptococcus neoformans, which is found worldwide and
may be spread by pigeons. It infects a wide range of
mammalian species but is most commonly seen in the cat.
Clinical signs may reflect nasal, respiratory, central
nervous system, ocular or cutaneous involvement.
Disseminated aspergillosis
Aspergillosis is an opportunist fungal infection. In the dog,
it generally presents as a nasal and frontal sinus infection
and   dolichocephalic
 breeds
 seem    predisposed
Disseminated aspergillosis is amore serious and often fatal
form presenting as a systemic disease with multiple organ
involvement. German Shepherd Dogs are predisposed to
the latter, possibly due to an inherited defect in mucosal
immunity.
Feline infectious peritonitis
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is caused by feline
coronavirus.Whilst many cats are seropositive for feline
coronavirus, only 10% will go on and develop FIP. FIP
can develop in two forms; ^dry’ or non-effusive FIP where
pyogranulomas develop in various organs throughout the
885
body, and ^wet’ or effusive FIPwhere ascites and pleural
effusions develop.
Histoplasmosis
The causal organism, Histoplasma capsulatum, is a
saprophytic soil fungus. Histoplasmosis is uncommon and
occurs mainly in the central USA, India and southeasterm
Asia. Clinical signs include fever, anorexia, weight loss,
cough, dyspnoea and ocular and skin lesions; however,
many infections are subclinical.
Mycobacterium avium complex
Mycobacteria are aerobic, acid-fast bacteria with each
species having a variation in host affinity and disease
potential. Mycobacterium avium complex has a worldwide
distribution in soil and water, however disease is rare. The
organisms cause extensive granuloma formation and the
site of formation determines the symptoms. The bowel,
spleen, liver and mesenteric lymph nodes are usually
involved in dogs, whilst regional lymph nodes, skin and
gastrointestinal tract are commonly involved in cats.
Parvovirus enteritis
An infectious viral diseasewhichmost commonly causes a
severe gastroenteritis, however, may also manifest as acute
myocarditis or neonatal mortality.
Pneumocystis carinii infection
886
A protozoal infection which may result in pneumonia in
the
 presenceof
 immunosuppression
(see
also
Haematological/immunological conditions).
Sporotrichosis
A fungal infection caused by Sporothrix schenckii. The
organism is found worldwide in soils rich in decaying
matter.  Infection results  in dermal  and subcutaneous
nodules, andmay result in disseminated disease with
multiple organ involvement more commonly in the cat
than dog
Tritrichomonas foetus infection
A protozoal infection which can cause intractable chronic
large bowel diarrhoea.
Infectious conditions of the skin
See under Dermatological conditions.
MUSCULOSKELETAL CONDITIONS
Accessory carpal bone fracture
These fractures are sprain avulsion type injuries caused by
carpal hyperextension during racing. Carpal pain may be
present.
Achondroplasia
887
Achondroplastic breeds are specifically bred for this
condition. They have short maxillae, flared metaphyses
and short, bowed limbs. This is accepted as part of the
breed standard.
Alaskan Malamute chondrodysplasia
This condition leads to short limbs with bowed front legs
and laterally deviated paws.Haemolytic anaemia is often
alsoseen.
Angular deformity of tibia
In this condition, distal tibial growth plate injury or
premature closure of the lateral aspect results in tarsal
valgus.
Ankyloglossia
Tongue tying,which causes drooling, poorweight gain and
inability to protrude the tongue.
Arthropathy associated with Scottish Fold cats
This condition has recently been characterized as an
osteochondrodysplasia  associated
with　inadequate
cartilage maturation. A radiographic survey showed that
all Scottish Fold cats examined were affected, whether or
not they were symptomatic.
Arthrosis of cervical articular facet joints
888
This condition causes severe pain on flexion of the neck.
Radiography is a useful screening test.
Avascular necrosis of the femoral head
Also known as  Legg-Calve-Perthes  disease.  This
condition involves an aseptic, avascular necrosis of the
femoral head. Signs are usually seen from 5 months of age.
Ischaemia of the femoral head leads to degeneration of the
bone which presents as a progressive uni- or bilateral
hindlimb lameness.
Avulsion of the tibial tuberosity
This is a fracture of the growth plate, which is seen more
commonly in dogs with large quadriceps muscles.
Bilateral radial agenesis
In this inherited condition, the radius is partially or
completely absent, and the ulna is shorter and thicker.
Bipartite/tripartite sesamoids
This finding is noted in some breeds, but is probably
clinically insignificant.
Bone cysts
These
 are
benign, 
 uncommon
cystic
lesions.
Intramedullary
metaphyseal
1 haemorrhage  may
be
involved. They are often asymptomatic, but may enlarge to
cause pain or even pathological fracture.
889
Brachyury
This is a condition in which dogs of breeds with normally
long tails occasionally develop with short tails.
Bull Terrier osteochondrodysplasia
This condition leads to an abnormal gait with possible
femoral neck fractures. Some long bones are distorted.
Burmese head defect
This congenital defect is inherited and has been described
as autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant with
incomplete penetrance. Heterozygotes have a range of
facial dimensions. The condition is fatal to homozygotes.
It is seen in the eastern, ^new look’ or contemporary strain
of Burmese. The upper maxillary region is duplicated.
Carpal laxity syndrome
This condition involves either carpal hyperextension or
carpal hyperflexion. It occurs in puppies and is usually
self-limiting.
Carpal ligament weakening
Gradual degeneration and subsequentweakening of the
carpal ligaments lead to subluxation and luxation of the
carpus. The tarsus is also sometimes involved. Obesity
predisposes, so weight loss is recommended.
Carpal soft tissue injury
890
Soft tissue injuries of the carpus are common in working
dogs. Collateral ligament injuries, hyperextension injuries
and luxations can be involved.
Cartilaginous exostosis
Osteochondromatous outgrowths from the long bones,
scapula, ilium, vertebrae and phalanges can be seen
radiographically in this condition
Chronic sesamoid disease
Chronic sesamoiditis may be an incidental finding on
radiographs or a cause of lameness. Clinical signs include
a gradual onset of lameness in one or both forelimbs.
Cleft palate/lip
This congenital condition involves a variety of possible
defects, including a unilateral cleft lip, incomplete fusion
of the soft palate or an oronasal fistula.
Congenital elbow luxation
This condition is uncommon. There are two recognized
types: type I ismore severe and results in a 90 ° outward
rotation of the proximal ulna. Lateral deviation of the
antebrachium is seen, with marked reduction in elbow
extension. The cause is unknown. Diagnosis is by
radiography. Closed reduction is the treatment of choice,
but some cases require open reduction. In type II luxation,
the proximal radius is displaced caudolaterally. This type
891
treatment, while others may require surgery, such as
osteotomy of the radius or ulna
Congenital scapulohumeral luxation
This is a rare condition, usually occurring at an early age,
but may be a sequel to minor trauma in an adult. The
deviation is usually medial, and craniocaudal radiographs
will confirm this.
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture
This common injury often presents as a severe, acute onset
lameness. Diagnosis is by ascertaining the presence of a
'cranial drawer’ motion in the stifle, by radiography and
by arthroscopy or arthrotomy.
Craniomandibular osteopathy
This condition is inherited in some breeds, but other
factors may be important in other breeds. Clinical signs
include mandibular swelling, drooling and pain on opening
the mouth. Irregular bone proliferation is seen on
radiographs. The disorder is usually self-limiting, although
in some cases hemimandibulectomy may be necessary.
Delayed/non-union of fractures of the distal third of the
radius and ulna in Miniature and Toy breeds
There is a disproportionately high incidence of malunion
following repair of fractures of the distal third of the radial
and ulnar diaphyses. Inadequate immobilization, infection
and an easily disrupted blood supply to the bones may be
892
responsible. Rigid fixation with plates or external fixators
help reduce the risk.
Distal limb fractures and dislocations
These fractures are common in racing Greyhounds, due to
the stresses of racing
Elbow dysplasia
Genetics and rapid growth predispose to this complex of
diseases which include an ununited anconeal process,
medial coronoid process disease and  osteochondritis
dissecans of the medial humeral condyle. It may be that
elbow dysplasia is caused by osteochondrosis, possibly
relating to incongruities of the trochlear notch. In the UK
and USA, there are screening schemes for elbow dysplasia
in operation.
English Pointer enchondrodystrophy
This condition leads to short limbs and bowed front legs,
with an abnormal gait.
Enostosis
Also known as panosteitis or eosinophilic panosteitis. This
condition is fairly common, affecting young dogs aged
6-18 months. Acute intermittent lameness affecting one
ormore limbs is seen, often associated with pyrexia. A
viral aetiology is suspected. The condition is usually
self-limiting.
893
Episodic falling in the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
Also known as hypertonicity, and collapsing Cavalier King
Charles Spaniels. This condition is poorly understood, but
it is speculated that it is due to a disorder in GABA
transmission. Extensor rigidity is seen, induced by
exercise, but mentation remains normal.
Exertional myopathy
Precipitated by overexertion in unfit dogs or in hot and
humid conditions, this condition has a variable severity.
Hyperacute   cases   show    severe   pain    leading   to
myoglobinuria, acute renal failure and death, whereas
acute cases have a lowermortality. A non-fatal subacute
formis also seen.
Familial Mediterranean fever (see also Renal amyloidosis
under Renal and urinary conditions)
Renal failure, associated with amyloidosis and swollen
joints,
is
found
in
this
condition.
Hypergammaglobulinaemia  and raised  serum  levels  of
interleukin-6 are seen.
Fibrotic myopathy of semitendinosus muscle
This condition is seen in young to middle-aged dogs. A
fibrous
bandof
tissue   develops   in   the
semitendinosusmuscle, leading to a reduced ability to
extend the affected limb. This condition may be part of a
complex with Gracilis contracture.
894
Foramen magnum dysplasia
This condition involves a malformation of the occipital
bone and enlargement of the foramen magnum. There may
be concurrent hydrocephalus and exposure of the brain
Neurological conditions.
Gastrocnemius tendon avulsion
The gastrocnemius tendon becomes avulsed from the
calcaneus, leading to an acute lameness or a chronic
lameness with thickened tendons.
Glycogen storage diseases types II and III
Type II glycogen storage disease (Pompe's disease) causes
weakness  and
exercise  intolerance.   Vomiting and
cardiovascular abnormalities are seen. The prognosis is
poor. Type IHI glycogen storage disease (Cori's disease)
leads to poor growth, weakness and liver disease. This
disease is rare and also has a poor prognosis.
Gracilis contracture
This is usually seen in athletic dogs and leads to a gait
alteration. This condition may be part of a complexwith
Fibroticmyopathyofsemitendinosus muscle.Surgery can
help but the condition can recur.
Hemivertebrae
895
These abnormal vertebrae are wedge shaped and are often
associated with angulation of the spine. See also under
Neurological conditions.
Hereditary canine spinal muscular atrophy
This condition is a motor neurone disease. Homozygotes
for the condition have an accelerated form of the disease,
whereas heterozygotes have an intermediate or chronic
form.Dogs are usually affected at less than l year of age.
Hereditary myopathy of Devon Rex
This hereditary disease leads to clinical signs of
generalized muscle weakness, collapse on exercise,
ventroflexion of the neck and sometimes death from
laryngospasm, possibly due to oropharyngeal weakness.
Hip dysplasia
This very common condition occurs in a wide range of
breeds. Various deformities in the hip lead to joint
instability with the development of degenerative joint
disease.  Genetics  undoubtedly play a role, but
environmental factors, such as nutrition and exercise, are
also important. Various screening programmesare used
around theworld to attempt to reduce the incidence of this
        
depending on breed, population examined andmethods
applied. Note that, for the purposes of this text, only
peer-reviewed reports of hip dysplasia incidence have been
used, but more information on breed incidences in a
particular country is often available from the screening
896
       
Association.
Hypokalaemic myopathy
Clinical signs of this condition include ventroflexion of the
neck and transient weakness. There may also be a tremor.
Serum potassium levels of less than 3 mmoL/L are seen.
Idiopathic polyarthritis
Canine idiopathic polyarthritis is the most common form
of immune-mediated arthropathy. Approximately 25% of
cases are associated with chronic infection remote from the
joint, 15% are associated with gastrointestinal disease and
another subset is associated with neoplasia remote from
the joints. In the other cases, which account for about 50%,
there is no other pathology or underlying aetiology
detected.
Incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle
This  conditionmay  presentwith  a  history  of mild
intermittent
tlameness  which  isunresponsive
to
anti-inflammatory drugs. Acute severe lameness may
follow exercise or mild trauma, corresponding with a
humeral condylar fracture.
Inherited myopathy of Great Danes
Previously known as central core myopathy, this very rare
condition leads to signs ofmuscle weakness which
897
becomes progressively more severe. The reported cases
were euthanazed before 2 years of age.
Irish Setter hypochondroplasia
The limbs are slightly shortened in this condition. The ulna
and radius may be bowed and carpal valgus is seen.
Juvenile onset distal myopathy
This recently recognized condition has been reported in
several  pups and has been described as a muscular
dystrophy. Clinical signs include decreased activity and
various postural abnormalities.
Labrador Retriever myopathy
This is an uncommon condition, but is widespread
throughout
the
UK．
Clinical   signs    include
generalizedmuscle  weakness,  exercise  intolerance
andmuscle wasting. Black- and yellowcoated Labradors
 are affected, and the condition is more common in working
lines.
Lateral patellar luxation
Also known as genu valgum. This condition is often seen
in the same breeds that are affected by hip dysplasia. There
may be a genetic pattern of occurrence.Both stifles are
often affected, causing a knock-kneed stance from 5 to 6
months of age.
Lumbosacral disease
898
Inefficient  facet geometry  at the  lumbosacral  junction
leads to an increase in osteophyte formation. This can be
associated with a risk of lumbosacral stenosis.
Masticatory myopathy
Also   known   as  eosinophilic 
 myositis, masticatory
myositis. This is a common condition and demonstrates
acute and chronic forms. The acute disease presents with
swelling of the masticatory muscles and trismus. The
chronic form demonstrates atrophy of the masticatory
muscles, with histology showing marked muscle fibrosis.
The condition is immune mediated.
Medial coronoid process disease
This common condition is part of the osteochondrosis
complexwhich
affects the elbow.Fragmentation of
themedial coronoid process occurs,with the fragments
     n n
Degenerative joint disease usually ensues. Signs of
lameness are seen from 4 to 5 months of age.
Medial displacement of biceps brachii tendon
A gradual onset in lameness which is exacerbated nby
exercise is seen with this unusual condition. Palpation and
manipulation of the shoulder can nreveal pain, crepitus and
sometimes a palpable npopping of the tendon out of the
intertubercular ngroove.
Medial patellar luxation
899
This condition usually presents as an intermittent
lameness, although in bilateral cases it may present as a
hindlimb gait abnormality. It is usually seen from 6months
of age, although in some cases it may not cause clinical
signs until the animal is older.
Metaphyseal osteopathy
Alsoknownas
hypertrophic  osteodystrophy,   this
idiopathic condition affects the metaphyses of the long
bones of large breed, young dogs, causing pain, swelling,
lameness and pyrexia.
Mitochondrial myopathy
A defect in mitochondrial function leads to decreased
exercise tolerance with tachycardia and  tachypnoea
resulting
g from severe acidosis. This condition can
occasionally cause sudden death
Mucopolysaccharidosis
This
group
of
 conditions   results    from   inherited
chromosomal abnormalities and leads to a metabolic bone
disease. Type I disease causes a large broad head which
may be associated with ocular and cardiac abnormalities
Pectus excavatum, fusion of the cervical vertebrae and hip
subluxations also occur. Type VI disease causes dwarfism
and skeletal, neurological and retinal abnormalities. There
is no treatment, although some affected animals may have
an acceptable quality of life.
Multiple enchondromatosis
900
This inherited condition leads to short bowed limbs with
distorted diaphyses. Femoral neck fractures are seen, and
the sternum lacks bone.
Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia
This inherited condition leads to short limbs, enlarged
joints, hip dysplasia and osteoarthropathy in adults.
Muscular dystrophy
A sex-linked muscular dystrophy of Golden Retriever
found in the USA has been found to be similar to
Duchenne's muscular dystrophy of humans. Clinical signs
include exercise intolerance, gait abnormalities, trismus
and occasionally cardiac involvement. Creatinine kinase
(CK)   is 
 massively elevated
on
biochemistry.
Othermuscular  dystrophies  in  dogs   include  the
facioscapulohumeral type in Springers, which is associated
with persistent atrial standstill. A condition resembling
oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy of humans has been
reported in Bouviers.
Myasthenia gravis
See under Neurological conditions
Myotonia
Clinical signs of this condition include excess muscle
mass, stiff gait after rest and collapse. Dyspnoea may be
seen if the respiratory muscles are involved.
901
Neonatal encephalopathy with seizures
Puppies affected with this condition are small and weak
and often die in the first week of life. Those surviving
longer show tremors, ataxia and seizures. None have been
reported to survive past 7 weeks of age.
Ocular skeletal dysplasia
This condition is inherited as an autosomal recessive, and
causes clinical signs of shortened limbs and deviated
joints, associated with ocular signs such as cataracts and
retinal detachment. See also Retinal dysplasia with skeletal
defects under Ocular conditions.
Odontoid process dysplasia
This condition results in atlantoaxial subluxation causing
signs ranging from neck pain to quadraplegia. See also
Atlantoaxial subluxation under Neurological conditions.
Osteochondrosis
Osteochondrosis    is    characterized   by    abnormal
development of the cartilage in the physeal and epiphyseal
sites.Commonregions for osteochondrosis are the caudal
humeral head, the medial condyle of the humerus,
themedial coronoid process of the ulna, the anconeal
process of the elbow, the lateral and medial condyles of the
stifle and the medial ridge of the talus.
Osteogenesis imperfecta
902
This group of inherited diseases causes osteopaenia and
increased bone fragility. The underlying defect is probably
in collagen formation. The condition is rare, and the exact
mode of inheritance is unknown. Cases may present with a
history of multiple fractures with little or no trauma.
Osteosarcoma
SeeNeoplastic conditions.
Patellar luxation
Luxation of the patella can be due to abnormalities of the
patellar groove or of the position of the tibial crest. It can
cause chronic or intermittent lameness
Patellar pain
This condition may be associated with patellar luxation,
even after surgery, or may occur in the absence of
luxation. Pain is seen on pressing the patella into the
trochlear groove.
Perineal hermia
This relatively common condition presents as a swelling in
the perineal region or as a defect palpable per rectum.
Urinary bladder retroflexion  with associated metabolic
complications is seen in 20% of dogs.
Pes varus
903
This is seen at 5-6months of age, and is probably related
to an underlying tibial dysplasia
Plasmacytic lymphocytic gonitis
This condition of unknown aetiology leads to joint laxity
Buolapun shop jo %oi oi dn un uaas s pue Aiqeisu pu
surgery of the cranial cruciate ligament.
Polyarthritis/meningitis
The underlying disorder in this condition is an idiopathic
polyarteritis,  which　 may be　becoming more
common.Themain clinical signs are related to meningitis,
such as neck pain and fever, but joint inflammation is not
unusual. The severity of the disease varies with breed.
Milder forms are often self-limiting, but themore severe
forms may not be.
Polydactyly/syndactyly
Several breeds show a tendency to more than the normal
number of digits (polydactyly) or fused digits (syndactyly)
Often these abnormalities do not cause a clinical problem.
Primary orthostatic tremor
This disease is characterized by a severe tremor present
when standing, i.e. abolished by walking or sitting
Prognathia
Overshot jaw.
904
Pseudoachondrodysplasia
This condition leads to short, bent limb bones and short
vertebrae. Osteopaenia may be seen.
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
As well as haematological abnormalities, this inherited
condition can lead to intramedullary osteosclerosis.
Pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase 1 deficiency
This rare inherited condition causes exercise intolerance,
andmay shorten life expectancy due to heart and lung
problems.
Retrognathia
Undershot jaw.
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis
See under Neurological conditions.
Scottish Fold arthropathy
Scottish Fold cats have abnormally shaped ears, due to an
abnormality in the ear cartilage (inherited as a simple
autosomal dominant). Homozygotes for this defect can
develop generalized cartilage defects causing a shortening
and thickening of the bones of the limbs, tail and spine and
a progressive arthropathy.
905
Shoulder luxation
This condition usually occurs at 3-4 months. Flexed and
rotated views of the shoulders can reveal the abnormality
on radiography.
Spondylosis deformans
Also known as ankylosing spondylitis. Bony spurs
(osteophytes) form around the margins of the vertebral
endplates. They becomemore common with age, and are
often apparent radiographically, but are rarely of clinical
significance.
Superficial digital flexor tendon luxation
This uncommon  condition causes acute but moderate
lameness. A calcaneal bursal effusion is seen. The luxation
is usually lateral.
Temporomandibular dysplasia/luxation
Abnormal development of the articular surfaces leads to
temporomandibular dysplasia with laxity of the joint. The
condition can be seen from 6 months of age. Clinical signs
include open mouth locking, often associated with
yawning,  and luxation  which  may be  chronic.
Degenerative joint disease and masticatory muscle wastage
may be seen in chronic cases.
Transitional lumbosacral vertebra
906
This anomaly is characterized by separation of the first
sacral segment identified on  the lateral view of a
radiograph by the presence of a radiolucent disc space
between what are normally the first and second sacral
segments. On the ventrodorsal view, there is separation of
the spinous processes between what are normally the first
and second sacral segments. The sacroiliac attachment is
often weakened, leading to premature disc degeneration.
Together with spinal canal stenosis, this can lead to cauda
equina syndrome.
Ununited anconeal process
In German Shepherd Dogs, the anconeal process develops
as a separate centre of ossification, which should be fused
to the ulna by 20 weeks. Failure of fusion leads to an
ununited anconeal process which is part of the elbow
osteochondrosis complex. Degenerative joint disease often
occurs, leading to a lameness which is seen from 4 to 5
months of age.
Vaccine-associated vasculitis with hypertrophic osteopathy
This vasculitis, which is
associatedwithroutine
vaccinations, leads to initial gastrointestinal signs, which
laterdevelop
 into lameness andhypertrophic
osteodystrophy.
Von Willebrand heterotopic osteochondrofibrosis
In this condition a mass of bony, fibrous or cartilaginous
can result, which is mainly mechanical in nature.
907
X-linked spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda
This rare condition is characterized by shortened body and
limb length and analgesia-responsive pain.  A similar
condition in people is caused by a defect in collagen
NEOPLASTIC CONDITIONS
Adrenocortical tumour
Adrenocortical tumours are responsible for 15-20% of
hyperadrenocorticism cases in the dog, and 20% in the cat
(see under Endocrine conditions). They are usually
unilateral (although 10% of cases have bilateral tumours)
and may be adenomas or carcinomas. The latter may be
invasive and metastasize.
Anal sac adenocarcinoma
Anal sac adenocarcinoma is a malignant tumour which is
palpable as a discrete or infiltrativemass in the anal sac.
These tumours are often associated with hypercalcaemia
and metastasize early to the sublumbar lymph nodes,
spleen and lung. These are rare in the cat.
Basal cell tumour
These common skin tumours arise fromthe basal epithelial
cells which give rise to the epidermis. They are usually
well circumscribed, firm, freely mobile masses found in
the dermis and subcutis around the head and neck. They
are generally slow growing and benign in behaviour, rarely
metastasizing.Most  basal    cell   tumours  have   been
908
reclassified, depending on evidence of differentiation into
epidermis, trifollicular epithelium, sweat or sebaceous
glands; however, a cytologic diagnosis of basal cell tumour
is still widely used to cover this group of tumours
(Goldschmidt & Mcmanus 2000, Bohn, Wills & Calpazi
2006). Basal cell carcinoma has low-grade malignancy and
is a more invasive form. They are reasonably common in
the cat but uncommon in dogs and rarely metastasize.
Some dermatopathologists now consider most basal cell
tumours tobe
 more
 accurately  classified  as
trichoblastomas.
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
These skin tumours are commonly seen in young dogs, and
appear as solitary, firm, wellcircumscribed intradermal
surface will ulcerate. They are benign and most will
regress spontaneously over a period of months.
Ceruminous gland tumours
Tumours of the ceruminal gland of the ear canal which
may be benign (adenoma) or malignant (carcinoma).
Benign tumours aremore common in dogs, whereas 50%
of tumours in cats may be malignant. They are usually
seen in one ear only.
Chemodectoma
Chemodectomas are derived from the chemoreceptor cells
of the aortic and carotid bodieswhich detect changes in the
blood  pH,  oxygen  and  carbon  dioxide levels.
909
Chemodectoma of the aortic body arises at the heart base
and is reported more frequently than carotid body tumours
which arise at the bifurcation of the carotid artery and
present as a cervical mass. Both are relatively uncommon
in the dog and cat, but brachycephalic dogs appear
predisposed. Chemodectomas may be locally invasive and
have the potential to metastasize.
Chondrosarcoma
This is the second most common primary bone tumour of
dogs accounting for 5-10% of cases. It generally grows
slowly
 and
metastasizes
less frequently than  the
osteosarcoma.
Cutaneous haemangioma
Haemangiomas are benign tumours arising from the
vascular endothelial cells of the dermis and subcutis. They
are common in dogs but rare in cats. They appear as
well-circumscribed blue/purple masses.   It has been
suggested that prolonged exposure to sunlight may be a
predisposing factor making light-skinned dogs with short
coats more vulnerable
Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma
Malignant tumours arising from the vascular endothelial
cells of the dermis and subcutis.May be indistinguishable
fromhaemangiomas ormay be infiltrative with large areas
of haemorrhage.
Cutaneous lymphoma
910
This  is an uncommonmalignant  neoplasiawhich  is
usuallymultifocal. Nodules are seen in the dermis and may
spread to the lymph nodes and internal organs. Cutaneous
lymphoma may be divided into epitheliotropic and
non-epitheliotropic forms.
Cutaneous papillomas
These are pedunculated or vegetative skin growths found
in older dogs and are distinct from the virally induced
papillomas found on the mucous membranes of young
dogs. They are considered benign.
Cutaneous plasmacytoma
These neoplasms are derived from plasma cells but are
rarely associated with multiple myeloma.  They occur
commonly on the digits, the lips, the chin and the ear
canal.
Fibroma - cutaneous
This is an uncommon, benign tumour of fibroblasts
locatedinthedermis or subcutaneous tissue.
Fibromatous epulis
A common oral tumour of the dog presenting as a firm
gingival mass. These tumours are benign, neither invading
locally nor metastasizing.
Fibrosarcoma
911
A fibrosarcoma is a malignant tumour derived from
fibrous tissues and may be found in many sites, including
the bone, skin, spleen and oral cavity. Tumour behaviour
varies with the site and histological grade. In general,
fibrosarcomas are locally invasive but have a relatively
low rate of metastasis. Oral fibrosarcomas tend to be
histologically low grade but biologically high grade with a
tendency  to aggressive local infiltration and a  higher
potential for  local and  distant metastasis.  Cutaneous
fibrosarcomas are more common in the cat than dog.
Tumours  vary  from  slowgrowing,  well-circumscribed
lesions which are more benign in behaviour to rapidly
growing, poorly circumscribed lesions whichmay be more
malignant.
Haemangiosarcoma
This is a highly malignant tumour arising from vascular
endothelial cells. Primary sites include the spleen (most
common site in the dog), the right atrium of the heart,
liver, skin, bone, nervous system, kidney, bladder and oral
cavity. Metastasis to a wide variety of sites is common,
and in many cases micrometastasis having occurred by the
time of diagnosis.
Hemangiopericytoma
A common tumour of the dog which arises from vascular
pericytes. They are usually found on the limbs and are
dermal or subcutaneous. They rarely metastasize but can
recur following surgical removal (see plate 28 in the colour
plate section).
912
Histiocytosis
A disorder of histiocytes which takes two forms, both
relativelyrare.Inlocalanddisseminatedhistiocytosis
(previouslykmownasmalignant
histiocytosis)
proliferation of histiocytes results in solid tumour masses
in a variety of organs, including the spleen, liver, lymph
nodes and lung. The disease is rapidly progressive and
fatal.Reactive histiocytosis comprises cutaneous
histiocytosis (see Dermatological conditions) and systemic
histiocytosis.
These
conditions    are 
considered
non-neoplastic.Systemichistiocytosisfollows amore
chronic, fluctuating course than local and disseminated
histiocytosis and involves the skin, eyes and peripheral
lymph nodes. Both systemic histiocytosis and local and
disseminated histiocytosis are seen most commonly in the
Bernese mountain dog.
Insulinoma
See under Endocrine conditions
Intestinal adenocarcinoma
See under Gastrointestinal conditions.
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma)
Benign cutaneous neoplasms which can be solitary or
multiple (generalized).
Lipoma
913
Benign tumours of fat cells which are generally found in
the subcutaneous tissues. They are common, affecting up
to 16% of dogs. Infiltrative lipomas are locally invasive,
making surgical excision more difficult, but they do not
metastasize.
Lymphoma
Lymphoma is a malignant lymphoproliferative disease also
known as malignant lymphoma or lymphosarcoma.
Lymphoma is the most common haematopoietic tumour in
the dog and cat. Lymphoma
1may
be  classified
anatomicallyby the location ofthedisease
(multicentric,mediastinal,   alimentary,  cutaneous 
or
extranodal), histologically or immunophenotypically as
B-cell or T-cell (see plate 29 in the colour plate section).
Malignant  cutaneous  peripheral  nerve  sheath  tumour
(malignant schwannoma, neurofibrosarcoma)
Tumours of the skin and subcutis which are derived from
Schwann  cells or perineural fibroblasts. Tumours are
moderately firm, up to several centimetres in diameter and
being infiltrative, will tend to occur following surgical
removal.
Malignant histiocytosis
See Histiocytosis.
Mammary tumours
914
These are common in both the dog and the cat. Mammary
tumours are derived from the epithelial and sometimes
myoepithelial tissues of the mammary glands. In dogs
approximately 50% are benign, in cats over 80% are
malignant. Entire animals or those spayed after several
seasons are predisposed. Behaviour varies depending on
the
ehistological
 grade,  but  malignant  mammary
tumoursmay be very aggressive,metastasizing to the local
lymph nodes, lungs and occasionally the abdominal organs
and bone.
Mast cell tumours
Mast cell tumours are relatively common in dogs.
representing up to 20% of skin tumours. They may present
in a wide variety of forms for which they need to be
included in the differential of all skin masses. Behaviour
varies from benign to highly aggressive malignant tumours
which have the potential to metastasize (usually to the
liver, spleen or kidney). Cutaneous mast cell tumours are
less common in the cat. ‘Mastocytic’ mast cell tumours are
similar to the canine mast cell tumours and occur mostly as
solitary nodules in older cats. A variant classified
histologically as a ^histiocytic' mast cell tumour has been
seen  in young
gSiamese cats.These tumours are
multicentric and regress spontaneously over a number of
months. Systemic and intestinal forms of mast cell tumour
may also be seen in this species.
Melanoma
Cutaneousmelanomas represent 46% of canine skin
tumours and1-2%of all feline skin tumours. They present
915
as firm, pigmented dermal masses and are more common
in dark-skinned dogs. Those found on the digits and close
to mucocutaneous junctions tend to be more malignant and
more distant sites.
Oral melanomas are the most common oropharyngeal
malignancy in the dog. They are highlymetastatic, up to
20% may havemetastatic disease at the time of diagnosis.
See Ocular conditions for ocular melanoma
Myxoma/myxosarcoma
These rare neoplasms arise from fibroblasts and occurmost
frequently on the limbs.Myxomas are benign and
myxosarcomas are malignant, both are infiltrative and
therefore tend to recur after surgery. Metastasis is
uncommon.
Nasal cavity tumours
The most common nasal cavity tumours diagnosed in the
dog are carcinomas (in particular adenocarcinomas). Other
types include sarcomas (fibrosarcoma, chondrosarcoma or
osteosarcoma), lymphoma and
1melanoma. Most are
s  s   
destruction, but are slow to metastasize. Doliocephalic
dogs, particularly of large and medium size, are reported to
be at increased risk, disease in these breedsmay be
associatedwith pollutants, e.g., passive smoking or living
in urban environments. In the cat, lymphoma is the most
916
common nasal cavity tumour followed by adenocarcinoma
and squamous cell carcinoma
Osteosarcoma
Osteosarcoma is the most common of the malignant
primary bone tumours in the dog, representing 80-90% of
bone tumours in large dogs. It is rapid in growth and
highly invasive and destructive. Osteosarcoma of the
appendicular skeletonof
dogs
is highlymalignant
andmetastasizes early (commonly to the lungs).
. In
common with other primary bone tumours, appendicular
osteosarcoma is more common in large- and giant-breed
dogs. They generally occur in older dogs but those
 a       
Osteosarcoma of the axial skeleton (including the skull) is
 generally considered less malignant. Osteosarcoma in the
cat is also less aggressive. See also under Musculoskeletal
conditions.
d     d   
section)
Parathyroid tumours are uncommon in the dog and cat.
Functional adenomas are the most common
1typeof
parathyroid
tumour,
resulting
in
primary
hyperparathyroidism and  hypercalcaemia  (see  Primary
hyperparathyroidism
under
Endocrine
conditions),
Adenomas
  are
benign
and
1well
encapsulated.
Adenocarcinomas may invade locally and metastasize.
Perianal (hepatoid) gland adenoma
917
     sn  a s
sebaceous glands of the perianal area. They appear as
well-circumscribed raised lesions  which may ulcerate.
Perianal gland (hepatoid) carcinomas are malignant and
difficult to distinguish from their benign counterparts in
gross appearance. They are less common.
Pilomatrixoma
An
uncommonbenign
tumour of the hair follicle.
Pilomatrixoma presents as a solitary, firm mass in the
dermis or subcutis, with ulceration of the overlying
epidermis. They usually occur over the neck, back and tail
of dogs. They are rare in cats.
Pituitary tumours
The most common pituitary tumour in the dog is the
adenoma of the corticotrophic cells of the anterior lobe.
These tumours are generally functional, resulting in an
overproduction of ACTH and hyperadrenocorticism (see
under Endocrine conditions). In the cat, pituitary tumours
may be associated with hyperadrenocorticism as above.
but tumours of the somatotrophic cells of the anterior
pituitary also occur, resulting in an overproduction of
growth hormone and acromegaly.
Primary brain tumours
See under Neurological conditions.
Prostatic carcinoma
918
The most common prostatic tumour in the dog. Prostatic
carcinoma is very invasive locally and metastasizes early
to the sublumbar lymphnodes, pelvic bones, lumbar
vertebrae, and further afield to the lungs. In contrast to the
disease in humans, canine prostatic carcinoma is not
increased risk in castrated dogs.
Renal cystadenocarcinoma
See under Renal and urinary conditions.
Sebaceous gland tumours
One of the most common skin tumours of the dog, but less
common in the cat. They may be single or multiple. There
are various histologic types: sebaceous hyperplasia (which
is not a neoplastic condition but may be the precursor of
sebaceousadenomas
or
epitheliomas),  sebaceous
epitheliomas,sebaceous adenomas
adenocarcinomas. All types appear as wart-like lesions
which may be ulcerated or melanocytic, regardless of
histopathological
type.With
the
exception
of
adenocarcinomas
which
may
(rarely)
metastasize,
sebaceous
gland tumours are 
 generally benign
behaviour.
Soft tissue sarcoma
A  malignant soft
tissue
tumour derived from the
mesenchymal connective tissues of the body. The
termcovers a diverse group of tumours froma variety of
919
tissues; however, some, particularly in the Flat-coated
Retriever, are poorly differentiated.
Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin
One of the more common malignant skin tumours in the
dog, and the most common in the cat. Dogs are commonly
affected on the head, trunk and perineum, whereas cats are
commonly affected on the pinnae, nasal planumand
eyelids. Squamous cell carcinoma is locally invasive but
the incidence of metastasis is variable. Exposure to UV
light may predispose to the development of actinic solar
dermatitis which
1mayprogresstosquamouscell
carcinoma.
Squamous cell carcinoma of the digit
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common cutaneous
tumour of the digit in dogs. It is locally invasive, resulting
in bone lysis, and metastasizes more frequently than
squamous cell carcinomas found in other cutaneous sites.
It occurs most commonly in large breed dogs with black
coats. Some dogs have multiple tumours.
Sweat gland tumours
These may be adenomas (of glandular or ductal origin) or
adenocarcinomas. They are uncommon in the dog and cat.
They may present as small solitary nodules in the dermis
and subcutis with or without ulceration. An inflammatory
form of adenocarcinoma is poorly circumscribed and more
infiltrative. Adenocarcinomas are highly invasive and may
920
metastasize to local and regional lymph nodes, and
occasionally to more distant sites, e.g., the lungs.
Systemic histiocytosis
See Histiocytosis.
Testicular neoplasia
See under Reproductive conditions
Thymoma
Thymoma is a tumour of the epithelial cells of the thymus
gland which is situated in the cranial mediastinum. It is
uncommon in both dogs and cats. Thymomas are generally
benign and slow growing. Symptoms relate to the presence
of a cranial mediastinal mass and may vary: cough.
dyspnoea, regurgitation and occasionally obstruction of the
cranial vena cava, leading to facial and forelimb oedema
(precaval syndrome'). Autoimmune conditions such as
Myasthenia gravis may be associated with thymoma.
Thyroid carcinoma
See Thyroid neoplasia in dogs under Endocrine conditions.
Trichoblastoma
These are common benign hair follicle tumours, appearing
as solitary, domedmasses. Theymay be melanocytic and
ulcerate. They commonly occur on the head and neck.
921
Trichoepithelioma
An uncommon benign tumour of the hair follicle. They
present as solitary, firm masses in the dermis or subcutis.
often with ulceration of the overlying epidermis. They
usually occur over the back, trunk and limbs of dogs.
NEUROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
Afghan myelopathy
A progressive disease of the white matter of the spinal
cord. Symptoms include pelvic limb ataxia and paresis,
progressing to thoracic limb involvement, tetraplegia and
eventually death from respiratory paralysis.
Amblyopia and quadriplegia
This is a lethal inherited condition of Irish Setters. Puppies
are unable to walk and progression to visual impairment,
nystagmus and seizures occurs.
Arachnoid pseudocysts
Arachnoid cysts are a rare cause of focal spinal cord
on the site of the lesion.
Atlantoaxial subluxation
This is seen primarily in young dogs of Toy breeds which
present with neck pain and neurological deficits in all four
922
congenital defects, including a lack of or hypoplasia of the
dens and shortening of the axis, lead to instability of the
atlantoaxial articulation. The condition may also be
acquired in any breed as a result of fracture of the dens or
damage to the ligamentous support. (See also Odontoid
process dysplasia under Musculoskeletal conditions.)
Birman cat distal polyneuropathy
Adegenerative polyneuropathywhich
results in
hypermetria in all limbs, progressive pelvic limb ataxia
and a tendency to fall. The condition is believed to be
hereditary.
Cerebellar degeneration
Cerebellar  cells
can
undergo
prematureaging,
degeneration and death (termed abiotrophy), leading to
signs of cerebellar dysfunction (intention tremor, ataxia,
hypermetria and menace deficits). In most cases the
 condition is believed to be hereditary.
Cerebellar malformation
Congenital malformations of the cerebellum include
hypoplasia and aplasia of the whole or part of the
cerebellum. Some may have a genetic basis, while others
result froma teratogen. Clinical signs are seen as soon as
the animal becomes mobile and are non-progressive. They
include hypermetria, head tremor and a wide-based stance.
There is no treatment, but animals may make suitable pets
if not severely affected.
923
Cerebrovascular disease
rostral cerebellar artery.
Cervical vertebral malformation (wobbler syndrome)
This is a developmental malformation andmalarticulation
of the caudal cervical vertebrae seen in large- and
giant-breed dogs, particularly the Dobermann and Great
Dane. Clinical signs result from spinal cord compression
and include neck pain and gait abnormalities (e.g. ataxia
and paresis) which are worse in the pelvic limbs.
Congenital deafness
This has been observed in numerous breeds (especially
Dalmatians and blue-eyed white cats) and usually results
from a partial or complete failure of development of the
organ of Corti.
Congenital vestibular disease
Young animals may present with signs of peripheral
vestibular dysfunction, including head tilt, circling, and
falling. Nystagmus is not a common feature of the
congenital condition. There is no treatment, but symptoms
may improvewith time as the animal compensates.
Vestibular disease may also be acquired secondarily to a
variety of causes, including middle ear infections in breeds
predisposed to ear disease. An idiopathic form may be
seen in older dogs.
924
Dalmatian leukodystrophy
This rarely reported progressive neurological condition
results in visual deficits and progressive weakness. On
gross pathology, there is atrophy of the brain, lateral
ventricle dilation and cavitation of the white matter of the
cerebral hemispheres.
Dancing Dobermann disease
This is believed to be a neuromuscular disease of the
gastrocnemiusmuscle; the underlying cause is not known.
It has only been reported in Dobermann Pinschers and
affected dogs initially flex one pelvic limb whilst standing.
As progression occurs to involve the other pelvic limb, the
dog is seen to altermately flex and extend each pelvic limb
in a dancing motion.
Degenerative myelopathy
A degenerative disease primarily seen in German Shepherd
Dogs over 5 years of age.Diffuse degeneration of the white
matter of the thoracolumbar spinal cord results in
progressive pelvic limb ataxia, paresis and loss of
conscious proprioception. A DNA mutation that is a major
risk factor for this condition has recently been identified.
Demyelinating myelopathy of Miniature Poodles
Arare, possibly  inherited condition characterized by
diffuse spinal cord demyelination. Pelvic limb paresis
progresses to paraplegia and tetraplegia. Spinal reflexes
are hyperactive.
925
Dermoid sinus
A dermoid sinus is a developmental defect arising from the
incomplete separation of the skin and neural tube. It may
be found midline in the cervical, cranial thoracic or
sacrococcygeal regions. In cases where the sinus
communicates with the dura mater, neurological signs may
be seen. The condition ismost commonly found in
theRhodesian Ridgeback and is believed to be hereditary
in this breed.
Discospondylitis
Infection of the intervertebral disc with osteomyelitis of
adjoining vertebral bodies. Infection occurs secondarily to
spinal surgery, foreign body migration or septic emboli
from the skin, urinary/genital tract, or from a concurrent
endocarditis. Clinical signs may include pyrexia, anorexia,
spinal pain and paresis.
Dysmyelination of the central nervous system
This rare congenital disease causes tremors that are present
from birth.
Episodic falling
See under Musculoskeletal conditions
Exercise-induced collapse of Labrador Retrievers
926
Labradors are prone to a condition of collapse on exercise,
but extensive investigations have as yet failed to reveal a
cause.
Feline orofacial pain syndrome
In this condition, chewing motions and pawing at the face
are seen. This can be episodic or continuous. Oral disease
is often present.
Fly catching
Dogs with this condition appear to catch imaginary flies.
This may be a form of psychomotor epilepsy.
Giant axonal neuropathy
This is a rare inherited neuropathy of German Shepherd
Dogs. The cause is unknown. Distal nerves in the pelvic
limbs and long tracts of the central nervous system are
affected first, giving rise to paresis, loss of spinal reflexes
and pain perception in the pelvic limbs. Megaoesophagus
and loss of bark occur later. There is no treatment.
Glycogenosis (glycogen storage disease)
A group of rare diseases resulting from a deficiency of one
or more enzymes involved in glycogen degradation or
synthesis. Glycogen accumulates in a variety of tissues,
including the central nervous system, muscle and liver,
resulting in clinical signs including seizures and muscular
weakness.
927
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis
This is an inflammatory condition of unknown cause. The
disease may be focal or diffuse and may affect any part of
the central nervous system, leading to a wide range of
clinical signs, including seizures, ataxia, nystagmus and
visual  deficits.  The disease
eisoftenchronicand
progressive. Small-breed dogs are most commonly
affected with Poodles representing about 30% of
diagnosed cases.
Head/foot irritation syndrome
This recently recognized condition of Cavaliers is distinct
from the scratching associated with syringomyelia
Hemivertebrae
Hemivertebrae are congenitally malformedvertebrae most
commonly seen at the level of thoracic vertebrae 7-9.
Neurological signs, e.g., pelvic limb ataxia, paresis, faecal
and urinary incontinence, may result from spinal cord
compression.
Hereditary ataxia
Progressive ataxia results from degeneration of the white
matter of the cervical and thoracic spinal cord in young
Smooth-haired Fox Terriers and Jack Russell Terriers.
Hereditary  polioencephalomyopathy   of  the  Australian
Cattle dog
928
This is a degenerative condition primarily affecting the
grey matter, causing focal malacia in the cerebellum, brain
stem and spinal cord.
Hereditary necrotizing myelopathy
1 so snoa un sisad q p ssn seas si
appears similar to Afghan myelopathy
Hound ataxia
A degenerative myelopathy seen in Foxhounds and
Beagles in the UK. Degenerative changes are most severe
in the mid-thoracic spinal cord but may extend to involve
the brainstem, caudal cerebellar peduncles or sciatic nerve.
Signs include pelvic limb weakness and ataxia. Muscle
atrophy and loss of spinal reflexes is not seen. The cause is
unknown but a link has been suggested to an all-tripe diet.
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus occurs where there is dilation of all or part
of the ventricular system of the brain, and may be
congenital or acquired (usually secondary to neoplasia or
inflammatory disease). Symptoms  include a domed
cranium, seizures and altered mental status.
Hyperaesthesia syndromes
Increased sensitivity to tactile and painful stimulation may
result in self-mutilation which varies in severity
fromrippling of the skinwhen touched or excessive licking
to autoamputation. Some cases are due to underlying
929
neuropathies or are forms of seizure; however, in others no
underlying cause is identified. Treatments tried include
phenobarbitone, megoestrol acetate and prednisolone.
Success has been variable
Hyperlipidaemia
Hyperlipidaemia (high blood lipid levels) is a familial
condition ofMiniature Schnauzers andcats  which  is
believed to be associated with a reduced activity of
lipoprotein lipase, resulting in defective lipid metabolism.
Affected animals may experience seizures as well as
abdominal distress and pancreatitis.
Hypertrophic neuropathy
An inherited neuropathy reported in the Tibetan Mastiff
which results in generalized weakness, hyporeflexia and
dysphonia from 7 to 10 weeks of age. There is no
treatment and the prognosis is guarded.
Hypoglycaemia
Hypoglycaemia is a common metabolic cause of seizures.
It may result from a variety of causes, including
insulinoma, hypoadrenocorticism, severe liver disease and
sepsis. Young dogs of Toy  breeds may  develop
hypoglycaemia easily when stressed, fed an inadequate
diet or affected by gastrointestinal disease. Hunting dogs
which are not fed on themorning of a hunt may also be
predisposed to hypoglycaemia as a result of physical
exertion.
930
Hypomyelination
Hypomyelination of the central nervous systemhasbeen
seen in several breeds of dog and is known to be hereditary
in some cases. Signs usually start at a few weeks of age
with generalized body tremors which worsen with
excitement. Hypomyelination of the peripheral nervous
system has been seen in  twoGolden Retriever
littermateswith pelvic limb weakness and depressed spinal
reflexes.
Idiopathic epilepsy
Recurrent seizures caused by functional disorders of the
brain. The high incidence in certain breeds of dog suggests
an inherited basis.
Idiopathic facial paralysis
Paralysis of the facial nerve results in drooping of the lip.
paralysis of the eyelids and impaired ear movement on the
affected side. Acute onset facial paralysis may occur in
adult dogs without evidence of an underlying cause.
Inherited polyneuropathy
A distal, symmetrical polyneuropathy has been described
in related Leonbergers. Exercise intolerance, a high
stepping hindlimb gait, a change in bark and dyspnoea
have been noted.
Intervertebral disc disease
931
Degeneration of the intervertebral discs, resulting in
extrusion or protrusion of the nucleus pulposus, may result
in  spinal cord  compression  and pain/paresis.  Nuclear
extrusion occurs early in chondrodystrophoid breeds, e.g.,
Pekingese, Dachshunds, Beagles,Welsh Corgis, French
Bulldogs, some Spaniels and Basset Hounds, giving rise to
signs in younger dogs
Lafora's disease
Progressive myoclonic epilepsy is seen in this condition
Diagnosis is by histopathological examination of affected
tissue.
Leukoencephalomyelopathy of Rottweilers
This is believed to be an inherited condition. Degeneration
of the myelin of the spinal cord, brainstem, cerebellum and
sometimes optic tracts results in ataxia, tetraparesis and
loss of conscious proprioception, with increased spinal
reflexes and muscle tone. Vision is usually unaffected. The
condition progresses over 6-12 months.
Lissencephaly
Adevelopmental  anomalywhere the  cerebral  cortex has
reduced or absent gyri or sulci, resulting in a smooth
appearance.Clinical signs are usually seen from a few
months of age and may include behavioural abnormalities,
lack of training, aggressive behaviour, visual deficits and
seizures.
Lumbosacral stenosis
932
Stenosis (narrowing) of the lumbosacral vertebral canal
lumbosacral nerve roots. Clinical signs may include pain
on palpation of the area, pelvic limb paresis or lameness,
tail paralysis, hypotonia of the anal sphincter and bladder
atonicity (lumbosacral syndrome'). It is most commonly
seen in adult German Shepherd Dogs.
Lysosomal storage diseases
These rare diseases result from a failure of normal
metabolic processes due to a deficiency of an enzyme
within the lysosomes of neuronal tissues. As a result.
substrate accumulates, causing cellular dysfunction and
eventually death. One of a variety of lysosomal enzymes
may be affected. Symptoms usually occur before 1 year of
age and may include ataxia, tremors, seizures, dementia
and blindness. Most lysosomal storage diseases
are
believed to be inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.
Meningitis and polyarteritis
This is a vasculitis ofmeningeal arteries which results in
clinical signs of recurrent fever, anorexia and cervical
rigidity. In some cases paraparesis or tetraparesis may be
seen. An immune-mediated aetiology has been suggested
and some cases may respond to high-dose, long-term
prednisolone treatment.
Meningoencephalocoele
A lethal malformation where part of the brain and
meninges is herniated through a defect in the skull.
933
Multisystem neuronal degeneration
Aslowly
 progressive degenerativedisease. Diffuse
neuronal loss throughout the subcortical, brainstem and
cerebellar nuclei results in symptoms, including loss of
recognition  of the  owner,
apathy, hyperactivity,
hypersexuality and aggression.
Muscle cramping
An inherited disorder of Scottish Terriers. Affected dogs
are normal at rest but exercise may provokemuscle spasms
which in its mildest form appear as pelvic limb stiffness.
Severe attacks cause rigidity of allmuscles, including
facialmuscles, causing the dog to fall over into a tightly
curled ball. Consciousness is maintained and the animal
makes a spontaneous recovery. The cause is unknown but
it is believed to be a disorder of central nervous system
neurotransmitters. A similar condition has been reported in
Dalmatians and Norwich Terriers.
Myasthenia gravis
Decreased numbers of acetylcholine receptors on the
post-synaptic
muscle
membrane
leadtodefective
neuromuscular transmission. The disease can be congenital
or acquired. Clinical signs in dogs include muscle
weakness on exercise which improves with rest, and
megaoesophagus. The onset may be chronic or acute and
the condition can be generalized or focal. Signs in cats
include drooling, ventroflexion of the neck, regurgitation,
weakness and lameness.
934
Narcolepsy/cataplexy
Narcolepsy is characterized by excessive sleepiness at
inappropriate times, whilst cataplexy is acute flaccid
paralysis from which the animal makes a complete
recovery after a few seconds to several minutes. In dogs,
cataplexy seems to be the more prominent and is often
associated with excitement, e.g., eating or playing.
Necrotizing meningoencephalitis
Signs of this condition include seizures and blindness. The
prognosis is guarded to poor.
Non-suppurative meningoencephalitis
This inflammatory  brain disease has been noted  in
Greyhounds in Ireland.
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
A   degenerative central  nervous 
Ssystemdisorderof
unknown  cause,  seen   primarily   in   Rottweilers.
Pathological findings include swellings of the distal axons
within the central nervous system and cerebellar atrophy
Symptoms include ataxia, hypermetria and intention
tremorswhichmay  be  slowly  progressive  over  several
years.
Organic aciduria
935
This group of inborn metabolic disorders causes
neurological signs, including seizures, ataxia, tremors and
dementia.
Partial seizures
Partial seizures result focal electrical activity in the brain.
The appearance of the seizure varies with the location of
the discharge butmay involve seizure-like activity of only
one body part, or may involve psychomotor (complex
partial) seizures, which are exhibited as fly-biting,
star-gazing, tailchasing or self-mutilating behaviour.
Polyradiculoneuritis
This is an inflammatory condition affectingmultiple nerve
roots, resulting in pelvic limb weakness which rapidly
progresses to quadriplegia. An idiopathic form may be
seen in any breed; however, the condition has been seen
following raccoon bites in hunting breeds such as
theCoonhound.  An immunological  reaction  to  raccoon
saliva may be the underlying cause in these cases.
Primary brain tumours
Primary brain tumours are derived from tissues of the
nervous system, including nerve cells, glial cells, meninges
and neuroepithelial cells. They are generally solitary and
most cases will present with signs of a space-occupying
lesion in the brain, the specific signs varyingwith the
location. Meningiomas and gliomas are themost common
primary brain tumours in dogs.Meningiomas are the most
936
q A pun in aq un snom uq Ad uoo
single or multiple in this species.
Primary secretory otitis media
Cavaliers are prone to getting a building up of secretions in
the middle ear, which can lead to signs of middle ear
disease.
Progressive axonopathy
See Sensory neuropathy
Progressive neuronopathy
An exercise-induced deterioration of neurological signs is
seen in this rare disorder of young dogs.
Pug encephalitis
A rare,  necrotizing meningoencephalitis of unknown
aetiology seen in Pugs. Symptoms are often acute in onset
and include seizures, depression, head pressing, circling,
blindness with normal pupillary reflexes and opisthotonus.
The condition is progressive and there is no treatment.
Most cases are euthanazed.
Pyogranulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
An acute, rapidly progressive disease of unknown cause
seen
in
mature
Pointers.Mononuclear
 and
throughout the central nervous system but especially in the
937
cervical spinal cord and lower brainstem. Dogs suffer from
cervical rigidity, ataxia and sometimes seizures. The
prognosis is poor. A temporary remission in response to
antibiotics may be seen.
Rage syndrome
Seen in young adult Springer Spaniels which become
aggressive to people, including their owners. No
intracraniallesion has been  found to  explain  this
behaviour.
Rottweiler distal sensorimotor polyneuropathy
A polyneuropathy of Rottweilers resulting in paraparesis
progressing to tetraparesis, reduced spinal reflexes,
hypotonia and neurogenic atrophy of limb muscles. The
condition progresses over 12 months.
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis
Congenital malformation of the sacrococcygeal spinal cord
and vertebral column which results in locomotor problems
in the hind legs and faecal and urinary incontinence.
Sensory neuropathy/sensory ataxic neuropathy
Sensory neuropathies have been seen in a number of
breeds. In Pointers, signs of self-mutilation associated with
loss of pain sensation predominate, whereas
1m
Dachshunds loss of proprioception and ataxia may be seen.
In Boxers, the condition is termed progressive axonopathy
938
and is characterized by  pelvic limb hyporeflexia.
hypotonia and proprioceptive loss.
Shaker dog disease
This condition has been most commonly observed in dogs
with white hair coats, particularly Maltese and West
Highland White Terriers. Dogs develop a fine whole-body
tremor which may worsen with excitement and stress.
Other signs may include nystagmus, menace deficits,
proprioceptive deficits and seizures. There may be an
underlying mild lymphocytic encephalitis, and affected
animals are usually responsive to immunosuppressive
doses of corticosteroidswith benzodiazepines.
Spina bifida
This is a developmental defect resulting from the failure of
the two halves of the dorsal spinous processes to fuse,
most commonly in the lumbar spine. Protrusion of the
spinal cord or meninges may result in symptoms including
pelvic limb ataxia, paresis and urinary or faecal
incontinence. If no protrusion occurs the condition is
termed ^spina bifida occulta'
Spinal dysraphism
This is a congenital malformation of the spinal cord
resulting in a wide-based stance and bunnyhopping gait of
the hindlimbs. It may be associated with hemivertebrae or
spina bifida. The condition is non-progressive.
Spinocerebellar degeneration
939
This is a late onset degenerative neurological condition,
affecting older dogs.
Spinal muscular atrophy
This is a  condition  where premature degeneration of
various neuronal cell populations of the brainstem and
ventral horn of the spinal cord result in generalized
weakness which may progress to muscular atrophy and
tetraparesis/plegia.
Spongiform degeneration
Spongiform degenerations are rare disorders resulting in
vacuolation of the brain and spinal cord whichmay result
in awide variety of neurological signs.
Syringomyelia
This condition involves a fluid-filled dilation in the
cervical spinal cord, which leads to clinical signs of neck
pain, persistent scratching around the head and neck and
sometimes ataxia. It has become increasingly recognized
recently due to the increased availability of MRI, which is
necessary for the diagnosis. Syringomyelia is caused by
amalformation of the occipital bone of the skull, which is
known  as Chiari  malformation,  or caudal  occipital
malformation  syndrome. Screening schemes are in
progress in the UK to attempt to reduce the incidence of
this condition.
OCULAR CONDITIONS
940
BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
TheBritish Veterinary
 Association/Kennel Club/
International Sheep Dog Society Eye Scheme has been set
up to enable breeders to reduce the frequency of inherited
 od so a  sop s  s aa
breeding. Screening is carried out by appointed eye
panelists. A list of panelists can be obtained from the
Kennel Club or British Veterinary Association.
Schedule A is a list of eye diseases of which it is
considered that enough evidence exists to show that the
condition is inherited in the breeds shown. Schedule B is a
list of conditions under investigation for the possibility of
inheritance in the breeds shown.
Conditions included in the scheme are those of the eye
itself only; eyelid and lacrimal conditions are not included.
The Canine Eye Registration Foundation (CERF)
Maintains a register of dogs in North America that
diplomates of the American College of Veterinary
Ophthalmologists (ACVO) have certified free of heritable
eye disease. The information generated by  these
examinations is used to maintain a research database, the
latest edition of which is the fifth edition published in 2007
(ACVO Genetics Committee 2007).
Abnormal pigment deposition
See Ocular melanosis.
941
Amblyopia and quadriplegia
An inherited condition of Irish Setters. Puppies are
congenitally paralyzed, have amblyopia (blindnesswithout
visible ocular cause), tremors, nystagmus and seizures.
Caruncular trichiasis
Normal hairs growing at themedial canthus may contact
and irritate the globe in exophthalmic breeds.
Cataract
An opacity which may affect all or part of the lens or lens
capsule, unilaterally or bilaterally. Cataracts may be
primary(where a hereditary basis is suspected)or
secondary, for example, to ocular inflammation, metabolic
disease or congenital anomalies such as persistent
pupillary membranes or persistent hyaloid artery. Cataracts
may be detected first in a variety of different areas of the
lens and may progress at different rates. A complete
cataract involves the whole lens and obscures the fundus,
resulting in blindness in the affected eye.
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome
A condition seen in the Persian cat. Symptoms may
include ocular and cutaneous albinism, cataracts,
susceptibility to infection and bleeding tendencies. See
also under Haematological/ immunological conditions.
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
942
A bilateral progressive inflammatory disease of the cormea
A fleshy, vascular lesion spreads towards the central
cormea from the temporal limbus.  Comeal pigmentation
follows and, if severe, vision loss occurs. It is suspected to
 n   sis -  a
ultraviolet radiation. The condition is more severe in dogs
living at high altitude. May be seen with plasma cell
infiltrationofthenictitatingmembrane(plasmoma)
Coloboma
A congenital absence of part of an ocular structure
whichmay affect the eyelid, iris, choroid, lens or optic disc
May be seen alone or with other ocular defects, e.g.,
microphthalmia, multiple ocular defects and Collie eye
anomaly.
Collie eye anomaly
A bilateral congenital condition characterized by abnormal
development of the eye. The severity and effect on vision
is variable. Mild cases may have only choroidal hypoplasia
(inadequate development of the choroid). More severe
cases may also have optic nerve colobomas, retinal
detachment and intraocular haemorrhage. The condition is
best diagnosed at 6-7 weeks and it is advisable to remove
affected dogs froma breeding programme.
Cone degeneration (hemeralopia or day blindness)
Day  blindness  with no  ophthalmoscopically  visible
abnormality. The  condition    results 
fromselective
degeneration of the cone photoreceptors of the retina. Dogs
943
show severe loss of vision in daylight from 8 to 12 weeks
but are able to see in dim light.
Congenital, subepithelial, geographic corneal dystrophy
(infantile cormeal dystrophy)
A transient, non-inflammatory cormeal opacity seen in
puppies younger than 10weeks and absent by 12-14
weeks.
Convergent strabismus (esotropia)
Abnormal deviation of the eyeballs medially.
Corneal dystrophy
Aprimary, non-inflammatory bilateral (though not
necessarily symmetrical) opacity of the cornea. The term
'dystrophy' implies a hereditary nature of the condition.
However, in  many cases of corneal dystrophy
firmevidence of inheritance is lacking, although no
underlying disease can be found.
Different layers of the cormea may be affected giving
epithelial, endothelial and stromal dystrophies. The
appearance, age of onset and rate of progression vary with
the breed. Visual disturbance may occur if the lesion
becomes extensive.
Cormeal sequestration
A disease of the cornea seen in the cat. The disease is
characterized by the development of a pigmented lesion in
944
the centre of the cornea. In some cases, it is secondary to
feline herpes virus keratitis, or chronic corneal irritation
from entropion or trichiasis.
Dermoid
A congenital defect in which palpebral skin is abnormally
located on the conjunctiva or cornea, often at the limbus,
and may cause irritation due to the hairs growing from its
surface.
Diamond eye
SeeMacroblepharon.
Distichiasis
Abnormally positioned cilia (eyelashes) which emerge
through or close tomeibomian gland orifices. They are
often of no clinical significance but in some cases may
        s
high incidence in certain breeds, though the exact mode of
transmission is unknown.
Ectopic cilia
Cilia (eyelashes) which emerge directly through the
palpebral conjunctiva to cause cormeal irritation, ulceration
and pain.
Ectropion
945
Eversion (rolling out) of all or part of the eyelid margin
leading to exposure and subsequent irritation of the ocular
tissues. In some cases ectropion is seen as part of
macroblepharon (see below).
Entropion
   o  o  o i  
[       
surfaces.
Entropionmay occur alone, or as part ofmacroblepharon
         
entropion occurs in the upper eyelid, trichiasis often
results.
In many cases, entropion arises as a result of conformation
of the skull and orbit, and the amount of skin on the head.
Most cases present in the first year; some severely affected
cases present as early as 2-6 weeks of age. Some mild
cases disappear as the dog matures.
Eversion of the cartilage of the nictitating membrane
Scrolling of the cartilage of the third eyelid which may
result in chronic conjunctivitis. Seen most commonly in
young large-breed dogs.
Glaucoma (canine)
946
A group of diseases characterized by degeneration of the
retinal ganglion cells and optic nerve resulting in
progressive loss of vision. The condition is associated with
an
increase
ini
intraocular
pressure. 
Primary
glaucomadevelopswithout the presence of other intraocular
disease and may be hereditary, with potential for bilateral
     
appearance of  the iridocormeal filtration angle into
‘open-angle’ and ‘closed-angle’ glaucomas.Causes of
secondary glaucomas include lens luxation, uveitis,
neoplasia and cataracts.
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
Degeneration of the retinal cells. An autosomal recessive
inheritance is suspected in most breeds. Different breeds
are affected at different ages by different types of GPRA.
However, all cases are bilateral and progress to blindness.
Inmost cases,  the  earliest
 clinical  signis   might
blindnesswith day vision being lost at a variable time later
(Curtis & Bamett 1993).
Ophthalmoscopically there is attenuation of retinal vessels
and tapetal hyper-reflectivity. In the later stages, the
condition is often accompanied by cataracts. More than
100 breeds of dog have been identified as suffering from
GPRA; however, only those where the condition is seen
relatively frequently, or is well-described, have been
included in Part IWhere known, the type of GPRA is
stated; however, it is beyond the scope of this book to
provide a description of these types.
Goniodysgenesis (pectinate ligament dysplasia)
947
Abnormal development of the iridocorneal filtration angle
which may predispose to closed-angle glaucoma later in
life.
Hereditary  retinal  dystrophy  of  Briards  (congenital
stationary night blindness)
A retinal dystrophy causing congenital night blindnesswith
a variable effect on day vision. The disease is slowly
progressive with no fundoscopic changes until 2-3 years
of age.Nystagmus may be present. A defect in retinal
polyunsaturated fatty acid metabolism may be involved.
Idiopathic epiphora
The failure of normal tear drainage leading to overflow of
tears over the lower lid, without evidence of increased tear
production or obstruction of the drainage system.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eye)
A common disease characterized by reduced aqueous tear
production resulting in drying and inflammation of the
conjunctiva and cormea. The condition may be congenital
(rarely), or result from infectious, drug-induced,
neurological   or  immune-mediated  causes.  A  genetic
influence is suggested by the high incidence in a number
ofbreeds
Lacrimal punctal atresia (imperforate lacrimal punctum)
A congenital anomaly where there is a failure of the
lacrimal punctum (tear duct) to open. It may affect upper,
948
lower or both punctae and may be unilateral or bilateral.
The lower punctum ismost commonly affected, resulting in
epiphora (overflow of tears).
Lens luxation
Displacement of the lens from its normal position. Lens
luxationmay be primary (not associated with other ocular
conditions) and considered inherited, or secondary to
trauma, cataract formation, glaucoma, neoplasia or uveitis.
Lens luxation is a potentially serious condition and may
result in raised intraocular pressure, glaucoma and loss of
vision. Where both lens luxation and glaucoma occur, it is
not always clear which condition is primary. Primary lens
        
usually  luxate    simultaneously.  Terrier   breeds  are
predisposed.
Lipaemia of the aqueous humour
A transient milky appearance in the eyes of young
 r       
metabolism.
Lysosomal storage disease
An inherited deficiency of a specific degradative enzyme
leads to the accumulation of its substrate in cells, causing
progressive  cellular  malfunction  from  an  early  age.
Various enzymes may be involved and in some cases the
eyesmay be affected.
Macroblepharon
949
An abnormally large palpebral fissure. In some cases (e.g.
brachycephalic breeds), this occurs as a result of
keratopathy. In others it results from overlong eyelid
margins and laxity of the canthal structures leading to both
upper lid entropion and lower lid ectropion, resulting in
diamond eye’ in severe cases. The precorneal tear film is
often disturbed, and corneal and conjunctival disease may
occur secondarily.
Medial canthal pocket syndrome
The combination of a narrow skull with deep set eyes leads
to the formation of a conjunctival pocket at the medial
canthus, allowing the collection of debris which may cause
recurrent conjunctivitis.
Melanoma - ocular
Melanomas are the most common primary tumour of the
globe. They are most commonly found in the anterior uvea
(canine anterior uveal melanoma - CAUM) but may be
found in other areas, for example, the limbus. In the dog
they have low metastatic potential but expansion may lead
to destruction of the eye. In the cat they may be malignant.
Microcormea
A congenital  abnormally  small  corneawhichmay  be
associated with other intraocular defects.
Microblepharon (blepharophimosis)
950
A congenital defect resulting in an abnormally small
palpebral fissure. Often accompanied by entropion.
Micropapilla
A congenitally small optic disc which is not associated
with visual impairment. Itmay be difficult to distinguish
from optic nerve hypoplasia ophthalmoscopically.
Microphakia
A congenital defect resulting in an abnormally small lens,
which may be associated with other intraocular defects.
Microphthalmia
Acongenitally small eye, often seenwith other ocular
defects, e.g., microcormea, anterior chamber defects,
cataract, persistent pupillary membranes and retinal defects
(Multiple ocular defects).
Multifocal chorioretinitis
A  clinically  inapparent, non-progressive chorioretinitis
described in the Borzoi and Beagle. Lesions may be uni- or
bilateral  and  consist of  focal retinal oedema  which
becomes pigmented and hyper-reflective later.
Multifocal retinopathy
Multifocal grey lesions develop initially in the outer retina
followed by the development of areas of serous retinal
951
detachment more centrally. No significant progression
with time and no loss of vision.
Multiple ocular defects
Several congenital defects present in the same eye.
Nasal fold trichiasis
Prominent nasal folds in some breeds (notably the
Pekingese) allow the facial hair to come into contact with
ocular tissues, causing irritation.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
An inherited storage disease resulting in the accumulation
of lipopigments in the brain and, in some breeds, in the
retina. Only those breeds where the retina is involved have
been included in this section.
Nodular  granulomatous   episclerokeratitis  (proliferative
keratoconjunctivitis)
Single or multiple, raised fleshy masses originating at the
limbus and invading the cormea. Involvement of the
nictitating membrane may occur. Usually a bilateral
condition. The lesions are inflammatory and respond to
prednisolone and azathioprine.
Nystagmus
Involuntary repetitive ocular movements.
952
Ocular melanosis (abnormal pigment deposition)
Large numbers of melanocytes infiltrate the iridocorneal
angle, episclera, choroid and iris, predisposing
gto
glaucoma (melanocytic glaucoma). Primarily seen in
middle-aged Cairn Terriers.
Optic nerve hypoplasia
A congenitally small optic disc with reduced numbers of
optic nerve axons and visual impairment.
Pannus
See Chronic superficial keratitis
Persistent hyaloid artery (PHA)
A congenital defect resulting from the failure of the
hyaloid artery to regress. The remnant is seen as a segment
(which may or may not contain blood) within the vitreal
cavity between the optic disc and the lens.Acataractmay
format the point of attachment to the lens capsule.
Acongenital condition in which there is abnormal
development and regression of the hyaloid system and
primary vitreous. It is often associated with persistent
hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis (PHTVL) in which
there is persistence of an embryonic vascular system
attached to the posterior lens capsule. The condition is
rare, but is seen more frequently in Dobermanns and
953
Staffordshire Bull Terriers. The condition varies in
severity. In its most severe form it is associated with
microphthalmia and other ocular defects.
Persistent pupillary membranes
Persistent pupillarymembranes (PPMs) are uveal remnants
which fail to regress normally in the first 6 weeks of life
and persist in the anterior chamber (either unilaterally or
bilaterally). Strands which bridge from iris-to-iris are
iris-tocormea or iris-to-lens strands may cause focal cormeal
and lenticular opacities, respectively. PPMs are a common
finding but severe visual impairment is rare.
Pigmentary keratitis
Corneal  pigmentation  is usually  seen  with  chronic
keratitis. Pigmentary keratitis is particularly common in
brachycephalic breeds and is often a result of chronic
irritation from distichiasis, trichiasis, entropion, ectropion,
and exposure keratopathy due to amacropalpebral fissure.
The breeds represented most commonly on the ACVO
Genetics Committee 2007 website have been listed in Part
I.
Pigmentary uveitis
Inflammation of the iris and ciliary body associated with
abnormal pigment deposition. Seen most commonly in the
Golden Retriever and often seen in conjunction with iris
cysts. Cataract and glaucoma are common sequelae.
954
Plasma cell infiltration of the nictitating membrane
(plasmoma)
Bilateral plasma cell infiltration of the nictitating
membrane   resulting   in   follicle  formation    and
depigmentation. Often associated with Chronic superficial
keratitis (pannus).
Posterior lenticonus
A congenital abnormality where there is a conical
protrusion of the posterior lens capsule and cortex into the
vitreous. It is often associated with other ocular
abnormalities,  including 
 congenital
 cataract,
microphthalmia and PHPV.
Prolapse of the gland of the nictitating membrane ('cherry
eye')
Prolapse of the tear gland normally located behind the
nictitating membrane results in exposure and irritation of
the gland. It is usually seen in young dogs, less than 2
years of age.
Pseudopapilloedema
An enlarged optic nerve head due to excessive myelination
of the optic nerve axons. No effect on vision.
Retinal detachment
Separation of the retina from the underlying tissues
resulting in loss of function of the detached portion.May
955
be partial or complete. Usually secondary to other ocular
or systemic disease.
Retinal dysplasia
Abnormal differentiation of the retina present at birth.
Retinal dysplasia may be inherited in some breeds. It may
occur alone, or with other ocular defects or, in Labrador
Retrievers and Samoyeds, with skeletal defects. Three
main forms exist:
·Multifocal retinal dysplasia: Retinal folds exist as focal or
multifocal lesions and appear as dots or linear streaks. Usually
not associated with vision loss.
·Geographic retinal dysplasia: Involvement of a larger irregular
     s    
with visual deficiencies.
· Total retinal dysplasia with detachment: The whole retina is
involved and results in complete retinal detachment and vision
loss.
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED), also known
as central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA)
Abnormal accumulation of pigment within the retina
resulting in a progressive retinal degeneration and visual
deficiencies. The condition was previously seen most
commonly in England, but is now infrequently seen.
Similar retinal lesions have been seen in dogs fed vitamin
E deficient diets, and in some breeds RPED lesions have
been associated with a deficiencv of vitamin E due to a
metabolic abnormality.
Senile iris atrophy
956
Progressive thinning of the iris. A common finding in
older dogs.
Spontaneous chronic cormeal epithelial defects (refractory
cormeal ulceration, indolent ulcer, Boxer ulcer, recurrent
cormeal erosion syndrome)
Slow-healing,  superficial  corneal  ulcers  which  may
represent a form of corneal epithelial dystrophy. Originally
described in the Boxer, but also occurs in most other
breeds. Usually seen in middle-aged dogs.
Superficial punctate keratitis
Bilateral  superficial  corneal  opacities  which  may  be
ulcerated. The   condition is  believed
tobe
immune-mediated and occurs mainly in the long-haired
Dachshund.
Systemic histiocytosis (see also Histiocytosis under
Neoplastic conditions)
A multisystemic disease characterized by infiltration of
affected tissues with histiocytes. Ocular tissuesmay be
affected, leading to uveitis, chemosis, episcleritis and
conjunctivitis. The disease is primarily seen as a familial
disease in the Bernese Mountain Dog
Tapetal degeneration
An inherited condition seen in Beagles, wherein there is
progressive degeneration of tapetal cells without any affect
on vision.
957
Trichiasis
Normally located hairs deviate to contact and irritate the
cornea and conjunctiva. Trichiasis may occur in the
caruncle (see Caruncular trichiasis) nasal folds (see Nasal
fold trichiasis) or as a result of upper eyelid entropion.
Uveal cyst
Cysts of the iris and ciliary body are usually benign and
may be single or multiple, unilateral or bilateral. They may
be congenital, or acquired, most occur spontaneously in
adult  dogs. They  are  generally
 benign and of no
significance unless large or multiple
Uveodermatological syndrome
This is believed to be animmune-mediated disorder similar
to Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome seen in humans.
Melanocytes are targeted by the immune system. Ocular
signs include anterior uveitis, uveal depigmentation and
retinal damage. Dermatological signs may include vitiligo
(depigmentation) of the eyelids, nasal planum and lips.
Vitreal syneresis
Degeneration of the vitreous results in liquefaction. This is
a common age-related finding and usually of no clinical
significance; however, in some breeds itmay occur at an
earlier age. Extension of the abnormal vitreous into the
anterior chamber may predispose to glaucoma. Rarely, it
may predispose to retinal detachment. Breeds have been
included in Part I where an unusually high percentage of
958
dogs seem to be affected, or they are predisposed to
glaucoma and/or retinal detachment secondarily.
RENAL AND URINARY CONDITIONS
Azotaemia
Blood levels of urea and creatinine can be used to assess
renal function. Where levels are higher than the reference
range, the term azotaemia is used. Young Birman cats may
be predisposed to high levels of creatinine±urea; however,
it is not certain whether this reflects underlying kidney
disease.
Ectopic ureters
A congenital anomaly involving one or both ureters. There
is failure of the affected ureter to terminate in the trigone
region of the bladder, opening instead into the urethra,
vagina or uterus.  Continuous or intermittent urinary
incontinence may be seen as a result, usually in the
juvenile bitch. Urinary incontinence is less commonly
associated with ectopic ureters in the male because of the
longer length of the urethra and stronger urethral sphincter.
Familial renal disease
Familial diseases include those that occur in related
individuals with a greater frequency than chance alone
would allow. Familial renal disease should be suspected
young animal. If chronic renal failure develops before
physical maturity, stunting will develop. Familial renal
959
diseases vary in clinical signs and pathology depending on
the breed:
· Glomerular basement membrane disorder: The main lesion in
this condition is a thickening and splitting of the glomerular
basement membrane, usually resulting in early onset proteinuria
and leading to renal failure.
Periglomerular fibrosis: Periglomerular fibrosis progresses to
generalized interstitial fibrosis and results in renal failure.
Polycystic kidney disease: See under separate heading
· Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis: Glomerulonephritis
    o    
glomerular capillary walls, leading to glomerular damage. In
most cases, there is significant proteinuria leading to
hypoalbuminaemia which, if severe, is manifest as peripheral
oedema or ascites (nephrotic syndrome). The condition may
progress to renal failure.
·Renalamyloidosis: See under separate heading.
· Renal dysplasia: The termrenal dysplasia refers to conditions
where there is disorganized development of the renal
parenchyma  resulting in the persistence of structures
inappropriate to the stage of development, e.g, immature
glomeruli.
· Renal cystadenocarcinoma: See under separate heading
·Renal telangiectasia: See under separate heading.
Fanconi's syndrome
Fanconi's syndrome results from generalized proximal
renal
 tubular dysfunction resulting
 in  abnormal
reabsorption of many solutes, including glucose, amino
acids and phosphate. Low blood levels of the solutes
involved may result. Affected dogs are polyuric and
polydipsic. The condition may progress to acute renal
failure or pyelonephritis.
960
Feline idiopathic cystitis
Signs of cystitis with no obvious underlying cause. Cases
present with dysuria, pollakuria, haematuria and
sometimes urethral obstruction. Predisposing factors are
believed to include being male, neutered, overweight.
using an indoor litter box, limited outside access, dry diet
and living in a stressful relationship with one or more other
cats.
Hypospadias
Hypospadias results from incomplete fusion of the urethral
folds during the formation of the male urethra such that the
urethra opens abnormally on the underside of the penis,
proximal to the normal urethral opening. Itmay be seen
with other congenital defects such as cryptorchidism and
intersexuality. It has also been described in the female
dogwhere it is mostly seen in intersex states.
Polycystic kidney disease
In this disorder, large portions of the renal parenchyma are
replaced by multiple cysts. Both kidneys are generally
involved and in some cases cysts are found in the liver
aswell.Kidneysmay be palpably enlarged and irregular,
and the diagnosis can be confirmed by ultrasound. The
condition progresses to renal failure at a variable rate.
Renal cysts may also be seen in cases of renal dysplasia or
neoplasia.
Reactive systemic amyloidosis
961
See Renal amyloidosis.
Renal amyloidosis
Amyloidosis results from the deposition of an insoluble
fibrillar protein (amyloid) in a variety of organs, resulting
in their dysfunction. Reactive systemic amyloidosis is a
systemic syndrome which is familial in the Abyssinian cat
and Shar Pei dog, in which amyloid deposition can be
found in many organs. Chronic inflammatory or neoplastic
breeds. Amyloid deposits in the kidney lead to progressive
renal dysfunction. In most cases there is glomerular
involvement, resulting in moderate to severe proteinuria
and sometimes nephrotic syndrome. In most breeds, renal
amyloidosis is seen in older dogs; however, in the Shar Pei
dog and Abyssinian cat it is seen at an earlier age.
Renal cystadenocarcinoma
This is a condition of bilateral and multifocal renal
neoplasia which is seen primarily in the German Shepherd
Dog. Cases present at 5-ll years of age with anorexia,
weight loss and polydipsia. The renal condition is
associated with generalized cutaneous nodules (nodular
dermatofibrosis or multiple collagenous naevi - see under
Dermatological conditions) and, in females, with multiple
uterine leiomyomas.
Renal telangiectasia
Abnormal development of blood vessels leads to the
formation of cavernous spaces filled with blood clots
962
which appear macroscopically as red or black nodules in
the kidney and sometimes in other tissues. Affected
individuals present with marked haematuria and in some
cases anaemia.
Unilateral renal agenesis
Congenital absence of one kidney. Often an incidental
finding, but individuals are predisposed to renal failure if
the remaining  kidney  becomes  compromised.May be
associated with anomalies of the reproductive tract.
Urethral prolapse
Prolapse of the urethral mucosa through the external
urethral orifice may occur in young
maledogs
Brachycephalic breedsmay be predisposed.
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence
A weak urinary sphincter allows urine leakage, usually
when the animal is relaxed and lying down. The condition
is the most common cause of urinary incontinence in the
adult dog and is most commonly diagnosed in neutered
females of medium to large breeds (>20 kg). In many
cases, the condition is responsive to reproductive hormone
administration.
Urethrorectal fistula
An uncommon condition in which a fistula connects the
lumen of the urethra with the lumen of the large
bowel.Most cases are congenital but the condition may be
963
acquired secondary totrauma or neoplasia.Affected
animalsmay pass urine via both the anus and the penis or
vulva, and are predisposed to urinary tract infection.
Urinary incontinence
Leakage of urine. In dogs the most commoncause is
urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence (see above),
while in cats it is most commonly seen inManx cats as part
ofManx syndrome (see under Gastrointestinal conditions)
Urolithiasis
The formation of stones (uroliths) anywhere within the
urinary tract.
Calcium oxalate urolithiasis
Calcium oxalate uroliths are commonly found in both dogs
and cats. In dogs, hypercalciuria, hypercalcaemia and
hyperadrenocorticism predispose to calcium oxalate urolith
formation. Dietary risk factors include excessive calcium.
excessive oxalic acid, high protein, high sodium, restricted
phosphorus, restricted potassium and dry diet formulation.
Calcium oxalate uroliths tend to be radiodense, often rough
and round or oval in shape. The risk is higher in males and
in older dogs. In cats the risk is higher in males and
neutered cats.
Cystine urolithiasis
Cystinuria occurs as a result of an inherited defect in
cystine transport in   the renal  tubules.  Cystinuria
964
predisposes to cystine urolithiasis. Most cystine uroliths
are relatively radiolucent, smooth andoval andaremore
likely to forminacidurine. They represent 1-3% of canine
uroliths in the USA. They are uncommon in cats. With the
exception of the Newfoundland, almost all cases recorded
have been in male dogs.
Silica urolithiasis
Silica uroliths are uncommon. They have a characteristic
jackstone appearance, are relatively radiodense and are
less soluble in acid urine. There may be a link between
dietary ingredients (notably corn gluten feed and soybean
hulls) and silica urolith formation. Most affected dogs are
male.
Struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate) urolithiasis
Struvite uroliths are relatively common in cats and dogs.
Previously considered the most common type of urolith.
several reports have suggested that calcium oxalate is now
more common (Ling et al. 2003, Picavet et al. 2007). They
are generally radiodense, smooth, round or faceted stones.
Most struvite uroliths are infection induced in the dog, and
since females are predisposed to urinary tract infections
this may explain the strong female predisposition seen.
Alkaline urine favours their formation. Struvite uroliths are
also seen more commonly in female and neutered cats.
Urate urolithiasis
Urate uroliths are the thirdmost commonurolith in the dog
after calcium oxalate and struvite accounting for
965
approximately 8% of canine uroliths. They are relatively
radiolucent and usually found as multiple, small, smooth.
round or oval stones of brown green colour. They tend to
form more in acid urine. Dalmatians are predisposed to the
development of urate uroliths because of a reduced
capacity to convert uric acid to allantoin in the liver,
leading to high levels of urinary uric acid excretion.
Animals with hepatic  portal  vascular anomalies are
predisposed to urate uroliths, owing to the reduced hepatic
ability to convert ammonia to urea and uric acid to
allantoin, leading to increased urinary excretion of these
substances.
REPRODUCTIVECONDITIONS
Cryptorchidism
A failure of one or both testes to descend into the scrotum
The undescended testis may be found in the inguinal canal
or abdomen. Cryptorchidism may be unilateral (in which
case the right testis is more commonly affected in the dog)
or bilateral. Smaller breeds of dog seem to have a higher
risk. The risk of testicular neoplasia is higher (reported as
9.2-13.6 times) in retained testes.
Cystic  endometrial  hyperplasia  -  pyometra  complex
(pyometra)
Accumulation of purulent fluid in the uterus, usually in
dioestrus. Clinical signs include inappetance, polyuria/
polydipsia, vomiting and a vulval discharge if the cervix is
open.
966
Dystocia
Dystocia can be defined as a difficulty or an inability in
giving birth. It may result fromawide range of maternal or
foetal factors. In dogs, brachycephalic breeds are
predisposed due to a combination of a narrow maternal
pelvis and a large foetal head and shoulders. Small nervous
breeds may be predisposed due to a tendency
to
psychological inhibition and primary uterine inertia.
Pedigree cats are at higher risk than mixed breed cats, with
dolicocephalic and brachycephalic types at greater risk
than mesocephalic.
Eclampsia (puerperal tetany)
Depletion   of
extracellular  calcium
resulting  in
hypocalcaemia. Symptoms include nervousness, panting.
restlessness, tremors and finally seizures. It is most
common within 6 weeks of parturition when demand for
milk is great. It can affect any breed but is most common
in small breeds.
Hypospadias
See under Renal and urinary conditions.
Male pseudohermaphrodite syndrome
A pseudohermaphrodite is an individual  in whom the
chromosomal and gonadal sex agree, but the phenotypic
sex is reversed. Therefore, a male pseudohermaphrodite
has both an X and a Y chromosome, testes (usually
967
undescended) and female genitalia. Persistent Mullerian
duct syndrome is an inherited form seen in Miniature
Schnauzers.
Persistent penile frenulum
A thin band of connective tissue which persists beyond
birth connecting the ventral glans penis to the prepuce or
body of the penis. Symptoms include abnormal urination,
excessive licking of penis and reduced libido.
Priapism
Persistent and painful erection. Has been seen in neutered
as well as entire cats.
Prostatic carcinoma
See under Neoplastic conditions.
Testicular neoplasia
Testicular neoplasia is common in the dog. There are three
main tumour types: sertoli cell tumour, seminoma and
interstitial (Leydig) cell tumour. They may be unilateral or
or both testes. Neoplasia occurs more commonly in
retained than descended testes; an increased risk of 13.6
times has been reported (Hayes & Pendergrass 1976).
Urethral prolapse
See under Renal and urinary conditions.
968
Vaginal hyperplasia/vaginal prolapse
Vaginal hyperplasia is an exaggerated response of the
vaginal mucosa to normal circulating oestrogen during
proestrus or oestrus.  Vaginal oedema and thickening
occurs and may result in a degree of vaginal prolapse.
Young large breed and brachycephalic bitches are most
commonly affected.
XX sex reversal
Sex reversal refers to the situationwhere the chromosomal
and phenotypic sex do not agree. In XX sex reversal a
phenotypic male is chromosomally a female. The
condition occurs as an autosomal recessive trait in the
American cocker spaniel, and it has also been reported in a
number of other breeds including the Beagle, German
shorthaired Pointer, Kerry Blue Terrier andNorwegian
Elkhound.
RESPIRATORY CONDITIONS
Agenesis of the nares
collapse.Dyspnoea, mouth breathing and snoring are seen.
Aspergillosis (see plate 31 in the colour plate section and
figure 24)
This fungal infection causes chronic nasal discharge. See
also under Infectious conditions.
969
Brachycephalic upper airway syndrome
This term is used to describe a group of anatomical
brachycephalic breeds. These deformities include stenotic
nares, laryngeal deformities and hypoplastic trachea. The
clinical signs are of upper airway obstruction and
secondary complications; concurrent conditions such as
laryngeal oedema and bronchopneumonia can occur in
severely affected dogs.
Bronchiectasis
This is a dilatation of the bronchi, occurring as a
complication of chronic bronchitis or bronchopneumonia.
The changes are irreversible once present.
Figure 24 Nasal aspergillosis in a 2-year-old female Jack
Russell Terrier. The right side of the nose shows loss of
the turbinate pattern, increased radiodensity due to exudate
and some punctate lucencies caudally
970
lgi9
Bronchial cartilage hypoplasia
971
This condition presents early in life, usually causing severe
respiratory distress.
Chylothorax
This condition is quite common. Clinical signs are the
same as for other pleural effusions, dyspnoea being
especially common.
Collapsed trachea
This condition can occur in young dogs with a severe form
of the condition, or later in life in those less severely
affected. Clinical signs include coughing and inspiratory
stridor.Acharacteristic ^goose-honk' cough may be heard
Congenital bronchoesophageal fistula
This is a rare congenital communication between the
bronchi and the oesophagus.
Feline asthma
Also known as feline bronchitis, allergic bronchitis. This
condition can present withmild, chronic or acute, severe
signs.Coughing and dyspnoea are seen.
Hypoplastic trachea
This is part of the brachycephalic upper airway syndrome
Laryngeal paralysis
972
This condition is usually idiopathic, but may be related to
generalized  myopathies
Sor  neuropathies. Stridor,
aggravated by excitement and exercise, is the main clinical
sign, although severe cases may progress to cyanosis and
collapse.
Lung lobe torsion
This rare condition is more common in large, deep-chested
breeds. Presenting signs include dyspnoea and pleural
effusion. There may be an accompanying chylothorax.
Neoplastic conditions)
This disease is due to a proliferation of histiocytic cells.
Respiratory signs, such as cough or respiratory distress, are
seen, as well as anaemia, weight loss and neurological
problems.
Nasal dermoid sinus cyst
This condition causes chronic nasal discharge. Complete
surgical excision leads to a good prognosis.
Nasopharyngeal polyps
These polyps are uncommon but cause chronic respiratory
disease.
Nasopharyngeal stenosis
973
This congenital condition occurs because of abnormally
thickened palatopharyngeal muscles. Clinical signs include
dyspnoea, dysphagia and salivation.
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
In this condition, the mechanism for removing mucus from
the airways is defective, leading to respiratory infections
Other conditions associated with defective ciliary function
include loss of hearing and loss of sperm motility, with
consequent infertility.
Pneumonia due to Pneumocystis carinii
P. carinii is a protozoal organism, an infection which may
result in pneumonia in the presence of immunosuppression
(see  also
umder   Haematological/
immunological
conditions).
Pulmonary interstitial fibrosis
This condition may be secondary to chronic respiratory
disease, leading to the replacement of alveolar walls and
lung interstitium with fibrous tissue. This leads to a
reduced inspiratory capacity. Clinical signs of cough and
exercise intolerance progress slowly
Respiratory distress syndrome
This condition has been reported in related Dalmatians.
Progressive pulmonary failure occurred, leading to death
in 3weeks. No known risk factors for ARDS could be
identified.
974
Spontaneous thymic haemorrhage
This may occur in young dogs at the time of thymic
involution, and may be fatal.
975
References
Abbot, J. (2003) Canine mitral valve disease-current
therapy. In: Proceedings, American College of Veterinary
Internal Medicine Congress.
Abramson, C.J., Platt, S.R., Jakobs, C., et al. (2003)
1-2-Hydroxyglutaric aciduria in Staffordshire Bull Terriers.
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 17, 551-6.
Acland,  G.M. & Aguirre,  G.D. (1987) Retinal
degenerations in the dog: IV. Early retinal degeneration
(erd)  in   Norwegian  elkhounds.   Experimental   Eye
Research, 44 (4), 491-521.
Acland, G.M., Blanton, S.H.,Herschfield, B., et al. (1994)
XLPRS: a canine retinal degeneration inherited as an
X-linked trait. American Journal of Medical Genetics, 52
(1), 27-33.
ACVO Genetics Committee (2007) Ocular disorders
presumed to be inherited in Purebred Dogs 5th edition
Adamama-Moraitou, K.K., Patsikas, M.N. & Koutinas,
A.F. (2004) Feline lower airway disease: a retrospective
study of 22 naturally occurring cases from Greece. Journal
of Feline Medicine and Surgery, 6, 227-33.
Adkins, E.A. & Hendrix, D.V.H. (2005) Outcomes of dogs
presented for cataract evaluation: a retrospective study.
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 41
(4), 235-40.
976
Affolter,  V.K.  (2004) Cutaneous  vasculitis  and
vasculopathy. In: Proceedings, World Small Animal
Veterinary Association World Congress.
Affolter, V.K. & Moore, P.F. (2002) Localised and
disseminated histiocytic sarcoma of dendritic cell origin in
dogs. Veterinary Pathology, 39 (1), 74-83.
Aguirre, A.L., Center, S.A., Randolph, JF., et al. (2007)
Gallbladder disease in Shetland Sheepdogs: 38 cases
(1995-2005). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 231, 79-88
Aguirre, G.D. & Rubin, L.F. (1975) Rod-cone dysplasia
(progressive retinal atrophy) in Irish Setters. Journal of the
157-64.
Ahman, S., Perrins, N. & Bond, R. (2007) Carriage
ofMalassezia spp. yeasts in healthy and seborrhoeic Devon
Rex cats. Medical Mycology, 45, 449-55
Alam, M.R., Lee, J.I., Kang, H.S., et al. (2007) Frequency
and distribution of patellar luxation in dogs. 134 cases
Comparative
Orthopaedics and Traumatology, 20, 59-64.
Aldrich, J., Ling, G.V.， Ruby, A.L.， et al. (1997)
Silica-containing urinary calculi in dogs (1981-1993).
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 11 (5), 288-95.
Alenza, D.P., Arenas, C., Lopez, M.L., et al. (2006)
Long-term efficacy of trilostane administered twice daily
977
in  dogs  with  pituitary-dependent  hyperadrenocorticism.
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 42
(4),269-76.
Allan, F.J., Thompson, K.G., Jones, B.R., et al. (1996)
  sis    a do
Collies. New Zealand Veterinary Journal, 44, 67-72
Allen, L.S.S. (1985) Skin condition in Yorkshire Terriers.
Canine Practice, 12, 29.
Alroy, J., Rush, JE., Freeman, L., et al. (2000) Inherited
infantile dilated cardiomyopathy in dogs: genetic, clinical,
biochemical, and morphologic findings. American Journal
of Medical Genetics,95,57-66.
Anderson, D.M. & White, R.A.S. (2002) Nasal dermoid
sinus cysts in the dog. Veterinary Surgery, 31, 303-8.
Anderson,M.A., Constantinescu, G.H., Dee, L.G., et al.
(1995a) Fractures and dislocations of the racing
greyhound.  Part I.  The  Compendium of Continuing
Education for the Practicing Veterinarians, 17,779-86.
Anderson,M.A., Constantinescu, G.H., Dee, L.G., et al.
(1995b) Fractures and dislocations of the racing
greyhound. Part II.  The Compendium of Continuing
Education for the Practicing Veterinarians, 17, 899-909.
Angles, JM., Famula, T.R. & Pedersen, N.C. (2005)
Uveodermatologic (VKH-like) syndrome in American
Akita dogs is associated with an increased frequency of
DQA1 *00201. Tissue Antigens, 66 (6), 656-65.
978
Arceneaux, K.A., Taboada, J. & Hosgood, G. (l998)
Blastomycosis in dogs: 115 cases (1980-1995). Journal of
the American Veterinary Medical Association, 213 (5),
658-64.
Arnbjerg, J., Jensen, A.L. & Olesen, A.B. (2007) X-linked
spondylo-epiphyseal  dysplasia
the
Danish-Swedish farm hound. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice, 48, 36-8.
Arnold, S. (1997) Urinary incontinence in castrated
bitches: Part 1: significance, clinical aspects and
etiopathogenesis. Schweizer Archiv fir Tierheilkunde, 139
(6), 271-6.
Aronsohn, M. (1985) Canine thymoma. The Veterinary
Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice, 15 (4),
755-67.
Arthurs, G.I&Langley-Hobbs, S.J. (2006) Complications
associated with corrective surgery for patellar luxation in
109 dogs. Veterinary Surgery, 35, 559-66.
Ashton, N., Barnett, K.C. & Sachs, D.D. (1968) Retinal
dysplasia in the Sealyham terrier. The Journal of
Pathology and Bacteriology, 96 (2), 269-72
Atkins, C.E. (2002) Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: what's
new and relevant in 2002. In: Proceedings, Atlantic Coast
Veterinary Conference.
979
Averill, D.R. & Bronson, R.T. (1977) Inherited necrotizing
myelopathy of Afghan hounds. Journal of Neuropathology
and Experimental Neurology, 36, 73447.
Awano, T., Katz, M.L., O'Brien, D.P., et al. (2006) A
  (s   s   
bulldogs with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.Molecular
Genetics and Metabolism,87 (4), 341-8
Axlund, T.W. (2004) Canine spinal cord disease: the
non-painful diseases. In: Proceedings, Atlantic Coast
Veterinary Conference.
Bagley, R.S. (2005) Clinical features of important and
common diseases involving the intracranial nervous
system of dogs and cats. In: Fundamentals of Veterinary
Neurology, 1st edn (ed Bagley, R.S.), Blackwell
Publishing, Iowa, pp. 119-49.
Baker-Gabb, M., Hunt, G.B. & France,M.P. (2003) Soff
tissue sarcomas and mast cell tumours in dogs: clinical
behaviour and response to surgery. Australian Veterinary
Journal, 81 (12), 732-8
Bannasch, D., Safra, N., Young, A., et al. (2008)
Mutations in the SLC2A9 gene cause hyperuricosuria and
hyperuricemia in the dog. PLoS Genetics, 4 (11),
e1000246.
Bannasch, D.L., Ling, G.V., Bea, J., et al. (2004)
Inheritance of urinary calculi in the Dalmatian. Jourmnal of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 18 (4), 483-7.
980
Baral, R.M., Metcalfe, S.S., Krockenberger, M.B., et al.
(2006). Dissemniated Mycobacterium avium infection in
young cats: overrepresentation of Abyssinian cats. The
Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery, 8 (1), 23-44.
Barnett, K.C. (1978) Diseases of the nictitating membrane
of the dog. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 18,
101-8.
Barnett, K.C. (1979) Imperforate and microlachrymal
puncta in the dog. The Journal of Small Animal Practice,
20 (8), 481-90.
Barnett, K.C. (1980) Hereditary cataract in the Welsh
Springer spaniel. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 21
(11), 621-5.
Barnett, K.C. (1986) Hereditary cataract in the German
Shepherd Dog. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 27
(6), 387-95.
Barnett, K.C. (2006) Congenital keratoconjunctivitis sicca
and ichthyosiformdermatosis in the cavalier King Charles
spaniel. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 47, 5248
Barnhart, K.F., Credille, K.M., Ambrus, A., et al. (2004)
A heritable keratinization defect of the superficial
epidermis in Norfolk terriers. Journal of Comparative
Pathology, 130, 246-54.
Bartges, JW., Osborne,C.A., Lulich, JP., et al. (1994)
Prevalence of cystine and urate uroliths in bulldogs and
981
urate uroliths in dalmations.Jourmnal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 204 (12), 19148.
Barthez, P.Y., Rivier, P. & Begon, D. (2003) Prevalence of
polycystic kidney disease in Persian and Persian-related
cats in France. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery, 5
(6), 345-7.
Bassett,R.J.,Burton,G.G.&Robson,D.C.  (2004)Antibiotic
responsive ulcerative dermatoses in German Shepherd
Dogs   with mucocutaneous 
spyoderma.Australian
Veterinary Journal, 82,485-9.
Basso, C, Fox, P.R., Meurs, K.M., et al. (2004)
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy causing
sudden cardiac death in Boxer dogs. Circulation, 109,
1180-5.
Batchelor, D.J., Noble, P.J., Cripps, P.J., et al. (2007)
Breed associations  for  canine  exocrine  pancreatic
insufficiency. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 21
(2),207-14
Batt, R.M., Barnes, A., Rutgers, H.C., et al. (l991)
Relative  IgA  deficiency  and  small intestinal  bacterial
overgrowth in German shepherd dogs. Research in
Veterinary Science, 50 (1), 106-11.
Batt, R.M., Carter, M.W. & McClean, L. (1984)
Morphological  and  biochemical  studies  of  a  naturally
occurring enteropathy in the Irish Setter dog: a comparison
with coeliac disease in man. Research in Veterinary
Science, 37, 339-46.
982
Batt, R.M. & Hall, E.J. (1989) Chronic enteropathies in the
dog. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 30 (1), 3-12.
Battersby, IA., Giger,U.&Hall,E.J.(2005)
Hyperammonaemic encephalopathy secondary to selective
cobalamin deficiency in a juvenile Border collie. The
Journal of Small Animal Practice, 46 (7), 339-44.
Beachley,M.&Graham, F.H. (1973)Hypochondroplastic
dwarfism (endochondral chondrodystrophy) in a dog
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association,
163,283-4.
Beale, B. (2008) Muscle and tendon injuries in the dog. In:
Proceedings, Western Veterinary Conference.
Beale, K. (2006) Differential diagnosis of facial
dermatoses in dogs. In: Proceedings, British Small Animal
VeterinaryAssociation.
Beardow, A.W. &Buchanan, JW. (1993) Chronic mitral
valve disease in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels: 95 cases
(1987-1991). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 203, 1023-9.
Beatty, J.A., Barrs, V.A.,Martin, P.A., et al. (2002)
   s    
amyloidosis. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 43 (8),
355-63.
Beco, L., Fontaine, J., Gross, T.L., et al. (1996) Colour
dilution in alopecia in seven Dachshunds. A clinical study
983
and the hereditary, microscopical and ultrastructural aspect
of the disease. The Veterinary Record, 7, 91-7.
Bedford, P. (2001) Inherited disease of the canine eye. In:
Conference Proceedings,World Small Animal Veterinary
Association World Congress Proceedings 2001.
Bedford, P.G. (1982a) Collie eye anomaly in the border
collie. The Veterinary Record, 111 (2), 34-5
Bedford, P.G. (1982b) Collie eye anomaly in the United
Kingdom. The Veterinary Record, 111 (12), 263-70
Bedford, P.G. (1982c) Multifocal retinal dysplasia in the
rottweiler. The Veterinary Record, 111 (13), 304-5
Bedford, P.G. (1998) Collie eye anomaly in the Lancashire
heeler. The Veterinary Record, 143 (13), 3546.
Bedford, P.G.C. (1988) Conditions of the eyelids in the
dog. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 29 (7),
416-28
Belanger, M.C., Ouellet, M., Queney, G., et al. (2005)
Taurine-deficient dilated cardiomyopathy in a family of
goldenretrievers.JournaloftheAmericanAnimal
Hospital Association, 41, 284-91.
Belhorn, R.W., Barmett, K.C. & Henkind, P. (1971) Ocular
coloboma in domestic cats. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 159 (8), 1015-21.
984
Bellinger, C.R,Maddison, J.E.,Mac-Pherson, G.C., et al.
(1990) Chronic pyloric gastropathy in 14 dogs. Australian
Veterinary Journal, 67 (9), 317-20.
Bende, B. & Németh, T. (2004) High prevalence of urate
urolithiasis in the Russian black terrier. The Veterinary
Record, 155 (8), 239-40.
Bennett, A.M., Davies, JD., Gaskell, C.J., et al. (1983)
Lobular dissecting hepatitis  in the dog. Veterinary
Pathology, 20 (2), 179-88.
Bennett, P.F., DeNicola, D.B., Bonney, P., et al. (2002)
Canine anal sac adenocarcinomas: clinical presentation
and response to therapy. Journal of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 16 (1), 100-104.
Bentley, E. (2005) Spontaneous chronic cormeal epithelial
defects in dogs: a review. Journal of the American Animal
Hospital Association, 41 (3), 158-65.
Berendt, M., Gullov, C.H., Christensen, S.L., et al. (2008)
Prevalence and characteristics of epilepsy in the Belgian
shepherd variants Groenendael and  Tervueren born  in
Denmark 1995-2004. Acta Veterinaria Scandinavia, 50,
51.
Berent, A.C., Mayhew, P.D. & Porat-Mosenco, Y. (2008)
Use of cystoscopic-guided laser ablation for treatment of
intramural ureteral ectopia in male dogs: four cases
(2006-2007). Journal of theAmerican Veterinary Medical
Association, 232 (7), 1026-34.
985
Berger,B.&Feldman,E.C.(1987)Primary
11)     s
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
191 (3), 350-56.
Bergman, P.J.,Withrow, S.J., Straw, R.C., et al. (1994)
Infiltrative lipoma in dogs: 16 cases (1981-1992). Journal
of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 205 (2),
322-4.
Bergsjo, T., Arnesen, K.,Heim, P., et al. (1984) Congenital
blindness with ocular developmental anomalies, including
retinal dysplasia, in Doberman Pinscher dogs. 184 (11),
1383-6.
Bergstrom, A.,Nodtvedt, A., Lagerstedt, A.S., et al. (2006)
Incidence and breed predilection for dystocia and risk
factors for caesarian section in a Swedish population of
insured dogs. Veterinary Surgery, 35 (8), 786-91.
Bernard, M.A. & Valli, V.E. (1977) Familial renal disease
in Samoyed dogs. The Canadian Veterinary Journal, 18
(7), 181-9.
Berthelin, C.F., Bailey, C.S., Kass, P.H., et al. (1994)
Cryptococcosis of the nervous system of dogs, part 1:
epidemiologic,  clinical and  neuropathologic
 features.
Progress in Veterinary Neurology, 5 (3), 88-97
Bichsel, P., Vandevelde, M., Lang, J., et al. (1983)
Degenerativemyelopathy in a  family  of SiberianHusky
dogs.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Association,183,998-1000.
986
Binder, H., Amold, S., Scherring, C., et al. (2000)
Palmoplantar hyperkeratosis in Irish terriers: evidence of
autosomal recessive inheritance. The Journal of Small
Animal Practice, 41, 52-5.
Bingel, S.A. & Sande, R.D. (1982) Chondrodysplasia in
the NorwegianElkhound.The American Journal of
Pathology, 107, 219-29.
Bingel, S.A.， Sande, R.D.  &Wight, T.N. (l985)
Chondrodysplasia    in
 the
Alaskan
malamute.
Characterization of proteoglycans dissociatively extracted
from dwarf growth plates. Laboratory Investigaions, 53,
479-85.
Birkenheuer, A.J., Correa, M.T., Lew, M.G., et al. (2005)
Geographic distribution of babesiosis among dogs in the
United States and association with dog bites: 150 cases
(2000-2003). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 227 (6), 942-7.
Bishop, L.M., Kelly,  D.F., Gibbs,  C.,  et  al.
(1979)Megaoesophagus and associated gastric heterotopia
in the cat. Veterinary Pathology, 16 (4), 444-9
Bishop, M.A., Steiner, JM., Moore, L.E., et al. (2004)
Evaluation of the cationic trypsinogen gene for potential
mutations in miniature schnauzers with pancreatitis.
Canadian Journal of Veterinary Research, 68 (4), 315-8
Bistner, S.I., Aguirre, G. & Shively, JN. (1976) Hereditary
corneal dystrophy in the Manx cat: a preliminary report.
Investigative Ophthalmology, 15 (1), 15-26
987
Bjerkas, E. &Haaland, M.B. (1995) Pulverulant nuclear
cataract in the Norwegian Buhund. The Journal of Small
Animal Practice, 36 (11), 471-4.
Bjerkas, E. & Narfstrom, K. (1994) Progressive retinal
atrophy in the Tibetan spaniel in Norway and Sweden. The
Veterinary Record, 134 (15), 377-9.
Bley, T., Gaillard, C., Bilzer, T., et al. (2002) Genetic
aspects of Labrador Retriever myopathy. Research in
Veterinary Science, 73, 231-6.
Boerno, C.M. & Eaton-Wells, R.D. (1995) Medial
displacement of the tendon of origin of the biceps brachii
muscle in 10 greyhounds. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice, 36, 69-73.
Boevé, M.H., Van Der Linde-Sipman, T. & Stades, F.C
(1988)  Earlymorphogenesis  of  persistent  hyperplastic
tunica vasculosa lentis and primary vitreous. The dog as an
ontogenetic model. Investigative Ophthalmology and
Visual Science, 29 (7), 1076-86.
Bohn, A.A., Wills, T. & Calpazi, P. (2006) Basal cell
tumour    or   cutaneous    basilar   epithelial   neoplasm?
Rethinking the diagnosis of basal cell tumors. Veterinary
Clinical Pathology, 35 (4), 449-53
Berendt, M., Gullov, C.H., Christensen, S.L., et al. (2008)
Prevalence and characteristics of epilepsy in the Belgian
shepherd variants Groenendael and  Tervueren bonm in
Denmark 1995-2004. Acta Veterinaria Scandinavia, 50,
51.
988
Berent, A.C., Mayhew, P.D. & Porat-Mosenco, Y. (2008)
Use of cystoscopic-guided laser ablation for treatment of
intramural ureteral ectopia in male dogs: four cases
(2006-2007). Journal of theAmerican Veterinary Medical
Association, 232 (7), 1026-34.
Berger, B.&Feldman,E.C.(1987)Primary
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
191 (3), 350-56.
Bergman, P.J.,Withrow, S.J., Straw, R.C., et al. (1994)
Infiltrative lipoma in dogs: 16 cases (1981-1992). Journal
of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 205 (2),
322-4.
Bergsjo, T., Arnesen, K.,Heim, P., et al. (1984) Congenital
blindness with ocular developmental anomalies, including
retinal dysplasia, in Doberman Pinscher dogs. 184 (11),
1383-6.
Bergstrom, A.,Nodtvedt, A., Lagerstedt, A.S., et al. (2006)
Incidence and breed predilection for dystocia and risk
factors for caesarian section in a Swedish population of
insured dogs. Veterinary Surgery, 35 (8), 786-91.
Bernard, M.A. & Valli, V.E. (1977) Familial renal disease
in Samoyed dogs. The Canadian Veterinary Journal, 18
(7), 181-9.
Berthelin, C.F., Bailey, C.S., Kass, P.H., et al. (1994)
  'so   s   io
989
epidemiologic, clinical and neuropathologic 
features
Progress in Veterinary Neurology, 5 (3), 88-97.
Bichsel, P., Vandevelde, M., Lang, J., et al. (1983)
Degenerativemyelopathy  in  a  family  of SiberianHusky
dogs.Journal oftheAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Association, 183, 998-1000.
Binder, H., Amold, S., Scherring, C., et al. (2000)
Palmoplantar hyperkeratosis in Irish terriers: evidence of
autosomal recessive inheritance. The Journal of Small
Animal Practice, 41, 52-5.
Bingel, S.A. & Sande, R.D. (1982) Chondrodysplasia in
the Norwegian Elkhound. The American Journal of
Pathology, 107, 219-29.
Bingel, S.A., Sande, R.D. &Wight, T.N. (1985)
Chondrodysplasia    in   the 
 Alaskan malamute.
Characterization of proteoglycans dissociatively extracted
from dwarf growth plates. Laboratory Investigaions, 53,
479-85.
Birkenheuer, A.J., Correa, M.T., Lew, M.G., et al. (2005)
Geographic distribution of babesiosis among dogs in the
United States and association with dog bites: 150 cases
(2000-2003). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 227 (6), 942-7.
Bishop, L.M.,  Kelly,  D.F.， Gibbs, C.， et al.
(1979)Megaoesophagus and associated gastric heterotopia
in the cat. Veterinary Pathology, 16 (4), 444-9)
990
Bishop, M.A., Steiner, JM., Moore, L.E., et al. (2004)
Evaluation of the cationic trypsinogen gene for potential
mutations in miniature schnauzers with pancreatitis
Canadian Journal of Veterinary Research, 68 (4), 315-8
Bistner, S.I., Aguirre, G. & Shively, J.N. (1976) Hereditary
cormeal dystrophy in the Manx cat: a preliminary report.
Investigative Ophthalmology, 15 (1), 15-26.
Bjerkas, E. &Haaland, M.B. (1995) Pulverulant nuclear
cataract in the Norwegian Buhund. The Journal of Small
Animal Practice, 36 (11), 471-4.
Bjerkas, E. & Narfstrom, K. (1994) Progressive retinal
atrophy in the Tibetan spaniel in Norway and Sweden. The
Veterinary Record, 134 (15), 377-9.
Bley, T., Gaillard, C., Bilzer, T., et al. (2002) Genetic
aspects of Labrador Retriever myopathy. Research in
Veterinary Science, 73, 231-6.
Boerno, C.M. & Eaton-Wells, R.D. (1995) Medial
displacement of the tendon of origin of the biceps brachii
muscle in 10 greyhounds. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice, 36, 69-73.
Boevé, M.H., Van Der Linde-Sipman, T. & Stades, F.C
(1988)  Earlymorphogenesis  of  persistent  hyperplastic
tunica vasculosa lentis and primary vitreous. The dog as an
ontogenetic model. Investigative Ophthalmology and
Visual Science, 29 (7), 1076-86
991
Bohn, A.A., Wills, T. & Calpazi, P. (2006) Basal cell
tumour or cutaneous basilar  epithelial  neoplasm?
Rethinking the diagnosis of basal cell tumors. Veterinary
Clinical Pathology, 35 (4), 449-53.
Bonagura, J.D. (2001) Chronic valvular heart disease in
dogs. In: Proceedings,World Small Animal Veterinary
Association World Congress
Bonagura, J.D. & Lehmkuhl, L.B. (1999) Congenital heart
disease. In: Textbook of Canine and Feline Cardiology,
2nd edn (eds Fox, P.R., Sisson, D. & Moise, N.S.), WB
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 471-535.
Boozer, L. &Macintire, D. (2005) Babesia gibsoni: an
emerging pathogen in dogs. The Compendium on
Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian, 27
(1), 33-42.
Borgarelli, M., Santilli, R.A., Chiavegata, D., et al. (2006)
Prognostic　 indicators 　 for  dogs with dilated
cardiomyopathy. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
20,104-10.
Bosie, J.T., Van Den Ingh, T.S. & Van Der Linde-Sipman,
JS. (1998) Polycystic liver and kidney disease in cats.
Veterinary Quarterly, 20 (4), 136-9.
Bovee, K.C., Joyce, T., Reynolds, R., et al. (1978) The
fanconi syndrome in Basenji dogs: a new model for renal
tubular defects. Science, 201 (4361), 1129-31
992
Bowles, M.K. & Mosier, D.H. (1992) Renal amyloidosis
in a family of beagles. Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 201 (4), 569-74.
Boyce, JT., DiBartola, S.P., Chew, D.J., et al. (1984)
Familial renal amyloidosis in Abyssinian cats. Veterinary
Pathology, 21 (1), 33-8.
golden retriever. The Journal of Small Animal Practice,
36, 382-4.
Braund, K.G., Shores, A., Cochrane, S., et al. (1994)
Laryngeal  paralysis-polyneuropathy  complex  in  young
Dalmatians. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 55,
534-52.
Braund, K.G., Shores, A., Lowrie, C.T., et al. (1997)
Idiopathic polyneuropathy in Alaskan malamutes. Journal
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 11, 243-9.
Brennan, K.E. & Ihrke, P.J. (1983) Grass awn migration in
dogs and cats: a retrospective study of 182 cases. Journal
of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 182,
1201-4.
Brenner, O., De Lahunta, A., Summers, B.A., et al. (1997)
Cattle dog. Acta Neuropathologica, 94, 54-66.
Breur, G.J., Zerbe, C.A., Slocombe, R.F., et al. (1989)
Clinical, radiographic, pathologic, and genetic features of
osteochondrodysplasia in Scottish deerhounds. Journal of
993
the American VeterinaryMedical Association, 195,
606-12.
Bridle, K.H. & Littlewood, J.D. (1998) Tail tip necrosis in
two litters of Birman kittens. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice, 39 (2), 88-9.
Brockman, D.J., Washabau, R.J. & Drobatz, K.J. (1995)
Canine gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome in a veterinary
critical care unit: 295 cases (1986-1992). Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association, 207 (4),
460-464.
Brodey, R.S. & Kelly, D.F. (1968) Thyroid neoplasms in
the dog. A clinicopathologic study of fifty-seven cases.
Cancer, 22 (2), 406-16.
Brooks,M. (1999)Areview of canine inherited bleeding
disorders: biochemical andmolecular strategies for disease
characterization and carrier detection. Journal of Heredity,
90, 112-8.
Brown, N., Patnaik, A. & MacEwen, E.G. (1985) Canine
haemangiosarcoma: retrospective analysis of 104 cases.
Journal of theAmericanVeterinaryMedical Association,
186, 56-8.
Bruce, D. (2001) Cryptorchidism in cats. The Veterinary
Record, 149 (7), 220.
Bruyette, D.s. &Feldman, E.C. (1988) Primary
hypoparathyroidism in the dog: report of 15 cases and
994
review  of 13 previously  reported  cases. Journal of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 2 (1), 7-14.
Bryden, S.L., White, S.D., Dunston, S.M., et al. (2005)
Clinical,  histopathological
and
immunological
characteristic of exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus
in   25  German short-haired pointers. Veterinary
Dermatology, 16, 239-52.
Buchanan, JW. (l963) Peristent left cranial vena cava in
dogs: angiocardiography, significance, and coexisting
anomalies.Journalof theAmericanVeterinary
Radiological Society, 4, 1.
Buchanan, JW. (1999) Prevalence of cardiovascular
disorders.In: Textbook of Canine and Feline Cardiology,
2nd edn (eds Fox, P.R., Sisson, D. & Moise, N.S.),WB
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 457-70.
Buchanan, JW. (2004) Tracheal signs and associated
vascular anomalies in dogs with persistent right aortic
arch. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 18, 510-14.
Buchanan, JW., Beardow, A.W. & Sammarco, C.D
(1997) Femoral artery occlusion in Cavalier King Charles
Spaniels. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 211, 872-4.
Burbidge, H.M. (1995) A review of laryngeal paralysis in
dogs. British Veterinary Journal, 151, 71-82.
Bureau, S., Monet, E. & Orton, E.C. (2005) Evaluation of
survival rate and prognostic indicators for surgical
995
treatment of left-to-right patent ductus arteriosus in dogs:
52 cases (1995-2003). Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 227,1794-9
Burkert, B.A., Kerwin, S.C., Hosgood, G.L., et al. (2005)
dogs: 513 cases (1980-2001). Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 227, 268-75
Burkett, G. (2000) Skin diseases in greyhounds. Veterinary
Medicine, 95,115-24.
Burms, M.S., Bellhorn, R.W., Impellizzeri, C.W., et al.
(1988) Development of hereditary tapetal degeneration in
the beagle dog. Current Eye Research, 7 (2), 103-14.
Burrows, C.F.&Ignaszewski, L.A. (1990) Canine gastric
dilatation-volvulus. The Journal of SmallAnimal Practice,
31 (10), 495-501.
Butterworth, S. & Cook, JL. (2006) The shoulder. In:
BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Musculoskeletal
Disorders (eds Houlton, J.E.F., Cook, JL., Innes, J.F., et
al.), British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
Gloucester, pp. 212-48.
Cairo, J., Font, J., Gorraiz, J., et al. (1999) Intestinal
volvulus in dogs: a study of four clinical cases. The
Journal ofSmall Animal Practice, 40 (3), 136-40
Callan,M.B.,Washabau, R.J., Saunders, H.M., et al. (1993)
Congenital oesophageal  hiatal  hermia  in  the  Chinese
996
Shar-pei dog. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7
(4), 210-15.
Callanan, J.J.,Mooney, C.T.,Mulcahy, G., et al. (2002) A
novel nonsuppurativemeningoencephalitis in
young greyhounds in Ireland. Veterinary Pathology, 39,
56-65
Cameron, JM., Maj, M.C., Levandovskiy, V., et al. (2007)
Identification    of   a   canine  model of   pyruvate
dehydrogenase   phosphatase   1  deficiency.  Molecular
Genetics and Metabolism, 90, 15-23.
Cameron, M.E., Casey, R.A., Bradshaw, JW.S., et al.
(2004) A study of environmental and behavioural factors
that may be associated with feline idiopathic cystitis. The
Journal of Small Animal Practice, 45 (3), 144-7.
Canier, P., Gallo, L., Sturaro, E., et al. (2004) Prevalence
of spondylosis deformans and estimates of genetic
parameters for the degree of osteophytes development in
Italian Boxer dogs. Journal of Animal Science, 82, 85-92.
Cannizzo, K.L., McLoughlin, M.A., Mattoon, J.S., et al.
(2003) Evaluation of transurethral cystoscopy and
excretory urography for diagnosis of ectopic ureters in
female dogs: 25 cases (1992-2000). Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association,223 (4),
475-81.
Cannon, A.B., Westropp, JL., Ruby, A.L., et al. (2007)
Evaluation of trends in urolith composition in cats: 5230
997
cases
(1985-2004).JournaloftheAmerican
VeterinaryMedical Association, 231(4), 570-76
Cannon, M.J., Mackay, A.D., Barr, F.J., et al. (2001)
Prevalence of polycystic kidney disease in Persian cats in
the United Kingdom. The Veterinary Record, 149 (14),
409-11.
Carlotti, D. (2001) Malassezia dermatitis in the dog. In:
Proceedings, World Small Animal Veterinary Association
World Congress.
Carpenter, JL.,Myers, A.M., Connor, M.W., et al. (1988)
Tuberculosis in five basset hounds. Journal of the
AmericanVeterinary Medical Association,192 (11),
1563-8.
Carrig, C.B., Sponenberg,D.P., Schmidt,G.M., et al.
(1988).  Inheritance of associated ocular and skeletal
dysplasia in Labrador retrievers. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 193 (10), 1269-72.
Casal, M.L., Giger,U., Bovee, K.C., et al. (l995)
Inheritance
of
cystinuria
and
renal
defect
inNewfoundlands. Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 207 (12), 1585-9.
Casal, M.L., Straumann, U. & Sigg, C. (1994) Congenital
hypotrichosis with thymic aplasia in nine Birman kittens.
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 30,
600-602.
998
Case, L.C., Ling, G.V., Franti, C.E., et al. (1992)
Cystine-containing urinary calculi in dogs: 102 cases
(1981-1989). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 201 (1), 129-33.
Castellano, M.C., Idiart, JR., Ruager, J., et al. (2000)
Generalised nodular dermatofibrosis  and  cystic renal
disease in five German Shepherd dogs. Canine Practice,
25 (2), 18-21.
Catchpole, B., Ristic, JM., Freeman, L.M., et al. (2005)
Canine diabetes mellitus: can old dogs teach us new tricks?
Diabetologica, 48 (10), 1948-56.
Caywood, D.D., Klausner, J.S., O'Leary, T.P., et al. (1988)
Pancreatic insulin-secreting neoplasms:clinical, diagnostic
and prognostic features in 73 dogs. Journal of the
American Animal Hospital Assosciation,24(5),577-84.
Center, S.A. (1996) Hepatic vascular diseases. In:
Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology, 3rd edn (eds
Guilford,W.C., Center, S., Strombeck, D., et al.),WB
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 802-46.
Cerundolo R., Mauldin E.A., Goldschmidt M.H., et al.
(2005) Adult-onset hair loss in Chesapeake Bay retrievers:
a clinical and histological study. Veterinary Dermatology,
16,39-46.
Cerundolo, R., Lloyd, D.H., McNeil, P., et al. (2000) An
analysis of factors underlying hypotrichosis and alopecia
in Irish Water Spaniels in the United Kingdom. Veterinary
Dermatology, 11, 107-22.
999
Cetinkava, M.A., Yardimki, C. & Saglam, M. (2007)
Carpal laxity syndrome in forty-three puppies. Veterinary
and Comparative Orthopaedics and Traumatology,20
126-30.
Chahory, S., Crasta, M., Trio, S., et al. (2004) Three cases
of prolapse of the nictitans gland in cats. Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 7 (6), 417-9.
Chandler, J.C. & MacPhail, C.M. (2001) Congenital
urethrorectal fistulas. The Compendium on Continuing
Education for the Practcing Veterinarian, 23 (11),
995-1002.
Chase, K., Sargan, D., Miller, K., et al.(2006)
Understanding the genetics of autoimmune disease: two
loci that regulate late onset Addison's disease in Portugese
Water Dogs. International Journal of Immunogenetics, 33
(3), 179-84.
Chastain, C.B., Panciera, D. & Waters, C. (l999)
Associations between age, parity, hormonal therapy and
breed, and pyometra in Finnish dogs. Small Animal
Clinical Endocrinology, 9 (2), 18.
Chastain, C.B., Panciera, D.  &Waters, C. (2001)
Eclampsia in dogs: 31 cases (1995-1998). Small Animal
Clinical Endocrinology, 11 (1), 9.
Chastain,
C.B.&Swayne,D.E.
(1985)Congenital
hypotrichosis inmale basset hound littermates. Journal of
the American Veterinary Medical Association, 187, 845-6.
1000
Chastain, C.B., Turk, M.A. & O'Brien, D. (1988) Benign
cutaneous mastocytomas in two litters of Siamese kittens.
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
193 (8), 959-60.
Chaudieu,  G. &Molon-Noblot,  S. (2004) Early
retinopathy in the Bernese Mountian Dog in France:
preliminary observations. Veterinary Ophthalmology, 7
(3), 175-84.
Chavkin, M.J., Roberts, S.M., Salman, M.D., et al. (1994)
Risk factors for the development of chronic superficial
keratitis
in
dogs.
Journal
of
theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
204 (10),
1630-34.
Chen, X., Johnson, G.S., Schnabel, R.D., et al. (2008) A
neonatal encephalopathy with seizures in standard poodle
dogs with a missense mutation in the canine ortholog of
ATF2. Neurogenetics, 9, 41-9.
Chetboul, V., Trolle, JM., Nicolle, A., et al. (2006)
Congenital heart diseases in the Boxer dog: a retrospective
studyof105
5cases(1998-2005).Journal
of
VeterinaryMedicine A,Physiology,Pathology and Clinical
Medicine, 53,346-51.
Chew, D.J., DiBartola, S.P., Boyce, J.T., et al. (1983)
Juvenile renal disease in Doberman Pinscher dogs. Journa!
of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 182 (5)
481-5.
1001
Chieffo, C., Stalis, IH., Winkle, T.J., et al. (1994)
Cerebellar Purkinje's cell degeneration and coat colour
dilution in a family of Rhodesian Ridgeback dogs. Journal
of Internal Veterinary Medicine, 8, 112-6.
Churcher,R.K.&Watson,A.D. (1997) Canine histiocytic
ulcerative colitis.AustralianVeterinary Journal, 75 (10),
710-13.
Ciekot, P.A., Powers, B.E.,Withrow, S.J., et al.
(1994)Histologically lowgrade yet biologically high grade
fibrosarcomas of the mandible and maxilla in dogs: 25
cases (1982-1991). Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 204 (4), 610-15.
Clements, D.N., Gear, R.N.A., Tattersall, J., et al. (2004)
Type I immune-mediated polyarthritis in dogs: 39 cases
(1997-2002). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 224, 1323-7.
Clemmons, R. M. (1992) Degenerative myelopathy. The
VeterinaryClinicsofNorthAmerica.Small Animal
Practice, 22, 965-71.
Clinkenbeard, K.D., Wolf, A.M., Cowell, R.L., et al.
(1989)   Canine    disseminated    histoplasmosis.  The
CompendiumonContinuingEducationforthe
PracticingVeterinarian, 11 (11), 1347-1351, 1354-1357,
1360.
Coates, JR., O'Brien, D.P., Kline, K.L., et al. (2002)
Neonatal cerebellar ataxia in Coton de Tulear dogs.
Journal ofVeterinary Internal Medicine,16,680-89
1002
Cole, L.K. (2002) Canine and feline pinnal diseases. In:
Proceedings, Western Veterinary Conference 2002
Collier, L.L., Bryan, G.M. & Prieur, D.J. (1979) Ocular
manifestations of the Chediak-Higashi syndrome in four
species of animals. Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 175 (6), 587-90.
Collins,B.K.,Collier, L.L., Johnson,G.S., et al. (1992)
Familial cataracts  andconcurrent  ocular  anomalies   in
Chow Chows. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 200 (10), 1485-91.
Cooley, P.L. & Dice, P.F. II. (1990) Cormeal dystrophy in
the dog and cat. The Veterinary Clinics of North America.
Small Animal Practice, 20 (3), 681-92.
Cooper, B.J., Valentine, B.A., Wilson, S., et al. (1988)
Canine muscular dystrophy:  confirmation  of  X-linked
inheritance. Journal of Heredity, 79, 405-8.
Coopman, F., Verhoeven, G., Saunders, J., et al. (2008)
Prevalence of hip dysplasia, elbow dysplasia and humeral
head osteochondrosis in dog breeds in Belgium. The
Veterinary Record, 22, 654-8.
Corcoran, B.M., Cobb, M., Martin, M.W., et al. (1999)
Chronic pulmonary  disease  in West  Highland  white
terriers. The Veterinary Record, 144, 611-6.
Corcoran, K.A. & Koch, S.A. (1993) Uveal cysts in dogs:
28 cases (1989-1991). Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 203 (4), 545-6
1003
Cordy, D.R. & Holliday, T.A. (1989) A necrotizing
meningoencephalitis of pug dogs. Veterinary Pathology,
26, 191-4.
Cork, L.C., Price, D.L., Griffin, JW., et al. (1990)
Hereditary canine spinal muscular atrophy: canine motor
neuron disease. Canadian Journal of Veterinary Research,
54, 77-82.
Cottrell, B.D. & Barnett, K.C. (1988) Primary glaucoma in
the Welsh Springer Spaniel. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice,29, 185-99.
Cowan, L.A., Hertzke, D.M., Fenwick, B.W., et al. (1997)
Clinical and clinicopathologic abnormalities in greyhounds
with cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy: 18
cases (1992-1994). Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 210, 789-93.
Cowan, S., Bartges, JW. & Gompf, R.E. (2004) Giant
platelet disorder in the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel.
Experimental Haematology, 32, 344-50.
Cox, N.R., Brawner, W.R. Jr., Powers R.D., et al. (1991)
Tumors of the nose and paranasal sinuses in cats: 32 cases
with comparison to a national database (1977 through
1987). Journal of the American Animal Hospital
Association, 27 (3), 339-47.
Cox, R.H., Peterson, L.H. & Detweiler, D.K. (1976)
Comparison of arterial hemodynamics in the mongrel dog
and  the racing greyhound. American Journal of
Physiology, 230, 211-8.
1004
Cox,  V.S.,Wallace,  L.J.,  Anderson,  V.E.,  et  al.
(1980)Hereditary esophageal dysfunction in theminiature
schnauzer dog. American Journal of Veterinary Research,
41 (3), 326-30.
Cox, V.S.,Wallace, L.J. & Jessen, C.R. (1978) An
anatomic and genetic study of canine cryptorchidism.
Teratology, 18 (2), 233-40.
Crawford, M.A., Schall, W.D., Jensen. R.K., et al. (1985)
Chronic  active  hepatitis  in  26  Doberman  pinschers.
Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
187 (12), 1343-50.
Crews, L.J., Feeney, D.A., Jessen, C.R., et al. (2008)
Radiographic   findings  in  dogs   with    pulmonary
blastomycosis 125 cases (1989-2006). Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association,232 (2),
215-22.
Cribb, A.E. (1988) Feline gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma:
a review and retrospective study. The Canadian Veterinary
Journal, 29 (9), 709-12.
Crispin, S.M. (1988) Cystalline corneal dystrophy in the
dog. Histochemical and ultrastructural study. Cornea, 7
(2), 149-61.
Crumlish, P.T., Sweeney, T., Jones, B., et al. (2006)
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy in the Weimaraner dog: lack
of association between DQAl alleles of the canine MHC
and hypertrophic osteodystrophy. Veterinary Journal, 171,
308-13.
1005
Cuddon, P.A. (2002a) Canine and feline neuropathies-Part
I1. In: Proceedings, Western Veterinary Conference.
Cuddon, P.A. (2002b) Acute lower motor neuron
tetraplegias.  In: Proceedings,  Western  Veterinary
Conference.
Cummings, JF.,De Lahunta, A., Braund, K.G., et al.
(1983)Hereditary sensory neuropathy.Nociceptive loss and
acral mutilation in pointer dogs: canine hereditary sensory
neuropathy. American Journal of Pathology, 112, 136-8.
Cummings, JF., Summers, B.A., De Lahunta, A., et al.
(1986) Tremors in Samoyed pups with oligodendrocyte
deficiencies and hypomyelination. Acta Neuropathologica
(Berlin), 71, 267-77.
Cunningham, J.G. & Farnbach, G.C. (1988) Inheritance
and idiopathic canine epilepsy. Journal of the American
Animal Hospital Association, 24, 421-24.
Curtis, R. & Barnett, K.C. (1980) Primary lens luxation in
the dog. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 21,
657-68.
Curtis, R. &Barnett, K.C.(1983) The “blue-eye
phenomenon. The Veterinary Record, 112 (15), 347-53
Curtis, R. & Barmett, K.C. (1989) A survey of cataracts in
golden and labrador retrievers. The Journal of Small
Animal Practice, 30 (5), 277-86
1006
Curtis, R. & Barnett, K.C. (1993) Progressive retinal
atrophy in miniature longhaired dachschund dogs. The
British Veterinary Journal, 149 (1), 71-85.
Curtis, R., Barnett, K.C. & Leon, A. (1987) An early onset
retinal dystrophy with dominant inheritance in the
Abyssinian  cat.  Clinical   and   pathological   findings.
Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 28 (1)
131-9.
Curtis, R., Barnett, K.C. & Startup, F.G. (1983) Primary
lens luxation in the miniature bull terrier. The Veterinary
Record, 112 (14), 328-30.
D'Anna, N., Sapienza, J.S., Guandalini, A., et al. (2007)
Use of a dermal biopsy punch for removal of ectopic cilia
in dogs: 19 cases. Veterinary Ophthalmology, 10 (1), 65-7.
Dambach, D.M., Lannon, A., Sleeper, M.M., et al. (1999)
Familial (
 dilated  cardiomyopathy
of
young
PortugueseWater dogs.Jourmalof VeterinaryInternal
Medicine, 13, 65-71.
Damur-Djuric, N., Steffen, F., Hassig, M., et al. (2006)
Lumbosacral transitional vertebrae in dogs: classification,
prevalence, and associated with sacroiliac morphology.
Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound,47,32-8.
Darke, P.G.G. (1989) Congenital heart disease in dogs and
cats. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 30, 599-607.
Davidson, A.G., Bell, E.J., Lees, G.E., et al. (2007)
Genetic causes  of  autosomal  recessive hereditary
1007
Veterinary InternalMedicine, 21 (3), 394 401.
Davidson, A.P., Pollard, R.E., Bannasch, D.L., et al.
(2004)  Inheritance  of cricopharyngeal  dysfunction in
GoldenRetrievers.AmericanJournalofVeterinary
Research, 65 (3), 344-9.
Davidson, B.J., Paling, A.C., Lahmers, S.L., et al. (2008)
Disease  association  and  clinical  assessment  of  feline
pericardial effusion.Journal of the American Animal
Hospital Association, 44, 5-9.
Davies, C. & Troy, G.C. (1996) Deepmycotic infections in
cats.Journalofthe AmericanAnimal
Hospital
Association, 32, 380-91.
Davies, D.R.&Irwin,  P.J. (2003) Degenerative
neurological  and  neuromuscular  disease  in  young
rottweilers. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 44,
388-94.
Day, M.J. (1997) Review of thymic pathology in 30 cats
and 36 dogs. The Journal ofSmall Animal Practice, 38 (9),
393-403.
Day,  M.J.  (2002)  Immunodeficiency
disease.
In:
Proceedings,Western Veterinary Conference.
Day，
M.J.
(2006a)
 Canine
breed-specific
immunodeficiency  syndrome presenting  as respiratory
disease. In:Proceedings,l6th European College of
1008
Veterinary
InternalMedicine-Companion
Animal
Conference.
Day, M.J. (2006b) Canine disseminated aspergillosis. In:
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edn (ed Green,
C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, pp. 620-26.
De Lahunta, A., Ingram, J.T., Cummings, JF., et al. (1994)
Labrador retriever  central axonopathy. Progress  in
Veterinary Neurology, 5, 117-22.
deMorais, H.S., DiBartola, S.P. & Chew, D.J. (1996)
Juvenile renal disease in golden retrievers: 12 cases
(1984-1994). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 209 (4), 792-7.
Dean, P.W., Bojrab, M.J. & Constantinescu, G.M. (1988)
Canine ectopic ureter. The Compendium on Continuing
Education for the Practcing Veterinarian, 10 (2), 146-57.
Deehr,  A.J.  (1998)  Ahistopathological study of
iridociliary cysts and glaucoma in Golden Retrievers.
Progress inVeterinary and Comparative Ophthalmology,
1 (2), 153-8.
Deforest, M.E. & Basrur, P.K. (1979) Malformations and
the Manx syndrome in cats. The Canadian Veterinary
Journal, 20 (11), 304-14
Degen, M. (1987) Pseudohyperkalemia in Akitas. Journa!
of theAmerican VeterinaryMedicalAssociation,190,541-3.
1009
Dekomien, G., Runte, M., Godde, R., et al. (2000)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy of Sloughi dogs is
due to an 8-bp insertion in exon 21 of the PDE6B gene.
Cytogenetics and Cell Genetics, 90 (3-4), 261-7.
Del Palacio, JF. (2002) Congenital heart diseases: Part I.
In:Proceedings,World
Association Congress.
Denerolle, P., Bourdoiseau, G.,Magnol, J.-P., et al. (1998)
German Shepherd Dog pyoderma: a prospective study of
23 cases. Veterinary Dermatology, 9, 243-48.
Der Lugt, J.J., Venter, IJ., van Rensburg, IB.J., et al.
(1996) Multiple congenital eye anomalies in bloodhound
Ophthalmology, 6 (1), 9-13.
Dewey, C.W. (2003a) Encephalopathies: disorders of the
brain. In: A Practical Guide to Canine and Feline
Neurology (ed Dewey, C.W.), Blackwells, Iowa, pp.
99-178.
Dewey, C.W. (2003b) Myelopathies: disorders of the
spinal cord. In: A Practical Guide to Canine and Feline
Neurology (ed Dewey, C.W.), Blackwells, Iowa, pp.
277-336.
DiBartola, S.P., Hill, R.L., Fechheimer, N.S., et al. (1986)
Pedigree analysis of  Abyssinian  cats with  familial
amyloidosis. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 47
(12), 2666-8.
1010
DiBartola, S.P., Tarr,M.J. & Benson,M.D. (1986) Tissue
distribution of amyloid deposits in Abyssinian cats with
familial amyloidosis. Journal of Comparative Pathology,
96 (4), 387-98.
DiBartola, S.P., Tarr, M.J., Parker, A.T., et al. (1989)
Clinicopathologic findings in dogs with renal amyloidosis:
59 cases (1976-1986). Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 195 (3), 358-64.
DiBartola, S.P., Tarr, M.J., Webb, D.M., et al. (1990)
Familial renal amyloidosis in Chinese Shar Pei dogs.
Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
197 (4), 483-7.
Dice, P.F. (1984) Corneal dystrophy in the Shetland
sheepdog.Transactions of the American College
Veterinary Opthamology, 15, 241-2.
Dice, P.F. II. (1980) Progressive retinal atrophy in the
Samoyed. Modern Veterinary Practice, 61 (1), 59-60.
Dickie, A.M., Schwarz, T. & Sullivan, M. (2002)
Temporomandibular joint morphology in Cavalier King
Charles Spaniels. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound,
43, 260-66.
Dickinson, P.J., Sturges, B.K., Shelton, G.D., et al. (2005)
Congenital myasthenia gravis in Smooth-Haired Miniature
Dachshund dogs.Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
19,920-23
1011
Diters, R.W. &Walsh, K.M. (1984) Feline basal cell
tumors: a review of 124 cases. Veterinary Pathology, 21
(1), 51-6.
Dodds, W.J. (2005) Bleeding disorders in animals. In:
Proceedings,World Small Animal Veterinary Association
World Congress.
Dole, R.S. & Spurgeon, T.L. (1998) Frequency of
supernumerary teeth in a dolichocephalic canine breed, the
greyhound. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 59,
16-7.
Donaldson, D., Sansom, J., Scase, T., et al. (2006) Canine
limbal melanoma: 30 cases (1992-2004) Part 1.
Signalment, clinical and histological features and pedigree
analysis. Veterinary Ophthalmology, 9 (2), 115-9
Dorn, C.R. & Priester,W.A. (1976) Epidemiologic analysis
of oral and pharyngeal cancer in dogs, cats, horses and
cattle.Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Association, 169 (11), 1202-6.
Dowling, P. (2006) Pharmacogenetics: it's not just about
ivermectin in collies. Canadian Veterinary Journal, 47,
1165-68.
Dueland, R.T.,Wagner S.D. & Parker, R.B. (1990)
von Willebrand   heterotopic   osteochondrofibrosis    n
Doberman pinschers: five cases (1980-1987). Journal of
theAmerican VeterinaryMedical Association,197(3),
383-8.
1012
Dugan, S.J., Ketring, K.L., Severin, G.A., et al. (1993)
Variant nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis in four
dogs.JournaloftheAmericanAnimalHospital
Association, 29 (5), 403-9.
Duncan, A.W., Marr, H.S., Birkenheuer, A.J., et al. (2008)
Bartonella DNA in the blood and lymph nodes of Golden
Retrievers  with Lymphoma and in healthy  controls.
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 22 (1), 89-95
Dupla, JB. (2002) Diseases of the esophagus. In:
Conference proceedings,World Small AnimalVeterinary
Association Congress 2002.
Duval, J.M., Budsberg, S.C., Flo, G.L., et al. (1999) Breed,
sex, and body weight as risk factors for rupture of the
cranial cruciate ligament in young dogs. Journal of the
American Veterinary MedicalAssociation,215,811-4
Eaton, K.A., Biller, D.S., DiBartola, S.P., et al. (1997)
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease in Persian
and Persian-cross cats. Veterinary Pathology, 34 (2),
117-26.
Eaton-Wells, R. (2006) The distal limb. In: BSAVAManual
ofCanineandFelineMusculoskeletalDisorders(eds
Houlton, JE.F., Cook, JL., Innes, JF., et al.), British
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Gloucester, pp.
292-308.
Edmonds, L., Stewart, R.W. & Selby, L. (1972) Cleft lip
and palate in Boston terrier pups. Veterinary Medicine and
Small Animal Clinician,67,1219-22
1013
Edwards, D.S., Henley, W.E., Harding, E.F., et al. (2003)
Breed incidence of lymphoma in a UKpopulation of
insured dogs. Veterinary and Comparative Oncology, 1
(4), 200-206.
Egenvall, A.,Hagman, R., Bonnett, B.N., et al. (200l)
Breed risk of pyometra in insured dogs in Sweden. Journal
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 15 (6), 530-38
Egenvall, A., Nodtvedt, A. & von Euler, H. (2007) Bone
soop qspamspansu ooooot go uogendod e un snoum
up to 10 years of age: incidence and survival. Canadian
Journal of Veterinary Research, 71 (4), 292-9.
Ekesten, B. & Torrang, I. (1995) Heritability of the depth
of the opening of the ciliary cleft in Samoyeds. American
Journal of Veterinary Research, 56 (9), 1138-43.
Ekstrand, C. & Linde-Forsburg, C. (1994) Dystocia in the
cat: a retrospective study of 155 cases. The Journal of
Small Animal Practice, 35 (9), 459-64.
Elkins, A.D. (2004) Perineal hernias: surgical and medical
management.
In:  Proceedings,  Western  Veterinary
Conference.
Ellinwood, N.M., Wang, P., Skeen, T., et al. (2003) A
model of   mucopolysaccharidosis   IHIB   (Sanfilippo
syndrome type IHIB): N-acetyl-alpha-D-glucosaminidase
deficiency in Schipperke dogs. Journal of Inherited
Metabolic Disease, 26, 489-504.
1014
Ellison, G.W. (2004) Portosystemic shunts in cats. In:
Proceedings, Western Veterinary Conference 2004.
Eneroth, A., Linde-Forsberg, C., Uhlhorn, M., et al. (1999)
Radiographic pelvimetry for assessment of dystocia in
bitches: a clinical study in two terrier breeds. The Journal
of Small Animal Practice, 40 (6), 257-64.
Engstrom, D. (1966). Tyrosinase deficiency in the Chow
       
R.W.),WB Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 352.
Erdman, C. (2005) Feline inherited facial defect linkage
analysis. In: Proceedings, Tufts' Canine and Feline
Breeding and Genetics Conference.
Eriksen, K. & Grondalen, J. (1984) Familial renal disease
in soft-coated Wheaten Terriers. The Journal of Small
Animal Practice, 25 (8), 489-500
Estrada, K. (2002) Ivermectin toxicity. In: Proceedings,
AmericanCollegeofVeterinaryInternalMedicine
Conference.
Fabrizio, F., Baumwart, R., Iazbik, M.C., et al. (2006) Left
basilar systolic murmur in retired racing greyhounds.
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 20, 78-82.
Fall, T.,Hamlin, H.H.,Hedhammar, A.,et al.(2007)
Diabetes mellitus in a population of 180,0o0 insured dogs:
incidence, survival and breed distribution. Journal of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 21 (6), 1209-16.
1015
Famula, T.R., Belanger, JM. & Oberbauer, A.M. (2003)
Heritability  and   complex   segregation   analysis   of
hypoadrenocorticism in the standard poodle. The Journal
of Small Animal Practice, 44 (1), 8-12.
Featherstone, H.J. & Sansom, J. (2004) Feline corneal
sequestra: a review of 64 cases (80 eyes) from 1993 to
2000. Veterinary Ophthalmology, 7 (4), 213-27.
Feldman, E.C. & Nelson, R.W. (1996) Canine and Feline
Endocrinology and Reproduction, 2nd edn, WB Saunders,
Philadelphia.
Giddens, W.E., Labbe, R.F., Swango, LJ., et al. (1975).
Feline congenital erythropoietic porphyria associated with
severe anemia and renal disease. Clinical, morphologic,
and biochemical studies. American Journal of Pathology,
80,367-86.
Ferguson, E.A., Cerundolo, R., Lloyd, D.H., et al. (2000)
Dermatomyositis in five Shetland sheepdogs in the United
Kingdom. The Veterinary Record, 146, 214-7.
Ferm, K.,Bjornerfeldt, S.,Karlsson, A., et al. (2009)
Prevalence of diagnostic characteristics indicating canine
autoimmune thyroiditis in giant schnauzer and hovawart
dogs. The Journal ofSmall Animal Practice, 50 (4), 176-9.
Finco, D.R., Duncan, JD., Crowell, W.A., et al. (1977)
Familial renal disease in Norwegian Elkhound dogs:
morphologic  examinations.  American Journal  of
Veterinary Research, 38 (7), 941-7.
1016
Firm, I. (2002) Epidemiological study of myxomatous
valvular disease-a retrospective study of 195 cases. In:
Proceedings, World Small Animal Veterinary Association
Congress.
Flagstad, A. (1989) Congenital myasthenic syndrome in
the dog breed Gammel Dansk Honsehund. An animal
model for research  in   neuromuscular disorders
Scandinavian Journal of Laboratory Animal Science, 16,
89-9.
Flatland, B.,Moore, R.R.,Wolf, C.M., et al. (2007) Liver
Pathology, 36 (1), 105-8.
Fluehmann, G., Doherr, M.G. & Jaggy, A. (2006) Canine
neurological  diseases  in  a  referral  hospital  population
between 1989 and 2000 in Switzerland. The Journal of
Small Animal Practice, 47, 582-7.
Foley, JE. & Pedersen, N.C. (1996) The inheritance of
susceptibility to feline infectious peritonitis in purebred
catteries. Feline Practice, 24 (1), 14-22.
Fonda, D., Gualtieri, M. & Scanziani, E. (1989) Gastric
carcinoma in the dog: a clinicopathological study of 11
cases. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 30 (6),
353-60.
Forcada, Y., Guitian, J. & Gibson, G. (2007) Frequencies
of feline blood types at a referral hospital in the south east
of England.The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 48,
570-573.
1017
Fordyce, H.H., Callan,M.B. & Giger, U. (2000) Persistent
cobalamin deficiency causing failure to thrive in a juvenile
beagle. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 41 (9),
407-10.
Fossum, T.W. (1988) The characteristics and treatments of
feline chylothorax. Veterinary Medicine, 83, 914-28.
Fossum, T.W., Birchard, S.J. & Jacobs, R.M. (1986)
Chylothorax in 34 dogs.Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 188, 1315-8.
Foster, S.J., Curtis, R. & Barnett, K.C. (1986) Primary lens
luxation in the Border Collie. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice, 27 (1), 1-6.
Fourmel, C., Chabanne, L., Caux, C., et al. (1992) Canine
systemic lupus erythematosus. I. A study of 75 cases.
Lupus, 1, 133-9.
Fox, P. R. (1999) Feline cardiomyopathies. In: Textbook of
Canine and Feline Cardiology, 2nd edn (eds Fox, P.R.,
Sisson, D. & Moise, N.S.),WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp.
621-78
Franklin, R.J., Jeffrey, N.D. & Ramsey, I. K. (1995)
Neuroaxonal dystrophy in a litter of papillon pups.The
Journal of Small Animal Practice, 36, 441-4.
Fuentes, V.L. (2003)Which heart disease inwhich breed?
In: Proceedings, Western Veterinary Conference.
1018
Fyfe, J.C., Giger, U., Hall, C.A., et al. (1991) Inherited
selective    intestinal   cobalamin    malabsorption   and
cobalamin deficiency in dogs. Pediatric Research, 29 (1),
24-31.
Fyfe, JC., Kampschmidt, K., Dang, V., et al. (2003)
Congenital hypothyroidism with goitre in toy fox terriers.
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 17 (1), 50-57.
Gabor, L.J.,Malik, R. & Canfield, P.J. (1998) Clinical and
anatomical features of lymphosarcoma in 118 cats.
Australian Veterinary Journal, 76 (11), 725-32.
Garden, O.A., Pidduck, H., Lakhani, K.H., et al. (2000)
Inheritance of gluten-sensitive enteropathy in Irish Setters.
American Journal of Veterinary Research, 61 (4), 462-8
Garosi, L.S., Rossmeisl, J.H., de Lahunta, A., et al. (2005)
Primary orthostatic tremor in Great Danes. Journal of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 19, 606-9.
Gaudet, A.D. (1985) Retrospective study of 128 cases of
canine dystocia. Journal of the American Animal Hospital
Association, 21, 813-8.
Gaynor, A.R., Shofer, F.S. & Washabau, R.J. (1997) Risk
factors for acquired megaoesophagus in dogs. Journal of
the American Veterinary Medical Association, 211 (11),
1406-12.
Gelatt, K.N. & Gum, G.G. (1981) Inheritance of primary
glaucoma in the beagle. American Journal of Veterinary
Research, 42 (10), 1691-3.
1019
Gelatt, K.N. &Mackay, E.O. (2004a) Prevalence of
breed-related glaucomas in pure-bred dogs in North
America. Veterinary Ophthalmology, 7 (2), 97-111.
Gelatt, K.N. & MacKay, E.O. (2004b) Secondary
glaucomas in the dog in North America. Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 7 (4), 245-59.
Gelatt, K.N. & Mackay, E.O. (2005) Prevalence of
breed-related cataracts in the dog in North America.
Veterinary Ophthalmology, 8(2), 101-11.
Gelatt, K.N. (2007) Veterinary Ophthalmology, 4th edn,
Blackwell Publishing, Oxford, UK. Gelatt, K.N., Powell,
N.G. & Huston, K. (1981) Inheritance of microphthalmia
with coloboma in the Australian shepherd dog. American
Journal of Veterinary Research, 42 (10), 1686-90.
Gelatt, K.N., Samuelson, D.A., Barrie, K.P., et al. (1983)
Biometry  and   clinical   characteristics   of   congenital
cataracts and microphthalmia in theMiniature Schnauzer
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
183 (1), 99-102.
Gelatt, K.N., Samuelson, D.A., Bauer, J.E., et al. (1983)
Inheritance of congenital cataracts and microphthalmia in
the Miniature Schnauzer. American Journal of Veterinary
Research, 44 (6), 1130-32.
Gelatt, K.N., Wallace, M.R., Andrew, S.E., et al. (2003)
Cataracts in the Bichon Frise. Veterinary Ophthalmology,
6 (1), 3-9.
1020
Gelatt, K.N., Whitley, R.D., Lavach, JD., et al. (1979)
Cataracts in Chesapeake Bay Retrievers. Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association, 175 (11),
1176-8.
Gelzer, A.R.M., Moise, N.S. & Koller, M.L. (2005)
Defibrillation  of German  Shepherds  with   inherited
ventricular arrhythmias  and  sudden death.  Journal  of
Veterinary Cardiology, 7, 97-107.
Genevois, J-P., Remy, D., Viguier, E., et al. (2008)
Prevalence of hip dysplasia according  to official
radiographic screening, among 31 breeds of dogs in
France.Veterinary and Comparative Orthopaedics and
Traumatology, 21, 21-4.
German,A.J.,Hall,
E.J.,Kelly,D.F.,
et
al.
(2000a)Animmunohistochemical  study   of   histiocytic
ulcerative colitis in boxer dogs. Journal of Comparative
Pathology, 122 (2-3), 163-75.
German, A.J., Helps, C.R., Hall, E.J., et al. (2000b)
Cytokine mRNA expression in mucosal biopsies from
German shepherd dogs with small intestinal enteropathies.
Digestive Diseases and Sciences, 45 (1), 7-17.
Giger,U. (2002) Feline anemias-a diagnostic challenge. In:
Proceedings,WorldSmall AnimalVeterinary Congress
Giger, U. (2003) Hereditary blood disorders. In:
Proceedings,World Small Animal Veterinary World
Congress.
1021
Giger,U. (2008) Focus on hereditary diseases&genetic
predispositions: clinical &laboratory diagnostic approach
to hereditary diseases. In: Proceedings, American College
of Veterinary Internal Medicine Congress.
Giger, U., Bucheler, J. & Patterson, D.F. (1991) Frequency
and inheritance of A and B blood types in feline breeds of
the United States. Journal of Heredity, 82, 15-20
Giger, U., Wang, P. & Boyden, M. (1999) Familial
methemoglobin reductase deficiency in domestic shorthair
cats. Feline Practice Supplement, 31, 14
Ginel, P.J., Lopez, R., Rivas, R., et al. (1995) A further
case of medoxyprogesterone acetate associated with
calcinosis  circumscripta  in  the dog.  The Veterinary
Record, 136, 44-5.
Gionfriddo, JR. & Powell, C. (2005) A greyhound with
red eyes. Veterinary Medicine, 100 (4), 2648.
Giuliano, E.A. & Van Der Woerdt, A. (1999) Feline retinal
(1994-1997). Journal of the American Animal Hospital
Association, 35 (6), 511-4.
Glickman, L.T., Domanski, L.M., Patronek, G.J., et al.
(1985) Breed-related risk factors for canine parvovirus
enteritis. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 187 (6), 589-94.
Glickman, L.T., Glickman, N.W., Perez, C.M., et al.
(1994) Analysis of risk factors for gastric dilatation and
1022
dilatation-volvulus in dogs. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 204 (9), 1465-71.
Goebel,H.H.，Bilzer,T.，
Dahme, 
E., et  al.
(1988)Morphological   studies  in canine  (Dalmatian)
neuronal  ceroid-lipofuscinosis.   American  Journal of
Medical Genetics, 5, 127-39
Goldschmidt. 
M.H.&Mcmanus,P．
(2000)
Dermatopathology. Skin Tumors of the Dog and Cat on
http://cal. vet.upenn.edu/projects/derm/index.html
(accessed on 25 May 2009).
Goldschmidt, M.H.& Shofer,F.S.(1992) Skin Tumours of
the Dog and Cat, 1st edn, Pergamon Press, Oxford, UK
Goldstein, R.E., Atwater, D.Z., Cazolli, D.M., et al. (2007)
Inheritance, mode of inheritance, and candidate genes for
primary hyperparathyroidism in Keeshonden. Journal of
Veterinary InternalMedicine, 21 (1), 199-203.
Gomez, S.M., Morris, D.O., Rosenbaum, MR., et al.
(2004). Outcome and  complications associated   with
treatment of pemphigus foliaceous in dogs: 43 cases
(1994-2000). Journal of the AmericanVeterinary Medical
Association,224,1312-16.
Goodrich, K.R., Kyles, A.E., Kass, P.H., et al. (2007)
Retrospective
comparison    of
surgical 
ligation
andtransarterial catheter occlusion for treatment of patent
ductus arteriosus in two hundred and four dogs
(1993-2003) Veterinary Surgery, 36,43-9.
1023
Grahn, B.H., Philibert, H., Cullen, C.L., et al. (1998)
Multifocal retinopathy of Great Pyrenees dogs. Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 1 (4), 211-21.
Grahn, B.H., Sandmeyer, L.S. & Breaux, C.B. (2006)
Multifocal bullous retinopathy of coton de Tulear dogs.
The Canadian Veterinary Journal, 47 (9), 929-30.
Grahn, B.H., Storey, E.S. & McMillan, C. (2004) Inherited
retinal  dysplasia  and  persistent  hyperplastic  primary
vitreous  in  Miniature  Schnauzer  dogs.   Veterinary
Ophthalmology,7 (3), 151-8.
Gray,
 JM.,Kirberger,R.M&Spotswood,T.C.
(2003)
Cervical spondylomyelopathy (wobbler syndrome) in the
Boerboel.JournaloftheSouthAfricanVeterinary
Association, 74, 104-10.
Greco,  D.S. (2002) Diagnosis  and  treatment of
hypothyroidism in dogs. In: Conference proceedings,
Atlantic Coast Veterinary Conference 2002.
Greenfield, C.L., Messick, JB., Solter, P.F., et al. (1999)
Leukopenia in 6 healthy Belgian Tervuren. Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association, 215 (8),
1121-2.
Gregory, B.L., Shelton, G.D., Bali, D.S., et al. (2007)
Glycogen storage disease  type IHla in curly-coated
retrievers. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 21.
40-46.
1024
Gross, T.L., Pascal-Tenorio, A.,Munn, R.J., et al. (1997)
Follicularlipidosisinthree Rottweilers.Veterinary
Dermatology, 8, 33-9.
Gualtieri, M.,Monzeglio,M.G. & Scanziani, E. (l999)
Gastric neoplasia. The Veterinary Clinics of North
America.Small Animal Practice, 29 (2), 415-40
Guilford, W.G.&Strombeck,D.P.
(1996a)Acute
haemorrhagic enteropathy/haemorrhagic gastroenteritis:
HGE.In:Strombecks Small Animal Gastroenterology,3rd
edn (edGuilford, W.G.), WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp.
433-5.
Guilford,W.G.&Strombeck,D.P.
(1996b) Idiopathic
inflammatory bowel diseases.  In: Strombecks Small
Animal Gastroenterology, 3rd edn (ed Guilford,W.G.),WB
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 477-80.
Guillard, M. (2007) Central tarsal bone fracture in the
Border Collie. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 48,
414-7.
Guillot, J., Bensignor, E., Jankowski, F., et al. (2003)
Comparative  efficacies of  oral ketoconazole  and
terbinafine for reducing Malassezia population sizes on the
skin of Basset Hounds. Veterinary Dermatology, 14,
153-7.
Gunby, JM., Hardie, R.J. & Bjorling, D.E. (2004)
Investigation of the potential heritability of persistent right
aortic arch in Greyhounds. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 224 (7), 1120-22
1025
Gunn-Moore, D.A. & Crispin, S.M. (1998) Unusual ocular
condition in young Burmese cats. The Veterinary Record,
142, 376.
Gunn-Moore, D.A. & Thrusfield, M.V. (1995) Feline
dystocia:  prevalence   and   association  with  cranial
conformation and breed. The Veterinary Record, 136 (14),
350-53.
Gunn-Moore, D.A. (2003) Feline lower urinary tract
disease. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery, 5
(2), 133-8.
Gunn-Moore, D.A., Brown, P.J., Holt, P.E., et al. (1995)
Priapism in seven cats. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice, 36 (6), 262-6.
Gunn-Moore, D.A., Dodkin, S.J. & Sparkes, A.H. (2002)
An unexpected high prevalence of azotemia in Birman
cats. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery, 4 (3),
165-6.
Gunn-Moore,D.A.,McCann, T.M., Reed,N., et al. (2007)
Prevalence of Tritrichomonas foetus infection in cats with
diarrhoea in the UK.Journal of Feline Medicine and
Surgery, 9 (3), 214-8.
Hall, J. (2000) Diseases of the stomach. In: Textbook of
Veterinary InternalMedicine, Vol 2, 5th edn (eds Etinger,
S.J. & Feldman, E.C.), WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp.
1154-77.
1026
Hall, J.A. (2005) Congenital and hereditary defects in skin
disease. In: Proceedings, Western Veterinary Conference.
Hamor, R.E., Roberts, S.M., Severin, G.A., et al. (2000)
Evaluation of results for Schirmer tear tests conducted
with and without application of a topical anesthetic in
clinically normal dogs of 5 breeds. American Journal of
Veterinary Research, 61, 1422-5.
Hampson, E.C.G.M., Smith, R.IE. & Bermays, M.E
(2002) Primary glaucoma in Burmese cats. Australian
Veterinary Journal, 80 (11), 672-80.
Harari, J., Patterson, JS. & Rosenthal, R.C. (1986)
Clinical and pathologic features of thyroid tumours in 26
dogs.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Association, 188 (10), 1160-64.
Harnevik, L., Hoppe, A. & Soderkvist, P. (2006) SLC7A9
cDNA cloning and nutritional analysis of SLC3Al amnd
SLC7A9 in canine cystinuria. Mammalian Genome, 17 (7),
769-76
Harpster, N.K. (2002) Subvalvular aortic stenosis. In:
Proceedings,Tufts Animal Expo
Harrington M.L., Bagley, R.S. & Moore, M.P. (1996)
Hydrocephalus. The Veterinary Clinics of North America.
Small Animal Practice, 26, 843-56
Harrus, S., Waner, T. Aizenberg, N., et al. (2002)
Development of hypertrophic osteodystrophy and antibody
1027
response in a litter of vaccinatedWeimaraner puppies. The
Journal of Small Animal Practice, 43, 27-31.
Harvey, C.E. (1989) Inherited and congenital airway
conditions. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 30,
184-7.
Harvey, JW. (2006) Pathogenesis, laboratory diagnosis.
andclinicalimplications of  erythrocyte enzyme
deficiencies in dogs, cats, and horses. Veterinary Clinical
Pathology, 35, 144-56.
Harvey, R.G. (1998) Feline alopecia: a problem-oriented
approach to diagnosis. In: Proceedings, Waltham Feline
MedicineSymposium.
Haupt, K.H., Prieur, D.J., Hargis, A.M., et al. (1985)
Familial canine
 dermatomyositis:  clinicopathologic,
immunologic and serologic studies. American Journal of
Veterinary Research, 46, 1870-875.
Havig, M.E., Cormell, K.K., Hawthorne, J.C., et al. (2005)
Evaluation  of  nonsurgical  treatment   of  atlantoaxial
subluxation in dogs: 19 cases (1992-2001). Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association, 227, 257-62
Hawkins, E.C. (2006) Canine and feline pulmonary
fibrosis. In: Proceedings, 16th European College of
Internal Medicine-Companion Animal Congress.
Hawkins,E.C., Basseches, J., Berry, C.R., et al.
(2003)Demographic, clinical, and radiographic features of
bronchiectasis in dogs: 316 cases (1988-2000). Journal of
1028
theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
223,
1628-35.
Hayes, H.M.Jr.(l974)Ectopic ureterin
dogs:
epidemiologic features. Teratology, 10 (2), 129-32.
Hayes, H.M. Jr. (1984) Breed associations of canine
ectopic ureter: a study of 217 female cases. The Journal of
Small Animal Practice, 25 (8), 501-4.
Hayes H.M. Jr., Milne, K.L. & Mandell, C.P. (1981)
Epidemiological features of feline mammary carcinoma.
The Vetrinary Record, 108 (22), 476-9.
Hayes, H.M. Jr. & Pendergrass, T.W. (1976) Canine
testicular tumours and epidemiologic features of 410 dogs.
International Journal of Cancer, 18 (4), 482-7.
Hayes, H.M. & Wilson, G.P. (1977) Hormone-dependent
neoplasms of the canine perianal gland. Cancer Research,
37 (7 pt 1), 2068-71.
Hayes, H.M. Jr. & Wilson, G.P. (1986) Hospital incidence
of hypospadias in dogs in North America. The Veterinary
Record, 118 (22), 605-7.
Hayes, H.M. Jr., Wilson, G.P. & Fraumeni, H.F. Jr. (1982)
Carcinoma of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses in
dogs: descriptive epidemiology. The Cornell Veterinarian,
72 (2), 168-79.
Hayes, HM. Jr., Wilson, G.P., Pendergrass, T.W., et al.
(1985) Canine cryptorchidism and subsequent testicular
1029
neoplasia: a case-control study with epidemiology update
Teratology, 32 (1), 51-6.
Haywood, S., Rutgers, H.C. & Christian, M.K. (1988)
Hepatitis and  copper  accumulation  in  Skye  terriers.
Veterinary Pathology, 25 (6), 408-14.
Heath, S.E. & Rusbridge, C. (2007) Feline hyperaesthesia
syndrome and orofacial pain in Burmese. In: Proceedings,
EuropeanSociety of Feline Medicine Congress.
Hedlund, C.S. (2003) Brachycephalic upper airway
syndrome.  In:  Proceedings,  Western   Veterinary
Conference.
Heinrich, C.L., Lakhani, K.H., Featherstone, H.J., et al.
(2006) Cataract in the UK Leonberger population.
Veterinary Ophthalmology, 9 (5), 350-56.
Heitmann, M., Hamann, H., Brahm, R., et al. (2005)
Analysis of prevalence of presumed inherited eye disease
in Entlebucher Mountain dogs.Veterinary Ophthalmology,
8 (3), 145-51.
Hellyer, P.W. (2005) Anaesthetic premedications. In:
Proceedings, Western Veterinary Conference.
Hendy-Ibbs, P.M. (1985) Familai feline epibulbar
dermoids. The Veterinary Record, 116 (1), 13-4
Henke, D., Bottcher, P., Doherr, M.G., et al. (2008)
Computer-assisted    magnetic    resonance   imaging
brainmorphometry in American Staffordshire Terriers with
1030
cerebellar cortical degeneration. Journal of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 22,969-75.
Henry, C.J., Brewer,W.G. Jr.,Whitley, E.M., et al. (2005)
Canine digital tumors: a veterinary cooperative oncology
group retrospective study of 64 dogs. Journal of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 19 (5), 720-24.
Herrera, H.D.,Weischler, N., Gomez, JR., et al. (2007)
Severe, unilateral, unresponsive keratoconjunctivitis sicca
in16 juvenille  Yorkshire  Terriers.
Ophthalmology, 10 (5), 285-8.
Hess, R.S., Kass, P.H., Shofer, F.S., et al. (1992)
Evaluation of risk factors for fatal acute pancreatitis in
dogs.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Association, 214 (1), 46-51.
Hess, R.S., Kass, P.H. & Ward, C.R. (2000) Breed
distribution of dogs with diabetes mellitus admitted to a
tertiary care facility. Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 216 (9), 1414-7.
Higgins,R.J., 
Dickinson,P.J.,Kube,  S.A.,  et  al.
(2008)Necrotising meningoencephalitis infive Chihuahua
dogs. Veterinary Pathology, 45, 336-46
Higgins, R.J., LeCouteur, R.A., Kornegay, JN., et al.
(1998)
 Late-onset   progressive
spinocerebellar
degeneration  in    Brittany
Spaniel   dogs.  Acta
Neuropathologica, 96, 97-101.
1031
Hinchcliff, K.W. (2002) Exercise physiology in sled dogs.
In: Proceedings, American College of Veterinary Internal
Medicine Conference.
Hirsch, V.M. & Cunningham, T.A. (1984) Hereditary
anomaly of  neutrophil  granulation  in Birman  cats.
American Journal of Veterinary Research, 45, 2170-74
Hnilica, K.A. (2003) "New" feline skin diseases. In:
Proceedings,WesternVeterinaryConference.
Hoffmann, G., Van Den Ingh, T.S.G.A.M, Bode, P., et al.
(2006) Copper-associated chronic hepatitis in Labrador
Retrievers. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 20
(4), 856-61.
Hogan,D.F. (2002) Diagnosis of congenital heart disease.
In: Proceedings, American College of Veterinary Internal
Medicine Conference.
Hohenhaus, A. (2008) Canine coagulopathies: approach
and diagnosis. In: Proceedings, Atlantic Coast Veterinary
Conference.
Holle, D.M., Stankovics, M.E., Sarma, C.S., et al. (1999)
The geographic formof retinal dysplasia in dogs is not
always  a   congenital
 abnormality.
Ophthalmology, 2 (1), 61-6.
Hollmer, M., Willesen, JL., Jensen, A.T., et al. (2008)
Aortic stenosis in the Dogue de Bordeaux. The Journal of
Small Animal Practice, 49, 432-7.
1032
Holm,  B.R.，  Rest, JR.  &  Seewald,W. (2004)A
prospective study of the clinical findings, treatment and
histopathology of 44 cases of pyotraumatic dermatitis.
Veterinary Dermatology,15,369-76.
Holm, K.S., Morris, D.O., Gomez, S.M., et al. (1999)
Eosinophilic dermatitis with edema in ninedogs, compared
with eosinophilic cellulitis in humans. Journal of the
AmericanVeterinary MedicalAssociation,215,649-52
Holmstom, S. (2001) Recognising oral disease. In:
Proceedings,World Small Animal Veterinary Association
Congress.
Holt, P.E. & Moore, A.H. (1995) Canine ureteral ectopia:
an analysis of 175 cases and comparison of surgical
treatments. The Veterinary Record, 136 (14), 345-9.
Holt, P.E. & Thrusfield, M.V. (1993) Association in
bitches between breed, size, neutering and docking, and
acquired urinary incontinence due to incompetence of the
urethral sphincter mechanism. The Veterinary Record, 133
(8),177-80.
Hood, JC., Dowling, J., Bertram, JF., et al. (2002a)
Correlation  of  histopathological  features   and renal
impairment in autosomal  dominant  Alport syndrome in
Bull Terriers. Nephrology, Dialysis, Transplantation, 17
(11), 1897-1908.
Hood, JC.,Huxtable,C.,Naito, I., et al. (2002b)Anovel
model of autosomal dominant Alport syndrome in
1033
Dalmatian dogs. Nephrology, Dialysis, Transplantation, 17
(12), 2094-8.
Hoppe, A., Swenson, L., Jonsson, L., et al. (l990)
Progressive nephropathy due to renal dysplasia in Shih
Tzu dogs in Sweden: a clinical pathological and genetic
study.The Journal of Small Animal Practice,31 (2),
83-91.
Hoppe, F. & Svalastoga, E. (1980) Temporomandibular
dysplasia in American Cocker Spaniels. The Journal of
Small Animal Practice, 21, 675-8.
Hoskins, JD. (1995) Congenital defects of cats. The
Compendium on ContinuingEducation for thePractising
Veterinarian,17 (3),385-405.
Houlton, JE. (1980) Anal furunculosis: a review of
seventy cases. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 21
(11), 575-84.
Houston, D.M., Moore, E.P., Favrin, M.G., et al. (2003)
Feline urethral plugs and bladder uroliths: a review of
5484 submissions 1998-2003. The Canadian Veterinary
Journal, 44 (12), 974-7.
Houston, D.M., Moore, A.E.P., Favrin, M.G., et al. (2004)
Canine urolithiasis: a look at over 16,000 urolith
submissions to the Canadian Veterinary Urolith Centre
from February 1998 to April 2003. The Canadian
Veterinary Journal,45 (3),225-30
1034
Houston, D.M., Ribble, C.S. & Head, L.L. (1996) Risk
factors associated with parvovirus enteritis in dogs: 283
cases(1982-1991).JournaloftheAmerican
VeterinaryMedical Association, 208 (4), 542-6.
Hubert, B. & Olivry, T. (1990) Dermatologie et hormones
sexuelles chez les carnivores domestique 2e partie: etude
clinique.Pratigue Medicale et ChirurgicaleDe L'Animal
De Compagnie, 25,477.
Hughes, A.M., Nelson, R.W., Famula, T.R., et al. (2007)
Clinical features and heritability of hypoadrenocorticism in
Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retrievers: 25 cases
(1994-2006). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 231 (3), 407-12
Hunt, G.B. (2004) Effect of breed on anatomy of
portosystemic shunts resulting fromcongenital diseases in
dogs and cats: review of 242 cases. Australian Veterinary
Journal, 82 (12), 746-9.
Huxtable, C.R. & Davis, P.E. (1976) The pathology of
polyarthritis in young greyhounds. Journal of Comparative
Pathology, 86, 11-21.
Ihrke, P.J., Stannard, A.A., Ardans, A.A., et al. (1985)
Pemphigus foliaceous in dogs: a review of 37 cases.
Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
186,59-66.
Indrebo, A., Langeland, M., Juul, H.M., et al. (2008) A
study of inherited short tail and taillessness in Pembroke
1035
Welsh corgi. Journal of Small Animal Practice,49,
220-24.
Inzana, K.D. (2002) Brain Malformation and storage
diseases. In: Proceedings, Western Veterinary Conference
Jacobi, S. & Dubielzig, R.R. (2008) Feline primary open
angle glaucoma. Veterinary Ophthalmology, 11 (3), 162-5
Jacobs, G., Mahaffey, M. & Rawlings, C.A. (1990)
Valvular pulmonic stenosis in four Boykin spaniels
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association,26,
247-52.
Jaderlund, K.H., Orvind, E., Johnsson, E., et al. (2007) A
neurologic syndrome in Golden Retrievers presenting as a
sensory ataxic neuropathy. Journal of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 21, 1307-15.
Jaeger, G.H., Marcellin-Little, D.J. & Ferretti, A. (2007)
Morphology  and   correction  of distal  tibial  valgus
deformities.The Journal of Small Animal Practice,48,
678-82.
Jaeger, J.Q.,Mattoon, J.S., Bateman, S.W., et al. (2003)
Combined use of ultrasonography and contrast enhanced
computed tomography  to evaluate acute  necrotizing
pancreatitis  in  two dogs.   Veterinary  Radiology  and
Ultrasound, 44 (1), 72-9.
Jaggy, A. & Vandevelde, M. (1988) Multisystem neuronal
degeneration in cocker spaniels. Journal of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 2, 117-20
1036
Jagielski, D., Lechowski, R., Hoffmann-Jagielska, M., et
al. (2002) A retrospective study of the incidence
andprognostic  factors ofmulticentric  lymphomain  dogs
(1998-2000). JournalofVeterinaryMedicine. A,
Physiology, Pathology, Clinical Medicine, 49 (8), 419-24.
James, T.N., Robertson, B.T.,Waldo, A.L., et al. (1975) De
subitaneis mortibus. XV. Hereditary stenosis of the His
bundle in Pug dogs. Circulation, 52, 1152-60.
Jansen, B., Thornes, P.S., Singh, A., et al. (1984) Animal
model of human disease: hereditary nephritis in Samoyed
dogs. The American Journal of Pathology, 116 (1), 175-8
Jarvinen, A.K., Saario, E.,Andresen, E., et al. (1995) Lung
injury leading to respiratory distress syndrome in young
Dalmatian dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
9,162-8.
Jefferies, R., Ryan, U.M., Jardine, J., et al. (2007) Blood,
bull terriers and babesiosis: further evidence for direct
transmission of Babesia gibsoni  in dogs. Australian
Veterinary Journal, 85 (11), 459-63
Jenkins,W.L., van Dyk, E. & McDonald, C.B. (1976)
Myasthenia gravis in a fox terrier litter. Journal of the
South Africa Veterinary Association, 47 (1), 59-62.
Jochman-Edwards, C.M., Tilley, L.P. & Lichtenberger, M
(2002)   Electrocardiographic   findings  in    Miniature
Schnauzers with syncope. Journal
Emergency and Critical Care, 12,253-9.
1037
Johnsen, D.A.J.,Maggs, D.J. & Kass, P.H. (2006)
Evaluation of  risk   factors  for  developmentof
secondaryglaucoma in dogs: 156 cases (1999-2004).
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
229 (8), 1270-74.
Johnson, B.W. (1991) Congenitally abnormal visual
pathways of Siamese  cats.   The  Compendium
on
ContinuingEducationfor thePracticingVeterinarian,13
(3), 374-8
Johnson, G.F., Sternlieb, I., Twedt, D.C., et al. (1980)
Inheritance of copper toxicosis in Bedlington terriers.
American Journal of Veterinary Research, 41 (11),
1865-6.
Johnson, G.R. & Feeney, D.A. (1984) Recurring lung lobe
torsion in three Afghan hounds. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association. 184, 842-5.
Johnson, K.A. (1987) Accessory carpal bone fractures in
the  racing  greyhound.  Classification  and   pathology.
Veterinary Surgery, 16, 60-64.
Johnson, L. (2000) Tracheal collapse. Diagnosis and
medical and surgical treatment. The Veterinary Clinics of
North America. Small Animal Practice, 30, 1253-66.
Johnson, R.P., Neer, T.M., Partington, B.P., et al. (2001)
Familial  cerebellar  ataxia  with  hydrocephalus in  bull
mastiffs. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound, 42, 246-9.
1038
Johnston, S.D., Root Kustritz, M.V. & Olson, P.N.S
(2001) Canine and Feline Theriogenology, WB Saunders,
Philadelphia
Jurina, K. & Grevel, V. (2004) Spinal arachnoid
pseudocysts in 10 Rottweilers.The Journal of Small
Animal Practice, 45, 9-15.
Kaae, J.A., Callan, M.B. & Brooks, M. (2007) Hereditary
factor VII deficiency in the Alaskan Klee Kai. Journal of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 21, 976-81.
Kaiser, E., Krauser, K. & Scwartz-Porsche, D. (1991)
Lafora disease (progressive myoclonic epilepsy) in the
Bassett hound-possibility of early diagnosis using muscle
biopsy? Tierarztliche Praxis, 19, 290-95.
Kalaher, K.M., Anderson,W.I. & Scott, D.W. (1990)
Neoplasms of the apocrine sweat glands in 44 dogs and 10
cats. The Veterinary Record, 127 (16), 400-403.
Kass, P.H., Peterson, M.E., Levy, J., et al. (1999)
Evaluation of environmental, nutritional, and host factors
in cats with hyperthyroidism. Journal of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 13 (4), 323-9
Kaswan,R.L.&Salisbury, M.A. (1990)Anewperspective
oncanine    keratoconjunctivitis   sicca.Treatment   with
ophthalmic cyclosporine. The Veterinary Clinics of North
America.Small Animal Practice, 20 (3), 583-613
Kathmann, I., Jaggy, A., Busato, A., et al. (1999) Clinical
and genetic investigations of idiopathic epilepsy in the
1039
Bernese mountain dog. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice, 40, 319-25.
Kato, K., Sasaki, N.,Matsunaga, S., et al. (2006) Incidence
of canine glaucoma with goniodysgenesis in Japan: a
retrospective study.The Journal of Veterinary Medical
Science, 68 (8), 853-8.
Katz, M.L., Coates, J.R., Cooper, J.J., et al. (2008) Retinal
Visual Science, 49 (6), 2686-95.
Katz,M.L, Narfstrom, K., Johnson, G.S., et al. (2005)
Assessment of retinal function and characterization of
lysosomal storage body accumulation in the retinas and
brains of Tibetan Terriers with ceroid lipofuscinosis.
AmericanJournalofVeterinaryResearch,66(1),67-76
Keller, G.G., Reed, A.L., Lattimer, JC., et al. (1999) Hip
dysplasia: a feline population study. Veterinary Radiology
& Ultrasound, 40, 460-64.
Kennedy, L.J., O'Neill, T., House, A., et al. (2008) Risk of
anal furunculosis in German Shepherd dogs is associated
with  the major histocompatibility complex.  Tissue
Antigens, 71 (1), 51-6.
Kerl,M.E. (2003) Update on canine and feline fungal
diseases. The Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small
Animal Practice, 33 (4), 721-47.
1040
Kerlin, R.L. & Van Winkle, T.J. (1995) Renal dysplasia in
golden retrievers. Veterinary Pathology, 32 (3), 327-9.
Kern, T.J.&Riis, R.C. (1981) Optic nerve hypoplasia in
threeminiature  poodles.Journalof the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 178 (1), 49-54.
Kerwin, S.C. (2004) Forelimb lameness: keys to diagnosis
In: Proceedings Western VeterinaryConference
Ketring, K.L. (2003) Canine breed incidence of posterior
segment diseases. In: Proceedings, Western Veterinary
Conference.
Ketteritzsch, K., Hamann, H., Brahm, R., et al. (2004)
Genetic analysis of presumed inherited eye diseases in
Tibetan Terriers. The Veterinary Journal, 168 (2), 151-9.
Kidd, L.B., Salavaggione, O.E., Szumlanski, C.L. (2005)
Thiopurine methyltransferase activity in red blood cells of
dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 18, 214-8
Kienle, R.D., Thomas, W.P. & Pion, P.D. (1994) The
natural history of canine congenital subaortic stenosis.
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 8, 423-31.
Kijas, J.W., Miller, B.J., Pearce-Kelling, S.E., et al. (2003)
Canine models of ocular disease: outcross breedings define
a dominant disorder present in the English mastiff and
bullmastiff breeds. The Journal of Heredity, 94 (1), 27-30.
Kimmel, S.E., Waddell, L.S. & Michel, K.E. (2000)
Hypomagnesaemia  and  hypocalcaemia  associated   with
1041
protein-losing enteropathy in Yorkshire Terriers: five cases
(1992-1998). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 217 (5), 703-6.
Kimmel, S.E.,Ward, C.R., Henthorn, P.S., et al. (2002)
Familial insulin-dependant diabetes mellitus in Samoyed
dogs.Journalof theAmericanAnimalHospital
Association, 38 (3), 235-8
Kimura, T. & Doi, K. (1996) Spontaneous comedones on
the skin of hairless descendants of Mexican hairless dogs.
Experimental Animals, 45, 377-84.
Kimura, T., Ohshima, S. & Doi, K. (1993) The inheritance
and breeding results of hairless descendants of Mexican
hairless dogs. Laboratory Animals, 27, 55-8.
Kinzel, S., Hein, S., Buecker, A., et al. (2003) Diagnosis
and treatment of arthrosis of cervical articular facet joints
in Scottish Deerhounds: 9 cases (1998-2002). Journal of
the American VeterinaryMedicalAssociation,223,
1311-5.
Kirberger, R.M. & Stander, N. (2007) Incidence of canine
elbow dysplasia in South Africa. Journal of the South
African Veterinary Association, 78, 59-62.
Kirberger, R.M., Steenkamp, G., Spotswood, T.C., et al.
(2006) Stenotic nasopharyngeal dysgenesis in  the
dachshund: seven cases (2002-2004). Journal of the
American Animal Hospital Association, 42, 290-97.
1042
Kirsch, J.A., Hauptman, JG. & Walshaw, R. (2002) A
urethropexy technique for surgical treatment of urethral
prolapse in the male dog. Journal of the American Animal
Hospital Association, 38 (4), 381-4.
Knowles, K.E., O'Brien, D.P. & Amann, JF. (1990)
Congenital idiopathic megaesophagus in a litter of Chinese
Shar peis: clinical, electrodiagnostic and pathological
findings. Journal of the American Animal Hospital
Association, 26 (3), 313-8.
Koch, S.A. (1972) Cataracts in interrelated old English
sheepdogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 160 (3), 299-301.
Koch, S.A. (1979) Congenital ophthalmic abnormalities in
the Burmese cat.Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 174, 90-91.
Kolbjornsen, O., Press, C.M. & Landsverk, T. (1994)
Gastropathies in the Lundehund. I. Gastritis and gastric
neoplasia associated with intestinal lymphangiectasia. Acta
Pathologica,Microbiologica
et
Immunologica
Scandinavica, 102 (9), 647-61.
Kommonen, B. & Karhunen, U. (1990) A late receptor
dystrophy in the Labrador retriever. Vision Research, 30
(2), 207-13.
Kooistra,H.S.,Voorhout,G.,Mol,  J.A.,  et al. (2000)
Combined    pituitary    hormone    deficiency   inGerman
shepherd  dogs   with dwarfism.   Domestic Animal
Endocrinology, 19 (3), 177-90.
1043
Koper, S. (1988) Investigations of the lameness in dogs in
the years1980-1985.VeterinaryRadiologyand
UItrasound,29,57-59.
Kramer, JW., Klassen, J.H., Baskin, D.G., et al. (1988)
Inheritance of diabetesmellitus in Keshond dogs. American
Journal of Veterinary Research., 4 (3),428-31.
Krotscheck, V., Adin, C.A., Hunt, G.B., et al. (2007)
Epidemiologic factors associated with the anatomic
Veterinary Surgery, 36 (1), 31-6.
Kuhl, K.A., Shofer, F.S. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1994)
Comparative histopathology of pemphigus foliaceus and
superficial folliculitis in the dog. Veterinary Pathology, 31,
19-27.
Kunkle, G.A., White, S.D., Calderwood-Mays, M., et al.
(1993) Focal metatarsal fistulas in 5 dogs. Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association, 202, 756-7.
Kuwamura, M., Adachi, T., Yamate, J., et al. (2002)
Necrotising encephalitis in the Yorkshire terrier: a case
report and literature review. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice, 43 (10), 459-63
Kyles, A.E., Feldman, E.C., De Cook, H.E.V., et al. (2003)
Surgical management of adrenal gland tumours with and
without tumour-associated thrombi in dogs: 40 cases
(1994-2001). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 223 (5), 654-62.
1044
Lachaume, P., Hitte, C.， Jouquand, S., et al. (1998)
Identification and analysis of the dog keratin 9 (KRT9)
gene. Animal Genetics, 29, 173-7.
Ladds, P.W., Dennis, S.M. & Leipold, H.W. (1971) Lethal
congenital edema  in  Bulldog pups. Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association, 159, 81-6.
LaFond, E., Breur, G.J&Austin, C.C. (2002) Breed
susceptibility  for  developmental  orthopedic  diseases  in
dogs. Journal of the AmericanAnimal Hospital
Association, 38, 467-77.
Lamb, C.R.&Gregory, S.P. (1998) Utrasonographic
findings in 14 dogs with ectopic ureters.  Veterinary
Radiology and Ultrasound, 39 (3), 218-23.
Landsverk, T.&Gamlem,H.(1984)Intestinal
lymphangiectasia in the Lundehund. Scanning electron
microscopy of intestinal mucosa. Acta Pathologica,
Microbiologica et Immunologica Scandinavica, 92 (5),
353-62.
Lang, J., Martig, S. & Gudel, A. (2006) Phenotype of
hereditary orthopaedic disease-and the role of diagnostic
imaging. In: Proceedings, World Small Animal Veterinary
Association World Congress.
Langley-Hobbs, S. (2006a) Diseases and disorders of
bone.In: BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline
Musculoskeletal Disorders (eds Houlton, JE.F., Cook,
J.L., Innes, J.F., et al.), British Small Animal Veterinary
Association, Gloucester, pp. 3449.
1045
Langley-Hobbs, S. (2006b)Disturbances of growth and
bone development. In: BSAVAManual ofCanine and Feline
Musculoskeletal Disorders (eds Houlton, JE.F., Cook
J.L., Innes, JF., et al.), British Small Animal Veterinary
Association, Gloucester, pp. 50-80
Lara-Garcia, A., Couto, C.G.&lazbik,M.C. (2008)
Postoperative
bleeding
in
retired
 racing
greyhounds.Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 22,
525-33.
Laratta, L.J., Ris, R.C., Kern, T.J., et al. (1985) Multiple
congenital ocular defects in the Akita dog. The Cornell
Veterinarian, 75 (3), 381-92.
Larsson, C.E. (2002) Pythiosis. In: Proceedings, World
Small AnimalVeterinary Congress.
Lawler, D.F., Keltner, D.G., Hoffman, W.E., et al. (1996)
Benign familial hyperphosphatasemia in Siberian huskies.
American Journal of Veterinary Research, 57, 612-7.
Lawson, D.D. (1973) Canine distichiasis. The Journal of
Small Animal Practice, 14 (8), 469-78.
Lazarus, JA., Pickett, JP. & Champagne, E.S. (1998)
Primary lens luxation in the Chinese Shar Pei: clinical and
hereditary characteristics. Veterinary Ophthalmology, 1
(2-3), 101-7.
LeCouteur,  R.A.  (2002)  Cerebellar diseases.  In:
Proceedings,World Small AnimalVeterinary Association
Congress. LeCouteur, R.A. (2009) Neuromuscular
1046
disorders.  In: Proceedings,  Veterinary Neurology
Symposium.
Lee, S., Lee, S.,Moon, H., et al. (2007) Isolation,
characterization and genetic analysis of canine GATA4
gene in a family of Doberman Pinschers with an atrial
septal defect. Journal of Genetics, 86, 241-7.
Lees, G.E., Hilman, R.G., Kashtan, C.E., et al. (1998) A
model of autosomal recessive Alport syndrome in English
Cocker Spaniel dogs. Kidney International, 54 (3),
706-19.
Leipold, H.W., Huston, K.,Blauch,B.,et al. (1974)
spinal cord in Manx cats. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 164 (5), 520-23.
Lekcharoensuk, C., Lulich, JP., Osborne, C.A., et al.
(2000) Association between patient-related factors and risk
of calcium oxalate and magnesium ammonium phosphate
urolithiasis in cats. Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 217 (4), 520-25.
Lekcharoensuk, C., Osborme, C.A. & Lulich, JP. (2001)
Epidemiologic study of risk factors for lower urinary tract
diseases
in
cats.
Journal
of
theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
218
(9),
1429-35.
LeMarie, S.L. (2003) Puppy skin diseases.
In:
Proceedings,WesternVeterinary Conference.
1047
Leon, A., Barnett, K.C. & Curtis, R. (1986) Hereditary
persistent primary vitreous in the Staffordshire Bull
Terrier.Journal of the American AnimalHospital
Association, 22, 765.
Leone, F., Cerundolo, R., Vercelli, A., et al. (2005) The
use of trilostane for the treatment of alopecia X in Alaskan
malamutes.Journal oftheAmericanAnimal Hospital
Association, 41, 336-42.
Leppanen, M., Martenson, J. & Maki, K. (2001) Results of
ophthalmologic  screening   examinations   of  German
Pinschers in Finland-a retrospective study. Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 4 (3), 165-9.
Levine, G.J., Levine, JM.,Walker,M.A., et al. (2006)
Evaluation  of the association between  spondylosis
deformans and clinical signs of intervertebral disk disease
in dogs: 172 cases (1999-2000). Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 228, 96-100.
Levine, J.M., Levine, G.J., Johnson, S.I., et al. (2007)
Evaluation of the success of medical management for
presumptive thoracolumbar intervertebral disk herniation
in dogs. Veterinary Surgery, 36, 482-91.
Lewis, D.C. (2000) Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
In: BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology
and Transfusion Medicine (eds Day, M., Mackin, A. &
Littlewood, J), British Small Animal Veterinary
Association, Gloucester, pp. 219-27.
1048
Lewis, D.D., Shelton, G.D., Piras, A., et al. (1997) Gracilis
American Animal Hospital Association, 33, 177-88.
Lewis,D.T.,Messinger, L.M., Ginn, P.E., et al. (1998) A
hereditary disorder of cornification andmultiplecongenital
defects in five Rottweiler dogs. Veterinary Dermatology,
9,61-72.
Lightfoot, R.M., Cabral, L., Gooch, L., et al. (1996)
Retinal   pigment   epithelial   dystrophy   in    Briard
dogs.Research in Veterinary Science, 60 (1), 17-23.
Lilliehook, I., Gunnarsson, L., Zakrisson, G., et al. (2000)
Diseases associated with pronounced eosinophilia: a study
of 105 dogs in Sweden. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice, 41, 248-53.
Ling, G.V., Stabenfeldt, G.H., Comer, K.M., et al. (1979)
Canine  hyperadrenocorticism: pretreatmentclinical  and
laboratory evaluation of 117 cases. Journal of the
American VeterinaryMedical Association, 174 (2), 159-63
Ling, G.V., Thurmond, M.C., Choi, Y.K., et al. (2003)
Changes in proportion of canine urinary calculi composed
of calcium oxalate or struvite in specimens analyzed from
Medicine, 17 (6), 817-23.
Lingaas, F., Aarskaug, T., Sletten, M., et al. (l998)
Genetic markers linked to neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in
English setter dogs. Animal Genetics, 29 (5), 371-6.
1049
Lipowitz, A.J., Schwartz, A., Wilson, G.P., et al. (1973)
Testicular neoplasms and concomitant clinical changes in
the dog.Journal of the AmericanVeterinaryMedical
Association, 163 (12), 1364-8.
Lipsitz, D., Berry, JL. & Shelton, G.D. (1999) Inherited
predisposition  to myasthenia gravis  in  Newfoundlands.
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
215,956-8.
Little, L., Patel, R. & Goldschmidt, M. (2007) Nasal and
nasopharyngeal lymphoma in cats: 50 cases (1989-2005).
Veterinary Pathology, 44 (6), 885-92.
Littlewood, J. D. (2000) Disorders of secondary
haemostasis. In: BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline
Haematology and Transfusion Medicine (eds Day, M.
Mackin, A. & Littlewood, J.), British Small Animal
Veterinary Association, Gloucester, pp. 209-15
Littman, M.P. & Giger, U. (1990) Familial protein-losing
enteropathy (PLE) and/or protein-losing nephropathy
(PLN)  in  soft-coated  wheaten terriers. Journal of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 4 (2), 133.
Littman, M.P., Dambach, D.M., Vaden, S.L., et al. (2000)
Familial  protein-losing enteropathy  and  protein-losing
nephropathy in Soft Coated Wheaten Terriers: 222 cases
(1983-1977). Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 14,
68-80.
Liu, S. & Fox, P.R. (1999) Cardiovascular pathology. In:
Textbook of Canine and Feline Cardiology, 2nd edn (eds
1050
Fox, P.R., Sisson, D. & Moise, N.S.),WB Saunders,
Philadelphia, pp. 817-44.
Lium, B. & Moe, L. (1985) Hereditary mulitfocal renal
cystadenocarcinomas and nodular dermatofibrosis in the
German  Shepherd dog:macroscopic  and histopathologic
changes. Veterinary Pathology, 22 (5), 447-55.
Lobetti, R.G. (200l) Pneumocystis carinii infection in
miniature dachshunds. The Compendium on Continuing
Education for the Practising Veterinarian, 23 (4), 320-26
Lobetti, R.G., Leisewitz, A. & Spencer, JA. (1996)
Pneumocystis carinii in the miniature dachschund: case
report and literature review. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice, 37 (6), 280-85.
Loeven,K.O. (1994)Hepatic amyloidosis in twoChinese
SharPeidogs. Journal of theAmerican Veterinary Medical
Association, 204 (8), 1212-6.
Long, S.E. & Crispin, S.M. (1999) Inheritance of
multifocal retinal dysplasia in the golden retriever in the
UK. The Veterinary Record, 145 (24), 702-4.
Lorenz, M.D. & Melendez, L. (2002) Hypoglycaemic
Syndromes.  In:  Conference  Proceedings,  Western
Veterinary Conference 2002.
Lothrup, C.D. Jr. (1988) Pathophysiology of canine
growth-hormone responsive alopecia. The Compendium of
Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarians, 10
(12), 1346-49.
1051
Louwerens, M.,London, C.A.,Pedersen, N.C., et al. (2005)
Feline lymphomain the post-feline leukaemia virus era.
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 19 (3), 329-35.
Lulich, JP., Osborme, C.A., Thumchai, R., et al. (1999)
Epidemiology   of   canine   calcium oxalate  uroliths.
Identifying   risk   factors.  TheVeterinary   Clinics
ofNorthAmerica. SmallAnimal Practice, 29 (1), 113-22.
Lulich, J.P., Osborne, C.A., Unger, L.K., et al. (1991)
Prevalence of calcium oxalate uroliths inminiature
schnauzers. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 52
(10), 1579-82.
Lurie, D.M., Lucrov, M.D., Griffev, S.M., et al. (2004)
T-cell-derived malignant lymphoma in the Boxer breed.
Veterinary and Comparative Oncology, 2 (3), 171-5.
Lynch, G.L. (2007) Ophthalmic examination findings in a
group
of
retired
racing
greyhounds.
VeterinaryOphthalmology,10 (6),363-7.
Mackin, A. (2002) Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia:
pathophysiology and diagnosis. In: Proceedings, American
CollegeofVeterinaryInternalMedicineCongress.
MacMillan, A.D. & Lipton, D.E. (1978) Heritability of
multifocal retinal dysplasia in American Cocker Spaniels.
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
172 (5), 568-72.
MacMillan, A.D., Waring, G.O. III, Spangler, W.L., et al.
(1979) Crystalline cormeal opacities in theSiberian Husky
1052
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
175 (8), 829-32.
Madewell, B.R., Stannard, A.A., Pulley, T.V., et al. (1980)
Oral  eosinophilic  granuloma  in  Siberian  husky  dogs.
Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
177, 701-3
Mahaffey, M.B., Yarbrough, K.M. & Munnell, JF. (1978)
Focal loss of pigment in the Belgian Tervuren Dog.
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
173, 390-96.
Mahoney, O.M., Knowles, K.E. & Braund, K.G. (1998)
Laryngeal  paralysis-polyneuropathy  complex  in  young
Rottweilers. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 12,
330.
Malik, R., Dill-Macky, E., Martin, P., et al. (1995)
Cryptococcosis in dogs: a retrospective study of 20
consecutive cases. Journal of Medical Mycology, 33 (5),
291-7.
Malik, R., Griffin, D.L.,White, JD., et al. (2005) The
prevalence of feline A/B blood types in the Sydney region
AustralianVeterinary Journal,83,38-44
Mandigers, P.F., Van Nes, J.J., Knol, B.W., et al. (1993)
Hereditary necrotizing myelopathy in Kooiker dogs
Research in Veterinary Science, 54, 118-23.
Mandigers, P.JJ.,Van Den Ingh, T.S.G.A.M., Bode, P., et
al. (2004)Association between liver copper concentration
1053
and subclinical hepatitis in Doberman pinschers. Journal
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 18 (5), 647-50
Manteca, X. (2002) Difficulties in the diagnosis of
dominance aggression in dogs. In: Proceedings, World
Small Animal Veterinary Association Congress.
Marcellin-Little, D.J., De Young, D.J., Ferris, K.K., et al.
(1994) Incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle in
Spaniels. Veterinary Surgery, 23, 475-87.
March, P.A., Coates, JR., Abyad, R.J., et al. (2009)
Degenerative myelopathy in 18 Pembroke Welsh Corgi
dogs. Veterinary Pathology, 46, 241-50.
Marshall, L.S., Oehlert, M.L., Haskins, M.E., et al. (1982)
Persistent mullerian duct syndrome in Miniature
Schnauzers.Journal of the AmericanVeterinary Medical
Association, 181, 798-901.
Martin, C.L. & Leipold, H.W. (1974) Aphakia and
multiple ocular defects in Saint Bernard puppies.
Veterinary Medicine, Small Animal Clinician, 69 (4),
448-53.
Martin, C.L. (1970) Everted membrane nictitans in
German shorthaired pointers. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 157 (9), 1229-32.
Martinez, S., Fajardo, R., Valdes, J., et al. (2007)
Histopathologic study of long-bone growth plates confirms
the basset hound as an osteochondrodysplastic breed.
Canadian Journal of Veterinary Research, 71, 66-9.
1054
Martinez, S., Valdes, J. & Alonso, R.A. (2000)
Achondroplastic dog breeds have no mutations in the
transmembrane domain of the FGFR-3 gene. Canadian
Journal of Veterinary Research, 64, 243-5.
Mason, K. (1988) A hereditary disease in Burmese cats
manifested as an episodic weakness with head nodding and
neck ventroflexion. Journal of the American Animal
Hospital Association, 24, 147-51.
Mason, K.V., Halliwell, R.E. & MacDougal, B.J. (1986)
Characterisation of lichenoid-psoriasiform dermatosis of
springer spaniels. Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 189, 897-901.
Mason, T.A. (1976) Persistent pupillary membrane in the
Basenji. The Australian Veterinary Journal, 52 (8), 343-4
Mauser, A.E., Whitlark, J., Whitney, K.M., et al. (1996) A
deletion mutation causes hemophilia B in Lhasa Apso
dogs. Blood, 88, 3451-5.
Matic, S.E. (1988) Congenital heart disease in the dog. The
Journal of Small Animal Practice, 29, 743-59.
Mauldin, E.A., Credille, K.M., Dunstan, R.W., et al.
     )
nonepidermolytic  ichthyosis  in   the golden  retriever.
Veterinary Pathology, 45, 174-80.
Mayhew, P.D., McLear, R.C., Ziemer, S.L., et al. (2004)
Risk factors for recurrence of clinical signs associated with
thoracolumbar intervertebral disk herniation in dogs: 229
1055
cases (1994-2000). Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association,225, 1231-6.
McCann, T.M., Simpson, K.E., Shaw,D.J., et al. (2007)
Feline diabetesmellitus in the UK: the prevalence within
an  insured cat  population  and a questionnaire-based
putative risk factor analysis. Journal of Feline Medicine
and Surgery, 9 (4), 289-99.
McCaw, D.L. & Hoskins, JD. (2006) Canine viral
enteritis. In: Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd
edn (ed Green, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, pp.
63-71.
McDonald, JM.,Mullen, H.S. &Moroff, S.D. (1993)
Adenomatous polyps of the duodenum in cats: 18 cases
(1985-1990). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 202 (4), 647-51.
McEntree, M.C. (2001) Nasal neoplasia in the dog and cat.
In:Congress Proceedings: Atlantic Coast Veterinary
Conference 2001.
McEwan,N.A.,Huang, H.P.  &Mellor, D.J. (2003)
Immunoglobulin levels in Bull terriers suffering from
lethalacrodermatitis.Veterinary
Immunology
and
Immunopathology, 96, 235-8.
McGraw, R.A. & Carmichael, K.P. (2006)Molecular basis
of globoid cell leukodystrophy in Irish setters. Veterinary
Journal, 171, 370-72.
1056
McGrotty, Y.L., Ramsey, IK. & Knottenbelt, C.M. (2003)
Diagnosis   and 
 management  of   hepatic
Ccopper
accumulation in a Skye terrier. The Journal of Small
Animal Practice, 44(2), 85-9.
McKeever, P.J&Dahl,M.V. (1977)Adisease in dogs
resembling human subcormeal pustular dermatosis. Journa!
of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 170,
704-8
McKenna, S.C. & Carpenter, JL. (1980) Polycystic
disease of the kidney and liver in the Cairm terrier.
Veterinary Pathology, 17 (4), 436-42.
McLellan, G.J., Elks, R., Lybaert, P., et al. (2002) Vitamin
E deficiency in dogs with retinal pigment epithelial
dystrophy. The Veterinary Record, 151 (22), 663-7.
Mealey, K.L., Munyard, K.A. & Bentien, S.A. (2005)
Frequency of the mutant MDRl allele associated with
multidrug sensitivity in a sample of herding breed dogs
living in Australia. Veterinary Parasitology, 131, 193-6.
Mellersch, C.S., Graves, K.T., McLoughlin, B., et al.
(2007) Mutation in HSF4 associated with early but not
late-onset hereditary cataract in the Boston Terrier. The
Journal of Heredity, 98 (5), 531-3.
Mellersch, C.S., Pettitt, L., Forman, O.P., et al. (2006)
Identification of mutations in HSF4 in dogs of three
different breeds with hereditary cataracts. Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 9 (5) 369-78.
1057
Melville, S.A., Wilson, C.L., Chiang, C.S., et al. (2005) A
mutation  in canine CLN5 causes neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis in Border collie dogs. Genomics, 86 (3),
287-94.
Melzer, K.J. & Sellon, R.K. (2002) Canine intestinal
lymphangiectasia.  The Compendium on Continuing
Education for the Practising Veterinarian,24 (12),
953-61.
Messinger, L. (2004) Management of pemphigus foliaceus.
In:Proceedings, Western Veterinary Conference
Meurs, K.M. (2003a) Inherited heart disease in the cat. Ini
Proceedings, Tufts Canine and Feline Breeding and
Genetics Conference.
Meurs, K.M. (2003b) Inherited heart disease in the dog. In:
Proceedings,Tufts Canine and Feline Breeding and
Genetics Conference.
Meurs, K.M., Miller, M.W. &Wright, N.A. (2001) Clinical
features of dilated cardiomyopathy in Great Danes and
results of a pedigree analysis: 17 cases (1990-2000).
Journal of theAmericanVeterinary Medical Association,
218, 729-32.
Meyer, H.P., Rothuizen, J., Ubbink, G.J., et al. (1995)
Increasing   incidence    of   hereditary    intrahepatic
portosystemic shunts in Irish wolfhounds inThe
Netherlands (19841992). The Veterinary Record, 136 (1),
13-6.
1058
Meyers, K.M., Lund, JE., Padgett, G., et al. (1969)
Hyperkinetic episodes in Scottish Terrier dogs. Journal of
the American Veterinary Medical Association, 155,
129-33.
Meyers, V.N., Jezyk, P.F., Aguirre, G.D., et al. (1983)
Short-limbed dwarfism and ocular defects in the Samoyed
dog.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Association, 183 (9), 975-9.
Meyers-Wallen, V.N. & Patterson, D.F. (1988) XX sex
reversal in the American cocker spaniel dog: phenotypic
expression and inheritance. Human Genetics, 80 (1),
23-30.
Meyers-Wallen, V.N., Donahoe, P.K., Ueno, S., et al.
(1989) Mullerian inhibiting substance is present in testes
of dogs with persistent mullerian duct syndrome. Biology
of Reproduction, 41 (5), 881-8.
Miller,A.&Hulse,D. (2006) The tarsus. In:BSAVAManual
ofCanineandFelineMusculoskeletalDisorders(eds
Houlton, J.E.F., Cook, JL., Innes, JF., et al.), British
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Gloucester, pp.
396-405.
Miller, D.M. (1995) The occurrence of mast cell tumours
in young Shar Peis. Journal of Veterinary Diagnostic
Investigation, 7 (3), 360-63.
Miller, L.M., Hegreberg, G.A., Prieur, D.J., et al. (1984)
Inheritance of congenital myasthenia gravis in smooth fox
terrier dogs. Journal of Heredity, 75, 163-6.
1059
Miller, L.M., Lennon, V.A., Lambert, E.H., et al. (1983)
Congenital myasthenia gravis in 13 smooth fox terriers.
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association,
182 (7), 694-7.
Miller, M.A. & Dunstan, R.W. (1993) Seasonal flank
alopecia in boxers and Airedale terriers: 24 cases
(1985-1992). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 203, 1567.
Miller,M.A.,Nelson,  S.L.&Turk,  J.R.,
et
al.
(1991)Cutaneous neoplasia in 340 cats.  Veterinary
Pathology, 28 (5), 389-95.
Miller, P.E., Miller, L.M. & Schoster, JV. (1990) Feline
blastomycosis: a report of three cases and literature review
(1961-1988). Journal of the American Animal Hospital
Association, 26 (4), 417-24.
Miller, S.A., Hohenhaus, A.E.& Hale, A.S. (2004)
Case-control study of blood type, breed, sex, and
bacteremia
in
 dogswithimmune-mediated    hemolytic
anemia.
Journal
ofAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Association, 224, 232-5.
Miller, W.H. (1990a) Colour dilution alopecia in Doberman
Pinschers with blue or fawn coat colours:a study on the
incidence and histopathology of this disorder. Veterinary
Dermatology, 1, 113.
Miller, W.H. (1990b) Follicular dysplasia in adult black
and red Doberman pinschers. Veterinary Dermatology, 1,
181.
1060
Miller, W.H. (2004) Structural follicular dysplasia. In:
Proceedings,World Small Animal Veterinary Association
Congress.
Miller,W.H. & Scott, D.W. (1995) Follicular dysplasia of
the PortugueseWater Dog. Veterinary Dermatology, 6,
67-74.
Millichamp,N.J.,Curtis,
R.&Bamet,K.C.
(1988)
Progressive retinal atrophy in Tibetan terriers. Journal of
the American Veterinary Medical Association, 192 (6),
769-76
Millis, D.L.,Hauptman, J.G. & Johnson, C.A.(1992)
Cryptorchidism
1  and
monorchism
1n
cats:25
cases(1980-1989).Journal of the AmericanVeterinary
Medical Association,200 (8),1128-30.
Millis, D.L. & Loonam, J. (2002) Joint and leg problems in
growing show dogs. In: Proceedings, Iams Company.
Milne, K.L. & Hayes, H.M. Jr. (1981) Epidemiologic
features    of   canine    hypothyroidism.   The   Cornell
Veterinarian, 71 (1), 3-14.
Minkus, G., Breuer, W., Wanke, R., et al. (1994) Familial
Pathology, 31 (4), 421-8.
Misdrop, W. & Hart, A.A. (1979) Some prognostic and
epidemiologic factors in canine osteosarcoma. Journal of
the National Cancer Institute, 62 (3), 537-45.
1061
Mitchell, M., Hurov, L.1. & Troy, G.C. (1979) Canine
thyroid carcinomas: clinical occurrence, staging by means
of scintiscans and therapy of 15 cases. Veterinary Surgery,
8 (4), 112-8.
Miyama, T., Sakata, Y., Shimada, Y., et al. (2005)
Epidemiological survey of Babesia gibsoni infection in
dogs in eastern Japan. Journal of Veterinary Medical
Science, 67 (5), 467-71.
Moe,   L.&Lium,B.  (1997)Hereditarymultifocal  renal
cystadenocarcinoma  and  nodular  dermatofibrosis  in  51
German Shepherd Dogs. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice,38,498.
Moeller, E.M., Steiner, JM.,Clark, L.A., et al. (2002)
Inheritance of pancreatic  acinar  atrophy  in  German
Shepherd Dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research,
63 (10),1429-34.
Moise, N. S. (1999) Diagnosis and management of canine
arrhythmias.In:  Textbook  of  Canine  andFeline
Cardiology, 2nd edn (eds Fox, P.R., Sisson, D. & Moise,
N.S.),WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 331-85.
Moneva-Jordan, A.,Corcoran, B.M., French, A., et al.
(2001) Sick sinus syndrome in nineWestHighland white
terriers. The Veterinary Record, 148, 142-7
Moon-Fanelli, A.A. & Dodman, N.H. (1998) Description
and development of compulsive tail chasing in terriers and
response to clomipramine treatment.Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association,212,1252-7
1062
Moon-Fanelli, A.A., Dodman, N.H. & Cottam, N. (2007)
Blanket and flank sucking in Doberman Pinschers. Journal
of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 23,
907-12.
Moore, F.M. & Thornton, G.W. (1983) Telangiectasia of
PembrokeWelsh Corgi dogs. Veterinary Pathology, 20 (2)
203-8
Moore, P.F. (1984) Systemic histiocytosis of Bernese
mountain dogs. Veterinary Pathology, 21 (6), 554-63.
Moore, P.F., Affloter, V.K. & Vernau,W. (2006) Canine
hemophagocytic histiocytic  sarcoma,  a proliferative
disorder of CDl1d +macrophages. Veterinary Pathology,
43 (5), 632-45.
Moore, P.F. & Rosin, A. (1986)Malignant histiocytosis of
Bermesemountain dogs. Veterinary Pathology, 23 (1),
1-10
Morales, M., Ynaraja, E. & Montoya, J.A. (2001) Dilated
cardiomyopathy in Presa canario dogs: ECG findings.
Journal ofVeterinary Medicine.A,Physiology,Pathology,
Clinical Medicine, 48, 577-80.
Morgan, JP.,Wind, A.&Davidson,A.P. (1999) Bone
dysplasias in the LabradorRetriever: a radiographic study.
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 35
(4), 332-40.
Morgan,   R.V. (1989)  Vogt-Koyanagi-Haradi   like
syndrome in humans and dogs. The Compendium of
1063
Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarians, 11,
1211-18.
Morgan, R.V., Duddy, JM. & McClurg, K. (1993)
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid in dogs:
aretrospective study of 89 cases (1980-1990). Journal of
the American Animal Hospital Association, 29(1), 56-60.
Moriello, K.A. (2004) A new look at Ulcerative
Dermatosis    of  Shetland   Sheepdogs  and  Rough
Collies. Veterinary Medicine, 99, 1003-4.
Morris, J. & Dobson, J. (2001) Small Animal Oncology,
Blackwell Science, Oxford, England.
Morris, JS., McInnes, E.F., Bostock, D.E., et al. (2002)
Immunohistochemical and histopahthologic features of 14
malignant   fibrous   histiocytomas    from    Flat-Coated
Retrievers. Veterinary Pathology, 39 (4), 473-9.
Morrison,W.B., Wilsman, N.J., Fox, L.E., et al. (1987)
Primary ciliary dyskinesia  in  the dog. Journal of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 1, 67-74.
Mukaratirwa, S., Van Der Linde-Sipman, J.S. & Gruys, E.
(200l) Feline nasal and paranasal sinus tumours:
clinicopathological study,  histomorphological  description
and   diagnostic  immunohistochemistry   of  123 cases.
Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery, 3 (4), 235-45.
Mulvihill, JJ., Mulvihill, C.J. & Priester, W.A. (1980)
Cleft palate in domestic animals: epidemiologic features.
Teratology, 21 (1), 109-12.
1064
Munday, J.S., Dyer, C.B., Hartman, A.C., et al. (2006) A
possible  predisposition  to  dilated   cardiomyopathy   in
Huntaway dogs. New Zealand Veterinary Journal, 54,
231-4.
Munyard, K.A., Sherry, C.R. & Sherry, L. (2007) A
retrospective evaluation of congenital ocular  defectsin
Australian Shepherd dogs. Veterinary Ophthalmology 10
(1), 19-22.
Murphy, K.A. & Brisson, B.A. (2006) Evaluation of lung
lobe torsion in Pugs: 7 cases (1991-2004). Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association, 228, 86-90.
Narama, I., Kobavashi, Y., Yamagami, T., et al. (2005)
Pigmented cutaneous papillomatosis (pigmentedepidermal
nevus) in three pug dogs; histopathology, electron
anod i q n a go sisg  dos
chain reaction. Journal of Comparative Pathology, 132,
132-8.
Naranjo, C., Dubielzig, R.R. & Friedrichs, K.R. (2007)
Canine  ocular  histiocytic
sarcoma.
Veterinary
Ophthalmology 10 (3), 632-45.
Narfstrom, K. & Dubielzig, R. (1984) Posterior lenticonus,
cataract and microphthalmia: congenital ocular defects in
the Cavalier King Charles spaniel. The Journal of Small
Animal Practice, 25,669-77.
Narfstrom,  K. &Wrigstad,  A. (1999) Clinical,
electrophysiological and morphological changes in a case
1065
of hereditary retinal degeneration in the Papillon dog
Veterinary Ophthalmology, 2 (1), 67-74.
Narfstrom, K. (1981) Cataract in theWestHighlandWhite
Terrier. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 22 (7),
467-71.
Narfstrom, K. (1985) Progressive retinal atrophy in the
Abyssinian cat. Clinical characteristics. Investigative
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 26 (2), 193-200.
Narfstrom, K. (1999a) Retinal dystrophy or ‘congenital
stationary night blindness’  in the Briard.  Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 2 (1), 75-6.
Narfstrom, K. (1999b) Herediatry and congenital ocular
diseases in the cat. Journal of Feline Medicineand
Surgery, 1, 135-41.
Narfstrom, K.,Wrigstad, A., Ekesten, B., et al. (2007)
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis: clinical and morphologic
findings in nine affected Polish Owczarek Nizinny (PON)
dogs. Veterinary Ophthalmology,10 (2), 111-20
Nash, A.S., Kelly, D.F. & Gaskell, C.J. (1984) Progressive
renal disease in Soft-coatedWheaten Terriers: possible
familial  nephropathy.  The  Journal  of  Small  Animal
Practice, 25 (8), 479-87.
Nayak, D.C., Tripathy, S.B., Dey, P.C., et al. (1997)
Prevalence of canine demodicosis in Orissa (India)
Veterinary Parasitology,73, 347-52
1066
Nesbitt, G. (2002) Malassezia dermatitis. In: Proceedings,
TuftsAnimalExpo.
Nesbitt, G.H., Izzo, J., Peterson, L., et al. (1980) Canine
hypothyroidism: a retrospective study of 108 cases.
Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,
177 (11), 1117-22
Nestor, D.D., Holan, K.M., Johnson, C.A., et al. (2006)
Serum alkaline phosphatase activity in Scottish Terriers
versus dogs of other breeds. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 228, 222-4.
Ng, C.Y. & Mills, J.N. (1985) Clinical and haematologica)
featuresof  haemangiosarcomas indogs.Australian
Veterinary Journal, 62 (1), 1-4.
Nielen, A.L.J., Janss, L.L.G. & Knol, B.W. (2001)
Hereditability estimations for diseases, coat colour,body
weight and height in a birth cohort of Boxers. American
Journal of Veterinary Research, 62, 1198-206.
Nieves, M.A. (2002) Juvenile orthopaedic disease. In:
Proceedings,WesternVeterinary Conference.
Niewold, T.A., Van Der Linde-Sipman, J.S., Murphy, C.
et al. (l999) Familial amyloidosis in cats:Siamese and
Abyssinian AA proteins differ in primary sequence and
pattern of deposition. Amyloid, 6 (3), 205-9.
Noden, D.M. & Evans, H.E. (1986) Inherited homeotic
midfacial malformations in Burmese cats. Journal of
1067
CraniofacialGeneticsandDevelopmentalBiology
Supplement, 2, 249-66.
Nodvedt, A., Egenvall, A., Bergvall, K., et al. (2006)
Incidence of and risk factors for atopic dermatitis in a
Swedish population of insured dogs. The Veterinary
Record, 159, 241-6.
Noli, C., Colombo, S., Abramo, F., et al. (2004) Papular
eosinophilic/mastocyticdermatitis (feline
urticaria
pigmentosa) in Devon Rex cats: a distinct disease entity or
a
histopathological
 reaction  pattern? Veterinary
Dermatology 15, 253-9.
Noonan, C.H. & Kay, JM. (1990) Prevalence and
geographic distribution of Fanconi Syndrome in Basenjis
in the United States.Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association,197 (3), 345-9.
Norris, JM., Boswars, K.L., White, JD., et al. (2005)
Clinicopathlogical   findings    associated    with    feline
infectious peritonitis in Sydney, Australia: 42 cases
(1990-2002). Australian Veterinary Journal, 83 (11),
666-73.
O'Brien, J. (1975) Spontaneous laryngeal disease in the
canine. Laryngoscope, 85, 2023-5.
O'Brien, C.R., Krokenberger, M.B.,Wigney, D.I., et al.
(2004)  Retrospective  study  of feline and  canine
cryptococcosis in Australia from 1981 to 2001: 195 cases.
Medical Mycology, 42 (5), 449-60.
1068
O'Brien, M.G., Berg, J. & Engler, S.J. (1992) Treatment
by  digital amputation of subungual squamous  cell
carcinoma in dogs: 21 cases (1987-1988). Journal of the
American
1VeterinaryMedical  Association,  201 (5),
759-61.
O'Brien, T.D., Osborne, C.A., Yano, B.L., et al. (1982)
Clinicopathologic  manifestations  of  progressive   renal
disease in Lhasa Apso and Shih Tzu dogs. Journal of the
American VeterinaryMedical Association,180 (6), 658-64.
O'Leary, C.A. & Atwell, R.B. (2003) Control of familial
and renal cardiac diseases in English Bull Terrriers: how to
repair   a   damaged   breed?  Australian    Veterinary
Practitioner, 33 (2), 75-80.
O'Leary, C.A., Ghoddusi, M. & Huxtable, C.R. (2002)
Renal  pathology  of  polycystic  kidney  disease  and
concurrent hereditary nephritis in Bull Terriers. Australian
Veterinary Journal, 80 (6), 353-61.
O'Leary, C.A., Mackay, B.M., Malik, R., et al. (1999)
Polycystic kidney disease in bull terriers: anautosomal
dominant  inherited  disorder.  Australian Veterinary
Journal, 77 (6), 361-6.
O'Leary, C.A., Mackay, B.M., Taplin, R.H., et al. (2005)
Auscultation   and  echocardiographic  findingsin   Bull
Terriers with and  without polycystic kidney disease.
Australian Veterinary Journal, 83 (5),270-275.
O'Toole, D., Young, S., Severin, G.A., et al. (1983)
Retinal dysplasia of English springer spaniel dogs: light
1069
microscopy of the postnatal lesions. Veterinary Pathology,
20 (3), 298-311.
Oberbauer, A.M., Bell, JS., Belander, JM., et al. (2006)
Genetic  evaluation  of  Addison's  disease  in the
PortugeseWater Dog. BMC Veterinary Research, 2 (1), 15.
Oberbauer, A.M., Bineman, K.S., Belanger, JM., et al.
(2002)  Inheritance of hypoadrenocorticism inbearded
collies. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 63 (5),
643-7.
Oberbauer, A.M.,Hollingsworth, S.R., Belanger, JM., et
al. (2008) Inheritance of cataracts and primary lens
luxation in Jack Russell Terriers.American Journal of
Veterinary Research,69 (2),222-7.
O'Brien, D.P., Johnson, G.S., Schnabel, R.D., et al. (2005)
Genetic mapping of canine multiple system degeneration
and ectodermal dysplasia loci. Journal of Heredity, 96,
727-34.
Ochoa, R., Breitschwerdt, E.B. & Lincoln, K.L. (l984)
Immunoproliferative  small  intestinal  disease  in Basenji
dogs: morphologic observations. American Journal of
Veterinary Research, 45 (3), 482-90.
Olby, N. (2003) Update on canine wobbler surgery. In:
Proceedings, American College of Veterinary Internal
Medicine Conference.
1070
Olesen, H.P., Jensen, O.A. & Norn, M.S. (1974)
Congenital   hereditary   cataract   in  cocker  spaniels.
TheJournal of Small Animal Practice, 15 (12), 741-50.
Olivera, D.K., Riis, R.C., Dutton, A.G., et al. (1991) Feline
lens displacement. A retrospective analysis of 345 cases.
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative Opthalmology, 1,
239-44.
Olsen, L.H., Fredholm, M. & Pedersen, H.D. (l999)
Epidemiology and inheritance of mitral valve prolapse in
Dachshunds. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 13,
448-5.
Onions, D.E. (1984) A prospective survey of familial
canine lymphosarcoma. Journal of the National Cancer
Institute, 72 (4), 909-12.
Osborne, C.A. & Finco, D.R. (1995) Canine and Feline
Nephrology
and
Urology,  Williams  andWilkins,
Philadelphia.
Osborne, C.A., Hammer, R.F. & Klausner, JS. (1981)
Caninesilicaurolithiasis.JournaloftheAmerican
Veterinary Medical Association, 178 (8), 809-13.
Osborne, C.A., Lulich, J.P., Polzin, D.J., et al. (1999)
Analysis of 77,0o0 canine uroliths. Perspectives from the
Minnesota Urolith Center. The Veterinary Clinics of North
America. Small Animal Practice, 29 (1), 17-38
Oshima, Y., Bjerkas, E. & Peiffer, R.L. Jr. (2004) Ocular
histopathologic observations in Norwegian Elkhounds with
1071
primary  open-angle,  close-cleft  glaucoma.  Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 7 (3), 185-8.
Ovrebo Bohnhorst, J., Hanssen, I. & Moen, T. (2001)
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) in Gordon setters with
symmetrical  lupoid  onychodystrophy   and  black  hair
follicular dysplasia. Acta Veterinaria Scandinavia, 42,
323-9.
Owen, T.J., Bruvette, D.S. & Lavton, C.E. (1996)
Chemodectoma in dogs. The Compendium on Continuing
Education for the Practising Veterinarian, 18 (3), 253-65
Oyama, M.A., Sisson,D.D., Behr, M.J., et al. (2003).
Severe valvular aortic stenosis in Bull Terriers: clinical,
anatomical  and   histolopathologic   characterisitics.  In:
Proceedings, American College of Veterinary Internal
MedicineConference.
Padgett, G.A.,Madewell, B.R., Keller, E.T., et al. (1995)
Inheritance of histiocytosis in Bernesemountain dogs. The
Journal ofSmall Animal Practice, 36 (3), 93-8.
Page,A.，Edwards, G.&Atwell,R.B.(1993)
Echocardiographic values in the greyhound. Australian
Veterinary Journal, 70, 361-4.
Page,  N.,  Paradis,M.,  Lapointe,  JM.,  et al.
(2003)Hereditary  nasal   parakeratosis  in   Labrador
Retrievers. Veterinary Dermatology, 14, 103-10.
Palmer, A.C., Blakemore,W.F.,Wallace,M.E., et al. (1987)
1072
the Bernese Mountain Dog. The Veterinary Record, 120.
609-12.
Palmer, A.C., Medd, R.K. & Wilkinson, G.T. (1984)
Spinal cord degeneration in hound ataxia. TheJournal of
Small Animal Practice, 25, 139-48.
Palmer, A.C., Payne, JE.& Lallace, M.E. (1973)
Hereditary quadriplegia and amblyopia in the Irish Setter.
The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 14 (6), 343-52
Palmer, R.H. (2005) Fractures of the radius/ulna. In:
Proceedings,WesternVeterinary Conference.
Panakova, L. Hoch, H., Kolb, S., et al. (2008) Thyroid
testing in Sloughis.Journal of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 22, 114448.
Panciera,D.L. (1994)Hypothyroidism in dogs: 66 cases
(1987-1992). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 204 (5), 761-7.
Panciera, D.L., Thomas, C.B., Eicker, S.W., et al. (1990)
Epizootiologic patterns of diabetes mellitus in cats 333
cases (1980-1986). Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 197 (11), 1504-8.
Panich, R., Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. (1991) Canine
cutaneous sterile pyogranuloma/granuloma syndrome: a
retrospective analysis of 29 cases (1976-1988). Journal of
theAmericanAnimal HospitalAssociation,27,519-28
1073
Paradis, M., De Jaham, C., Page, N., et al. (2005) Acral
mutilation and analgesia in 13 French spaniels. Veterinary
Dermatology, 16, 87-93.
Paradis, M., Scott, D.W. & Breton, L. (1989) Squamous
cell carcinoma of the nail bed in three related Giant
Schnauzers. The Veterinary Record, 125 (12), 322-4
Parker,W.M. & Foster, R.A. (1996) Cutaneous vasculitis
in five Jack Russell Terriers. Veterinary Dermatology, 7,
109-15.
Parry, B.W., Howard, M.A., Mansell, P.D., et al. (1988)
Haemophilia A in German Shepherd Dogs. Australian
Veterinary Journal, 65, 276-9.
Pascual, A.L., Shelton, G.D., Targett, M.P., et al. (2006)
Inheritedmyopathy of Great Danes. The Journal of Small
Animal Practice, 47, 249-54.
Pastor, J. (2002) Canine haemangiosarcoma.
. Clinical
update. In: WSA VA 2002 Congress Proceedings.
Patnaik, A.K. (1989) Canine sinonasal neoplasms:
clinicopathological study of 285 cases. Journal of the
American Animal Hospital Association, 25 (1), 103-14.
Patterson, D.F. (1989) Hereditary congenital heart defects
in dogs. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 30 (3),
153-65.
Patterson, E.E.,Mickelson, JR., Da, Y., et al. (2003)
Clinical  characteristics  and   inheritance  of  idiopathic
1074
epilepsy in Vizslas. Journal of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 17,319-25
Patterson, W.R., Estry, D.W., Schwartz, K.A., et al. (1989)
Absent  platelet aggregation  with normal  fibrinogen
binding  in basset hound  hereditary
 thrombopathy.
Thrombosis and Haemostasis, 62, 1011-5.
Payne,  J.D.,Mehler,  S.J.&Weisse,C.  (2006)Tracheal
collapse. TheCompendium onContinuing Education for the
Practicing Veterinarian,28,373-82.
Pedersen, K.&Scott, D.W.(1991)Idiopathic
pyogranulomatous  inflammation  and  leukocytoclastic
vasculitis of the nasal planum, nostrils and nasal mucosa in
Scottish Terriers in Denmark. Veterinary Dermatology, 2,
85-9.
Peeters, M.E. & Ubbink, G.J. (1994) Dysphagia-associated
muscular dystrophy: a familial trait in the bouvier des
Flandres. The Veterinary Record, 134, 444-6.
Peiffer, R. & Petersen-Jones, S. (2009) Small Animal
Ophthalmology:A Problem-Oriented Approach, 4th edn.
Saunders Elsevier, London, UK.
Pekow, C.A., Hinds, T.R., Maggio-Price, L., et al. (1992)
Osmotic stress in red blood cells from beagles with
hemolytic  anemia.American Journal of Veterinary
Research, 53, 1457-61.
Penderis, J. (2003) Junctionopathies: disorders of the
neuromuscular junction.In: A Practical Guide to Canine
1075
and Feline Neurology (ed Dewey, C.W.), Blackwell, Iowa,
pp.463-515.
Pesteanu-Somogyi, L.D., Radzai, C. & Pressler, B.M.
(2006) Prevalence of feline infectious peritonitis in
specific cat breeds. Journal of Feline Medicine and
Surgery, 8 (1), 1-5.
Peters, J.A. (1969) Canine mastocytoma: excess risk as
related to ancestry. Journal of the National Cancer
Institute, 42 (3), 435-43.
Peters,
J.E.,Hirshman,C.A.&Malley,A.
(1982)
TheBasenji-Greyhound dogmodel of asthma: leukocyte
histamine release, serum IgE, and airway response to
inhaled antigen. Journal of Immunology, 129, 1245-9.
Petersen-Jones,
S.M.,
Entz,D.D.&Sargan,D.R
(1999)cGMPphosphodiesterase-alphamutation
causes
progressive retinal atrophy in the CardiganWelsh Corgi
dog.Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 40
(8), 1637-44.
Petersen-Jones, S.M., Forcier, J. & Mentzer, A.L. (2007)
Ocular melanosis in the Cairn Terrier: clinical description
and investigation of mode of inheritance. Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 10 (1), 63-9.
Peterson, M.E. (2007) Diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism
in dogs. Clinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice, 22
(1), 2-11.
1076
Peterson, M.E., Kintzer, P.P.& Kass, P.H. (l996)
Pretreatment clinical and laboratory findings in dogs with
hypoadrenocorticism: 225 cases (1979-1993). Journal of
the American Veterinary Medical Association, 208 (1),
85-91.
Pettigrew, R., Kent, M., Berry,W., et al. (2005) Peripheral
neuropathy in catsmuscle and nerve biopsies in 138 cats:
diagnosis and outcome. In: Proceedings, American
College of Veterinary InternalMedicine Congress.
Phillips, J.C., Stephenson, B., Hauck, M., et al. (2007)
Heritability and segregation analysis of osteoarcoma in the
Scottish deerhound. Genomics, 90 (3), 354-63.
Picavet, P., Detilleux, J., Verschuren, S., et al. (2007)
Analysis of 4495 canine and feline uroliths in the Benelux.
A retrospective study: 1994-2004. Journal of Animal
Physiology and Animal Nutrition, 91 (5-6), 247-51.
Piek, C.J., Hazewinkel, H.A.,Wolvekamp,W.T., et al.
(1996) Long-termfollow-up of avascular necrosis of the
femoral head in the dog. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice, 37, 12-8.
Pitcher,  G.D.C.&Hahn  C.N. (2007) Atypical
masticatorymusclemyositis in three cavalier King Charles
spaniel littermates. The Journal of Small Animal Practice,
48,226-8.
Platt, S.R. (2008) Working up the weak: neuromuscular
causes of acute collapse. In: Proceedings, American
College of Veterinary Internal Medicine Conference.
1077
Podell, M. (2002) Inflammatory myopathies. The
VeterinaryClinics of North America.Small Animal
Practice, 32, 147-67.
Poncet, C.M., Dupre, G.P., Freiche, V.G., et al. (2005)
Prevalence   of gastrointestinal  tract  lesions  in  73
brachycephalic dogs with upper respiratory syndrome. The
Journal of Small Animal Practice, 46, 273-9.
Popovitch, C.A., Weinstein, M.J., Goldschmidt, M.H., et
al. (1994) Chondrosarcoma: a retrospective study of 97
dogs (1987-1990).Journal of the American Animal
Hospital Association, 30 (1), 81-5.
Post, K., Van Haaften, B. & Okkens, A.C. (1991) Vaginal
hyperplasia in the bitch: literature review and commentary.
Canadian Veterinary Journal, 32 (1), 35-7.
Prelaud, P. & Guaguere, E.(1998) Diagnostic de la
dermatite par allergie aux piqures de puces. Pratique
Medicale et Chirurgicale De L Animal De Compagnie, 33
(suppl), 373.
Prymak, C., McKee, L.J., Goldschmidt, M.H., et al. (1988)
Epidemiologic, clinical, pathologic and prognostic
characteristics of splenic hemangiosarcoma and splenic
haematoma: 217 cases (1985). Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association,193 (6), 706-12
Puerto, D.A., Brockman, D.J., Lindquist, C., et al. (2002)
Surgical and nonsurgical management of and selected risk
factors for spontaneous pneumothorax in dogs: 64 cases
1078
(1986-1999). Journal of theAmerican Veterinary Medical
Association, 220,1670-74.
Pujar, S., Kothapalli, K.S., Kirkness, E., et al. (2005)
Exclusion of Lhx9 as a candidate gene for Srynegative XX
sex reversal in the American cocker spaniel model. The
Journal of Heredity, 96 (4), 452-4.
Radasch, R.M., Lewis, D.F., McDonald, D.E., et al. (2008)
Pes varus correction in Dachshunds using a hybrid external
fixator. Veterinary Surgery, 37, 71-81.
Rah, H., Maggs, D.J., Blankenship, T.N., et al. (2005)
Early-onset,   autosomal recessive,  progressiveretinal
atrophy in Persian cats. Investigative Ophthalmology and
Visual Science, 46 (5), 1742-7.
Ralphs, S.C. & Kramek, B.A. (2003) Novel perineal
oq  u s   go   s
The Canadian Veterinary Journal, 44 (10), 822-23.
Ramos-Vara, J.A., Beissenherz, M.E., Miller, M.A., et al.
(2000) Retrospective study of 338 canine oral melanomas
with clinical, histologic and immunohistochemical review
of 129 cases. Veterinary Pathology, 37 (6), 597-608.
Rand, J.S., Bobbermien, L.M., Hendrikz, J.K., et al. (1997)
Over-representation  of  Burmese  cats with   diabetes
mellitus. Australian Veterinary Journal, 75 (6), 402-5.
Randolph, JF., Center, S.A., Kallfelz, F.A., et al. (1986)
Familial  non-spherocytic  hemolytic  anemia  inpoodles.
American Journal of Veterinary Research, 47,687-95
1079
Rasmussen, P.G. (1971 )Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia in a
litter of Beagle puppies. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice, 12, 91-6
Read, R.A. & Broun, H.C. (2007) Entropion correction in
dogs and cats using a combination Holz-Celsus and lateral
eyelid wedge resection: results in 3l1 eyes. Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 10 (1), 6-11.
Reimer, S.B., Kyles, A.E., Filipowicz,D.E., et al. (2004)
Long-termoutcome  of  cats  treated conservatively  or
surgically for peritoneopericardial  diaphragmatic hernia:
66 cases (1987-2002). Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association,224,728-32
Reusch, C., Hoerauf, A., Lechner, J., et al. (1994) A new
familial glomerulopathy in Bermese Mountain dogs. The
Veterinary Record, 134 (16), 411-5.
Reusch,C.E.&FeldmanE.C.(1991)Canine
hyperadrenocorticism
due to
adrenocortical
neoplasia.Pretreatment evaluation of 41 dogs. Journal of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 5 (1), 3-10.
Richtsmeier, J.T., Sack, G.H. Jr., Grausz, H.M., et al.
(1994) Cleft palate with autosomal recessivetransmission
in Brittany spaniels.  The Cleft Palate Cranio-facial
Journal, 31 (5), 36471.
Riecks, T.W., Birchard S.J. & Stephens, J.A. (2007)
Surgical correction of brachycephalic syndrome indogs: 62
cases (1991-2004). Journal of the American Veterinary
MedicalAssociation,230,1324-8.
1080
Roach,W. & Hecht, S. (2007)What is your diagnosis?
Gastroesophageal   intussusception.  Journal   of   the
American Veterinary Medical Association, 231 (3), 381-2.
Robbins, G.R. (1965) Unilateral renal agenesis in the
beagle. The Veterinary Record, 77 (46), 1345-7.
Robertson, JJ. (1984) Perineal hernia repair in dogs.
Modern Veterinary Practice, 65, 365-8.
Robins,G.&Innes, J. (2006) The elbow. In:BSA VAManua!
ofCanineandFelineMusculoskeletalDisorders(eds
Houlton, JE.F., Cook, JL., Innes, JF., et al.), British
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Gloucester, pp.
249-80.
Robinson, E.P., Sams, R.A. & Muir, W.W. (l986)
Barbuturate anaeshthesia in greyhound and mixedbreed
dogs:  comparative  cardiopulmonary effects, anesthetic
effects, and recovery rates. American Jourmal of
Veterinary Research, 47, 2105-12.
Robinson, R. (1985) Chinese crested dog. Journal of
Heredity, 76, 217-8.
Romagnoli, S.E. (1991) Canine cryptorchidism. The
Veterinary Clinics ofNorthAmerica.Small Animal
Practice, 21 (3), 533-44
Ropstad, E.O., Narfstrom, K., Lingaas, F., et al. (2008)
Functional and structural changes in the retina of
wire-haired   dachshunds   with   early-onset    cone-rod
1081
dystrophy.InvestigativeOphthalmologyandVisual
Science, 49 (3), 1106-15.
Rosenberger, J.A., Pablo, N.V. & Crawford, P.C. (2007)
Prevalence and intrinsic risk factors  for appendicular
osteosarcoma in dogs: 179 cases (1996-2005). Journal of
the American Veterinary Medical Association, 231 (7),
1076-80.
Rosychuk, R. (2002) Pododermatitis in Dogs and
Cats-Part II. In: Proceedings, American College of
VeterinaryInternalMedicine.
Roth, A.M., Ekins, M.B., Waring, G.O. III, et al. (1981)
Oval  corneal  opacities  in  beagles.  II  Histochemical
demonstration of stromal lipids without hyperlipidaemia.
Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 21 (1
pt1), 95-106.
Rothstein, E. (2002) How to diagnose and manage adverse
food reactions. In: Proceedings, Tufts Animal Expo.
Rubin, L.F. (1989) Inherited Eye Diseases in Purebred
Dogs, Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, USA.
Rudd, R.G., Whitehair, J.G. & Margolis, JH. (1990)
Results of management of osteochondritis dissecans of the
humeral head in dogs: 44 cases [1982-1987]. Journal of
the American Animal Hospital Association, 26, 173-8.
Rudmann, D.G., Coolman, B.R., Perez, C.M., et al. (1992)
Evaluation of risk factors for blastomycosis in dogs: 857
1082
cases (1980-1990). Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 201 (11), 1754-9.
Rusbridge, C. (2005) Neurological diseases of the Cavalier
King Charles Spaniel. The Journal of Small Animal
Practice, 46, 265-72
Rusbridge, C.,Knowler, S.P., Pieterse, L., et al. (2009)
Chiari-likemalformation   in  theGriffon  Bruxellois.  The
Journal of Small Animal Practice, 50, 386-93.
Russell, N.J., Bond, K.A., Robertson, I.D., et al. (2006)
Primary Hypoparathyroidism in dogs: a retrospective study
of 17 cases. Australian Veterinary Journal, 84 (8), 285-90
Saito, M.,  Sharp,  N.JH., Kortz,G.D., et
al.
(2002)Magnetic   resonance 
 1maging
features
of
lissencephaly in 2 Lhasa Apsos. Veterinary Radiology and
Ultrasound, 43, 331-7
Sakai, T., Harashima, T. & Yamamura, H. (1994) Two
of Irish setters. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 35,
221-3.
Salisbury, S.K. (2002) Nasopharyngeal and ear polyps in
cats. In: Proceedings, Atlantic Veterinary Conference.
Sanchez, R.F., Innocent, G., Mould, J. & Billson, F.M.
(2007) Canine keratoconjunctivitis sicca: diseasetrends in
areviewof229cases.TheJournalof SmallAnimal
Practice, 48 (4), 211-7.
1083
Sapienza, J.S., Simo, F.J. & Prades-Sapienza, A. (2000)
Golden  Retriever uveitis:  75 cases (1994-1999).
Veterinary Ophthalmology, 3 (4), 241-6
Sapierzynski, R., Malicka, E., Bielecki, W., et al. (2007)
Tumours of the urogenital system in dogs and cats.
Retrospective review of 138 cases. Polish Journal of
Veterinary Sciences, 10 (2), 97-103.
Sargan, D.R. (2004) IDID: inherited diseases in dogs:
web-based  information  for canine inherited  genetics.
Mammalian Genome, 15 (6), 503-6.
Sargan, D.R.,Withers, D., Pettitt, L., et al. (2007)Mapping
themutation causing lens luxation in several terrier breeds.
The Journal of Heredity, 98 (5), 534-8.
Schmutz, S.M., Moker, J.S., Clark, E.G., et al. (1998)
Black hair follicular dysplasia, an autosomal recessive
condition in dogs. Canadian Veterinary Journal, 39,
644-6.
Scholten-Sloof, B.E., Knol, B.W., Rijnberk, A., et al.
   )
family of Dandie Dinmont terriers. The Journal of
Endocrinology, 135 (3), 535-42
Schultheiss, P.C. (2006) Histologic features and clinical
outcomes of melanomas of lip, haired skin and nail bed
locations of dogs.  Journal of  Veterinary  Diagnostic
Investigation, 18 (4), 422-5
1084
Schultz, R.M., Puchalski, S.M., Kent,M., et al. (2007)
Skeletal lesions of histiocytic sarcoma in nineteen dogs.
Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound, 48 (6), 539-43.
Schulz, K.S. (2002) Elbow dysplasia in the dog. In:
Proceedings, Western Veterinary Conference.
Schwassmann, M. (2005) Non-neoplastic lumps and
bumps. In: Proceedings, Western Veterinary Conference.
Scott, D.W. (1986) Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis in
the Cocker Spaniel. Journal of the American Animal
Hospital Association, 22, 125.
Scott, D.W. & Anderson, W.I. (1990) Canine sebaceous
gland tumors: a retrospective analysis of 172 cases. Canine
Practice, 15 (1), 19-27.
Scott, D.W. & Anderson,W.I. (1991) Canine hair follicle
neoplasms: a retrospective analysis  of 80  cases
(1986-1987). Veterinary Dermatology, 2 (3-4), 143-50
Scott, D.W. & Buerger, R.G. (1988) Idiopathic calcinosis
circumscripta in the dog: a retrospective analysis of 130
cases.Journalof the American AnimalHospital
Association, 24, 651.
Scott, D.W. &Miller,W.H. (1990) Epidermal dysplasia
andMalassezia   pachydermatis   infection 
in West
HighlandWhite Terriers. Veterinary Dermatology, 1,
25-36.
1085
Scott, D.W. &Miller,W.H. (1999) Idiosyncratic cutaneous
adverse drug reactions in the dog: literaturereview and
report of 14 cases (1990-1996). Canine Practice, 24, 16.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (1995) Muller &
Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 5th edn, WB Saunders,
Philadelphia
Scott, D.W.,Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E.(200la)
Pigmentary abnormalities In: Muller & Kirk's Small
Animal Dermatology, 6th edn (eds Scott, D.W., Miller,
W.H. & Griffin, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St Louis,
Missouri, pp. 1005-24.
Scott,D.W.,Miller,W.H.&Griffin, C.E. (2001b) Parasitic
skin
diseases.
In:Muller&Kirk'sSmall
Animal
Dermatology, 6th edn (eds Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. &
Griffin, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri, pp.
423-516.
Scott, D.W.,Miller,W.H. &  Griffin, C.E. (2001c)
Neoplastic and non-neoplastic tumours. In: Muller &
Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn (eds Scott,
D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St
Louis, Missouri, pp. 1236-1414.
Scott, D.W.,Miller,W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001d)
Congenital and hereditary defects.  In:Muller & Kirk's
AnimalDermatology,
6th
edn
(eds
Scott,D.W.,Miller,W.H. & Griffin, C.E.), Saunders
Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri, pp. 913-1003.
1086
Scott,  D.W.,Miller,W.H. & Griffin,  C.E.  (2001e)
Environmental skin diseases. In:Muller & Kirk's Small
Animal Dermatology, 6th edn (eds Scott, D.W., Miller,
W.H. & Griffin, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St Louis,
Missouri, pp. 1073-1111.
Scott,D.W.,Miller,W.H.&Griffin, C.E. (2001f) Bacterial
skin
diseases.
In:Muller&Kirk's
Small
Animal
Dermatology, 6th edn (eds Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. &
Griffin, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri, pp.
274-335.
Scott, D.W.， Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E.(200lg)
Nutritional skin diseases.In: Muller & Kirk's Small
Animal Dermatology, 6th edn (eds Scott, D.W., Miller,
W.H. & Griffin, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St Louis,
Missouri, pp. 1112-24.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001h) Skin
immune system and allergic skin diseases. In: Muller &
Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn (eds Scott,
D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St
Louis, Missouri, pp. 543-666.
Scott, D.W.，Miller,W.H.& Griffin,C.E.(200li)
Miscellaneous skin diseases. In: Muller & Kirk's Small
Animal Dermatology, 6th edn (eds Scott, D.W., Miller,
W.H. & Griffin, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St Louis,
Missouri, pp. 1125-83.
Scott, D.W.,  Miller,W.H.&Griffin, C.E. (2001j)
Endocrine and metabolic diseases. In: Muller & Kirk's
Small
AnimalDermatology,
6th
edn
(eds
1087
Scott,D.W.,Miller,W.H.  &  Griffin,  C.E.),  Saunders
Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri, pp. 780-885.
Scott, D.W.,Miller,W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001k) Diseases
of eyelids, claws, anal sacs and ears. In: Muller & Kirk's
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn (eds Scott,
D.W.,Miller,W.H. & Griffin, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St
Louis, Missouri, pp. 1185-1235.
Scott, D.W.,Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E.(20011)
Acquired alopecias. In: Muller & Kirk's Small Animal
Dermatology, 6th edn (eds Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. &
Griffin, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri, pp.
887-912.
Scott,D.W.,Miller,W.H.&Griffin,
C.E.
(2001m)
Immune-mediateddisorders.In:Muller&Kirk'sSma!l
Animal Dermatology, 6th edn (eds Scott, D.W., Miller,
W.H. & Griffin, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St Louis,
Missouri, pp. 667-779.
Scott,D.W.,Miller,W.H.&Griffin,
C.E.
(200ln)Keratinisation defects.  In:Muller&Kirk's Small
Animal Dermatology, 6th edn (eds Scott, D.W., Miller,
W.H. & Griffin, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St Louis,
Missouri, pp. 1025-1054.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H.& Griffin, C.E. (200lo)
Psychogenic skin diseases. In: Muller & Kirk's Small
Animal Dermatology, 6th edn (eds Scott, D.W., Miller,
W.H. & Griffin, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St Louis,
Missouri, pp. 1055-1072.
1088
Scott, D.W.,Miller,W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (200lp) Fungal
Dermatology, 6th edn (eds Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. &
Griffin, C.E.), Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri, pp.
336-422.
Scott, D.W. & Paradis,M. (1990) A survey of canine and
feline skin disorders seen in a university practice: small
Animal Clinic, University of Montreal, Saint-Hyacinthe,
Quebec (1987-1988). Canadian Veterinary Journal, 31,
830-35.
Scott-Moncrieff, JC., Snyder, P.W., Glickman, L.T., et al.
(1992) Systemic necrotizing vasculitis in nine young
beagles.Journal of the American VeterinaryMedical
Association, 201, 1553-8.
Seeliger, F., Leeb,T., Peters,M., et al. (2003) Osteogenesis
imperfect in 2 litters ofDachshunds. Veterinary Pathology,
40, 530-39.
Seim, H.B. (2001) Brachycephalic syndrome. In:
Proceedings,AtlanticVeterinary Conference.
Sellon, R.K. (2005) The MCV in health and disease. In:
Proceedings, American College of Veterinaryinternal
Medicine Congress.
Sevelius, E.,Andersson, M.&Jonsson, L. (1994)Hepatic
accumulation of alpha-1 -antitrypsin in chronicliver disease
in the dog. Journal of Comparative Pathology, 111 (4),
401-12.
1089
Shaker,E.,Hurvitz,A.I.&Peterson,
M.E
(1988)Hypoadrenocorticismin a family of standard
poodles.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Association, 192 (8), 1091-1092.
Sharman, JR.& Wilton, A.N. (2007) Elimination of
neutrophil elastase and the genes for (corrected) adaptor
protein complex 3 subunits (corrected) as the cause of
trapped neutrophil syndrome in Border Collies. Animal
Genetics, 38 (2), 188-9.
Shelton, G.D. (1999) Neuromuscular disorders affecting
young
 dogs
 and
cats.
Veterinary
Neurology
andNeurosurgery Journal, 1, 1.
Shelton, G.D. (2002)Metabolic and endocrinemyopathies
and neuropathies. In: Proceedings, American College of
VeterinaryInternalMedicineCongress.
Shelton, G.D., Podel, L.M., Poncelet, L., et al. (2003)
intermediate  form  of   Charcot-Marie-Toothdisease?
Muscle Nerve, 27, 471-7.
Sherding, B. (2001) Diagnosis and management of feline
oesophageal disease. In: World Small Animal Veterinary
Association World Congress Proceedings 2001.
Shiel, R.E.,Brennan, S.F.& Omodo-Eluk, A.J. (2007a)
Thyroid hormone concentrations  in young, healthy,
pretraining greyhounds. The Veterinary Record, 161,
616-9.
1090
Shiel, R.E., Brennan, S.F. & O'Rourke, L.G. (2007b)
Hematologic  values  in  young   pretraining healthy
Greyhounds. Veterinary Clinical Pathology, 36, 274-7.
Shih, JL., Keating, JH., Freeman, L.M., et al. (2007)
Chronic  hepatitis  in  Labrador   Retrievers:   clinical
presentation and prognostic factors. Journal of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 21 (1), 33-9.
Sidjanin, D.J., Lowe, JK., McElwee, JL., et al. (2002)
Canine CNGB3 mutations establish cone degenerationas
orthologous to the human achromatopsia locus ACHM3.
Human Molecular Genetics, 11(16), 1823-33
Silvestre-Ferreira,A.C., Pastor, J., Almeida,O., et al.
(2004) Frequencies of feline blood types in northern
Portugal. Veterinary Clinical Pathology, 33, 240-43
Sisson, D. (1990) Heritability of idiopathic myocardial
hypertrophy and dynamic subaortic stenosis in Pointer
dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 4, 118.
Sisson, D. (2002) Pericardial effusion: diagnosis and
management.
In:Proceedings,
World
nnus
AnimalVeterinary Association Congress.
Skelly, C.M., McAllister, H. & Donnelly, W.J. (1997)
Avulsion of the tibial tuberosity in a litter of greyhound
puppies. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 38 (10),
445-9.
1091
Slappendel, R.J., Beijer, E.G. & Van Leeuwen, M. (1998)
Type III von Willebrand's disease in Dutch kookier dogs.
Veterinary Quarterly, 20, 93-7.
Slappendel, R.J., van Zwieten, R., van Leeuwen, M., et al.
(2005) Hereditary spectrin deficiency inGolden Retriever
Dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 19,
187-92.
Slappendel, R.J., Van Der Gaag, I., Van Nes, JJ., et al.
(1991)
Familial
stomatocytosis-hypertrophic
gastritis(FSHG), a newly recognised disease in the dog
(Drentse patrijshond). The Veterinary Quarterly,13 (1),
30-40.
Slatter, D.H., Blogg, JR. & Constable, IJ. (1980) Retinal
degeneration   in   Greyhounds. Australian Veterinary
Journal, 56 (3), 106-15.
Smith, F.O. (2006) Canine pyometra. Theriogenology, 66
(3),610-12.
Smith, F.W.K. (2004) Thoracic radiography of cardiac
disease. In: Proceedings, Western VeterinaryConference
Snyder, JM., Shofer, F.S., Van Winkle, T.J., et al. (2006)
Canine    intracranial  primary   neoplasia:   173cases
(1986-2003). Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 20,
669-75.
Snyder, P.W.,Kazacos, E.A., Scott-Moncrieff, J.C., et al.
(1995) Pathologic features of naturally occurring juvenile
1092
polyarteritis in beagle dogs. Veterinary Pathology, 32,
337-45.
Solanti, S., Laitinen, O. & Atroshi, F. (2002) Hereditary
and  clinical  characteristics of lateral luxationof the
superficial digital flexor tendon in Shetland sheepdogs.
Veterinary Therapeutics:Research in AppliedVeterinary
Medicine, 3, 97-103
Sparkes, A.H., Gruffydd-Jones, T.J., Shaw, S.E., et al.
(1993) Epidemiological and diagnostic features of canine
and feline dermatophytosis in  the United Kingdom
from1956 to 1991. The Veterinary Record, 133, 57-61.
Sparkes, A.H., Rogers, K., Henley, W.E., et al. (2006) A
questionnaire-based study of gestation, parturition and
 a  s h d  a 
Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery, 8 (3), 145-57.
Speeti, M., Stahls, A., Meri, S., et al. (2003) Upregulation
of major histocompatibility complex class HIantigens in
hepatocytes  in   Doberman 
Immunology and Immunopathology, 96 (1-2), 1-12.
Speiss, B.M. (1994) Inherited eye disease in the
Entlebucher  Mountaindog.
SchweizerArchivfir
Tierheilkunde, 136 (3), 105-10.
Speiss, B.M., Bolliger, JO., Guscetti, F., et al.
(1998)Multiple ciliary body cysts and secondary glaucoma
in the Great Dane: a report of nine cases. Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 1 (1), 41-5.
1093
Sponenberg,D.P.  &Bowling,   A.T.  (1985)Heritable
syndrome of skeletal defects in a family of Australian
shepherd dogs. Jourmal of Heredity, 76, 393-4.
Srenk, P. (2002) Cauda equina, clinical manifestations,
diagnosis and prognosis. In: Proceedings, World Small
Animal Veterinary Association Congress.
Stanley, R.G. (1988) Superficial stromal keratitis in the
dog. Australian Veterinary Journal, 65 (10), 321-3
Stanley, R.G. & Blogg, JR. (1991) Eye diseases in
Siberian husky dogs. Australian Veterinary Journal, 68
(5), 161-2.
Stannard, A.A. & Pulley, L.T. (1975) Intracutaneous
cormifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma) in the dog: a
retrospective study of 25 cases. Journal of the American
VeterinaryMedical Association, 167 (5), 355-8.
Starr, A.N., Famula, TR.,Markward, NJ., et al.
(2007)Hereditary  evaluation  ofmultiple  developmental
abnormalities in the Havanese dog breed. Journal of
Heredity, 98, 510-17.
Steinberg, K.S.,VanWinkle, T., Bell, JS., et al. (2000)
Cerebellar degeneration in Old English Sheepdogs.Journal
of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 217,
1162-65.
Stern-Bertholtz, W., Sjostrom, L. & Hakanson, N.W
(2003) Primary secretory otitis media in theCavalier King
1094
Charles spaniel: a review of 6l cases. The Journal of Small
Animal Practice,44,253-6.
Storey, E.S., Grahn, B.H. & Alcorn, J. (2005)Multifocal
chorioretinal lesions   in   Borzoi  dogs.   Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 8 (5), 337-47.
Strain, G.M. (2004) Deafness prevalence and pigmentation
and gender associations in dog breeds at risk. Veterinary
Journal, 167, 23-32.
Stritzel, S.,Mischke, R., Philipp, U., et al. (2008) Familial
canine   pituitary-dependent   hyperadrenocorticism
 in
wire-haired Dachshunds.Berliner undMiinchener
Tierarztliche Wochenschrift, 121 (9-10), 349-58
Sturges, B.K. (2003a) Congenital spinal malformations. In:
Proceedings,Western Veterinary Conference.Sturges, B.K
(2003b) Neuropathies: CN IHI-VII. In: Proceedings,
WesternVeterinary Conference.
Sturges, B.K. (2006) Disc disease-something old,
something new. In: Proceedings, VeterinaryNeurology
Symposium.
Sturgess, C.P., Waters, L., Gruffydd-Jones, T.J., et al.
(1997) Investigation of the association between whole
blood and tissue taurine levels and the development of
thoracic deformities in neonatal Burmese kittens. The
Veterinary Record, 141, 566-70.
Sueky, H., Shanley,K., Goldschmidt,M.H., et al. (1997)
Dominantly  inherited  epidermal  acantholysis  in  dogs.
1095
simulating  human  benign  familial  chronic pemphigus
(Hailey-Hailey disease).British Journal of Dermatology,
136, 190-96.
Sullivan, M., Lee, R., Fisher, E.W., et al. (1987) A study
of 31 cases of gastric carcinoma in dogs. The Veterinary
Record, 120 (4), 79-83.
Suwankong, N., Meij, B.P., Voorhout, G., et al. (2008)
Review and   retrospective analysis  of  degenerative
lumbosacral stenosis in 156 dogs treated by dorsal
laminectomy. Veterinary and Comparative Orthopaedics
and Traumatology, 21, 284-93.
Takanosu, M., Takanosu, T., Suzuki, H., et al. (2008)
Incomplete    dominant   osteochondrodysplasia   in
heterozygous Scottish Fold cats. The Journal of Small
Animal Practice, 49, 197-9.
Tams, T.R. (2001) Inflammatory bowel diseases in dogs.
In:Conference Proceedings:Atlantic Coast Veterinary
Conference 2001.
Tanaka, H., Nakayama, M.&Takase, K. (2003)
Histiocytic ulcerative colitis in a French bulldog. The
Journal of Veterinary Medical Science, 65 (3), 431-3
Taylor, J. & Tangner, C.H. (2007) Acquired muscle
contractures in the dog and cat. A review of the literature
and case report. Veterinary and Compartive Orthopaedics
and Traumatology,20, 79-85
1096
Temizsoylu, M.D. & Avki, S. (2003) Complete ventral
ankyloglossia in three related dogs. Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association, 223, 1443-5.
Teske, E.,Naan, E.C., vanDik, E.M., et al. (2002a)Canine
prostate carcinoma: epidemiological evidence of an
increased risk in castrated dogs. Molecular and Cellular
Endocrinology, 197 (1-2), 251-5.
Teske, E., van Straten, G., van Noort, R., et al. (2002b)
Chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, vincristine and
prednisolone (COP) in cats withmalignant lymphoma: new
results with an old protocol. Journal of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 16 (2), 179-86
Tevell, E.H., Bergvall, K.&Egenvall, A.(2008)
Sebaceous adenitis in Swedish Dogs, a retrospective study
of 104 cases. Acta Veterinaria Scandinavia, 50, 11.
Thomas, JB. &Robertson, D. (1989) Hereditary
cerebellar abiotrophy in Australian kelpie dogs. Australian
Veterinary Journal, 66, 301-2.
Thomas, JS.,McConnell, M.F., Bell, T.G., et al. (1992)
Platelet aggregation and dense granule secretion in a
colony of dogs with spontaneous hypertension. Journal of
Hypertension, 10, 1493-8.
Thomas, R.C. & Fox, L.E. (1998) Tumors of the skin and
subcutis.  In:  Cancer  in  Dogs  and  Cats (ed
Morrison,W.B.),Williams andWilkins, Baltimore, pp.
489-510.
1097
Thomas, W. (2003) Seizures and narcolepsy. In: A
Practical Guide to Canine and Feline Neurology (ed
Dewey, C.W.), Blackwell, Iowa.
Thomas, W.B. (2002) Movement disorders in small
animals: shaking, head bobbing, fly biting, and dancing
Dobermans. In: Proceedings, Tufts Animal Expo.
Thomsen, M.K. & Kristensen, F. (1986) Contact dermatitis
Medicin, 38, 129.
Thornburg, L.P., Rottinghaus, G., Dennis, G., et al. (1996)
The relationship between hepatic copper content and
morphologic changes in the liver ofWest HighlandWhite
terriers. Veterinary Pathology, 33 (6), 656-61.
Thornburg, L.P., Shaw, D., Dolan, M., et al. (1986)
Hereditary copper toxicosis inWest HighlandWhiteterriers.
Veterinary Pathology, 23 (2), 148-54.
Thumchai, R., Lulich, J., Osborne, C.A., et al. (1996)
Epizootiologic evaluations of urolithiasis in cats: 3498
cases (1982-1992). Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association, 208 (4), 547-51.
Tidholm, A. (1997) Retrospective study of congenital heart
defects in 151 dogs. The Journal of Small Animal Practice,
38,94-8.
Tidholm, A.,Haggstrom, J., Borgarelli, M., et al. (2001)
Canine idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.Part I:
1098
aetiology, clinical characteristics, epidemiology and
pathology. Veterinary Journal, 162, 92-107.
Tidholm, A. & Jonsson, L. (1996) Dilated cardiomyopathy
in the Newfoundland: a study of 37 cases (1983-1994).
Journal of theAmericanAnimal Hospital Association,32,
465-70.
Tidholm, A. & Jonsson, L. (1997) A retrospective study of
canine dilated cardiomyopathy (189 cases). Jourmal of the
American Animal Hospital Association, 33, 544-50.
Tillson, D.M. & Winkler, J.T. (2002) Diagnosis and
treatment of portosystemic shunts in the cat. The
VeterinaryClinics ofNorth America.Small Animal
Practice, 32 (4), 881-99.
Tipold, A. (2002) Steroid-responsive meningitis-arteritis in
dogs. In: Proceedings, American College of Veterinary
InternalMedicineCongress
Tipper, F.E., Padgett, G.A., Eyster, G., et al. (1987)
Primary hypertension in a colony of dogs. Hypertension, 9,
49-8.
Tisdall, P.L., Hunt, G.B., Bellenger, C.R., et al. (1994)
Congenital portosystemic shunts in Maltese and Australian
Cattle dogs. Australian Veterinary Journal, 71 (6), 1748
Tobias, A., Jacob, K., Fine, D., et al. (2002) Pericardial
disorders: 87 cases of pericardial effusion indogs (January
1, 1999-December 31, 2001). In: Proceedings, American
CollegeofVeterinaryInternalMedicine Conference
1099
Tobias,K.M. (2003) Determination of inheritance of single
congenital  portosystemic  shunts  inYorkshire   terriers.
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 39
(4),385-9.
Tobias, K.M. & Rohrbach, B.W. (2003) Association of
breed with the diagnosis of congenital portosystemic
shunts in dogs: 2,400 cases (1980-2002). Journal of
theAmerican VeterinaryMedicalAssociation,  223  (11),
1636-9.
Toma, S. & Noli, C. (2005) Isotetinoin in the treatment of
multiple benign pilomatixomas in a mixed breed dog.
Veterinary Dermatology, 16 (5), 346-50.
Tonokura, M., Fujita, K. & Nishina, S. (2007) Review of
pathophysiology and clinical management of narcolepsy in
dogs. The Veterinary Record, 161, 375-80.
Torrez, C.V. &Hunt, G.B. (2006) Results of surgical
correction of abnormalities associated with brachycephalic
airway obstruction syndrome in dogs in Australia. The
Journal of Small Animal Practice, 47,150-54.
Turk,M.A., Gallina, A.M. & Russell, T.S. (1981)
Nonhematopoietic  gastrointestinal  neoplasia  in  cats:
aretrospective study of 44 cases. Veterinary Pathology, 18
(5),614-20.
Turney, C., Chong, N.H., Alexander, R.H., et al. (2007)
Pathological and electrophysiological  features of canine
cone-rod dystrophy in the minature long-haired dachshund.
1100
Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science,48 (9)
95-106.
Tuttle, J. (1980) FelineHyperaesthesia Syndrome. Journal
of theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,176,
1166-69.
Twedt, D.C., Sternlieb, I. & Gilbertson, S.R. (l979)
Clinical, morphologic and chemical studies on copper
toxicosis of Bedlington terriers. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 175 (3), 269-75
Urfer, S.R., Gaillard, C. & Steiger, A. (2007) Lifespan and
predispositions  in the Irish Wolfhound: a review.
Veterinary Quarterly, 29, 102-11.
Vaden, S.L., Breitschwerdt, E.B., Henrikson, C.K., et al.
(1991) Primary ciliary dyskinesia in Bichon Frise litter
mates. Journal of the American Animal Hospital
Association, 27, 633-40.
Van de Sandt, R.R., Boeve, M.H., Stades, F.C., et al.
(2003) Abnormal pigment deposition and glaucoma in the
dog. Veterinary Ophthalmology, 6 (4), 273-8.
Van Der Linde-Sipman, JS. (1987) Dysplasia of the
    d   
des Flandres dog. Veterinary Pathology, 24 (3), 4240-49.
Van Der Woerdt, A., Stades, F.C., van der Linde-Sipman,
JS., et al. (1995) Multiple ocular anomalies in two related
litters of soft-coated wheaten terriers. Progress in
Veterinary and Comparative Ophthalmology, 5 (2), 78-82
1101
Van Grundy, T. (1989) Vascular ring anomalies. The
Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practising
Veterinarian, 11, 36-48.
Van Ham, L., Vandevelde, M. & Desmidt, M. (1994) A
tremor syndrome with a central axonopathy in Scottish
terriers. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 8,
290-92.
Van Ham, L.M.L., Desmidt, M., Tshamala, M., et al.
(1993) Canine X-linked muscular dystrophy in Belgian
Groenendaeler Shepherds. Journal of the American Animal
Hospital Association, 29, 570-74.
Van Rensburg, I.B. & Briggs, O.M. (1986) Pathology of
canine lentiginosis profusa. Journal of the South African
Veterinary Association, 57, 159-61.
Van Rensberg, IB.J., Van der Lagt, J. & Smit, M. (1992)
Multiple  inherited  eye anomalies  including persistent
hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis in the Bouvier des
Flandres.Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
Ophthalmology, 2, 143.
van Straten, G., Leegwater, P.A.J., de Vries,M., et al.
(2005)  Inherited   congenital  extrahepatic  portosystemic
shunts in Cairn terriers. Journal of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 19 (3), 321-4.
van Toor, A.J., van der Linde-Sipman, J.S., van den Ingh,
T.S., et al. (l991) Experimental induction of fasting
hypoglycaemia and fatty liver syndrome in three Yorkshire
terrier pups. The Veterinary Quarterly, 13 (1), 16-23.
1102
Vandevelde,M., Braund, K.G.,Walder, T.L., et al. (1978)
Dysmyelination of the central nervous system in the
Chow-Chow dog. Acta Neuropathologica, 42, 211-5.
Vasseur, P.B., Foley, P., Stevenson, S., et al. (1989)Mode
of inheritance of Perthes’ disease inManchester terriers.
Clinical Orthopoedics, 244, 281-92.
Viitmaa, R., Cizinauskas, S., Bergamasco, L.A., et al.
(2007) Magnetic resonance imaging findings in Finnish
Spitz dogs with focal epilepsy. Journal of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 20, 305-1.
Vilboux, T., Chaudieu, G., Jeannin, P., et al. (2008)
Progressive retinal atrophy in the Border Collie: a new
XLPRA. BMC Veterinary Research, 3 (4), 10.
Virga, V. (2004) Behavioral dermatology: psychogenic
alopecia, ALD and related syndromes. In: Proceedings,
NortheastVeterinaryConference.
Volk, S. (2006) Patellar luxation update. In: Proceedings.
British Small Animal Veterinary Association Congress.
Vollmar, A. (2000) The prevalence of cardiomyopathy in
the Irish Wolfhound: a clinical study of 500dogs. Journal
of the American Animal Hospital Association,36,125-32
Von Bomhard, W., Mauldin, E.A., Schmutz, S.M., et al.
(2006)Blackhair  follicular
dysplasia
in
LargeMunsterlander dogs: clinical, histological and
ultrastructural  features.  Veterinary
Dermatology,
17,182-8.
1103
Von Landenberg, F., Biermann, U., Hamann, H.P., et al.
(199o)Multifocalserous chorioretinitis inbeagle dogs
Lens and Eye Toxicity Research, 7 (3-4), 685-91.
Vroom, M.W., Theaker, M.J., Rest, JR., et al. (1995)
Lupoid dermatosis in five German Short-hairedPointers.
Veterinary Dermatology, 6, 93-8.
Wallace, M.E. & Palmer, A.C. (1984) Recessive mode of
inheritance in myasthenia gravis in the Jack Russell terrier.
The Veterinary Record, 114, 350.
Wallace, M.R., MacKay, E.O., Gelatt, K.N., et al. (2005)
Inheritance of cataract in the Bichon Frise. Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 8 (3), 203-5.
Wallin-Hakanson, B.,Wallin-Hakanson, N. & Hedhammar,
A. (2000) Collie eye anomaly in the rough collie in
Sweden: genetic transmission and influence on offspring
vitality. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 41 (6),
254-8.
Walton, G. S. (1977) Allergic contact dermatitis. In:
Current Veterinary Therapy VI (ed Kirk, R.W.), WB
Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 571.
Walvoort, H.C. (1985) Glycogen storage disease type II in
the Lapland dog. Veterinary Quarterly, 7, 187-90.
Wang,P.，
Seng,A.， Huff,A.,etal.
(2005)Mucopolysaccharidosis in dogs and cats: clinical
signs to DNA tests. In: Proceedings, Tuftis’ Canine and
FelineBreedingand GeneticsConference.
1104
Washabau, R. (2001) Canine idiopathic megaesophagus:
pathogenesis, diagnosis and therapy. In: Conference
Proceedings World Small Animal Veterinary Association
Congress 2001.
Washabau, R.J. (2004) Diagnosis and management of
swallowing disorders in dogs and cats. In: Proceedings,
Atlantic Coast Veterinary Conference.
Watson, P.J. (2004) Chronic hepatitis in dogs: a review of
current understanding of the aetiology, progression and
treatment. The Veterinary Journal, 167 (3), 228-41.
Watson, P.J., Herrtage, M.E., Peacock, M.A., et al. (1999)
Primary ciliary dyskinesia in Newfoundland dogs. The
Veterinary Record, 144, 718-25.
Watson,P.J.,Roulois,  A.J.,  Scase,T.,  et  al.
(2007)Prevalence and breed distribution of  chronic
pancreatitis at post-mortem examination in first-opinion
dogs. The Journal of Small Animal Practice, 48 (11),
609-18.
Watson, P.J.,Wotton, P., Eastwood, J., et al. (2006)
Immunoglobulin deficiency in Cavalier  King  Charles
Spaniels  with  pneumocystis  pneumonia.  Journal   of
Veterinary Internal Medicine,20,523-7.
Weaver, A.D. (1983) Survey with follow-up of 67 dogs
with sertoli cell tumours. The Veterinary Record, 113 (5),
105-7.
1105
Webb, C.B., Twedt, D.C. & Meyer, D.J. (2002)
Copper-associated liver disease in Dalmatians: a review of
10 dogs (1998-2001). Journal of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 16 (6), 665-8.
Weir, JA., Yager J.A., Caswel, JL., et al. (1994) Familial
cutaneous vasculopathy of German shepherds: clinical,
genetic and preliminary pathological and immunological
studies. Canadian Veterinary Journal, 35, 763-9.
Wentink, G.H., Van Der Linde-sipman, JS., Meijer,
A.E.F.H., et al. (1972) Myopathy with possible recessive
X-linked inheritance in a litter of Irish terriers. Veterinary
Pathology, 9, 328.
Wermer, A.H. (1999) Recognizing and treating discoid
lupus erythematosus and pemphigus foliaceous in dogs
Veterinary Medicine,94,955-66
Werner, A.H. (2004) Self-injurious behavior in dogs and
cats-a dermatologist's perspective. II. In: Proceedings,
White, S.D., Bourdeau, P., Rosychuk, R.A., et al. (2001)
Zinc-responsive dermatosis in dogs: 41 cases and a
literature review. Veterinary Dermatology, 12, 101-9
Whitney, K.M. & Lothrop C.D. (1995) Genetic test for
pyruvate kinase deficiency of Basenjis. Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association, 207, 918.
Wiberg, M.E., Saari, S.A. & Westermarck, E. (1999)
Exocrine pancreatic atrophy in German Shepherd Dogs
1106
and Rough-coated Collies: an end result of lymphocytic
pancreatitis. Veterinary Pathology, 36 (6), 530-41.
Wilcock, B.P. &Patterson, JM. (1979) Familial
glomerulonephritis in Doberman Pinscher dogs. The
Canadian Veterinary Journal, 20 (9), 244-9.
Willis,M.B., Curtis, R., Barnett, K.C., et al. (1979) Genetic
aspects of lens luxation in the Tibetan terrier. The
Veterinary Record, 104 (18), 409-12.
Witsberger, T.H., Villamil, JA., Schultz, L.G., et al.
(2008) Prevalence of and risk factors for hip dysplasia and
American VeterinaryMedical Association, 232, 1818-24.
Wood, F.D., Pollard, R.E., Uerling, M.R., et al. (2007)
Diagnostic imaging findings and endocrine test results in
dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism that
did or did not have neurologic
abnormalities: 157 cases (1989-2005). Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association, 231 (7),
1081-85.
Wood, JL., Lakhani, K.H., Mason, IK., et al. (2001)
Relationship of the degree of goniodysgenesis and other
ocular measurements to glaucoma in Great Danes.
American Journal of Veterinary Research, 62 (9), 1493-9.
Wood, JL., Lakhani, K.H.&Read, R.A. (1998) Pectinate
ligament dysplasia and glaucoma in Flat-coatedRetrievers.
1107
II Assessment of prevalence and heritability. Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 1 (2-3), 91-9.
Xenoulis, P.G., Suchodolski, JS., Levinski, M.D., et al.
(2007)  Investigation of hypertriglyceridemia in healthy
Miniature Schnauzers. Journal of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 21, 122430.
Yaeger,M.J.,Majercik, K., Carter,M., et al. (2000) An
autosomal recessive, lethal, neurologic disease of Gordon
Setter
puppies.Journal
Diagnostic
Investigation, 12,570-73.
Yang, TJ. (1987) Pathobiology of canine cyclic
haematopoeisis (review). In Vivo, 1 (5), 297-302
Yasuba,M.,Okimoto,K., Hida,M., et al. (1988) Cerebellar
cortical    degeneration 
inbeagle
Pathology, 25, 315-7.
Yates, D., Hayes, G., Heffernan, M., et al. (2003)
Incidence of cryptorchidism in dogs and cats. The
Veterinary Record, 152 (16), 502-4.
Yogalingam, G., Pollard, T., Gliddon, B., et al. (2002)
Identification of amutation causingmucopolysaccharidosis
type IHIA in New Zealand Huntaway dogs. Genomics, 79,
150-53.
Young, A.E., Biller, D.S., Herrgesell, E.J., et al. (2005)
Feline polycystic kidney disease is linked to the PKD1
region. Mammalian Genome, 16 (1), 59-65
1108
Zaal, M.D., Van Den Ingh, T.S., Goedegebuure, S.A., et
al. (1997) Progressive neuronopathy in two Cairn terrier
litter mates. Veterinary Quarterly, 19, 34-6.
Zanna, G., Fondevila, D., Bardagi, M., et al. (2008)
Cutaneous mucinosis in shar-pei dogs is due to hyaluronic
acid deposition and is associated with high levels of
hyaluronic acid in serum. Veterinary Dermatology, 19,
314-8.
Zeugswetter, F., Hoyer, M.T., Pagitz, M., et al. (2008) The
desmopressin  stimulation test  in dogs  with cushings
syndrome. Domestic Animal Endocrinology, 34 (3),
254-60.
Zhang, Q.,Baldwin,V.J.,Acland, G.M., et al. (1999)
Photoreceptor dysplasia (pd) in miniature schnauzer dogs:
evaluation of candidate genes by molecular genetic
analysis. The Journal of Heredity, 90 (1), 57-61.
Zhul, D., Carrig, C.B., Conners, R.W., et al. (1992) Canine
bone shape analysis by use of a radiographic
image-classification   system.  American   Journal   of
Veterinary Research,53,1090-95.
1109
Appendix: Genetic test providers
(NB.Thisbook does notcontain an exhaustivelist of
genetic tests or providers. New genetic tests are becoming
available all the time.)
Animal Health Trust
Genetic Services, Lanwades Park, Kentford, Newmarket,
Suffo1k, CB8 7UU, UK
http://www.aht.org.uk
Auburn University
College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn, Alabama 36849,
USA
http://www.vetmed.auburn.edu/
Canigen
University of Helsinki, Finland, Genoscoper Oy, P.O. Box
36, 00501 Helsinki, Finland
http://www.genoscoper.com/in english2
Cornell University
Coagulation Section - Animal Health Diagnostic Center,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell
University, P.O.Box 5786
1110
http://www.diaglab.vet.cornell.edu/coag/test/hemopwh.asp
Diagnostic Laboratories
Langford House, Langford, North Somerset, BS40 5DU
http://www.langfordvets.co.uk/diagnostic laboratories.htm
Goldstein Molecular and Genetics Laboratory
Richard E. Goldstein, DVM, DACVIM, DECVIM-CA.
phpt@comell.edu
http://www. vet.cormell.edu/labs/goldstein/
HealthGene
2175 Keele St., Toronto, Ontario, M6M 3Z4, Canada
http://www.healthgene.com
Michigan State University
Laboratory of Comparative Medical Genetics, 2209
Biomedical Physical Sciences Bldg, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, MI 48824-4320
http://mmg.msu.edu/92.html
OptiGen?, LLC
Cornell Business & Technology Park 767Warren Road.
Suite 300, Ithaca, New York 14850, USA
1111
genetest@optigen.com
http://www.optigen.com/
Orthopedic Foundation  for Animals / University of
Missouri
2300 E Nifong Boulevard, Columbia, MO65201
www.offa.org/
PennGen Laboratories
School of Vet Med, Univ of Pennsylvania, 3900 Delancey
St, Rm 4013, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6010, USA
penngen@lists.upenn.edu
http://research. vet.upenn.edu/penngen
University of Minnesota
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Minnesota, 1333 Gortner Avenue,
St Paul, MN 55108-1098
http://www.cvm.umn.edu/
University of New South Wales
AlanWilton, BABS, School of Biotechnology, University
of New SouthWales, NSW 2052, Australia
1112
http://www.babs.unsw.edu.au/
canine_genetics_facility_tns.php
VetGen
3728 Plaza Drive, Suite 1, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 48108
USA
http://www.vetgen.com
Veterinary Genetics Laboratory
University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue,
Davis, CA 95616 - 8744, USA
http://www.vgl.ucdavis.edu/services/index.php
Washington State University
Veterinary Cardiac Genetics Laboratory, Washington State
University, Post Office Box 605, Pullman, WA 99163 -
0605, USA
http://www.vetmed.wsu.edu/deptsVCGL/index.aspx
1113
Plate 1 Mature cataract in a 9-year-old neutered male
Bichon Frise. Photo courtesy of Mark Bossley.
Plate 2 Iris cyst. Photo courtesy of Mark Bossley.
1114
Plate 3 Prolapse of the gland of the nictitating membrane
('cherry eye') in a bulldog pup.
1115
Plate 4 Oral malignant melanomain a 10-year-old
crossbreed.
Plate 5 Jaundice is one of the symptoms of acute
haemolyticanaemia.
1116
Plate 6 Choroidal hypoplasia and increased blood vessel
tortuosity in a 2-year-old entire female Rough Collie with
collie eye anomaly. Photo courtesy of Mark Bossley
Plate 7 Corneal lipid dystrophy in a 2-year-old entire
female Rough Collie. Photo courtesy of Mark Bossley.
1117
Plate 8 Acral lick granuloma. Photo courtesy of A. Foster,
University of Bristol.
1118
Plate 9 Scrotal histiocytoma in a 2-year-old crossbreed
dog
1119
Plate 10 Lipoma in an 11-year-old neutered female dog
(H&E stain,× 132).
Plate ll Severe perianal fistulation (anal furunculosis) in
an 8-year-old German Shepherd dog.
1120
Plate 12 A splenic haemangiosarcoma being removed at
exploratory coeliotomy. The mass has omentum adhered to
it.
Plate 13 Plasmoma in a 10-year-old entire male German
Shepherd dog. Photo courtesy of Mark Bossley.
1121
Plate 14 Plasmoma in a 10-year-old entire male German
Shepherd dog. Photo courtesy of Mark Bossley.
1122
Plate 15 Plasmoma in a 10-year-old entire male German
Shepherd dog: conjunctival scraping. Photo courtesy of
MarkBossley.
1123
Plate 16 Mast cell tumour (skin) in a 6-year-old female
Staffordshire Bull Terrier. Mast cells have round nuclei
with granular cytoplasm. Some eosinophils are present
(H&Estain,× 132).
1124
Plate 17 Mast cell tumour (skin): metachromatic granules
are visible in the cytoplasm with a toluidine blue stain
(toluidine blue, x 132).
Plate 18 Post-mortem of the heart showing right
ventricular enlargement secondary to tricuspid dysplasia
1125
Plate 19 Cormeal pigmentation, neovascularization and
oedema secondary to keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a Jack
Russell Terrier. Photo courtesy of Mark Bossley.
1126
Plate 20 Vaginal hyperplasia. Note there is also a rectal
prolapse. Photo courtesy of Andy Moores.
1127
Plate 21 Cutaneous histiocytoma in an 8-month-old male
Rottweiler (H&E stain, × 132).
Plate 22 Urate crystals sedimented in a urine sample.
Photo courtesy of E. Hall, University of Bristol.
1128
Plate 23 Atopy in a West Highland White Terrier. Photo
courtesy of A. Foster, University of Bristol.
1129
Plate 24 Cormeal sequestrum and secondary lower lid
entropion in a 5-year-old neutered male cat. Photo courtesy
of Mark Bossley.
Plate 25 Polycystic kidney disease in a 7-year-old Persian
cat at post-mortem.
1130
Plate 26 Struvite uroliths removed at cystotomy. Photo
courtesy of Emma Wells.
Plate 27 Gastric adenocarcinoma. Photo courtesy of E.
Hall, University of Bristol.
1131
Plate 28 Haemangiopericytoma in a 10-year-old female
dog. Spindle cells are seen in a whorl configuration, some
are around blood capillaries (H&E stain, × 132).
1132
10-year-old male dog: malignant lymphoma (H&E stain, x
132).
Plate 30 Parathyroid adenoma × 400 magnification
1133
Plate 31 Loss of pigment and nasal discharge in a dog, due
to aspergillosis. Photo courtesy of Emma Wells.
1134