SMALL
ANIMAL
Second
SURGERY
Edltlon
SECRETS
Qucstions and Answers
Reveal the Secrets
tothe Principles and
Pactice of Small
Animal Surgeny
IOSEPH HARARI,DVM,MS,DACVS
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
HANLEY & BELFUS, INC.
An lmprint of Elsevier
The Curtis Center
Independence Square West
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106-3399
SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY SECRETS
1-56053-579-2
Copyright @ 2004, 2000 Hanley & Belfus, Inc.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
your request on-line via the Elsevier Science homepage (http://www.elsevier.com, by selecting "Customer
Support" and then "Obtaining Permissions.")
Notice
Veterinary Medicine is an ever-changing field. Standard safety precautions must be followed, but as new
become necessary or appropriate. Readers are advised to check the most current product information
provided by the manufacturer of each drug to be administered to verify the recommended dose, the
method and duration of administration, and contraindications. lt is the responsibility of the treating
treatment for each individual patient. Neither the Publisher nor the author assumes any liability for any
The Publisher
In honor and memory of my uncle,
Zvi Eder,
a Pioneer of the Promised Land
Acquisitions Editor: Liz Fathman
Developmentat Editor:Jolynn Gower
Design Manager: Bill Drone
Pubtishing Services Manager: Gayle May
Marketing Manager: Greg Heth
International Standard Book Number 1-56053-579-2
Printed in the United States of America
Last digit is the print number 9 8 76 5 4 3 2 1
HANLEY & BELFUS, INC.
An Imprint of Elsevier
The Curtis Center
Independence Square West
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106-3399
SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY SECRETS
1-56053-579-2
Copyright @ 2004, 2000 Hanley & Belfus, Inc.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier lnc. Rights Department in Philadelphia, USA: phone:
(+1)215 238 7869, fax: (+1) 215 238 2239, email: healthpermissions@ elsevier.com. You may also complete
your request on-line via the Elsevier Science homepage (http://www.elsevier.com, by selecting "Customer
Support" and then "Obtaining Permissions.")
Notice
Veterinary Medicine is an ever-changing field. Standard safety precautions rmust be followed, but as new
provided by the manufacturer of each drug to be administered to verify the recormimended dose, the
method and duration of administration, and contraindications. lt is the responsibility of the treating
physician, relying on experience and knowledge of the patient, to determine dosages and the best
treatment for each individual patient. Neither the Publisher nor the author assumes any liability for any
The Publisher
In honor and memory of my uncle,
Zvi Eder,
a Pioneer of the Promised Land
Acquisitions Editor: Liz Fathman
Developmentat Editor:Jolynn Gower
Design Manager: Bill Drone
Pubtishing Services Manager: Gayle May
Marketing Manager: Greg Heth
Intermnational Standard Book Number 1-56053-579-2
Printed in the United States of America
Last digit is the print number 9 8 7 6 5 43 2 1
CONTRIBUTORS
Tannaz Amalsadvala, BVSc, AH, MS
Curtis W. Dewey, DVM, MS, DACVS,
Veterinarian/Post-doctoral Fellow
DACVIM (Neurology)
Scott-Ritchey Research Center
 Long Island Veterinary Specialists
College of Veterinary Medicine
Plainview, New York
Auburn University, Alabama
Dianne Dunning, DVM, MS, DACVS
Kenneth E. Bartels, DVM, MS
Assistant Professor
 McCasland Professor of Laser Surgery, Cohn
Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
Chair for Animal Care
University of Illinois, College of Veterinary
Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
Urbana, Illinois
Oklahoma State University
Stillwater, Oklahoma
James M. Fingeroth, DVM, DACVS
Veterinary Specialists of Rochester
Trevor N. Bebchuk, DVM, DACVS
Rochester, New York
Associate Professor Small Animal Surgery
Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Randall B. Fitch, DVM, MS, DACVS
Western College of Veterinary Medicine
Veterinary Surgery Associates
University of Sas katchewan
San Mateo, California
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan
Canada
J. David Fowler, DVM, MVSc, DACVS
Gulf Coast Veterinary Specialists
Randy J. Boudrieau, DVM, DACVS
Houston, Texas
Professor of Surgery
Clinical Sciences
 Joanne N. Franks, DVM, DACVS
 Tufts University School of Veterinary
Surgeon
Medicine
Dallas Veterinary Surgical Center
Tufts University
Dallas, Texas
North Grafton, Massachusetts
Section Head - Small Animal Surgery
Lynetta J. Freeman, DVM, MS, DACVS
Clinical Sciences
Director
Foster Hospital for Small Animals
Franchise Development
North Grafton, Massachusetts
Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc.
Cincinnati, Ohio
Elaine R. Caplan, DVM, DABVP, DACVS
Capital Area Veterinary Specialists
Thomas R. Fry, DVM, MS, DACVS
Austin, Texas
Owner
Cascade Veterinary Specialists
Bradley R. Coolman, DVM, MS, DACVS
 Issaquah, Washington
Adjunct Assistant Professor
Veterinary Clinical Medicine
Joseph C. Glennon, VMD, DACVS
Purdue University
Senior Surgeon
West Lafayette, Indiana
 Department of Surgery
Chief of Surgery
Veterinary Specialties Referral Center
Veterinary Surgical Services
Pattersonville, New York
Fort Wayne, Indiana
vi
Contributors
Barbara R. Gores, DVM, DACVS
Leigh A. Lamont, DVM, MS, DACVA
Arizona Veterinary Surgery
Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology
Tucson, Arizona
Department of Companion Animals
Atlantic Veterinary College
John Haburjak, DVM, DACVS
University of Prince Edward Island
Chief of Surgery
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island
Berkeley Center for Special Veterinary
Canada
Services of Surgery
(Orthopedic, Soft Tissue, Neurosurgical)
Otto I. Lanz, DVM, DACVS
Berkeley, California
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of
Associate/Consultant
Veterinary Medicine
Veterinary Orthopedic and Surgery Service
 Department of Small Animal Clinical
Fremont, California
Sciences
Blacksburg, Virginia
Joseph Harari, MS, DVM, DACVS
Veterinary Surgical Specialists
Sandra Manfra Maretta, MA, DVM,
Spokane, Washington
DACVS, DAVDC
Professor Small Animal Surgery and
Patricia A. Heine, DVM, PhD
Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana
Veterinary Clinical Medicine
University of Illinois
Robin Halliday Holtsinger, DVM, DACVS
Urbana, Illinois
Small Animal Surgeon
 South Florida Veterinary Surgical Services,
Steven L. Marks, BVSc, MRCVS, MS
Inc.
DACVIM
Fort Lauderdale, Florida
Associate Professor and Head
Small Animal Medicine
Spencer A. Johnston, VMD, DACVS
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
Professor
University of Illinois
Department of Small Animal Clinical
Urbana, Illinois
Sciences
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of
Juan M. Marti, MVM, DACVS
Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech
Veterinary Surgical Specialists
Blacksburg, Virginia;
Chesapeake, Virginia
Staff Surgeon
Upstate Veterinary Specialists
Timothy C. McCarthy, DVM, PhD,
Greenville, South Carolina
DACVS
 Owner/Chief Surgeon
 Lisa S. Klopp, DVM, MS, DACVIM
Surgical Specialty Clinic for Animals
(Neurology)
Beaverton, Oregon
Assistant Professor Neurology &
Neurosurgery
Sheila M. McCullough, MS, DVM,
Colorado State University
DACVIM
Dept. of Clinical Sciences
Clinical Assistant Professor
Fort Collins, Colorado
 Director of Emergency Services
Small Animal Medicine
Elizabeth J. Laing, DVM, DVSc, DACVS
University of Illinois
Surgical Referral Service
Urbana, Illinois
Fort Atkinson, Wisconsin
Linda S. McGonagle, MSPT, LVT
 Morningstar Animal Physical Therapy
Genoa, New York
Contributors
vii
Ron M. McLaughlin, DVM, DVSc, DACVS
Bernard Seguin, DVM, MS, DACVS
Associate Professor and Head, Small Animal
Assistant Professor
Surgery
 Department of Surgical and Radiological
 Department of Clinical Sciences
Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
School of Veterinary Medicine
Mississippi State University
University of California, Davis
Mississippi State, Mississippi
Davis, California
Holly S. Mullen, DVM, DACVS
John T. Silbernagel, DVM, MS, DACVS
ChiefofStaff
 Indiana Veterinary Specialists
California Veterinary Surgical Practice
Indianapolis, Indiana
VCA Emergency Animal Hospital and
Referral Center
Michael J. Singer, DVM, MS
San Diego, California
Boston Road Animal Hospital
Springfield, Massachusetts
Dennis E. Olsen, DVM, MS, DACVS
 Program Director, Veterinary Technology
C.W. Smith, DVM, MS, DACVS
Division of Health Sciences
Professor Emeritus
Community College of Southern Nevada
University of Illinois
Specialty Surgeon
Champaign, Illinois 
Southern Nevada Veterinary Surgical
Specialists
Steven P. Swaim, DVM, MS
Las Vegas, Nevada
Wound Healing/Reconstructive Surgery
Program
Sheldon L. Padgett, DVM, MS, DACVS
Scott-Ritchey Research Center/Department of
Metropolitan Veterinary Referral Group
Clinical Sciences
Akron, Ohio
College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn University, Alabama
Mark B. Parchman, DVM, DACVS
South Bay Veterinary Specialists
D. Michael Tillson, DVM, MS, DACVS
San Jose, California
Associate Professor
Clinical Sciences
Mary K. Quinn, DVM, MS, DACVS
Small Animal Surgery
 Dundee Animal Hospital
Auburn University
Dundee, Illinois
College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn, Alabama
Robert M. Radasch, DVM, MS, DACVS
 Dallas Veterinary Surgical Center
Katherine L. Wells, DVM
Dallas, Texas
Medical Director, Head of Surgery
Surgery
MaryAnn Radlinsky, DVM, MS, DACVS
 Metroplex Veterinary Referral Group
University of Georgia
Irving, Texas
College of Veterinary Medicine
Athens, Georgia
Kristi M. Sandman, DVM, MS
Surgeon
Animal Emergency and Treatment Center
Grayslake, Illinois
Surgeon
Mobile Animal Surgical Service
Lincolns hire, Illinois
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
This second edition of Smaff Animaf Surgery Secrets is intended to continue the tradition of the
human and veterinary Secrets senies in providing concise, relevant, and sometimes irreverent
clinical information to readers. New contributors and chapters have been added, and previously
published material has been updated to stimulate the interest of students, house officers, and
practicing surgeons.
The organization of the book follows a format similar to that of the previous edition: general
text are similar to the educational and training processes of surgery students, interns, and
residents. Furthermore, readers will benefit from reviewing material obtained from a diverse
country.
 I am indebted to Bill Lamsback of Hanley & Belfus for assisting me with the development
and completion of this project. Additionally, the contributors are sincerely thanked for donating
their time and expertise to share their professional secrets with others.
JosephHarari,DVM,MS,DACVS
Section I
General Concepts
1. WOUND HEALING
Ioseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip A.C.VS
1. Why should surgeons need an understanding of wound healing?
The cornerstone of surgery is the restoration of function. Recovery of organ or limb function
is based on cells and tissues regaining biologic integrity by healing from wounds created
naturally or iatrogenically.
2. What is a wound?
Disruption of normal anatomic continuity and metabolic functions of body structures,
including organs, tissues, and cells.
3. List common causes of wounds.
·Surgery
●Trauma (vehicular, firearm, fights)
· Neoplasia
· Topical medications
·Infection
·Chemicals
·Excessive temperatures
·Irradiation
4. What is wound healing?
The physiologic restoration of organ structure and function. It is characterized by cellular
and biochemical processes occurring in an organized and sequential pattern lasting from days to
months to years.
5. How do wounds heal?
1. After wounding, inflammation occurs within minutes and lasts for 1-3 days. This is also
called the lag or substrate phase and is characterized by vasoconstriction followed by
vasodilation and vascular fluid leakage secondary to release of chemical mediators
(histamine, serotonin, prostaglandins) by mast cells and platelets. Neutrophils and
monocytes migrate into the wound for phagocytosis and enzymatic destruction of foreign
and host cellular debris. In situ macrophages release chemotactic substances to stimulate
fibroplasia, angiogenesis, and collagen synthesis.
2. Between days 3 and 21, the repair or proliferative phase occurs. It is characterized by
fibroblastic proliferation, capillary infiltration, and reepithelialization. Fibroblasts
produce an amorphous ground substance and collagen, which is responsible for wound
proliferation provides surface coverage of the wound.
2
Wound Healing
3. After the repair phase, and lasting months to years, is the maturation or remodeling
phase. It is characterized by increased cross-linking of collagen fibers, development of a
bas ket-weave arrangement of the fibers, and deposition of the fibers along lines of stress.
6. How do wound defects close?
Via epithelialization and contraction. Marginal basal cells proliferate and mobilize over the
adjacent healing granulation bed. Myofibroblasts contain actin and undergo cellular contraction,
which results in a rearrangement and reduction of the surrounding tissue matrix.
7. What is the basis for wound strength?
Collagen is the major structural protein of connective tissue. In wounds, the initial type II
(%o) seixoidde snss punom go ytuans su sseud uogeneu s ut I ed Aq poeidi si
but never equals that of normal tissue and is related to cross-linking of collagen fibers, not
continued deposition.
8. What marker is used to assess wound strength?
Hy droxyproline is assayed as an indicator of collagen content in the wound. The maximum
rate of increasing wound strength occurs between days 5 and 12 postwounding.
9. Describe the categories of wound healing.
· First intention or primary wound closure is apposition of tissues by sutures, staples, tapes,
or adhesives.
· Second intention or secondary wound closure occurs when large cutaneous wounds are
allowed to close by granulation, epithelialization, and contraction without the use of
sutures, staples, and so forth.
· Third intention wound healing is surgical closure of a granulating (second intention)
wound after excision of granulation tissue or freshening of epithelial margins. These
wounds heal more rapidly than primary wound closures because the inflammatory and
proliferative phases of healing have already occurred.
10. What is granulation tissue?
A mixture of capillaries, lymph vessels, fibroblasts, macrophages, amorphous matrix,
granular) is based on reforming capillary buds and loops. It provides a barrier to infection, a bed
for epithelialization, and a cellular source for wound contraction and support.
11. Which cells are most important in influencing neovascularization, granulation tissue
formation, and epithelial migration in healing wounds?
Macrophages—by their secretion of various growth factors, chemoattractants, and
proteolytic enzymes.
12. Which growth factors are important in wound healing?
·Platelet-derived growth factors (initiate cellular division)
· Transforming growth factors (increase collagen synthesis)
·Epidermal growth factor
13. Which factors affect wound healing?
Local
· Vascularity provides oxygenation and delivery of nutrients to cells and tissues.
· Foreign material can delay healing by exacerbating inflammation and promoting
infection.
WoundHealing
3
·Dead space and fluid accumulation inhibit cellular migration and increase risk of infection.
· Irradiation within 2 weeks of surgery decreases fibroblast formation, collagen synthesis,
and capillary regeneration.
· Bacterial infection impedes healing because of persistent inflammation, tissue necrosis,
and accumulation of fluids.
·Lavage solutions (lactated Ringer's, saline, 0.05% chlorhexidine, 0. 1% povidone-iodine)
can promote healing by reducing contamination.
· Nonadherent dressings promote epithelialization, whereas adherent gauze dressings
mechanically debride contaminated wounds.
Systemic
·Hypoproteinemia may delay fibroplasia, decrease wound strength, and produce edema.
·Uremia depresses granulation, epithelialization, and wound strength.
· Long-term, high doses of corticosteroids inhibit the inflammatory phase and decrease
collagen synthesis.
· Chemotherapeutic agents inhibit the repair (cellular division) and maturation (collagen
synthesis) phases.
·Advanced age slows cellular reparative functions.
· Distant malignancy may impair healing by producing cachexia, altering metabolism, and
reducing inflammatory cell functions.
· Uncontrolled diabetes and hyperglycemia impair collagen synthesis, vascular ingrowth,
and granulocyte cell functions.
14. Which factors affecting wound healing can be directly controlled by the surgeon?
 Proper surgical technique by adherence to Halsted's principles:
· Gentle tissue handling
·Preservation of vascularity
· Surgical asepsis
· Approximation of tissues
· Obliteration of dead space
· Removal of necrotic tissue
15. Who was Halsted?
A Baltimore surgeon (1852-1922) whose name is associated with surgical instruments,
sutures, and operations. He is considered by many to be the father of human surgical science in
the United States based on the training program he established (following the example of the
European schools) for surgeons at The Johns Hopkins Hospital.
16. Which technique is useful for treatment of chronic, nonhealing axillary or thigh
wounds in cats?
A vascular omental pedicle graft externalized from the abdomen.
17. Which culinary compounds are effective and economic in treating large contaminated
open wounds?
Honey and sugar have been used to accelerate tissue debridement and are bacteriocidal due
to high osmolarity and liberation of hydrogen peroxide.
18. What is a seroma?
 A subcutaneous accumulation or pocket of protein-enriched serum in a closed wound. It
Tesponses. It usually develops as a surgical failure in technique (see Halsted's principles)
Wound Healing
19. What are characteristics of intestinal healing?
Wounds of the small intestine heal more predictably and with fewer complications than
liquid state of contents, smaller bacterial content, and reduced tissue collagenolytic activity
20. What is wound dehiscence?
 Partial or total disruption of the operative wound layers.
21. What is evisceration?
Protrusion of viscera through a wound.
22. What is eventration?
Protrusion of the bowels through the abdominal wall.
23. What factors are associated with wound dehiscence?
· Local and systemic factors affecting wound healing (see earlier)
· Increased abdominal pressure
24. When does dehiscence usually occur?
Usually 3-5 days after surgery, before collagen synthesis increases wound tensile strength.
25. What are the signs of wound dehiscence?
·Incisional swelling
·Pain
·Discoloration
·Tissue necrosis
·Serosanguineous discharge
26. Describe the treatments for dehiscence.
Treatments are directly related to the severity of the lesion:
· Primary wound closure can be performed if the injury is minor; the wound is not infected;
and tissue closure is necessary to protect body cavities, joints, implants, or pressure points.
· Second intention healing can be permitted in cases not requiring tissue apposition.
 n io sd ssd  s   d i ns u  e
subsequent excessive tissue contraction.
wounds with moistened towels. Therapeutic antibiotics (cephalosporins, clindamycin,
enrofloxacin, amoxicillin/clavulanate) are necessary in these patients. Management of wound
dehiscences includes lavage, sterile dressings, and drainage.
27. What are the characteristics of bone healing?
Bone healing results from a continuum of interactions and overlapping phases; sharp
demarcations or stages do not occur because of variances in lesions and repairs. Initially the
fracture site is a milieu of blood clots and devitalized osseous and soft tissue structures. Within
3-4 days, a soft fibrocartilaginous callus forms as a collar in and around the bone to serve as an
internal splint. With poor vascularity, reduced oxygenation, and reduced motion, fibrous tissue
develops during the next several months. With abundant vascularity, increased ox ygenation, and
limited motion, endochondral ossification predominates, and a hard callus is formed. After bone
bridging and osseous umion, remodeling of the endosteal and penritoneal surfaces occurs as bone
bone during the ensuing months to years.
WoundHealing
5
 Primary bone union is via direct osteonal healing with a small gap or end-to-end bone contact
and is associated with rigid implants such as plates and screws. Secondary bone healing is charac-
terized by development of a fracture callus and is associated with nonrigid implants (pins, wires).
28. What is Wolff's law?
Published in 1892, it states, "Form follows function or bone develops as a structure most
suited to resist the forces acting on it." This adaptive characteristic refers primarily to the
cancellous trabeculae of bone and not just the cortex.
29. What are causes of abnormal bone healing?
Abnormal bone healing can be slowed (delayed union), nonexistent (nonunion), or
inappropriate (malunion) and is associated with:
·Inadequate fracture stabilization
· Decreased osteogenesis
·Impaired vascularity
·Infection
30. What are treatment options for abnormal bone healing?
Treatments are based on underlying causes and include:
· Replacement of implants
· Rigid stabilization
·Cancellous grafting
· Debridement
·Antibiotic therapy
· Bone loading by reduction of stabilizing devices
31. How does cartilage heal after injury?
In response to superficial lesions, chondrocytes proliferate and synthesize the proteoglycans
and collagen of the intercellular matrix. Avascularity of cartilage limits repair, and structural
defects often persist. Deep lacerations breach the subchondral bone to produce an inflammatory
response, including pluripotential cells, and subsequent filling of the defect with fibrocartilage.
32. List treatment options for damaged cartilage.
· Resection of the damaged cartilage and underlying bone
· Restoration via fibrocartilage secondary to drilling or curettage of subchondral bone
·Replacement with a prosthetic device
·Arthrodesis of the joint
· Medical therapy with joint fluid modifiers (glycosaminoglycans, sodium hyaluronate)
and antinflammatory medications (aspirin, glucocorticosteroids, carprofen, ketoprofen,
etodolac, deracoxib)
33. How do tendons or ligaments heal after a crush injury?
Defects heal after a sequence characterized by hematoma formation and organization,
inflammatory cellular migration, matrix and cellular (fibroblasts) proliferation, and scar tissue
formation. Collagen reorientation occurs through the scar and based on remodeling forces. The
mechanical derangement of the tissue takes 34 months to subside, but the material properties of
34. To what does the term one woundone scar refer?
After tendon injury, the amalgam of fluid, severed tissues, injured fat, and possibly bone or
cartilage develops into a single viscous gel that permeates the wound. Each structure in the
wound is interconnected during one phase of scar evolution.
Control ofInfection
35. What are key issues of muscle repair?
Muscle cells do not regrow by mitosis and development of new cells and tissue; old
scar during secondary repair may offer the best chance for maximal muscle regeneration and
minimal recurrence of fibrosis. Primary repair is best performed early after injury before fibrous
protein synthesis; this would be indicated for extensive, palpable gaps in the injured muscle.
CONTROVERSIES
36. Does intestinal surgery in hypoproteinemic patients result in dehiscence?
No. Intestinal biopsies of hypoalbuminemic dogs yielded uncomplicated healing during a 7-
day postoperative period.
37. Do older animals heal more slowly than younger animals?
In healthy human beings, elderly volunteers had decreased epithelialization rates (2 days)
and catheter wounds.
38.1
 Do patients receiving antineoplastic therapy develop nonhealing surgical wounds?
A definitive answer is impossible because of variable conclusions derived from a paucity of con-
trolled clinical studies and a plethora of uncontolled clinical studies and experimental models. In
people, a combination of clinical determinants (e.g., age, concurrent disease, type of surgery, hyper-
BIBLIOG RAPHY
Lascelles BD, White RS: Combined omental pedicle grafs and axial pattem flaps for treatment of chronic,
nonhealing axillary wounds in cats. Vet Surg 30:20-285, 2001.
Lucroy MD, Edwards BF: Low-intensity laser light-induced closure of a chronic wound in a dog. Vet Surg 28:292-
295, 1999
Mattews KA, Binnington AG: Woumd management using honey and sugar. Commp Contin Educ Pract Vet 24:41-59, 2002.
O' Driscol1 Sw: The healing and regeneration of articular cartilage. J Bone Joint Surg Am 80:1795-1805, 1998.
Pavletie MM: Atlas of small animat reconstrucnive surgery, ed 2. Philadelphia, 1999, W.D. Saunders, pp 11-40.
Swaim JF: Wound contraction: basic and clinical factors. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 23:20-23, 2001
2. CONTROL OF INFECTION
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip A.C.VS
1. Define surgical wound infection.
In 1992, the Surgical Wound Infection Task Force established definitions of surgical site
infections to reduce miscommunication in the medical and surgical communities. The term
surgical wound was replaced by surgical site to include infections after surgery in organ spaces,
such as bone and peritoneum, deep to the skin and soft tissues.
microbial isolation, and local signs of inflammation.
·Deep incisional surgical site infection—purulence from deep incision, dehiscence, fever,
local signs of inflammation, and deep abscessation.
microbial isolation, and organ abscessation.
Control ofInfection
35. What are key issues of muscle repair?
Muscle cells do not regrow by mitosis and development of new cells and tissue; old
scar during secondary repair may offer the best chance for maximal muscle regeneration and
minimal recurrence of fibrosis. Primary repair is best performed early after injury before fibrous
protein synthesis; this would be indicated for extensive, palpable gaps in the injured muscle.
CONTROVERSIES
36. Does intestinal surgery in hypoproteinemic patients result in dehiscence?
No. Intestinal biopsies of hypoalbuminemic dogs yielded uncomplicated healing during a 7-
day postoperative period.
37. Do older animals heal more slowly than younger animals?
In healthy human beings, elderly volunteers had decreased epithelialization rates (2 days)
and catheter wounds.
38.1
 Do patients receiving antineoplastic therapy develop nonhealing surgical wounds?
A definitive answer is impossible because of variable conclusions derived from a paucity of con-
trolled clinical studies and a plethora of uncontolled clinical studies and experimental models. In
people, a combination of clinical determinants (e.g., age, concurrent disease, type of surgery, hyper-
BIBLIOG RAPHY
Lascelles BD, White RS: Combined omental pedicle grafs and axial pattem flaps for treatment of chronic,
nonhealing axillary wounds in cats. Vet Surg 30:20-285, 2001.
Lucroy MD, Edwards BF: Low-intensity laser light-induced closure of a chronic wound in a dog. Vet Surg 28:292-
295, 1999
Mattews KA, Binnington AG: Woumd management using honey and sugar. Commp Contin Educ Pract Vet 24:41-59, 2002.
O' Driscol1 Sw: The healing and regeneration of articular cartilage. J Bone Joint Surg Am 80:1795-1805, 1998.
Pavletie MM: Atlas of small animat reconstrucnive surgery, ed 2. Philadelphia, 1999, W.D. Saunders, pp 11-40.
Swaim JF: Wound contraction: basic and clinical factors. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 23:20-23, 2001
2. CONTROL OF INFECTION
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip A.C.VS
1. Define surgical wound infection.
In 1992, the Surgical Wound Infection Task Force established definitions of surgical site
infections to reduce miscommunication in the medical and surgical communities. The term
surgical wound was replaced by surgical site to include infections after surgery in organ spaces,
such as bone and peritoneum, deep to the skin and soft tissues.
microbial isolation, and local signs of inflammation.
·Deep incisional surgical site infection—purulence from deep incision, dehiscence, fever,
local signs of inflammation, and deep abscessation.
microbial isolation, and organ abscessation.
Control of Infection
7
2. Historically, what other classification scheme has been used to predict probability of
infection based on intraoperative contamina tion?
In 1964, the National Research Council, Ad Hoc Committee on Trauma established the
following categories of wounds:
· Clean—elective procedure; primary closure; no break in aseptic technique; no entrance
into alimentar y, respiratory, or urogenital tracts.
· Clean-contaminated—nonelective procedure, controlled opening of normally colonized
body cavity, minimal break in asepsis, reoperative through clean incision.
· Contaminated—major break in asepsis, penetrating trauma, <4 hours old, chronic open
wound, acute nonpurulent inflammation.
· Dirty—purulence, drainage, penetrating wounds, >4 hours old, rupture of colonized body
viscera.
3. What rates of infection have been published for the wound categories?
Examples in Human Medicine
CLEAN
CLEAN-CONTAMINATED
CONTAMINATED
DIRTY
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Canada (1980)
1.5
7.7
15.2
40
Vermont (1986)
1.5
3.1
8.2
11.7
United States (1991)
2.1
3.3
6.4
7.1
Examples in Veterinary Medicine?
CLEAN
CLEAN-CONTAMINATED
CONTAMINATED
DIRTY
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
California (1988)
2.5
4.5
5.8
18.1
 Pennsylvania (1997)
4.7
5.0
12.0
10.1
aWound infection based on purulent discharge within 14 days after surgery, dehiscence, or local signs of
 inflamm ation.
4. List the classic signs of inflammation.
·Redness (rubor)
●Swelling (tumor)
·Pain (dolor)
·Heat (calor)
·Loss of function (functio laesa)
5. Is wound contamination synonymous with wound infection?
No. Contamination describes microorganisms transiently present on tissue surfaces without
invasion or physiologic response. Infection means multiplication of microbes within tissues and
as subsequent host response.
6. What is the difference between disinfection and antisepsis?
 An antiseptic is a chemical agent applied to a body surface to kill or inhibit growth of
pathogenic microorganisms. A disinfectant is a chemical agent used to kill microorganisms on
inanimate objects.
8
Control of Infection
7. What is the difference between asepsis and sterilization?
Asepsis refers to the maintenance of a pathogen-free environment in biologic tissues.
Sterilization is the complete elimination of all microorganisms from living or inanimate tissues.
 8. List sources of bacterial wound infections.
· Patient
·Surgeon
· Surgical equipment (suction tips)
· Operating room air
9. Which wound factors can influence infection?
The degree of contamination, viability, and vascularity of tissues. Vascular perfusion is
critical for delivery of oxygen and cellular elements necessary for metabolism, debridement, and
repair in wounds.
10. Which human patient factors affect wound infection rates?
FACTOR
EFFECT
 Increasing age
May be a modest risk factor
 Preexisting illness
Increased ASA scores associated with increased infections
Diabetes
May be a significant factor not completely understood
Obesity
Weakly associated with certain incisions (sternotomies)
 Preoperative hospitali zation
Unproven association
 Body site operation
Unclear association
Malignancy
Is not an independent risk factor for sepsis
Remote site infections
Catheteri zations may be a concern
Malnutrition
Uncertain relati onship to wound infection
ASA; American Society of Anesthesiologists.
11. Which operative factors affect wound infection?
FACTOR
EFFECT
 Duration of surgery
Increasing length (>75th percentile) is a considerable risk
for infection
Glove punctures
No effect
 Emergency procedures
Higher rates but not statistically valid
 Early morning (midnight to
Higher rates but not statistically valid
 8 AM) surgeries
Summer months surgeries
Higher rates but unknown si gni ficance
Airborne contamination
Conflicting data
Preoperative hair removal
 Increased infection rates unless done just before surgery
 Adhesive drapes
Conflicting data
 Topical wound irri gation
Questionable effect
Antibiotics
Prophylaxis or therapeutic
Control of Infection
6
12. Which risk factors for wound infection have been identified in veterinary patients?
HIGH RISK
LOW RISK
Surgery sites clipped before induction
Surgery sites clipped after induction
Operative procedures >90 minutes
Operative procedures <60 minutes
Animals with clean wounds receiving
Animals with clean wounds receiving
antibiotics >2 hours before or
perioperative anti biotics just before and
 >24 hours after surgery
not after (>24 hours) surgery
Length of anesthesia
Mild hypothermia
13. Which anesthetic agent has been implicated with increased postoperative wound
infections?
contamination.
14. What is the relationship between antibiotics, surgery, and wound infections?
As stated by Wangensteen, "Antibiotics may turn a third-class surgeon into a second-class
Antibiotics are given in a prophylactic manner to prevent bacterial infection or with therapeutic
protocols to treat an existing infection.
15. When should antibiotic prophylaxis be instituted?
Intravenous administration should be performed just before surgery and repeated during the
operative procedure, based on the elimination half-life, to maintain levels above the minimum
inhibitory concentration at the wound site. Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended for clean
procedures in which infection would be disastrous (bone implants, prosthesis, neurosurgery or
cardiopulmonary surgery) or clean-contaminated wounds.
16. Which drug is most frequently used for antibiotic prophylaxis?
17. When are therapeutic antibiotics administered?
In contaminated or dirty wounds with existing infection, antimicrobial drugs may be given
orally or parenterally based on the severity of the wound and overall patient health. Selection may
be based on tissue or fluid microbiologic culture and antibiotic sensitivity testing, Gram or
Wright-Giemsa staining, or may be empiric based on previously known pathogens. Duration of
treatment is variable (1-3 weeks) and determined by location of lesion (deep versus superficial)
and signs of infection.
18. Which parameters are useful in evaluating the presence of infection?
· Clinical signs (fever, depression, inappetence, limb or organ dysfunction)
·Laboratory data (leukocytosis, degenerative left shift, anemia, elevated fibrinogen, posi-
tive cultures)
·Imaging studies (bone lysis, abscessation, implant failures, increased fluid density)
19. List bacteria most often associated with surgical infections.
·Staphylococcus intermedius (coagulase positive)
·Escherichia coli
10
Control of Infection
·Pasteurella multocida
·Pseudomonas aeruginosa
·β-Hemolytic Streptococcus
·Bacteroides (anaerobe)
·Klebsiella
 20. What are some useful antibiotics and their spectrum of activity for treating surgical
wound infections?
·Cefazolin/cephalexin (Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, E. coli)
·Amoxicillin/clavulanate (Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Bacteroides)
·Enrofloxacin (Pasteurella, Pseudomonas, Klebsiella, E. cofi)
·Clindamycin (Staphyfococcus, Streptococcus)
·Metronidazole(Bacteroides)
 21. What issues need to be identified with antibiotic prophylaxis or therapy?
· Likelihood of bacterial infection
· Untoward effects of the drugs in debilitated patients (i.e., metabolism and elimination)
· Development of microbial resistance
·Costs to owners
22. What are causes of antibiotic treatment failures?
· Inappropriate antibiotic selection
·Dosing errors
+ Lack of delivery to affected site
· Bacterial resistance
· Polymicrobial infection
· Implant-associated conditions
·●Misdiagnosis (noninfectious causes)
23. What are nosocomial infections?
Wound infections, not present or incubating at the time of hospital admission, that develop
during hospitalization.
24. List common associations of nosocomial infections.
·Breaks in aseptic or disinfecting techniques
+Prolonged hospitalization
·Recumbency
·Catheters
· Direct contamination of wounds and bandages
·Excessive use (or misuse) of antibiotics
· Unclean hospital (wards, surgery, intensive care unit) environment
 25. Which surgical preparation protocols have been found useful in operative patients?
One-step, sealed kits containing 0.5% available iodine and isopropyl alcohol, povidone-
iodine, or 4% chlorhexidine gluconate rinsed with saline or isopropyl alcohol. Chloroxylenol
(3%) is less effective than chlorhexidine in immediate antimicrobial activity but is associated
with similar low wound infection rates.
26.  Which lavage solutions are useful in reducing bacterial contamination or infection?
Chlorhexidine diacetate solutions (O.05%) have been associated with less bacterial
contamination than povidone-iodine (0.1%) or saline. High volumes (500-1o00 ml) can be
 1 ss ( g) ie   ii e   nf d  
Control of Infection
11
flow. In vitro studies with fibroblasts reveal cytotoxic effects of normal saline and tap water
compared with lactated Ringer's or phosphate-buffered saline.
27. What is the golden period?
Four to 6 hours after injury; a contaminated wound may be cleaned and primarily closed
without the likelihood of infection developing. This assumes bacterial counts <l0' per gram of
tissue and normal host or tissue defense factors.
28. What is the relationship between sutures and infected wounds?
Multifilament, nonabsorbable sutures potentiate infection as a result of bacterial replication
within the interstices of the material. Chromic catgut potentiates infection and has unpredictable
absorption in infected (inflamed) tissues. Prolonged-degrading, absorbable sutures or inert,
monofilament sutures are preferred in infected wounds. In general, if infected wounds are
29. What parameters are used for sterilization of instruments and packs?
Although affected by pack size and content, gravity-displaced steam sterilization is
performed for 10-20 minutes at 120-135*C (250-275*F). Prevacuumed sterilization is usually
performed for 4 minutes at 135°C. Flash, emergency sterilization of unwrapped material is
microbial death by denaturation of cellular proteins.
30. What is ethylene oxide?
P   n  ns n  x  s o  
humidity and 55°℃ (13 1°F) temperature for 4 hours poststerilization aeration to allow diffusion
of ethylene oxide from the packs
 31. Discuss the physicians noted for their pioneering work in wound infection control.
handwashing protocols (Vienna, 1847-1849) with hypochlorite solutions. Joseph Lister, in
carbolic acid as a disinfectant. John Burke published the first conclusive data (196l) on the
timing of chemoprophylaxis for dermal wounds. Peter Cruse (1973) and Rosemary Ford (1980)
in Alberta, Canada, published the earliest and largest prospective studies of wound infection rates.
32. How are open, contaminated fractures classified?
Based on the severity of the injury:
· Grade I—small, external puncture wound caused by underlying bone penetration
· Grade Il—external wound apparent and contiguous with the fracture, moderate tissue
damage
· Grade Ill—extensive damage and loss of soft tissues and bone (high-energy wound)
33. Which factors influence infection rates in humans with open fracture wounds?
INCREASED RISK
NOEFFECT
· No antibiotic treatment
· Length of antibiotic treatment
· Antimicrobial resistance
· Time between injury and surgical debridement
· Increased time from injury to
antibiotic treatment
·Extent of soft tissue damage
12
Shock
CONTROVERSY
34. Are bacterial cultures and antibiotic sensitivity assays useful in the management of
open contaminated wounds and fractures?
Nearly 50% of cultures obtained at the beginning and end of fracture repair surgery yielded
bacterial growth; postoperative complications were more common in dogs and cats with positive
cultures than in animals with negative assays (Ohio, 1986). In 20 dogs with gunshot fractures, 19
had negative single intraoperative cultures; 3 of these dogs developed osteomyelitis (Virginia,
1995). In human patients with infections, predebridement and postdebridement cultures were
Tarely predictive with each other or subsequent disease (Califormia, 1997). In all of these studies,
questions abound regarding sampling techniques, effect of perioperative antibiotics, wound
debridement and lavage, and a variable wound microbial population. With clean or elective
orthopedic procedures, intraoperative bacterial isolation was not predictive for development of
infection (1llinois, 1999)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Beal MW, Brown DC: Effects of hypothermia and duration of anesthesia on postoperative wound infection rate.
Vet Surg 29:123-127, 2000.
Vet Med Assoc 210:1302-1306, 1997
14:185-189, 2001.
4. Heldmann E, Brown CD: The association of propofol usage with postoperative wound infection rate in clean
wounds. Vet Surg 28:256-259, 1999.
5. Hirsh DC, Jang SS: Antimicrobial susceptibility of selected infectious bacterial agents from dogs. J Am Anin
Hosp Assoc 30:487494, 1994.
6. Lee J: Efficacy of cultures in the management of open fractures. Clin Orthol 339:71-75, 1997.
7.
Stevenson S, Olmstead ML: Bacterial culturing for prediction of postoperative complications following open
fracture repair in smmall animals. Vet Surg 15:99-102, 1986.
8. Sturgeon C, Lamport A1: Bacterial contamination of suction tips. Am J Vet Res 61: 779-783, 2000.
3. SHOCK
Steven L. Marks, B.VSc., M.R.C.VS., M.S., Dip. A.C.VI.M
1.What is shock?
Loss of effective circulating blood volume leading to poor tissue perfusion and inadequate
Ultimately, cellular hypoxia will result in cell death and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome.
 2. List the different types of shock based on pathophysiology.
·Hypovolemic
· Distributive
·Cardiogenic
Occlusive
3. Describe each of the listed categories of shock and provide a clinical example of each.
Hypovolemic shock: Loss of volume due to vomiting, diarrhea, diuresis, third-space
effusions, or hemorrhage. Traumatic hemorrhage would be an ex ample of hypovolemic shock
12
Shock
CONTROVERSY
34. Are bacterial cultures and antibiotic sensitivity assays useful in the management of
open contaminated wounds and fractures?
Nearly 50% of cultures obtained at the beginning and end of fracture repair surgery yielded
bacterial growth; postoperative complications were more common in dogs and cats with positive
cultures than in animals with negative assays (Ohio, 1986). In 20 dogs with gunshot fractures, 19
had negative single intraoperative cultures; 3 of these dogs developed osteomyelitis (Virginia,
1995). In human patients with infections, predebridement and postdebridement cultures were
Tarely predictive with each other or subsequent disease (Califormia, 1997). In all of these studies,
questions abound regarding sampling techniques, effect of perioperative antibiotics, wound
debridement and lavage, and a variable wound microbial population. With clean or elective
orthopedic procedures, intraoperative bacterial isolation was not predictive for development of
infection (1llinois, 1999)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Beal MW, Brown DC: Effects of hypothermia and duration of anesthesia on postoperative wound infection rate.
Vet Surg 29:123-127, 2000.
Vet Med Assoc 210:1302-1306, 1997
14:185-189, 2001.
4. Heldmann E, Brown CD: The association of propofol usage with postoperative wound infection rate in clean
wounds. Vet Surg 28:256-259, 1999.
5. Hirsh DC, Jang SS: Antimicrobial susceptibility of selected infectious bacterial agents from dogs. J Am Anin
Hosp Assoc 30:487494, 1994.
6. Lee J: Efficacy of cultures in the management of open fractures. Clin Orthol 339:71-75, 1997.
7.
Stevenson S, Olmstead ML: Bacterial culturing for prediction of postoperative complications following open
fracture repair in smmall animals. Vet Surg 15:99-102, 1986.
8. Sturgeon C, Lamport A1: Bacterial contamination of suction tips. Am J Vet Res 61: 779-783, 2000.
3. SHOCK
Steven L. Marks, B.VSc., M.R.C.VS., M.S., Dip. A.C.VI.M
1.What is shock?
Loss of effective circulating blood volume leading to poor tissue perfusion and inadequate
Ultimately, cellular hypoxia will result in cell death and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome.
 2. List the different types of shock based on pathophysiology.
·Hypovolemic
· Distributive
·Cardiogenic
Occlusive
3. Describe each of the listed categories of shock and provide a clinical example of each.
Hypovolemic shock: Loss of volume due to vomiting, diarrhea, diuresis, third-space
effusions, or hemorrhage. Traumatic hemorrhage would be an ex ample of hypovolemic shock
Shock
13
Distributive shock: Vasogenic shock due to an inappropriate distribution of blood flow.
Examples include anaphylactic, septic, or traumatic shock.
Cardiogenic shock: Cardiac output is decreased due to pump failure. Animals in congestive
heart failure have cardiogenic shock.
Obstructive shock: Considered by some authors to be a subset of cardiogenic shock.
Primarily found with pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade, pulmonary hypertension, and
thromboembolism.
 4. Which type of shock is most commonly found in small animals?
Hypovolemic shock.
5. What are the classic clinical signs associated with shock?
They include pale mucous membranes, tachycardia, weak femoral pulses, oliguria, hyper-
ventilation, and mental depression.
6. List the organ systems most commonly affected by hypoperfusion during shock.
Cardiovascular
Pulmonary
Renal
Gastrointestinal
Central nervous system
 7. Can the clinical signs of shock be used to differentiate the etiology?
Possibly, based on physical examination; often, the clinical signs of shock are due to
hypoperfusion and may be similar regardless of the underlying etiology.
8. How is shock treated?
Shock syndromes are best treated by identifying the underlying disease or problem
whenever possible. In many cases, this is not possible and fluid therapy becomes the foundation
cardiogenic shock.
9.  What is the fluid of choice to treat shock?
In most cases, crystalloid fluids are used to treat shock. They are rapidly and safely
admimistered, cost-effective, and readily available. Balanced isotonic electrolyte solutions such
as Normosol-R, Plasmalyte-A, and lactated Ringer's solution are common choices for fluid
therapy. These fluids are similar in composition to plasma. Colloid solutions may also be used
for rapid volume expansion. Products such as plasma, fresh whole blood, stored whole blood,
packed red blood cells, hydroxyethyl starch, and Oxyglobin can be considered as dictated by
the case.
10. What volumes of crystalloid should be administered for shock therapy?
90 ml/kg/hr intravenously for the dog
45 ml/kg/hr intravenously for the cat
11. How are these volumes best administered?
It is safe and convenmient to divide the total shock volume to be administered into quarter
doses. One quarter of the calculated dosage can be delivered over one quarter of the time frame.
In other words, administer one fourth of the calculated volume over 15 minutes and then reassess
the pet. The full shock dosage may not need to be given. A quick formula for calculating
approximate one-quarter shock volumes is to add a U to the body weight in pounds for the dog or
the body weight in kilograms for cats.
14
Shock
Example: 40 1b dog. 90 m1/kg/hr = 18 kg × 90 = 1620 ml, and 405 ml is the 1/4 dose. Using
the quick rule: adding a 0 to 40 gives 400 ml as the 1/4 dose.
Example: 10 1b cat. 45 ml/kg hr = 4.5 kg × 45 = 202.5 ml, and 50.6 is the 1/4 dose. Using
the quick rule: adding a 0 to 4.5 gives 45 ml as the 1/4 shock dose.
12. What is a colloid solution?
 Colloids are a group of solutions that are isotonic, but contain large molecules that provide
increased osmolality in the intravascular space. The colloids can be divided into natural colloids
such as whole blood, plasma products, and albumin products; or synthetic colloids such as
hy droxyethyl starch (Hetastarch) and dextrans.
13.  What is the standard dosage of colloid that can be administered during shock?
The standard maintenance dosage of colloid that can be administered is 20 ml/kg/24 hours.
This can be modified and the volume given over 4-6 hours during treatment for shock syndromes.
Administration to effect can also be used in critically ill patients. This volume of colloid solution
can be used in combination with crystalloid solution therapy
14. What is hypertonic saline and how is it used?
Hypertonic saline is a hypertonic (7.5%), crystalloid solution that can be used for fluid
resuscitation. It is generally administered as a bolus (1-4 ml/kg cat, 4-8 ml/kg dog) and provides
Tapid volume expansion. The mechanism of action is based on drawing interstitial and
intracellular fluid into the vascular space. The effect is short lived, but hypertonic saline can be
combined with a colloid solution to prolong the effect.
15. Is oxygen therapy beneficial to patients in shock, and how can it be provided?
oAxo nood on spel uoisngedoy se yoous suunp ieoyug sq Aeur joddns uxo
delivery. Administration techniques include face mask, oxygen canopy, nasal cannula, and
oxygen cage.
16.  Are antibiotics indicated as adjunct therapy during shock?
The use of antimicrobial agents is highly recommended during therapy for shock. Certainly
in septic shock it would seem intuitive that antimicrobial agents would be necessary, but, as a
result of the cellular hypoxia and depressed immune function found in all shock syndromes,
antibiotics should be considered in all such cases. Agents are broad spectrum and administered
intravenously to provide four-quadrant (G±6 aerobes, anaerobes) coverage. Penicillins or first-
generation cephalosporins, in combination with enrofloxacin or an aminoglycoside, are
suggested.
17. How is shock treatment monitored?
Physical examination should be performed at least twice daily as findings can change
arterial blood pressure, pulse oximetry, arterial blood gas analysis, ECG, blood glucose, BUN,
Creatinine, PCV, total protein, CBC, electrolytes, urine output, and coagulation parameters should
be followed.
18. What is a Swan-Ganz catheter?
The Swan-Ganz catheter is a flexible, balloon-tipped, flow-directed catheter that is placed
into the pulmonary artery. There are two ports on this catheter. Once the catheter is properly
placed, one port will be in the pulmonary artery and the other in the right atrium.
Anesthesia
15
19. What information can a pulmonary arterial catheter supply?
A Swan-Ganz catheter placed in the pulmonary artery can provide cardiac output,
pulmonary wedge pressure, central venous pressure, mixed venous Oz, core body temperature,
and pulmonary arterial pressures.
CONTROVERSY
20. Should corticosteroids be used to treat shock?
The use of corticosteroids remains controversial in the management of shock syndromes.
Some studies have supported their use in septic shock, while others show no benefit at all. The
suggested beneficial effects include enhanced phagocytic activity of the reticuloendothelial
system, stabilization of lysosomal membranes, inhibition of vasoactive peptide release, reduction
of cerebral edema, inhibition of the arachidonic acid pathway, and reduced platelet and neutrophil
hemorrhage, delayed wound healing, hepatopathy, and adrenal suppression.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Haskins S: Therapy for shock. In Bonagura JID, editor: Kirk's current veterinary therapy, vol XIll Philadelphia,
2000, W.B. Saunders, pp 140-147.
2. Kirby R, Rudloff E: Fluid and electrolyte therapy. In Etinger SJ, Feldman EC, edlitors: Textbook of veterinary
internat medicine, ed 5, Philadelphia, 2000, W.B. Saunders, pp 325-347.
3. Mathews KA. Shock. In Mathews KA, editor: Veterinary emergency and criticat care manuat, Ontario, 1996,
Lifeleam, pp 23/1-23/8.
4. Raffe MR: Hemorrhage and hypovolemia. In Raffe MR, Wingfield WW, editors: The veterinary ICU book.
Jackson Hole, Wyo, 2002, Teton New Media, pp 453-478.
5. Rudlloff E: Resuscitation from hypovolemic shock. Waltham Focus 11:11-22, 2001.
4. ANESTHESIA
Leigh A. Lamont, D.VM., M.S., DACVA
1. What are the goals of preanesthetic administration?
· Calm the patient
· Induce sedation and increase handler safety
· Provide analgesia and muscle relaxation
·Decrease airway secretion and salivation
· Obtund autonomic reflex responses
· Suppress or prevent vomiting or regurgitation
· Decrease anesthetic requirements
· Promote smooth induction and recovery from anesthesia
 2. What types of cardiac dysrhythmias are most commonly associated with C,-agonist
administration?
Both xylazine and medetomidine can produce profound bradycardia with potential for
sinoatrial block, first-degree or second-degree atrioventricular block, atrioventricular dissocia-
tion, and, occasionally, sinoatrial arrest.
Anesthesia
15
19. What information can a pulmonary arterial catheter supply?
A Swan-Ganz catheter placed in the pulmonary artery can provide cardiac output,
pulmonary wedge pressure, central venous pressure, mixed venous Oz, core body temperature,
and pulmonary arterial pressures.
CONTROVERSY
20. Should corticosteroids be used to treat shock?
The use of corticosteroids remains controversial in the management of shock syndromes.
Some studies have supported their use in septic shock, while others show no benefit at all. The
suggested beneficial effects include enhanced phagocytic activity of the reticuloendothelial
system, stabilization of lysosomal membranes, inhibition of vasoactive peptide release, reduction
of cerebral edema, inhibition of the arachidonic acid pathway, and reduced platelet and neutrophil
hemorrhage, delayed wound healing, hepatopathy, and adrenal suppression.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Haskins S: Therapy for shock. In Bonagura JID, editor: Kirk's current veterinary therapy, vol XIll Philadelphia,
2000, W.B. Saunders, pp 140-147.
2. Kirby R, Rudloff E: Fluid and electrolyte therapy. In Etinger SJ, Feldman EC, edlitors: Textbook of veterinary
internat medicine, ed 5, Philadelphia, 2000, W.B. Saunders, pp 325-347.
3. Mathews KA. Shock. In Mathews KA, editor: Veterinary emergency and criticat care manuat, Ontario, 1996,
Lifeleam, pp 23/1-23/8.
4. Raffe MR: Hemorrhage and hypovolemia. In Raffe MR, Wingfield WW, editors: The veterinary ICU book.
Jackson Hole, Wyo, 2002, Teton New Media, pp 453-478.
5. Rudlloff E: Resuscitation from hypovolemic shock. Waltham Focus 11:11-22, 2001.
4. ANESTHESIA
Leigh A. Lamont, D.VM., M.S., DACVA
1. What are the goals of preanesthetic administration?
· Calm the patient
· Induce sedation and increase handler safety
· Provide analgesia and muscle relaxation
·Decrease airway secretion and salivation
· Obtund autonomic reflex responses
· Suppress or prevent vomiting or regurgitation
· Decrease anesthetic requirements
· Promote smooth induction and recovery from anesthesia
 2. What types of cardiac dysrhythmias are most commonly associated with C,-agonist
administration?
Both xylazine and medetomidine can produce profound bradycardia with potential for
sinoatrial block, first-degree or second-degree atrioventricular block, atrioventricular dissocia-
tion, and, occasionally, sinoatrial arrest.
16
Anesthesia
3. Is preemptive anticholinergic administration recommended before C,-agonist adminis.
tration in the preanesthetic period?
treatment after the fact. Whenever administering an O-agonist, heart rate and rhythm should be
monitored closely.
4. What is the appropriate treatment for acepromazine overdosage?
eral antiadrenergic activity, and direct vasodilatory effects. Vasopressors or catecholamines may
be indicated if cardiovascular compromise is severe. Phenylephrine and ephedrine are the drugs
of choice because their primary site of action is the C-receptor.
5. Would epinephrine be useful after acepromazine overdosage?
No. Epinephrine is contraindicated. In the presence of α,-receptor blockade, epinephrine
administration may lead to unopposed βz-receptor activity, which augments vasodilation and
makes hypotension more severe.
6. What preanesthetic drugs alter respiratory drive and may cause hypercapnea?
· Opioids
·Phenothiazines
·C-agomists
No. In most patients, the use of low incremental doses administered to effect minimizes
respiratory disease), opioids can still be used safely if monitoring is vigilant and ventilation can
be supported.
 8. Is routine preoperative anticholinergic administration recommended?
Not necessarily. In general, it is indicated to decrease salivary and respiratory secretions and
to counteract sinus bradycardia. Its selective use is indicated when potent vagotonic preanesthetic
and anesthetic drugs are used (e.g., Cz-agonists) or if a powerful vagal response is anticipated
during the procedure.
9. How do propofol and thiopental differ in their effects on cardiopulmonary function?
There is no appreciable difference. Both cause transient dose-dependent decreases in
stimulating effects of arterial carbon dioxide and depress peripheral chemoreceptor sensitivity at
higher doses.
10. Can induction apnea be avoided when administering propofol?
Slow administration over 60-90 seconds to facilitate dosing significantly decreases the
incidence of apnea. By incorporating other agents to achieve balanced anesthesia, the required
dose of propofol wll be decreased and propofol-induced respiratory depression can be mimimized.
11. What is the treatment for thiopental-induced or propofol-induced respiratory arrest?
Secure the airway and support ventilation first, then assess the stability of the cardiovascular
system. Spontaneous ventilation resumes when sufficient drug has been redistributed (usually
within 5-10 minutes).
Anesthesia
17
12. How does recovery from single bolus injections of thiopental and propofol differ?
Though both drugs are rapidly redistributed from the central nervous system to the skeletal
muscle and adipose tissue, recovery from propofol anesthesia is consistently more rapid and
complete than with thiopental, with few residual central nervous system effects.
13. How does biotransformation of thiopental and propofol differ?
Propofol is rapidly metabolized in the liver, and to a lesser degree in extrahepatic sites, to
the inactive metabolite, propofol glucuronide. It is then excreted in urine and feces. The relative
in all cases, metabolism is much slower.
14. Why is thiopental not recommended for induction of anesthesia in sight hounds?
Sight hounds have minimal stores of adipose tissue, which rapidly become saturated with
clearance of thiobarbituates compared with mixed-breed dogs, and the rate of drug elimination is
nonlinear. This suggests that hepatic clearance may be a saturable process in this breed.
15. What effect does ketamine have on ventilation?
At high doses, ketamine causes a respiratory pattern called apneustic breathing, which
          
administered alone, ketamine causes minimal respiratory depression. In combination with
other commonly administered adjuncts, such as benzodiazepines, acepromazine, opioids, or
O2-agonists, minute ventilation is usually decreased, and arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure
increases. Other respiratory effects include airway dilation and maintenance of laryngeal
reflexes.
16. What effect does ketamine have on intracranial pressure (ICP)?
 1. Ketamine can increase mean arterial blood pressure, which may increase cerebral blood
flow, leading to a passive increase in ICP in patients that are unable to autoregulate blood
flow efficiently.
carbon dioxide (Pacoz). The brain responds to elevations in PaCO, by increasing cerebral
blood flow, which increases ICP.
17. What type of dysrhythmia is commonly associated with the thiobarbiturates?
Ventricular bigeminy, which is usually self-limiting and transient. Thiamylal is most often
associated with this dysrhythmia, although the other thiobarbiturates, including thiopental, have
al so been implicated.
18. What is Telazol?
thebenzodiazepinezolazepam.
19. How does recovery from Telazol anesthesia differ between dogs and cats?
The fixed ratio of dissociative anesthetic to benzodiazepine can cause different patterns of
Tecovery amongspecles.
 In dogs, the zolazepam component seems to be metabolized more rapidly than the tiletamine
recovery as a result of residual effects of the dissociative anesthetic.
In cats, tiletamine is typically metabolized more quickly than zolazepam, so that they often
appear sedated for a prolonged period and awake more slowly and quietly.
18
Anesthesia
20. Compare the cardiovascular effects of halothane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane.
Halothane
· Direct myocardial depression at clinically relevant concentrations
·↓Cardiac output
·↓ Mean arterial blood pressure
·↓ Heart rate
· Sensitizes myocardium to catecholamines
Isoflurane
· Minimal myocardial depression at clinically relevant concentrations
· Minimal effect on cardiac output
·  Systemic vascular resistance
· ↓ Mean arterial blood pressure
·↑Heart rate
· No myocardial sensitization
Sevoflurane
· Minimal myocardial depression at clinically relevant concentrations
· Minimal effect on cardiac output
· Systemic vascular resistance
· ↓ Mean arterial pressure
· Minimal effect on heart rate
· No myocardial sensitization
21. Do volatile anesthetic agents possess analgesic properties?
No. With the exception of methox yflurane, none of the commonly used volatile anesthetic
agents (i.e., isoflurane, halothane, enflurane, sevoflurane, desflurane) have any clinically signifi
cant analgesic properties.
22. Define the terms low flow, closed, and semiclosed anesthesia.
Low-flow, closed, and semiclosed refer only to fresh gas flow rates within a circle system.
Traditional semiclosed circles use fresh gas flows (25-50 ml/kg/min), which significantly exceed
the patient's metabolic oxygen consumption (approximately 5-10 ml/kg/min). Low-flow circle
systems use fresh gas flows greater than the patient's metabolic oxygen consumption but less than
the traditional higher flow rates noted. In a closed circle, the fresh gas flow matches the patient's
metabolic consumption of oxygen and anesthetic (i.e., 5-10 ml/kg/min). Because oxygen
consumption varies among individuals, common practice is to set a flow rate that keeps the
Teservoir bag approximately 75% full. Although closed circle flow rates are more economical
23. What is total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA)?
Induction and maintenance of general anesthesia using intravenous agents only. Recovery is
determined by the phamacokinetic profiles of the drugs used and, in many cases, may be faster
and smoother than after inhalation anesthesia. TIVA protocols still mandate endotracheal
intubation and supplemental inspired oxy gen.
24. What is the most commonly used anesthetic agent for TIVA in veterinary medicine?
Propofol. Its short duration of action and rapid biotransformation to inactive metabolites
make it well suited for this purpose in the dog. Propofol infusions of 2 hours have been
successfully used to provide anesthesia for a variety of surgical procedures in dogs. For major
surgical procedures, coadministration of adjunctive drugs, such as opioids, Cz -agomists, benzodi
azepines, or acepromazine, is recommended to decrease propofol requirements and provide
preemptive and intraoperative analgesia.
Anesthesia
19
25. Can propofol infusions be used in cats?
Possibly. Propofol infusions in cats have not been studied in detail, but preliminary work
suggests that prolonged infusions may have toxic effects on feline red blood cells and may result
in delayed recoveries.
 26. When is treatment of bradycardia in anesthetized patients indicated?
When bradycardia causes an excessive decrease in cardiac output or when heart rate
decreases below 50-60 beats/min in an animal with adequate circulating volume. It is helpful to
quantify intraoperative bradycardia in terms of the patient's resting heart rate (i.e., has heart rate
dropped by 20-30% of the preanesthetic value?). Before treatment is initiated, consideration
should be given to the cause of bradycardia.
 27. List the causes of bradycardia in anesthetized patients.
· Excessive anesthetic depth
·Excessive vagal tone
· Anesthetic agents that decrease sympathetic tone or directly depress depolarization
·Hypothermia
·Exogenous toxemias
·Endogenous metabolic disturbances
28. What information does pulse oximetry provide about the patient?
Pulse oximetry is an indirect, noninvasive method of measuring the percent saturation of
hemoglobin (Spoz). Normal Spo, readings are >95%, whereas readings <95% indicate mild
hypoxemia. Readings <90% indicate serious hypoxemia, and readings <75% indicate life-
threatening hypoxemia. Although patients that are intubated and are breathing 100% oxygen are
at much less risk of developing hypoxemia, pulse oximetry provides early warning of potentially
dangerous desaturation. Cyanosis, the cardinal clinical sign of hypoxemia, is not apparent until
severe desaturation has already occurred.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Greene SA: Veterinary anesthesia and pain management secrets, Philadelphia, 2002, Hanley and Belfus.
2. Paddleford RR: Manuat of small animat anesthesia, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999, W.B. Saunders.
dogs. Am J Vet Res 59:1137-1143, 1998.
4. Thumon JC, Tranquilli WJ, Benson GJ, editors: Lumb and fones veterinary anesthesia,ed 3, Baltimore, 1996,
Williams & Wilkins.
5. Wright B, Hellyer PW: Respiratory monitoring during anesthesia: pulse oximetry and capnography. Conp Cont
Educ Pract Vet 18:1083-1096, 1996.
6. Zoran DL, Riedesel DH, Dyer DC: Phamacokinetics of propofol in mixed-breed dogs and Greyhounds. Am J
Vet Res 54:755-760, 1993.
5.PERIOPERATTVE PAINMANAGEMENT
Leigh A. Lamont, D.VM., M.S., DACVA
1.1
How do we know if an animal is in pain?
Veterinarians must rely on behavioral and physiologic parameters to assess pain.
anticipate the level of pain associated with a particular trauma or surgical procedure and
focus on proactive pain management. In most cases, the benefits of analgesic adminis-
tration greatly outweigh the risks; if an animal's pain status is uncertain, anthropomor-
phism is appropriate in guiding analgesic therapy.
2.Describe the pathophysiology of acute postoperative pain.
The surgical insult activates a specialized set of peripheral nerve endings (nociceptors),
which trigger transmission of the signal to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Other neurons can
intervene at this level and modulate the afferent information. Spinal tracts then carry the impulse
to higher brain stem and cortical structures. Pain is the end result of the integration, modulation
and perception of noxious stimuli by the nervous system. Neurons can become sensitized by the
release of inflammatory mediators from damaged tissue or by sustained noxious input to the
dorsal horn. Sensitization reduces the stimulus threshold required to produce pain and causes an
exaggerated response to noxious stimuli at the site of injury and in nearby noninjured tissue.
3. What are the adverse physiologic effects associated with postoperative pain?
· The release of stress hormones (catecholamines) secondary to pain can cause tachycardia
and hypertension, which increase cardiac work and myocardial oxygen consumption.
· Increased sympathetic tone decreases gastrointestinal motility and may prolong recovery.
· Muscle splinting, arising from abdominal or thoracic pain, impairs chest wall excursions
and may decrease alveolar ventilation and promote atelectasis.
· Metabolic processes are shifted into a catabolic state, immune function may be impaired
and behavioral patterns are affected.
· Animals experiencing postoperative pain often suffer from disruptions in their normal
sleep cycle and may be unwilling to eat or drink, both of which can further delay recovery.
4. What is preemptive analgesia?
Administration of analgesic drugs before the initiation of painful stimuli. Acute postopera-
tive pain may be associated with altered processing of pain information by the nervous system, a
phenomenon referred to as sensitization. Preemptive analgesia is based on the premise that these
 changes can be minimized, resulting in a better response to postoperative pain treatment and an
earlier return to function.
5. What is multimodal analgesia?
Administration of a combination of different classes of analgesic drugs to achieve optimal
pain control in the perioperative period. The rationale is based on targeting several points along
side effects seen with the administration of larger doses of a single anal gesic drug.
PerioperativePainManagement
21
 6. What preanesthetic drug combinations are commonly used to provide preemptive
analgesia?
An opioid in combination with a sedative/tranquilizer such as acepromazine, medetomidine,
or mi dazolam, administered intramuscularly before anesthesia. In geriatric or debilitated patients
the opioid may be administered alone. A variety of local and regional analgesic techniques may
also be employed preemptively depending on the type of surgical procedure.
7. What drugs can be used to provide supplemental analgesia intraoperatively?
Supplemental doses of opioids, such as ox ymorphone and fentanyl. The incorporation of
ative requirements for additional anal gesics, often resulting in a more stable plane of anesthesia
with a lower inhalant anesthetic vaporizer setting. In very painful procedures, low doses of keta-
mine in combination with opioi ds may be administered intraoperatively.
8. In addition to intramuscular or subcutaneous injections, what other routes are
available for administration of postoperative analgesic agents?
A constant rate infusion may be administered by adding morphine or fentanyl to the
patient's intravenous fluids or by using a syringe pump. Transdermal opioid delivery is also
available in the form of a fentanyl patch. Once the patient is awake, oral administration of a non-
 9. List the commonest classes of analgesic drugs in veterinary medicine.
· Opioids
· NSAIDs
· Local anesthetics
10. In addition to opioids, NSAIDs, and local anesthetics, what other drugs can be used for
perioperative pain management?
The dissociative agent, ketamine and the Oz-agonists, such as medetomidine and xylazine,
analgesia
11. What is the mechanism of ketamine-induced analgesia?
Although ketamine has multiple binding sites, it is believed that N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptor blockade is responsible for most of the drug's analgesic actions. Ketamine
neurons and may even abolish hypersensitivity once it is already established.
12. How do O-agonists produce analgesia?
 Oz-agonists bind oz-receptors located in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, which inhibits
invol ved in transmission of pain impulses. Binding of αz-receptors located supraspinally in the
locus coeruleus, thalamus, and cerebral cortex inhibits norepinephrine release, producing pro
found sedation, which diminishes the conscious perception of pain.
13. What are analgesic adjuncts?
Drugs that have primary indications other than pain but have analgesic actions in some
painful conditions. Tranquilizers such as acepromazine and the benzodiazepines have little or no
inherent analgesic effect when administered alone but may enhance analgesia produced by othe
antinflammatory effects at the site of tissue injury.
22
PerioperativePain Management
14. What is the difference between opioid agonists and agonist-antagonists?
Pure opioid agonists, such as morphine, oxymorphone, and fentanyl, bind to and activate
opioid receptors to produce analgesia. Opioid antagonists, such as naloxone, bind to and inhibit
phanol and buprenorphine have agonist and antagonist actions at various subpopulations of
opioid receptors.
15. Why is this difference clinically significant?
Mixed agonist-antagonist drugs have a ceiling effect. That is, once the maximal effect is
types of pain.
16. List potential side effects of opioid therapy.
·Urinary retention
·Nausea
·Vomiting
· Respiratory depression
·Bradycardia
·Sedation
· Dysphonia
●Histamine release (with urticaria, hypotension, erythema, pruritus)
17. What is the difference between opioid potency and efficacy?
Potency refers to the number of milligrams of drug required to produce an effect, whereas
efficacy measures the capacity of the agonist-receptor complex to produce a response in an
appropriate clinical setting. The potencies of commonly administered opioids relative to mor-
phine are as follows: oxymorphone, 10; fentany1, 75-125; butorphanol, 3-5; and buprenorphine,
efficacious for moderate-to-severe pain, whereas butorphanol and buprenorphine tend to be
effective for only mild-to-moderate pain.
18. Can cats be treated with pure opioid agonists?
Yes. Cats are more likely to experience opioid-induced excitement and dysphoria than are
dogs. If intravenous bolus dosing is avoided and lower doses combined with a tranquilizing
agent, such as acepromazine or medetomidine, are used, opioid agonists can and should be
used preemptively in a preanesthetic protocol or postoperatively at regular dosing intervals to
manage pain.
19. What is a fentanyl patch?
Fentanyl is a highly lipid-soluble opioid agonist that can be effectively absorbed through the
skin. Fentanyl transdermal patches have been developed for use in humans and have been
successfully used for perioperative pain management in dogs and cats, although they are not
currently approved for use in these species. Plasma fentanyl concentrations usually peak within
24 hours of patch application in the dog and remain stable for 3 days, whereas plasma
concentrations can peak as early as 4-8 hours in the cat and remain stable for 5 days. For
PerioperativePain Management
23
perioperative use, the patch should be applied 12-24 hours before surgery, and additional opioids
may be required postoperatively to treat breakthrough pain.
20. What are complications of fentanyl patch usage?
In addition to side effects associated with any type of opioid administration, accidental
human exposure and the potential for abuse are significant concerns. For this reason, many
Tecommend that fentanyl patches be reserved for hospitalized patients only.
21. What are the onset and duration of action of local anesthetic agents commonly used in
small animal patients?
DRUG
ONSET OF ACTION
DURATION OF ACTION
Lidocaine
 5-10 min
1-2 h
Bupivacaine
20 min
4-6 h
22. What are the toxic doses of lidocaine and bupivacaine in dogs and cats?
 In dogs, toxic side effects occur at intravenous doses of approximately 10 mg/kg of lidocaine
and 3-5 mg/kg of bupivacaine. Rarely would doses greater than 5mg/kg of lidocaine and 2 mg/kg
of bupivacaine be necessary in this species. In cats, total doses should not exceed 2.5 mg/kg of
lidocaine and 1 mg/kg of bupivacaine.
23. List the toxic side effects of lidocaine and bupivacaine.
· Restlessness
· Muscle tremors
·Seizures
· Cardiopulmonary depression
·Coma
·Death
 24. List the commonest local and regional analgesic techniques used in small animal
patients.
● Surgical site infiltration
· Interpleural administration
· Regional nerve blocks (including dental nerve blocks and intercostal nerve blocks)
·Brachial plexus blocks
·Intraarticular blocks
·Epidural anesthesia/analgesia
25. What is epidural anesthesia/analgesia?
Analgesic agents are placed into the epidural space, located between the dura mater and the
intervertebral ligament. The lumbosacral junction is the most commonly used site for accessing
ss
26. What types of drugs can be administered into the epidural space?
n   sdo  s on sd  r s 
epidural techniques, although other agents, such as Cz-agonists and ketamine, are occasionally
added to standard drugcombinations.
24
Perioperative Pain Management
27. Which opioids are most commonly administered in the lumbosacral epidural space?
DURATION OF
DRUG
LIPID SOLUBILITY
ANALGESIA (h)
USES
Morphine
Low
18-24
Hindlimb, thoracic, and
 forelimb procedures
with lumbosacral
injection
Ox ymorphone
 Intermediate
8-10
 Hindlimb procedures
only with lumbosacral
injection 
Fentanyl
High
0.5-1
 Infusion or repeated
boluses through 
epidural catheter
28. For what types of procedures is epidural analgesia/anesthesia beneficial?
· Hindlimb orthopedic procedures
· Tail amputations
· Perineal hernia or perianal fistula repairs
· Cesarean sections or other painful abdominal procedures
· Forelimb orthopedic procedures (opioids only)
·Thoracotomies (opioids only)
 29. Which NSAIDs are commonly used for pain management in veterinary patients?
· Carprofen
· Ketoprofen
·Deracoxib
·Etodolac
·Meloxicam
·Meclofenamic acid
·Aspirin
 30. What types of pain can be effectively managed with NSAIDs?
Aspirin and the newer NS AIDs are the drugs of choice for management of mild-to-moderate
 inflammatory pain (musculoskeletal pain, including bone pain and arthritis) and are less effective for
31. What are the adverse side effects associated with NSAID use?
·Gastrointestinal irritation and ulceration
· Renal insufficiency due to decreased renal blood flow
· Bleeding resulting from inhibition of platelet function
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1.Basbaum A: Anatomy and physiology of nociception. In Kanner R, editor: Pain management secrets,
Philadelphia, 1997, Hanley & Belfus.
2. Kyles AE: Transdemmal fentany1. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 20:721-726, 1998.
Physical Therapy
25
3. Matthews KA: Nonsteroidal antinflammatory analgesics to manage acute pain in dogs and cats. Comp Cont
Educ Pract Vet 18:1117-1123, 1996.
4. Muir WW: Mechanismis of pain and therapeutic implications. J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1346-1356, 2001.
5. Papich MG: Principles of analgesic drug therapy. Semin Vet Med Surg Sm Anim 12:80-93, 1997.
6. Pascoe P: Local and regional anesthesia and analgesia. Semin Vet Med Surg Sm Anim 12:94-105, 1997.
7. Raffe M: Recent advances in our understanding of pain: How should they affect management? Semin Vet Med
Surg Sm Anim 12:75-79, 1997.
8. Tranquilli WJ, Thumon JC: Perioperative pain and its management. In Thumon JC, Tranquilli WJ, Benson GJ,
editors: Essentiats of smalt animat anesthesia and anaigesia, Baltimore, 1999, Lippincott williams & Wilkins.
6. PHYSICAL THERAPY
Lin McGonagle, M.S.P.T., L.VT
1. What is physical therapy?
Alleviation of impairment and functional limitation by design, implementation, and
physical therapy.
2. Is physical therapy a replacement for traditional veterinary medicine?
No. Physical therapists work in collaboration with veterinarians using a team approach to
examination and intervention. Acquiring a veterinary referral before client evaluation is the
prefeired model of practice.
3. What are the educational and licensure requirements for physical therapists?
Most physical therapists enter the profession with a master's degree, and many further their
education by attaining a doctoral degree. There are 159 physical therapy programs, graduating
approximately 4,500 therapists each year in the United States. The core curriculum requires 2 to 2/
years. Each student completes 4-6 months of clinical internships prior to graduation. Every therapist
must pass a national licensure ex amination. Additional requirements vary from state to state.
4. List the benefits of physical therapy for animals.
Improved recovery from injury or surgery
Return to typical performance or work
Enhancement of natural healing processes
Reduced pain
Increased speed and quality of movement
Improved strength and endurance
Minimized side effects of injury or surgery
Improved biomechanics and posture
Increased flexibility
Prevention of future injury through owner/trainer education
Positive psychological effects for pet and owner
 5. List the common conditions addressed by physical therapist intervention.
Postsurgical: orthopedic, neurologic
Soft tissue injury
Spinal dysfunction
Physical Therapy
25
3. Matthews KA: Nonsteroidal antinflammatory analgesics to manage acute pain in dogs and cats. Comp Cont
Educ Pract Vet 18:1117-1123, 1996.
4. Muir WW: Mechanismis of pain and therapeutic implications. J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1346-1356, 2001.
5. Papich MG: Principles of analgesic drug therapy. Semin Vet Med Surg Sm Anim 12:80-93, 1997.
6. Pascoe P: Local and regional anesthesia and analgesia. Semin Vet Med Surg Sm Anim 12:94-105, 1997.
7. Raffe M: Recent advances in our understanding of pain: How should they affect management? Semin Vet Med
Surg Sm Anim 12:75-79, 1997.
8. Tranquilli WJ, Thumon JC: Perioperative pain and its management. In Thumon JC, Tranquilli WJ, Benson GJ,
editors: Essentiats of smalt animat anesthesia and anaigesia, Baltimore, 1999, Lippincott williams & Wilkins.
6. PHYSICAL THERAPY
Lin McGonagle, M.S.P.T., L.VT
1. What is physical therapy?
Alleviation of impairment and functional limitation by design, implementation, and
physical therapy.
2. Is physical therapy a replacement for traditional veterinary medicine?
No. Physical therapists work in collaboration with veterinarians using a team approach to
examination and intervention. Acquiring a veterinary referral before client evaluation is the
prefeired model of practice.
3. What are the educational and licensure requirements for physical therapists?
Most physical therapists enter the profession with a master's degree, and many further their
education by attaining a doctoral degree. There are 159 physical therapy programs, graduating
approximately 4,500 therapists each year in the United States. The core curriculum requires 2 to 2/
years. Each student completes 4-6 months of clinical internships prior to graduation. Every therapist
must pass a national licensure ex amination. Additional requirements vary from state to state.
4. List the benefits of physical therapy for animals.
Improved recovery from injury or surgery
Return to typical performance or work
Enhancement of natural healing processes
Reduced pain
Increased speed and quality of movement
Improved strength and endurance
Minimized side effects of injury or surgery
Improved biomechanics and posture
Increased flexibility
Prevention of future injury through owner/trainer education
Positive psychological effects for pet and owner
 5. List the common conditions addressed by physical therapist intervention.
Postsurgical: orthopedic, neurologic
Soft tissue injury
Spinal dysfunction
26
Physical Therapy
Gait abnormality or lameness
Joint injury
Contractures
 Managing performance in the canine athlete
Rehabilitation for degenerative disease
Geriatric issues—hospice
 Pain management
Overuse injuries
Edema and circulation deficiency
Wound healing
 Respiratory complications
Peripheral nerve injury
Critical care recovery
6.  List common physical therapy interventions.
Massage
Manual therapy, including joint mobilization and manipulation
Range of motion and stretching
 Individualized conditioning and strengthening programs
Hydrotherapy
Magnetic field therapy
 Postural drainage and percussion
Acupressure
 Phy sical agents——heat, cold, ultrasound, electric stimulation
Electric stimulation—FES, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)
Home care instruction
Functional training
Neuromuscular facilitation and reeducation
Wound care
Relaxation techniques
7. Describe a typical physical therapy session.
After the initial visit for evaluation, a follow-up session may last 30-60 minutes. A brief
discussion of responses to past treatment and new concerns occurs. The therapist assesses
function and takes any objective measurements relative to the injury. The treatment protocol may
include several techniques within one session. Measurements are documented after the
intervention as needed. Modifications might be made to the home program. Client education and
recommendations for future treatment are discussed.
8. What equipment is recommended for a rehabilitation clinic?
Portable, adjustable-setting, electric stimulator
Ultrasound that offers 1 and 3 MHz, pulsed and continuous
Hot and cold pack
Stethoscope
Accustim for acupressure points
 Tape measure with pressure gauge
Goniometer
Reflex hammer
Leash with collar, harness
Muzzle
Clipper
Straps for electrodes
Physical Therapy
27
Theraband
Obstacle course
Physioball
Access to stairs, ramp, curb
Treadmill
Video camera
Laser
Dog treats, carrots, corn
Hy drotherapy tank with under water treadmill
Gait analysis system
Rubber-mat, non-slip walk way
9. What might be a low-tech approach to rehabilitation in the intensive care unit?
· Massage and heat for relaxation
·Ice packs to decrease edema
· Pressure stockings to decrease edema
· Range of motion: 2-3 times/day to prevent joint contractures
· Postural drainage and percussion to improve ventilation
· Positioning changes every 2 hours to prevent pressure sores and urine scald
10. What would a rehabilitation plan include for geriatric patients, especially in cases
dealing with osteoarthritis?
 Individualized exercise programs
Functional training
 Change environment (ramps, remove rugs, avoid slippery surfaces)
Elevate food bowls
Mobility sling or towel walking
Massage
Range of motion
 Heat and ice to decrease pain
Restrict jumping
Swimming
Education in positioning and lifting
Under water treadmill
 Pain management using TENS and acupressure
Wound care
11. What measurements are useful in a rehabilitation program?
· Limb circumference
· Range of motion
·Gait analysis
·Pain scale
·Functional skill inventory
12. What is the function of massage?
To stimulate circulation, reduce edema, improve muscle and tendon mobility, decrease
muscle spasm, minimize scar tissue formation, and relax the patient through use of the hands to
mobilize soft tissue (muscle, tendons, ligaments, and fascia)
13. Describe traditional massage techniques.
Swedish massage includes the traditional strokes: effleurage, petrissage, and friction.
·Effleurage is gentle stroking over large areas of the body using slight-to-moderate
28
Physical Therapy
pressure. It can have a stimulating or calming effect depending on the pressure and speed
of the strokes.
spasms and increase circulation.
· Transverse friction decreases scar tissue and prevents adhesions. The stroke consists of
small circular strokes across muscle and tendon fibers using firm pressure
14. What is the standard protocol for a cranial cruciate ligament repair?
There is no standard rehabilitation protocol for any surgical procedure—all intervention is
tailored to the individual patient. A variety of approaches are summarized:
Day 1—crate confinement, ice for 10-15 minutes every 2-4 hours, compression bandages,
range of motion 2-3 times-day, leash walks for toileting only.
 Day 2—electric stimulation to quadriceps or biceps femoris and hamstrings once per day for
15 minutes for 4-5 days, then every other day for 4-5 weeks; active movement; joint
approximation; laser for pain relief and to decrease edema
Day 7-10—begin hydrotherapy: underwater treadmill or free swimming in a pool 2-3
minutes, then work up to 10-15 minutes; leash walks 5-10 minutes on flat surfaces, no
hills, ramps, or stairs; continue with electric stimulation.
Week 2—add ultrasound (pulsed); add functional training.
Week 3-4—add inclines, walks 10-15 minutes.
Week 5-6—add stairs, leash walks 15-20 minutes, add dancing (walking on back legs while
hol ding front legs off floor), balance activities.
Add running, jumping, and agility exercises as directed by the veterinarian.
15. List physical therapy interventions for acute back pain.
·Ice to painful area
· Electric stimulation for pain relief
· Ultrasound
·Laser
·Massage
·Myofascial release
·Acupressure
16. Should acute musculoskeletal injuries be treated with cold and chronic injuries with
warmth?
Cold therapy should be used for the first 24-72 hours after an injury. Light pressure bandages
to prevent further edema are also recommended. In the presence of swelling or heat, even in a
chronic injury, it is advisable to use cold therapy initially. Warm compresses (moist hot packs) or
 continued cold can be effective. Alternating warm and cold baths are also used in clinical practice.
17. What rehabilitation approaches can improve postoperative care?
· Immediate and frequent use of ice and lightweight pressure bandages to reduce edema
· Early passive range of motion and stimulation of involved musculature
·Pain management interventions
· Early weight bearing through use of an underwater treadmill
· Functional training to address individual patient goals
·Massage
18. What strategies are useful to encourage postoperative weight bearing?
·Wheelbarrow walk or dancing (forelimb/hindlimb usage)
· Slow walks on stairs, over obstacles, on sand, inclines and declines
Physical Therapy
29
● Syringe cap under contralateral foot
· Underwater treadmill
·Circle walks (injured limb inside)
19. List methods to enhance recovery from fracture repairs.
Superficial heat and cold therapies
Massage
Exercise
Hydrotherapy
 Electrical stimulation to promote bone healing
Pressure bandages
Range-of-motion
Controlled weight bearing
20. Define active and passive exercises.
Passive exercises are movements to the joints or muscles performed without the patient's
increase flexibility. Range of motion involves cycling of a joint through all planes of movement.
Each joint can be moved individually, or a total limb technique addressing several joints at the
same time can be used. Stretching involves moving the muscle into an elongated position and
holding it for several seconds to several minutes.
Active exercises involve the participation of the patient. The techniques of stimulating active
Active exercise includes walking in a figure eight, using stairs and inclines, repeated sit-to-stand
movements, underwater treadmill, and an agility obstacle course with jumps.
21. What can be done for pulmonary complications?
A rehabilitation program might include positioning, postural drainage, percussion,
vibration, tracheal suctioning, rib springing, induced cough, massage, passive and active exercise,
compression bandages, and standing frames or carts. Precautions to physical therapy intervention
are pain, open wounds or burns, unstable cardiovascular conditions, recent skin graft,
thoracotomy within the previous 24 hours, pneumothorax, coagulopathy, and rib fractures.
22. What would a rehabilitation plan include for TPLO?
In the first three weeks post-op, multiple short walks (5-10 min), passive range of motion,
massage and ice.By the fourth or fifth week,walks can be increased to 20-30 min and
could be added, as well as controlled swimming, trotting in straight lines, tug of war, dancing, and
ramps. More advanced activities such as running in a straight line, use of leg weights or resistance
23. What functional skills would a physical therapist address in the dog?
·Ambulation in or on a straight line, circles, inclines, stairs, and curbs
·Arising, running, jumping, rolling, crouching, climbing
· Head and neck movements
·Performance of "work"’ related skills, e.g, sled dogs, police/rescue dogs
BIBLIOGRAPHY
canine sporting breeds, Philadelphia, 1998, W.B. Saunders, pp 265-274.
2. Jerram RM, Hart RC, Shulz KS: Post-operative management of the canine spinal surgery patient—Part I. Comp
Cont Educ Pract Vet 19:147-161, 1997.
30
Perioperative Nutrition
3. Manning AM, Ellis D: Physical therapy for critically ill veterinary patients: Part I. Chest physical therapy. Comp
Cont Educ Pract Vet 6:675-685, 1997.
4. Marsolais GS, Dvorak G, Conzemius MG: Effects of postoperative rehabilitation on limb function after cranial
5. Marsolais GS, McLean S, Derrick T, Conzemius MG: Kinenatic analysis of the hind limb during swimming and
walking in healthy dogs and dogs with surgically corrected cranial cruciate ligament rupture. JAVMA 222:739.
743,2003
6. Millis DL, Levine D: The role of exercise and physical modalities in the treatment of osteoarthritis. Vet Clin
North Am Sm Anim Prac 4:913-930, 1997.
7. Speciale J, Fingeroth JM: Use of physiatry as the sole treatment for three paretic or paralyzed dogs with chronic
compressive conditions of the caudal portion of the cervical spinal cord. JAVMA 217:43-47, 2000.
7. PERIOPERATIVE NUTRITION
Sheila M. McCullough, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VI.M.
1. What role does nutrition play in the perioperative patient?
·Enhances wound healing
·Enhances immunocompetence
· Speeds onset of therapeutic effects from other treatments
·Serves to meet the metabolic demands of the patient
· Improves survival rate of critical care patients
 2. What are the goals of providing perioperative nutrition?
Provide enough calories to aid the body in healing from surgery and underlying disease
Prevent atrophy of the gut, which predisposes the patient to ulceration, bacterial translo-
cation, and potential for sepsis
Ensure adequate glucose levels and avoid large fluctuations
Maintain neutral pH
Provide organs with nutritional support to prevent organ failure as a result of malnutrition
3. Describe the pathophysiology of starvation in the critically ill patient.
Demands on the body place the patient in a hyperrmetabolic and catabolic state. Hyper-
metabolism results from the increasing hormonal response (e.g., glucagon, epinephrine, norepi-
nephrine, and cortisol) to maintain normal glucose levels and the production of inflammatory
mediators, such as cytokines (e.g., tumor necrosis factor-o, also known as cachectin; interleukin-1,
progress rapidly.
4. How can the anorectic patient be fed with minimal invasiveness?
The initial approach is to test the appetite by small amounts of canned food in a flat dish. Sense
of smell is enhanced by clearing nasal discharge, removing nasal tubing, using beef or chicken
bouillon with food, making homemade recipes, or hand feeding. Often clients are involved
in hospital feeding schedules. Appetite stimulants, such as cyproheptadine, oxazepam, and
failure in feline patients resulting from diazepam therapy has been reported.
30
Perioperative Nutrition
3. Manning AM, Ellis D: Physical therapy for critically ill veterinary patients: Part I. Chest physical therapy. Comp
Cont Educ Pract Vet 6:675-685, 1997.
4. Marsolais GS, Dvorak G, Conzemius MG: Effects of postoperative rehabilitation on limb function after cranial
5. Marsolais GS, McLean S, Derrick T, Conzemius MG: Kinenatic analysis of the hind limb during swimming and
walking in healthy dogs and dogs with surgically corrected cranial cruciate ligament rupture. JAVMA 222:739.
743,2003
6. Millis DL, Levine D: The role of exercise and physical modalities in the treatment of osteoarthritis. Vet Clin
North Am Sm Anim Prac 4:913-930, 1997.
7. Speciale J, Fingeroth JM: Use of physiatry as the sole treatment for three paretic or paralyzed dogs with chronic
compressive conditions of the caudal portion of the cervical spinal cord. JAVMA 217:43-47, 2000.
7. PERIOPERATIVE NUTRITION
Sheila M. McCullough, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VI.M.
1. What role does nutrition play in the perioperative patient?
·Enhances wound healing
·Enhances immunocompetence
· Speeds onset of therapeutic effects from other treatments
·Serves to meet the metabolic demands of the patient
· Improves survival rate of critical care patients
 2. What are the goals of providing perioperative nutrition?
Provide enough calories to aid the body in healing from surgery and underlying disease
Prevent atrophy of the gut, which predisposes the patient to ulceration, bacterial translo-
cation, and potential for sepsis
Ensure adequate glucose levels and avoid large fluctuations
Maintain neutral pH
Provide organs with nutritional support to prevent organ failure as a result of malnutrition
3. Describe the pathophysiology of starvation in the critically ill patient.
Demands on the body place the patient in a hyperrmetabolic and catabolic state. Hyper-
metabolism results from the increasing hormonal response (e.g., glucagon, epinephrine, norepi-
nephrine, and cortisol) to maintain normal glucose levels and the production of inflammatory
mediators, such as cytokines (e.g., tumor necrosis factor-o, also known as cachectin; interleukin-1,
progress rapidly.
4. How can the anorectic patient be fed with minimal invasiveness?
The initial approach is to test the appetite by small amounts of canned food in a flat dish. Sense
of smell is enhanced by clearing nasal discharge, removing nasal tubing, using beef or chicken
bouillon with food, making homemade recipes, or hand feeding. Often clients are involved
in hospital feeding schedules. Appetite stimulants, such as cyproheptadine, oxazepam, and
failure in feline patients resulting from diazepam therapy has been reported.
Perioperative Nutrition
31
5. What are the approaches to feeding the surgical patient?
Entera!
· Force feeding/appetite stimulation
· Nasoesophageal tube
· Nasogastric tube
· Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube
· Esophagestomy tube
·Gastrostomy tube
●Jejunostomy tube
Parenteral
· Partial parenteral nutrition (PPN)
· Total parenteral nutrition (TPN)
 6. What is parenteral nutrition?
TPN
· A mixture of dextrose, amino acids, and lipid solution providing l00% of the patient's
nutritional requirements in a central vein
PPN
· Dextrose solutions that provide minimal calories to the patient
· Free amino acid solutions (FreeAmine, Aminosyn, Travasol) with balanced electrolytes
added
·Amino acid and dextrose solutions (Clinimix, Quick Mix, ProcalAmine)
· Dextrose, amino acids, and lipid mixtures that provide 50% of the patient's caloric
requirements
 7. List the advantages and disadvantages of PPN.
Advantages
· Peripheral vein
·Noninvasive
·Easy to obtain
·Cost-effective
·Can feed immediately
Disadvantages
· Sepsis potential
·Partial nutrition
· Dedicated line
· Must be rehydrated
 8. List the advantages and disadvantages of TPN.
Advantage
· Full nutrition
Disadvantages
·Expensive
·Central vein
·Dedicated line
· Sepsis potential
·Increase feedings gradually
· Must be rehydrated
32
Perioperative Nutrition
 9. List the advantages and disadvantages of enteral nutrition.
Advantages
· Most physiologic
· Inexpensive
● Prevents gut atrophy and ulcers
· Decreases bacterial translocation
Disadvantages
·Invasive
·Infection
·Expensive
·Slow feeding
10. List the advantages and disadvantages of nasoesophageal and nasogastric tubes.
Advantages
· Easy to place and care for
· Immediate nutrition
· Bolus feeding or constant rate infusion
· Does not require general anesthesia for placement
Disadvantages
· Must use liquid enteral solution
· Nasogastric tubes cross the lower-esophageal sphincter (with or without reflux
esophagitis)
· Chronic vomiting may displace tube
●May require Elizabethan collar
11. What are the benefits of an esophagostomy or pharyngostomy tube?
placed esophagostomy or pharyngostomy tubes can be maintained for months if needed, are large
enough to give pureed canned foods, and are easily managed by the client.
12. What are the indications for percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tubes?
· Bypass oral, pharyngeal, and esophageal dysfunctions
· Long-term hospital or home feedings
● Supplemental nutrition for hyporexic patient
13. What are the indications for jejunostomy tubes?
· Patients with gastroesophageal, pancreatic, and proximal intestinal dysfunctions
· Nutritional support and avoidance of aspiration pneumonia
14.  When is aggressive nutritional support indicated for a surgical patient?
·Patients present with anorexia, protracted vomiting, or diarrhea for a few days
· Patients have poor body condition scores or have not eaten for at least 3 days
· Patients with sustained illnesses, such as neoplasia, severe infection, or trauma
15. When are TPN and PPN indicated?
·Patients cannot tolerate enteral feeding
· As a supplement to enteral feeding
Perioperative Nutrition
33
16. What is nutritional pharmacology?
The study of the importance of particular nutrients in the diet and their trophic effects on the gut
17. Discuss the importance of glutamine to the diet.
Glutamine is a free amino acid that has been shown to be significant in maintenance of a
functional gastrointestinal lining and local immune function. Glutamine is important in gluconeo
genesis, nitrogen transport, nucleotide synthesis, and renal ammoma genesis, and as an energy
source for dividing cells. In stressed animals, glutamine levels are low and may prove to be an
essential requirement for enteral and parenteral nutrition formulations.
18. Define RER, IER, and PER.
RER: Resting energy requirement = amount of calories to maintain minimal metabolism;
30× body weight (kg) + 70 = kcal/day (for patients weighing 2-35 kg)
         o  =    
19. What are the major complications in enteral and parenteral nutrition delivery?
Mechanical: Blocked enteral tubes and kinked catheters can present physical difficulties
Metabolic: Alterations in electrolyte balances, hyperglycemia, acid-base disturbances, and
hyperlipidemia occur. It is not uncommon to see diarrhea or soft stool from enteral
nutntion.
Septic: Parenteral solutions are an ideal growth medium for bacteria (aseptic technique is
essential when administering parenteral solutions).
20. How is a patient monitored during nutritional support?
Patients should be weighed daily. Temperature, pulse, and respiration can be monitored fou1
times a day. A mimimum database of packed cell volume, total protein, glucose, and blood urea
nitrogen should be performed twice a day. Monitoring electrolyte imbalances, albumin, hyper-
triglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia, hyperammonemia, and urine dipstick for glucosuria and
ketones is recommended. The patient should be monitored for volume overload.
21. What is refeeding syndrome?
Occasionally, when a debilitated patient is started on nutritional support, severe electrolyte
disturbances, such as hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, and hypomagnesemia, may occur. Severe
hypophosphatemia may result in red blood cell hemolysis.
22. How is refeeding syndrome managed?
It may be necessary to give a blood transfusion. The main directive is to continue supportive
care, correct electrolyte imbal ances, and maintain perfusion.
23. Why is nutritional assessment critical for patients?
"All deaths are hateful to miserable mortals, but the most pitiable death of all is to starve'
(Homer, Odyssey XI1:34 1).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Chandller ML: Use of peripheral parenteral nutritional support in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:669-
672, 2000.
2. Michel KE: Interventional nutrition for the critical care patient. Clin Tech Sm Anim Pract 13:204-210, 1999.
3. Stevenson MAM: One-step placement of a percutaneous nonendoscopic low profile gastrostomy port in cats.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:1636-1641, 2000.
8. DRESSINGS AND EXTERNAL COAPTATION
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip A.C.VS.
1. What are the functions of bandages?
·Cover and protect open wounds
· Reduce edema, hemorrhage, and dead space 
·Promote wound healing
· Immobilize osseous and soft tissue structures
2. What are the components of a bandage?
· Inner, primary (contact) layer
· Middle, secondary (intermediate) layer
·Outer, tertiary (external) layer
 3. What are the types of and indications for dressings used in the contact layer?
Adherent
· Wet or dry gauze used to absorb exudate or mechanically debride necrotic tissue
Nonadherent (See Figure 8-1)
· Semiocclusive dressings that retain moisture and promote epithelialization; used during
reparative stages (healthy granulation, minimal tissue necrosis)
· Occlusive dressings, completely impermeable to air, that promote epithelialization and
collagen synthesis
 4. List examples of nonadherent, semiocclusive dressings.
·Commercial preparations (Telfa, Release)
· Petrolatum-impregnated (with or without antibiotics) autoclaved gauze sponges
·Polyurethane foam (Hydrabsorb)
 5. List examples of nonadherent, occlusive dressings.
·Hydrocolloids (DuoDerm)
·Hydrogels (BioDres)
· Silicone membrane (BioBrane)
· Natural products such as seaweed fibers (Curasorb)
6. What biologic tissues have been used as wound dressings in veterinary medicine?
·Autogenous skin grafts
· Equine amnion
· Feline greater omentum
· Hydrolyzed bovine collagen
7. Who declared, “I dressed the wound (him) and God healed it."
Ambroise Pare (1510-1590), the most celebrated surgeon of the Renaissance; famous for
abolishing boiling oil treatment of gunshot wounds and using ligatures during limb amputation.
A.NONADHERENT,NONABSORBENTDRESSING
Paraffin/petrolatum-
coated gauze
B.NONADHERENT,ABSORBENT DRESSING
Porouspolyethylene
film (nonadherent)
Absorbent cotton
and/or rayon pad
C.NONADHERENT,ABSORBENT,OCCLUSIVEDRESSING(HYDROCOLLOID)
Polyurethane film
Semiopencellfoam
Hydrocolloid/adhesive
layer
Polyethylene
Nylon support mesh
film
Hydrogel
E.NONADHERENT,ABSORBENT,SEMIOCCLUSIVEDRESSING(COMPOSITE)
Acrylic adhesive
Polyurethane
Perforated
film
Exudative
polyurethane
reservoir
film
Polyurethane
film
Absorbent pad
Acrylic adhesive
Nonadherent perforated
membrane
F. SEMIOCCLUSIVE, NONABSORBENT TRANSPARENT FILM DRESSING
Polyurethane
film
Ether/acrylic-based
adhesive
Figure 8-1 Composition of various nonadherent dressings. (Adapted from Cohen 1K, Diegelmann RF,
Lindbald W], editors: Wound heating, ed 1, Philadelphia, 1992, W.B. Saunders, p 568, with permission.)
36
Dressings and External Coaptation
8. What are the functions and composition of the intermediate bandage layer?
To absorb wound exudate, blood, and debris away from the wound, and inner bandage layer;
secure the contact layer to the wound; reduce tissue swelling; and provide limb support. Materials
used for this layer include cast padding, combine or cotton roll, and disposable diapers.
9. What are the functions and composition of the outer bandage layer?
To secure the other bandage layers in place, provide pressure support, and protect the middle
tape. Conforming stretch bandage, stockinette, and cling are also used in combination with tape
10. Which lavage solutions have been used in contaminated or infected wounds?
·Tap water (severe contamination, cytotoxic)
·Saline (mechanical flushing, acidic pH)
·Lactated Ringer's (mechanical flushing)
·0.05% chlorhexidine (antimicrobial)
· 0. 1-1% povidone-iodine (antimicrobial activity inactivated by purulence, irritating)
11. What volume of lavage solutions should be used to treat contaminated or infected
wounds?
Difficult, if not impossible, to determine from the medical literature. General recommen-
dations (500 ml-1.0 L) are to reduce gross contamination, while avoiding tissue edema and
discoloration.
12. What rate of delivery is recommended for lavage solutions?
Various systems have been described: pulsatile lavage, gravity flow, or manual (8 psi)
delivery via a 35-60 gauge syringe with an 18-19 gauge needle. Caution is always expressed for
dispersal of contaminants through tissues.
13. List topical dressings that have been used in veterinary patients.
· Antimicrobials (bacitracin/neomycin/pol ymyxin, gentamicin, nitrofurazone, chlorhexi-
dine, and sil ver sulfadiazine)
· Hydrophilic agents
· Enzymatic debridement agents
·Hydrogels
·Yeast derivatives
·Aloe vera
14. Which agents are useful in burns?
·Silver sulfadiazine (antimicrobial activity permeates eschar)
·Hydrogels (enhanced healing)
·Aloe vera (antithromboxane activity)
15. Is topical antibiotic lavage useful in reducing wound infections?
16. What are some general guidelines for applying bandages to small animals?
·Animals often require chemical restraint.
· Limbs and joints should be placed in near-normal positions, unless elimination of weight
bearing is required.
·Joints above and below the injury need to be stabilized.
Dressings and ExternalCoaptation
37
tissues.
· Postsplintage radiographs are useful in confirming adequacy of bone alignment
17. What is a Robert Jones bandage?
A bulky and compressive cotton roll applied to injuries below the elbow and stifle joints. In
general, 1 1b of cotton is used per 20 lb of body weight; correctly applied, it should sound like a
18. What is a modified Robert Jones bandage?
Similar to a Schanz (German orthopedist, 1868-1931) padded limb bandage; cast padding is
used instead of cotton roll and often supported with metal, aluminum, wooden, or cast splint
19. What is a spica splint?
adjacent vertebrae, and trunk. Used to immobilize proximal limb injuries; the name is derived
from the Latin term spica, meaning ear of wheat (i.e., the bandage crosses on itself).
20. What is a Velpeau sling?
A padded bandage applied to a flexed forelimb held in close apposition to the thorax used
to treat shoulder luxation and scapular fracture injuries; name is derived from a French surgeon,
Alfred Armand Louis Velpeau (1795-1867).
21. What is an Ehmer sling?
Tape and bandaging material applied to a pelvic limb to produce non-weight-bearing.
internal rotation, and abduction; used to treat coxofemoral fractures and luxations. Named after
22. What is a Schroeder-Thomas splint?
 A traction device composed of bandages, tape, and aluminum rods used for treatment of
minimally displaced forelimb and hindlimb fractures. Named after a veterinarian, E. F
Schroeder, who descnibed traction (1933) and modification of a splint developed by a British
surgeon (Hugh Owen Thomas, 1834-1891).
23. What is a pelvic limb sling?
A combined limb and abdominal wrap used to control weight-bearing after hindlimb or
pelvic injuries (surgery). It permits modified joint motions to prevent fibrosis and was developed
              
City during the 1970s.
24. Which factors determine the ultimate strength of a cast?
The tensile and compressive strengths of the material as well as the degree of adhesion
(lamination) between the cast layers. The latter is affected by the amount and distribution of resin
and efficiency of application.
25. What are some differences between plaster of Paris and fiberglass casts?
Plaster of Paris is stronger in compression than tension because of its crystalline structure,
           
radiolucent, easy to apply, and more expensive than plaster casts.
38
Monitoring The Postoperative Patient
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Brockman DJ, Pardo A D: Omentum-enhanced reconstruction and chronic nonhealing wounds in cats. Vet Surg
25:99-104, 1996.
2. Fossum Tw: Smalt animat surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby-Year Book, pp 145-153.
3. Morgan WP, Binnington AG: The effect of occlusive and semi-occlusive dressings on the healing of acute full-
thickness wounds. Vet Surg 23:494-502, 1994.
4. Simpson AM, Beale BS: Bandaging in dogs and cats: basic principles. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 23:12-16,
2001.
5. Swaim, SF, Gillette RL, Sartin EA, Hinkle SH, Coolman SL: Effects of hydrolyzed collagen dressing in the
healing of open wounds in dogs. J Vet Res 61:1574-1578, 2000.
6. Wilson DG, Vanderby R: An evaluation of fiberglass cast application techniques. Vet Surg 24:118-121, 1995.
9. MONITORING THE POSTOPERATIVE PATIENT
Steven L. Marks, B.V. Sc., M.S., M.R.C.VS., Dip. A.C.VI.M
1. What parameters should be evaluated postoperatively?
 Parameters are based on the underlying disease process or the surgical procedure performed.
· Heart rate
·Pulse quality
· Respiratory rate
· Capillary refill time
·Body weight
·Body temperature
·PCV
· Total protein
·Serum glucose
·Activated clotting time (ACT)
 2. List techniques used to monitor the respiratory system.
· Visual assessment of respiratory rate and pattern
· Thoracic auscultation
· Thoracic percussion
·Pulse oximetry
· Blood gas analysis
·Thoracic radiographs
3. What is pulse oximetry?
A noninvasive technique that provides continuous estimation of arterial oxyhemoglobin
saturation. A light source and photodetector are used to measure a difference in light absorption
between pulsatile blood and background absorption to calculate a percentage of hemoglobin
saturation (Saoz). It does not correlate directly with Paoz but is an indicator of tissue perfusion.
The pulse oximeter also provides a pulse rate.
 4. What information does arterial blood gas analysis provide?
·pH
·PaOz
·PaCOz
38
Monitoring The Postoperative Patient
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Brockman DJ, Pardo A D: Omentum-enhanced reconstruction and chronic nonhealing wounds in cats. Vet Surg
25:99-104, 1996.
2. Fossum Tw: Smalt animat surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby-Year Book, pp 145-153.
3. Morgan WP, Binnington AG: The effect of occlusive and semi-occlusive dressings on the healing of acute full-
thickness wounds. Vet Surg 23:494-502, 1994.
4. Simpson AM, Beale BS: Bandaging in dogs and cats: basic principles. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 23:12-16,
2001.
5. Swaim, SF, Gillette RL, Sartin EA, Hinkle SH, Coolman SL: Effects of hydrolyzed collagen dressing in the
healing of open wounds in dogs. J Vet Res 61:1574-1578, 2000.
6. Wilson DG, Vanderby R: An evaluation of fiberglass cast application techniques. Vet Surg 24:118-121, 1995.
9. MONITORING THE POSTOPERATIVE PATIENT
Steven L. Marks, B.V. Sc., M.S., M.R.C.VS., Dip. A.C.VI.M
1. What parameters should be evaluated postoperatively?
 Parameters are based on the underlying disease process or the surgical procedure performed.
· Heart rate
·Pulse quality
· Respiratory rate
· Capillary refill time
·Body weight
·Body temperature
·PCV
· Total protein
·Serum glucose
·Activated clotting time (ACT)
 2. List techniques used to monitor the respiratory system.
· Visual assessment of respiratory rate and pattern
· Thoracic auscultation
· Thoracic percussion
·Pulse oximetry
· Blood gas analysis
·Thoracic radiographs
3. What is pulse oximetry?
A noninvasive technique that provides continuous estimation of arterial oxyhemoglobin
saturation. A light source and photodetector are used to measure a difference in light absorption
between pulsatile blood and background absorption to calculate a percentage of hemoglobin
saturation (Saoz). It does not correlate directly with Paoz but is an indicator of tissue perfusion.
The pulse oximeter also provides a pulse rate.
 4. What information does arterial blood gas analysis provide?
·pH
·PaOz
·PaCOz
Monitoring The Postoperative Patient
39
·Sodium bicarbonate
·Base excess
·Hemoglobin saturation
 5. What is the A-a gradient?
The alveolar-arterial gradient is calculated using arterial blood gas analysis in hypoxemic
patients.
A = (BP - 47)0.21 - PacO/0.8 a = PaO2
BP is barometric pressure.
47 is the vaporization pressure of water.
0.21 is the approximate concentration of Oz in room air.
0.8 is the respiratory exchange ratio and is a constant.
A-a should be < 10 mm Hg.
 Abnormal values indicate a significant oxy gen transport problem.
At sea level (barometric pressure = 760 mm Hg), the formula can be simplified to 150 -
PaCO/0.8.
6. How is thoracic percussion performed?
with the middle finger of the opposite hand allows thoracic percussions to be heard. Change in
7. List techniques used to monitor the cardiovascular system.
· Thoracic auscultation
· Palpation of peripheral arterial pulses
· Capillary refill time
·Electrocardiography
·Echocardiography
·Thoracic radiographs
· Cardiac output
8.Does the ECG provide information about cardiac function?
No. The ECG provides information concerning electric activity of the heart and conduction
of this activity. The morphology of the complexes suggests chamber size.
9. What is central venous pressure?
Central venous pressure is measured by placing a large-bore catheter via the jugular vein
into the intrathoracic cranial vena cava. The catheter is connected to a fluid-filled line creating a
continuous fluid column between the right atrium and a manometer. The manometer is zeroed at
the approximate level of the right atrium with the animal in lateral or sternal recumbency. The
monitoring of this parameter can be used to assess right atrial pressures and correlate well with
hydration status. Normal values for the dog and cat are 0-5 cm HO.
10. What is a pulmonary artery catheter?
A flexible, balloon-tipped, flow-directed catheter placed into the pulmonary artery (also
called Swan-Ganz catheter). This catheter has two ports. When placed correctly, the proximal
port is in the right atrium and the distal port in the pulmonary artery. The information provided
includes cardiac output, pulmonary artery pressure, mixed venous Oz, central venous pressure,
pulmonary wedge pressure, and core body temperature.
40
Monitoring ThePostoperative Patient
11. Name three techniques for obtaining blood pressure measurements in the dog and cat.
1. Direct-catheterization of peripheral artery and connection to pressure trans ducer.
2. Indirect—Doppler crystal with inflatable cuff.
3.Indirect—oscillometric.
12. List the laboratory tests used to evaluate the coagulation system.
·ACT
·Prothrombin time (PT)
· Partial thromboplastin time (PTT)
· Buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT)
13. What do the tests measure?
· The ACT and the PTT evaluate the intrinsic and common pathways.
· The PT evaluates the extrinsic and common pathways.
· The BMBT evaluates platelet function and Von Willebrand's factor.
The intrinsic path way can be remembered by the pneumonic "Kmart is in." At Kmart, the
price is not $12, but rather $11.98 (intrinsic pathway contains factors 12, 11, 9, and 8). The
ex trinsic pathway only has one factor (7). The tests with more letters (ACT and PTT) evaluate the
pathway with more factors (intrinsic). The test with fewer letters (PT) evaluates the pathway with
fewer factors (extrinsic).
14. What is the normal urine output for a dog and cat?
1-2 ml/kg/hr. This is measured by an indwelling urinary catheter with a closed collection
systern.
15. What are ins and outs?
Ins and outs describe a techmique for calculating fluid requirements based on measurement
of urine output in the dehydrated patient with oliguria or diuresis. Initially a fluid rate based on
the patient's hydration status is administered for 4 hours. When using this technique, fluid
admimistration can be divided into six, 4-hour periods. At the end of the first 4 hours, urine output
is measured, and this is the sensible portion of the fluid requirement for the next 4 hours. The
insensible portion of the fluid requirement is calculated based on 20 ml/kg/24 hr (one third of
maintenance, which is 60 ml/kg/24 hr) divided by 6. By calculating the insensible requirements
and measuring the sensible requirements, the clinician meets the fluid requirements of the patient
without overhydrating the patient.
16.  List techniques for evaluating the neurologic system.
·Evaluate mentation
· Cranial nerve examination
·Complete neurologic examination
17. List monitoring techniques that can be used to assess the abdominal cavity.
·Abdominal palpation
·Abdominal paracentesis
· Diagnostic peritoneal lavage
·Abdominal radiographs
· Abdominal ultrasound
18. How does one monitor for pain in postoperative patients?
Signs of pain:
·Tachycardia
·Tachypnea
Sutures, Staples,and Adhesives
41
·Hypertension
·Cardiac arrhythmias
· Dilated pupils
·Salivation
·Vocalization
· Restlessness
· Behavior changes—aggression or depression
·Abnormal body postures
●Bruxism (teeth grinding)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Fossum TW: Postoperative care of the surgical patient. In Fossum TW, editor: Smalt animat surgery, ed 2, St.
Louis, 2002, Mosby, p 69-91.
2002, W.B. Saumders, pp 2608-2612
10. SUTURES. STAPLES, AND ADHESIVES
Bradley R. Coolman, D.VM., M.S., Dip A.C.VS.
1. What are functions of sutures?
To facilitate healing (approximation of divided tissues) and control hemorrhage (ligation of
severed vessels).
2. Do sutures have any negative effects on healing wounds?
Yes. Suture materials are foreign bodies in the wound, can delay healing, and can lead to the
wounds, suggesting that sutures may delay healing. In a classic study of human subjects, the
number of Staphylococcus required to cause a subcutaneous infection decreased 10,000-fold
when a single silk suture was added to the wound.
3. What guidelines should be used when placing sutures in surgical wounds?
The fewest number of the smallest diameter, least reactive sutures required to give adequate
support to the wounded tissues should be used.
4. List the characteristics of an ideal suture material.
·Adequate tensile strength
· Good knot security
·Easy to handle
· Nonreactive, nonelectrol ytic, noncapillary, nonallergenic, nontoxic
· Does not promote bacterial adherence or growth
· Absorbable at a dependable rate after healing is complete
·Readily available
·Easily sterilized
·Inexpensive
5. Does the ideal suture material exist?
No. Some of the currently available synthetic suture materials come close
Sutures, Staples,and Adhesives
41
·Hypertension
·Cardiac arrhythmias
· Dilated pupils
·Salivation
·Vocalization
· Restlessness
· Behavior changes—aggression or depression
·Abnormal body postures
●Bruxism (teeth grinding)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Fossum TW: Postoperative care of the surgical patient. In Fossum TW, editor: Smalt animat surgery, ed 2, St.
Louis, 2002, Mosby, p 69-91.
2002, W.B. Saumders, pp 2608-2612
10. SUTURES. STAPLES, AND ADHESIVES
Bradley R. Coolman, D.VM., M.S., Dip A.C.VS.
1. What are functions of sutures?
To facilitate healing (approximation of divided tissues) and control hemorrhage (ligation of
severed vessels).
2. Do sutures have any negative effects on healing wounds?
Yes. Suture materials are foreign bodies in the wound, can delay healing, and can lead to the
wounds, suggesting that sutures may delay healing. In a classic study of human subjects, the
number of Staphylococcus required to cause a subcutaneous infection decreased 10,000-fold
when a single silk suture was added to the wound.
3. What guidelines should be used when placing sutures in surgical wounds?
The fewest number of the smallest diameter, least reactive sutures required to give adequate
support to the wounded tissues should be used.
4. List the characteristics of an ideal suture material.
·Adequate tensile strength
· Good knot security
·Easy to handle
· Nonreactive, nonelectrol ytic, noncapillary, nonallergenic, nontoxic
· Does not promote bacterial adherence or growth
· Absorbable at a dependable rate after healing is complete
·Readily available
·Easily sterilized
·Inexpensive
5. Does the ideal suture material exist?
No. Some of the currently available synthetic suture materials come close
42
Sutures, Staples, and Adhesives
6. How are suture materials classified?
·Natural origin versus synthetic
·Absorbable versus nonabsorbable
· Multifilament versus monofilament
7. What is the difference between natural and synthetic sutures?
· Natural origin sutures are derived from plant (e.g., cotton) or animal (e.g., catgut, silk)
sources.
·Synthetic onigin sutures are polymers from man-made sources.
8. What is the difference between absorbable and nonabsorbable sutures?
· Absorbable sutures undergo degradation and rapid loss of tensile strength within 60 days
of impl antation.
· Nonabsorbable sutures retain tensile strength for 60 days after implantation.
9.What is the difference between multifilament and monofilament sutures?
· Multifilament sutures are made by twisting or braiding multiple smaller strands of a
matenial into a larger suture. These sutures have an irregular surface, which increases the
Inction (drag) duning placement and can harbor bactenia away from the patient's immune
system.
·Monofilament sutures are a single, smooth strand of suture material made by extrusion.
s
10. How are some commonly used suture materials classified?
· Chromic catgutnatural, absorbable, multifilament
· Silk—natural, nonabsorbable, multifilament
· Polyglactin 910 (Vicryl), Polyglycolic acid (Dexon)—synthetic, absorbable, multifilament
·Polydioxanone (PDS), Polyglyconate (Maxon), Poliglecaprone 25 (Monocryl)—
synthetic, absorbable, monofilament
·Polypropylene (Prolene), Nylon (Ethilon)—synthetic, nonabsorbable, monofilament
11. What is the origin of catgut suture material?
Not from the feline intestinal tract. Catgut is derived from the submucosal layer of sheep
intestine or the serosa of bovine intestine and is composed of formaldehyde-treated collagen fibers.
12. How is catgut degraded and absorbed?
Catgut is absorbed in a two-staged process involving macrophages (phagocytosis). First,
molecular bonds are broken by acid hydrolysis and collagenolysis. Then, the protein is digested
and absorbed by proteolytic enzymes. Because catgut is a foreign protein, it stimulates a
13. How are synthetic absorbable sutures degraded?
Synthetic absorbable sutures are broken down by hydrolysis through esterase enzyme
activity. These materials are associated with a significantly decreased inflammatory process when
compared with catgut and have a more consistent rate of absorption and a more constant rate of
14. List commonly used absorbable suture materials from highest to lowest initial tensile
strength.
·Poliglecaprone 25 (Monocryl) (strongest)
·Polyglyconate (Maxon)
·Polydioxanone (PDS)
Sutures, Staples,and Adhesives
43
·Polyglactin 910 (Vicryl)
· Polyglycolic acid (Dexon)
·Chromic catgut (weakest)
15. Which absorbable suture material retains its tensile strength the longest after
implantation in a surgical wound?
Polydioxanone sulfate (PDS). It takes PDS approximately 6 weeks to lose half of its original
tensile strength.
16. List commonly used nonabsorbable suture materials from highest to lowest initial
tensile strength.
·Stainless steel (strongest)
·Polyester (Ethibond, Mersilene)
·Polymenized caprolactum (Vetafil, Braunamid)
·Nylon (Ethilon)
· Polypropylene (Prolene)
·Silk (weakest)
17. What determines the strength of a freshly closed surgical wound?
Sutured wounds are only as strong as the tissue anchoring the sutures. The strength of a
closed wound depends on content and orientation of the collagen fibers in the sutured tissue (not
the strength of the suture material).
18. What are the relative holding strengths of soft tissues?
· Strongestligaments, tendons, fascia, skin
· Intermediate—muscle, hollow organs (stomach and small intestine, colon and urinary
bladder)
·Weakest—fat, parenchymal organs (liver, kidney, spleen)
19. What is knot security?
The ability of a suture to hold without slipping when tied with a square knot. Knot security
is a relative measurement and an inherent property of the suture material.
20. How many throws are needed to tie a secure knot?
·Simple interrupted pattern:
Stainless steel—two throws (one square knot)
 Poly glactin 910, polyglycolic acid, surgical gut, polypropylenethree throws
Polydioxanone, nylon—four throws
· Starting continuous patterns: add one additional throw for minimum security
● Ending continuous patterns:
Polyglycolic acid, surgical gut, polypropylene—five throws
Polyglactin 910, nylon—six throws
Polydioxanone—seven throws
21. What is the most frequent cause of dehiscence for beginning surgeons?
Improperly tied knots.
22. What are the advantages and disadvantages of interrupted suture patterns?
Advantages:
·Greater secunity
·● Allow for precise adjustment of tension at each point of suturing
44
Sutures,Staples,and Adhesives
Disadvantages:
·Use more suture material (poor suture economy)
· Leave greater amounts of foreign material in the wound
· More time-consuming to place compared with continuous patterns
23. What is capillarity?
Ability of a suture material to act as a wick and transport contaminated fluid along the suture
to adjacent sterile tissues.
24. Which suture materials have the greatest degree of capillary action?
Multifilament suture materials such as chromic catgut, silk, coated caprolactum, polyester,
and cotton have the most capillarity and should be avoided in contaminated and infected wounds.
Multifilament suture materials have a large surface area and interstices to harbor bacteria.
25. List some principles for selection and use of suture needles.
· Swaged needles are less traumatic and are preferred to eyed needles.
·Suturing deeper tissues requires a needle with a greater curvature
· Taper-point needles should be used whenever possible because they are less traumatic and
make a smaller hole in the tissue.
· Cutting-point needles should be used for skin, tendons, ligaments, and dense fascia.
26. What are the advantages and disadvantages of using surgical stapling devices in small
animal surgery?
Advantages:
· Speed
· Consistency of application
· Secunity of hemostasis
· Utility in areas that are difficult to access (i.e., deep cavity ligation)
Disadvantages:
· Increased cost
● Lack of availability of stapling equipment in many practices
· Lack of familiarity with stapling techniques
● Potential for failure if used improperly
27. What are some surgical stapling instruments used in small animal surgery?
· Skin staplers have been used for a wide variety of surgical applications, including skin
closure, fixation of drains and surgical drapes, securing mesh for hernia repairs,
fashioning colostomies, closure of gastrointestinal wounds, intestinal anastomoses,
fixation of gastropexies, and emergency closure of penetrating cardiac wounds
· Vascular clips are V-shaped metallic staples that are useful for rapid hemostasis or vessel
ligation.
· Ligating-dividing staplers (LDS) apply two U-shaped vascular clips and simultaneously
divide the vessel (useful for rapid splenectomy).
· Thoracoabdominal (TA) stapling instruments (United States Surgical Corporation, USSC)
and the proximate linear stapler (Ethicon) are useful for lung lobectomy, division of large
vascular pedicles, resection of atrial appendage tumors, typhlectomy, liver lobectomy,
partial splenectomy, and closure of gastrointestinal incisions.
S  d  (  ()  s
(Ethicon) can perform many of the same functions as the TA and linear staplers and are
useful for partial gastrectomy, intestinal anastomoses, cholecystojejunostomy, and
Tesection of esophageal diverticulum.
Laser Surgery
45
· End-to-end anastomosis (EEA) stapler is used for esophageal anastomosis, gastroduo-
denostomy (Bilroth I), and colorectal anastomosis (subtotal colectomy in cats).
28. What are tissue adhesives?
Cyanoacrylates are commercially available adhesives that polymerize in the presence of
moisture (body fluids) to produce a strong, flexible bond.
29. List some common uses for tissue adhesives in small animal surgery.
·Skin closure
·Declawing injuries
·Tail docking
·Ear cropping
·Controlling hemorrhage
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Boothe HW: Suture materials, tissue adhesives, staplers, and ligating clips. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smatt
animat surgery,ed 2, Philadelphia, 1993, W.B. Saunders, pp 204-212.
2. Booth HW: Selecting suture materials for small animal surgery. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 20:155-163, 1998.
3. Fossum TW: Biomaterials, suturing, and henostasis. In Fossum TW, editor: Small animat surgery, ed 2, St.
Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp 43-59.
            
5. Smeak DD: Selection and use of currently available suture materials and needles. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current
techniques in small animat surgery,ed 4, Baltimore, 1998, williams & Wilkins, pp 19-26.
11. LASER SURGERY
Thomas R. Fry. D.VM., M.S., Dip A.C.VS., and Kenneth E. Bartels, D.VM., M.S.
1. What is a laser?
A device that emits a high-intensity, narrow spectral width, highly directional or near-zero
divergent beam of light (electromagnetic radiation) by stimulating the transitions of electrons,
ions, or molecules to higher energy levels and allowing them to fall to lower energy levels.
2. What is the derivation of the term laser?
Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation.
 3. Do all lasers emit radiation in the same region of the electromagnetic spectrum?
No. The electromagnetic spectrum relevant to lasers consists of invisible ultraviolet (short
wavelength) radiation, visible light, and infrared (long wavelength) radiation. Medical lasers may
be in all portions of the spectrum. Wavelength is most often measured in nanometers or lo-? m.
The most commonly used lasers in veterinary medicine include the diode (635-980 nm) and
neodymium: yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd: YAG) (1,064 nm) lasers in the near-infrared spectrum,
and the carbon dioxide (CO2) (10,600 nm) laser in the far-infrared spectrum (see Figure 11-1).
4. What are the components of a generic laser?
· Optical resonator: a chamber containing the active medium. CO, lasers contain CO, gas
and small amounts of nitrogen (serves as an excitor) and helium (serves as a buffer) inside
the optical resonator as the active medium.
Laser Surgery
45
· End-to-end anastomosis (EEA) stapler is used for esophageal anastomosis, gastroduo-
denostomy (Bilroth I), and colorectal anastomosis (subtotal colectomy in cats).
28. What are tissue adhesives?
Cyanoacrylates are commercially available adhesives that polymerize in the presence of
moisture (body fluids) to produce a strong, flexible bond.
29. List some common uses for tissue adhesives in small animal surgery.
·Skin closure
·Declawing injuries
·Tail docking
·Ear cropping
·Controlling hemorrhage
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Boothe HW: Suture materials, tissue adhesives, staplers, and ligating clips. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smatt
animat surgery,ed 2, Philadelphia, 1993, W.B. Saunders, pp 204-212.
2. Booth HW: Selecting suture materials for small animal surgery. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 20:155-163, 1998.
3. Fossum TW: Biomaterials, suturing, and henostasis. In Fossum TW, editor: Small animat surgery, ed 2, St.
Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp 43-59.
            
5. Smeak DD: Selection and use of currently available suture materials and needles. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current
techniques in small animat surgery,ed 4, Baltimore, 1998, williams & Wilkins, pp 19-26.
11. LASER SURGERY
Thomas R. Fry. D.VM., M.S., Dip A.C.VS., and Kenneth E. Bartels, D.VM., M.S.
1. What is a laser?
A device that emits a high-intensity, narrow spectral width, highly directional or near-zero
divergent beam of light (electromagnetic radiation) by stimulating the transitions of electrons,
ions, or molecules to higher energy levels and allowing them to fall to lower energy levels.
2. What is the derivation of the term laser?
Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation.
 3. Do all lasers emit radiation in the same region of the electromagnetic spectrum?
No. The electromagnetic spectrum relevant to lasers consists of invisible ultraviolet (short
wavelength) radiation, visible light, and infrared (long wavelength) radiation. Medical lasers may
be in all portions of the spectrum. Wavelength is most often measured in nanometers or lo-? m.
The most commonly used lasers in veterinary medicine include the diode (635-980 nm) and
neodymium: yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd: YAG) (1,064 nm) lasers in the near-infrared spectrum,
and the carbon dioxide (CO2) (10,600 nm) laser in the far-infrared spectrum (see Figure 11-1).
4. What are the components of a generic laser?
· Optical resonator: a chamber containing the active medium. CO, lasers contain CO, gas
and small amounts of nitrogen (serves as an excitor) and helium (serves as a buffer) inside
the optical resonator as the active medium.
46
Laser Surgery
ICIEN
EFFI
aser-iissue
Optics
ORPTION
Melanir
ABS
0.20.3 0.40.6 0.8
2.04.0
5.0
10.020.0
WAVELENGTH (μum) - not to scale
Figure 11-1
· Total and partially reflective mirrors at each end of the optical resonator allow laser
energy (light) to bounce back and forth within the chamber and generate more light, a
around its edge, through a hole, or through a partially transparent section. The light that
leaks out of the laser cavity is the laser beam.
molecules of the lasing medium to reach higher energy levels, releasing photons, a
process called stimulated emission.
5. What are the three types of laser delivery systems?
1.Articulated arms are a series of hollow tubes and mirrors that deliver the beam to the
laser tip. Older-generation CO lasers, excimer lasers, and ruby lasers all use this system.
These are often bulky, easily damaged, and expensive to maintain.
 2. Fiberoptic systems are thin-diameter quartz fibers capable of delivering laser energy
through small-diameter fibers and are extremely useful in endoscopic or relatively inac-
cessible surgical sites. They are the most economical of the delivery systems. Nd:YAG,
potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP), holmium:YAG, and diode lasers all use quartz fiber
delivery.
 3. Hollow waveguides are a refinement of articulated arm systems. They are small-diame-
ter, flexible metal, plastic, or ceramic tubes lined with thin metal as a reflective surface.
They are much more flexible than articulated arms, have lower maintenance, and have
many of the advantages of quartz fiber systems. Newer-generation CO, lasers use this
technology
6. How may the surgeon vary the output of the laser beam or alter the tissue interaction?
· Power density ( watts/cm') on the target tissue may be changed by varying the power input
· Distance of fiber or waveguide tips from the target tissue plays a significant role in total
energy delivery and concentration.
· Changing the energy delivery mode or energy gating mechanism. Medical lasers may be
operated in continuous wave (CW), pulse, superpulse (CO2), or Q-switched (Nd:YAG)
modes.
LaserSurgery
47
7. What are the unique characteristics of laser light?
·Monochromatic—single color (wavelength)
· Nondivergent or collimated—light travels in parallel lines
8. How are lasers named?
Based on the active medium in the optical resonator or deterinined by the material
stimulated by an energy source. Laser pointers (helium-neon lasers) have helium and neon gases
as the active medium. Diode lasers are composed of wafers of a semiconductor material, such as
gallium aluminum arsenide (GaAlAs).
9. How do lasers differ from electrosurgery devices?
Laser energy does not stimulate nerve and muscle causing movement in the patient, as do
most electrosurgery devices. Lasers can photothermally seal nerve endings and lymphatic
vessels. Appropriate surgical laser use results in reduced inflammation and lessens postoperative
edema and discomfort.Depth of penetration and decreased collateral tissue damage are more
ability differs tremendously between laser types. Carbon dioxide lasers are minimally effective
for coagulating blood vessels > 0.5 mm diameter, whereas Nd:YAG and diode lasers may be quite
effective if used properly. Lasers may be used to incise, coagulate, and vaporize tissue. Laser
tissue vaporization can also reduce surface bacterial numbers on the wound surface.
10. What are the minimum standards for laser safety?
Standards are based on the American National Standards Institutes document: Safe Use of
Lasers in Health Care Facilities, ANS1 Z 136.3—1993. General considerations for safety should
avoid a burn and learn attitude and include:
· Shielding patient corneas and using wavelength-specific goggles for the OR team.
may contain carcinogens, toxins, viable bacteria, and viable viruses.
· Using gloves and gowns; saline-moistened sponges should be placed over any patient
tissues at risk.
● Shielding or moistening anything (hair) at risk with drapes. Placing a moistened sponge
into the rectum (of the patient) to minimize gas ignition (flatulence is flammable).
Avoiding flammable preparations (isopropyl alcohol) on the skin.
+ Avoiding polyvinyl chloride endotracheal tubes, which may ignite; use special laser tubes,
which are commercially available
· Using the laser in a closed room with appropriate warning signs.
· Using instruments with antireflective coatings if they will come in contact with the
bearm.
· Completing a training course specific to the type and manufacturer of laser being used.
· Observing state and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations
applicable for lasers in veterinary medicine.
11. What are the types of laser-tissue interaction?
Laser-tissue interaction occurs when laser energy is converted to heat, chemical, acoustic, 01
and photodisruptive reactions, respectively. All of these reactions are representative of
absorption—which is defined as the conversion of one energy form to another.
12. What is meant by a cold laser and how are they used?
Low-energy laser radiation is thought by some to stimulate wound repair, regenerate tissues,
or decrease painful stimuli. Most data regarding these properties are currently anecdotal.
48
Laser Surgery
13.  Discuss undesirable laser-tissue interactions.
Reflection, scatter, and transimission are not desired reactions; absorption is the desired
adjacent to the intended target tissue, and transmission penetrates deep to the desired target tissue
Vaporization of the surgeon's own tissues is also undesirable. As laser technology and the
concept of photonics (use of different types and aspects of radiant energy) advance, transmitted
absorbed, back-scattered, and reflective light energy will be used for diagnostic and therapeutic
purposes.
14. What are typical soft-tissue responses in photothermal laser-tissue interaction?
Photothermal tissue responses to laser light are similar to burns. A superficial zone of
necrosis and finally a deep zone of cellular edema, thermal injury, and repair. Tissue in the
superficial and intermediate zones is ablated, whereas tissue in the deep zone is retained. Depth
of this damage depends on laser type and wavelength, tissue characteristics, and laser settings
15. What are some examples of lasers that work by the three different methods of
absorption?
·Photothermal reactions are typical of CO, Nd: YAG, or diode. All three laser types can cause
vaporization of tissues, but vary in their ability depending on tissue water content. Each is
an example of an infrared laser in which water is differentially heated by the laser beam
and proteins also play roles in differential laser energy absorption, also depending on laser
whereas penetrance of the Nd:YAG or diode lasers may be up to 5 mm.
· Photochemical reactions are typical of dye lasers or new-generation diode lasers in which
laser light is applied to affected tissue that is pretreated with photosensitizing agents.
Laser application results in singlet ox ygen production at the mitochondrial level leading
to tissue death. This process is known as photodynamic therapy and is useful in the
treatment of certain tumors.
· Photomechanical or acoustic reactions occur when pulsed lasers such as the
holmium:YAG laser are used at high-energy settings for lithotripsy of urinary-tract and
gallbladder concretions. Interestingly, the holmium laser may also have photothermal
effects similar to those of Nd:YAG and COz lasers when used at similar settings. This
effect is due to the wavelength, water absorption differences, and pulsed energy delivery
system inherent in most holmium lasers.
· Photodisruptive tissue interaction is a more recently recognized type of laser ablation
produced by femtosecond (10-'5 sec) laser pulses. The intense ultrafast laser pulse ionizes
atoms on the target surface and virtually athermally ablates tissue with no associated
and material interdependent. Although devices are not currently available for common
clinical use, ultrafast laser ablation could revolutionize the precision of laser surgery as
we know it today.
16. Why choose one laser over another for a given task?
Absorption characteristics of the target tissue must be considered as well as the desired depth
of ablation, which may be illustrated by the following examples (see figure with Question 3).
· COz lasers are highly absorbed by water with little variability because of tissue pigments.
CO, lasers would be a poor choice for tissue ablation if the tissue has low water content
(i.e., bone).
· Ruby lasers are highly absorbed by dark pigment but minimally absorbed by hemoglobin.
They are an excellent tool for tattoo removal in humans.
Laser Surgery
49
· Because of their greater depth of penetrance and tissue scatter, Nd:YAG and diode lasers
are useful for large resections, particularly if coagulation of a rich blood supply is needed.
Nd:YAG and diode laser energy is also readily absorbed by protein in addition to water.
is made.
In summary, there is no one ideal laser for all tasks, but certain lasers work very well for
specific procedures.
17. Discuss some uses for lasers in small animal surgery.
· Treatment of brachycephalic airway syndrome with COz, Nd:YAG, diode, and KTP lasers
· Nd:YAG palliation of meningioma and subtotal prostatectomy
·Ablation of numerous neoplasms using Nd:YAG, CO2, diode, and KTP lasers
· Eosinophilic granuloma, feline stomatitis, perianal fistula resection with CO, and Nd:YAG
modalities
· Feline onychectomy with CO, and diode lasers
·Treatment of nasal squamous cell carcinomas in cats with Nd:YAG, COz, and photody-
namic therapy laser applications
· Pulpotomy as well as other dental procedures in dogs with the CO, laser
· Holmium: YAG laser for prophylactic ablation of canine intervertebral disks
The authors have used lasers for chronic wound treatment (tissue sterilization), ear canal
ablation, salivary mucocele resection, nasopharyngeal stenosis treatment, tumor resections in
pocket pets, oral mass resections, treatment of feline fibrosarcoma, anal sacculectomy, rectal
polyp and neoplasia resections, feline thyroidectomy, orbital mass resections, acral lick lesions,
ophthalmology are now commonplace in the treatment of retinopathy and glaucoma. These same
conditions have also been treated with Q-switched Nd:YAG lasers. The CO, laser was used to
treat epibulbar melanomas in dogs as well as a variety of eyelid tumors.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Bartels KE, edlitor: Lasers in medicine and surgery, Vet Clin N Am 32 (special issue), 2002.
2. Barles KE: Laser surgery. In Bojrab MI, editor: Current techniques in smat animat surgery, Baltimore, 1998,
Williamns and Wilkins, pp 45-52.
3. Davidson EB, Davis MS, Canpbell GA, et al: Evaluation of carbon dioxide laser and conventional incisional
techniques for resection of soft palates in brachycephalic dogs. JAVMA 219:776-781, 2001.
4. Dickey DT, Bartels KE, Henry GA, et al: Percutaneous thoracolumbar intervertebral disc ablation in the dog
using the holmium laser. I Am Vet Med Assoc 208:1263-1267, 1996.
a dog. Prog Vet Neuro 4:3-9, 1993.
6. Ellison GW, Bellah JR, Stubbs WP, et al: Treatment of perianal fistulas with Nd: YAG laser results in twenty
cases. Vet Surg 24:140-147, 1995
7. Lucroy MD, Magne ML, Peavy GM, et al: Photodynamic therapy in veterinary medicine: current status and
implications for applications in human disease. I Clin Laser Surg Med 14:305-310, 1997.
8. Lucroy MD, Bartels KE: Using biomedical lasers in veterinary praclice. Vet Med, Supp1 October: 4-9, 2000.
9. Lucroy MD, Bartels KE: Surgical lasers. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smatl animat surgery, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2003, W.B. Saunders, pp 227-235
10. Taylor DL, Schafer SA, Nordquist RE, et al: Comparison of a high power diode laser with the Nd:YAG laser
using in situ wound strength analysis of healing cutaneous incisions. Lasers Surg Med 21:248-254, 1997.
12. MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERY
Timothy C. McCarthy, D.VM., Ph.D., Dip A.C.VS
1. What are the main advantages of minimally invasive surgery?
· Minimally invasive surgery is less traumatic than open laparotomy and thoracotomy
(decreased postoperative pain).
· Exploratory examination and surgery are performed in the chest and abdomen through 5-
to 10-mm diameter portals.
· Direct visualization of abdominal and thoracic structures and pathology with
magnification and perfect lighting is possible.
· Submacroscopic lesions can be easily visualized with laparoscopy or thoracoscopy
because of the magnification.
· The visual field is moved into the area of the operative site.
2. List the most common indications for minimally invasive abdominal and thoracic
surgery.
· Thoracic and abdominal neoplasia
· Ovarian remnant syndrome
· Cushing's disease (adrenal hyperplasia and neoplasia)
· Cryptorchidism
· Cholecystectomy
· Pancreatic biopsy and partial pancreatectomy
· Gastric volvulus prevention (gastropexy)
· Spontaneous pneumothorax
· Pericardial effusions (pericardial window)
·  Idiopathic pleural effusion
·Chylothorax (thoracic duct occlusion)
· Abdominal hemorthage, hemothorax, pneumothorax
·Ovariohysterectomy
3. Can minimally invasive surgery be cost-effective (and profitable) in small animal
practice?
Yes. The time savings in some common minimally invasive procedures are dramatic and can
make minimally invasive surgery a profitable endeavor. The most significant deterrents (cost of
the equipment and time spent on the learning curve) are easily overcome.
 4. How long do minimally invasive surgical procedures take compared with traditional
surgery?
An accomplished minimally invasive surgeon can expect to complete procedures in a time
similar to the intraabdominal or intrathoracic portion of open surgery, without having to perform
an open approach or closure. For the beginner, operative times are longer (in the time range of
the first open surgical procedures performed by a beginning surgeon).
 5. What hand instrumentation is needed for minimally invasive surgery?
·Metzenbaum scissors
·Tissue graspers (two)
·Dissectors
Minimally Invasive Surgery
51
· Suture scissors
· Knot pusher
· Suction and irrigation cannula
·Hemostatic clip applicators
·Pretied suture loops
·Additional instrument cannulas
·Endo GIA staplers
6. Is a video camera required for performing minimally invasive surgery?
Yes. A good-quality endoscopic video camera system is an absolute necessity for perform-
ing minimally invasive surgery.
 7. Is an insufflator required for performing minimally invasive abdominal surgery?
Yes. An automatic abdominal insuflator is necessary for performing minimally invasive
surgery.
8. Is electrosurgery needed for most currently performed minimally invasive surgical
procedures?
Yes. Electrocautery is not absolutely necessary for minimally invasive surgery but greatly
facilitates procedures, shortens operative time, and moves the surgeon forward in the complexity
of procedures that can be performed.
9. Can the same instrumentation and techniques be used for minimally invasive thoracic
surgery as are used for minimally invasive abdominal surgery?
Yes. Almost all of the equipment used for laparoscopy can be used for thoracoscopy. There
are five major differences in equipment:
· An abdominal insufflator is not needed.
· An anesthetic ventilator is required.
● Cannula designs are different, but laparoscopic cannulas can be adapted for thoracoscopy.
· 30° telescopes have advantages in the chest.
·Special double lumen endotracheal tubes or endobronchialblockers are needed for
selective intubation if one-lung ventilation is used.
10. What telescope size and configuration are best for minimally invasive surgery in small
animal practice?
The most common telescopes used for minimally invasive abdominal and thoracic surgery
are 10- and 5-mm diameter laparoscopes. Another important telescope factor is the visual angle.
Zero-degree telescopes, which view straight ahead, with the axis of the visual field centered on
the axis of the telescope, provide the most accurate image orientation, least distortion, and least
operator disorientation and are optimal for minimally invasive surgery. In the chest, a 30° angle
of view, in which the axis of the visual field is angled 30° from the axis of the telescope,
telescope.
11. Is more than one telescope needed?
No. A 5-mm-diameter, 0° visual angle telescope can be applied effectively for thoracic and
12. How much of an investment in equipment is required?
Total cost for a basic minimally invasive surgery system is $20,000-50,000. Addition of
thoracoscopy system could cost $5000-15,000.
52
Minimally Invasive Surgery
13. Can this equipment be used for anything else?
The video system and light source can be used for all diagnostic and operative endoscopic
procedures. A 5-mm diameter 0° degree laparoscope can be used for diagnostic laparoscopy and
thoracoscopy, bronchoscopy in small dogs, and transurethral or percutaneous cystoscopy in large
female dogs.
14. Which insufflation gases and pressures are recommended for minimally invasive
abdominal surgery?
Carbon dioxide is the standard for minimally invasive human surgery and has the major
advantage of not supporting combustion. Carbon dioxide is readily available, colorless, and elim-
inated through the lungs. The major disadvantages of carbon dioxide are that it forms carbolic
acid, which is irritating to visceral surfaces, and absorption can cause hypercarbia with acidosis
and subsequent deleterious physiologic consequences. Nitrous oxide has been used more fre-
quently in the past. Advantages of nitrous oxide are that it is not irritating, has analgesic proper
hypercarbia. The major disadvantage of nitrous oxide is that it can support combustion and, in the
presence of methane gas from the large bowel, can be explosive; it cannot be used in procedures
employing electrosurgery or lasers.
15. What pressures are recommended for minimaly invasive abdominal surgery?
Pressures above 20 mm Hg are to be avoided.
16. Is insufflation used for minimally invasive thoracic surgery?
 Pleural insufflation is not commonly employed for minimally invasive thoracic surgery.
Pleural insufflation has been used for cases with stiff noncompliant lungs that do not collapse
well with simple pneumothorax. Pressures of less than 5 mm Hg are tolerated with minimal phys-
iologic consequences. One-lung ventilation is preferred over pleural insufflation if there is an
inadequate visual operative space.
17. Is one-lung ventilation necessary for minimally invasive thoracic surgery?
One-lung ventilation, the procedure of choice in human thoracoscopy, is not necessary for
diagnostic thoracoscopy or for basic operative thoracoscopy. Single-lung ventilation produces
complete collapse of the lung on the side of the invaded hemithorax. This greatly facilitates per
forming complex surgical procedures by improving visualization through reduced lung volume
and reduced tissue movement with ventilator excursions.
18. What is VATS?
Video Assisted Thoracic Surgery; synonymous with minimally invasive thoracic surgery
2Aaans uado rog uogeedad o paeduo uoneedard guned si aoH o1
           
surgery. Anesthetic considerations are similar to those for open surgery, but one must consider the
ventilation.
s
more difficult than with open procedures. With minimally invasive surgery, gravity is the best
retractor
Minimally InvasiveSurgery
53
21. How does postoperative recovery from minimally invasive surgery compare with open
surgery?
o e          i 
laparotomy or thoracotomy. Patients are typically fully recovered, pain-free, and acting as if
nothing was done within a few hours after the procedure. Many patients can be released from the
hospital on the day of or day after surgery (unless this is prevented by the underlying disease
processes).
22. Are there any contraindications for performing minimally invasive surgery?
There are no defined contraindications for minimally invasive surgery in small animal prac-
tice. The complexity of procedures that can be performed is limited by the level of minimally
invasive surgical skills.
23. Discuss the most common complications of minimally invasive surgery.
are associated with abdominal wall penetration and with insufflation. Severe complications asso-
ciated with insufflation include:
· Laceration of solid organs with the Veress needle or with trocar placement
·Perforation of a hollow viscus with a trocar
· Perforation or laceration of major abdominal vessels
· Overinsufflation causing cardiorespiratory compromise or abdominal wall or diaphragm
injury
● Pneumothorax from inadvertent penetration of the diaphragm
· Gas embolism
With proper care, attention to detail, and adequate training, the incidence of significant com-
plications with minimally invasive thoracic and abdominal surgery is low.
24. Where can one receive training on minimally invasive surgery in animals, and are
there any good references available?
Courses are available that cover instrumentation, indications, and technique with wet labora
sive surgery in veterinary medicine is Veterinary Endosurgery, edited by Lynn Freeman.
25. What is the learning curve for minimally invasive surgery, and is it worth the effort?
Basic minimally invasive surgery, even with the difficulties of becoming proficient, is within
the reach of anyone who is willing to expend the effort and time needed to learn.
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Faunt KK, Cohen LA, Jones BD: Cardiopulmonary effects of bilateral hemithorax ventilation and diagnostic
thoracoscopy in dogs. Am J Vet Res 59:1491-1498, 1998.
2. Faunt KK, Jones BD, Turk JR: Evaluation of biopsy specimens obtained during thoracoscopy fron lungs of
clinically nommal dogs. Am J Vet Res 59:1499-1502, 1998.
3. Freeman LJ, editor: Veterinary endosurgery, St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
 4. Remedios AM, Ferguson J: Minimally invasive surgery: Laparoscopy and thoracoscopy in small animals. Comp
Cont Educ Pract Vet 18:1191-1198, 1996.
5. Twedt DC: Laparoscopy of the liver and pancreas. In Tams TR, editor: Smatt animat endoscopy, St Louis, 1999,
Mosby, pp 409-426.
6. Walton RS: Thoracoscopy. In Tams TR, editor: Small animat endoscopy, St Louis, 1999, Mosby, pp 471-488.
13. ARTHROSCOPY
Timothy C. McCarthy. D.VM., Ph.D., Dip. A.C.VS.
1.
What are the indications for arthroscopy in small animals?
Whenever a history, physical finding, radiographic change, or laboratory result suggests
joint disease.
 2. What are the major advantages of arthroscopy over conventional surgery?
diagnostic technique, including postmortem examination.
2. Arthroscopes magnify intraarticular structures, allowing visualization of anatomic
details and pathologic changes that are beyond the resolution of radiographs, computed
tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging.
3. Submacroscopic lesions missed with open surgical exploration can be easily visualized
with arthroscopy
with telescope angulation (30°), provide visual access to areas not seen with open surgery.
 5. Arthroscopy is a minimally invasive technique causing less tissue trauma compared with
arthrotomy.
3. Are there any disadvantages?
The long, difficult learning process. Arthroscopy is the most difficult of all endoscopic tech-
miques to learn.
4. How much does arthroscopy equipment cost?
A basic arthroscopy setup with one telescope, hand operative instruments, and a video
lage shaver, and a complete video system can cost more than $50,000.
 5. Which joints can be examined with arthroscopy in dogs and cats?
In dogs, arthroscopy is performed most commonly in the shoulder, elbow, and stifle.
Arthroscopy is also performed in the radiocarpal joint, hip, and tibiotarsal joint. Arthroscopy has
been performed in the stifle and shoulder of cats. This technique is largely undeveloped in cats.
 6. List the most common diagnoses with arthroscopy according to joints.
Shoulder
·OCD
· Bicipital tendinitis and ruptures
· Medial glenohumeral ligament and subscapularis tendon injuries
· Lateral glenoid labial separations
·Chondromalacia
· Ununited supraglenoid tubercle
· Neoplasia
Elbow
· Coronoid processes fragmentation
· OCD of the humerus
Arthroscopy
55
· Ununited anconeal process
·Joint incongruity
· Intracondylar fractures
● Synovitis and villus synovial proliferation
Radiocarpal
· Radial carpal bone fractures
· Chip fractures of the dorsal margin of the distal radius
· Dorsal joint capsule tears
· Immune-mediated arthropathies
Hip
·Hip dysplasia
· Dorsal joint capsule tears
Stifle
·Cruciate ligaments rupture
·Meniscal injuries
· OCD of the femoral condyles
· Medial patellar luxation
·Degenerative joint disease
● Intracapsular surgical failures
·Neoplasia
Hock
·OCD of the talus
·Intraarticular fractures
● Immune-mediated arthropathies
 7. List the most common surgical procedures performed according to joints.
Shoulder
· OCD cartilage flap removal and lesion debridement
· Bicipital tendon transection
· Osteophyte and joint mouse removal
●Thermocapsulorrhaphy
Elbow
· Coronoid processes fragment removal
· Coronoid process revision for incongruity
· OCD cartilage flap removal and lesion debridement
·Anconeal process removal
· Osteophyte removal
Radiocarpal
· Carpal chip removal
Stifle
· Cruciate ligament debridement and removal
· Meniscectomy—partial
· OCD cartilage flap removal and lesion debridement
·Meniscal release
· Osteophyte removal
56
Arthroscopy
Hock
· OCD cartilage flap removal and lesion debridement
·Joint mouse removal
· Tarsal chip removal
 8. What additional equipment is required for arthroscopy?
1. Telescopes ($3,700-4,000): See Question 21 for recommendations on selection of a
telescope for small animal arthroscopy. Telescope cannulas with blunt obturators and
sharp trocars ($s00-8o0). Arthroscopes must be used with a cannula or sheath that
protects the telescope and provides a channel for fluid flow.
  n so y  yo mo iy pni si ns  ts) sn g 7
clear visual field during arthroscopy.
 3. Operating cannula ($40o): Access for instrumentation is established through the operative
portal sites that are maintained by placing a cannula into the joint. Operative cannulas are
optional with free passage of instruments through the portals without a cannula.
4. Operative hand instruments ($1,800-3,600): Rongeurs, forceps, curets, probes, knives.
 5. Light source ($3,000-5,000): A light source and fiberoptic light guide cable are required
forarthroscopy
6. Power shaver (optional; $8,00o): Used to remove cartilage, bone, and soft tissues and to
smooth surfaces after tissue removal.
ular pressures by automatically varying flows.
 8. Video system ($10,000-30,000): Camera, monitor, printer and recorder.
9. Does one need a power shaver to get started with arthroscopy?
No. The most common beginning-level procedures, OCD and FCP management, can be per-
formed adequately with hand instruments. The potential for excessive joint damage is greatly
10. What is the optimum fluid for joint irrigation during arthroscopy?
There are no proven clinical disadvantages or adverse effects of using either lactated
Ringer's solution or saline.
11. Where are the portals for the commonly examined joints?
A. Shoulder joint portals: see Figure 13-1.
Telescope:
· Craniolateral: Lateral portal placed distal to the tip of the acromion process and cranial to
the acromion portion of the deltoid muscle.
· Craniomedial: A telescope portal can be established on the cranial aspect of the joint
medial to the bicipital tendon for ex amining the lateral labia of the glenoid
Egress:
· An outflow portal is established on the cranial aspect of the joint medial to the greater
tubercle and lateral or medial to the bicipital tendon. If the craniomedial site is being used
egress portal site.
Arthroscopy
57
Suprascapular
nerve
Lateral view
Deltoid
muscle
Axillary
Figure 13-1 Arthroscopy portal sites on the
artery
lateral aspect of the shoulder joint for access to
OCD lesions. Telescope portal (o), operative
Axillary
portal (), and egress portal (x). For bicipital
nerve
tendon surgery the OCD egress portal site is
used and the operative portal can be used for an
egress portal.
Ulnar nerve
Brachialartery
Medial
epicondyle
Median nerve
Figure 13-2 Arthroscopy portal sites on the medial aspect of the elbow for access
to the medial coronoid process of the ulna. Telescope portal (o), operative portal (),
and egress portal (x).
58
Arthroscopy
B. Elbow joint portals: see Figure 13-2.
Telescope:
Medial: Located 1-1.5 cm directly distal and caudal to the tip of the medial humeral
epicondyle.
Craniolateral: At the intersection of the cranial margin of the radial head and cranial aspect
of the capitulum.
Caudal: The telescope can also be inserted into the olecranon fossa from medial, from
lateral, or through the triceps tendon. This portal allows visualization of the anconeal
 process and olecranon fossa and provides access to the lateral coronoid process.
Operative:
· Craniomedial: Caudal to the medial collateral ligament and 1.0 to 1.5 cm cranial and
slightly proximal to the cameral portal.
· Lateral: Access to the lateral coronoid process of the ulna and capitulum can be obtained
by entering the joint on the lateral surface distal to the epicondyle.
· Craniolateral: An operative portal can also be established at the crarmiolateral camera portal site.
Egress:
· A caudal portal with the cannula positioned in the olecranon fossa is the standard egress
portal site for the elbow joint, but if the caudal portals are being used for a procedure, any
of the unused portal sites can be used for an egress cannula.
C. Radiocarpal joint portals: see Figure 13-3.
 Portals for the radiocarpal joint are on the cranial or dorsal aspect of the joint either medial
or lateral to the tendon of the common digital extensor tendon.
Common digital
extensor
Figure 13-3 Arthroscopy portal sites on the dorsal aspect
of the radiocarpal joint. Telescope portal (o), operative portal
(), and egress portal (x).
Arthroscopy
59
D. Hip joint portals: see Figure 13- 4.
All portals for the hip joint are on the dorsal aspect of the joint.
E. Stifle joint portals: see Figure 13- 5.
· Telescope: On the cranial aspect of the joint medial or lateral to the patellar tendon
approximately halfway between the distal end of the patella and the tibial crest. Portals
placed more distally at the level of the tibial plateau are preferred by some surgeons.
· Operative: Placed on the side of the patellar tendon not used for the telescope and at the
same level as the telescope.
· Egress: Suprapatellar pouch.
F. Hock joint portals: see Figure 13- 6.
· Telescope: All four quadrants of the tibiotarsal joint can be entered for arthroscopy.
· Dorsal: Telescope and operative portals are interchangeable and are either medial or
lateral to the long digital extensor tendon and the tendon of the cranial tibial muscle on
the dorsal aspect of the joint.
· Plantar: Medial or lateral, at the junction of the plantar margin of the distal tibial articular
surface and the plantar portion of the trochlear ridge of the talus.
Figure 13-4  Arthroscopy portal sites for the hip joint.
Telescope portal (●), operative portal (), and egress portal (x).
Figure 13-5 Arthroscopy portal sites on the cranial aspect of the stifle
portal (x). The telescope and operative portals can be exchanged as
needed.
60
Arthroscopy
Saphenous
Superficial
artery
peroneal
nerve
Cranial tibial
Long digital
tendon
extensor
Tibial joint 
capsule
Figure 13-6 Arthroscopy portal sites for the tibiotarsal joint on
the dorsal (a) aspect and the lateral aspect (b). Telescope portal (o),
(x ed s  ( d )
·Operative: Access to OCD lesions on the medial ridge of the talus can be achieved
through a medial operative portal distal to the medial malleolus and immediately caudal
to the collateral li gament.
· Egress: The tibiotarsal joint is small, and in many cases there is not enough room for all1
three portals. Egress is allowed to occur through the operative portal.
12.1
How is the patient positioned for arthroscopy on the different joints?
Most commonly, in a similar manner to what would be used for an open arthrotomy.
13. How long do typical arthroscopic procedures take compared with conventional surgery?
For the experienced arthroscopic surgeon, commonly performed procedures (OCD lesion or
coronoid process fragment removal) take considerably less time than an open arthrotomy. Times
are dramatically longer for the beginner. Speed is not the most important criterion or the most
important advantage of arthroscopy over open arthrotomy.
14. How does postoperative recovery differ from that of open arthrotomy?
Recovery is much faster after arthroscopy than after an open arthrotomy. Most dogs recover
15. What are the complications of arthroscopy?
Clinically significant complications are uncommon.
 Potential complications include:
·Failure to enter the joint
·Articular cartilage damage
Arthroscopy
61
·Periarticular fluid accumulation
·Neurovascular injury (rare)
·Infection (rare)
16. What are the contraindications for arthroscopy?
17. How does one learn arthroscopy?
Courses are available that cover instrumentation, indications, and technique with hands-on
wet laboratories to provide initial exposure and experience. Additional learming can be obtained
tive procedure, on every joint that is going to have an open arthrotomy.
18. How difficult is arthroscopy to learn?
19. If arthroscopy is this difficult, is it worth learning?
Yes, because of its significance in small animal orthopedics.
20. Is the fragmented coronoid process syndrome a surgical or a medical disease?
Neither. It is an arthroscopic disease. Results after arthroscopic revision of the elbow joint
for coronoid process fragmentation are superior to those with surgical or medical management.
CONTROVERSY
 21. Which is the best arthroscope for small animal arthroscopy?
advantages, disadvantages, and applications. A practical answer to this question is based on
practice type more than the attributes of individual telescopes. If the telescope is to be used
exclusively for arthroscopy, the short 2.7-mm or the 2.4-mm arthroscope is the best choice. If the
telescope is to be used for multiple applications (rhinoscopy and cystoscopy), the long 2.7-mm
arthroscope is the best choice.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. McCarthy TC: Arthroscopy. In Freeman LJ, editor: Veterinary endosurgery, St Louis, 1999, Mosby, pp 237-250.
2. Taylor RA: Arthroscopy. In Tams TA, editor: Small animat endoscopy, St Louis, 1998, Mosby, pp 461-470.
3. van Bree HI, Van Ryssen B: Diagnostic and surgical arthroscopy in osteochondrosis lesions. Vet Clin N Am Sm
Anim Pract 28:161-189, 1998.
Section Il
Soft Tissue Surgery
14. SKIN GRAFTS
Tarnaz Amalsadvala, B.VSr., A.H., M.S
Steven F. Swaim, D.VM., M.S.
1. What is the difference between a skin graft and a skin flap?
·"A graft is a piece of detached skin, which is dead when you put it on and comes to life later.
A flap is a partly attached piece of skin which is alive when you put it on and may die later.'2
· A skin graft is a piece of skin taken away from its blood supply and placed on a recipient
wound, where it develops a new blood supply.
· A skin flap is a piece of skin that remains attached to a blood supply when it is placed
over a recipient wound.
2. Where are skin grafts primarily used?
· To close wounds located in anatomical areas beyond the reach of flaps.
· To cover areas of the body where skin is sparse, taut and closely associated with vital
structures such as blood vessels and nerves.
ficient for wound closure.
· To repair wounds over flexion surfaces, thereby preventing wound contraction from pro-
gressing to contracture.
· In summary - wounds on limbs, particularly distal limbs.
3. Considering paw wounds, why are skin grafts indicated?
· They provide closure where open wound healing and wound contraction could result in
 misalignment of the paw pads and weight bearing on skin not designed for that purpose.
4. What skin stretching and relaxing technique can be used to close limb wounds so that
a graft is not necessary (or reduce wound size so that only a small graft is needed)?
· An adjustable horizontal mattress suture. This is a continuous, monofilament, intra.
dermal horizontal mattress suture. An adjustment apparatus on either end of the suture can
modify the tension on this suture periodically.
5. What type of tissue must be present in a wound for a skin graft to heal?
·Healthy granulation tissue.
·Vascularized tissue that can produce granulation tissue.
6. What are the 3 primary reasons, grafts do not heal well?
· Movement of the graft on the wound.
· Hematoma or seroma formation beneath the graft.
·Infection beneath the graft.
Skin Grafts
63
 7. What are the 3 types of skin grafts that help alleviate the reasons grafts do not heal
well?
·Mesh grafts.
· Strip grafts.
· Pinch / Punch grafts.
 8. How should a traumatic wound be treated in the early period of management to
prepare it for grafting?
+ Staged debridement and lavage with 0.05% chlorhexidine solution.
· Application of a topical water-soluble antibiotic/antibacterial (e.g. silver sulfadiazine or
nitrofurazone ointment) compound.
· Daily bandage change with:
Gauze sponges as the primary layer to facilitate continued, mechanical debridement until
the wound is free of necrotic tissue.
Polyurethane foam sponge or calcium alginate dressings to enhance granulation tissue
formation.
 9. How should the granulation tissue of a wound be treated the day before skin graft
application?
·Gentle scraping of the surface with a # l0 surgical blade to help remove surface coagulum
and resident bacterial flora
· Application of 0.1% gentamicin sulfate ointment (not cream) on a sterile, open-mesh
gauze sponge.
·Application of outer bandage layers.
10. On the day of surgery, what should be done to prepare the wound for grafting?
Nothing, except protection from contact with surgical preparation soaps and solutions used
on the skin around the wound.
11. Where is the skin harvested for the graft?
Lower craniolateral thoracic area because the skin is thin and contains hair. The thinness of
the skin is beneficial for quick revascularization and the hair provides a functional and cosmetic
graft.
12. How should the donor site be prepared for surgery?
· It is important to clip hair widely on the donor site. Thus, as the donor site is closed,
haired, unprepared skin is not pulled from under the drapes into the surgical field as
wound edges are advanced and apposed.
· Routine scrub and antiseptic applications are used for skin preparation.
13. If a wound has granulation tissue and a rim of epithelium along the wound edge, what
is the first thing to be done to prepare it for mesh grafting?
· A # 15 scalpel blade and thumb forceps are used to remove the rim of epithelium. The
first incision is perpendicular to the wound surface at the junction of haired skin and
epithelium (step l in Figure 14-1).
· The second incision is parallel to the wound surface under the epithelium (step 2 in
Figure 14-1).
14. How is a pattern of the wound made and used to obtain the graft?
·A piece of sterile, surgical towel is cut to a size slightly larger than the wound and placed
over the wound.
64
Skin Grafts
2
Figure 14-1Removing epithelium from the wound edge prior to grafting.
hemorrhagic surface (from epithelium removal).
· Using scissors, the towel is cut to the shape and size of the imprint to provide a template
for the graft.
15. How is the towel pattern of the wound placed on the donor site?
· The pattern is placed on the donor site such that the direction of hair growth on the graft
after it is placed on the wound is the same as the hair growth around the wound.
16.  What happens if the towel pattern is accidentally turned over as it is transferred from
the wound to the donor site?
After the graft is harvested, it fits on the wound only if it is placed epidermal (haired) side
against the wound, obviously not a good situation.
17. To ensure accurate shape to the graft, what should be done?
· Trace around the pattern with a sterile, skin-marking pen.
· Alternatively, a sterile toothpick or a cotton-tipped applicator stick, broken to a splintered
 end, can be dipped in sterile methylene blue for tracing.
·The traced graft is then incised with a #15 scalpel blade.
18. How should the wound be managed while the graft is being harvested and
prepared?
The wound should be covered with a sterile, saline-moistened sponge.
19. How is the dermal surface of the graft prepared for placement on the wound?
·Using hypodermic needles, the graft is fixed dermal-side up on a piece of autoclaved,
corrugated cardboard.
· The graft is stretched in all directions as needles are placed. Thumb forceps and sharp-
sharp scissors are used to remove all cutaneous trunci muscle and subcutaneous tissue
from the dermis.
· The dermal surface should have a cobblestone appearance after this tissue is removed.
The cobblestones are bulbs on hair follicles.
 20. How is the graft maintained during preparation and until it is transplanted to the
recipient site?
The harvested graft should be kept moist throughout by a sterile saline-soaked gauze sponge
covering the exposed dermis.
Skin Grafts
65
 21. What is a simple, inexpensive way to mesh a graft?
Mesh holes about 1 cm long can be cut with a # 11 scalpel blade in parallel, staggered rows
0.5 cm apart.
22. Describe the closure technique of the donor site.
· While one clinician is preparing a graft, another clinician can be closing the donor site
· "Wal king sutures" of 2-0 or 3-0 absorbable suture material (e.g. polydioxanone suture or
 polyglactin 910) are placed to advance the wound edged together.
· A simple continuous subcutaneous suture of 2-0 or 3-0, absorbable suture material (e.g.
polydioxanone suture or polyglactin 9l0) is placed within the subcutaneous tissue to help
obliterate dead space.
· Simple interrupted 2-0 or 3-0, non-absorbable sutures (e.g. polypropylene or nylon) or
skin staples, are used for final skin apposition.
23. What are “walking"’ sutures?
Tension-distributing sutures placed in an interrupted pattern around a wound to advance
wound edges together.
24. How are "walking"’ sutures placed and what is the appropriate suture material used?
· Skin around the wound is undermined, if necessary.
·At the fornix of the undermined area, the first suture bite is placed intradermal, within the
skin surrounding the graft donor site defect. The needle is directed almost perpendicular
to the wound edge.
· The skin in the area of the first suture bite is stretched toward the center of the wound
without excess tension.
·The second suture bite is placed subcutaneously where the intradermal suture bite meets
the donor site connective tissue.
· The suture is secured with a surgeon's knot. As the knot is tied, that segment of the skin
is "walked" closer to the center of the wound.
· "walking"’ sutures are placed in two or three staggered rows, until both wound margins
have been walked almost into apposition.
● Monofilament, absorbable suture material such as 2-0 or 3-0 polydiox anone may be used.
Ist Suture bite
Figure 14-2 Walking sutures.
(A) Placing the first and second suture
bites. Segrment of skin to be stretched
(a to b). (B) Tying a walking suture
advances skin toward the center of the
2nd Suture bite
wound (a to b is increased). (C) Walk-
ing sutures placed in rows. (D) Placing
A
B
a simple continuous subcuticular
suture along the wound edge and
simple interrupted skin apposition
sutures. Broken lines are buried walk-
ing sumures. (A and B: From Swairm
SF. Henderson RA: Smalt animat
wound management, ed 2, Baltimore;
1997, Williams and wilkins, p 154.) C
and D: after Swain SF. The repair of
the skin: techniques of plastic and
reconstructive surgery. ln Bedford
PGC, editor Atlas of canine surgicat
techniques, Oxford; 1984, Blackwel
C
D
Scientific,p49.)
66
Skin Grafts
25. What are the three important properties of “walking"’ sutures?
· They redistribute tension evenly and away from the wound edges.
26. After removing the graft from the cardboard and properly orienting it on the wound,
what needs to be done immediately?
avoid inadvertent loss of the graft (on the floor).
27. What should be done if a graft does fall on the floor?
71 1oy yooi 0i ahgen sun oy yoeg dons nox se na sun uo ds 1oN oa 's -
·Second, remember that mom's "three-second rule" for cookies DOES NOT apply to skin
grafts. You cannot blow it off and continue.
·Lavage it thoroughly with 1:40 chlorhexidine solution, followed by sterile, physiologic
saline and proceed with graft placement.
·Administer systemic antibiotics to the patient.
28. What are some ways to affix a graft to the wound edges?
Simple interrupted or simple continuous 2-0 or 3-0, monofilament nonabsorbable sutures
(e.g. polypropylene or nylon) or skin staples.
 29. After affixing the graft edges, what is the next important step?
Placement of tacking sutures follows graft edge fixation. These are placed between mesh
holes, deep into the underlying tissue to help immobilize the graft on the wound surface.
30. Is it necessary to place tacking sutures between all mesh holes?
No; however, they should especially be placed in areas where there may be potential move
ment that would interfere with graft immobilization. They should also be placed in areas of
wound concavity to pull the graft against the underlying wound surface.
31. What change in appearance of the graft is most obvious and why does it occur?
+ The most obvious change is the alteration in graft color as healing progresses.
· Within the first 24-48 hours post-operatively, the graft appears almost white (anemic) due
to total lack of blood supply
result of vasodilation, plasmatic imbibition and subsequent release of degraded hemic
contents.
● Blood vessel inosculation with anastomosis of graft and wound bed vessels results in
improved, yet sluggish blood supply, resulting in a congested (dark, dull red), edematous
appearance ofthegraft.
is occurring, the congestion and edema are reduced (graft appears lighter red). As the
vessels mature, blood flow regains its normal velocity and venous and lymphatic drainage
are being re-established.
·By day 7-8 post-operatively, a reddish-pink hue is visible.
· Gradually, toward day 14 post-operatively, the graft assumes a healthy pink color of
normal tissue perfusion.
 32. What materials and medications should be used in bandaging the grafted area?
tamicin sulfate ointment
Skin Grafts
67
· Secondary layer - soft absorbent bandage wrap
· Tertiary layer - pre-torn strips of 2-inch surgical, porous, adhesive tape.
 g  u p sh s s e  s    
 provide adequate immobilization of the limb.
33. How often should bandages be changed?
· For dogs - daily for the first week, every other day for the second week and twice in the
third week. Bandages are generally discontinued after 3 weeks. However, a bandage may
be left in place for l more week if the dog shows signs of hyperesthesia of the graft
because of re-innervation.
· For cats - bandage changes may be less frequent and for a shorter time because of more
rapi d healing.
34. When can the sutures be removed?
· Donor site - skin sutures may be removed by post-operative day 10.
· Graft site - peripheral and tacking sutures may be removed by post-operative day 14.
35. What are the advantages of a mesh graft?
· Increased extensibility - covering a larger area with a smaller graft.
· Increased flexibility - conforming intimately to the undulating surface of the wound bed
·Adequate drainage through the mesh holes.
walls of mesh holes provide greater surface area for blood vessels to re-establish
circulation.
36. What shape and location of wound lends itself to strip grafting?
A wound that is parallel to the long axis of the limb.
37. What type of wound bed is necessary for strip grafting?
A granulation tissue bed must be present so that grooves can be cut in it to place the grafts
38. What are the dimensions for the grooves to accommodate strip grafts and the
dimensions for the strip grafts?
 ede  s-e pue dop u z exdde pue led se she s iy so
grafts are measured 5 mm wide.
· Cut the long dimensions and one end of the grafts; leave the other end temporarily
attached.
· Grasp the free end of each graft with thumb forceps and apply tension to stretch the graft
because the remaining end is still attached to skin.
· Run scissors down the dermal side of the graft to remove subcutaneous tissue.
40. How are strip grafts sutured in place?
One simple interrupted 3-0 polypropylene or nylon suture is placed at each end of the graft
and, where needed, along the edges of the graft to anchor it in the groove.
41. How do strip grafts heal in place?
· With the grafts setting in grooves, they revascularize from the bottom and edges of the
grooves.
68
Skin Grafts
· Myofibroblasts, from the granulation tissue between grafts, attach to the graft edges and
contract so grafts widen as they heal.
· Epithelium from the graft edges covers the granulation tissue between grafts.
 42. What are the advantages and disadvantages of strip grafts?
·Advantages:
They require no special instruments
They heal quickly
·Disadvantages:
They may not be as cosmetic as mesh grafts or skin flaps.
43. What are the ways that pinch /punch grafts can be harvested?
· The point of a suture needle can be placed in the donor skin. Upward tension is placed on the
needle to tent the skin. A # 15 scalpel blade is used to cut the tip off of the tent to provide a
pinch graft (see Figure 14-3). Alternatively, a fine-toothed thumb forceps can be used to tent
the skin.
· A dermal biopsy punch (4 to 6 mm diameter) can be used to cut a punch graft. By angling
the biopsy punch parallel to the angle of the hair follicles in the skin, more intact hair
follicles are obtained with each graft (see Figure 14-4).
Figure 14-3 A suture needle tents the skin while a #15 scalpel blade cuts
the tip off of the“tent."”
Figure 14-4 A dermal biopsy punch is angled parallel to the direction of hair follicles to cut
 44. How is a recipient site prepared for a pinch/punch graft?
· A #15 scalpel blade can be inserted into the granulation tissue of the wound almost
parallel to the wound surface to make pockets that are 2-4 mm deep and 5-7 mm apart.
Skin Grafts
69
After the pocket is made, a graft is placed in the pocket. A pocket and graft placement is
done sequentially and immediately.
· A dermal biopsy punch 1 size smaller than the punch used to harvest the skin graft is used
to cut a plug from the wound granulation tissue. After hemostasis is attained in the
hole, being certain that the graft is below the level of the wound surface.
45. How is bandaging of pinch/punch grafts different from bandaging mesh grafts?
sutured in place, bandages are not changed as often to prevent disruption of the grafts.
46. What is a paw pad graft?
uaa ped med peinfut ue uo peq snssg uogeinueia e on paueidsuen pue peuue sues sun yo ped
ally a metacarpal or a metatarsal pad.
47. Why is haired skin not substituted for paw pad skin?
· Paw pad skin is specialized tissue with a thick, keratinized stratum corneum designed for
weight bearing; whereas, haired skin has a thin, minimally keratinized stratum corneum
that abrades easily.
· Haired skin, if transplanted on to paw pad, will not metaplase into paw pad tissue.
48. How are the pad grafts harvested?
x-ray film.
digital pads (donor sites) of the same paw or another paw on the same animal.
· Digital pads are incised using a #ll scalpel blade and harvested using iris scissors and
thumbforceps.
· All subcutaneous tissue is removed with the help of iris scissors.
49. How is the recipient site prepared for grafting?
· The recipient site / wound is managed as an open wound until a good bed of granulation
tissue has formed.
· With a sterile surgical skin marker, the same template (described in Question 48) is traced
at four to five, equidistant locations along the periphery of the granulation tissue bed.
· Marked segments of granulation tissue are incised with a #ll scalpel blade and removed
with iris scissors and thumb forceps, creating 2 mm deep depressions within the granula-
tion tissue.
50. How are the grafts maintained after transplantation?
· Each graft is placed in a single, granulation tissue depression.
the graft and maintain contact with the granulation tissue bed.
· 4-0 or 5-0, non-absorbable, monofilament suture material such as nylon or pol ypropylene
is used.
51. How are the donor sites managed after harvesting the grafts?
· Donor sites are generally managed as open wounds.
· If there is sufficient surrounding pad tissue, the sites may be closed using 3-0, monofila-
70
SkinGrafts
 52. Why is the far-near-near-far suture pattern utilized?
This suture pattern distri butes tension away from the suture line, simultaneously maintaining
apposition of the wound margins.
53. How does immobilizing the limb for a paw pad graft differ from that for a mesh graft?
There must be relief of pressure off of the paw pads as they heal. Therefore, a "clam shell"
bandage / splint is used as a localized crutch and weight is transferred from the paw pads to the
distal ends of the splints.
54. What is a "clam shell" bandage?
·In addition to the routine, three-layer bandage described above, two metal, Mason
· The splints are taped in place using pre-torn strips of 2-inch, porous adhesive tape.
55. When are the sutures removed?
Graft and donor site sutures (if any) are removed on day 14, post-operatively.
56. How does paw pad graft healing differ from mesh graft healing?
With pad graft healing, the thick, hard stratum corneum is removed very easily post suture
Temoval, exposing vital tissue that will regenerate new, keratinized stratum corneum. This tissue
will extend from the graft to cover the intervening area between grafts as the wound contracts and
coalesces the grafts together.
57. When are the splints and bandage removed?
By 21 days post-operatively, the splints are removed; however, a progressively lighter
bandage is continued for another week.
58. How would the issue of patient comfort be addressed, once the light bandage is removed?
To make the transition from light bandage to no bandage smoother for the animal, a "bootie'
may be used until such time as the animal is comfortable bearing normal weight directly on the
grafted paw pads. This may take anywhere from 2 to 4 weeks.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Fossum TW: Small animal surgery, ed 2, St Louis, Mosby, 2002, pp 135-228.
2. Gillies H, Millard DR: The principles and art of plastic surgery, Boston, 1957, Little Brown, p 113.
3. Pavletic MM: Arlas of small animat reconstructive surgery, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999, W.B. Saunders, pp 275-296.
4. Scardino MS, Swaim SF, Henderson RA, Wilson ER: Enhancing wound closure on the limbs. Conp Cont Educ
Pract Vet 18:919-933, 1996
5.Swain SF: Skin grafts. In Slatter DH editor:Textbook of smalt aimal surgery, ed3, Philacelphia, 2003,W.B. Saumders.
6.Swaim SF, Henderson RA: Small animat wound management, ed 2,Baltimore, 1997, Williams & Wilkins,
pp 295-370.
15. SKIN FLAPS
J. David Fowler, D.VM., M.VSc., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What is a skin flap?
2. How are skin flaps classified?
By their vascular supply:
· Axial pattern skin flaps incorporate a direct cutaneous artery and vein in the flap design.
· Subdermal plexus flaps are harvested without consideration of their inherent vascular
supply. Blood reaches the flap via the subdermal vascular plexus, which is maintained at
the cutaneous attachment. Also called random pattern or local flaps.
 3. Is there a difference between axial flaps and subdermal plexus flaps in terms of size or
reliability?
Yes. Axial flaps have a consistent and reliable vascular supply, whereas subdermal plexus
flaps have an inconsistent vascular supply. As a result, extensive areas of skin can be elevated in
an axial flap design.
 4. Why would one use a subdermal plexus flap, if axial flaps are more consistent and
reliable?
Subdermal plexus flaps are useful primarily for the local redistribution of tension around a
wound. They are particularly helpful when reconstructing wounds located adjacent to critical
structures, such as the eyelid, prepuce, or anus.
5. How are subdermal plexus flaps classified?
According to the type of movement used to transfer the flap from donor to recipient site:
· Advancement flaps are advanced in a linear direction parallel to the length of the flap.
· Rotation flaps are elevated using an arcuate incision extending away from the wound.
· Transposition flaps are elevated approximately 9o° from the orientation of the wound
6. What factors determine the choice of subdermal plexus flap design?
· Location, shape, and size of the wound
·Elasticity of surrounding skin
7. Is there a reliable method to determine the size of subdermal plexus flap that can be
harvested relative to the size and location of the attached cutaneous border?
No.
8. What size subdermal plexus flap is generally considered safe?
Length-to-width ratios of less than 2:l are quite safe. Longer and narrower flaps are at
increased risk of partial flap necrosis.
9. At what tissue depth should subdermal plexus flaps be elevated?
To preserve the vascular supply to the flap, dissection should be carried out in deep
subcutaneous tissue. Larger flaps located in areas where superficial cutaneous musculature exists
should be dissected deep to the cutaneous muscle layer.
72
Skin Flaps
10. Should sutures be used to obliterate dead space underlying the flap?
No. Sutures placed into the deep surface of the flap compromise blood supply and increase
the risk of partial flap necrosis. A drain should be used, if necessary.
11. What is a pouch flap?
A two-stage technique used for transfer of a single-pedicle or bipedicle flap from the body
wall to a distal extremity.
12. Describe the pouch flap procedure.
In the first stage, a flap is elevated from the thoracic or abdominal wall. The distal extremity
wound is placed beneath the flap, and the flap margins are sutured to wound margins as
completely as possible. The limb is then bandaged such that it is stabilized onto the body wall for
10-14 days. During this period, vascular ingrowth occurs from the recipient wound bed into the
overlying flap. During the second stage, the flap pedicle is transected, and the remaining margins
between the wound and the flap are sutured. The donor site is debrided and closed.
13. When should pouch flaps be used?
Perhaps never, because a pouch flap is nothing more than a delayed skin graft. Skin grafts
can be used with equal success and without the disadvantages of a staged surgical procedure and
14. When should axial pattern flaps be used?
For reconstruction of large defects located on the face or on the proximal to midextremities.
15. How many axial pattern flaps exist in the dog and the cat?
As many as there are direct cutaneous arteries and veins.
16. How is an axial pattern flap selected for clinical use?
The vascular territories (or angiosomes) that are supplied by direct cutaneous vessels vary
considerably in size. Only the largest of the axial pattern flaps are used clinically. This reduces
the number of clinically useful flaps to four or five. The flap that is chosen is the one that will
reach the recipient wound after elevation.
17. How are axial pattern flaps defined?
According to the direct cutaneous vessels that support the flap.
18. What are the most useful axial pattern flaps?
·Superficial cervical (omocervical)
· Thoracodorsal
·Caudal superficial epi gastric
19. How can the vascular pedicle be identified with certainty before dissection?
The general location of the vascular pedicle can be determined using anatomic land-
marks. Precise localization can be achieved by locating the arterial signal using a Doppler flow
probe.
sua deg aenbape asua o Assanu si ld aaeaadoard peua o
The location of the vascular pedicle must be determined precisely because this forms the
point of fixation for the flap. The distance from the vascular pedicle to the most distant point of
the wound should be slightly less than the distance from the vascular pedicle to the most distant
point of the flap
Skin Flaps
73
21. Can inadequate length be compensated by excess width?
 Yes, if the flap is not quite long enough to reach the most distant aspect of the wound com-
fortably. In this situation, the excess width of the flap can be translated into additional length
without creating undue tension.
22. At what depth should axial pattern skin flaps be elevated?
Dissection should be performed to include all underlying subcutaneous tissue and
superficial cutaneous musculature. This dissection ensures preservation of the flap's
microvasculature.
23. Does a cutaneous attachment need to be maintained?
No. It is easier to transpose axial flaps into position if they are dissected as island flaps. The
only attachment that should be preserved at the donor site is that of the vascular pedicle.
24. Can the flap be rotated without obstructing the vascular pedicle?
Yes. Flap rotation of ls0° is well tolerated, as long as there is no tension placed on the
vascular pedicle.
 25. What should be done if intact skin is interposed between the donor and the recipient
site?
An access incision should be made extending from the vascular pedicle to the recipient site.
Skin edges can be undermined and the axial pattern flap placed into the resulting defect. The
formation of tube flaps extending over intact skin between the donor and recipient sites is not
recommended.
26. What is a reverse saphenous conduit flap?
A flap based on the cranial and caudal branches of the medial saphenous artery and vein.
The saphenous vessels are ligated and transected as they arise from the femoral artery. Flap eleva-
tion is extended distally, raising the skin from the medial aspect of the crus with the branches of
the saphenous vessels maintained with the elevated skin flap. The distal extension of the medial
saphenous vessels is maintained, as is a distal cutaneous attachment. Vascular perfusion of this
flap is provided by retrograde flow through the branches of the saphenous artery and vein, with
arterial flow extending from distal to proximal and venous return flowing from proximal to distal.
Anastomotic connections between the saphenous vessels and other arterial and venous systems
in the foot are necessary to ensure flap perfusion.
27. What are the applications of a reverse saphenous conduit flap?
Reconstruction of wounds located on the tarsus and metatarsus.
28. What is a skin fold advancement flap?
Skin fold advancement flaps are large subdermal plexus flaps raised from either the axillary
or inguinal skin folds.
29. How are skin fold flaps dissected?
Skin folds have lateral and medial attachments to the body wall and to the extremity. Skin
fold flaps are elevated by incising three of these four attachments. The flap is nourished via the
30. What areas can be reconstructed using skin fold flaps?
Large wounds invol ving the proximal extremities or the body wall adjacent to skin folds can
be reconstructed. Skin fold flaps can also be used to facilitate skin advancement into wounds
distant to the flap.
74
Management of Burn Wounds
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Fowler D, Williams IM: Manuat ofcanine and feline wound management and reconstruction, Cheltenham, 1999,
British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
2. Pavletic MM: Arlas of small animal reconstrucrive surgery,ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999, W.B. Saunders, pp 237-273
3. Hunt GB, Tisdall PLC, Liptak JM, Beck JA, Swinney GR, Malik R: Skin-fold advancement flaps for closing large
proximal limb and trunk defects in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 30:440-448, 2001.
16. MANAGEMENT OF BURN WOUNDS
I. David Fowier, D.V.M., M.VSc., Dip. A.C.VS
1.What are some common causes of burn wounds?
·Extreme temperature (themal burns)
·Chemicals (caustic)
·Electricity
·Irradiation
2. How are burn wounds classified in small animals?
According to cause, depth of injury, or surface area involved. Burns are further classified as
either partial-thickness or full-thickness injuries.
3. What is the rule of nine?
A rapid method to estimate the percentage of affected surface area
·Each forelimb represents 9% of the total body surface area.
· The dorsal and ventral surfaces of each hindlimb represent 9%.
· The head and neck represent 9%.
· The dorsal and ventral surfaces of the trunk each represent 18%
4. Is there a critical temperature at which thermal injury occurs?
No. Tissue injury depends on temperature and time of exposure. Thermal injury can occur
at temperatures as low as 44*℃ (111*F) with prolonged exposure.
 5. What patient factors predispose an anesthetized animal to thermal injury?
The ability of the animal to dissipate heat from an area of local application can affect the
extent of injury. Dehydrated animals or animals with poor peripheral perfusion are at increased
of time.
6. List actions that can be taken to minimize the risk of iatrogenic thermal injury in
anesthetized patients.
·Do not use electrical heating sources.
7. How are burn wounds recognized?
Not easily in small animals because of an absence of blistering and a covering hair coat.
Within the first few hours after injury, thermal wounds are characterized by erythema, transu
74
Management of Burn Wounds
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Fowler D, Williams IM: Manuat ofcanine and feline wound management and reconstruction, Cheltenham, 1999,
British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
2. Pavletic MM: Arlas of small animal reconstrucrive surgery,ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999, W.B. Saunders, pp 237-273
3. Hunt GB, Tisdall PLC, Liptak JM, Beck JA, Swinney GR, Malik R: Skin-fold advancement flaps for closing large
proximal limb and trunk defects in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 30:440-448, 2001.
16. MANAGEMENT OF BURN WOUNDS
I. David Fowier, D.V.M., M.VSc., Dip. A.C.VS
1.What are some common causes of burn wounds?
·Extreme temperature (themal burns)
·Chemicals (caustic)
·Electricity
·Irradiation
2. How are burn wounds classified in small animals?
According to cause, depth of injury, or surface area involved. Burns are further classified as
either partial-thickness or full-thickness injuries.
3. What is the rule of nine?
A rapid method to estimate the percentage of affected surface area
·Each forelimb represents 9% of the total body surface area.
· The dorsal and ventral surfaces of each hindlimb represent 9%.
· The head and neck represent 9%.
· The dorsal and ventral surfaces of the trunk each represent 18%
4. Is there a critical temperature at which thermal injury occurs?
No. Tissue injury depends on temperature and time of exposure. Thermal injury can occur
at temperatures as low as 44*℃ (111*F) with prolonged exposure.
 5. What patient factors predispose an anesthetized animal to thermal injury?
The ability of the animal to dissipate heat from an area of local application can affect the
extent of injury. Dehydrated animals or animals with poor peripheral perfusion are at increased
of time.
6. List actions that can be taken to minimize the risk of iatrogenic thermal injury in
anesthetized patients.
·Do not use electrical heating sources.
7. How are burn wounds recognized?
Not easily in small animals because of an absence of blistering and a covering hair coat.
Within the first few hours after injury, thermal wounds are characterized by erythema, transu
ManagementotBurnWounds
75
dation of fluid, and easily epilated hair follicles. A full-thickness burn has three concentric zones
of injury:
1. Central coagulative necrosis
 2. Middle vascular stasis
3. Outer hyperemia
The ultimate depth and extent of tissue injury may not be readily apparent for 24-72 hours,
at which time obvious margins of demarcation between healthy and nonviable tissue usually
develop.
8. What causes fluid shifts after burn injury?
Thermal damage causes direct vascular injury, resulting in a breakdown of the semiper-
oncotic pressure becomes ineffective in maintaining intravascular volume. Massive loss of
pl asma albumin accompanies moderate-to-severe burns.
9. How are red blood cells damaged during burn wounds?
In severe injuries, many red blood cells are directly destroyed by heat. Red blood cell mem-
branes can be damaged such that cells are removed prematurely from the circulating pool in the
first 5-7 days. Red blood cell loss can be significant after thermal injury, necessitating whole-
blood transfusion.
10.  Which electrolytes must be monitored during the treatment of severe burn wounds?
Sodium and potassium.
11. How is sodium affected?
●Sodium loss directly accompanies intravascular fluid loss after injury.
· Sodium has a high affinity for denatured collagen in burn wounds.
· The sodium pump in damaged cells becomes inefficient
12. How is potassium affected?
· Potassium is released from damaged red blood cells and other tissue cells immediately
after injury and may cause a transient hyperkalemia.
· In the presence of adequate renal function, urinary potassium excretion increases, result-
ing in the potential development of hypokalemia.
· Intravenous fluid therapy can further aggravate hypokalemia.
13. Are there other systemic effects of burn wounds?
Yes. Immune competence is adversely affected by severe thermal injury and can predispose
the patient to burn wound infection and septicemia. Nutritional demands increase in direct pro-
portion to the severity of injury.
14. Discuss the immediate treatment of dogs and cats with severe burn wounds.
Fluid support using a balanced electrolyte solution is critical. Acute reduction of intravas-
cular fluid volume must be offset to maintain cardiac output and peripheral tissue perfusion.
Colloid and plasma replacement therapy is generally not indicated for the first 24 hours after
injury because continued escape of large-molecular-weight compounds through damaged vessel
walls can exacerbate ongoing fluid shifts. Analgesia (opioids) must also be provided. Non
tissue injury, but adequate renal function should be clearly established before their administra-
tion. Topical cooling is also effective in reducing pain associated with burn wounds.
76
ManagementofBurnWounds
15. Should systemic antibiotic therapy be initiated?
Probably not. Although burn wounds are susceptible to the development of infection, the
prophylactic administration of antibiotics does not appear to decrease infection rates. Antibiotic
therapy should be reserved for the management of established wound infection or septicemia, to
avoid the risk of resistant bacterial infection.
16. How aggressively should nutritional support be provided?
Burn patients should be fed at least 1.5 times their resting energy requirement. Many
s
17. Can respiratory tract injury occur subsequent to thermal injury?
Yes. Direct thermal injury is uncommon and is generally limited to the nasal cavity, pharynx,
and larynx because of efficient heat exchange in these tissues.
18. What is the mechanism of injury to lower airways and lung?
Inhalation injury occurs secondary to toxic agents in smoke. The severity of inhalation
injury depends upon the extent and duration of exposure as well as the source of the smoke. Wood
fires are particularly damaging because of their elevated levels of carbon monoxide and aldehyde
gases such as acrolein.
19. Is the severity of inhalation injury apparent at initial presentation?
No.
 20. Over what time period do respiratory complications progress?
The first 24-36 hours are most crucial in predicting the severity of inhalation injury. Animals
uncomplicated recovery. Progressive respiratory compromise over the first 24 hours indicates a
relatively poor prognosis for uncomplicated recovery.
21. How should inhalation injury be managed?
 o ed  i    s ixo  r 
edema causes obstruction to air flow. Adequate intravenous fluid support reduces the risk of pul-
monary edema and pneumonia.
22. When is debridement indicated for treatment of burn wounds?
Full-thickness injuries should be aggressively debrided as soon as areas of nonviable tissue
are established. Maintaining the eschar over a burn wound is contraindicated and is associated
with increased risk of infection and wound complications. Debridement can be conservative
(hydrotherapy, wet dressings) or aggressive via surgery.
23. What bandaging techniques are indicated for the management of open burn wounds?
This depends on the size of the wound and complicating systemic factors.
wet-to-dry contact dressing to assist in wound debridement.
· Larger wounds in debilitated patients should receive a nonadherent contact dressing that
provides a moist wound environment.
· Biologic dressings, such as freeze-dried porcine xenografts, can be considered for severe
wounds to help reduce ongoing fluid losses.
·A topical nonirritating antimicrobial (water-miscible) agent, such as silver sulfadiazine, is
useful.
PharyngealDiseases
77
24. How frequently should the wound be evaluated?
 In most cases, daily assessment is required for the first several days because progressive
tissue injury can occur during this period. Debridement is repeated to remove all nonviable tissue.
25. When should the wound be reconstructed?
In general, full-thickness burn wounds should be reconstructed as soon as
· There is no ongoing tissue necrosis.
· All nonviable tissue has been debnided from the wound.
· There is no complicating wound sepsis.
● In many cases this may be as early as 2-3 days after injury.
26. How should the wound be reconstructed?
Location, size, availability of regional tissues, and inherent vascularity of tissues in the
wound bed should be considered in selecting an optimal method for reconstruction. Options
include the following:
· Mesh grafts
·Axial pattern flaps
·Skin advancement
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Drobatz KJ, Walker LM, Hendricks JC: Smoke exposure in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:1306-1316,
6661
2. Pavletic M: Bums. In Pavletic M, editor: Atlas of small animat reconstructive surgery, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999,
W.B. Saunders, pp 70-84.
3. Williams IM: Special considerations in wound management. In Fowler D, Williams JM, editors: Manuat of
canine and feline wound management and reconstruction, Cheltenham, 1999, British Small Animal Veterinary
Association pp 123-136.
17. PHARYNGEAL DISEASES
John I. Haburjak, D.VM., Dipl. A.C.VS
1. Describe the three portions of the pharynx.
The pharynx is a passage common to the respiratory and digestive systems. The rostral
respiratory portion (nasopharynx) extends from the choana of the nasal cavity caudally, above the
soft palate, to the intrapharyngeal opening into the pharynx. The primarily digestive portion of
the pharynx (oropharynx) is the area bounded dorsally by the soft palate, ventrally by the root of
the tongue, and laterally by the tonsillar fossa. The common portion of the pharynx
(laryngopharynx) is that portion of the pharynx which lies dorsal to the larynx.
2. What is the functional role of the laryngopharynx?
Deglutition (the act of swallowing).
3.  What is the Eustachian tube and what is its function?
The Eustachian tube (named after Italian anatomist, Bartolomeo Eustachio, 1520-1574) or
auditory tube (tuba auditiva) is a short canal that extends from the middle ear cavity to the nasopharynx.
This tube functions to equalize atmospheric pressure on both sides of the tympanic membrane.
PharyngealDiseases
77
24. How frequently should the wound be evaluated?
 In most cases, daily assessment is required for the first several days because progressive
tissue injury can occur during this period. Debridement is repeated to remove all nonviable tissue.
25. When should the wound be reconstructed?
In general, full-thickness burn wounds should be reconstructed as soon as
· There is no ongoing tissue necrosis.
· All nonviable tissue has been debnided from the wound.
· There is no complicating wound sepsis.
● In many cases this may be as early as 2-3 days after injury.
26. How should the wound be reconstructed?
Location, size, availability of regional tissues, and inherent vascularity of tissues in the
wound bed should be considered in selecting an optimal method for reconstruction. Options
include the following:
· Mesh grafts
·Axial pattern flaps
·Skin advancement
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Drobatz KJ, Walker LM, Hendricks JC: Smoke exposure in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:1306-1316,
6661
2. Pavletic M: Bums. In Pavletic M, editor: Atlas of small animat reconstructive surgery, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999,
W.B. Saunders, pp 70-84.
3. Williams IM: Special considerations in wound management. In Fowler D, Williams JM, editors: Manuat of
canine and feline wound management and reconstruction, Cheltenham, 1999, British Small Animal Veterinary
Association pp 123-136.
17. PHARYNGEAL DISEASES
John I. Haburjak, D.VM., Dipl. A.C.VS
1. Describe the three portions of the pharynx.
The pharynx is a passage common to the respiratory and digestive systems. The rostral
respiratory portion (nasopharynx) extends from the choana of the nasal cavity caudally, above the
soft palate, to the intrapharyngeal opening into the pharynx. The primarily digestive portion of
the pharynx (oropharynx) is the area bounded dorsally by the soft palate, ventrally by the root of
the tongue, and laterally by the tonsillar fossa. The common portion of the pharynx
(laryngopharynx) is that portion of the pharynx which lies dorsal to the larynx.
2. What is the functional role of the laryngopharynx?
Deglutition (the act of swallowing).
3.  What is the Eustachian tube and what is its function?
The Eustachian tube (named after Italian anatomist, Bartolomeo Eustachio, 1520-1574) or
auditory tube (tuba auditiva) is a short canal that extends from the middle ear cavity to the nasopharynx.
This tube functions to equalize atmospheric pressure on both sides of the tympanic membrane.
78
Pharyngeal Diseases
4.1
How are the nasopharyngeal meatus and nasopharynx related?
The nasopharyngeal meatus (meatus nasopharyngeus) is the caudal continuation of the
ventral nasal meatus (meatus nast ventralis). It is considered part of the nasal cavity and separated
from the nasopharynx by two caudal oval openings called choanae.
5. What are palatine tonsils and where are they located?
Tonsilla palatina are long, thin, paired lymph nodes located in each of the lateral walls of the
oropharynx just caudal to the palatoglossal arch.
6. What are common pharyngeal diseases?
· Cricopharyngeal achalasia
· Cleft palate (see Chapter 103)
· Otopharyngeal polyps
·Tonsillitis
·Trauma
 7. What is the most common presenting sign with pharyngeal disease?
Dy sphagi a.
8. Define dysphagia.
Difficulty with swallowing that may either be functional (motor disturbance) or mechanical
(local anatomic lesion).
9. List other signs of pharyngeal disease.
·Anorexia or polyphagia
· Apparent pain on prehension
·Gagging
·Retching
· Coughing/dyspnea (lower or upper airway signs)
·Nasal discharge (exudative, hemorrhage)
10. Name the three phases of swallowing.
·Oropharyngeal
·Esophageal
· Gastroesophageal
11.1
 Describe each of the three stages of the oropharyngeal phase of swallowing and list the
motor and sensory innervation necessary for each stage.
STAGE
DESCRIPTION
CRANIAL NERVES
Oral stage
 Food prehension, transportation
V (trigeminal)
caudally to the base of the tongue
VII (facial)
and accumulation into a bolus
XIl (hypoglossal)
 Pharyngeal stage
The prepared bolus is propelled, via
V (trigeminal)
tongue and pharyngeal constrictors
VII (facial)
across the pharynx. The epiglottis
Xll (hypoglossal)
covers the glottis and the tongue
 IX (glossopharyngeal)
covers the naso- and oropharynx
X (vagus)
 Pharyngoesophageal stage
 Cricophary ngeal muscle relaxes and the
 IX (glossopharyngeal)
upper esophageal sphincter opens
X (vagus)
PharyngealDiseases
79
12. What is the most common stage of the oropharyngeal phase of swallowing implicated
in swallowing disorders?
Pharyngoesophageal stage.
13. What is cricopharyngeal achalasia?
This is an acquired or congenital condition in which there is a failure to open (achalasia) or
a failure to coordinate opening (asynchrony) of the pharynx in response to bolus presentation and
pharyngeal constriction.
14. How is cricopharyngeal achalasia diagnosed?
Swallowing is an active process; therefore, fluoroscopic examination of a barium swallow is
essential in this diagnosis.
15. What are typical findings of a fluoroscopic barium swallow from a patient with
cricopharyngeal achalasia?
Good pharyngeal contractions force passage of a small stream of contrast through a closed,
distorted cricopharyngeal area or into the caudal pharyngeal wall.
16. Why is it important to distinguish between cricopharyngeal achalasia and other forms
of dysphagia?
 s     e  g  s
dysphagia.
d  h          
Cricopharyngeal myotomy (resection of the dorsal part of the cricopharyngeus muscle)
nosis is excellent in congenital forms of this condition; however, in acquired forms the result may
tion pneumonia must be treated to ensure surgical success.
18. What are feline otopharyngeal polyps?
These are benign, pendunculated, inflammatory growths of fibrous connective tissue with
uncertain origin. However, current thought suggests the origin as the tympanic cavity or
Eustachian tube.
19. List common clinical signs associated with feline otopharyngeal polyps.
Signs associated with this condition are referable to the area of polyp formation (ear versus
pharynx). The signs are the result of obstruction and secondary bacterial infection or mechanical
obstruction. The history may include otorrhea, stertorous respiration, nasal discharge, sneezings
dyspnea, dysphagia, Horner's syndrome, ataxia, head tilt, and nystagmus.
20. Name two treatment options for feline otopharyngeal polyps.
·Traction-avulsion
·Surgical extirpation (bullae osteotomy)
21. What is the success rate of the traction-avulsion technique for feline otopharyngeal polyps?
In a recent report, cats with nasopharyngeal polyps were nearly four times as likely to be
cured with traction-avulsion than cats with aural polyps. In this report, long-term follow-up infor-
22.  What is the success rate of surgical bullae osteotomy for feline otopharyngeal polyps?
All 29 cats followed long-term in one report demonstrated complete resolution of polyps
80
Pharyngeal Diseases
23. What is the most common complication associated with surgical extirpation of feline
otopharyngeal polyps via bullae osteotomy?
Horner's syndrome. In one report, 81% of patients had this complication. Most patients had
complete resolution within 4 weeks of surgery.
24. What should be told to the owner of a cat presenting with feline otopharyngeal polyps
and signs referable to inner ear disease (head tilt, nystagmus)?
Improvement, but not resolution of signs should be expected after surgery.
25. In dogs, what are the causes of tonsillitis?
 Primary disease of the tonsil is rare; primary bacterial infection has been described in young,
small-breed dogs and is usually bilateral, causing anorexia, fever, retching, and lethargy. Secondary
tonsilitis is more common and typically secondary to upper or lower respiratory tract infections,
periodontitis, gastric disorders that cause vomiting, and conditions causing regurgitation.
26. Is tonsillitis a surgical disease?
Typically not. Unless associated with neoplasia, treatment for tonsillitis should be directed
toward the primary condition.
27. Oropharyngeal penetrating injuries in dogs have two presentations. Describe them.
·Acute—dysphagia, hypersalivation, oral pain, pyrexia, local cellulitis
· Chromc—discharging sinus of head, neck, or cramal thorax, diffuse swelling
28. Describe the common signalment of dogs with oropharyngeal penetrating injuries.
Medium- to large-breed dogs are implicated most commonly with oropharyngeal penetrat
ing injuries. It is hypothesized that this is due to the speed and trajectory of their bodies and heads
during retrieving exercises.
29. What is the most serious complication of oropharyngeal penetrating injuries in dogs?
Death from unrecogmized esophageal laceration and mediastinal disease in the acute patient.
30. What is the most common complication of oropharyngeal penetrating injuries in
dogs?
Chronic, unresolving discharging sinus is the most common complication. In a recent report,
only 62% of patients that presented with chronic signs of oropharyngeal penetrating injuries had
31. Describe the surgical management of a dog presenting with an acute oropharyngeal
penetrating injury.
Dogs should be explored aggressively at initial presentation. The prognosis is better at this
rated. These patients are usually best explored via an oral approach. Esophageal endoscopy may
promised tissues should be the goal. Most acute injuries will be able to drain orally
32. Describe the surgical management of a dog presenting with a chronic oropharyngeal
penetrating injury.
Careful and complete surgical debridement of all sinus tracts is essential in obtaining a
successful result. The use of an esophageal bougie at the time of debridement will be helpful in
identifying critical anatomic landmarks. Tissues should be submitted for culture and sensitivity
studies as well as histopathology. Ventral drainage should be established. The retrieval of a for-
eign body is not necessarily a determinant of success.
Ear Canal Resection, Ablation, and Bulla Osteotomy
81
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. A1len HS, Broussard J, Noon L: Nasopharyngeal diseases in cats: a retrospective study of 53 cases (1991-1998)
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:457-461, 1999.
2. Anderson DM, Robinson RK, White RAS: Management of inflammatory polyps in 37 cats. Vet Rec 147:684-687,
2000
3. Griffiths LG, Tiruneh R, Sullivan M, Reid SWJ: Oropharyngeal penetrating injuries in 50 dogs: a retrospective
study. Vet Surg 29:383-388, 2000
4. Ladlow J, Hardie RJ: Cricopharyngeal achalasia in dogs. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 22:750-755, 2000.
 5. Niles JID, William JIM, Sullivan M, Crowsley FE: Resolution of dysphagia following cricopharyngeal myectomy
in six young dogs. J Sm Anim Pract 42:32-35, 2001.
18. EAR CANAL RESECTION, ABLATION, AND
BULLA OSTEOTOMY
Elizabeth I. Laing, D.VM., D.VSc., Dip. A.C.VS
1. Lateral ear canal resection, vertical canal resection, and total ear canal ablation are all
treatments for what common condition?
Otitis externa. Each procedure removes a progressively greater amount of tissue.
2. What are other indications for these surgical treatments?
They provide access to the deeper regions of the ear canal and tympanic bulla for removal
of tumors, polyps, and foreign bodies.
3.  When might a simple ear infection benefit from lateral ear canal resection?
When it has not responded to or has recurred after appropriate medical management. The
goal of lateral resection is to provide drainage and ventilation to the horizontal ear canal,
improving the efficacy of future medical treatment.
4. When should lateral resection not be performed in favor of a more radical procedure?
With chronic and diffuse hyperplastic otitis externa. Also, because most dogs require some
o o 1 sop ssi 1oy uo go ns  no si n1 s e o e jo 9
these reasons, it rarely is the best choice for cocker spamiels.
5. What is the overall success rate for lateral ear canal resection?
7 of patients are cured.
/3 are better but require regular ear cleaning and medication.
% continue to have recurrent and progressive ear disease.
6.  What is the difference between a Zepp and Lacroix procedure?
These two terms are often used synonymously, albeit incorrectly, to describe the lateral ear
canal resection. Although both procedures involve removal of the lateral wall of the vertical ear
canal, only in the Zepp is that tissue used to form a ventral drain board.
7.What are the indications for a vertical ear canal resection?
· To remove tumors confined to the vertical ear canal
·To restore patency in cases of canal stenosis or trauma to the ear cartilages
Ear Canal Resection, Ablation, and Bulla Osteotomy
81
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. A1len HS, Broussard J, Noon L: Nasopharyngeal diseases in cats: a retrospective study of 53 cases (1991-1998)
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:457-461, 1999.
2. Anderson DM, Robinson RK, White RAS: Management of inflammatory polyps in 37 cats. Vet Rec 147:684-687,
2000
3. Griffiths LG, Tiruneh R, Sullivan M, Reid SWJ: Oropharyngeal penetrating injuries in 50 dogs: a retrospective
study. Vet Surg 29:383-388, 2000
4. Ladlow J, Hardie RJ: Cricopharyngeal achalasia in dogs. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 22:750-755, 2000.
 5. Niles JID, William JIM, Sullivan M, Crowsley FE: Resolution of dysphagia following cricopharyngeal myectomy
in six young dogs. J Sm Anim Pract 42:32-35, 2001.
18. EAR CANAL RESECTION, ABLATION, AND
BULLA OSTEOTOMY
Elizabeth I. Laing, D.VM., D.VSc., Dip. A.C.VS
1. Lateral ear canal resection, vertical canal resection, and total ear canal ablation are all
treatments for what common condition?
Otitis externa. Each procedure removes a progressively greater amount of tissue.
2. What are other indications for these surgical treatments?
They provide access to the deeper regions of the ear canal and tympanic bulla for removal
of tumors, polyps, and foreign bodies.
3.  When might a simple ear infection benefit from lateral ear canal resection?
When it has not responded to or has recurred after appropriate medical management. The
goal of lateral resection is to provide drainage and ventilation to the horizontal ear canal,
improving the efficacy of future medical treatment.
4. When should lateral resection not be performed in favor of a more radical procedure?
With chronic and diffuse hyperplastic otitis externa. Also, because most dogs require some
o o 1 sop ssi 1oy uo go ns  no si n1 s e o e jo 9
these reasons, it rarely is the best choice for cocker spamiels.
5. What is the overall success rate for lateral ear canal resection?
7 of patients are cured.
/3 are better but require regular ear cleaning and medication.
% continue to have recurrent and progressive ear disease.
6.  What is the difference between a Zepp and Lacroix procedure?
These two terms are often used synonymously, albeit incorrectly, to describe the lateral ear
canal resection. Although both procedures involve removal of the lateral wall of the vertical ear
canal, only in the Zepp is that tissue used to form a ventral drain board.
7.What are the indications for a vertical ear canal resection?
· To remove tumors confined to the vertical ear canal
·To restore patency in cases of canal stenosis or trauma to the ear cartilages
82
Ear CanalResection,Ablation,andBulla Osteotomy
· In rare instances, to treat hyperplastic lesions confined to the vertical canal. Although this
technique will preserve hearing, these lesions frequently progress (despite treatment) to
involve the horizontal canal.
8. What is the most common complication of lateral and vertical ear canal resections?
Impaired wound healing, with wound dehiscence and/or secondary stenosis of the canal opening.
9. How can this be avoided?
Wound dehiscence and stenosis of the canal opening can be minimized (but not entirely
ate antibiotic therapy.
10. What are the most common ear canal tumors?
Benign tumors
· Inflammatory polyps
·Papillomas
· Sebaceous and ceruminous gland adenomas
· Basal cell tumors
·Cholesteatoma
Malignanttumors
· Ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma
· Squamous cell carcinoma
· Carcinoma of undetermined origin
11. Do malignant tumors look different from benign or inflammatory masses?
Only under a microscope.
12. From the surgeon's viewpoint, what are some of the characteristics of end-stage
otitis?
· Severe calcification or rupture of the ear cartilages
· Occlusion of the ear canal by hyperplastic tissue
·Antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections of the external or middle ear
· Noncompliant patients and owners
13. What is the treatment of choice for end-stage otitis externa?
Total ear canal ablation with lateral bulla osteotomy.
14.Can dogs still hear after total ear canal ablation-lateral bulla osteotomy?
Maybe. Most studies show hearing loss after surgery, with any remaining auditory function
Tesulting from bone conduction rather than air conduction. Because most dogs with chronic otitis
already have diminished hearing, however, owners frequently do not notice any detenioration
postoperatively.
15. How is such a radical procedure justified to the client?
16. What is the purpose of a lateral bulla osteotomy during total ear canal ablation?
To remove debris and epithelial remnants, decreasing (it is hoped) the incidence of postoper
ative fistula formation and improving middle ear drainage. Creating a wide opening to the tym-
panic bulla encourages granulation tissue ingrowth and provides the immune system with direct
vascular access to any residual pathogens.
Ear Canal Resection,Ablation,and Bulla Osteotomy
83
17. Should a lateral bulla osteotomy always be performed during total ear canal ablation?
Yes.
18. What nerve crosses the base of the ear canal and must be avoided during ear
ablation-lateral bulla osteotomy?
ative transient neurapraxia. Overzealous dissection or retraction may result in permanent nerve
damage.
19. How would one diagnose postablation facial nerve injury?
The ipsilateral blink reflex is weak or absent.
20.  How is this condition treated?
Artificial tears or ophthalmic lubricants until the blink reflex returns.
21. List three causes of paraaural abscess in dogs.
· Incomplete removal of debris and epithelium following total ear canal ablation
· Traumatic separation of the auricular and annular cartilages with secondary stenosis
·Rupture of the ear canal secondary to trauma, infection, or neoplasia
 22. What is the recommended treatment for postablation fistulas?
If the fistula is due to residual infection, systemic antibiotics (based on bacterial culture and
sensitivity) may be helpful. Usually, however, fistulas result from residual epithelial tissue and
require surgical exploration. There is no consensus as to whether a lateral or ventral bulla osteoto-
my is a better approach in these cases.
23. What are middl ear polyps?
 Berign growths that arise from the mucous membranes lining the tympanic cavity, auditory canal,
and nasopharynx. They occur primarily in younger cats and, less frequently, dogs. They probably
develop secondary to chronic inflammation and issue irritation, although the exact cause is not known.
24. How are middle ear polyps treated?
Pol yps extending along the auditory canal into the nasopharynx are removed through an oral
approach, retracting the soft palate rostrally. Polyps within the middle ear are removed via a
and that both chambers must be explored. Alternatively the polyp can be removed via traction
through the external ear canal, with the aid of a rigid fiberoptic scope. In any case, if excision is
incomplete,expect recurrence.
CONTROVERSY
25. Should a drain be placed after total ear ablation and bulla osteotomy?
in treatment outcome between dogs having a passive drainage system and those without drains
The drainage group required a longer hospital stay. A drain may be useful in cases with
preoperative clinical signs of otitis media, especially if associated with antibiotic-resistant
bacterial infections. Otherwise, it probably is not necessary.
26. Is it possible to treat disease deep within the ear canal while preserving hearing?
Ventral bulla osteotomy generally has no long-term effect on hearing. A caudal auricular
approach with reconstruction of the auditory ossicles and a tympanic membrane graft has also
been used to preserve auditory function. Other techniques involving auditory canal reconstruction
following removal of the ear canal are currently undergoing clinical evaluation.
84
Salivary Gland Diseases
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Connery NA: Para-aural abscessation following traumatic ear canal separation in a dog. J Sm Anim Pract
42:253-256, 2001.
2. Davidson EB, Brodie HA, Breznock EM: Removal of a cholesteatoma in a dog, using a caudal auricular
approach. J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:1549-1153, 1997.
3. DeVitt DM, Seim HB, Wiler R: Passive drainage versus primary closure after total ear canal ablation-lateral
bulla osteotomy in dogs: 59 dogs (1985-1995). Vet Surg 26:210-216, 1997.
 4. Garosi LS: Review of diagnostic imaging of ear diseases in the dog and cat. Vet Radiol and Ultrasound 44: 137-
146, 2003.
 5. Holt D, Brockman DJ, Sylvestre AM: Lateral exploration of fistulas developing after total ear canal ablations:
10 cases (1989-1993). I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:527-530, 1996.
6. Krahwinkel DJ: Extemal ear canal. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smatl animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia,
2003, W.B. Saunders, 1746-1756.
 7. London CA, Dublizeig RR, Vail DMI: Evaluation of dogs and cats with tumors of the ear canal: 145 cases (1978-
1992). I Am Vet Med Assoc 208:1413-1418, 1996.
8. Pratscke KM: Inflammatoy polyps of the middle ear in 5 dogs. Vet Surg 32: 292-296, 2003.
9. Smeak DD, Crocker CB, Birchard SJ: Treatment of recurrent otitis media that developed after total ear
canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy in dogs. Nine cases (1986-1994). I Am Vet Med Assoc 209:937-942,
1996.
10. Vogel PL, Kommtebedde J, Hirsch DC, et al: Woumd contanination and antimicrobial susceptibility of bacteria
cultured during total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1641-1643,
1999.
19. SALIVARY GLAND DISEASES
John I. Haburjak, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. Name the four pairs of salivary glands.
1. Parotid
2. Mandibular
3. Sublingual
4.Zygomatic
 2. Which important neurovascular structures lie in proximity to the parotid gland?
·Internal maxillary artery courses through the gland.
· Palpebral, auriculotemporal, and buccal nerves lie underneath the rostral portion of the
gland.
· Facial nerve lies underneath the dorsomedial aspect of the gland in close proximity to the
ex ternal ear canal.
3. What is the course of the parotid duct?
It arises from the rostral border of the gland and courses rostrally with the masseter muscle.
4.Which important vascular structures lie in proximity to the mandibular gland?
The gland lies between the maxillary vein ventrally and the linguofacial vein dorsally
84
Salivary Gland Diseases
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Connery NA: Para-aural abscessation following traumatic ear canal separation in a dog. J Sm Anim Pract
42:253-256, 2001.
2. Davidson EB, Brodie HA, Breznock EM: Removal of a cholesteatoma in a dog, using a caudal auricular
approach. J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:1549-1153, 1997.
3. DeVitt DM, Seim HB, Wiler R: Passive drainage versus primary closure after total ear canal ablation-lateral
bulla osteotomy in dogs: 59 dogs (1985-1995). Vet Surg 26:210-216, 1997.
 4. Garosi LS: Review of diagnostic imaging of ear diseases in the dog and cat. Vet Radiol and Ultrasound 44: 137-
146, 2003.
 5. Holt D, Brockman DJ, Sylvestre AM: Lateral exploration of fistulas developing after total ear canal ablations:
10 cases (1989-1993). I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:527-530, 1996.
6. Krahwinkel DJ: Extemal ear canal. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smatl animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia,
2003, W.B. Saunders, 1746-1756.
 7. London CA, Dublizeig RR, Vail DMI: Evaluation of dogs and cats with tumors of the ear canal: 145 cases (1978-
1992). I Am Vet Med Assoc 208:1413-1418, 1996.
8. Pratscke KM: Inflammatoy polyps of the middle ear in 5 dogs. Vet Surg 32: 292-296, 2003.
9. Smeak DD, Crocker CB, Birchard SJ: Treatment of recurrent otitis media that developed after total ear
canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy in dogs. Nine cases (1986-1994). I Am Vet Med Assoc 209:937-942,
1996.
10. Vogel PL, Kommtebedde J, Hirsch DC, et al: Woumd contanination and antimicrobial susceptibility of bacteria
cultured during total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1641-1643,
1999.
19. SALIVARY GLAND DISEASES
John I. Haburjak, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. Name the four pairs of salivary glands.
1. Parotid
2. Mandibular
3. Sublingual
4.Zygomatic
 2. Which important neurovascular structures lie in proximity to the parotid gland?
·Internal maxillary artery courses through the gland.
· Palpebral, auriculotemporal, and buccal nerves lie underneath the rostral portion of the
gland.
· Facial nerve lies underneath the dorsomedial aspect of the gland in close proximity to the
ex ternal ear canal.
3. What is the course of the parotid duct?
It arises from the rostral border of the gland and courses rostrally with the masseter muscle.
4.Which important vascular structures lie in proximity to the mandibular gland?
The gland lies between the maxillary vein ventrally and the linguofacial vein dorsally
Salivary Gland Diseases
85
the mandibular gland?
The monostomatic portion of the sublingual gland adjoins the rostroventral portion of the
gland. Both glands share a common thick fibrous capsule that originates from the deep cervical
fascia. Mucocele formation by the sublingual gland necessitates removal of both (sublingual and
mandibular) glands.
6. What is the course of the mandibular duct?
It arises from the medial surface of the gland and runs rostrally in close association with and
medially to the sublingual gland. It courses with the major sublingual duct and opens on a small
papilla located lateral to the rostral end of the frenulum.
7.Describe the two parts of the sublingual gland.
1. The monostomatic part is flat, truncated, and darker than the mandibular gland. It is
composed of lobules that are loosely arranged around the mandibular duct near the root
of the tongue. Its secretions are emptied in the major sublingual duct.
2. The polystomatic portion is forrmed by 6-12 small lobules that secrete directly into the
oral cavity.
8. Do the sublingual and mandibular glands have a common opening into the oral cavity?
Yes, in 20-34% of dogs.
9. Where is the zygomatic gland located?
Ventral to the zy gomatic arch against the ventral portion of the periorbita.
10. Where is the zygomatic duct opening in the oral cavity?
open caudally to the major duct along the same plane.
11. What are the major diseases of the salivary system?
DISEASE
CLINICAL SIGNS
Sialodenitis (necrosis)
Enlarged, hard, painful glands; retching, vomition, and/or
regurgitation
Sialodenosis
Generalized enlarged, s wollen, nonpainful salivary glands;
retching, gulping, ptyalism
Infarcti on
Regional, firm swelling of salivary glands, pyrexia, anorexia
Sialocele (mucocele)
Regionally diffuse, nonpainful flocculent swelling sublingually,
rostro-ventro cervically or submandibularly
Sialoli thiasis
Painful, firm swelling of the salivary gland (usually parotid)
Neoplasia
 Usually nonpainful, firm enlargement of a specific salivary
gland
12. Which salivary disease is most common?
Mucocele: accumulation of saliva in the subcutaneous tissue subsequently causing tissue
reaction to the saliva. The cause often remains obscure although trauma has been implicated.
Mucocele occurs most commonly in the inframandibular space (cervical) but can be located
orally (ranula) or in the pharyngeal wall (pharyngeal).
86
Salivary Gland Diseases
13. Which breeds are typically affected with a mucocele?
Toy and miniature poodles and German shepherds 2-4 years of age.
14. What are the treatment alternatives for mucocele (starting with the best option)?
·Surgical excision of the implicated gland
· Marsupialization (mostly for ranula and pharyngeal mucocele)
15. What is marsupialization?
suturing of cut edges to adjacent skin. (From the Latin marsupium, pouch.)
16. What is the most common complication of mucocele surgery?
Recurrence (5%), resulting from failure to remove the entire affected gland or damage to the
opposite gland when the sublingual gland is removed.
17. What is the most common tumor affecting the salivary gland?
18. Describe the treatiment of choice for adenocarcinoma.
Aggressive surgical excision is usually not curative and needs to be combined with radiation
therapy to provide permanent local control and long-term survival. Median survival rate for
animals treated with surgery with or without radiation is 12 months.
19. What is the treatment of choice for sialoliths?
Incision of the duct over the sialolith and removal.
20. What is sialodenosis?
Idiopathic, painless, noninflammatory glandular enlargement; resolves following
phenobarbital administration.
21. What is sialodenitis?
Idiopathic, painful enlargement of all salivary glands associated with thoracic esophageal
disease and possibly a vagal reflex arc.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Bellenger CR, Simpson DI: Canine sialocoeles—60 clinical cases. J Sm Anim Pract 33:376-380, 1992.
2. Boydel1 P, Pike R, Crossley D: Sialadenosis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:872-874, 2000.
3. Schroeder H, Berry WL: Salivary gland necrosis in dogs: a retrospective of 19 cases. J Sm Anim Pract 39:121-
125,1998.
4. Withrow SJ: Cancer of the salivary gland. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG, editors: Small animal clinical oncology,
ed 2, Philadelphia, 1996, W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, pp 240-241.
20. BRACHYCEPHALIC SYNDROME
Holly S. Mullen, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What does brachycephalic mean?
Brachycephalic animals are characterized by a short, wide face. The bones of the base of the
skull have reduced length and normal width. The soft tissues of the face, nose, and nasopharynx
are relatively normal but excessive for a shortened skull.
2. Name some brachycephalic breeds.
Dogs
·Bulldog
· Boston terrier
·Boxer
·Lhasa apso
·Pug
·Pekingese
·Shar-pei
Cats
●Himalayan
· Persian
 3. Why are brachycephalics predisposed to upper respiratory obstructive conditions?
 Their shortened skulls cause compression and distortion of the nasal passages. During inspi-
ration, these changes, plus redundant soft tissue in the nose and nasopharynx, increase negative
pressure in the airway and cause secondary anatomic changes.
4. What are congenital components of the brachycephalic syndrome?
·Stenotic nares
· Elongated soft palate
· Hypoplastic trachea
 5. What are acquired components of the brachycephalic syndrome?
· Everted laryngeal saccules
· Laryngeal edema
· Laryngeal collapse
· Redundant (edematous) pharyngeal folds
6. List the clinical signs of brachycephalic syndrome.
·Exercise intolerance
· Respiratory distress
· Gagging and dysphagia
● Open mouth or stertorous breathing
·Sleep apnea
·Cyanosis
·Collapse
88
Brachycephalic Syndrome
· Death as a result of respiratory obstruction
·Aspiration pneumonia
7. What is the best way to evaluate brachycephalic syndrome?
Thoracic radiography and oral examination of the dog under anesthesia (simultaneous
surgical correction). Tracheoscopy and bronchoscopy may also be done.
Preoxygenation and rapid induction followed by prompt endotracheal intubation prevent
hypoxemia and hypercapnea. Several sizes of endotracheal tubes need to be available in case the
trachea is smaller than expected. A lar yngoscope and spay hook can be used to move aside tissues
(including an elongated soft palate) for a complete oral examination.
9. What is a hypoplastic trachea?
A congenital narrowing, not shortening, of the trachea.
10. List the three dog breeds, in descending order, with the highest incidence of
hypoplastic trachea.
1. English bulldog (approximately 55% of dogs with hypoplastic trachea)
2. Boston terrier (approximately 15%)
3. Boxer (approximately 5%)
11. Has hypoplastic trachea been reported in the cat with brachycephalic syndrome?
No.
12. Is there a sex predilection for hypoplastic trachea?
Males are affected twice as often as females.
13. What is the clinical significance of hypoplastic trachea?
Reduced tracheal size means less respiratory volume per breath. In the absence of other res-
piratory or cardiac abnormalities, a hypoplastic trachea is usually fairly well tolerated. In combi-
14. Is there any effective treatment for hypoplastic trachea?
No. If there are underlying cardiac or respiratory conditions, correcting them may improve
the situation.
15. Compare a normal and elongated soft palate
NORMAL SOFT PALATE
ELONGATED SOFT PALATE
Extends to caudal aspect of tonsils
Extends beyond the tonsils into the larynx
Tip of palate barely touches epiglottis
Tip of palate falls into laryngeal opening, blocking
alr flow
16. List the surgical options for reduction of an elongated soft palate.
·Traditional excision
·Carbon dioxide laser excision
Brachycephalic Syndrome
89
17. What is the optimal patient positioning for soft palate resection (staphylectomy)?
·Sternal recumbency, head elevated, mouth open
· Patient at end of table
18. How is soft palate excision performed?
1. Grasp the tip of the elongated soft palate with an Allis tissue forceps.
 2. Place a 4-0 absorbable suture at one end of the proposed incision.
3.Excise one half of the redundant tissue.
 4. Close oral mucosa to nasopharyngeal mucosa with a simple continuous suture pattern.
 5. Excise the remaining half of redundant palate.
6.Continue the closure using the same suture pattern.
19. What are perioperative concerns with soft palate surgery?
1. Avoid cautery or crushing tissues; both cause increased swelling.
2. Minimize swelling in the first 24 hours by administering water-soluble, short-acting
corticosteroids, if necessary.
3. Leave the endotracheal tube in as long as possible; partially deflate the cuff when
extubating to help remove blood clots that may have fallen into the tracheal lumen.
20. What kind of postoperative care is needed?
1. Feed soft foods for 1 week.
2. Avoid situations that stimulate barking or heavy breathing for l week
21. How soon after surgery can improvement be noted?
Immediately, unless there is a lot of postoperative swelling; improvement should continue
over the next 3-4 weeks as healing occurs.
22. What are stenotic nares?
Mild-to-severe reduction of the nostril lumen resulting from excessively thickened or
medially displaced nasal and alar folds.
23. What are some problems caused or enhanced by stenotic nares?
· Increased inspiratory pressure, leading to everted saccules.
· Increased mouth breathing, causing increased swelling and dryness of oral membranes;
nasal filtration and humidification systems are bypassed by mouth breathing
24. In what three cat breeds are most stenotic nares noted?
· Persians and Himalayans—same mechanism as dogs
· Scottish fold—nonbrachycephalic; nasal folds may roll into the lumen of the nares, as a
result of the same cartilaginous defect affecting ears
25. What is the best treatment for stenotic nares?
Nasal fold revision by horizontal, vertical, or lateral wedge resection, or by laser ablation.
26. What are everted laryngeal saccules, and how do they occur?
The saccules are the mucosal lining of the laryngeal ventricles. With chronic upper airway
27. What is the appearance of everted saccules?
Vel vety pink, soft, round masses protruding into the ventral laryngeal lumen, just rostral to
the vocal folds.
90
Brachycephalic Syndrome
28. What is the surgical treatment for everted saccules?
greatly facilitates removal of the saccules.Replace the endotracheal tube after bilateral sacculec-
tomy to allow good oxy genation during recovery.
 29. What is the most severe, life-threatening secondary problem seen with brachycephalic
syndrome?
Laryngeal collapse.
 30. What is the sequence of events leading to laryngeal collapse?
Advanced, uncorrected brachycephalic syndrome →> Excess negative pressure in the airway →
Pharyngeal and laryngeal edema → Greater negative airway pressure →> Everted saccules → Even
lary ngeal lumen → Complete, life-threatening obs truction.
31.
What is the primary differential dia gnosis for laryngeal collapse?
Lar yngeal paraly sis.
 32. How would you differentiate the two conditions?
Oral ex amination.
33. What is the treatment for laryngeal collapse?
Permanent tracheostomy, a salvage procedure.
34. Are cats affected by brachycephalic syndrome?
Yes, but rarely. There are brachycephalic cat breeds, some of which have one or more com-
ponents of brachycephalic syndrome.
35. What component of brachycephalic syndrome is most frequently seen in affected cats?
Stenotic nares.
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Hedllund CS: Brachycephalic syndrome. In Bojrab MI, editor: Current techniques in small animat surgery, ed 4,
Baltimore, 1998, Williams & wilkins, pp 357-362.
2. Monnet E:Brachycephalic airway syndrome,In Slatter D,editor: Textbook of small aninal surgery, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2003, W.B. Saunders, pp. 808-813
21. LARYNGEAL PARALYSIS
Robert M. Radasch, D.VM., M.S., D.A.C.VS.
1. What is laryngeal paralysis?
The partial or, more commonly, the complete failure of the arytenoid cartilages and vocal
folds to abduct during inspiration, leading to mechanical upper air way obstruction
 2. What causes laryngeal paralysis?
Interruption of the motor innervation to the intrinsic muscles of the larynx. Occasionally, it
3. Which nerves supply motor innervation to the intrinsic laryngeal muscles?
The vagus nerve supplies all motor innervation to the intrinsic laryngeal muscles. The vagus
gives rise to the cranial and caudal laryngeal nerves. The ex ternal branch of the cranial laryngeal
nerve provides the sole innervation to the cricothyroideus muscle. The caudal laryngeal nerve
leaves the vagus in the thorax and courses rostrally through the neck to terminate as the recurrent
 i e n og  ss  n ni   
and adductor muscles except the cricothyroideus muscle.
4. What is the primary intrinsic laryngeal muscle responsible for abduction of the vocal
folds and arytenoid cartilages to cause opening of the laryngeal rima glottis?
Cricoarytenoideus dorsalis muscle.
 5. Name the two forms of laryngeal paralysis.
· Congenital
·Acquired
6. Which form of laryngeal paralysis is more common?
7. What is the breed predisposition for the congenital form?
·United States—Siberian Huskies and possibly Dalmatians
·Netherlands—Bouvier des Flandres
·Britain—Bulldogs
 8. What is the anatomic site of the primary neurologic abnormality in dogs affected by
the congenital form of laryngeal paralysis?
The nucleus ambi guus of the brain. Wallerian degeneration of the recurrent laryngeal nerves
has also been observed.
9. List the causes of acquired laryngeal paralysis.
· Trauma or surgery to the cranial aspect of the thorax or cervical area, resulting in injury
to the vagus or recurrent laryngeal nerves
·● Intrathoracic or cervical masses that cause vagal or recurrent laryngeal nerve damage or
compression
· Primary recurrent lar yngeal nerve lesions
· Generalized polyneuropathy, myopathy, or myasthenia gravis
92
Laryngeal Paralysis
· Hypothyroidism, possibly causing distal die-back of the recurrent laryngeal nerve
· Neoplasia, either primary or metastatic, affecting the recurrent laryngeal nerve, central or
 peripheral portions of the vagus nerve, or larynx
· Idiopathic, in which no underlying cause can be found. This is the most common form of
laryngeal paralysis, usually occurming in middle-aged to older, large-breed dogs (e.g,
Labrador retrievers, golden retrievers, Irish setters)
10.  List characteristic clinical signs of laryngeal paralysis.
The following signs are progressive:
·Dysphonia—(70% of cases)
·Exercise intolerance—(90% of cases)
· Inspiratory stridor—(100% of cases)
· Postprandial gagging and coughing—(65% of cases)
· Respiratory distress and collapse
11. Does laryngeal paralysis occur in cats?
Yes, but less frequently than in dogs. The most common clinical signs are tachypnea, dysp
nea, dysphagia, weight loss, change in vocalization, coughing, and lethargy. Cats with unilateral
laryngeal paralysis have less severe clinical signs and can be managed medically, whereas cats
with bilateral disease have more severe symptoms requiring surgical intervention
12. How can laryngeal paralysis be definitively diagnosed?
· Electromyography of the laryngeal muscles to confirm denervation potentials
· Laryngoscopy to confirm lack of abduction of the arytenoid cartilages and vocal folds
13. Is one method of diagnosis more accurate than another?
No. One study found 100% agreement between electromyographic studies and laryn-
laryngeal motion under light general anesthesia.
14. Is the plane of anesthesia important for evaluation of laryngeal paralysis?
Yes. A normal animal has no laryngeal movements when placed under a deep plane of anes-
thesia. The patient should be anesthetized to a point where the mouth can be opened and a s wal.
low laryngeal reflex initiated if the larynx is touched.
15. What should be seen during laryngoscopy to diagnose laryngeal paralysis?
· Medial displacement of the arytenoid cartilages and vocal folds, during inspiration and
expiration (absence of normal abduction during inspiration)
· Inflammation and reddening of the edges of the arytenoid mucosa
(paradoxic motions). This should not be confused with normal abduction that occurs
during inspiration.
16. What other diagnostic tests should be performed before surgery if laryngeal paralysis
is suspected?
Chest radiographs, cervical neck palpation, and a thorough neurologic and physical exami-
nation to rule out neoplasia and generalized polyneuropathies or myopathies. Many patients with
idiopathic laryngeal paralysis exhibit mild generalized neurologic weakness. Evaluation of thy-
roid function should also be considered because hypothyroidism has been associated with distal
axon die-back, possibly resulting in polyneuropathy (including laryngeal paralysis). If indicated,
Laryngeal Paralysis
93
17. How should an animal presented with respiratory distress, resulting from laryngeal
 paralysis, be initially managed?
·Sedation (oxymorphone, butorphanol, acepromazine, or diazepam)
· Corticosteroids
· Cooling, if hyperthermic
Animals failing to respond to sedation, steroids, or cooling should have an immediate tem-
porary tube tracheostomy or definitive surgical correction of the laryngeal paral ysis.
18.  List surgical procedures that can be performed in patients with severe signs of respira-
tory distress resulting from laryngeal paralysis.
·Partial laryngectomy, combined with unilateral or bilateral ventriculocordectomy
· Modified castellated laryngofissure
·Permanent tracheostomy
·● Muscle-nerve pedicle transposition to reinnervate the larynx
·Arytenoid cartilage lateralization (tie-back procedure)
19. What structures are removed with a partial laryngectomy?
One or both vocal folds and associated vocalis muscle; unilateral partial resection of the cor-
niculate, cuneiform, and vocal processes of one arytenoid cartilage.
 20. Name the approach used to perform a partial laryngectomy.
Oral or ventral midline laryngotomy.
21. What are the advantages and disadvantages of the oral approach for a partial
laryngectomy?
Advantages:
·Technically easy
· Short operative time
Disadvantage:
· If excessive tissue is removed, glottic stenosis and aspiration of food and water can
OCcur.
22. What are the advantages and disadvantages of ventral midline laryngotomy?
Advantage:
· Primary closure of the mucosa can minimize excessive scar tissue formation.
Disadvantages:
·Inability to evaluate functional size of the airway during procedure
● Excessive scar tissue along the ventral laryngotomy incision
● Aspiration of food and water if excessive tissue is removed
· Demanding surgical technique
23. Discuss the complications associated with partial laryngectomy versus
ventriculocordectomy.
 Of dogs with bilateral ventriculocordectomy, 58% have aspiration pneumonia, persistent
cough, increased stridor, and exercise intolerance. In one study, 38% of dogs developed severe
94
Laryngeal Paralysis
Tesulted in a 49% overall complication rate, including death, aspiration pneumonia, and excessive
scartissue.
24. Is there a contraindication to performing partial laryngectomy?
Yes. Dogs with laryngeal paralysis complicated by laryngeal collapse are poor surgical can
didates. A 50-83% incidence of postoperative death has been reported. Laryngeal collapse com
plicating laryngeal paralysis has often been seen in brachycephalic breeds and should be treated
25. What is a castellated laryngofissure?
This procedure entails creating a stepped, or castellated, incision through the ventral surface
Tepositioned to widen the opening of the glottis. The halves of the thyroid cartilage are sutured
together in this expanded position.
 26. Why should this technique not be commonly performed?
·Technically demanding
· Associated with numerous complications
·Produces questionable results
27. Why is muscle-nerve pedicle transposition to reinnervate the intrinsic laryngeal
muscles seldom used?
This procedure is technically demanding, and the reinnervation process takes 5-11 months
before clinical improvement is seen. A patient in acute distress will probably die before it works,
making it impractical for the management of acute respiratory distress.
 28. What surgical procedure is currently recommended for an older large-breed dog with
idiopathic laryngeal paralysis?
(n   o e 
29. How effective is a laryngeal tie-back?
Studies have shown that the procedure results in a 70-80% increase in glottic diameter, with
>90% of the patients having less respiratory distress and improved exercise tolerance.
30. What structures are tied back?
and tied back to either (1) the caudal third of the cricoid cartilage near the dorsal midline or (2)
the caudodorsal aspect of the thyroid cartilage. Sutures tied to the thyroid cartilage pull the ary
tenoid laterally, whereas sutures tied to the cricoid mimic the function of the cricoarytenoideus
dorsalis muscle and rotate the arytenoid laterally.
31. Is it more effective to suture the arytenoid cartilage to the cricoid or thyroid cartilage?
operative area, was 140% and 207% for unilateral thyroarytenoid and cricoarytenoid lateraliza-
tion, respectively.
32. Does the amount of suture tension used to lateralize the arytenoid cartilage during a
“tie back' influence outcome?
Yes. Low suture tension (suture tightened only until resistance was felt) increased rima glot-
tidis area by 82% while high suture tension (suture tightened as much as possible) increased it by
129%. However, high suture tension increased the aperture opening of the rima glottidis while
Tracheostomy
95
the epiglottis was in a closed position, potentially predisposing a patient to aspiration pneumo-
nia. High suture tension may also cause the laryngeal cartilages to fissure or break. Low suture
tension is therefore recommended!
33. Should arytenoid cartilage lateralization be performed bilaterally?
No, because of postoperative complications. Even though a bilateral procedure increases
the glottic diameter 180%, it results in an unacceptably high rate (43%) of aspiration
pneumonia.
34. List the common complications associated with arytenoid cartilage lateralization.
· Gagging and coughing after drinking water (improves with time)
· Aspiration pneumonia (incidence is less than that associated with performing a partial
laryngectomy)
· Some residual inspiratory stridor, which usually does not cause any clinical problems
·Altered vocalization
Tespiratory distress
 35. Should a permanent tracheostomy be considered as a treatment option for laryngeal
paralysis?
This technique may be considered in the following situations:
1. Brachycephalic breeds presented with laryngeal paralysis complicated by laryngeal collapse
 2. Extremely small patients
3. Cases in which excessive scar tissue has caused severe glottic stenosis
 4. Arytenoid cartilage lateralization procedures that have failed because of fracture of the
arytenoid cartilage
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Bureau S, Monnet E: Effects of suture tension and surgical approach during unilateral arytenoid lateralization on
the rima glottidis in the canine larynx. Vet Surg 31:589-595, 2002
2. Griffiths LG, Sulliva M, Reid SWJ: A commparison of the effects of unilateral thyroarytenoid lateralization versus
cricoarytenoid laryngoplasty on the area of the rima glottidis and clinical outcome in dogs with laryngeal
paralysis. Vet Surg 30:359-365, 2001
3. Hedlund CS: Laryngeal paralysis. In Fossum TW, editor: Smatl animat surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby.
4. Monnet E: Laryngeal paralysis. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003
W.B. Saunders, pp 837-844.
5. Schachter S, Norris CR: Laryngeal paralysis in cats: 16 cases (1990-1999). I Am Vet Med Assoc 216: 1100-1103,
2000
22. TRACHEOSTOMY
D. Michael Tillson, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is a tracheostomy?
An opening between the skin and tracheal lumen. It allows air to enter the respiratory tract,
while bypassing the nasal cavity, nasopharynx, and upper airway. In veterinary surgery, a tra-
d ge io e  s po s 
Tracheostomy
95
the epiglottis was in a closed position, potentially predisposing a patient to aspiration pneumo-
nia. High suture tension may also cause the laryngeal cartilages to fissure or break. Low suture
tension is therefore recommended!
33. Should arytenoid cartilage lateralization be performed bilaterally?
No, because of postoperative complications. Even though a bilateral procedure increases
the glottic diameter 180%, it results in an unacceptably high rate (43%) of aspiration
pneumonia.
34. List the common complications associated with arytenoid cartilage lateralization.
· Gagging and coughing after drinking water (improves with time)
· Aspiration pneumonia (incidence is less than that associated with performing a partial
laryngectomy)
· Some residual inspiratory stridor, which usually does not cause any clinical problems
·Altered vocalization
Tespiratory distress
 35. Should a permanent tracheostomy be considered as a treatment option for laryngeal
paralysis?
This technique may be considered in the following situations:
1. Brachycephalic breeds presented with laryngeal paralysis complicated by laryngeal collapse
 2. Extremely small patients
3. Cases in which excessive scar tissue has caused severe glottic stenosis
 4. Arytenoid cartilage lateralization procedures that have failed because of fracture of the
arytenoid cartilage
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Bureau S, Monnet E: Effects of suture tension and surgical approach during unilateral arytenoid lateralization on
the rima glottidis in the canine larynx. Vet Surg 31:589-595, 2002
2. Griffiths LG, Sulliva M, Reid SWJ: A commparison of the effects of unilateral thyroarytenoid lateralization versus
cricoarytenoid laryngoplasty on the area of the rima glottidis and clinical outcome in dogs with laryngeal
paralysis. Vet Surg 30:359-365, 2001
3. Hedlund CS: Laryngeal paralysis. In Fossum TW, editor: Smatl animat surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby.
4. Monnet E: Laryngeal paralysis. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003
W.B. Saunders, pp 837-844.
5. Schachter S, Norris CR: Laryngeal paralysis in cats: 16 cases (1990-1999). I Am Vet Med Assoc 216: 1100-1103,
2000
22. TRACHEOSTOMY
D. Michael Tillson, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is a tracheostomy?
An opening between the skin and tracheal lumen. It allows air to enter the respiratory tract,
while bypassing the nasal cavity, nasopharynx, and upper airway. In veterinary surgery, a tra-
d ge io e  s po s 
96
Tracheostomy
2. What are indications for tracheostomy tube placement?
· Life-threatening upper airway obstruction (current or anticipated)
· Prolonged ventilatory assistance in conscious or semiconscious patients
· Removal of aspirated materials
· Maintenance of a patent airway for oxygen delivery (with or without anesthetic gases)
    o ss 
3. What changes in the respiratory tree are associated with tracheostomy tube
placement?
Incision into the tracheal lumen and placement of a tracheostomy tube results in disruption
inflammation of the submucosal layer. The disruption of the respiratory clearing mechanism pre-
disposes the patient to bronchopneumonia or bronchi obstruction and lung atelectasis.
4. Is a temporary tracheostomy an emergency procedure?
Tracheostomy tube placement is rarely a crash procedure to prevent death from anoxia. In most
cases, patients requiring tracheostomy tubes can be intubated and ventilated before and during
surgery. In rare cases in which intubation is prevented because of obstructive lesions or laryngeal
swelling, the insertion of a large-gauge catheter or needle into the tracheal lumen with attachment
to an oxy gen source is useful.
5. How is a tracheostomy tube placed?
The patient is placed in dorsal recumbency with the head extended and the neck sup-
ported or arched. The skin, subcutaneous tissues, and ventral neck muscles are incised from the
larynx extending five to six rings caudally. The trachea is cleared approximately half the dis-
(jugular vein, carotid artery, cranial thyroid artery, recurrent laryngeal nerve, vagosympathetic
trunk).
 Once the proposed insertion point is identified, stay sutures are placed around a tracheal ring
cranial and caudal to the proposed incision. When the site is prepared and the tube is ready, the
endotracheal tube is removed, and incision is made into the tracheal lumen. While applying
gentle traction to the distal stay suture, the proximal portion of the trachea is gently depressed
and the tracheostomy tube is inserted. One or two simple interrupted sutures are used to close
the extremes of the skin incision. A nonadherent pad is covered with a topical antibiotic and
placed around the tracheostomy tube. The tube is secured around the neck with umbilical tape
and a light wrap.
 6. Describe three different methods for incision into the tracheal lumen.
In general, the tracheal incision is begun three to five rings below the cricoid cartilage
(larynx).
1. The most common method is a horizontal incision (so% of circumference) between
tracheal rings.
 2. A second technique involves a longitudinal (vertical) incision across several tracheal
rings.
3. The transverse flap tracheostomy involves the formation of a flap from the ventral wall
of the trachea. This is done as either an I or lazy U incision.
7. What is the advantage of the transverse flap technique?
Telocation of the sternohyoideus muscle dorsally. No increase in stricture formation was reported
when the flap method was compared with standard tracheostomy incisions.
Tracheostomy
97
8. List the complications associated with tracheostomy tube placement.
·Asphyxiation—tube kinking, occlusion, improper placement
·Selective bronchial intubation—excessive tube length
9. What complications are associated with the maintenance of a tracheostomy tube?
· Occlusion of the tracheostomy tube and patient death from asphyxiation (prevented by
Toutine removal and cleaning of the tracheostomy tube and periodic aspiration of the
tracheal lumen) to remove excessive secretion. Tracheostomy tube cuffs are kept deflated
except when the patient is being manually/mechanically ventilated.
· Respiratory tract drying (as a result of air bypassing nasal passages, oxygen
supplementation, and decreased mucociliary mechanism).
·Local wound infection.
· Tracheal damage.
· Subcutaneous emphysema (usually mild and self-limiting)
10. Can tube-associated tracheal damage be minimized?
Yes, with use of a tube one half to two thirds of the tracheal lumen diameter, deflating the cuff.
11. How is drying of the respiratory tract managed?
The best method involves humidification (nebulizer) of oxygen flowing to a patient or inter-
mittently infusing stenile saline into the tracheostomy tube and trachea.
12. How is suctioning of the tracheostomy tube performed?
The tracheostomy tube is first cleaned to remove any accumulated material that could be dis-
lodged into the lungs. The patient is hyperoxygenated (2-3 minutes) before suctioning. A sterile
suction tube is inserted through the tracheostomy tube lumen and advanced to the level of the
twisting.
13. List desirable characteristics of tracheostomy tubes.
· Large enough to allow for adequate oxygen transport
· Rigid enough to prevent tube kinking/occlusion and to maintain its shape
● Flexible enough to prevent tracheal damage
14. What are advantages and disadvantages of a double-lumen tracheostomy tube?
A double-lumen tracheostomy tube allows the inner cannula to be unlocked and removed for
cleaning. The outer cannula remains in place, providing a patent airway for the patient. The use
of a double-lumen tube decreases the stress created by the routine removal of tracheostomy tubes
for cleaning
The disadvantage of double-lumen tubes is that a double-lumen tube provides the
patient with a smaller airway compared with a single-lumen tube with the same outside
diameter.
15. When is tracheostomy tube placement an elective procedure?
· Upper respiratory surgeries (soft palate resections, ventriculocordectomies, laryngec-
tomies, modified castellated laryngofissures)
· Tracheal surgeries
· Surgenies involving the oral cavity when: (l) there is significant risk of postoperative
airway obstruction or (2) an endotracheal tube increases the difficulty of the surgical
procedure
98
Tracheostomy
16. Should a tracheostomy site be sutured after final tube removal?
Allow the wound to heal by second intention. Protect the site with a light bandage for 2-3
17. What antibiotics are indicated for a patient with a temporary tracheostomy?
None for the tracheostomy; broad-spectrum, bactenicidal agents, based on culture and
sensitivity testing, for underlying disease.
18. What is the difference between a temporary and permanent tracheostomy?
A temporary tracheostomy allows access to the respiratory system during a limited period
use the term tracheotomy (otomy indicating an incision into a structure).
A permanent tracheostomy is a definitive treatment for specific diseases. It creates a
permanent opening (stoma) for the tracheal lumen on the ventral surface of the neck, bypassing
the nasal and phar yngeal portions of the respiratory system.
19. What are the steps for creation of a permanent tracheostomy?
 2. The trachea is elevated by separating the sternohyoideus muscles and suturing them
together dorsally to the trachea.
3. A stoma is created by removing the ventral aspect of three to four rings, including the
ass ociated annular ligaments.
4. The trachea is sutured to the subcutaneous tissues to secure it in position
5. The tracheal mucosa is elevated and sutured to the skin edge to form a mucocutaneous
junction.
20. What is most critical in creating a successful permanent stoma?
The creation of a mucocutaneous junction. Accurate apposition of tracheal mucosa to skin
edge is vital to prevent postoperative stricture of the stoma.
21. What is the aftercare for a permanent tracheostomy?
Because the surgical procedure creates a direct communication between the environment
and the tracheal lumen, care must be taken to prevent aspiration of foreign matenials (grasses,
excessive dust, leaves, water), hair must be trimmed, and daily wound cleansing must be
perfomed. Obese patients need to lose weight, and, in some cases, surgical removal of excessive
skin is necessary.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Colley P, Huber M: Tracheostomy techniques and management. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 21:44-53, 1999.
2. Nelson AW: Diseases of the trachea. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animal surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia,
2003, W.B. Saunders, pp. 858-879.
23. TRACHEAL RESECTION AND ANASTOMOSIS
D. Michael Tillson, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What is the normal anatomy of the trachea?
The trachea is a semirigid tube connecting the oral cavity to the lower respiratory tract. In
the dog and cat, it is composed of 35-45 C-shaped rings formed from hyaline cartilage (providing
rigid support), a dorsal tracheal membrane (the trachealis muscle), and fibrous connective tissues
stretching between the cartilage rings (annular ligaments). The tracheal lumen is covered by a
pedicles provide a segmental vascular supply to the trachea.
2. List the clinical signs in animals with a tracheal lesion requiring resection and
anastomosis.
·Dyspnea with noisy inspiratory (stertor) or wheezy expiratory (stridor) sounds
·Exercise intolerance
· Coughing (productive or with blood)
· Subcutaneous emphysema
· Cyanosis or syncopial episodes
· During hot weather, heat stress or stroke
3. What are the indications for tracheal resection and anastomosis?
· Any obstructive lesion of the lumen that results in a significant compromise in air
passage: neoplastic lesions, inflammatory lesions, and strictures
· Severe tracheal damage from trauma, bite wounds, or infectious processes
·Tracheal avulsion after trauma
4. List the most common neoplastic diseases of the canine or feline trachea.
· Tumors of cartilage (chondromas, osteochondromas, chondrosarcomas)
·Osteomas
·Osteosarcomas
·Leiomyomas
●Mast-cell tumors
·Adenocarcinomas
·Lymphosarcomas
· Squamous-cell carcinomas
· Chondromas
· Epidermal-cell cancers
5. What techniques are used for lesion localization?
Radiographs are useful for intraluminal lesions because the air within the lumen tends to
highlight intraluminal obstructions. Tracheoscopy is helpful for lesion localization and biopsy
(neoplastic or granulomatous lesions).
6. Describe the surgical approaches to the trachea.
 The cervical trachea is approached using a ventral midline incision. The trachea is found under
the sternohyoideus muscle. Care must be taken during retraction and dissection to avoid injury to the
  n  e    s   go s
100
TrachealResectionandAnastomosis
recurrent laryngeal nerve) and the segmental blood supply to the trachea. In many cases, the midline
cervical incision allows access to the trachea extending back to the second intercostal space. Incision
through the manubrium and a few cranial sternebrae (limited sternotomy) may allow resection of
Lesions closer to the tracheal bifurcation require a lateral thoracotomy for adequate
exposure. The trachea is approached through a left third or fourth intercostal incision. The third
intercostal space allows better exposure to the more proximal trachea, whereas the fourth space
permits better exposure to the bifurcation and distal trachea. Median sternotomy offers limited
exposure to the thoracic trachea and is especially difficult in large, deep-chested animals.
7. Name two methods of tracheal anastomosis.
1. Split ring technique: Using a sharp scalpel blade, the trachea is incised through the
cartilage rings, proximal and distal to the lesion. The anastomosis is performed by placing
a nonabsorbable, monofilament suture around the rings, gently apposing them. In most
cases, there is minimal telescoping of the distal portion into the larger proximal portion
 2. Annular ligament anastomosis: A suture is placed around the first cartilage ring on either
side of the incision.
8. Which method is preferred for tracheal resection and anastomosis?
Split ring technique. The annular ligament anastomosis technique created a greater amount
of luminal stenosis when evaluated 2 months after surgery compared with the split ring anasto-
motic technique.
9.Is there a preferred suturing technique for tracheal anastomosis?
plete, tissue apposition was improved and postoperative stenosis was decreased with an interrupt-
ed pattern. Long-lasting, monofilament, absorbable or nonabsorbable sutures can be used for
mosis is performed with a smaller suture (4-0). After anastomosis, the stay sutures are converted
into tension-relieving sutures by encircling a ring on either side of the incision.
10. How many tracheal rings can be removed?
Approximately 8-10 rings (25%) of the trachea can be resected in the adult dog. In juvenile
animals, the risk of postoperative stenosis is increased (most likely because of growth), and
Temoval of fewer nings is recommended.
11. Is tracheal resection and anastomosis considered a treatment for tracheal collapse?
No.
12. What factors should be considered relative to anesthesia and airway management in
dogs undergoing tracheal resection and anastomosis?
Animals in respiratory distress should be preoxygenated and closely monitored after pre-
medication admimistration. Smooth, rapid induction, along with the establishment of assisted
ventilation, is important. A wide selection of endotracheal tubes should be available for use
because the tracheal lesions may limit the size of endotracheal tubes that can be placed. Care is
taken to ensure that the endotracheal tube extends beyond the lesion or is proximal to the lesion
to avoid tube obstruction.
13. How does the patient get oxygen and anesthetic gases during resection and anastomosis?
Begin with preoperative planning in coordination with anesthetists.
1. The distal tracheal segment is intubated by the surgeon using a sterile endotracheal tube
from the surgical site.
TrachealResection and Anastomosis
101
 2. A long endotracheal tube is placed, and after a rapid resection of the affected area, the
endotracheal tube is manipulated into the distal tracheal segment across the incision site.
around the tube.
4. Various combinations of these techniques may be required.
14. What steps should be taken to help ensure an uneventful anesthetic recovery?
· Aspiration of blood/fluids from tracheal lumen
Supply supplemental oxygen (nasal oxygen)
· Adequate postoperative analgesia
15. Discuss the postoperative complications associated with tracheal resection and
anastomosis.
o    s e s  s sd s
edema can result in immediate postoperative respiratory distress. Laryngeal paralysis, secondary
to trauma to the recurrent laryngeal nerve, can be a major complicating factor in dogs and cats
during recovery. Swelling and occlusion of the anastomotic site could cause airway obstruction
Surgery on the trachea and suture placement within the tracheal lumen can also result in mucosta
sis. Failing to clear blood and mucus from the trachea after surgery can predispose the patient to
aspiration pneumonia.
Long-term complications include tracheal dehiscence as a result of vascular compromise
and airway obstruction secondary to stricture or granuloma formation. Granuloma formation has
been associated with the use of braided, nonabsorbable suture materials.
16. What are reasons for the postsurgical stricture formation?
1. Tension across the anastomosis site. Tension creates stenosis by promoting tracheal
elongation as a response to increased tensile forces. As the trachea elongates, tension
across the anastomotic site decreases, but the lumen diameter also decreases, forming a
stenoticarea
2. Poor apposition at the resection and anastomosis site. This is more commonly reported
with the annular ring anastomosis than with the split ring anastomosis technique.
17. List techniques that can be used for reducing tension across a tracheal incision.
· Limiting the number of tracheal rings resected
·● Use of tension sutures (using previously placed stay sutures)
· Annular ligament incisions (incise fibrous portion of annular ligament leaving mucosa
intact)
·Flexion neck harnesses
18. What techniques are used to treat postoperative tracheal strictures?
stents can be used to help delay the reformation of strictures. The usefulness of this therapy is
still debated. Severe tracheal strictures may require additional surgery (i.e., a second resection
and anastomosis). Concurrent use of corticosteroids to slow the formation of fibrous tissue and
Testricture is questionable but frequently a component of stricture management.
19. What is mucostasis?
Disruption of the mucociliary transport mechanism caused by respiratory disease, mucosal
pe sde siel inq ‘esoon sun un sde eus ssoioe 1nooo ueo josui 'sisouns 1o ‘enen
stenosis result in reduction of this cleansing action. Reduced mucus clearance increases the risk
ofrespiratoryinfections.
102
Thyroid Hgperplasia and Neoplasia
29. What clinical sign would be the most dramatic indication of a surgical dehiscence after
tracheal resection and anastomosis?
The formation of severe subcutaneous emphysema.
In patients with a dehiscence of an intrathoracic portion of the trachea, the development
of severe dyspnea is the primary clinical sign. This may indicate the development of a pneu
mothorax or possibly a life-threatening tension pneumothorax. Placement of a thoracostomy tube
and continuous suction are needed to manage such a complication. Diagnostic tests, including
undertaken to determine the cause and severity of the leakage. Immediate reoperation may be the
most prudent option because chances of spontaneous healing are slight in cases with significant
leakage. It is possible to see subcutaneous emphysema in cases of thoracic tracheal leakage
within the mediastinum. The air migrates through the thoracic inlet into the subcutaneous
tissues.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Fingland RB: Tracheal resection and anastomosis. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current technigues in small anima
surgery, Baltimore, 1996, Williams & wilkins.
2. Hardie E, Spodnick GI: Tracheal rupture in 16 cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc 214:508-512, 1999.
3. Mitchell SL: Tracheal rupture associated with intubation in cats: 20 cases (1996-1998). I Am Vet Med Assoc
216:1592-1595, 2000.
24. THYROID HYPERPLASIA AND NEOPLASIA
Sheidon Padgett, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the vascular supply to the thyroid gland in dogs?
The cranial thyroid artery (arising from the common carotid artery) is the primary arterial
supply; the caudal thyroid artery (a branch of the brachiocephalic trunk) also supplies the gland.
Each artery has a paired vein, which drains into the internal jugular vein.
2. Is the above anatomy also true for the cat?
No. The caudal thyroid artery is usually not present in the cat
3.  What are the indications for thyroid and parathyroid surgery?
Tumors.
        n a t
Ventral midline, proximal cervical exploratory just distal to the larynx between the ventral
 5. What are differences between thyroid tumors in dogs and cats?
Felinethyroid tumors
· Common
· Mostly benign (adenomatous hyperplasia)
· Functional
· Hyperthyroid
102
Thyroid Hgperplasia and Neoplasia
29. What clinical sign would be the most dramatic indication of a surgical dehiscence after
tracheal resection and anastomosis?
The formation of severe subcutaneous emphysema.
In patients with a dehiscence of an intrathoracic portion of the trachea, the development
of severe dyspnea is the primary clinical sign. This may indicate the development of a pneu
mothorax or possibly a life-threatening tension pneumothorax. Placement of a thoracostomy tube
and continuous suction are needed to manage such a complication. Diagnostic tests, including
undertaken to determine the cause and severity of the leakage. Immediate reoperation may be the
most prudent option because chances of spontaneous healing are slight in cases with significant
leakage. It is possible to see subcutaneous emphysema in cases of thoracic tracheal leakage
within the mediastinum. The air migrates through the thoracic inlet into the subcutaneous
tissues.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Fingland RB: Tracheal resection and anastomosis. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current technigues in small anima
surgery, Baltimore, 1996, Williams & wilkins.
2. Hardie E, Spodnick GI: Tracheal rupture in 16 cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc 214:508-512, 1999.
3. Mitchell SL: Tracheal rupture associated with intubation in cats: 20 cases (1996-1998). I Am Vet Med Assoc
216:1592-1595, 2000.
24. THYROID HYPERPLASIA AND NEOPLASIA
Sheidon Padgett, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the vascular supply to the thyroid gland in dogs?
The cranial thyroid artery (arising from the common carotid artery) is the primary arterial
supply; the caudal thyroid artery (a branch of the brachiocephalic trunk) also supplies the gland.
Each artery has a paired vein, which drains into the internal jugular vein.
2. Is the above anatomy also true for the cat?
No. The caudal thyroid artery is usually not present in the cat
3.  What are the indications for thyroid and parathyroid surgery?
Tumors.
        n a t
Ventral midline, proximal cervical exploratory just distal to the larynx between the ventral
 5. What are differences between thyroid tumors in dogs and cats?
Felinethyroid tumors
· Common
· Mostly benign (adenomatous hyperplasia)
· Functional
· Hyperthyroid
Thyroid Hyperplasia and Neoplasia
103
·Present with:
Weight loss
Hyperactivity
Polyphagia
Vomiting
 Polyuria and polydipsia
Poor hair coat
·Elevated liver enzymes
·Elevated thyroxine (T4) concentrations
Canine thyroid tumors
·Rare
· Mostly malignant (locally invasive, pulmonary metastasis)
·Nonfunctional
·Euthyroid
· Present with:
Ventral cervical mass (vascular)
Dysphagia
Dysphonia
6.  What are the therapeutic options for thyroid tumors in cats?
1. Antithyroid medication to block release of thyroid hormone
 Pro: No surgery (for patients unstable to undergo anesthesia, avoids complications of surgery)
Con: Lifelong daily medication, significant hematologic and gastrointestinal effects
 2. Radioactive iodine (131) to eradicate hyperplastic thyroid cells
 Pro: No surgery, spares nonhyperplastic tissue, usually curative
 Con: Availability of a nuclear medicine treatment facility, patient quarantine time varies
with state law
3. Surgical removal of hyperplastic tissue
Pro: Widely available, can be curative
Con: Complications with inadvertent parathyroidectomy, recurrence with incomplete
excision
 7. What are the chances for unilateral versus bilateral involvement in feline hyperthyroidism?
Approximately 30% of hyperthyroid cats have unilateral involvement versus 70% that have
bilateral involvement.
 8. Can one accurately diagnose unilateral or bilateral involvement at surgery?
Not always. Approximately 15% of thyroid glands that look normal at the time of surgery
contain adenomatous tissue. If a disease is truly unilateral, there should be atrophy of the normal
gland because of the autonomous release of thyroid hormone from the hyperplastic gland.
 9. How can one avoid the problems inherent in relying on gross evaluation of the feline
thyroid?
 Preoperative sodium pertechnetate (technetium) scanning demonstrates the location of
hyperplastic thyroid tissue. Technetium scanning also demonstrates functional ectopic tissue and
metastatic disease from thyroid adenocarcinomas.
10. What are the potential risks of surgical therapy for feline hyperthyroidism?
1. Postoperative hypoparathyroidism (commonest). If both external parathyroid glands are
accidentally removed or the vascularity to the glands is disrupted, postoperative hypocal-
cemia can ensue. This can be severe and life-threatening.
104
Thyroid Hyperplasia and Neoplasia
2. Anesthetic death. Hyperthyroid patients commonly have compromised cardiac function
because of tachycardia, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and myocardial sensitization to
catecholamines.
3. Damage to recurrent laryngeal nerve (rare). The recurrent laryngeal nerve lies close to
the thyroid gland; if this nerve is damaged, decreased function can lead to voice change
or laryngeal paralysis.
11. In what ways can the risks of treating feline hyperthyroidism be decreased?
Hypoparathyroidism:
· Use meticulous surgical technique in preserving the external parathyroid gland and the
associated vascularity.
· If bilateral thyroidectomy is needed, staging the procedure (performing two unilateral
thyroidectomies, allowing 2-3 weeks between) decreases incidence of postoperative
hypocalcemia.
· If both external parathyroid glands are inadvertently removed, one or both glands can be
transplanted to a muscle belly and become functional in 2-3 weeks.
Anesthesia:
[eversible).
· Treat tachycardia with appropriate b-blocker before anesthesia
·Use an anesthetic protocol that minimizes catecholamine-induced arrhythmias
(premedication with acepromazine, avoid ketamine and xylazine, thiobarbiturates for
induction, avoid methox yflurane and halothane as inhalant anesthetic).
Nerve damage:
·Use meticulous surgical technique.
12. In addition to surgery, what other options are available for treatment of thyroid
carcinomas in dogs?
·Dox orubicin
·Cisplatin
· Megavoltage irradiation
BIBLIOGRAPHY
s   r ss i o ui e ioun yo n ioy s uds  u 1
Assoc 34:109-112, 1998.
2. Klein MK, Powers BE, Withrwo SJ, et al: Treatment of thyroid carcinoma in dogs by surgical resection alone: 20
cases (1981-1989). J Am Vet Med 206:1007-1009, 1995.
3. Slater MR: Long-tem health and predictors of survival for hyperthyroid cats treated with iodine-131. I Vet Intem
Med 15:47-51, 2001
4. Theon AP: Prognostic factors with unresectable thyroid carcinomas in dogs treated with megavoltage irradliation.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1775-1779, 2000.
25. PARATHYROID TUMORS
James M. Fingeroth, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. In dogs and cats, how many parathyroid glands are present, and from what embryonic
structures are they derived?
Both species normally have four glands. Two are external to the thyroid gland (at the cranial
pole) and two are internal, within the thyroid parenchyma, caudally. They are derived from the
third and fourth pharyngeal (branchial) pouches (endoderm), which in the embryo/fetus is located
in the cranial thorax, and with development the glands migrate to their definitive cervical/thyroid
location. Consequentially, it is possible to have ectopic parathyroid gland tissue along the course
of this migration. This has clinical significance in both dogs and cats.
2. What are the functions of the parathyroid glands?
The parathyroid glands contain two cell types: the chief cells and oxyphils. Chief cells, in
Tesponse to lowered levels of calcium ions in the blood, secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH), which
acts with vitamin D on bone (osteoclasts), intestine, and the kidneys to increase ionized calcium
levels in the blood. PTH production is normally reduced by negative feedback when iomized calcium
by secretion of calcitonin by the parafollicular cells ("C-cells") of the thyroid glands. This balancing
mechanism is not sustained, however, since calcitonin is usually secreted only for short durations,
3. What is the most common clinical parathyroid gland problem in the cat?
Spontaneous parathyroid gland disease in cats is rare, although both hyper- and hypo
parathyroidism have been reported. The most common parathyroid gland abnormality seen in
is the result of removal or devascularization of the parathyroid glands during the operation.
4. What are the signs of feline iatrogenic hypoparathyroidism?
The loss of parathyroid function leads to inability to maintain calcium homeostasis. The
clinical consequence is hypocalcemia. Marked reduction of ionized calcium increases the excit-
ability of nerve fibers and muscle cells. Signs are related to increased nerve and muscle depolar-
ization. Neurologic signs could be peripheral or central. Twitching, fasciculations, irritability,
tachycardia, tetany, and seizures are reported in affected cats.
5. Do all cats that have inadvertent parathyroid gland removal/devascularization develop
iatrogenic hypoparathyroidism?
No. Even cats that have had the four normal glands removed may not develop signs or sero-
logic evidence of hypocalcemia. It is speculated that up to 35% of cats have functional ectopic
problem is identifying these cats preoperatively. Surgical thyroidectomy should therefore be done
with careful attention to identifying and preserving the external parathyroid glands and their
(e poiu euo un go youg) Addns poogg
6.  How soon can iatrogenic hypoparathyroidism be identified?
The reported half-life of parathyroid hormone (PTH) is 30 minutes. This would suggest that
signs should be seen quickly. Experimentally parathyroidectomized animals will have marked
106
Parathyroid Tumors
decreases in serum calcium levels within 4 hours. However, clinical experience demons trates that
tially assayed, since decreases in the serum calcium concentration occur sooner than overt clini
adding a vitamin D analog.
 7. What is the most common clinical parathyroid gland problem in the dog?
Spontaneous primary hyperparathyroidism is caused by a functional tumor in a parathyroid
gland. Tumors can be benign (adenomas) or malignant (carcinomas). Dogs can also get renal or
nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism, and more rarely, spontaneous hypoparathyroidism
8. What are the presenting signs of canine hyperparathyroidism?
Since parathyroid tumors are small, they typically do not induce local signs or become
detectable by routine physical examination (parathyroid tumors in cats may be palpable). The
classic tip-off is hypercalcemia. This may be found incidentally on a routine biochemical screen
of serum, but if prolonged, will tend to induce clinical signs. These signs include polydipsia/
polyuria, lethargy, weakness, urinary calculi, and in severe cases, pathologic fractures. In people,
the syndrome of hyperparathyroidi sm has been described as "stones, groans, and old bones." Cats
usually do not evidence polydipsia.
9. What are other causes of hypercalcemia?
associated with multicentric malignant lymphoma, anal sac adenocarcinoma, or multiple myelo-
ma. These tumors are postulated to produce a parathyroid-like hormone (PTH-related peptides),
neoplastic disease, including granulomatous disease, hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease),
and renal failure. Signalment may yield some clues. Dogs afflicted with primary hyperparathy-
of dogs that develop diseases such as lymphoma. The one established breed predilection for
primary hyperparathyroidism is in Keeshonds.
10. What does an elevated serum calcium mean?
The corrected calcium (factoring in the serum albumin level, since calcium is largely
protein-bound) should be calculated, or samples for determination of ionized calcium levels. As
with all abnormal laboratory tests, consider repeating the test to be sure it is not an error. If hyper-
calcemia is confirmed (hoofbeat), search first for the "horses" (lymphoma, anal sac tumor,
multiple myeloma, other malignancies) before considering "striped equids" such as primary
hyperparathyroidism.
11. How is it determined whether a dog has primary hyperparathyroidism?
The most useful test is assay of serum PTH levels. With pseudohyperparathyroidism, the
calcium levels are elevated because of some process occurring away from the parathyroid glands.
(elevated calcium) by decreasing their output of PTH. Some laboratories can assay for both PTH
and PTH-related peptide, which can be very helpful in establishing the correct pathophysiology
negative feedback response. Therefore, an elevated PTH signals either primary or secondary
hyperparathyroidism. Since the latter is uncommon in dogs (few dogs nowadays have such poor
diets that they develop nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism, and most dogs with renal
secondary hyperparathyroidism will have eucalcemia), the finding of an elevated PTH in a
hypercalcemic dog warrants a high index of suspicion for a parathyroid gland adenoma or
carcinoma
107
12. Can a parathyroid gland tumor be palpated in a dog?
In numerous reports no one has been able to palpate these tumors reliably.
13. How else can a parathyroid gland abnormality be examined preoperatively?
Experienced ultrasonographers visualize the parathyroid glands using a 10-MHz linear-
array high-resolution transducer. It is also possible to utilize scintigraphy and angiography, but
14. What is the treatment for primary hyperparathyroidism? Secondary
hyperparathyroidism?
With the former, it is typical for only one gland to be affected. In secondary hyperparathy-
Toidism, by definition, all the glands are hyperplastic. Uniglandular parathyroid tumors should be
surgically ablated.
15. What is the preoperative workup?
This would include a complete blood count, biochemistry screen that includes renal function
parameters, electrolytes and liver enzymes, urinalysis, chest radiographs (three projections) or
chest CT scan, electrocardiogram, possibly abdominal radiographs (to assess bone density in the
lumbar spine, and to look for evidence of urolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, or soft-tissue mineraliza-
tion secondary to an elevated calcium/phosphorus product), and possibly abdominal ultrasonog-
raphy (again to screen for urolithiasis). It is not uncommon for these patients to have some
compromised renal function, either as a consequence of advanced age or due to calcium-induced
16. How is hypercalcemia managed before anesthesia?
Diurese the patient with isotonic normal saline solution (0.9% NaCl) at approximately 3
times their calculated fluid maintenance requirements. Be sure to check cardiac function before
administering such high fluid rates, however. The saline will promote calciuresis. If the animal
has an elevated phosphorous level it may be prudent to utilize phosphate binders per os. Other
drugs can be used, too, including bisphosphonates, calcitonin, mithramycin, sodium EDTA, and
glucocorticoids. If renal function is compromised and the animal is azotemic or uremic, other
medical interventions (such as use of antacids, loop diuretics, and bicarbonate) may be warranted,
17. What are treatment options for parathyroid tumors?
The traditional treatment is surgical excision. Percutaneous ablation using alcohol injection
under ultrasonographic guidance has also been reported. The advantage of surgery is to more
fully visualize the tumor (if present), effect complete removal, obtain specimens for histopath
ology, and perform a more complete exploration in the rare instance of an ectopic parathyroid
gland tumor. The advantages of alcohol ablation are shortened anesthesia time, avoidance of
surgical risk, and reduced cost.
18. What is the best surgical approach?
subcutaneous tissues, and platysma muscle are incised and retracted bilaterally, exposing the
paired sternothyroid/sternohyoid ("strap") muscles. These are separated on the midline, and self-
retaining retractors are useful for maintaining exposure. The thyroid glands are visualized
at the cramial pole of the respective thyroid gland. They may be surrounded by a layer of adipose
tissue. If there is a tumor, the affected gland will appear grossly larger than the contralateral
  sn  o         
obscure), most reported parathyroid gland tumors affect the external glands, making them readily
108
Parathyroid Tumors
apparent. However, if the two external glands appear of equal and normal size, the thyroid glands
should be palpated to try and identify a tumor of the internal gland. If the tumor involves an
internal gland it can be removed either by enucleation (preserving the surrounding thyroid gland)
or by unilateral thyroidectomy, depending on its accessibility. External parathyroid gland tumors
are gently dissected away from the thyroid gland and capsule, and the afferent blood supply
ligated, clipped, or electrocoagulated while preserving the main trunk of the cranial thyroid
artery. Fine-tipped, bipolar electrocautery forceps are helpful for these dissections.
19. What are explanations for absence of an obvious tumor?
The tumor may be small and hard to grossly distinguish from the normal gland, there may
be an ectopic tumor, or the diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism may be incorrect. Of these,
an ectopic tumor is most likely. The exploration must be continued into the caudal aspect of the
neck and cranial mediastinum.
20. How can ectopic tissue be identified?
Preferential vital staining that occurs in hyperfunctional parathyroid glands when exposed
to intravenous Methylene Blue (IV MB) dye. The reason this occurs is not well known, but
parathyroid gland tissue will take on a dusky blue tone after IV MB. Hyperfunctional tissue will
stain more intensely, so an abnormal gland in its normal location or an ectopic gland should be
distinguishable from normal tissues.
21. Can laboratory New Methylene Blue be used in place of Methylene Blue?
NO! Methylene Blue, USP, is a sterile product packed for in vivo, intravenous use. It is not the
same as New Methylene Blue (NMB), and NMB is neither sterile nor safe for IV administration.
22. How is Methylene Blue administered?
A dose of up to 3 mg/kg is diluted in 250 ml of 0.9% saline solution and administered at the
normal intraoperative crystalloid fluid rate of approximately 10 ml/kg/hr. Staining will usually be
abnormal tissue is identified.
23. What are the potential negative consequences of using IV MB?
·Pseudocyanosis
· Renal toxicity
·Heinz body anemia
24. What are postoperative concerns following parathyroidectomy?
· Malignant or benign histologic diagnosis
·Hypocalcemia
25. What is the cause of postoperative hypocalcemia?
When there is a uniglandular functional tumor causing a syndrome primary hyperparathyroidism/
hypercalcemia, the other glands are responding appropriately to the negative feedback of high serum
calcium by shutting down production and release of PTH.
26. Are the signs of hypocalcemia in the dog the same as in cats?
They are, but one interesting tidbit observed in dogs is that they may develop signs of facial
pruritis.
27. How is rebound hypoparathyroidism managed?
If the hypocalcemia is persisting (months), a vitamin D analog is warranted.
Pulmonary Lobectomy
601
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Berger B, Feldman EC: Primary hyperparathyroidism in dogs: 21 cases (1976-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc
191:350-356, 1987.
2. Fingeroth JM, Smeak DD: Intravenous methylene blue infusion for intraoperative identification of parathyroid
gland tumors in dogs. Part I1l: Clinical trials and results in three dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:673-678, 1988.
3. Flanders JA: Parathyroid gland. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smalt aniat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002,
W.B. Saunders, pp 1711-1723.
4. Long CD, Goldstein RE, Homof WJ, et al: Percutaneous ultrasound-guided chemical parathyroid ablation for
treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:217-221, 1999.
6. Rosol TJ: Disorders of calcium: Hypercalcemia and hypocalcenia. In DiBartola SP, editor: Fluid therapy in smalt
animat practice,ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, W.B.Saunders, pp 108-162.
7. Wisner ER, Pennick D, Biller DS, et al: High-resolution parathyroid sonography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38:462-
466, 1997.
26. PULMONARY LOBECTOMY
Robin H. Holtsinger, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. List the indications for pulmonary lobectomy in the dog and cat.
·Primary pulmonary neoplasia
·Lung abscesses
· Pneumothorax resulting from bullae or cysts
·Severe pulmonary trauma
· Lung lobe torsion
2. What surgical approaches are commonly used for pulmonary lobectomy?
· Lateral intercostal thoracotomy
·Median sternotomy
 3. What are the advantages and disadvantages of each of these approaches?
· Lateral thoracotomy allows access to a limited (specific) region of the thorax, whereas
median sternotomy allows greater exposure to the entire thoracic cavity.
· Lateral thoracotomy is preferable to median sternotomy when access to the hilar or dorsal
thoracic regions is required.
· Both approaches carry similar rates of postoperative morbidity and compromise to the
patient's vital capacity.
 4. Which intercostal space is most commonly chosen for lateral thoracotomy to perform
pulmonary lobectomy?
The affected lung lobes are most commonly approached through a lateral 5th or 6th inter-
costal space thoracotomy; it allows the best access to the hilar region of all lung lobes. When in
doubt, one should choose the more caudal space because ribs are more readily retracted cranially
than caudally.
5.What two methods are most commonly used toperform pulmonary lobectomy?
1. Conventional lobectomy (isolation and transection of the airway and vasculature)
 2. Use of surgical stapling equipment
Pulmonary Lobectomy
601
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Berger B, Feldman EC: Primary hyperparathyroidism in dogs: 21 cases (1976-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc
191:350-356, 1987.
2. Fingeroth JM, Smeak DD: Intravenous methylene blue infusion for intraoperative identification of parathyroid
gland tumors in dogs. Part I1l: Clinical trials and results in three dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:673-678, 1988.
3. Flanders JA: Parathyroid gland. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smalt aniat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002,
W.B. Saunders, pp 1711-1723.
4. Long CD, Goldstein RE, Homof WJ, et al: Percutaneous ultrasound-guided chemical parathyroid ablation for
treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:217-221, 1999.
6. Rosol TJ: Disorders of calcium: Hypercalcemia and hypocalcenia. In DiBartola SP, editor: Fluid therapy in smalt
animat practice,ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, W.B.Saunders, pp 108-162.
7. Wisner ER, Pennick D, Biller DS, et al: High-resolution parathyroid sonography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38:462-
466, 1997.
26. PULMONARY LOBECTOMY
Robin H. Holtsinger, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. List the indications for pulmonary lobectomy in the dog and cat.
·Primary pulmonary neoplasia
·Lung abscesses
· Pneumothorax resulting from bullae or cysts
·Severe pulmonary trauma
· Lung lobe torsion
2. What surgical approaches are commonly used for pulmonary lobectomy?
· Lateral intercostal thoracotomy
·Median sternotomy
 3. What are the advantages and disadvantages of each of these approaches?
· Lateral thoracotomy allows access to a limited (specific) region of the thorax, whereas
median sternotomy allows greater exposure to the entire thoracic cavity.
· Lateral thoracotomy is preferable to median sternotomy when access to the hilar or dorsal
thoracic regions is required.
· Both approaches carry similar rates of postoperative morbidity and compromise to the
patient's vital capacity.
 4. Which intercostal space is most commonly chosen for lateral thoracotomy to perform
pulmonary lobectomy?
The affected lung lobes are most commonly approached through a lateral 5th or 6th inter-
costal space thoracotomy; it allows the best access to the hilar region of all lung lobes. When in
doubt, one should choose the more caudal space because ribs are more readily retracted cranially
than caudally.
5.What two methods are most commonly used toperform pulmonary lobectomy?
1. Conventional lobectomy (isolation and transection of the airway and vasculature)
 2. Use of surgical stapling equipment
110
Pulmonary Lobectomy
6. What are pulmonary ligaments and why are they important?
Pleural reflections that attach the caudal lung lobes to the caudal mediastinum and
diaphragm. Incision of these avascular ligaments facilitates mobilization of the lung lobes and
exposure of the hilus.
7. How is a conventional pulmonary lobectomy performed?
The hilar region is approached and the bronchus identified by palpation and dissection. The
pulmonary artery is isolated with right-angle forceps and triple-ligated, then divided between the
distal two ligatures. The lung lobe is then retracted dorsally, and the pulmonary vein is isolated
and double-clamped with vascular forceps. It is transected leaving a 3- to 5-mm stump. Multiple
overlapping interrupted horizontal mattress sutures are placed across the stump. The stump is
decreases air leakage from needle passage sites)
Half (50%) of total lung mass. Because of its relatively smaller volume, the entire left lung
can be removed if the right side is healthy. Conversely, acute removal of the entire right side is
likely to be fatal, although staged excision of a greater volume may be possible.
9. Which of the currently available surgical stapling equipment is most useful for
pulmonary lobectomy?
Most commonly used is the TA 30 linear vascular stapling device (United States Surgica
plifying lung lobectomy. The numeric designation refers to the length in millimeters of the staple
row placed after discharge. The staples usually occlude the pulmonary vessels satisfactorily, but
occasionally a residual leak from the bronchus necessitates hand suturing.
10. How is pulmonary lobectomy performed by stapling?
The tissue to be excised is placed in the jaws of the stapler, and they are closed. The approx -
Teleased, and the trigger is fired until it locks into the handle, sealing the tissue with staples. The
edge of the stapling device is then used as a cutting guide for a blade to transect the tissue distal
to the rows of staples. The jaws are released, and the instrument is removed. The stump is inspect-
ed closely for leakage. Additional sutures can be placed as needed.
11. When is partial lung lobectomy preferable to total lobectomy?
·Peripheral lobar lesions (such as pulmonary blebs or bullae)
· Tumor metastasis where complete lobectomy is not necessary
12. Name two methods of performing partial pulmonary lobectomy.
1.Surgical stapling using the TA 30 autostapler
2. Conventional partial lobectomy via a row of overlapping interrupted horizontal mattress
sutures and a simple continuous oversew with fine monofilament absorbable sutures on
a tapered needle
13. What are the advantages of the stapling technique in partial pulmonary lobectomy?
·Quicker
·Requires less tissue manipulation
·Results in less air leakage than hand-sewn partial lobectomy
Pulmonary Lobectomy
111
taken to ensure an uneventful postoperative course?
· The thorax is filled with warmed sterile saline and the surgical site evaluated during
positive-pressure ventilation for air leakage (particularly from the bronchial stump).
·A chest tube is always placed before closure.
· Chest tubes are aspirated frequently (every 2-4 hours), and the amount of air is quantitated.
· Chest tubes are generally removed in 24-48 hours if air is not accumulating in the pleural
space postoperatively.
15. When are most postoperative complications seen after pulmonary lobectomy?
Most occur within the critical 24-hour period after thoracotomy.
16. List the most common postoperative problems.
·Hypoventilation
·Hypoxemia
·Hypothermia
·Pain
17. What postoperative monitoring techniques are particularly helpful after lobectomy?
· Arterial blood gas measurement
· Respirometer to evaluate tidal volume
·Central venous pressure measurement
·Pulse oximetry
·Capnography
18. What does a Pa0, of <60 mm Hg suggest in a postlobectomy patient?
required.
19. When is surgical reexploration necessary postlobectomy?
When there is continuous leakage of air resulting from inadequate closure of the bronchial
stump or a tear in the pulmonary parenchyma (>500 ml of air per 24 hours), or significant
ongoing hemorrhage is obser ved. It is also important to rule out the primary incision and the chest
tube as potential sources of air leakage before surgery is repeated.
20. What is the prognosis for a dog with a pulmonary abscess associated with chronic
pneumonia?
Good, if the patient survives the critical perioperative period. There is a 20% perioperative mor-
tality rate, a 50% rate of resolution with surgery, and a 25% rate of recurrent or unresolved pneumonia.
21. What are the most common primary pulmonary neoplasms in the dog?
Pulmonary adenocarcinomas and alveolar carcinomas comprise 95% of primary lung tumors.
22. What is the prognosis for a dog with a primary neoplasm after pulmonary lobectomy?
 In patients in which complete excision has been performed and whose lymph nodes are free
of tumor, the median survival time is approximately 1 year. If there has already been spread of
tumor to the regional nodes, a median survival time of 2-3 months may be expected.
 23. What is the rationale for considering patients for pulmonary metastectomy via partial
lobectomy?
immunotherapy.
112
Chylothorax
24. Which lung lobe is most frequently involved in lung lobe torsion?
The right middle lung lobe.
25. What is the treatment of choice for this condition?
Lateral thoracotomy and lobectomy in situ is recommended to prevent the release of
sequestered endotoxin and other vasoactive substances into the systemic circulation.
26. In cases of spontaneous pneumothorax, what is the most commonly reported
histopathologic finding that causes the clinical signs?
Bullous emphysema, resulting in rupture of a bleb or bulla and accumulation of air in the
pleural space. Other reported associated conditions include heart worm disease (thromboembolic
events), neoplasia, and pneumonia.
27. What is the prognosis for dogs with spontaneous pneumothorax?
Guarded. Recurrence rates for dogs treated conservatively (thoracocentesis or tube thoracos
tomy) approach ≥80%, whereas those treated surgically have a 25% recurrence rate (other areas
of the lung may develop bullae that subsequently rupture).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Fossum TW: Surgery of the lower respiratory system: Lumgs and thoracic wall. In Fossum TW, editor: Smalt
animal surgery,ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp 760-788.
2. Holtsinger RH, Beale BS, Bellah JR: Spontaneous pneumothorax in the dog: A retrospective analysis of 21 cases.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:195-210, 1993.
3. Murphy ST: Pulmonary lobectomy in the management of pneumonia in five cats. I Sm Anim Pract 38:159-162,
1997.
4. Neath PI: Lung lobe torsion in dogs: 22 cases (1981-1999). I Am Vet Med Assoc 217:1041-104, 2000.
5. Nelson WA: Lumgs. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002, W.B.
Saunders, pp 880-888.
6. O'Brien MG, Straw RC, Withrow SJ: Resection of pulmonary metastases in canine osteosarcoma: 36 cases
(1983-1992). Vet Surg 22:105-109, 1993
 7. Puerto D: Surgical and nonsurgical management and risk factors for spontaneous pneumothorax in dogs. I Am
Vet Med Assoc 220:1670-1674, 2002.
27. CHYLOTHORAX
Dianne Dunning, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is chyle?
The milky fluid that is taken up by the lacteals from the digested food in the intestine. It consists
of droplets of triglyceride fat (chylomicrons) and typically contains >80% lymphocytes in a stable
emulsion. Normally, it passes into the veins by the thoracic duct, becoming mixed with blood
2. What constitutes a chylous effusion?
A chylous effusion develops when chyle from the cisterna chyli-thoracic duct system gains
access to the abdominal or (more commonly) pleural space.
112
Chylothorax
24. Which lung lobe is most frequently involved in lung lobe torsion?
The right middle lung lobe.
25. What is the treatment of choice for this condition?
Lateral thoracotomy and lobectomy in situ is recommended to prevent the release of
sequestered endotoxin and other vasoactive substances into the systemic circulation.
26. In cases of spontaneous pneumothorax, what is the most commonly reported
histopathologic finding that causes the clinical signs?
Bullous emphysema, resulting in rupture of a bleb or bulla and accumulation of air in the
pleural space. Other reported associated conditions include heart worm disease (thromboembolic
events), neoplasia, and pneumonia.
27. What is the prognosis for dogs with spontaneous pneumothorax?
Guarded. Recurrence rates for dogs treated conservatively (thoracocentesis or tube thoracos
tomy) approach ≥80%, whereas those treated surgically have a 25% recurrence rate (other areas
of the lung may develop bullae that subsequently rupture).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Fossum TW: Surgery of the lower respiratory system: Lumgs and thoracic wall. In Fossum TW, editor: Smalt
animal surgery,ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp 760-788.
2. Holtsinger RH, Beale BS, Bellah JR: Spontaneous pneumothorax in the dog: A retrospective analysis of 21 cases.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:195-210, 1993.
3. Murphy ST: Pulmonary lobectomy in the management of pneumonia in five cats. I Sm Anim Pract 38:159-162,
1997.
4. Neath PI: Lung lobe torsion in dogs: 22 cases (1981-1999). I Am Vet Med Assoc 217:1041-104, 2000.
5. Nelson WA: Lumgs. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002, W.B.
Saunders, pp 880-888.
6. O'Brien MG, Straw RC, Withrow SJ: Resection of pulmonary metastases in canine osteosarcoma: 36 cases
(1983-1992). Vet Surg 22:105-109, 1993
 7. Puerto D: Surgical and nonsurgical management and risk factors for spontaneous pneumothorax in dogs. I Am
Vet Med Assoc 220:1670-1674, 2002.
27. CHYLOTHORAX
Dianne Dunning, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is chyle?
The milky fluid that is taken up by the lacteals from the digested food in the intestine. It consists
of droplets of triglyceride fat (chylomicrons) and typically contains >80% lymphocytes in a stable
emulsion. Normally, it passes into the veins by the thoracic duct, becoming mixed with blood
2. What constitutes a chylous effusion?
A chylous effusion develops when chyle from the cisterna chyli-thoracic duct system gains
access to the abdominal or (more commonly) pleural space.
Chylothorax
113
Characteristics of Chylous Effusion
PARAMETER
FINDING
Color
White-to-pink, forms a cream layer when left to stand
Clarity
 Opaque; remains clear when centrifu ged
Specific gravity
1.019-1.050
Protein content
2.5-4.0 g/d1
Chylomicrons
Present
Total wBC/μl
1650-24,420 μ/l
 Predominant cell type
Lymphocytes or neutrophils
Trigl yceride content
>Serum
Cholesterol content
Serum
Sudanophilic fat globules
Present
Ether clearance
Clears
WBC; White blood cells.
 3. What is the cisterna chyli and where is it located in the dog and cat?
The thoracic duct is a cranial continuation of the cisterna chyli, which is an elongated
saccular reservoir receiving lymph from the lumbar and mesenteric lymphatic trunks. In the dog,
the cisternal chyli is sublumbar to vertebrae L1-L4, to the right of the dorsal aspect of the aorta,
and is bordered laterally by the crura of the diaphragm. In the cat, the cisterna chyli is located
ventral to T 13-L4 and is bipartite with a large saccular portion dorsal to the aorta and a plexiform
portion ventral to the aorta.
4.List common conditions associatedwith chylothorax.
· Idiopathic
·Thoracic duct ectasia
· Thoracic duct rupture
· Cranial vena cava obstruction
·Heartwom disease
·Restrictive pericarditis
·Cardiomyopathy
·Neoplasia (mediastinal lymphoma)
· Lung lobe torsion
· Diaphragmatic hernia
● Fungal pulmonary infections (blastomycosis)
· Long-term jugular catheter use
5. What are possible causes of chylothorax?
The exact etiology of chylothorax is unknown. Chylothorax may be secondary to conditions
that cause obstruction of the thoracic duct or prevent lymph flow to venous circulation, leading
to lymphatic hypertension, dilation, and subsequent transmural leakage of chyle. Experimental
and clinical studies in dogs with idiopathic chylothorax reveal lymphangiectasia (dilation) of the
mediastinal and pleural lymphatics consistent with aberrant lymphatic flow or obstruction
6. Which breeds are at risk for chylothorax?
Typical signalment includes a middle-aged to older animal of any breed. Afghans, Sheba
Inus, Siamese, and Himalayans appear to have an increased risk. Sheba Inus may present early,
at <l year of age.
114
Chylothorax
7. What is the typical history for a dog or cat with chylothorax?
A vague history of coughing refractory to empiric medical management before the onset of
 8. Describe the typical presenting signs.
The most common presentation is dyspnea. Increased bronchovesicular sounds may be aus-
cultated dorsally, with absent heart and lung sounds present ventrally. In addition to compromised
respiration, chronic chylothorax may also result in the debilitation of the animal because of the
loss of large amounts of proteins, fats, fat-soluble vitamins, and lymphocytes into the thoracic
cavity. Common electrolyte abnormalities include hyperkalemia and hyponatremia.
9. How is the diagnosis of chylothorax best established?
and may be confirmed via thoracocentesis and analysis of the fluid. Given the multitude of dis-
eases associated with chylothorax, further diagnostic evaluations, including radiography, ultra-
sonography, fluid culture and sensitivity, and echocardiography, are recommended to identify an
underlying primary disease condition. If no underlying pathology is identified, the diagnosis of
idiopathic chylothorax is made.
10. Discuss the medical therapy for idiopathic chylothorax.
The goal is to provide for the nutritional and metabolic needs of the patient until the effusion
low-fat diet.
· Pleural drainage—alleviates signs of respiratory distress
·Dietary management:
Low-fat diets reduce the lipid content of the effusion, but do not seem to decrease the
volume
 Medium-chain triglycerides (MCT) may be used to supplement the caloric content of the
low-fat diet and are directly absorbed into the venous system.
by the complete bypass of gastrointestinal tract
· Phamaceuticals
Diuretics (furosemide) are not effective, may lead to dehydration, and are not
recommended.
Steroids may decrease inflammation and pleuritis, enabling more effective fluid
resorption and prevent fluid formation; however, no scientific evidence is available to
support this assumption.
11. What is rutin?
A benzopyrone compound extracted from the fruit of the Brazilian Fava D'Anta (Dimor-
phandra) tree. In humans, it is used with mixed success in medical management of lymphedema
associated with axillary lymph node extraction necessitated by metastatic breast cancer and ele-
phantiasis caused by filarial disease. The overall conclusion within the human literature regarding
the use of rutin in lymphedema is that it is safe, of variable effectiveness, but slow to work (months
to years). Successful treatment of feline patients has been recently reported. Currently, there are two
types of benzopyrones therapeutically in use in human and veterinary medicine: coumarin deriva
tives (benzoopyrones) and flavone derivatives (benzoopyrones). Rutin is a flavone derivative and
available as a nutrapharmaceutical, sometimes referred to as a bioflavonoid.
12. List the proposed mechanisms of action of rutin and benzopyrone compounds.
·Reduces leakage from blood vessels
·Increases protein removal by lymphatic vessels
Chylothorax
115
· Increases phagocytosis via stimulation of macrophages
s   o   s
· Increases proteolysis and removal from tissues
13. When are animals with idiopathic chylothorax considered surgical candidates?
Absolute indications for surgery have not been established in veterinary medicine. However,
surgery is usually considered if a patient fails to respond to medical management after 10-14
days. Other indications for surgery include a loss of chyle >20 ml/kg/day over a 5-day period or
if the animal displays severe protein-calorie malnutrition and hypoproteinemia
14. List the surgical options for chylothorax.
· Thoracic duct ligation
·Pleurodesis
· Active pleurovenous and pleuroperitoneal shunting
·Passive pleuroperitoneal shunting
· Omental pedicle drainage
15. What is the difference in surgical approaches between dogs and cats with chylous effusion?
Chyle is transported from the intestines to the venous system via the thoracic duct on the
right side in dogs and on the left side of the thoracic cavity in cats. Because of the anatomic dif-
ferences in location, the thoracic duct is approached through a right thoracotomy in dogs and a
left thoracotomy in cats, at the 1Oth or llth intercostal space. An abdominal approach is also
described for cats.
16. What does thoracic duct ligation involve?
Some authors ad vocate identification and dissection of the thoracic duct and all its branches
others recommend en bloc ligation of mediastinal tissues dorsal to aorta.
17. How is successful thoracic duct surgery defined?
Complete resolution of the chylous effusion.
18. What is the success rate of thoracic duct ligation?
For dogs and cats, 20-60%, with more recent studies quoting 59% for dogs and 53% for cats
of 16 dogs, 5 years after successful surgical ligation of the thoracic duct, so initial "successful"
results should be viewed with caution.
19. What preoperative and postoperative studies are required for thoracic duct ligation?
Preoperative and postoperative positive contrast lymphangiography. However, immediate
postoperational ligation studies must be carefully interpreted as dissection of the tissues around
the duct without ligation has been shown to impair lymph flow and thus may be a deceptive
method for determining complete duct ligation.
20. How is Methylene Blue used in surgery to delineate the thoracic duct and ensure
complete ligation?
The dye (0.5-1.0 ml) is injected into an adjacent mesenteric lymphatic or lymph node that
drainage into the chest via the thoracic duct or any of its tributaries.
21. What is pleurodesis?
A method of treating pleural effusion by inducing diffuse adhesions between parietal and
visceral pleura.
116
Chuylothorax
22. How is pleurodesis performed?
1. Chemical pleurodesis uses agents such as tetracycline, quinacrine hydrochloride,
bleomycin, fluorouracil, and talc. Because of its safety and effectiveness, tetracycline has
been the drug of choice used in both veterinary and human medicine for many years. But
as a result of its decreasing availability, alternative methods of chemical pleurodesis,
such as talc, are under investigation
2. Mechanical pleurodesis is performed by rubbing a dry gauze sponge on the parietal
pleurae.
23. What is the difference between active and passive shunts?
created by a manual pump into a large abdominal vein or the peritoneal cavity, where
it is absorbed. The inflow tube is placed in thorax, which is connected to a pump cham
ber placed subcutaneously over a rib. The outflow tube is placed in a large abdominal
vein (such as the caudal vena cava or azygous) or free floating within the abdominal
cavity.
peritoneal cavity via fenestrations in the diaphragm. Silastic mesh implants are most com
monly employed; however, long-term patency may be compromised because of adher-
ence of liver or omentum.
24. When are shunts contraindicated?
· All shunting techniques are contraindicated with sepsis.
·Most shunting techniques are not effective in cats because of their small size.
· Pleuroperitoneal shunts have been shown to be ineffective when there are disease
processes present that impair absorption from the peritoneal cavity, such as right-sided
heart failure or diffuse lymphatic disease.
25.How is the omentum used to treat chylothorax?
An omental pedicle is advanced into the thoracic cavity for a physiologic drain and preven.
tion of chyle accumulation via its adherent and granulation properties.
26. Why would anyone ever want to peel a lung?
Peeling refers to decortication of a lung lobe, a process performed when restrictive or con-
strictive pleunitis exists, a condition seen more commonly in cats than dogs. Decortication
invol ves the removal of the fibrous adhesions coating the surface of the lung, restricting its ex pan-
sion and limiting air exchange. This procedure is associated with severe hemorrhage, persistent
pneumothorax, and a high incidence of morbidity and mortality.
27. Can one treat chylothorax with Superglue?
through a catheter in a mesenteric lymphatic duct. Fluoroscopic monitoring is performed during
embolization to prevent excessive amounts of this embolic compound from entering the vena
cava. Complete obstruction of thoracic duct has been reported in the experimental and clinical
setting, eliminating the need for a thoracotomy.
28. What are the complications that occur after thoracic duct ligation and embolization?
Recurrence of the original effusion or the appearance of a persistent nonchylous effusion.
Recurrence of the chylous effusion is associated with the incomplete ligation of the thoracic duct
inal cavities. The development of a nonchylous effusion after thoracic duct ligation is a direct
result of the inflammation associated with the residual pleuritis.
ThoracicWallResection andReconstruction
117
CONTROVERSY
29. Is surgery a reasonable treatment for animals with idiopathic chylothorax?
There is considerable debate whether any animal is a surgical candidate, given the multitude of
primary disease conditions associated with chylothorax, the relatively low success rate (approximately
60%) with thoracic duct ligation, and the potential of recurrence because of the extensive arborization
of the lymphatic system. Some clinicians advocate only medical management for the treatment for
however, early surgical intervention has been proposed as a means to prevent constrictive pleuritis, to
which cats seem particularly sensitive. With chronic effusion, cats develop severe constrictive pleural
fibrosis that compromises pulmonary function with chronic effusion from the imritative effects of chyle.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Birchard SJ, Smeak DD: Treatment of idiopathic chylothorax in dogs and cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc. 212:652-
657, 1998.
2. Hawkins EC, Fossum TW: Medical and surgical management of pleural effusion. In: Keen BW, Lehmkuhl LB,
editors: Kirk's current veterinary therapy Xff, Philadelphia, 2000, W.B. Saunders, pp 819-825
3. Jerram RM, Fossum TW: Efficacy of mechanical abrasion and talc slurry as methods of pleurodesis in nomal
dogs. Vet Surg 28:322-332, 1999.
4. Kovak JR, Ludwig LL: Use of thoracoscopy to determine the etiology of pleural effusion in dogs and cats: 18
cases (1998-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:990-994, 2002.
5. LaFond E, Weinrich WE: Omentalization of the thorax for treatment of idiopathic chylothorax with constrictive
pleuritis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:74-78, 2002.
6. Monnet E: Pleura and pleural space. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery,ed 3, Philadelphia,
2003, W.B. Saunders, pp 387-405
7. Smeak DD, Birchard SJ: Treatment of chronic pleural effusion with pleuroperitoneal shunts in dogs: 14 cases
(1985-1999). J Amm Vet Med Assoc 219:1590-1597.
8. Thompson MS, Cohn LA, Jordan RC: Use of rutin for medical management of idiopathic chylothorax in cats.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:345-348, 1999.
9. Williams IM, Niles JD: Use of omentum as a physiologic drain for treatment of chylothorax in a dog. Vet Surg
28:61-65, 1999.
28. THORACIC WALL RESECTION AND
RECONSTRUCTION
D. Michael Tillson, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1.List the indications for thoracic wall reconstruction.
·En bloc resection of neoplastic diseases
· En bloc resection for chronic infections (bacterial or mycotic)
·Severe chest wall trauma
·Congenital defects
2. What is en bloc resection?
Removal of large portions of tissues without regard to tissue planes, intralesional dissection,
or preservation of structures. When a chest wall mass is removed en bloc, the mass is removed
and deep muscle layers, involved ribs and a rib craniad and caudad to the mass, intercosta
muscles, and the pleura. Extension of the disease into the thoracic cavity may result in adhesions
or local tumor metastasis requiring debridement or removal of pulmonary tissue as well.
ThoracicWallResection andReconstruction
117
CONTROVERSY
29. Is surgery a reasonable treatment for animals with idiopathic chylothorax?
There is considerable debate whether any animal is a surgical candidate, given the multitude of
primary disease conditions associated with chylothorax, the relatively low success rate (approximately
60%) with thoracic duct ligation, and the potential of recurrence because of the extensive arborization
of the lymphatic system. Some clinicians advocate only medical management for the treatment for
however, early surgical intervention has been proposed as a means to prevent constrictive pleuritis, to
which cats seem particularly sensitive. With chronic effusion, cats develop severe constrictive pleural
fibrosis that compromises pulmonary function with chronic effusion from the imritative effects of chyle.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Birchard SJ, Smeak DD: Treatment of idiopathic chylothorax in dogs and cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc. 212:652-
657, 1998.
2. Hawkins EC, Fossum TW: Medical and surgical management of pleural effusion. In: Keen BW, Lehmkuhl LB,
editors: Kirk's current veterinary therapy Xff, Philadelphia, 2000, W.B. Saunders, pp 819-825
3. Jerram RM, Fossum TW: Efficacy of mechanical abrasion and talc slurry as methods of pleurodesis in nomal
dogs. Vet Surg 28:322-332, 1999.
4. Kovak JR, Ludwig LL: Use of thoracoscopy to determine the etiology of pleural effusion in dogs and cats: 18
cases (1998-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:990-994, 2002.
5. LaFond E, Weinrich WE: Omentalization of the thorax for treatment of idiopathic chylothorax with constrictive
pleuritis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:74-78, 2002.
6. Monnet E: Pleura and pleural space. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery,ed 3, Philadelphia,
2003, W.B. Saunders, pp 387-405
7. Smeak DD, Birchard SJ: Treatment of chronic pleural effusion with pleuroperitoneal shunts in dogs: 14 cases
(1985-1999). J Amm Vet Med Assoc 219:1590-1597.
8. Thompson MS, Cohn LA, Jordan RC: Use of rutin for medical management of idiopathic chylothorax in cats.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:345-348, 1999.
9. Williams IM, Niles JD: Use of omentum as a physiologic drain for treatment of chylothorax in a dog. Vet Surg
28:61-65, 1999.
28. THORACIC WALL RESECTION AND
RECONSTRUCTION
D. Michael Tillson, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1.List the indications for thoracic wall reconstruction.
·En bloc resection of neoplastic diseases
· En bloc resection for chronic infections (bacterial or mycotic)
·Severe chest wall trauma
·Congenital defects
2. What is en bloc resection?
Removal of large portions of tissues without regard to tissue planes, intralesional dissection,
or preservation of structures. When a chest wall mass is removed en bloc, the mass is removed
and deep muscle layers, involved ribs and a rib craniad and caudad to the mass, intercosta
muscles, and the pleura. Extension of the disease into the thoracic cavity may result in adhesions
or local tumor metastasis requiring debridement or removal of pulmonary tissue as well.
118
ThoracicWall Resection and Reconstruction
3. Which tumors are most commonly associated with the thoracic wall?
·Osteosarcoma
·Chondrosarcoma
4. Which of these tumors has a better prognosis?
Chondrosarcoma (10.7 months versus 3.3 months for osteosarcoma)
 5. State the goals of thoracic wall reconstruction.
·Restoration of thoracic cavity stability
·Creation of an air-tight cavity
6.  Why is restoration of thoracic wall stabiity important?
enlarges the thoracic cavity and creates a lower intrathoracic pressure. This pressure differential
allows air movement into the lungs and al veoli. Unstable chest wall conditions (paradoxic chest
wall movement) compromise respiration.
7. List several options for thoracic wall reconstruction.
· Primary closure with autogenous tissues
·Diaphragmatic advancement
· Reconstruction using prosthetic materials
8.  Are there limits to the size of an en bloc resection?
Resection ≤ 6 nibs.
 9. List the advantages and disadvantages using autogenous tissues for thoracic wall
closure.
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
 Fewer complications
 Increased surgery and anesthesia time
Low cost
Reduced margins because of fear of incomplete closure
Use of viable muscle tissues
Inadequate resection and contamination of flap tissues
10. What muscles are available for muscle flap elevation?
Although any of the thoracic wall muscles can be used for wound reconstruction, the latis-
simus dorsi muscle is preferred. The latissimus dorsi muscle is triangular, with the broad base
originating from thoracolumbar fascia and the last ribs. Although some of the blood supply is
ligated in raising the flap, the muscle can survive on the cranial vascular supply. The muscle can
be released and rotated ventrally to close large defects.
11. What is diaphragmatic advancement?
Diaphragmatic advancement is the release and cramiad movement of the diaphragmatic edge
(crus). This repositioning practically changes the defect resulting from mass resection from a
defect in the thoracic wall to an abdominal wall defect.
12. How does diaphragmatic advancement play a role in thoracic wall reconstruction?
implantation or muscle flap elevation and advancement.
ThoracicWall Resection andReconstruction
611
13. List the advantages and the disadvantages in performing a diaphragmatic advance-
ment for the repair of a chest wall defect.
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
Technical ease
Decrease in thoracic cavity
Autogenous tissue
Decrease in tidal volume and lung capacity
Basic instrumentati on
Good cosmesis
14. Can diaphragmatic advancement be used to convert any thoracic wall defect?
No. The diaphragm can be advanced only a certain distance without compromising respira-
tory function. A general guideline is diaphragmatic advancement can be used in resection of the
caudal thoracic wall (ribs 9 to 13),
15. What synthetic materials can be used in thoracic wall reconstruction?
 Pol ypropylene and polyethylene, nonreactive, nonabsorbable materials that maintain a high
tensile strength, which are woven into mesh sheets. The open weave allows for ingrowth of
fibrous tissue into the mesh. The inherent rigidity of the meshes and the ingrowth of fibrous tissue
into the mesh weave help to restore chest wall stability. The primary disadvantages of the
synthetic meshes are cost of the material and handling qualities. Closure of large wounds using
grafts, or molded methyl methacrylate) is reported in the veterinary literature. Other materials,
including Silastic sheets, Dacron, and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) patches, have been used to
close thoracic wall defects. The flexible nature of these materials makes them less effective in
reestablishing the rigidity of the chest wall unless combined with other materials
( s   n  s  r i  o a 
Biosyt SIS). Available in single and multiple layers, these products provide a biologic matrix for
ingrowth of surrounding tissues. Although their flexibility when moistened can make handling
difficult, acellular collagen sheets offer another option for sealing large thoracic wounds
16. How is the mesh used?
After the mesh is correctly sized, it is sutured in place using simple interrupted or mattress-
type sutures (monofilament, nonabsorbable). In closing thoracic wall defects, mesh is secured to
the dorsal and ventral ribs using circumcostal sutures cranially and caudally and mattress sutures
in the intercostal spaces. Care must be taken to avoid damaging the intercostal vascular structures.
Any locally available soft tissues are used to cover the mesh and allow for final wound closure.
Some surgeons cover both sides of mesh with vascular tissue to decrease adhesion formation and
increase the chances of viable skin coverage. The omentum is the most widely described tissue
allowing for suture placement closer to the mesh edge.
17. How is omentum used to cover the implanted mesh?
1. A paracostal incision is made, and the abdomen is entered with a flank approach. The
omentum is grasped and pulled into the subcutaneous tissues. A subcutaneous tunnel is
created to allow the omentum to be advanced to the thoracic wall defect. The omentum
is then placed over and around the mesh and sutured in place.
 2. A small diaphragmatic incision is created for passage of the omentum. This approach requires
an abdominal incision because gentle manipulation is used to maintain omental blood supply
120
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
 In both cases, minimal closure is performed to avoid placing sutures around or through major
omental vessels, and herniation is possible.
18. Are infections common after the implantation of synthetic materials?
No.
19. What routine precautions should be taken for prosthetic mesh implantation?
· Perioperative administration of a broad-spectrum antibiotic
· Debridement of the surgical field before prosthetic implantation
· Wound closure with elimination of dead space
· Limited use of drains in the postoperative period
· Reduced exposure of the mesh to the environment before implantation
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Current techniques in small animat surgery, Baltimore, 1996, Williams & Wilkins.
2. Bowman KLT, Birchard SJ: Complications associated with the implantation of polypropylene mesh in dogs and
cats: A retrospective study of 21 cases (1984-1996). I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:225-233, 1998
3. Johnson KA: Methylmethacrylate and polypropylene mesh for reconstruction of a thoracic wall defect. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumato1 6:62-65, 1993.
4. Matthiesen DT, Clark GN: En bloc resection of primary rib tumors in 40 dogs. Vet Surg 21:201-204, 1992.
29. PATENT DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS
Joanne N. Franks, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the ductus arteriosus?
A normal fetal blood vessel connecting the main pulmonary artery and the aorta. The vessel
allows shunting of blood away from the fetal lungs, into the systemic circulation, and normally
closes shortly after birth.
2. What triggers the shunt to close?
At birth, a sudden increase in oxygen tension in the systemic circulation leads to smooth
muscle contraction in the vessel wall, resulting in a physiologic closure. Over time fibrosis
occurs, creating the ligamentum arteriosum.
 3. What are the consequences of the ductus arteriosus remaining patent?
The shunt allows blood to circulate from the aorta to the pulmonary artery, causing pul-
4. Describe the cardiac effects of a PDA.
Volume overload to the left side of the heart causes left ventricular dilation, stretching of the
mitral annulus, and mitral regurgitation.
5. What happens if a PDA is uncorrected?
Mitral regurgitation worsens the left-sided volume overload, resulting in eventual congestive
heart failure, pulmonary edema, and death. Of dogs with uncorrected PDAs, 70% die of
120
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
 In both cases, minimal closure is performed to avoid placing sutures around or through major
omental vessels, and herniation is possible.
18. Are infections common after the implantation of synthetic materials?
No.
19. What routine precautions should be taken for prosthetic mesh implantation?
· Perioperative administration of a broad-spectrum antibiotic
· Debridement of the surgical field before prosthetic implantation
· Wound closure with elimination of dead space
· Limited use of drains in the postoperative period
· Reduced exposure of the mesh to the environment before implantation
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Current techniques in small animat surgery, Baltimore, 1996, Williams & Wilkins.
2. Bowman KLT, Birchard SJ: Complications associated with the implantation of polypropylene mesh in dogs and
cats: A retrospective study of 21 cases (1984-1996). I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:225-233, 1998
3. Johnson KA: Methylmethacrylate and polypropylene mesh for reconstruction of a thoracic wall defect. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumato1 6:62-65, 1993.
4. Matthiesen DT, Clark GN: En bloc resection of primary rib tumors in 40 dogs. Vet Surg 21:201-204, 1992.
29. PATENT DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS
Joanne N. Franks, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the ductus arteriosus?
A normal fetal blood vessel connecting the main pulmonary artery and the aorta. The vessel
allows shunting of blood away from the fetal lungs, into the systemic circulation, and normally
closes shortly after birth.
2. What triggers the shunt to close?
At birth, a sudden increase in oxygen tension in the systemic circulation leads to smooth
muscle contraction in the vessel wall, resulting in a physiologic closure. Over time fibrosis
occurs, creating the ligamentum arteriosum.
 3. What are the consequences of the ductus arteriosus remaining patent?
The shunt allows blood to circulate from the aorta to the pulmonary artery, causing pul-
4. Describe the cardiac effects of a PDA.
Volume overload to the left side of the heart causes left ventricular dilation, stretching of the
mitral annulus, and mitral regurgitation.
5. What happens if a PDA is uncorrected?
Mitral regurgitation worsens the left-sided volume overload, resulting in eventual congestive
heart failure, pulmonary edema, and death. Of dogs with uncorrected PDAs, 70% die of
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
121
congestive heart failure and arrhythmias before a year of age, although another recent study found
40% of dogs were older than I year at initial presentation to a referral hospital.
6. Describe a “reverse" PDA.
In a reverse PDA, blood is shunted from the right side (pulmonary artery) to the left side (aorta)
7. Why do reverse PDAs develop?
Reverse PDAs may be congenital (persistent pulmonary hypertension after birth) or
acquired. A left-to-right PDA may reverse over time because of secondary changes in the pul-
monary vasculature resulting in pulmonary hypertension. Chronic increased pulmonary blood
flow causes medial hypertrophy and intimal proliferation, narrowing the small pulmonary ves-
sels. Vascular compliance decreases, resistance increases, and pulmonary hypertension develops.
This leads to higher pressure on the pulmonary side of the shunt, and the flow through the PDA
changes to right-to-left.
8. Are reverse PDAs common?
No. The reported incidence ranges from 1% to 6% of PDAs.
9. Diagram the circulatory pathways of left-to-right and right-to-left PDAs.
Body
Body
RV
RV
PDA
Ao
PA
Ao
PA
PDA
LV
Lungs
Lungs
Left-to-Right
Right-to-Left
PDA
PDA
ductus arteriosus.
10. Name the breeds that are predisposed to PDA.
German shepherd, Cavalier King Charles spaniel, Maltese, Pomeranian, Sheltie, English
springer spaniel, keeshoden, bichon frises, miniature and toy poodle, Yorkshire terrier, border collie.
11. Contrast clinical signs associated with standard and reverse PDAs.
Young animals with left-to-right shunts are usually asymptomatic, and the condition is
detected on a routine physical exam. In older animals, signs are referable to cardiac enlargement or
122
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
reverse PDA include exercise intolerance, hindlimb weakness, collapse, lethargy, and seizures.
12. Describe physical exam findings for a dog with a PDA.
heart base, palpable cardiac thnll, hyper kinetic ("bounding") femoral pulses, due to a large gradi
13. What are clinical abnormalities associated with a reverse PDA?
Differential cyanosis, hypoxemia. Dogs may have a systolic murmur or none.
14. What is differential cyanosis and why does it occur?
Cyanosis in the rear limb toenail beds and prepuce or vulva, but the oral mucous membranes
are normal. The ductus is anatomically located caudal to the origin of the brachycephalic trunk and
left subclavian arteries. Therefore oxygenated and nonoxygenated blood mix in the descending aorta
15. What is the most common laboratory abnormality in patients with a reverse PDA and
why? What are the consequences of the abnormality?
causes hyperviscosity and sludging of blood, and poor oxygen delivery to capillary beds
16. List the diagnostic tests that may be used to confirm the diagnosis of standard or
reverse PDA, and describe the most common abnormalities associated with each.
·Thoracic radiography: cardiomegaly, left atrial and ventricular enlargement, pulmonary
overcirculation, dilation of the descending aorta on the dorsoventral view. A reverse PDA
shows biventricular enlargement, dilated main pulmonary artery, and enlarged and tortu-
ous lobar pulmonary arteries.
·Electrocardiography: tall R waves (>2.5 m V), deep Q waves, and wide P waves. Atrial
fibrillation in advanced cases.
· Echocardiography: left ventricular dilation and hypertrophy, left atrial enlargement,
pulmonary artery dilation, increased aortic ejection velocity, mitral regurgitation
Concurrent cardiac defects were found in 10% of cases. With a reverse PDA there will be
right ventricular dilation and turbulent flow in the pulmonary artery as seen with Doppler
sonography.
17. What is the “saline bubble' test?
A diagnostic procedure that assists in diagnosis of a reverse PDA. While the descending
shunt is present, bubbles (which would normally be dispersed in the pulmonary vasculature) will
be visualized in the aorta.
18. How can PDAs be treated?
· Dissection and ligation via thoracotomy—most common
·Ligation and division via thoracotomy—performed due to ductal rupture during
attempted ligation, or to treat recanalization
·Hemoclip occlusion via thoracotomy
· Intravascular coil occlusion
19. Describe ligation via thoracotomy.
A left fourth-space intercostal thoracotomy is performed. The vagus nerve is identified,
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
123
is used to isolate the vessel. A loop of silk or monofilament nonabsorbable suture is passed medial
to the ductus and divided to create two ligatures. Each ligature is tied, aortic side first. Alterna-
tively, one or more hemoclips can be used to occlude the ductus without the need to perform dis-
section around the medial wall.
20. What is the Jackson-Henderson ligation technique?
This technique allows ligation of the PDA without dissecting the medial side. The goal is to
prevent hemorrhage from the medial wall of the ductus. The mediastinal pleura dorsal to the aorta
is incised and dissection is performed over and around the right (medial) side of the aorta and
aortic arch. An instrument is passed from ventral to dorsal under the right side of the aorta cranial
to the ductus, and a loop of suture is drawn around the aorta. The instrument is then passed in the
same direction just caudal to the ductus. The ends of the suture dorsal to the aorta are pulled
around the aorta, to engage the medial aspect of the ductus between the aorta and pulmonary
artery. The suture is divided and the PDA is double ligated. In a recent study, there was no signifi-
cant difference between the two surgical techmiques in terms of survival, occurrence of hemor-
rhage (8.3% as compared to 12.2% for standard ligation), or residual shunting.
21.What are the potential complications of surgery?
 Intraoperative hemorrhage, residual ductal flow, and recanalization of the ductus postoper-
atively. Postoperative rupture of an aortic aneurysm has also been reported, as have cardiac arrest,
wound seroma, atrial fibrillation, pneumothorax, pronounced Branham's reflex, chylothorax, laryn-
geal paralysis, iatrogenic lung wound, acute heart failure, and transient ventricular arrhythmias.
22. What are the clinical features of the most common complications?
·Hemorrhage due to rupture of the ductus during dissection is the most serious
complication, occurring in 6-12% of dogs. Rapid exsanguination and death can occur, as
seen in 1/64 (1.6%) of dogs in one study and 3% in another study. Risk of hemorrhage
decreases with surgeon experience, careful dissection, and delicate tissue handling. Small
ruptures may seal with digital pressure, but further dissection should not be performed.
Larger ruptures require occlusion with vascular clamps and pledget-buttressed mattress
suture repair or ductal division. The risk of hemorrhage with hemoclip occlusion is the
same as with dissection and ligation. Some authors advocate the Jackson-Henderson
ligation technique to avoid medial dissection, or preplacement of Rummel tourniquets
around the vena cava, descending aorta, and brachiocephalic trunk in case of hemorrhage.
· Persistent ductal flow can occur from incomplete occlusion. The incidence in a recent
study, as identified by color flow Doppler, was 23/51 (45%) for surgical ligation and 5/9
(55%) for coil occlusion. Residual flow may be clinically insignificant.
· Recanalization is reported to occur in an estimated 1-2% of ligations. Usually ductal flow
is hemodynamically insignificant and clinical signs are not seen. Recanalization was not
reported with hemoclip occlusion; however, one patient had incomplete occlusion at the
time of surgery.
23. What is the Branham reflex?
Arterial hypertension and bradycardia seen immediately after ligation of the PDA due to a
rapid increase in systemic blood flow.
24. Describe intravascular coil occlusion and potential complications.
Under general anesthesia, a femoral artery is catheterized to allow induction of the coil
delivery system. One or more coils are fluoroscopically guided to the ductus and carefully
deployed to engage the vessel walls. Occlusion is confirmed with arteriography. Potential compli
ment, femoral artery hemorrhage, and hemol ysis.
124
PatentDuctusArteriosus
25. What are advantages and disadvantages of intravascular coils?
Advantages:
· Minimally invasive procedure
· Avoidance of thoracotomy, associated postoperative intensive care, and possible
prolonged hospitalization
· Less postoperative pain than with thoracotomy
· Decreased risk of hemorrhage from rupture of the ductus
Disadvantages:
· Requires specialized equipment and fluoroscopy
· Requires specialized training and particular expertise
· Some ductal morphologies are not amenable to coil placement
· Residual flow through the ductus from incomplete occlusion occurs in 14-55% of cases
26. Is surgery indicated for a reverse PDA?
27. Discuss treatment options for reverse PDA.
·Supportive care and exercise restriction.
· Intermittent phlebotomy is beneficial to relieve polycythemia, decrease blood viscosity,
and increase perfusion. A recommended protocol for phlebotomy is removal of 10-28%
of the patient's circulating blood volume every 3-8 weeks based on clinical signs. Some
authors advocate volume replacement with crystalloids, but this has not been proven
necessary. Patient survival of greater than 2 years has been reported.
coincident with reductions in PCV
BIBLIOG RAPHY
(1969-1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:2011-2013, 1990
 2. Corti LB, Merkley D, Nelson OL, et al: Retrospective evaluation of occlusion of patent ductus arteriosus with
henoclips in 20 dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:548-555, 2000
dogs. J Vet Intem Med 15:39-42, 2001.
4. Fossum TW: Patent ductus arteriosus. In Fossum TW, editor: Small animat surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2002,
Mosby, pp 686-690.
Surg 30:58, 2001.
6. Miller MW, Meurs KM, Gordon SG, at al: Transarterial ductal occlusion using Gianturco vascular occlusion
coils: 43 cases, 1994-1998. Proceedings of the 17th Annual Veterinary Medical Forum of the American College
of Veterinary Intemal Medicine, Chicago, IL, 1999, p 713
7. Moore K W, Stepien RL: Hydroxyurea for treatment of polycythemia secondary to right-to-left shunting patent
ductus arteriosus in 4 dogs. J Vet Intem Med 15:418-421, 2002.
8. Olsen D, Harkin K, Banwell M, et al: Postoperative rupture of an aortic aneurysmal dilation associated with
patent ductus arteriosus in a dog. Vet Surg 31:259-265, 2002
9. Tanaka R, Hoshi K, Nagashima Y, et al: Detachable coils for occlusion of patent ductus arteriosus in 2 dogs. Vet
Surg 30:580-584, 2001.
10. Van Israel N, French AT, Dukes-McEwan J, et al: Review of left-to-right shunting patent ductus arteriosus and
short temn outcome in 98 dogs. I Small Anim Pract 43:395-400, 2002.
30. CARDIAC VALVULAR SURGERIES
Dianne Dunning, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What causes mitral valve insufficiency?
Mucoid valvular degeneration and myxomatous transformation of the left atrioventricular
2. What is the incidence of mitral valve insufficiency?
Mitral valve insufficiency is one of the most common acquired heart diseases in the dog. It
is seen more often in the small-breed dog, such as the poodle, and has a documented familial
predisposition in the King Charles Cavalier spamiel. Prevalence increases with age, affecting 5%
of the canine population <1 year and >75% of population by 16 years of age.
 3. Discuss the pathophysiology of mitral insufficiency.
With mitral valve insufficiency, part of the blood flow normally ejected out of the aortic
val ve regurgitates back through the mitral valve, increasing the blood volume in the left atrium.
With this increase in blood volume the left atrium and annulus begin to dilate. With chronic
insufficiency. Late in the disease course, this chronic increase of left ventricular preload leads to
left ventricular dilation and contractile dysfunction.
4. How is mitral insufficiency diagnosed?
The predominant physical ex amination finding is a holos ystolic murmur, best auscultated at
the left heart base. Diagnosis may be confirmed by echocardiography.
 5. Discuss the indications for mitral valvular surgery.
Recommendations for surgery are based on the animal's clinical signs and echocardiographic
findings. Indications for mitral valvular surgery in the dog have not been clearly defined. However,
corrective surgery is usually reserved for the patient in medically refractive congestive heart failure,
although the procedure must be undertaken before secondary cardiomyopathy has become irreversible.
6. Why is mitral valve surgery generally delayed in the dog?
1. Most dogs are not diagnosed with congestive heart failure resulting from mitral valve
disease until much later during the disease course when compared with people.
2. The canine patient tolerates medical management reasonably well.
Delaying surgery until this late in the disease probably results in higher patient morbidity
and mortality; however, a reversal of ventricular dilation and myocardial dysfunction after mitral
val ve replacement has been reported.
7.  What procedures are available for mitral valve disease?
·Mitral valve repair
· Mitral valve replacement
8. What surgical procedures constitute mitral valve repair?
· Annuloplasty: repair of the valve's dilated ring annulus with imbrications, sutures, or a
ring prosthesis
· Valvuloplasty: repair of the valve leaflets
126
Cardiac Valvular Surgeries
9. What are the two basic types of valves available for mitral valve replacement?
· Mechanical val ves
·Bioprosthetic/tissue valves (usually porcine in origin)
10. What are the benefits and drawbacks of replacement versus repair?
Replacement
Long lifespan of the prosthesis
Anticoagulation required due
to risk of thromboembolic
disease
 Can be used at any stage of the
Failure of valves is catastrophic,
disease
resulting in death of patient
 Guaranteed to be competent
Repair
Reduces risk of sepsis
Advanced stage of disease makes
repair difficult
Valve prosthesis not required
Sharp learming curve of surgery
 causes high initial mortality rate
Long-term anticoagulation
 Unclear if human techniques are
not required
applicable to dogs
11. What is the incidence of pulmonic stenosis?
· Common in dogs and uncommon in cats.
· Estimated to occur in 1 of every 1000 live births in dogs
12. Which canine breeds are at risk for pulmonic stenosis?
·English bulldogs
·Beagles
· Cocker spaniels
Chihuahua
· German shepherds
●Miniature schnauzers
·Samoyeds
·Mastiffs
·Termier breeds
13. What is the most common anatomic anomaly in pulmonic stenosis?
 Pulmonic stenosis is a congenital narrowing of the pulmonic val ve, pulmonary artery, or right
ventricular outflow tract. In dogs, the stenosis is usually valvular, although supravalvular stenosis
and subvalvular stenosis have also been reported. Valvular stenosis may be simple or dysplastics
· Simple valvular stenosis consists of an incomplete separation of the bicuspid leaflets.
· Dysplastic valvular stenosis is characterized by a hypoplastic valvular annulus and
thickened immobile valve leaflets. Of dogs with pulmonic valvular stenosis, more than
80% are dysplastic.
14. Are there any other concurrent anomalies commonly associated with pulmonic stenosis?
English bulldogs and boxers have a high concurrent incidence of an aberrant left coronary
artery, which crosses directly over the stenotic valve. This artery is important to identify before
attempting medical dilation or primary surgical enlargement of the pulmonary outflow tract
Cardiac Valvular Surgeries
127
because laceration of this vessel results in death of the animal. These animals require a val ved or
nonvalved conduit placed between the right ventricle and pulmonary artery.
15. What is a typical history suggesting pulmonic stenosis?
Young animals are often asymptomatic. Older animals present with signs of exercise intoler-
ance, syncope, or right-sided heart failure.
16. What physical examination findings suggest pulmonic stenosis?
left heart base. Electrocardiogram findings are consistent with a right axis shift resulting from
right heart enlargement or hypertrophy.
17. How is the diagnosis of pulmonic stenosis confirmed?
Echocardiography. Cardiac catheterization (the diagnostic gold standard in human medi-
e oo  e ue sss  s ou no s  
18. What are the indications to treat pulmonic stenosis?
·Presence of clinical signs
· Progression of right ventricular enlargement
· Systolic pressure gradients obtained by echocardiography:
SYSTOLIC PRESSURE
GRADE OF
<50 mm Hg
Mild
 Medical management
50-75 mm Hg
Moderate
 Medical management, ± balloon
dilation
>75 mm Hg
Severe
 Patch graft valvuloplasty or valved/
nonvalved conduit
19. What is the medical management of pulmonic stenosis?
· Symptomatic treatment of congestive heart failure
· Fluoroscopically guided balloon catheter valvuloplasty, where a dilation catheter with a
balloon is threaded across the stenosis during cardiac catheterization. Once at the stenotic
site, the balloon is then inflated to expand the obstructing valve. This procedure is used
most successfully in dogs with moderate grades of pulmonic stenosis, where the annulus
is normally formed and the valves are thin and fused. However, delayed restenosis has
been reported as a complication associated with this technique. Balloon dilation valvulo-
plasty is contraindicated in dogs with aberrant left coronary arteries and hypoplasia of the
pulmonary annulus, as the results are less predictable and life-threatening complications
are more common (i.e., rupture and exsanguination)
20. What surgical treatments are available for pulmonic stenosis?
· Transventricular valve dilation: used mostly in animals with moderate pressure gradients,
simple valvular stenosis, and moderate right ventricular hypertrophy.
· Patch graft valvuloplasty: reserved for animals with severe pressure gradients, dysplastic
valvular stenosis, and severe right ventricular hypertrophy.
cardiac bypass: Allows direct visualization and manipulation of the stenotic lesion.
128
CardiacValvularSurgeries
· Placement of a conduit from the right ventricle to the pulmonary artery: Bypassing the
stenosis altogether.
21. Describe the technical details of transventricular valve dilation.
Surgery is performed via a left fourth intercostal thoracotomy. The pericardium is opened
over the right outflow tract. A buttressed mattress suture is placed in the right ventricular outflow
tract, ventral to the stenosis. A stab incision is made through the ventricle, and a dilating instru-
ular outflow tract and across the pulmomic valve. After dilation, the instrument is removed and
the ventricular incision closed with the preplaced mattress suture.
22. Describe the technical details of patch graft valvuloplasty.
A technique for closed pulmonic patch graft valvuloplasty has been described and accom-
plished without inflow occlusion or cardiopulmonary bypass. However, the success of this essen-
tially blind techmique is heavily reliant upon accurate placement of a cutting wire through the
ventricular outflow tract, and the technique is therefore prone to error and has fallen out of favor.
sion or full cardiopulmonary bypass. Surgery is performed via a left fourth intercostal thoracoto-
suture pattern, reinforced with pledget-buttressed (stented) mattress sutures.
23. What are the advantages and disadvantages of full-bypass patch graft valvuloplasty?
ensunng correct patch size and positioming and a reduced operative mortality when
compared with inflow occlusion.
· Disadvantages: Cost, limited availability of a bypass unit and trained surgical team, and a
24. If an aberrant left coronary artery is present, what surgical procedure can be used to
treat a dog with pulmonic stenosis?
A val ved or nonvalve conduit may be placed between the right ventricle and the pulmonary
artery. This vascular conduit allows blood to bypass the stenosis, alleviating the right ventricular
pressure overload.
25. List common complications associated with the patch graft technique.
· Failure to relieve stenosis and recurrence of stenosis
·Patch failure and leakage
·Hemorrhage
·Cardiac arrhythmias
· Complications associated with inflow occlusion or cardiopulmonary bypass
26. What is the incidence of aortic stenosis?
· Second or third most common congenital heart defect in the dog
·Uncommon in the cat
27. Which canine breeds are at risk for aortic stenosis?
·Newfoundland (genetic basis)
·Golden retriever
·Rottweiler
· German shepherd
·Boxers
·Samoyeds
Cardiac Valvular Surgeries
129
28. Describe the most common anatomic anomaly in aortic stenosis.
A congenital narrowing of the aortic valve, aorta, or left ventricular outflow tract. In >90%
of dogs, the stenosis is subvalvular; the severity and morphology of the lesion can vary greatly.
The typical lesion is a discrete fibrotic ring located beneath the valve annulus and is associated
with mild aortic insufficiency and left ventricular septal hypertrophy. In severe cases of aortic
stenosis, mitral insufficiency is present because of the reflection of the fibrous ring lesion onto
the adjacent mitral valve leaflets.
29. What is a typical history suggesting aortic stenosis?
Ranging from asymptomatic to exhibiting exercise intolerance, collapse, syncope, or sudden
death.
30. Describe physical examination findings suggestive of aortic stenosis.
The predominant finding is a systolic ejection murrmur, loudest at the left heart base but radi-
ating to the right side of the thorax and thoracic inlet. Femoral pulses are weak and hypokinetic.
Electrocardiogram findings are consistent with a left axis shift resulting from left heart
enlargement or hypertrophy.
31. What is the most common cause of death in dogs with aortic stenosis?
The exact cause is unknown; however, profound reflex vasodilation and bradycardia or fatal
ventricular dysrhythmias are suspected.
32. How is the diagnosis of aortic stenosis confirmed?
Systolic pressure gradients may be calculated from the peak aortic velocity.
33. What are the indications to treat aortic stenosis?
· Presence or development of climical signs
· Progression of left ventricular hypertrophy
· Systolic pressure gradients obtained from echocardiography:
SYSTOLIC PRESSURE
GRADE OF
< 50 mm Hg
Mild
Medical management
50-75 mm Hg
Moderate
Medical management, ± balloon 
dilation
>75 mm Hg
Severe
Valve dilation or open fibrotic ring
resection under cardiopulmonary
bypass
34. What is the medical management of aortic stenosis?
·Symptomatic treatment of congestive heart failure
·β-Adrenergic blocker therapy
· Balloon dilation for moderate aortic stenosis
35. What surgical treatments are available for aortic stenosis?
· Transventricular valve dilation: Acute relief of stenosis is achieved, but pressure gradients
usually recur within 3 months. This technique is not recommended.
· Open fibrotic ring resection: Reserved for animals with severe pressure gradients and
130
Cardiac Valvular Surgeries
significant left ventricular hypertrophy. Cardiopulmonary bypass allows for direct
considered palliative (does not protect against sudden death); however, there may be some
improvements in exercise tolerance in severely clinical patients.
 36. Describe the technical details of fibrotic ring resection.
bypass. A curvilinear incision is made on the aortic outflow tract, and the aortic valve leaves aré
mitral valve or the conduction tissues along the septal wall. The aortotomy is closed with a
continuous horizontal mattress suture pattern with the pledgets (stents), which is then oversewn
with a simple continuous suture pattern.
 37. List common complications associated with open fibrotic ring resection.
·Hemorrhage
·Rupture of the aorta
· Cardiac arrhythmias
· Restenosis
· Complications associated with cardiopulmonary bypass
 38. Is there any surgical treatment for tricuspid valve dysplasia?
management of right-sided congested heart failure is unsatisfactory but before end-stage right-
sided heart failure. The valve may be repaired or replaced. If replacement is undertaken, a
bioprosthetic val ve is preferred because it reduces the risk of thromboembolic disease.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Boggs, LS, Dewan SJ: Mitral valve reconstruction in a toy-breed dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1872-1876,
1996.
2. Bussadori C, DeMadron E: Balloon valvuloplasty in 30 dogs with pulmonic stenosis. J Vet Intem Med 15:553-
558,2001
3. Dhokarikar P, Caywood DD, Ogbum PN, Burtnick NL. Closed aortic valvotomy: A retrospective study in 15
dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:402-410, 1995.
4. Monnet E, Orton EC: Open resection for subvalvular aortic stenosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1255-1261, 1996.
5. Orton EC: Cardiac surgery. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery,ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002, W.B.
Saunders, pp 955-986.
6. Orton EC: Current indications for cardiac surgery. In Keene BW, Lehmkuhl LB, editors: Kirk's current veterinary
herapy X!/l, Philadelphia, 2000, W.B. Saunders, pp 745-748
7. Orton EC, Hemdon GD, Boon J, Gaynor J, Hackett TB, Monnet E: Influence of open surgical correction on
intermediate-tem outcome in dogs with subvalvular aortic stenosis: 44 cases (1991-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc
216:364-367, 2000.
31. PERSISTENT RIGHT AORTIC ARCH
James M. Fingeroth, D.VM., Dipt. A.C.VS
1.  Can you define persistent right aortic arch?
Persistent right aortic arch, or PRAA, falls into the larger class of diseases known as vascular
ring anomalies (VRAs).It is the most common of the VRAs, accounting for about 95% of
reported cases. It is a lesion in which the aorta, which normally arises from the left fourth aortic
arch, instead arises from the right fourth arch. It is shorthand for what better would be abbreviated
normally from the left sixth aortic arch).
2. Is this a problem?
The embryonic ductus arteriosus (which then becomes the ligamentum arteriosum after
closure at birth) connects the aorta and the pulmonary artery. With the aorta on the right side
(PRAA), the ligamentum has to cross from left to right, which results in entrapment of the
esophagus as it descends through the region over the base of the heart. This entrapment results in
focal stenosis of the esophagus, and large food boluses cannot traverse the affected zone.
3. Are there breed predilections?
breed as well as in mixed breeds. In cats, it seems more common in Siamese and Persians
4. What are the aortic arches?
The aortic arches are the embryological primordia that differentiate into the heart and great
vessels. There are normally six paired arches at the outset. Following a scheme of coalescence
and dissolution, the aorta normally arises from the left fourth arch, and the ductus arteriosus from
the left sixth arch. If there was a persistence of both a right fourth and a right sixth aortic arch,
the esophagus would be normal, and we would probably not know the patient had a VRA except
as an incidental radiographic, surgical, or postmortem finding.
5. What other abnormalities can exist?
While PR (4"b') AA with a left sixth ductus/ligamentum is the most common, any failure of
proper development can cause problems. Most of these will result in fetal death. The ones that
survive include double aortic arches (both the left and right fourth arches persist, and these join
over the heart to form a common aorta), persistent right sixth aortic arch with normal left aorta
(a mirror image to the PR (4")AA, with identical clinical consequences), and aberrant subclavian
arteries (both left and right) due to maldevelopment of the third aortic arches. Some of these
(PR(4"h)AA/left 6"h, PR(6"h)AA/left aorta, double AA) form rings that completely encircle the
esophagus (hence, "complete rings"), whereas others (aberrant subclavians) form only partial
rings as they compress the esophagus from one side, cranial to the heart base. Double aortic
ple anomalies (such as PRAA and aberrant subclavian) in the same patient
Generally not, since the blood doesn't care if it's flowing on the left or the right. However.
is the least hemodynamically interesting since correction entails dividing a nonpatent vessel (the
132
Persistent Right Aortic Arch
ligamentum arteriosum). At least we presume it is nonpatent (see below). Correction of others
(most notably the double aortic arch) requires division or rerouting of great arteries, and that
certainly calls for proper planning and equipment.
7. What are the typical signs of a VRA?
The inability to pass boluses of food beyond the esophageal stricture results in signs of
Tegurgitation, usually first noted at the time of weaning onto solid foods. The animal may appear
presented to the veterinarian by the time they are 6 weeks of age, although, in rare instances that
defy good explanation, some may not be evident for months or years. The frequency and severity
nutri tion leaves them further compromised and vulnerable to secondary infections.
8. How should a suspected VRA be treated?
 9. Which diagnostic tests need to be performed before surgery?
The development of regurgitation in association with weaning is the hallmark of VRA, and
playing the (95%) odds, it is most likely "classic" PRAA. However, other diagnostic tests are war-
Tanted to help establish the specific diagnosis and to assess for concomitant problems. Thoracic
radiography is important for helping establish the laterality (or bilaterality) of the definitive
arch(es) of the aorta and assessing the presence of any pneumonia. Angiography is useful in those
cases where double aortic arch, aberrant subclavian artery, or other anomaly is suspected. If the
esophagus cannot be visualized on plain films, contrast esophagraphy with barium can be used to
prove the presence of a stricture over the base of the heart. This will help distinguish VRA from
baseline against which future (postoperative) esophagrams can be compared to assess improvement.
Fluoroscopic esophagraphy is the best method for determining esophageal motility, and also
provides a tool by which postoperative improvement can be quantified. Appropriate laboratory
patient with possible pneumonia. Endoscopic esophagoscopy can be useful in confirming a stric-
ture over the heart base, and in some cases visualizing the indentation by the ligamentum arteriosum
as it crosses dorsolaterally to reach the (pulsating) aorta. Endoscopy will also reveal any ulceration
10. What preoperative medical therapy is useful to get the patient in the best shape?
Because of the rapid growth and development of these young patients, pathophysiology proceeds
tion of the esophagus cranial to the stricture and concomitant loss of peristaltic function due to damage
of the esophageal wall. Unfortunately, by the time most patients are diagnosed (even at 5-6 weeks of
age), there will already be significant esophageal dilation/ damage (see long-term results, below). How-
ever, the more quickly there is surgical intervention, the better the odds for successful outcome.
· If there is fever or pneumonia, the patient should be treated with antibiotics.
· If the patient is dehydrated, it should be on intravenous or intraosseous fluids
     go      s  a
conjunction with the surgery to treat the VRA or done prior to thoracic surgery.
11. What are the goals and approach for surgery?
The first goal of surgery is to divide the ligamentum arteriosum, since this is the band of
tissue that forms the ring and strictures the esophagus. The second, equally important goal of
Persistent RightAortic Arch
133
surgery is to relieve fibrous bands in the wall of the esophagus that continue to cause stricture,
even after the ligamentum has been divided. Surgical access is gained by performing a standard,
left fourth intercostal space, lateral thoracotomy for "classic" PRAA, or via thoracoscopy.
12. How does the operative site appear?
Ligamentum arteriosum -
Main pulmonary artery 
Aorta
Esophagus
Trachea-
Figure 3 1-1 Pertinent anatomy of persistent right aortic arch as seen through a left
fourth space intercosta] thoracotomy.
Once the lungs are packed off, the dilated esophagus fills the cranial mediastinum. The
proximal aorta is not seen because it's on the right side, behind the esophagus. The diagram in
this chapter is highly stylized; the actual ligamentum will tend to be obscured in the depths of
pericardial and mediastinal tissue formed behind the billowing esophagus. Dissection will be
needed to actually perceive the ligamentum. Other structures (4o% prevalence with PRAA)
include a large venous structure running cranial to caudal, entering the right atrium. This would
be a persistent left cranial vena cava. It is also of no hemodynamic significance, but may need
may be seen caudodorsally. This would be a left hemizygous vein. If it is obstructing visualiza-
tion it can be ligated and divided. If an aberrant left subclavian, originating on the right side
and crossing the esophagus cranial to the base of the heart, is significantly compressing the
esophagus (partial ring), it can be sacrificed (blood should flow into the axillary artery via anasto-
moses with the vertebral and superficial cervical arteries),
13. What procedures are performed?
The ligamentum is carefully dissected circumferentially so that ligatures can be placed at the
aortic and pulmonary artery sides. Although it is extremely rare for this fetal vessel to remain
used to retract the ligamentum dorsally and ventrally. The next procedure is to have an assistant
pass a Foley-type (balloon-tipped) catheter per os through the esophagus. The bulb of the catheter
can be positioned within the stricture and gently inflated. The surgeon can then delicately dissect
fibrous bands in this region until the bulb can be more fully inflated and pass orad and aborad
through this zone without impediment.
134
PersistentRight Aorfic Arch
14. How should a dilated cranial esophagus be treated?
Unfortunately, there is no good surgical therapy. All kinds of resections and plications have
been tried, but none have any proven benefit to the patient. The only instance where surgery on
this part of the esophagus is warranted is when there is an impaction that can only be relieved by
esophagotomy (kittens tend to make large hairballs and form an esophageal cast).
15. What is needed for postoperative care and management?
The thoracotomy is closed routinely, bearing in mind the age and size of the patient (e.g,
there may be no need for an indwelling thoracostomy tube). In a 6-week-old puppy or kitten a
and instruments, if one chooses a minimally invasive technique. If one hasn't been placed already,
a left-sided gastrostomy tube can be installed if there are concerns about ongoing nutritional
these animals need to be kept on gruel feedings initially and should be taught to eat from and
maintain an upri ght position to have gravity aid in passage of ingesta into the stomach. Supportive
care and treatment for concomitant problems (undernourishment, pneumonia, etc.) are continued
as needed. Affected animals that survive should eventually be neutered because of the heritability
of the disease.
CONTROVERSY
16. What is the expected long-term outcome?
There have been two long-term retrospective studies reported, with some conflicting results.
Approximately 10-40% will die or be euthanized within a month of surgery because of intractable
primary signs or sequelae. Those who survive will usually have some ongoing signs of dysphagia.
While many can eventually abandon upri ght feedings, most will still require some dietary modifi-
cation ranging from continued gruel feedings to simply avoiding foods that are a problem (e.g.,
semimoist foods may tend to stimulate choking and regurgitation more than dry kibble for some).
Only about 10% will have excellent results (virtually no signs, or regurgitation less than once
weekly).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Ellison Gw: Surgical correction of persistent right aortic arch. In Bojrab MI, editor: Current techniques in smatl
animat surgery, ed 4, Baltimore, 1998, williams & wilkins, pp 659-662
Vet Med Assoc 191:981-983, 1987.
3. Isakow K, Fowler D, Walsh P: Video-assisted thoracoscopic division of the ligamentum arteriosum in two dogs
with persistent right aortic arch. I Am Vet Med Assoc 217:1333-1336, 2000.
4. Kyles AE: The esophagus. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smatl animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002, W.B.
Saunders, pp 573-592.
5. MacPhail CM, Monner E, Twedt DC: Thoracoscopic correction of persistent right aortic arch in a dog. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 37:577-581, 2001.
6. Muldoon MM, Birchard SJ, Ellison GW: Long-temm results of surgical correction of persistent right aortic arch
m dogs: 25 cases (1980-1995). I Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1761-1763, 1997.
 7. Shires PK: Persistent right aortic arch in dogs: A long-temm follow-up after surgical correction. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 17:773-776, 1981.
32. PERICARDIECTOMY
Joanne N. Franks, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the pericardium?
A thick double-layer sac around the heart. There is an outer fibrous layer and an inner serous
layer. The fibrous layer is continuous with the adventitia of the great vessels dorsally and forms the
2. List the functions of the pericardium.
· Maintains the heart in its normal anatomic position within the thoracic cavity
● Protects the heart during thoracic trauma
·Prevents great vessel kinking
● Provides a smooth gliding surface for heart motion
· Prevents spread of disease from the pleural space to the heart
· Prevents overdilation of the heart
3.  What is the primary manifestation of pericardial disease?
Pericardial effusion.
4. List the types of pericardial effusion and give causes of each.
· Transudative—right-sided congestive heart failure, hypoproteinemia, incarceration of a
liver lobe within the pericardium
·Exudative—bacterial (aerobic or anaerobic) or fungal infectious pericardi tis arising from
trauma, migrating foreign bodies, or hematogenous spread
·Sanguinous—neoplasia, idiopathic, coagulopathy
5. What are the most common causes of pericardial effusion in cats?
Pericardial disease is rare in cats, but may be caused by feline infectious peritonitis (FIP),
feline cardiomyopathy, renal failure, neoplasia (lymphosarcoma, mesothelioma, metastatic carci-
noma), bacterial or fungal organisms, or toxoplasmosis.
6. Describe the pathologic effects of pericardial effusion.
The severity of cardiac dysfunction depends on rate of fluid accumulation and compliance
of the pericardium. The pericardium will expand from a gradual accumulation of fluid, and com-
within the pericardium increases pressure on the heart, reducing diastolic filling and cardiac
heart failure are observed first. Cardiac tamponade, with large volume of fluid or small volume
accumulated rapidly, leads to acute circulatory collapse. It is associated with reduced ventricular
filling, decreased cardiac output, and arterial hypotension.
 7. What are the most common neoplasms that cause pericardial effusion?
Hemangiosarcoma, chemodectoma/aortic body tumors, mesothelioma, ectopic thyroid car-
cinoma, metastatic carcinomas, lymphosarcoma.
136
Pericardiectomy
8. What are the salient clinical features of the most common tumors associated with
perica rdial effusion?
short survival times (4-7 months maximum) due to high rate of metastasis (spleen, liver,
lungs).
· Chemodectoma or aortic body tumor—usually older large-breed and brachycephalic
dogs, tend to be slow growing and have the longest survival times (up to 2 years after
pericardiectomy), although they are invasive and unlikely to be surgically removable
· Mesothelioma—a neoplasm of the visceral or parietal pericardium or pleura. Median
survival time is 13.6 months. Cytologic exam of pleural effusion often finds reactive
mesothelial cells, which should not be overinterpreted as neoplastic
9. Describe idiopathic pericardial disease.
effusion. It is the second most common cause of pericardial effusion. Most commonly seen in
large-breed, middle-aged dogs
10. Describe clinical signs that can be found in a patient with pericardial effusion.
Weakness, lethargy, exercise intolerance, abdominal enlargement, ascites, hepatomegaly,
dyspnea, tachypnea, anorexia, muffled heart sounds, and weight loss may be identified. With
cardiac tamponade, tachycardia, weak peripheral pulse quality, jugular vein distention, and
decreased heart sounds are found.
11. What tests are used to diagnose pericardial effusion and what are the features of each?
· Thoracic radiography—reveals enlarged, globoid cardiac silhouette. Small amounts of
fluid are difficult to identify. Pleural effusion may be present with right-sided heart
failure.
· Echocardiography—sensitive for small amounts of fluid, can identify functional effects of
the myocardium, may identify underlying cause (e.g., mass).
· Electrocardiography—diminished QRS amplitude, possible electrical alternans due to the
shifting of the heart inside the pericardium with each beat (~50% of cases). Arrhythmias
are uncommon.
12. When is pericardiocentesis indicated? Describe the procedure.
Pericardiocentesis is used for initial stabilization of a patient with signs referable to cardiac
tamponade or as a temporary treatment for idiopathic effusion. It also allows for diagnostic analy-
sis of the pericardial fluid. Ultrasound guidance may be used, but is not necessary unless the
d     x   s    go 
is the cardiac notch at the right fourth or fifth intercostal space, at the level of the costochondral
junction. A local lidocaine block is performed, to include the pleura. A 14- to 18-gauge needle or
catheter attached to extension tubing and a three-way stopcock is slowly advanced through the
thoracic wall, with constant negative pressure applied to the syringe. The needle is advanced to
contact and then perforate the pericardium. Advancement is stopped as soon as fluid is with-
drawn. The needle is carefully withdrawn if movement associated with contact of the myocardi-
um is felt. Fluid obtained is submitted for analysis, cytology, aerobic and anaerobic culture, and/
or fungal culture, as indicated clinically.
13. What are the potential complications of pericardiocentesis?
Cardiac puncture, hemorrhage, arrhythmias, coronary artery laceration, lung puncture or
laceration, and dissemination of infection or neoplasia.
Pericardiectomy
137
14. What is constrictive pericarditis?
An idiopathic pericardial disease whereby the layers of the pericardium become thickened,
fibrotic, and inelastic. Diastolic filling of the heart is compromised, cardiac output decreases, and
from res trictive cardi omyopathy.
15. When is surgery for pericardial disease indicated?
Pericardiectomy is indicated for pericardial effusion, masses of the pericardium, infectious
pericarditis, and constrictive pericarditis. Thoracic exploratory and pericardiectomy allow drain
age of effusion, diagnosis, and possible excision or biopsy of mass lesions.
16. What surgical techniques are available for treatment of pericardial disease?
· Open pericardiectomy by thoracotomy or medi an sternotomy
·Thoracoscopic pericardiectomy
· Percutaneous balloon pericardiotomy
17. What approaches are used for open pericardiectomy? What are advantages and
disadvantages of each technique?
· Intercostal thoracotomy is the most commonly used approach. It allows evaluation of the
ipsilateral heart base for neoplasia. Mass lesions on the contralateral side might be
missed, and it is difficult to visualize the far phrenic nerve and pericardium for excision.
· Median sternotomy allows access to both sides of the heart for a total or subtotal
(subphrenic) pericardiectomy, but may be a more complex and painful procedure. It may
be difficult to evaluate the base of the heart for masses in deep-chested dogs.
18. What is the difference between total pericardiectomy, subtotal pericardiectomy, and a
pericardial window?
With a total pericardiectomy, both phrenic nerves are elevated from the pericardial sac and
the pericardium is removed as close to the base of the heart as possible. A subtotal (subphrenic)
pericardiectomy is performed by incising the pericardium just ventral to the phrenic nerves. A
pericardial window indicates removal of a portion of the pericardium.
19. If pericardiectomy is performed palliatively, won't pleural effusion develop?
Yes, but in most cases the increased surface area of the pleural space allows for fluid resorp-
tion, and small amounts of fluid accumulation are often subclinical. Clinical signs associated with
cardiac compromise are relieved. In one study, pleural effusion was the most common complica-
tion seen in the immediate postoperative period (8/22 dogs), but it resolved in all dogs by day 5.
 i  s s s e s  s   d s
disease and poor survival rates
 20. Describe the surgical technique for subtotal pericardiectomy via thoracotomy.
A right fifth intercostal thoracotomy is performed. Horizontal and vertical ("T") incisions are
made in the pericardium ventral to the phrenic nerve. The incisions are continued cranially and
caudally and around the left side of the heart, protecting the myocardium, vena cava, and phrenic
nerves. The pericardiophrenic ligament, attaching the pericardium to the diaphragn, is divided and
the pericardium is removed. Hemostasis is confirmed. The heart base and right atrium are ex amined
for mass lesions. A thoracostomy tube is placed and the thoracotomy is closed routinely.
21. What are the advantages and disadvantages of thoracoscopic pericardiectomy?
Advantages:
·Avoids either surgical approach
· Decreased operative time with expertise
138
Pericardiectomy
· Decreased postoperative pain and morbidity
· Fewer wound complications
· Pulmonary exclusion (one-lung ventilation) is usually not necessary
Disadvantages:
· Expense of specialized equipment
·Steep learning curve
·Potential complications: phrenic nerve transection, lung laceration, hemorrhage
possibly necessitating conversion to an open surgery
22. How does the long-term prognosis differ between idiopathic and neoplastic disease?
months after surgery was 72%. In another study median survival was 15.3 months. Prognosis for
neoplastic disease depends on the tumor type. In general, reported survival time for dogs with
neoplastic disease is a median of 52 days as compared to 792 days for benign disease.
23. What is the single most important factor affecting survival time in dogs with heart-
based masses?
 Performing a pericardiectomy. Dogs that underwent pericardiectomy had a significantly
longer survival time (661 days) than dogs that were treated medically (129 days).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Aronsohn MG, Carpenter JL: Surgical treatment of idiopathic pericardial effusion in the dog: 25 cases (1978-
1993). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:521-525, 1999.
2. Dunning D, Monnet E, Orton C, et al: Analysis of prognostic indicators for dogs with pericardial effusion: 46
cases (1985-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:1276-1280, 1998.
3. Dupre GP, Corlouer JP, Bouvy B: Thoracoscopic pericardiectomy performed without pulmonary exclusion in 9
dogs. Vet Surg 30:21-27, 2001
4. Ehrhart N, Ehrhart EJ, Willis J, et al: Analysis of factors affecting survival in dogs with aortic body tumors. Vet
Surg 31:44-48, 2002
5. Fossum TW: Pericardial effusion and pericardial constriction. In Fossum TW, edlitor: Smal animat surgery, ed 2,
St Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp 701-706.
6. Kerstetter K, Krahwinkle D, Millis D, et al: Pericardiectomy in dogs : 22 cases (1978-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc
211:736-740, 1997.
25 cases (1986-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:485-487, 2001.
postoperative pain and morbidity. Vet Surg 28: 472-479, 1999.
33. ESOPHAGEAL FOREIGN BODIES
Katherine L. Wells, D.VM.
1. Where do foreign objects commonly lodge?
Proximal esophagus, thoracic inlet, base of the heart, or the diaphragmatic hiatus.
2. List the clinical signs of a patient with an esophageal foreign body.
●Difficulty in swallowing
·Excessive salivation
· Regurgitation
·Fever, malaise
·Cervical swelling or drainage
·Inappetence (cats)
· Respiratory distress
3.
How does the shape of the foreign body affect clinical signs?
1. Hollow bones may permit passage of fluids or semisolids.
 2. Balls may completely obstruct the esophageal lumen.
 3. Hooks and needles cause perforation and infection.
4. How is the diagnosis made?
· Suspicion based on clinical signs and history
· Survey or contrast radiography (obstruction, air or dye leakage)
·Endoscopy (direct visualization)
5. How are objects removed nonsurgically?
·Endoscopic retrieval
· Balloon inflation to dislodge embedded objects
· Gentle aboral dislodgment into the stomach
Success rates may be nearly 90%.
 6. What are indications for surgical removal of a foreign object?
· Embedded objects
· Suspected perforations greater than 3 mm
· Prolonged unsuccessful endoscopy
7. What are the surgical approaches to the esophagus?
Ventral cervical or lateral thoracotomy (right side for heart base access, left side for lesions
cranial or caudal to the heart).
8. What methods have been described for esophagotomy closure?
● Double-layer appositional
· Single-layer simple continuous
·Single-layer simple intertrupted
9. Which is the holding layer of the esophagus?
The submucosa.
140
EsophagealForeignBodies
10. Discuss advantages and disadvantages of the different closure techniques.
The double-layer appositional technique requires the longest operative time. This technique
uous closure requires the least amount of operative time but results in the least wound strength
and poorest tissue apposition of all three techniques. Single-layer simple interrupted is interme-
diate in operative time and results in mucosal eversion of tissue.
11. What are causes of dehiscence after esophageal surgery?
· Lack of serosal (omental) coverage for devitalized lesions
· Inadequate segmental blood supply or disruption of intramural vascular elements
·Excessive tension or motion (ingesta)
·Patient debilitation
12. Describe two ways to reinforce esophageal closure.
The two most common methods for reinforcement are partial circumferential myotomy
and omental flap. Partial circumferential myotomy involves transection of only the longitudinal
circumferential myotomy in reducing tension. The omentum can be used to adhere to other
organs, induce vascularization, fill dead space, and function in the face of infection. Omentum
can be used to reinforce esophageal anastomoses.
13. What are complications associated with foreign body removal from the esophagus?
· Esophagitis
· Ischemic necrosis
· Dehiscence of the suture line
·Leakage
·Stricture
·Fistulae
· Esophageal diverticula
Perforation of the esophagus may lead to mediastinitis, pyothorax, and pleuritis.
14. Describe post-operative care after esophageal foreign body retrieval.
· Analgesics as necessary for thoracotomy patients
· Nothing per os for 24 to 48 hours
· Initially water (in 24 to 48 hours) then blenderized food for at least 7 days (if no vomiting
or regurgitation)
· Gastrostomy tube if esophagitis is severe or anastomosis has been performed; tube feed-
ing for a minimum of 7 days
● Hz antagonists (cimetidine, famotidine) or proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole)
· Gastrointestinal protectants (sucralfate)
·Antibiotics for 7 days
CONTROVERSY
15. What contrast media should be used when performing an esophagram to aid in the
diagnosis of a foreign body?
to be intact.
● Water-soluble organic iodine contrast medium: This agent should be used instead of
siid jng uneg uun es si juse su ino pnni sq uo uogod e un ug
less detail. Iodinated contrast should not be used if a bronchoesophageal fistula is suspect-
DiaphragmaticHernia
141
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Dallman MI: Functional suture-holding layer of the esophagus in the dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 192:638-640,
1988.
 2. Hosgood G: The omentum—the forgotten organ: physiology and potential surgical applications in dogs and cats
Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 12:45-50, 1990.
3. Oakes MG, Hosgood G, Snider TH, et al: Esophagotomy closure in the dog. A comparison of a double-layer
4. Shamir MH, Shahar R, Johnston DE, et al: Approaches to esophageal sutures. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 21:
414-20, 1999
5. Spielman BL, Shaker EH, Garvey MS: Esophageal foreign body in dogs: A retrospective study of 23 cases. J Am
Animm Hosp Assoc 28:570-574, 1992
34. DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIA
D. Michael Tillson, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is a diaphragmatic hernia? Are they congenital or acquired?
Diaphragmatic hernias are disruptions in the diaphragm resulting in the abnormal
positioning of abdominal viscera within the thoracic cavity. Diaphragmatic hernias involve either
a tear in the diaphragm that allows abdominal viscera to move into the pleural cavity (pleuroperi
toneal) or a failure of the diaphragm to separate from the pericardial sack and to fuse into a single
sheet (pericardioperiteoneal). Acquired diaphragmatic hernias are seen most frequently in young
male dogs and are associated with traumatic events. The formation of an iatrogenic hernia by
improper surgical closure of the diaphragm or incisional dehiscence is also possible.
2. Describe the proposed etiology of traumatic diaphragmatic hernias.
 Diaphragmatic tears result from the creation of a large pressure differential between the
abdominal and thoracic cavities. As the abdomen is compressed, the increasing pressure is
transmitted across the diaphragm to the thoracic cavity. When the glottis is closed, the thoracic
and abdominal pressure is equalized across the diaphragm. If there is an open glottis, the air
pressure ruptures the diaphragm creating the hernia.
3. Should veterinary patients routinely have thoracic radiography after a major trauma?
Yes. Diaphragmatic hernias are most commonly found in dogs and cats that are presented
after major traumas, such as being struck by an automobile. The high correlation between
traumatic accidents (automobiles) and diaphragmatic hernias means every dog with a history of
hernia as well as other pulmonary and cardiovascular injuries.
4. Will a diaphragmatic hernia heal on its own?
5. What are the clinical signs associated with traumatic diaphragmatic hernias?
Some dogs have no clinmical signs, with the diaphragmatic hernia being an incidental finding
on thoracic films, whereas other dogs are in acute respiratory distress and shock, with cardiac
dysrhythmias (12%).
DiaphragmaticHernia
141
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Dallman MI: Functional suture-holding layer of the esophagus in the dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 192:638-640,
1988.
 2. Hosgood G: The omentum—the forgotten organ: physiology and potential surgical applications in dogs and cats
Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 12:45-50, 1990.
3. Oakes MG, Hosgood G, Snider TH, et al: Esophagotomy closure in the dog. A comparison of a double-layer
4. Shamir MH, Shahar R, Johnston DE, et al: Approaches to esophageal sutures. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 21:
414-20, 1999
5. Spielman BL, Shaker EH, Garvey MS: Esophageal foreign body in dogs: A retrospective study of 23 cases. J Am
Animm Hosp Assoc 28:570-574, 1992
34. DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIA
D. Michael Tillson, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is a diaphragmatic hernia? Are they congenital or acquired?
Diaphragmatic hernias are disruptions in the diaphragm resulting in the abnormal
positioning of abdominal viscera within the thoracic cavity. Diaphragmatic hernias involve either
a tear in the diaphragm that allows abdominal viscera to move into the pleural cavity (pleuroperi
toneal) or a failure of the diaphragm to separate from the pericardial sack and to fuse into a single
sheet (pericardioperiteoneal). Acquired diaphragmatic hernias are seen most frequently in young
male dogs and are associated with traumatic events. The formation of an iatrogenic hernia by
improper surgical closure of the diaphragm or incisional dehiscence is also possible.
2. Describe the proposed etiology of traumatic diaphragmatic hernias.
 Diaphragmatic tears result from the creation of a large pressure differential between the
abdominal and thoracic cavities. As the abdomen is compressed, the increasing pressure is
transmitted across the diaphragm to the thoracic cavity. When the glottis is closed, the thoracic
and abdominal pressure is equalized across the diaphragm. If there is an open glottis, the air
pressure ruptures the diaphragm creating the hernia.
3. Should veterinary patients routinely have thoracic radiography after a major trauma?
Yes. Diaphragmatic hernias are most commonly found in dogs and cats that are presented
after major traumas, such as being struck by an automobile. The high correlation between
traumatic accidents (automobiles) and diaphragmatic hernias means every dog with a history of
hernia as well as other pulmonary and cardiovascular injuries.
4. Will a diaphragmatic hernia heal on its own?
5. What are the clinical signs associated with traumatic diaphragmatic hernias?
Some dogs have no clinmical signs, with the diaphragmatic hernia being an incidental finding
on thoracic films, whereas other dogs are in acute respiratory distress and shock, with cardiac
dysrhythmias (12%).
142
Diaphragmatic Hernia
6. List useful diagnostic tests.
·Radiography (disruption in diaphragmatic outline or loss of diaphragmatic detail, increased
soft tissue opacity, with or without gas-filled viscera in the thoracic cavity, pleural effusion).
·Ultrasonography (as above).
document migration into the thoracic cavity)
 7. What type of diaphra gmatic tears are seen with hernias?
A radial tear begins in the central, muscular portion of the diaphragm and radiates outward.
A circumferential tear denotes an avulsion of the diaphragm away from the abdominal wall.
Commonly, a diaphragmatic hernia will comprise both radial and circumferential tears.
8. What is the difference in prognosis between acute and chronic diaphra gmatic hernias?
or cardiovascular complications associated with the hernia itself).
· Chronic diaphragmatic hernia deaths are related to chronic organ compromise, adhesions
between abdominal and thoracic structures, and postoperative complications (reperfusion
injunies).
9. Discuss reperfusion injuries.
Reperfusion injury refers to a cascade of events occurring at the cellular level in response to the
sudden reintroduction of highly oxygenated blood into an anaerobic environment. As the oxygen
returns, there is generation of a large number of free oxygen radicals and other highly reactive com-
pounds. These compounds have a short half-life and are unstable. They are generated and interact
immediately with cells. This interaction can severely damage cellular integrity and generate more
free radical molecules. Only by reacting with a free radical scavenger is the cycle intertupted.
pansion of chronically atelectic lungs and restoring blood flow to chronically compromised por-
tions of liver or gastrointestinal tract results in generation of free radicals. Conditions such as
reexpansion pulmonary edema and liver shock, reported as complications of chromic diaphrag
matic hernia repair, may be blunted by careful consideration of the potential for reperfusion
injury. No single method is effective in preventing or managing reperfusion events in patients.
Medications, such as steroids or free radical scavengers, and management practices, such as
lobectomy for severely compromised liver lobes and slow gradual reinflation of compromised
lung tissue over several days, may decrease the severity of reperfusion injury.
10. If acute diaphragmatic hernias have a high mortality rate, when should a
diaphragmatic hernia be considered an emergency procedure?
· Entrapment of a distending hollow organ (stomach) in the thoracic cavity
·Visceral (spleen, liver, intestines) entrapment with vascular compromise
·An inability to stabilize the trauma patient
11. What are anesthetic guidelines for diaphragmatic hernia surgery patients?
·IV catheter and intravenous fluids.
·Supplemental oxygen or preoxygenation.
· Premedications to reduce patient anxiety, provide analgesia, and reduce dosage of
induction agents.
· ECG, pulse oximetry. An end-tidal CO, monitor helps evaluate ventilation.
+Gas anesthetics and controlledventilation.
·Avoidance of mitrous oxide.
Diaphragmatic Hernia
143
12. Why shouldn't nitrous oxide be used in animals anesthetized for diaphragmatic hernia
repair?
Postoperatively, nitrous oxide exacerbates the pneumothorax by diffusing into the chest
cavity, reexpanding the gas space, and inhibiting lung expansion.
13. What type of ventilation is appropriate?
Ventilation can be performed either by a mechanical ventilator or by an assistant/technician.
·6-10 respirations per minute
·Do not exceed airway pressures greater than 20 cm HzO since this can result in
barotrauma—especially in compromised lungs. Ventilation is continued throughout the
surgical procedure until negative intrathoracic pressure has been reestablished. At that
point, the rate of ventilation can be decreased and the patient is encouraged to begin spon-
taneous respiration. Intraoperative anesthesia can be supplemented by the administration
(under 2.0-2.5% isoflurane).
· A seemingly stable patient with a diaphragmatic hernia can quickly decompensate after
administration of premedications or induction of anesthesia.
15. What is the surgical management for diaphragmatic hernia? What is the medical
management?
·Generous surgical site clipped.
· Ventral midline celiotomy from xiphoid to pubis.
·Begin ventilation when the abdominal incision is begun.
● Identify the location and type of diaphragmatic tear. Carefully check the diaphragm to
avoid missing a second tear.
· Bluntly or sharply break down adhesions.
· Complete an abdominal exploratory to ensure that organs are healthy and correctly
positioned.
· Use judicious debridement to freshen hernia edges.
patterns are the most efficient for diaphragmatic repair.
· Negative intrathoracic pressure is restored prior to abdominal closure.
16. What do you do if the herniated organs cannot be easily reduced into the abdominal
cavity?
The hernia may have contracted or the herniated organs may have become larger or
 trouble reducing herniated organs should:
· Check for and resect any adhesions
· Increase the size of the hernia
· Extend the ventral midline incisions through the caudal portion of the sternum for better
exposure
17. List intraoperative complications of diaphragmatic hernia surgery.
· Reexpansion and reperfusion injury of lungs
·Hemorrhage
·Chronic adhesions, strictures, or tears
·Loss of diaphragmatic tissue for repair
144
Diaphragmatic Hernia
18. Describe the best way to close a diaphragmatic hernia
·Begin closure dorsally and work in a ventral direction.
·Use a long-lasting absorbable or nonabsorbable suture in continuous, interrupted, or inter
locking patterns.
· Close radial tears first.
·Leave the suture tag long so that it can be used as a stay suture.
19. Is special equipment needed for diaphragmatic hernia repair?
No. A routine surgical pack for abdominal surgery will generally be sufficient. However, the
repair may be easier if you include Balfour abdominal retractors, long (>l0-inch) needle holders
and thumb forceps, malleable retractors, and a surgical assistant.
20. What is done if the diaphragmatic tear cannot be closed by reapposing the natural
tissues?
A number of options are available to fill in gaps left in the diaphragm:
·Muscle flaps
· Prosthetic mesh
·Silastic sheeting
·Omental flaps
·Advancement of diaphragm
22. How can negative intrathoracic pressure be reestablished?
By placing a thoracostomy tube or percutaneous or transdiaphragmatic thoracocentesis.
Transdiaphragmatic thoracocentesis is ideal because it allows the surgeon to see the restoration
of negative thoracic pressure as the diaphragm resumes its normally curved shape. Failure to
curvature) alerts the surgeon to the presence of significant leaks and helps identify other
di aphragmatic lesions.
23. What parameters should be most closely monitored in the postoperative period?
· Respiratory rate and quality (tachypnea and cyanosis indicate problems).
Other postoperative considerations include adequate pain management, continued fluid
support, and cardiac monitoring.
24.  Are antibiotics required after repair of a diaphragmatic hernia?
In the absence of a long surgical procedure (>2 hours), use of a prosthetic mesh, or organ
compromise, prophylactic anti biotic administration is not required. Otherwise, administration of
mised organ is the liver, and the antibiotic chosen should be effective against Clostridium
organisms.
25. What is empty abdomen syndrome?
Adaptation of abdominal musculature in chronic diaphragmatic hernia cases to having less
viscera in the abdomen. After returning the misplaced organs to the abdominal cavity, room is at a
premium, and closure is tight. Care must be taken to avoid incorporating the viscera in the abdom-
inal closure or creating excessive pressure within the abdominal cavity and compromising vascular
supply. Although the abdominal cavity may be tight, it adjusts to the viscera in a short time.
CONTROVERSY
26. Is a thoracostomy tube required after repair of a diaphragmatic hernia?
Not routinely. When continued accumulation of fluid or air is expected during the initial
postsurgical period, a thoracostomy should be placed. A thoracostomy tube can be used for
HepaticLobectomy
145
thoracostomy tube is that patients with compromised (atelectic) lungs are less likely to suffer
reexpansion pulmonary edema secondary to excessive efforts to restore negative intrapleural
pressure. Tubes require diligent maintenance to avoid iatrogenic problems
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Boudrieau RJ, Muir WW: Pathophysiology of traumatic diaphragmatic hemia in dogs. Comp Cont Educ Pract
Vet 9:379385, 1987.
2. Hosgood G: Diagnosis and management of diaphragmatic diseases. Waltham Focus 6:2-9, 1996.
3. Schmiedt CW: Traumatic diaphragmatic hernia in cats: 34 cases (1991-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:1237-
1240, 2003.
4. Spattini G: Use of ultrasound to diagnose diaphragmatic rupture in dogs and cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:226-
230, 2003.
35. HEPATIC LOBECTOMY
Sheldon L. Padgett, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What are indications for partial or total hepatic lobectomy?
·Mass lesion (neoplasia, abscess, cyst)
· Fracture or damage to lobe with severe hemorrhage
· Hepatic arteniovenous fistula
· Hepatic lobe torsion
 2. What is a maximum amount of canine liver that can be removed, assuming normal
function of the remaining liver?
 The maximum is 70-80%; regeneration via hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the remaining
porti on occurs within 6 weeks.
3. During lobectomy, which afferent vessels to the liver need to be identified and
preserved to avoid fatal iatrogenic hemorrhage?
·Hepatic arteries (the number varies between two and five)
·Portal vein
 4. If bleeding from the liver is uncontrolled and a source not readily identified, what
potential life-saving measure can be performed by the surgeon at the time of
laparotomy?
The Pringle maneuver acutely obstructs afferent sources of blood to the liver parenchyma.
This obstruction is accomplished by occluding the structures (hepatic artery and portal vein) in
the hepatoduodenal ligament between the thumb and forefinger at the level of the epiploic
foramen.
 5. List some local methods for controlling mild hepatic lobular hemorrhage secondary to
trauma.
·Ligature of vessels
·Cautery
· Clips
·Fibrin glue
HepaticLobectomy
145
thoracostomy tube is that patients with compromised (atelectic) lungs are less likely to suffer
reexpansion pulmonary edema secondary to excessive efforts to restore negative intrapleural
pressure. Tubes require diligent maintenance to avoid iatrogenic problems
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Boudrieau RJ, Muir WW: Pathophysiology of traumatic diaphragmatic hemia in dogs. Comp Cont Educ Pract
Vet 9:379385, 1987.
2. Hosgood G: Diagnosis and management of diaphragmatic diseases. Waltham Focus 6:2-9, 1996.
3. Schmiedt CW: Traumatic diaphragmatic hernia in cats: 34 cases (1991-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:1237-
1240, 2003.
4. Spattini G: Use of ultrasound to diagnose diaphragmatic rupture in dogs and cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:226-
230, 2003.
35. HEPATIC LOBECTOMY
Sheldon L. Padgett, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What are indications for partial or total hepatic lobectomy?
·Mass lesion (neoplasia, abscess, cyst)
· Fracture or damage to lobe with severe hemorrhage
· Hepatic arteniovenous fistula
· Hepatic lobe torsion
 2. What is a maximum amount of canine liver that can be removed, assuming normal
function of the remaining liver?
 The maximum is 70-80%; regeneration via hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the remaining
porti on occurs within 6 weeks.
3. During lobectomy, which afferent vessels to the liver need to be identified and
preserved to avoid fatal iatrogenic hemorrhage?
·Hepatic arteries (the number varies between two and five)
·Portal vein
 4. If bleeding from the liver is uncontrolled and a source not readily identified, what
potential life-saving measure can be performed by the surgeon at the time of
laparotomy?
The Pringle maneuver acutely obstructs afferent sources of blood to the liver parenchyma.
This obstruction is accomplished by occluding the structures (hepatic artery and portal vein) in
the hepatoduodenal ligament between the thumb and forefinger at the level of the epiploic
foramen.
 5. List some local methods for controlling mild hepatic lobular hemorrhage secondary to
trauma.
·Ligature of vessels
·Cautery
· Clips
·Fibrin glue
146
PortosystemicShunts
· Pressure by packing the area or reapposing the capsule with large mattress sutures
· Removal of affected lobe
6. What is the effect of ligating a hepatic artery supplying a liver lobe that is to remain in
place?
No effect; collateral circulation supplies the affected lobe.
7. What is the effect of ligating a hepatic duct draining a lobe that is to remain in place?
Either lobar atrophy or biliary diversion to an adjacent lobe.
8. What is the effect of ligating a portal vein?
Acute, persistent ligation results in portal hypertension and death.
9. Does surgical stapling have a place in hepatic lobectomies?
Although both blunt dissection with ligation and surgical stapling are associated with
minimal morbidity when performed correctly, stapling (Autosuture, TA 90, 55, or 30) is quicker
and more complete.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Fossum TW: Surgery of the liver. In Fossum TW, editor: Small animat surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby- Year
Book, pp 450-474.
2. Martin RA, Lanz Ol: Liver and biliary system. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2003, W.B. Saunders, pp 708-725
36. PORTOSYSTEMIC SHUNTS
Sheldon L. Padgett, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What are the two major anatomic categories of portosystemic shunts (Pss)?
·Extrahepatic
· Intrahepatic
2. How are most extrahepatic PsS characterized?
Single (60-80%) congenital shunts in small dogs.
 3. Which persistent fetal vessel commonly creates a single intrahepatic Pss?
The ductus venosus.
 4. What side of the liver usually contains a persistent (patent) ductus venosus?
The left.
5. In single extrahepatic shunts, what are the common vessels of origin for the shunt?
· Portal vein
· Left gastric vein
· Splenic vein
146
PortosystemicShunts
· Pressure by packing the area or reapposing the capsule with large mattress sutures
· Removal of affected lobe
6. What is the effect of ligating a hepatic artery supplying a liver lobe that is to remain in
place?
No effect; collateral circulation supplies the affected lobe.
7. What is the effect of ligating a hepatic duct draining a lobe that is to remain in place?
Either lobar atrophy or biliary diversion to an adjacent lobe.
8. What is the effect of ligating a portal vein?
Acute, persistent ligation results in portal hypertension and death.
9. Does surgical stapling have a place in hepatic lobectomies?
Although both blunt dissection with ligation and surgical stapling are associated with
minimal morbidity when performed correctly, stapling (Autosuture, TA 90, 55, or 30) is quicker
and more complete.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Fossum TW: Surgery of the liver. In Fossum TW, editor: Small animat surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby- Year
Book, pp 450-474.
2. Martin RA, Lanz Ol: Liver and biliary system. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2003, W.B. Saunders, pp 708-725
36. PORTOSYSTEMIC SHUNTS
Sheldon L. Padgett, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What are the two major anatomic categories of portosystemic shunts (Pss)?
·Extrahepatic
· Intrahepatic
2. How are most extrahepatic PsS characterized?
Single (60-80%) congenital shunts in small dogs.
 3. Which persistent fetal vessel commonly creates a single intrahepatic Pss?
The ductus venosus.
 4. What side of the liver usually contains a persistent (patent) ductus venosus?
The left.
5. In single extrahepatic shunts, what are the common vessels of origin for the shunt?
· Portal vein
· Left gastric vein
· Splenic vein
Portosystemic Shunts
147
· Cranial or caudal mesenteric vein
· Gastroduodenal vein
6. What physiologic abnormality leads to the development of multiple (extrahepatic)
portosystemic shunts?
Portal hypertension
 7. List common physical examination findings in patients with a PSS.
·Small body size
·Ascites (acquired shunt)
8. What physical examination finding is common in cats with PsS?
Ptyalism, and cats with copper-colored eyes.
9. List the commonest clinical signs associated with PSS.
(increased ammonia, aromatic amino acids)
·Polyphagia
· Vomiting or diarrhea
· Polyuria and polydipsia
·Prolonged anesthetic recovery
10. List common laboratory findings associated with PSS.
· Increased liver enzymes
· Decreased blood urea nitrogen
· Decreased albumin
·Increased fasting ammonia
· Elevated bile acids
·Ammonium biurate crystalluria
11. Why do many animals with Pss have urinary calculi?
One of the functions of the liver is to conjugate nitrogen-containing proteins into urea. With
inadequate hepatic function, the high concentration of ammonium in the urine leads to calculi
containing ammonium biurate.
12. Are ammonium biurate urinary calculi pathognomonic for PsS?
No, only for liver disease and Dalmatians.
support the diagnosis of a Pss (elevated serum bile acids, low albumin, and low blood urea
nitrogen). At the time of exploratory surgery, no extrahepatic shunt is found. An intra-
operative portogram is performed, and there is no evidence of a vascular anomaly. How
do you explain the laboratory and clinical abnormalities?
The syndrome of hepatic microvascular dysplasia is most likely occurring. This condition
consists of normal gross vascular anatomy, but shunting at the level of the hepatic sinusoids.
nation of the liver tissue.
14. What is the prognosis of microvascular dysplasia compared to PSs?
Medical management of microvascular dysplasia is more successful than that of PSS.
Abnormal gastrointestinal signs may not resolve while neurologic signs improve. Many animals
do well with dietary management alone.
148
Portosystemic Shunts
15. What is transcolonic scintigraphy?
Use of sodium pertechnetate (technetium-99m) applied colonically; in animals with PSS
blood is shunted away from the liver into systemic circulation, and nuclear activity is detected in
the heart and lungs before the liver.
16. What other diagnostic test may be useful in diagnosing a PsS?
Ultrasonography.
17. What are the basic items used in medical therapy of a PsS and how are they beneficial?
·Lactulosedecreases colonic pH, decreasing the amount of ammomia absorbed
· Oral antibiotics—decrease the number of urease-producing bacteria in the colon, decreas-
ing the amount of toxins absorbed
· Protein restriction—decreases the substrate for production of ammonia
18. What are anesthetic concerns for patients with Pss?
· Hepatic dysfunction or insufficiency—increased and unpredictable effect of drugs
(diazepam, isoflurane are recommended)
· Pressure changeshypotension resulting from hypoalbuminemia and surgical manipula
tions; decrease in central venous pressure after ligation of shunt (increase in portal
pressures)
·Hypothermia and hypoglycemia in young, small patients
19. In what three intraabdominal areas should one look for a PSS?
·Right mesentenic root
·Epiploic foramen
· Left mesenteric root (traversing the diaphragm, as in a portoazygous shunt)
20. Once a shunt is found at surgery, what is done next?
Complete occlusion is the eventual goal; this can be done acutely via ligation or gradually
with an ameroid constrictor or other gradual occlusion technique (such as cellophane banding)
21.  What is the primary morbidity associated with acute occlusion of the anomalous vessel?
Severe portal hypertension (which can be fatal).
22. What is done to avoid acute portal hypertension during ligation?
during slow ligation of the shunt. Portal pressures are maintained less than l0 cm HzO over preli-
gation pressures. If full ligation of the shunt is not possible, partial ligation is performed.
 23. What other objective parameter can be measured during ligation to signal hypertension?
Central venous pressure can be measured via a jugular catheter; there should be less than a
1-cm drop in preligation pressures.
24. What are some subjective intraoperative methods to detect acute portal hypertension?
·Pulsating of splanchnic vasculature
· Congestion, cyanosis, or both, of the small intestine
·Hypermoti lity of the small intestine
25. How does an ameroid constrictor decrease morbidity?
The constrictor, when placed around the anomalous vessel, slowly (over weeks) decreases
the lumen of the vessel. This allows the hepatic parenchyma to accommodate the increased blood
flow gradually, decreasing the chance of portal hypertension.
Portosystemic Shunts
149
26. What is an ameroid constrictor?
Casein in the ring expands because of its hygroscopic properties. The metal jacket around
the constrictor forces inward expansion and, when placed around a shunt, leads to obliteration of
the lumen.
27. Are there any treatments for multiple extrahepatic PsS?
Medical therapy is recommended. Banding of the posthepatic vena cava can be done to
increase the caval pressure. Consequentially, this decreases the amount of blood that runs off into
the cava, increasing portal flow. Although patients can tolerate caval banding with some morbid-
28. What are the most common postoperative complications associated with ligation of a PsS?
· Ascites: prognosis good if mild.
· Generalized motor seizures: prognosis guarded to poor if not suppressed
29. Are any animals more likely to seizure after ligation of a PsS?
 ) s 
30. There has been a lot of discussion about partial versus complete ligation of portosys-
temic shunts; does it really matter?
Yes, partial ligation patients have a much higher incidence (50%) of long-term problems
31. How can you avoid these late complications?
By using an ameroid constrictor or by repeating a laparotomy 1-4 months after the initial
partial ligation and attempting full ligation at that time.
32.  Are there any predictors for full shunt ligation?
from full ligation versus those with encephalopathy (60% chance that full ligation can be per-
formed without causing fatal portal hypertension).
33. How can successful recovery from PsS surgery be documented?
· Absence of clinical signs and patient growth
· Minimal dietary requirements
· Repeat nuclear scinti graphy or portography
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Allen L, Stobie D: Clinicopathologic features of dogs with microvascular dysplasia. J Am Vet Med Assoc
214:218-220, 1999.
 s    ss    e        7
1993). I Am Vet Med Assoc 208:1849-1854, 1996.
3. Christianson J, Hottinger H, Allen L, et al: Hepatic microvascular dysplasia in dogs: a retrospective study of 24
cases (1987-1995). J Am Aninm Hosp Assoc 36:385-389, 2000.
        o          
extrahepatic portosystemic shunts in cats: 23 cases (1996-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1341-1347, 2002.
5. Murphy S, Elison G, Long M, et al: A comparison of the ameroid constrictor versus ligation in the surgical
management of single extrahepatic portosystemic shunts. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:390-396, 2001.
animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003, W.B. Saunders, pp 727-752.
Surg 28:38-47, 1999.
37. BILIARY SURGERY
Sheldon L. Padgett, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What are the most important functions of the biliary tree?
Accumulation, concentration, storage, and delivery of bile.
2. Where is the gallbladder located?
Between the quadrate and right medial hepatic lobes.
 3. Describe the anatomy of the extrahepatic biliary system.
Each liver lobe is drained by its own hepatic duct. The cystic duct supplies and empties the
gallbladder. The cystic duct and the hepatic ducts converge to form the common bile duct (CBD).
mal duodenum (in dogs, at the major duodenal papilla with the ventral pancreatic duct)
4. What is the composition of canine choleliths?
Choleliths in the dog are usually formed from calcium salts of biliary pigment.
5. Are choleliths the most common cause of extrahepatic biliary obstruction?
In humans, yes; in dogs, no. Most cases of cholelithiasis are clinically silent.
6.  What is the most common cause of extrahepatic biiary obstruction in dogs?
Obstruction (usually because of inflammation) of the CBD as it passes through the
pancreatic area and empties into the duodenum.
7. List other possible causes of extrahepatic biliary obstruction in small animals.
· Inflammation of the biliary tract (cholangitis, cholecystitis)
·Biliary stasis
· Neoplasia (either of the biliary tree or extraluminal neoplasia leading to lumen
compromise)
· Diaphragmatic hernias
·Parasitic infestation of the liver
· Congenital dysplasia
 8. Should a coagulation profile be performed on a patient with chronic posthepatic
biliary obstruction?
Yes. Fat absorption may be impaired with biliary obstruction; fat-soluble vitamin K is not
well absorbed. Coagulation factors Vll, IX, and X are vitamin K dependent and may not be
hours before surgery restores adequate vitamin K factors.
9. What is the most common type of biliary neoplasia?
Bile duct carcinoma is the second most common type of hepatic tumor and the commonest
type of tumor in the biliary tree.
10. What is cholecystitis?
Inflammation and infection of the gallbladder.
Biliary Surgery
151
11. What are the most common pathogenic organisms of cholecystitis?
Escherichiacofi andKlebsiefla.
12. When a physician client asks you if Charcot's triad is seen in canine cholecystitis, what
is your response?
 Although biliary colic (pain) and fever is present, as it is in humans, jaundice is not seen as
often as vomiting in dogs.
13. What portion of the biliary tree most commonly ruptures?
CBD.
14. What are causes of biliary ruptures?
·Trauma (bile duct)
● Cholecystitis (gallbladder)
· Cholelithiasis (gallbladder)
·Mucocele (gallbladder)
15. What is a gallbladder mucocele?
cholangiohepatitis. The bile appears striated and looks similar to a kiwi fruit.
16. What is the treatment for a mucocele?
Cholecystectomy and antimicrobial therapy based on culture/sensitivity.
17. Discuss the preferred method of repair for biliary trauma.
 Primary repair alone is usually not possible except in cases of avulsion of the CBD from its
duodenal insertion. If trauma to the length of the CBD is minimal, primary closure with stenting
via an intraluminal stent may be possible. If the CBD is severely traumatized, biliary diversion,
ligation of the duct, and auxiliary routes drain bile from the affected lobe.
18.  Discuss the preferred surgical treatment for cholecystitis.
Cholecystectomy is indicated to remove the infected tissue. This procedure involves
dissection of the gallbladder from the hepatic fossa, freeing the cystic duct and accompanying
vessels, and ligation at the junction with the CBD.
19. What are the indications for a cholecystotomy?
To remove contents from the gallbladder or CBD that cannot be removed by a less invasive
method, such as aspiration. When performing a cholecystotomy for cholelith removal, one should
procedure for the treatment of choleliths.
20. When creating a stoma in the gallbladder and intestine for a cholecystenterotomy,
what are guidelines for the dimensions of the opening?
Over time, the orifice strictures to approximately half of the original length. The stoma
should be either the entire length of the gallbladder, from the apex to the infundibulum, or 4 cm
in length, whichever is less.
21. What is the sequela of creating a stoma that is not large enough?
Chronic, recurrent ascending cholangiohepatitis.
152
GastricDilatation-Volvulus
22. What is the difference between cholecystoduodenostomy versus cholecystojejunostomy?
Location of the anastomosis of the gallbladder within the intestinal tract (duodenum [more
physiologic]or jejunum)
23. What are treatment options for bile peritonitis?
Culture of the peritoneal cavity is indicated, and perioperative and postoperative antibiotics
should be given. The source of the biliary effusion should be identified and treated. High-volume
ss go    s go  n e d  os 
nutri tional support).
24. What are some prognostic factors of bile peritonitis?
 s  ss n  ns   e  s  
Average neutrophil count in animals that survive biliary rupture is significantly lower than in
those who do not survive.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Besso J, Wrigley R, Gliatto J,et al: Ultrasonographic appearance and clinical findings in 14 dogs with gallbladder
mucocele. Vet Radio1 Ultrasoumd 41:261-71, 2000
 2. Eich S, Ludwig L: The surgical treatment of cholelithiasis in cats: A study of nine cases. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
38:290-296, 2002
3. Martin RA, Lanz Ol: Liver and biliary system. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2003, W.B. Saunders, pp 708-726.
4. Parchman MB, Flanders JA: Extrahepatic biliary tract rupture: Evaluation of the relationship between the site of
rupture and the cause of rupture in 15 dogs. Comell Vet 80:267-272, 1990
5. Tobias KS: Hepatobiliary system. In Harari J,. editor: Small animat surgery, Media, Penn, 1996, Williams &
Wilkins, pp 143-155.
38. GASTRIC DILATATTON-VOLVULUS
Bradley R. Coolman, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV)?
An acute, life-threatening, medical and surgical emergency affecting primarily large and
giant breeds of dogs. The stomach of affected dogs becomes distended with gas and malposi-
tioned, leading to shock and rapid deterioration of the patient if not properly treated.
2. What causes GDV?
The exact cause of GDV is not known; however, several risk factors have been identified.
3. What are some specific risk factors that have been associated with GDV in dogs?
·Age—middle-aged and old dogs are at an increased risk.
· Body weight-breeds with a higher average adult body weight are at increased risk of
GDV. Obesity is not a risk factor.
risk of GDV.
152
GastricDilatation-Volvulus
22. What is the difference between cholecystoduodenostomy versus cholecystojejunostomy?
Location of the anastomosis of the gallbladder within the intestinal tract (duodenum [more
physiologic]or jejunum)
23. What are treatment options for bile peritonitis?
Culture of the peritoneal cavity is indicated, and perioperative and postoperative antibiotics
should be given. The source of the biliary effusion should be identified and treated. High-volume
ss go    s go  n e d  os 
nutri tional support).
24. What are some prognostic factors of bile peritonitis?
 s  ss n  ns   e  s  
Average neutrophil count in animals that survive biliary rupture is significantly lower than in
those who do not survive.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Besso J, Wrigley R, Gliatto J,et al: Ultrasonographic appearance and clinical findings in 14 dogs with gallbladder
mucocele. Vet Radio1 Ultrasoumd 41:261-71, 2000
 2. Eich S, Ludwig L: The surgical treatment of cholelithiasis in cats: A study of nine cases. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
38:290-296, 2002
3. Martin RA, Lanz Ol: Liver and biliary system. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2003, W.B. Saunders, pp 708-726.
4. Parchman MB, Flanders JA: Extrahepatic biliary tract rupture: Evaluation of the relationship between the site of
rupture and the cause of rupture in 15 dogs. Comell Vet 80:267-272, 1990
5. Tobias KS: Hepatobiliary system. In Harari J,. editor: Small animat surgery, Media, Penn, 1996, Williams &
Wilkins, pp 143-155.
38. GASTRIC DILATATTON-VOLVULUS
Bradley R. Coolman, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV)?
An acute, life-threatening, medical and surgical emergency affecting primarily large and
giant breeds of dogs. The stomach of affected dogs becomes distended with gas and malposi-
tioned, leading to shock and rapid deterioration of the patient if not properly treated.
2. What causes GDV?
The exact cause of GDV is not known; however, several risk factors have been identified.
3. What are some specific risk factors that have been associated with GDV in dogs?
·Age—middle-aged and old dogs are at an increased risk.
· Body weight-breeds with a higher average adult body weight are at increased risk of
GDV. Obesity is not a risk factor.
risk of GDV.
GastricDilatation-Volvulus
153
susceptibility to GDV.
· Genetics—-Purebred dogs have a higher risk of GDv than mixed-breed dogs.
· History—dogs with a family history of GDV have an increased risk of developing the
syndrome.
4. List the clinical signs for a dog with acute GDV
· Restlessness and pain
· Increased respiratory rates
·Nervous pacing
·Abdominal distention (bloat)
· Repeated vomiting (often nonproductive)
·Hypersalivation (ptyalism)
 5. What comes first, dilation or volvulus?
This is the proverbial chicken or the egg question of the GDV syndrome. Most investigators
believe that gastric dilation precedes rotation of the stomach. Analysis of the stomach gas from
dogs with GDv shows that the gas filling the bloated stomach is essentially room air, and
is also reported to occur.
6. In which direction does the stomach normally rotate during GDV?
Usually in a clockwise direction (to 270°) as viewed ventrodorsally into the abdomen (i.e.,
7a-c. Discuss the pathophysiology of GDV.
a Cardiovascular: Dogs with GDV present in shock. Dilation of the stomach causes com-
pression of the caudal vena cava and portal vein, resulting in sequestration of blood in the caudal
half of the body and markedly decreased venous return to the heart (hypovolemic shock).
Decreased cardiac output and decreased arterial blood pressure result, which in turn lead to
cellular hypoxia and a shift to anaerobic metabolism. Myocardial ischemia can lead to decreased
contractility and arrhythmias, which contribute to cardiac dysfunction (cardiogenic shock). Stasis
of the portal circulation decreases the ability of the hepatic monocyte-macrophage defense
system to clear bacteria and endotoxins from the circulation, and consequently distributive or
predispose to the development of disseminated intravascular coagulation.
 b. Respiratory: The grossly distended stomach pushes on the diaphragm and results in
decreased pulmonary compliance. The respiratory impairment leads to a ventilation-perfusion
mismatch, which further decreases blood oxygenation and exacerbates tissue hypoxia.
causes compression of the thin-walled gastric veins, resulting in vascular stasis and edema of the
gastric wall. Avulsion of the short gastric vessels along the greater curvature of the stomach often
thickness or full-thickness necrosis of the gastric wall may occur, most commonly along the left
side of the greater curvature and fundus.
8. How is GDV diagnosed?
Usually based on signalment, clinical signs, and physical examination.
9. Are abdominal radiographs required to diagnose GDV?
Only for radiologists.
154
GastricDilatation-Volvulus
B
D
Figure 38-1From Matthiesen DT: Gastric dilation-volvulus syndrome. In
Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smatl animal surgery ed 2; Philadelphia, 1993,
W.B. Saunders, p 580.
10. Which radiographic view is recommended?
The right lateral recumbent view is considered the view of choice for confirming a diagnosis
 of GDv. Dogs with gastric volvulus have a distinct compartmentalization line between the gas-
filled fundus and pylorus (double bubble or pillar sign).
11. Is it important to distinguish between simple gastric dilation and GDV?
No. Dogs with acute gastric dilation should be treated identically to dogs with GDV.
12. List some differential diagnoses for GDV in dogs.
·Mesenteric volvulus
·Splenic torsion
GastricDilatation-Volvulus
155
·Ascites
·Hemoabdomen
·Abdominal neoplasia
13. What are the emergency treatments for a dog that presents with acute GDV?
·Aggressive shock treatment (see Chapter 3)
· Gastric decompression with an orogastric tube or via percutaneous trocarization
14. List the goals of surgery for GDV.
· Gastric decompression and repositioning
· Assessment of abdominal organ viability
· Permanent gastropexy of the stomach to the body wall
15. List methods for intraoperative gastric decompression.
· Orogastric tube passed by an assistant and guided through the gastroesophageal junction
by the surgeon.
· Trocarization with a large-bore needle (14- 18 gauge) attached to the surgical suction hose
· Temporary gastrostomy tube.
16. Is gastrotomy useful for intraoperative gastric decompression?
Gastrotomy should be avoided if possible and used only if a gastric foreign body or
desiccated, packed gastric contents are present.
17. What is the first structure seen during an emergency celiotomy for GDV?
The omentum covering the distended stomach.
18. How is the stomach repositioned in a dog with a 180° clockwise rotation?
Carefully, to avoid organ trauma. With the surgeon standing on the dog's right side, the right
hand reaches up toward the dog's left dorsal body wall and grabs the pylorus. The left hand
pushes down on the stomach as the right hand gently lifts up and back on the pylorus. The
stomach should flip back into a normal position. Complete derotation is confirmed by visualizing
the esophagus, pylorus, omentum, and spleen in their normal positions.
19. What percentage of dogs with GDV have gastric necrosis?
Approximately 10%.
20. What criteria are used to determine gastric and splenic viability?
and thinning of the stomach wall, and lack of active bleeding after gastric incision.
Splenic necrosis, avulsion of splenic mesentenic vessels, and thrombosis of the splenic
vessels are indications for splenectomy. An engorged spleen may return to normal size and color
several minutes after repositioning.
21. Is intravenous fluorescein dye injection valuable for assessment of gastric viability?
No; it has no advantage over subjective assessment.
22. Which clinical laboratory assay has been described as useful in identifying gastric
necrosis in dogs with GDV?
23. Does splenectomy decrease the recurrence rate of GDV in dogs?
No.
156
Gastric Dilatation-Volvulus
24  List methods for partial gastrectomy.
·Surgical resection and two-layer inverting, hand-sewn closure.
· Resection and closure with automated surgical stapling equipment (i.e., TA 90 or GIA 55
staplers, United States Surgical Corporation).
· Invaginating the necrotic portion into the gastnic lumen and oversewing of the gastric
wall.
· For all gastrectomy techniques, an orogastric tube should be placed first to maintain
 patency of the esophageal-gastric opening.
25. What techniques are commonly used for permanent gastropexy?
·Tube gastropexy
·Circumcostal gastropexy
·Belt-loop gastropexy
·Incisional gastropexy
·Ventral midline gastropexy
· Laparoscopic gastropexy
 26. Which gastropexy method creates the strongest adhesion in experimental cases?
Circumcostal gastropexy.
27. Is the increased strength of the circumcostal gastropexy clinically important?
No. All of the methods listed are associated with a low rate of recurrence (<10%). Surgeons
should select a familiar and consistently successful method.
 28. Should pyloromyotomy or pyloroplasty be routinely performed on dogs that have
GDV?
No. These procedures do not increase gastric emptying rates or prevent future episodes of
gastric dilation; they do increase the postoperative complication rates.
29. What is the case fatality rate of dogs with acute GDV?
15-33%.
30. What factors are associated with an increased risk of perioperative mortality?
·Poor physical condition on hospital admission (i.e., depressed or comatose dogs)
· Gastric necrosis or gastric rupture
· Splenectomy or partial gastrectomy
·Preoperative cardiac dy srhythmias
· Disseminated intravascular coagulation
 31. List the primary immediate postoperative complications encountered in dogs with
GDV.
· Shock
·Ventricular dysrhythmias
· Vomiting and gastritis
·Hypokalemia
·Hypoproteinemia
·Anemia
·Gastric atony
·Gastric necrosis
· Peritonitis
· Disseminated intravascular coagulation
·Death
Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies
157
CONTROVERSY
32. What is the optimal timing of surgery for a GDV patient?
Most surgeons believe that the dog should be taken to surgery as soon as possible
immediately after initiating shock therapy; others argue that the dog should be subjected to
surgery only after a more extensive period of medical stabilization (12-24 hours). The timing of
surgery ultimately depends on the condition of the patient, the response to shock treatment, the
judgment of the attending clinician, and the availability of a surgeon.
33. Should prophylactic gastropexy be recommended?
Valuable working dogs or show dogs of "at risk" breeds may benefit from a prophylactic gas-
tropexy. Dogs with a first-degree relative that had a GDV or a family history of GDV are at higher risk.
In all cases, the costs and risks of prevention versus treatment must be considered
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Brockman DJ, Washabau RJ, Drobatz KJ: Canine gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome in a veterinary critical
care unit: 295 cases (1986-1992). I Am Vet Med Assoc 207:460-464, 1995.
2. Brouman JD, Schertel ER, Allen DA, et al: Factors associated with perioperative mortality in dogs with surgically
managed gastric dilatation-volvulus: 137 cases (1988-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:1855-1858, 1996.
3. de Papp E, Drobatz KJ: Plasma lactate concentration as a predictor of gastric necrosis and survival in dogs with
GDV. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:49-53, 1999
4. Glickman LT, Glickman NW, Schellenberg DB, et al: Multiple risk factors for the gastric dilatation-volvulus
61 t1  d   1 s o 1    
5. Glickman LT, Lantz GW, Schellenberg DB, et al: A prospective study of survival and recurrence following the
acute gastric dilatation-volvulus syndrome in 136 dogs. J Am Anin Hosp Assoc 34:253-259,1998.
6. Lantz GC: Treatment of gastric dilatation-volvulus. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in smalt animat
surgery, ed 4, Baltimore, 1998, williams & Wilkins, pp 223-231.
7. Rawlings CA: Laparoscopic assisted gastropexy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:15-18, 2002.
39. GASTROINTESTINAL FOREIGN BODIES
Bradley R. Coolman, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
 1. Why are gastrointestinal foreign bodies a common problem in small animals?
Small animals (especially juveniles) have a high orolingual curiosity. The oropharyngeal entrance
to the gastrointestinal tract has a larger diameter than any other portion of the digestive system.
 2. What clinical signs are associated with foreign bodies in the stomach and intestine?
·Vomiting
·Dehydration
·Anorexia
· Depression
·Fever
·Abdominal pain
3. List the characteristic radiographic findings in an animal with mechanical obstruction
of the intestine.
· Multiple loops of gas-filled or fluid-filled, dilated small intestine
     
· Delayed passage (or retention) of gastrointestinal contrast material
Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies
157
CONTROVERSY
32. What is the optimal timing of surgery for a GDV patient?
Most surgeons believe that the dog should be taken to surgery as soon as possible
immediately after initiating shock therapy; others argue that the dog should be subjected to
surgery only after a more extensive period of medical stabilization (12-24 hours). The timing of
surgery ultimately depends on the condition of the patient, the response to shock treatment, the
judgment of the attending clinician, and the availability of a surgeon.
33. Should prophylactic gastropexy be recommended?
Valuable working dogs or show dogs of "at risk" breeds may benefit from a prophylactic gas-
tropexy. Dogs with a first-degree relative that had a GDV or a family history of GDV are at higher risk.
In all cases, the costs and risks of prevention versus treatment must be considered
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Brockman DJ, Washabau RJ, Drobatz KJ: Canine gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome in a veterinary critical
care unit: 295 cases (1986-1992). I Am Vet Med Assoc 207:460-464, 1995.
2. Brouman JD, Schertel ER, Allen DA, et al: Factors associated with perioperative mortality in dogs with surgically
managed gastric dilatation-volvulus: 137 cases (1988-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:1855-1858, 1996.
3. de Papp E, Drobatz KJ: Plasma lactate concentration as a predictor of gastric necrosis and survival in dogs with
GDV. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:49-53, 1999
4. Glickman LT, Glickman NW, Schellenberg DB, et al: Multiple risk factors for the gastric dilatation-volvulus
61 t1  d   1 s o 1    
5. Glickman LT, Lantz GW, Schellenberg DB, et al: A prospective study of survival and recurrence following the
acute gastric dilatation-volvulus syndrome in 136 dogs. J Am Anin Hosp Assoc 34:253-259,1998.
6. Lantz GC: Treatment of gastric dilatation-volvulus. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in smalt animat
surgery, ed 4, Baltimore, 1998, williams & Wilkins, pp 223-231.
7. Rawlings CA: Laparoscopic assisted gastropexy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:15-18, 2002.
39. GASTROINTESTINAL FOREIGN BODIES
Bradley R. Coolman, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
 1. Why are gastrointestinal foreign bodies a common problem in small animals?
Small animals (especially juveniles) have a high orolingual curiosity. The oropharyngeal entrance
to the gastrointestinal tract has a larger diameter than any other portion of the digestive system.
 2. What clinical signs are associated with foreign bodies in the stomach and intestine?
·Vomiting
·Dehydration
·Anorexia
· Depression
·Fever
·Abdominal pain
3. List the characteristic radiographic findings in an animal with mechanical obstruction
of the intestine.
· Multiple loops of gas-filled or fluid-filled, dilated small intestine
     
· Delayed passage (or retention) of gastrointestinal contrast material
158
GastrointestinalForeignBodies
4. Can gastric and intestinal foreign bodies be successfully removed with an endoscope?
Yes, for gastric foreign bodies.
No, for foreign bodies from the small intestine.
 5. How long should an internist attempt endoscopic removal of a gastric foreign body
before the patient is taken to surgery?
A time limit should be set at the start of the procedure (e.g., 30 minutes) to prevent excessive
anesthesia time and patient trauma. The efficiency of removing the foreign body or the ability to
endoscopy.
6. Is conservative management (supportive care only) successful for gastric or intestinal
foreign bodies?
Limited information is published concerning conser vative management of gastrointestinal
foreign bodies in small animals. In human patients (mainly pediatrics), 80-90% of ingested for-
eign bodies will pass without intervention and cause no adverse effects. In one report, 9 of 19 cats
gually lodged string was freed.
7. What are linear foreign bodies?
String, fabric, thread, or other objects that become fixed proximally in the gastrointestinal
tract, extend distally, and cause partial gastrointestinal obstruction.
8.  Describe the pathophysiology of a linear foreign body.
After the linear foreign body becomes fixed proximally, the intestine becomes plicated on
the string because of repeated peristaltic activity. The linear foreign body becomes taut at the
mesenteric border of the intestine and eventually begins to cut into the mucosa. If the string is not
Temoved or released, the foreign body eventually cuts through the bowel. The end result is
localized or generalized peritonitis, with extensive adhesions at the mesenteric border.
9. What radiographic findings are characteristic of linear foreign bodies?
· Plication of the intestine with sharp turns and irregular gas bubbles
· Loss of serosal detail or free gas in the abdominal cavity, which indicate bowel
perforation and peritonitis
10. Where do linear foreign bodies typically lodge?
· Cats—around the base of the tongue
·Dogsat the pylorus
11. Where do nonlinear gastric and intestinal foreign bodies typically become lodged?
· Pylorus
·Ileocecocolic valve
12. List the indications for surgical removal of a gastric or intestinal foreign body.
· Complete gastrointestinal obstruction
· Increased vomiting or abdominal pain
·Fever, lethargy, or deterioration of patient status
·Failure of a foreign body to move (based on radiographs) for more than 8 hours
Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies
159
13. What is the surgical treatment for a gastric foreign body?
Gastrotomy. The gastrotomy incision should be made in an avascular region of the body of
the stomach and closed in one or two layers using either an appositional or an inverting pattern.
Excessive inversion of the stomach should be avoided.
14. What are the surgical treatments for an intestinal foreign body?
Enterotomy made just aboral to the foreign body (in healthy bowel) and closed in a single-
enterotomies for complete removal.
15. When should intestinal resection and anastomosis be performed?
· If the foreign body obstruction has caused necrosis of the bowel
· If perforation and localized peritonitis are present (i.e., linear foreign body)
·If the viability of the intestine is in question
16. Should a biopsy specimen of the bowel be obtained when removing a foreign body?
Yes, if the bowel is thickened or stenotic at the level of the obstruction.
17. Why should a biopsy be performed in this situation?
Patients can develop a foreign body obstruction secondary to neoplastic impingement into
the bowel lumen. Neoplasia must always be considered in middle-aged and older patients.
18. What is the incidence of intestinal wound dehiscence in dogs and cats?
7-26%
19.  What risk factors have been associated with increased rates of intestinal dehiscence in
small animals?
· Traumatic intestinal injuries
· Intestinal foreign body
· Peritonitis present at the initial surgery
·Serum albumin <2.5 g/dl
identification of gastrointestinal wound dehiscence?
4 days—this corresponds to the end of the lag phase of intestinal healing
21. What is the mortality rate for patients that experience intestinal dehiscence?
/3-80%
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Coolman BR, Ehrhart N, Manfra SM: Healing of intestinal anastomoses. Compendium Cont Educ Pract Vet
22(4):363-372, 2000.
2. Coolman BR, Ehrhart N, Manfra SM: Use of skin staples for rapid closure of gastrointestinal incisions in the
treatment of canine linear foreign bodies. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:542-547, 2000.
3. Evans KL, Smeak DD, Biller DS: Gastrointestinal linear foreign bodies in 32 dogs: A retrospective evaluation
and feline commparison. I Am Anin Hosp Assoc 30:445-450, 1994.
4. Hedlund CS, Fossum TW: Surgery of the digestive system. In Fossum TW, editor: Smalt animat surgery, ed 2, St
Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp 337-387.
5. Michels GM, Jones BD, Huss BT, et al: Endoscopic and surgical retrieval of fishhooks from the stomach and
esophagus in dogs and cats: 75 cases (1977-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1194-1197, 1995.
6. Ralphs SC, Jessen CR, Lopowitz AJ: Risk factors for leakage following intestinal anastomosis in dogs and cats
115 cases (1991-2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc 223:73-77, 2003.
160
Gastric Outflow Obstruction
Saunders, pp 592-640.
8. Wylie KB, Hosgood G: Mortality and morbidity of small and large intestinal surgery in dogs and cats: 74 cases
(1980-1992). I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:469-474, 1994.
40. GASTRIC OUTFLOW OBSTRUCTION
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. List the most common causes of gastric outflow obstruction in dogs and cats.
·Foreign bodies
· Pyloric stenosis
· Chronic hypertrophic pyloric gastropathy
·Infiltrative fungal diseases
· Gastric neoplasia
·Pancreatic abscess or neoplasia
·Previous gastric surgery
2. What is pyloric stenosis?
A congenital lesion characterized by a benign thickening of the circular smooth muscle of
the pylorus.
 3. What is the typical signalment of animals with pyloric stenosis?
Young animals having clinical signs after weaning. Brachycephalic dogs are most
commonly affected, especially bulldogs, Boston terriers, and boxers. Siamese cats have also been
diagnosed with this condition.
4. What is chronic hypertrophic pyloric gastropathy?
An acquired, benign condition involving hypertrophy (mucosal and/or muscular) of the pylorus.
· Chronic antral mucosal hypertrophy
·Antral pyloric hypertrophy
· Chronic hypertrophic gastritis
·Acquired pyloric stenosis
pyloric gastropathy?
Middle-aged to older, small-breed dogs weighing less than 10 kg.
 7. Is there a gender predisposition in chronic hypertrophic pyloric gastropathy?
Male dogs are affected approximately twice as often as female dogs.
8. What infiltrative fungal disease may cause gastric outflow obstruction?
Pythiosis, caused by Pithium insidiosum. Ingested spores penetrate the gastric mucosa, enter
lymphatics, and result in the development of granulomas within the submucosa and muscularis,
causing gastric outflow obstruction.
160
Gastric Outflow Obstruction
Saunders, pp 592-640.
8. Wylie KB, Hosgood G: Mortality and morbidity of small and large intestinal surgery in dogs and cats: 74 cases
(1980-1992). I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:469-474, 1994.
40. GASTRIC OUTFLOW OBSTRUCTION
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. List the most common causes of gastric outflow obstruction in dogs and cats.
·Foreign bodies
· Pyloric stenosis
· Chronic hypertrophic pyloric gastropathy
·Infiltrative fungal diseases
· Gastric neoplasia
·Pancreatic abscess or neoplasia
·Previous gastric surgery
2. What is pyloric stenosis?
A congenital lesion characterized by a benign thickening of the circular smooth muscle of
the pylorus.
 3. What is the typical signalment of animals with pyloric stenosis?
Young animals having clinical signs after weaning. Brachycephalic dogs are most
commonly affected, especially bulldogs, Boston terriers, and boxers. Siamese cats have also been
diagnosed with this condition.
4. What is chronic hypertrophic pyloric gastropathy?
An acquired, benign condition involving hypertrophy (mucosal and/or muscular) of the pylorus.
· Chronic antral mucosal hypertrophy
·Antral pyloric hypertrophy
· Chronic hypertrophic gastritis
·Acquired pyloric stenosis
pyloric gastropathy?
Middle-aged to older, small-breed dogs weighing less than 10 kg.
 7. Is there a gender predisposition in chronic hypertrophic pyloric gastropathy?
Male dogs are affected approximately twice as often as female dogs.
8. What infiltrative fungal disease may cause gastric outflow obstruction?
Pythiosis, caused by Pithium insidiosum. Ingested spores penetrate the gastric mucosa, enter
lymphatics, and result in the development of granulomas within the submucosa and muscularis,
causing gastric outflow obstruction.
Gastric Outflow Obstruction
161
 9. What is the typical signalment of dogs affected with pythiosis?
Young, large-breed, male dogs living in the Gulf Coast areas of the southeastern United
States.
10. What types of gastric neoplasia are seen in dogs and cats?
· Gastric adenocarcinoma—the most common type of gastric neoplasia in dogs.
+ Leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas—smooth muscle tumors. Leiomyomas are the most
common benign gastric tumor in the dog
11. Which portions of the stomach are usually affected with gastric neoplasia?
· Adenocarcinomas—pyloric antral region or along the lesser curvature
·Leiomyomas—the cardia
·Lymphoma—discrete masses of the gastric wall or a diffusely infiltrative disease
12. What is the typical signalment of a patient presenting with gastric neoplasia?
Older dogs (8-9 years of age for adenocarcinoma). There is a breed predisposition in Belgian
shepherd dogs, and male dogs of this breed are more frequently affected than females.
There is a breed predisposition for leiomyomas in beagles, with very old dogs (>15 years)
affected most commonly.
13. Describe the common clinical signs seen in patients with gastric outflow obstruction.
Chronic intermitent vomiting that may be projectile. Cats, especially, may regurgitate and
have esophagitis. Some animals may be dehydrated and have electrolyte and acid-base imbal-
ances, depending on the chronicity and severity of the obstruction.
14. What diagnostic tests are useful when working up a patient with gastric outflow
obstruction?
· Complete blood count, chemistry profile, and urinalysis
· Abdominal radiographs—usually unrewarding, but may reveal an enlarged stomach
● Contrast radiographs—filling defects, irregular mucosal surfaces, gastric wall thickening,
or delayed gastric emptying
· Thoracic radiographsto evaluate for metastatic disease
·Abdominal ultrasound ex amination—to evaluate for metastatic disease
· Gastroscopy—the best diagnostic test, to identify and biopsy the lesion
15. What is the definitive trea tment for gastric outflow obstruction?
Surgery.
16. What medical management should be provided before performing surgery?
The patients should be stabilized by rehydrating and correcting electrolyte and acid-base
abnormalities. If esophagitis is present, H,-receptor blockers or a protein-pump inhibitor should
be admimistered. Penioperative antibiotics may be started preoperatively
17. List the surgical procedures that can be used for treatment of gastric outflow
obstruction.
·Fredet-Ramstedt pyloromyotomy
·Heineke-Mikulicz pyloroplasty
· Y-U pyloroplasty
·Billroth I gastroenterostomy
·Billroth II gastroenterostomy
162
Gastric Outflow Obstruction
18. What type of suture material should be used when closing gastric incisions?
Synthetic, monofilament, absorbable suture material, usually in 3-0 or 4-0 sizes for most
small animal patients. Chromic gut suture material should not be used because it is rapidly
removed when exposed to digestive enzymes and does not reliably retain its holding strength for
an adequate period to allow for sufficient wound healing.
19. What is a Fredet-Ramstedt pyloromyotomy?
An incision through the serosa and muscularis over the pylorus, without penetrating the
mended for minor pyloric outflow obstructions (congenital pyloric stenosis). Because of rapid
healing and fibrosis of the pyloromyotomy incision, long-term efficacy of this procedure is
20. Who were Fredet and Ramstedt?
Wilhelm Ramstedt (1867-1963) was a German surgeon who described pyloromyotomy. At
the same time, Pierre Fredet (1870-1946), a French surgeon, reported a similar procedure.
21. What is a pyloroplasty?
One or more full-thickness incisions through the pylorus with subsequent suturing of the
is indicated with mild pyloric outflow obstruction, when full-thickness excision of the gastric
wall is not necessary to relieve the obstruction.
22. What is the Heineke-Mikulicz pyloroplasty?
A full-thickness, longitudinal incision centered over the pylorus on the ventral surface of the
pylorus. The incision extends equal distances into the pyloric antrum and proximal duodenum
and is closed trans versely using a simple interrupted suture pattern.
23. Who were Heineke and Mikulicz?
Walter Hermann Heineke (1834-1901) was a German surgeon. Little information regarding
his career is available from surgery history textbooks. Johann von Mikulicz-Radecki (1850-1905)
began his career as an assistant to Billroth in Vienna. He was an active contributor to the surgica.
24.  Describe the Y-U pyloroplasty.
An advance flap pyloroplasty procedure in which a full-thickness Y-shaped incision is made
over the duodenum, pylorus, and pyloric antrum. The incision is then closed in a U shape
 25. What are the advantages of the Y-U pyloroplasty over the Heineke-Mikulicz pyloroplasty?
Adequate exposure is afforded to allow excessive pyloric mucosa to be resected. The longi
tudinal direction of the incisions results in less alteration of py loric function.
26. What is a Billroth I gastroenterostomy?
A pylorectomy with a gastroduodenostomy. It is indicated when full-thickness resection of
the stomach wall is required to relieve the obstruction and when the disease is localized to the
pylorus and distal pyloric antral region.
27. What is a Billroth II gastroenterostomy?
A distal gastrectomy with gastrojejunostomy. It is indicated when extensive, full-thickness
resection of the distal portion of the stomach, pylorus, and proximal duodenum is necessary and
when the extent of the resection precludes the surgeon from performing an end-to-end anastomo
sis between the remaining stomach and duodenum.
Gastric Outflow Obstruction
163
28. Who was Billroth?
Theodor Billroth (1829-1894) was Germany's most celebrated surgeon. He was an outstand-
ing surgical technician able to bring his experimental successes to the practical side of clinical
surgery. He established one of the earliest surgical training programs at the University of Vienna,
authored several texts, and pioneered numerous gastrointestinal surgical procedures.
 29.  What adjacent anatomic structures must be carefully protected during a gastroenterostomy?
The common bile duct and pancreatic ducts.
30. What treatment is appropriate if either of these structures becomes damaged during
the gastroenterostomy or if the disease process involves these structures?
A cholecystoenterostomy may be necessary to reestablish biliary outflow from the gall-
bladder. If the pancreatic ducts are damaged, the patient may develop pancreatic exocrine insuffi-
clency and needs to be treated with enzymes to allow for food digestion.
 31. What complications may be seen in association with pyloromyotomy?
Inadequate long-term relief from the clinical signs associated with most types of gastric
outflow obstruction. Consequently, it is recommended only for use in mild cases of congenital
pyloric stenosis.
 32. What complications may be seen in association with pyloroplasty?
· Suture line dehiscence or leakage and peritonitis
· Inadequate resection of tissues resulting in inadequate relief of clinical signs
·Duodenal-gastric reflux (is not as much of a problem with the Y-U pyloroplasty)
+ Suture line dehiscence or leakage and peritonitis
· Recurrence of neoplastic disease at the surgical site
·Metastasis of malignant neoplasms
34. What is the prognosis for a patient with surgically treated pyloric stenosis?
Excellent, if the condition is treated properly.
 35. What is the prognosis for a patient with surgically treated chronic hypertrophic pyloric
gastropathy?
Excellent. Surgery should be curative for this disease, assuming all abnomal tissue was resected.
36.  Discuss the prognosis for a patient with gastric neoplasia that has been surgically treated.
If the tumor is benign (i.e., leiomyoma), surgery should be curative. Most gastric tumors are
a guarded to poor prognosis for long-term survival must be given in these cases. The exception
BIBLIOGRAPHY
-s ooz sno is Zp ans  us o  unsso ur ys n yo ns  unss 1
Year Book, pp 360-363.
 2. Fossum TW: Presumptive iatrogenic gastric outflow obstruction associated with prior gastric surgery. I Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 31:391-395, 1995
51,2003
4. Swann HM: Canine gastric adenocarcinoma and leiomyosarcoma. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:157-164, 2002.
41. INTUSSUSCEPTION
Barbara R. Gores, D.V.M., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. Define intussusception.
An intussusception is the prolapse of one part of the intestine into the lumen of an imme-
part receiving the bowel is called the intussuscipiens. Jejunum and ileum are most commonly
invol ved; however, ileum into colon and stomach into esophagus also occur. The intussusception
may be sliding (first forming, then self-reducing) and produce resol ving clinical signs. Intussus.
ceptions are usually a strangulating obstruction of the bowel.
2. What are the types of intussusception?
· Colic—-involving segments of the large intestine
· Enteric—involving only the small intestine
· Ileocolic—ileum prolapses through the ileocecal valve into the colon
· Cecocolic—cecum prolapses into the colon
· Gas troesophageal—stomach prolapses into the esophagus
 3. What causes intussusception?
The exact cause is unknown. It is considered a sign of an underlying disorder, such as:
·Parvovirus infection
· Severe intestinal parasitism
· Intestinal obstruction:
Foreign body
Mass (neoplastic, fungal, or granulomatous)
 4. List the clinical signs of a patient with an intussusception.
·Vomiting (severity depends on location)
· Abdominal pain
· Melena or hematochezia
·Palpable abdominal mass
5. What is the differential diagnosis for intussusception?
· Intestinal foreign body
· Intestinal mass (neoplastic, fungal, granulomatous)
· Abdominal abscess
·Intestinal volvulus
· Inflammatory bowel disease
·Peritonitis
6. How is the diagnosis made?
1. Recognition of classic clinical signs.
2. Palpation of a bowel loop leading into an abdominal mass or a sausage-like mass
associated with the intestines.
 3. Survey radiography indicating bowel obstruction—gas-dilated or fluid-dilated loops of
intestine proximal to the intussusception and a tissue density mass in the abdomen.
165
4.Contrast radiography:
a Upper gastrointestinal view shows obstructive pattern sometimes with constriction of
the dye column.
b. Barium enema may outline the intussuscipiens.
5. Ultrasonography.
 7. What is the initial medical management?
Correction of electrolyte, acid-base, and fluid imbalances with intravenous crystalloids,
corticosteroids, antibiotics, and glucose.
8. When should surgery be performed?
After hemodynamic resuscitation or if worsening clinical status despite medical treatments.
9. Discuss the surgical options.
Manualreduction
· The bowel proximal to the intussusception is gently supported, while the intussusceptum
is squeezed out of the intussuscipiens.
· There is no correlation between the duration of signs and ability to reduce the intussus.
ception manually.
· The degree of damage is related to the degree of vascular compromise.
● Small serosal tears may occur and do not necessarily compromise the bowel wall (think
of pyloromyotomy incisions).
· Enteroplication may be performed, but is controversial.
Resection and anastomosis:
· Assess bowel viability to decide if resection is necessary
Color
Peristalsis
Arterial pulsations
Pulse oximetry
Intravenous fluorescein dye injection—lack of fluorescence under ultraviolet light
· Consider for an irreducible lesion, questionable viability, or tearing through the
muscularis layer.
10. How is intestinal resection and anastomosis performed?
Isolate affected bowel and ligate mesenteric vascular supply. Gently milk intestinal contents
simple interrupted or continuous approximating pattern. To reduce mucosa eversion, excess
tissue can be resected before anastomosis or intramural sutures are placed to avoid the lumen
Synthetic absorbable monofilament or nonabsorbable monofilament sutures are used.
11. Can skin staplers be used for intestinal anastomosis?
Yes; simple, safe, and rapid end-to-end anastomoses can be performed.
12. How can leakage from anastomotic sites be minimized?
·Good operative techmique
· Wrapping of the site with omentum
s
166
Intussusception
13. What is short-bowel syndrome?
Intractable diarrhea associated with malabsorption and bacterial overgrowth secondary to
extensive (70-80%) bowel resection (with or without ileocecal valve function)
14. What is the postoperative care?
·Nothing by mouth for 12 hours.
· Water, then bland food at 12-24 hours.
●Antibiotics for 7 days if there is serosal tearing.
·Continue to correct electrolyte and fluid deficits as required.
· Monitor for signs of intestinal breakdown and leakage.
15. What are the commonest postoperative complications after reduction of an
intussusception?
· Recurrence of intussusception
·Breakdown of anastomosis
· Peritonitis
CONTROVERSY
16. Should enteroplication be performed after reduction or resection?
For
 Of patients that do not receive an enteroplication, 11-25% have another intussusception in
ders of the bowel side-by-side in a series of gentle loops using an absorbable suture. It has been
recommended that three loops of plicated bowel be used proximal and distal to the anastomosis
or reduced intussusception.
Against
Fully 75-97% of patients do not suffer another intussusception after surgery, and the tech-
nique may increase operating time in a patient who is compromised. There is also a potential for
complications directly related to the procedure. The complication rate (19%) is the same as the
        s g  
whether it needs to be routinely performed.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
2002.
cases (1989-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1415-1418, 2001.
3.Brown DC: Small intestines. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smatl animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002,
W.B. Saunders, pp 644-664.
4. Kyles AE, Schneider TA, Clare A: Foreign body intestinal perforation and intra-abdominal abscess formation as
a complication of enteroplication in a dog. Vet Rec 143:112-113, 1998.
5. Oakes MG: Enteroplication to prevent recurrent intestinal intussusception. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current
techniques in small animat surgery, ed 4, Baltimore, 1998, Williams & Wilkins, p 254.
6. Patsikas MN: Ultrasonographic signs of intestinal intussusception associated with gastroenteritis in 19 young
dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39:57-66, 2003.
42. INTESTINAL VOLVULUS
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What is intestinal volvulus?
Abnormal twisting of the bowel on its mesenteric axis. It can include intestinal torsion,
which is a rotation of the bowel along its long axis.
2. What are the patient data for this condition?
 Infrequently identified in veterinary patients, intestinal volvulus occurs in young, medium
to large dogs presented with peracute abdominal discomfort and pain, vomiting, bloody diarrhea,
shock, and unexpected death. German shepherd dogs were most often reported as affected
patients. Associated events before hospital admission include athletic activity, trauma, gastroin-
testinal disease, and dietary indiscretion.
 3. What diagnostic parameters are useful in identifying the condition antemortem?
· Peracute, highly morbid clinical signs.
· Radiographic evidence of severe bowel distention.
· Abdominocentesis yielding a modified transudate.
·Blood work variable.
· Ultrasonography and laparoscopy may help determine diagnosis.
· Surgery or necropsy provides conclusive evidence.
4. What treatments should be instituted?
· Immediate fluid resuscitation for shock, including acid-base restoration
· Corticosteroid and antibiotic medications
·Exploratory celiotomy
 5. List other conditions that should be considered in the differential diagnosis.
· Cecocolic volvulus
·Intestinal entrapment
· Gastric dilation or volvulus
· Splenic torsion
· Intestinal obstruction or intussusception
·Pancreatitis
·Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis
·Viral enteritis
6. What gross anatomic changes or pathology have been found at surgery or necropsy
with this condition?
· Dilated, discolored, and ischemic bowel loops rotated clockwise around the mesenteric axis
·Thrombosis of the mesenteric vasculature
7. Which surgical procedures are recommended?
· Derotation and repositioning of the bowel and mesentery
·Intestinal resection and anastomosis
·Abdominal lavage and drainage
·Intraoperative euthanasia when the severity of the condition warrants
168
Peritonitis
8. What conditions are the pathologic basis for the high degree of morbidity (or
mortality) associated with intestinal volvulus?
· Intestinal obstruction and hypoxia
· Vascular compromise
·Endotoxemia
· Circulating shock
·Cardiovascular failure
·Postresuscitation injury
9. What is meant by postresuscitation injury?
After restoration of blood pressure, continued ischemia and progressive tissue injury may
oxygen debt.
10. What is meant by reperfusion injury?
Toxic metabolites accumulating during ischemia are washed out during reflow and delivered
 ) sd  o  i s x s   
 produce a chain reaction of toxin generation and cell injury.
11.
What is the prognosis for this disease?
Grave; mortality is nearly 100%.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Cairo J, Font J: Intestinal volvulus in dogs: A study of four clinical cases. J Sm Anim Pract 40:136-140, 1999.
2. Carberry C, Flanders JA: Cecal-colic volvulus in two dogs. Vet Surg 22:225-228, 1993.
3. Carberry C, Harvey HJ: Small intestinal volvulus in a dog. Commp Cont Educ Pract Vet 11:1322-1325, 1989.
4.
Shealy PM, Henderson RA: Canine intestinal volvulus. Vet Surg 21:15-19, 2992.
5. Wingfield, WE, Raffe MR: The veterinary ICU book,ed 1, Jackson Hole, Wyo, 2002. Teton New Media, pp 43-44
43. PERITONITIS
Mary K. Ouinn, D.VM., MS, Dipl. A.C.VS
1. What is the function of the peritoneum?
The peritoneum is a semipemeable membrane that lines the abdominal cavity and covers
 the visceral surface of the abdominal organs. The peritoneum produces a small amount of fluid
fibrin for the formation of adhesions.
2. What is peritonitis?
Peritonitis is inflammation of peritoneum. There are a number of ways to classify peritonitis :
primary versus secondary, acute versus chronic, localized versus generalized, and septic versus
aseptic.
3.  What is the most common form of peritonitis in dogs?
Secondary, generalized septic peritomitis.
168
Peritonitis
8. What conditions are the pathologic basis for the high degree of morbidity (or
mortality) associated with intestinal volvulus?
· Intestinal obstruction and hypoxia
· Vascular compromise
·Endotoxemia
· Circulating shock
·Cardiovascular failure
·Postresuscitation injury
9. What is meant by postresuscitation injury?
After restoration of blood pressure, continued ischemia and progressive tissue injury may
oxygen debt.
10. What is meant by reperfusion injury?
Toxic metabolites accumulating during ischemia are washed out during reflow and delivered
 ) sd  o  i s x s   
 produce a chain reaction of toxin generation and cell injury.
11.
What is the prognosis for this disease?
Grave; mortality is nearly 100%.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Cairo J, Font J: Intestinal volvulus in dogs: A study of four clinical cases. J Sm Anim Pract 40:136-140, 1999.
2. Carberry C, Flanders JA: Cecal-colic volvulus in two dogs. Vet Surg 22:225-228, 1993.
3. Carberry C, Harvey HJ: Small intestinal volvulus in a dog. Commp Cont Educ Pract Vet 11:1322-1325, 1989.
4.
Shealy PM, Henderson RA: Canine intestinal volvulus. Vet Surg 21:15-19, 2992.
5. Wingfield, WE, Raffe MR: The veterinary ICU book,ed 1, Jackson Hole, Wyo, 2002. Teton New Media, pp 43-44
43. PERITONITIS
Mary K. Ouinn, D.VM., MS, Dipl. A.C.VS
1. What is the function of the peritoneum?
The peritoneum is a semipemeable membrane that lines the abdominal cavity and covers
 the visceral surface of the abdominal organs. The peritoneum produces a small amount of fluid
fibrin for the formation of adhesions.
2. What is peritonitis?
Peritonitis is inflammation of peritoneum. There are a number of ways to classify peritonitis :
primary versus secondary, acute versus chronic, localized versus generalized, and septic versus
aseptic.
3.  What is the most common form of peritonitis in dogs?
Secondary, generalized septic peritomitis.
Peritonitis
169
4. List some common causes of aseptic peritonitis
· Mechanical and foreign object-induced peritonitis
·Enzymatic from pancreatitis
 Starch granulomatous peritonitis
· Chemical peritonitis
· Parasitic peritonitis
· Urine peritonitis (usually aseptic)
· Bile peritonitis (usually aseptic)
 5. List some of the sources of septic peritonitis.
·Leakage from the gastrointestinal tract
·Ruptured pancreatic, liver, prostatic, splemic abscesses
Genitourinary tract
· Secondary to peritoneal dialysis
· Penetrating abdominal wound
·Surgical contamination
6. What are the clinical signs of a patient with peritonitis?
·Anorexia
·Vomiting
· Depression
·Pyrexia
·Dehydration
·Shock (weak femoral pulse)
·Abdominal pain
· Abdominal distention
 7. What is the most useful diagnostic test for peritonitis?
Abdominocentesis. The cytologic characteristics of peritoneal fluid from an animal with
septic peritonitis include: cloudy fluid with some color, large (>50o/ul) numbers of degenerate
neutrophils, and the presence of intracellular bacteria. A complete blood count, chemistry panel,
abdominal ultrasound, and abdominal radiographs should also be performed.
8.  What are the cytologic characteristics of a postoperative peritoneal tap?
 Inflammation is created when abdominal surgery is performed regardless of the surgeon's
skill. A postoperative peritoneal tap has 7000-9000 leukocytes/μl with mild to moderate peritoni-
tis and more than 90oo leukocytes/μl with severe peritonitis. Intracellular bacteria should not be
present.
9. What is the initial treatment for patients with peritonitis?
colloids can be used. Alterations in fluid therapy are based on serum electrolytes analysis.
 Antimicrobial therapy should be instituted as soon as peritoneal fluid samples have been collect-
e e sd ue o uso   s  s  p
side are generally recommended.
10. What are the goals of surgery for the treatment of septic peritonitis?
Surgery allows the diagnosis, correction, or elimination of the source bacterial infection and
  s     g     e
enteral nutrition.
170
Peritonitis
11. What are the problems with peritoneal drainage?
A number of different materials and drain types have been evaluated for drainage of the peri-
toneal cavity. However, most types of drains inadequately empty the entire peritoneal cavity. In
addition, the omentum commonly occludes the lumen of the drain or the drain exit sites. Acquired
bacterial infections of the peritoneum may also occur with all methods of peritoneal drainage.
The ideal method of peritoneal cavity drainage remains a matter of controversy.
12. What is open peritoneal drainage?
Open peritoneal drainage is accomplished by the placement of loose simple continuous
monofilament suture to close the linea alba. A 1-cm to 6-cm gap is left bet ween wound edges. Some
surgeons also fix the omentum to areas of questionable viability to prevent it from migrating to the
Skin
Subcutaneous fat
Linea alba
Figure 43-1  Simple continuous suture pattern used
to close the linea alba loosely during open peritoneal
drainage.
13. What is the postoperative management for patients with open peritoneal drainage?
The patient should be maintained in an intensive care unit in order to receive 24-hour care.
Large volumes of fluid, protein, and some red blood cells are lost in the peritoneal drainage.
Hydration status, albumin, electrolyte levels, and the hematocrit should be monitored and sup-
ported as needed. A closed urinary collection system should be placed in male dogs to prevent
14. How is the bandage changed?
The bandage is changed at least once daily. It may need to be changed more frequently if it
becomes wet from the abdominal drainage, or if it is soiled from the outside. The bandage is
materials will need to be sterilized prior to use.
15. When can the abdominal cavity be closed?
The abdominal cavity can be closed when there is gross improvement in the color and
clarity of the drainage and progressive decrease in the volume of the drainage, and when
Peritonrtis
171
cytologic evaluation of the fluid reveals a decrease in cellular toxicity and absence of
bactena
16. Should the peritoneal cavity be cultured at the time of closure?
Yes. It is not uncommon to obtain a positive culture from the peritoneal cavity at the time of
abdominal closure. A nosocomial infection should be considered when the culture results differ
from those taken at the initial surgery. Treatment for 1-2 weeks with an appropriate antibiotic is
recommended. The presence of the same organism as was obtained at the first surgery may mean
there is continued contamination of the peritoneum. Decisions about further medical and surgical
17. What about laparoscopic treatment?
reported. In humans, laparoscopy has been used for the diagnosis and treatment of appendicitis
and bacterial peritonitis. Some research has found laparoscopy to be detrimental in cases of
peritonitis because of the diffuse damage to the peritoneum caused by insufflation. Further
research is warranted on the topic.
18. What is the prognosis for septic peritonitis?
With advancements in critical care medicine, survival of patients with septic peritonitis has
improved over the years. However, caution must be exercised when evaluating retrospective
studies of this condition because of variabilities in case presentation and patient management.
e sso u  p pud udo ioy yo o pne  si i  s
are treated with correction of the underlying cause, peritoneal lavage, and aggressive postoper-
ative care.
19. Are there ways to protect an anastomosis or enterotomy in the face of peritonitis?
Peritonitis has been associated with an increased risk of suture line disruption and leakage
because of an increase in proteolytic activity. The suture line can be protected in the following ways:
·Serosal patching
· Omentalization
· Use of suture material (synthetic absorbable or nonabsorbable suture) that will provide
prolonged wound support
· Avoid use of chromic gut
CONTROVERSY
20. Can septic peritonitis be treated surgically without abdominal drainage?
This is a controversial issue, as it has been generally accepted that some form of drainage is
needed in cases of septic peritonitis. However, a recent report on the surgical treatment of septic
peritonitis without postoperative drainage revealed that the mortality rate in dogs treated with
tics, and supportive therapy was not unlike the mortality of dogs treated with open peritoneal
drainage. This suggests that when the source of the bacterial contamination is identified and cor-
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Kirby BM: Peritoneum and peritoneal cavity. In Slater D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery,ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2003, W.B. Saunders, pp 414-445
2. Lanz OI, Ellison GW, Bellah JR, Weichman G, et al: Surgical treatment of septic peritonitis without abdominal
drainage in 28 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37: 87-92, 2001.
3. Staatz AJ, Monnet E, Seim HB: Open peritoneal drainage versus primary closure for the treatment of septic
peritonitis in dogs and cats: 42 cases (1993-1999). Vet Surg 31:174-180, 2003.
44. MEGACOLON
Joseph C. Glennon, VM.D., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What is the anatomy of the colon?
The colon is divided into three regionally continuous portions: ascending, transverse, and
descending. The ascending portion begins at the ileocolic valve on the right side of the abdomen
and runs cranially ending at the right colic flexure (hepatic flexure). The transverse colon starts
at the right colic flexure, runs trans versely from right to left, and ends at the left colonic flexure
(splenic flexure). The descending colon begins at the left colonic flexure and runs caudally along
the left side of the abdomen to the pelvic inlet, where it becomes the rectum. The descending
colon is the longest segment. The cecum is a diverticulum of the proximal colon separated by a
cecocolic orifice located just distal to the ileocecal sphincter.
2. What is the blood supply to the colon?
The ileocolic artery, which arises from the cranial mesenteric artery, supplies the proximal
portion. The branches of the ileocolic artery supply the cecum, the right colic artery, the ascending
and half of the descending colon. The remainder of the descending colon is supplied by the left
colic artery (some anastomoses with the middle colic artery), and the blood supply from these
vessels to the colon is by numerous vasa recti. The caudal mesenteric artery also gives rise to the
cranial rectal artery, which primarily supplies the rectum; however, it also supplies a short
3. What is the nerve supply to the colon?
The intrinsic portion is from the submucosal (Meissner's) plexus and myenteric
(Auerbach's) plexus. The intrinsic innervation is responsi ble for intestinal contractions that occur
even in the absence of extrinsic innervation. The ex trinsic portion is from parasympathetic and
sympathetic innervation. The parasympathetic (cholinergic) innervation is from the vagus and
pelvic nerves. The sympathetic (adrenergic) innervation is from the paravertebral sympathetic
trunk via the abdominal sympathetic ganglia. Parasympathetic innervation stimulates smooth
muscle contraction, and sympathetic innervation suppresses smooth muscle activity.
4.What is thefunction of the colon?
The proximal colon functions to absorb water from the fecal material via an osmotic gra-
dient created by the active absorption of sodium. During this process, bicarbonate ions are
secreted in exchange for chloride ions. Potassium is lost from extracellular fluid by an active
transport mechanism, secretion of mucus, and desquamation of mucosal epithelial cells. The
distal colon functions to store the dehydrated fecal material. Numerous nutrients including
vitamin K are synthesized in varying degrees by colonic bacteria. This is of little significance in
the canine and feline.
5. What is megacolon?
Enlarged colon. It is not a specific disease but a descriptive term for the clinical signs of
chronic constipation associated with increased colonic diameter and progressive colonic inertia
(hypomotility). It represents the end stage of a condition that usually results in intractable
constipation.
Megacolon
173
6. What is the difference between constipation and obstipation?
Much discomfort. Constipation is "crowding together of feces,” whereas obstipation is unre-
lievable constipation.
7. What are the causes of megacolon?
· Idiopathic: Unknown etiology. Generalized dysfunction of colonic smooth muscle, or
intrinsic/extrinsic innervation. Most commonly seen in middle age to older cats; rare in
thedog
· Congenital: Sacral agenesis or dysgenesis (Manx cats); segmental agangliosis (two cats);
absent myenteric ganglia (two cats)
· Acquired: Spinal cord trauma; pelvic fracture nonunion; chronic sacroiliac luxation, per-
ineal hernia; perianal fistula; proctitis; rectal strictures; anal sac disease; chronic colonic
inflammation; neoplasia; foreign body; dietary indiscretion; behavioral; endocrine (hypo
thyroidism); atresia ani; electrolyte imbalances (hypercalcemia, hypokalemia)
8. What is Hirschsprung's disease?
 A congenital disease in humans characterized by absence of ganglionic segments in the wall
of the colon. The aganglionic segment remains tonically contracted and the colon proximal to this
segment is dilated. This condition has not been documented in the dog or cat.
9. What are the common clinical signs of megacolon?
Clinical signs include tenesmus, anorexia, depression, weakness, vomiting, weight loss, and
distended or possibly painful abdomen. Scant amount of feces or paradoxical diarrhea may occur
due to liquid fecal matter passing around fecal concretions.
10.  What is passage of bloody feces?
Hematochezia.
11. What are the common physical examination findings?
Lean body condition, poor hair coat, depression, and dehydration. Abdominal palpation
Teveals a firm, large tubular structure (feces filled colon) in the abdomen. The abdomen may be
painful. Digital rectal ex amination reveals hard feces within the rectum.
12. What other diagnostics may be useful?
· Radiography: Distended colon filled with feces. The presence of pelvic, sacral, or coccygeal
lesions should be noted. Positive contrast enema can help identify strictures or neoplasia.
· Ultrasonography and colonoscopy; used to identify strictures or neoplasia.
13. What is the treatment of megacolon?
It must be determined whether the megacolon is idiopathic, congenital, or acquired. If
possible, the underlying etiology should be addressed first.
· Medical: Dehydration, electrolyte and acid-base imbalances need to be corrected. For
immediate relief, evacuation of feces can be accomplished by stool softeners, enemas, and
or manually (digitally or with instrumentation). General anesthesia may be required.
Long-term management consists of high-fiber diets, stool softeners, bulk laxatives
(canned pumpkin), and periodic enemas. Prokinetic drugs (cisapride) can be used once
the colon has been evacuated; however, it appears to have limited usefulness.
· Surgery: Indicated in cases of chronic constipation that are refractory to medical therapy.
Idiopathic megacolon in the cat is best managed by subtotal colectomy, which has
minimal complications and good long-term results. Subtotal colectomy in the dog is also
minimally complicated; however, chronic diarrhea, electrolyte imbalances, and bacterial
overgrowth of the small intestine may occur, resulting in a less than favorable outcome.
174
Megacolon
14. Is presurgical bowel preparation necessary?
In most cases, immediate preoperative enemas are not necessary. If an enema is required, it
is preferable that it be performed 3 to 4 days prior to surgery so the bowel is not inflamed and
there is a minimum of dry feces at the time of surgery.
15. Are presurgical antibiotics necessary?
 Parenteral prophylactic antibiotics effective against gram-negative aerobic and anaerobic
organi sms should be administered.
16. Should the ileocolic valve be preserved?
The ileocolic val ve minimizes access of colonic bacteria to the small intestine. Removal of
the valve can result in bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine and deconjugation of bile acids.
This does not appear to be a problem in the cat; therefore preservation is not necessary. Removal
allows for a tension-free ileocolic anastomosis. In the dog, bacterial overgrowth in the ileum
causes long-term problems; therefore preservation of the valve is recommended.
17. How much of the descending colon should be removed?
As much as possible. In general, the colon is transected approximately 2-4 cm cranial to
the pubis.
18. What vessels should be transected?
If the ileocolic valve is removed, transect the ileal arteries and veins, ileocolic arteries and
veins, caudal mesenteric artery and vein, and the cranial rectal artery and vein. If the ileocolic
valve is preserved, transect the ight colic, middle colic, and caudal mesenteric vessels. In the
Transect only the left colic artery and vein and the vasa recta from the cranial rectal artery.
19. How should the anastomosis be performed?
parity can be corrected by transecting the smaller lumen bowel at an oblique angle or removing
angle. If the ileocolic valve is preserved, an end-to-end colocolostomy is performed. Side-to-end
Or side-to-side anastomosis is not necessary.
20. What type of suture and pattern should be employed?
In nondebilitated patients, a 3-0 or 4-0 monofilament absorbable material (polydioxanone,
poliglecaprone25, or polyglyconate) is recommended. In debilitated or hypoalbuminemic
 patients, a 3-0 or 4-0 monofilament nonabsorbable material (nylon, polybutester, polypropylene)
is preferred. In all cases, full-thickness simple interrupted pattern is utilized.
21. Can internal staplers be used?
A ring type (end-to-end anastomosis) stapler can be used. Anastomosis can be accomplished
by inserting the instrument through an incision in the antimesentenic border of the cecum or
colon. Upon completion of the anastomosis, the antimesenteric enterotomy can be closed with a
the diameter of the anus and pelvic canal may be too small to accommodate the instrument.
22. What is the postoperative care?
Provided there is no gross abdominal contamination during surgery, antibiotics are not indi-
cated beyond the perioperative period. Hydration status should be carefully momitored for several
days after surgery because the patient will have loose stools. Fluid supplementation via intra-
venous or subcutaneous route may be necessary. Analgesics should be administered as necessary.
Rectal Tumors
175
Food should be offered within the first 24 hours after surgery to help maintain nutritional status.
Tenesmus, soft to liquid stool, and melena should be anticipated for several days after surgery.
23. What are the surgical complications associated with subtotal colectomy?
Dehiscence, leakage, peritonitis, stricture formation, ischemic bowel necrosis, and abscess
formation are possible but uncommon.
24. Will the patient have diarrhea or fecal incontinence?
A soft formed stool should be expected along with an increased frequency of defecation (3-
4 times/day). In cats, the stool generally will become more firm over 6 weeks. Occasionally, it
may take 4-6 months for the stool to become firm. Rarely will diarrhea persist. Persistent diarrhea
jugation, and steatorrhea. True fecal incontinence should not occur.
25. Will there be recurrent constipation?
Not commonly.
26. Will there be any nutritional, biochemical, or electrolyte imbalances?
No. The enteric function in cats with subtotal colectomy was found to be similar to that of
27. What is the prognosis?
Subtotal colectomy in cats with idiopathic megacolon is associated with a very favorable
prognosis. Subtotal colectomy in the dog may result in persistent diarrhea.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Bertoy RW: Megacolon in the cat. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 32:901-915, 2002.
2. Hasler AH, Washabau RJ: Cisapride stimulates contraction of idiopathic megacolonic smooth muscles in cats. J
Vet Intem Med 11:313-318, 1997.
3. Holt DE, Brockman D: Large intestine. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animal surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia,
2002, W.B. Saunders, pp 665-682.
4. Kudisch M, Pavletic MMI: Subtotal colectomy with surgical stapling instruments via trans-cecal approach for
treatment of acquired megacolon in cats. Vet Surg 22: 457-463, 1993.
5. Washabau RJ, Holt D: Pathogenesis, diagnosis, and therapy of feline idiopathic megacolon. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 29:589-603, 1999
45. RECTAL TUMORS
Barbara R. Gores, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. How common are rectal tumors?
Primary tumors of the colon and rectum are common; the rectum is more frequently affected
than the colon. Tumors of the colon and rectum represent 36-60% of all canine intestinal neo-
Rectal Tumors
175
Food should be offered within the first 24 hours after surgery to help maintain nutritional status.
Tenesmus, soft to liquid stool, and melena should be anticipated for several days after surgery.
23. What are the surgical complications associated with subtotal colectomy?
Dehiscence, leakage, peritonitis, stricture formation, ischemic bowel necrosis, and abscess
formation are possible but uncommon.
24. Will the patient have diarrhea or fecal incontinence?
A soft formed stool should be expected along with an increased frequency of defecation (3-
4 times/day). In cats, the stool generally will become more firm over 6 weeks. Occasionally, it
may take 4-6 months for the stool to become firm. Rarely will diarrhea persist. Persistent diarrhea
jugation, and steatorrhea. True fecal incontinence should not occur.
25. Will there be recurrent constipation?
Not commonly.
26. Will there be any nutritional, biochemical, or electrolyte imbalances?
No. The enteric function in cats with subtotal colectomy was found to be similar to that of
27. What is the prognosis?
Subtotal colectomy in cats with idiopathic megacolon is associated with a very favorable
prognosis. Subtotal colectomy in the dog may result in persistent diarrhea.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Bertoy RW: Megacolon in the cat. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 32:901-915, 2002.
2. Hasler AH, Washabau RJ: Cisapride stimulates contraction of idiopathic megacolonic smooth muscles in cats. J
Vet Intem Med 11:313-318, 1997.
3. Holt DE, Brockman D: Large intestine. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animal surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia,
2002, W.B. Saunders, pp 665-682.
4. Kudisch M, Pavletic MMI: Subtotal colectomy with surgical stapling instruments via trans-cecal approach for
treatment of acquired megacolon in cats. Vet Surg 22: 457-463, 1993.
5. Washabau RJ, Holt D: Pathogenesis, diagnosis, and therapy of feline idiopathic megacolon. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 29:589-603, 1999
45. RECTAL TUMORS
Barbara R. Gores, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. How common are rectal tumors?
Primary tumors of the colon and rectum are common; the rectum is more frequently affected
than the colon. Tumors of the colon and rectum represent 36-60% of all canine intestinal neo-
176
Rectal Tumors
2. What sort of tumors occur?
Most primary tumors exist as a solitary mass. In the dog, benign adenomas (polyps) are most
mon. Malignant transformation of adenomas, lymphosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, and leiomyoma
are also reported in the dog. In the cat, leiomyosarcoma, adenocarcinoma, and lymphosarcoma
are the most frequent types of tumors diagnosed.
3. Where in the rectum are tumors most common?
Distal in the rectum; very distal tumors may even prolapse during defecation. Note, how-
if one has a long finger).
 4. List common clinical findings.
·Hematochezia
·Tenesmus
·Rectal prolapse
·Rectal licking
·Rectal bleeding
·Palpable rectal mass
· Palpable rectal constriction
·Scooting
 5. What is the best way to confirm disease?
Colonoscopy:
· Determines location of the tumo
·Permits biopsy
· Rules out multiple tumors (uncommon)
6. Discuss the value of a biopsy.
A biopsy is extremely helpful, yet not always definitive to determine treatment options and
prognosis. Ideally, biopsy specimens should al ways be taken before treatment is performed. The
biopsy diagnosis may not always be in agreement with the final histologic diagnosis of the
excised tumor (e.g., adenoma on biopsy may turn out to be adenocarcinoma on excised tumor).
Several biopsy specimens should be taken. In the case of lymphosarcoma, the tumor area is often
surrounded by marked lymphocytic-plasmacytic infiltrates, which may be misleading. An exci-
sional biopsy of pedunculated tumors can be performed using a submucosal resection. As large a
margin as possible should be taken because this may be a curative treatment if the tumor is
 7. What is a possible complication of rectal wall biopsy?
Rectal perforation after biopsy of an intramural lesion.
8. How common is metastasis?
Metastasis occurs readily for malignant disease, and the condition must be staged (evalua
of enlarged lymph nodes) before treatment. Pulmonary metastasis is rare; however, thoracic
Tadiographs are indicated to rule out multicentric or metastasic disease.
9. Is surgical resection the treatment of choice?
Depends on the diagnosis, stage of the disease, location of the tumor, and the pet owner's
wishes for treatment given the prognosis. Surgery is the treatment of choice for solitary tumors
such as adenoma, plasmacytoma, and polypoid adenocarcinoma. Chemotherapy is indicated for
Rectal Tumors
177
excision is not possible. Radiation therapy may be indicated for nonresectable tumors or as
adjuvant therapy to surgery when metastatic sublumbar lymph node disease is found.
10. How much tissue should be excised?
A submucosal resection may be curative for adenomas; however, a full-thickness rectal
resection is required for malignant tumors
11. What are some surgical approaches to the rectum?
The dorsal or ventral approach, which requires removal of the pubis, both offer limited
access and do not always allow direct visualization of the tumor. The best method is a rectal pull-
through procedure. This is a difficult procedure and despite grossly clear margins, local recur-
(EEA; End-to-End Anastomosis) have been used in place of hand-sewn anastomoses to reduce
tissue trauma and surgical/anesthetic time.
12. What is the Swenson pull-through procedure?
An abdominal-anal pull-through procedure for terminal colonic or proximal rectal tumors.
This procedure involves two surgeons; one working in the abdominal cavity, the other working
Tectally. A colorectal resection is performed by means of stay sutures. Considerable tension on
the left colic artery may develop. Caution is required to avoid devascularization of the remaining
colonic segment when a large section of colon or rectum is rermoved.
13. How much of the rectum can be removed without compromising function?
The rectum contributes to fecal continence by acting as a functional reservoir. Resection of
a large portion of the rectum affects continence. Resection of 4 cm of rectum allows normal rectal
function in the dog, but resection of 6 cm results in fecal incontinence.
14. What is the prognosis for rectal tumors?
For malignant tumors, poor because of recurrence. A benign tumor can also recur if not ade-
quately resected. This is particularly applicable to benign tumors that are "lopped" off for a diag
nosis with no follow-up resection performed. Malignant transformation of benign tumors can
occur. Rechecks at 90-day intervals are indicated to closely monitor animals that have had tumors
resected, even if the diagnosis was benign.
15. Has colostomy been performed in dogs?
Yes. Diverting flank colostomies have been descri bed in dogs with pelvic and rectal tumors.
readily accomplished by owners.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Aronson L: Rectum and anus. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smatl animat surgery,ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002,
W.B. Saunders, pp 682-708.
3. Slawienski MJ, Mauldin GE: Mlalignant colonic neoplasia in cats: 46 cases (1990-1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc
211:878-881, 1997.
4. Valerius KD, Powers BE, McPherron MA, et al: Adenomatous polyps and carcinoma in situ of the canine colon
and rectum: 34 cases (1982-1994). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:156-160, 1997.
 5. Williams FA Jr, Bright RM, Daniel GB, et al: The use of colonic irrigation to control fecal incontinence in dogs
with colostomies. Vet Surg 28:348-354, 1999.
46. PERIANAL FISTVLAE
Barbara R. Gores, D.V.M., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. Are perianal fistulae a disease specific to German shepherd dogs?
No. They appear to afflict German shepherd dogs most frequently, although they are report-
 2. Are perianal fistulae a disease primarily of the anal sacs?
No. The disease appears to begin in the perineal epithelium with extension into the adnexal
structures characterized by superficial necrosis and ulceration. Progressive invol vement results in
deep inflammation and creation of subcutaneous sinus tracts. The anal sacs become secondarily
invol ved.
3. What is the cause of perianal fistulae?
Unknown. Historically, theories have cited hypothyroidism and bacterial pyodermatitis
combined with anatomic predisposition, such as increased density of apocrine sweat glands in the
zona cutanea of the perianal region, and conformational characteristics, such as a low tail head
position. An immune-mediated cause has also been proposed. The occurrence of perineal fistula
has also been linked to concurrent inflammatory bowel disease and colitis.
4. Are these true fistulae?
No. By definition, a fistula is a communication between one epithelial surface and another.
Unless they communicate between the skin and the rectum or the skin and the anal sac, the tracts,
 5. When are most clinical cases presented for treatment?
In a fairly advanced stage because early lesions are difficult to visualize.
6. What is the clinical presentation of early lesions?
Early lesions are characteristically pinpoint holes in the perianal surface and may go unde-
tected unless the owner is prompted to look closely at the perineum of the dog after noticing
bleeding from the area, excessive licking of the perianal region by the dog, or the dog straining
to defecate (tenesmus). The dog may also show anorexia and weight loss. Fecal incontinence can
occur, and surface tissue loss may be present.
7. Should perianal fistulae be differentiated from neoplasia before treatment is
instituted?
Yes. Although perianal fistulae do not require histologic examination to confirm a diagnosis
made on clinical findings, it is prudent to rule out neoplastic disease as a cause of the clinical
findings. Perianal adenocarcinoma can present as a diffuse, ulcerated, dissecting lesion and
should be on the differential list for a dog with perianal lesions. Histologic features of perianal
fistulae are compati ble with hidradenitis and necrotizing pyogranulomatous inflammation.
8.What is deroofing?
Excision of intact skin and, sometimes, granulation and necrotic tissue from the top of each
tract to create a saucer-shaped wound.
Perianal Fistulae
179
9. What is fulguration?
Passage of a spark across a gap greater than l mm into tissues to create destruction (from
Latin fuigur-lightning)
10. Is medical management a treatment option?
Yes. Two immunosuppressive medications have shown the best results: oral cyclosporine
and topical tacrolimus. The cost of oral cyclosporine may be prohibitive, although it is similar to
100 ng/ml have made cyclosporine treatment more affordable. Concurrent administration of a
cytochrome p-450 inhibitor such as ketoconazole may reduce the dosing requirements and cost
of cyclosporine but may cause side effects. Tacrolimus ointment 0.1% applied topically once
daily is very affordable and devoid of systemic side effects.
Other medical management is the administration of oral prednisone, metronidazole, or
sulfasalazine for the treatment of concurrent inflammatory bowel disease.
11. Are stool softeners indicated or contraindicated for this disease?
 Indicated. Usually, stool softeners that increase the bulk but decrease the consistency of the
stool are preferred (i.e., psyllium). Diet management, in conjunction with treatment for inflam-
matory bowel disease, may achieve the same result.
12. What is the best approach to take when presented with a dog with perianal fistulae?
1. Be aggressive with therapy, do not give false hope to the owners, and closely monitor the
dog—lesions can get out of hand in 2 weeks.
 2. Offer medical and surgical management and the pros and cons of each.
 3. Immunosuppressive therapy with either cyclosporine or tacrolimus is emerging as the
treatment of choice because of the low morbidity and superior results compared to
surgery.
 4. Inform the owners of the necessity for strict compliance with dosing medications and
close monitoring of the perianal region that will be required of them.
 5. Rechecks every 2-3 weeks regardless of how the owner perceives the dog to be doing are
highly recommended.
CONTROVERSY
13. Is surgery the treatment of choice for perianal fistulae?
that resolve and then recur or fail to resolve completely should undergo bilateral anal sacculec-
tomy. The majority of dogs will respond with this treatment alone. Many surgical approaches
have been described, including cryosurgery, chemical cauterization (iodine, sil ver nitrate), en
debri dement, surgical debridement (deroofing) and fulguration and high tail amputation. All have
disadvantages, including failure to control disease, postoperative rectal and anal stricture, tissue
sloughing, and fecal incontinence. Of the surgical treatments, high tail amputation (preferably in
conjunction with anal sacculectomy) is preferred by the author.
14. Is tail amputation necessary for success of surgical treatment?
No, but it may help in the postoperative management of the perianal region. The only report
second or third coccygeal vertebrae) in the treatment of perianal fistulae. Tail amputation may
facilitate the postoperative management of the disease by allowing easy cleansing and aeration of
the area and easy visualization of the lesions as they regress or progress.
180
Perineal Hernia
15. Should the anal sacs be removed regardless of whether or not they are affected?
complete resolution is achieved and medication is stopped, or when fistulas fail to resolve
completely on cyclosporine therapy, performing bilateral anal sacculectomy results in complete
resolution of fistulas in the majority of cases.
If surgical debridement is being performed, both anal sacs could be removed, regardless of
their degree of involvement (never remove just one!).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Aronson L: Rectum and anus. In Slater D, editor: Textbook of smatt aniat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002,
W.B. Saunders, pp 682-708.
2. Griffths LG, Sullivan M, Borland wW: Cyclosporin as the sole treatment for anal furunculosis: preliminary
results. J Smmal1 Anin Pract 40:569-572, 1999.
3. Mathews KA, Ayres SA, Tano CA, et al: Cyclosporine treatment of perianal fistulas in dogs. Can Vet J 38:39-41, 1997.
4. Misseghers BS, Binnington AG, Matthew KA: Clinical observations of the treatment of canine perianal fistulas
with topical tacrolimus in 10 dogs. Can Vet J 41:623-7, 2000
5. Patricelli AJ, Hardie RJ, McAnulty JE: Cyclosporine and ketoconazole for the treatment of perianal fistulas in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1009-1016, 2002.
47. PERINEAL HERNIA
John T. Silbernagel, D.VM., M.S., Dip A.C.VS.
Patricia A. Heine, D.VM., Ph.D.
1. What is the perineal region?
The perineal region is the area between the base of the tail and scrotum (in the male) or the
most caudal mammary glands (in the female). The area is bound laterally by the semimembra-
nosus muscles. The perineum is the tissue (muscle and connective tissue) deep to this perineal
Tegion, primarily composed of the pelvic diaphragm.
2. What is the pelvic diaphragm?
The pel vic diaphragm is the major component of the perineum. It consists of the levator ani
and coccygeal muscles, along with their fascial coverings. It is attached to the caudal vertebrae
dorsally and pelvis ventrally, affording a stable closure to the pelvic outlet.
 3. What are the major neurovascular structures pertinent to perineal hernia surgery?
· Pudendal nerve—-Dorsolateral to the internal obturator, coccygeus, and levator ani muscles
· Sciatic nerve—Craniolateral to the sacrotuberous ligament
· Caudal rectal nerve—Caudal border of the levator ani muscle
· Caudal gluteal artery and vein—Lateral to the internal obturator muscle
· Internal pudendal artery and vein—Dorsolateral to the internal obturator, coccy geus, and
levator ani muscles
· Caudal rectal artery and vein—Caudal borders of the levator ani muscles
4. What causes perineal herniation?
associated with older intact male dogs. Overrepresented breeds include Boston terriers, boxers,
collies, Kelpies, Old English sheepdogs, and Pekingese.
180
Perineal Hernia
15. Should the anal sacs be removed regardless of whether or not they are affected?
complete resolution is achieved and medication is stopped, or when fistulas fail to resolve
completely on cyclosporine therapy, performing bilateral anal sacculectomy results in complete
resolution of fistulas in the majority of cases.
If surgical debridement is being performed, both anal sacs could be removed, regardless of
their degree of involvement (never remove just one!).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Aronson L: Rectum and anus. In Slater D, editor: Textbook of smatt aniat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002,
W.B. Saunders, pp 682-708.
2. Griffths LG, Sullivan M, Borland wW: Cyclosporin as the sole treatment for anal furunculosis: preliminary
results. J Smmal1 Anin Pract 40:569-572, 1999.
3. Mathews KA, Ayres SA, Tano CA, et al: Cyclosporine treatment of perianal fistulas in dogs. Can Vet J 38:39-41, 1997.
4. Misseghers BS, Binnington AG, Matthew KA: Clinical observations of the treatment of canine perianal fistulas
with topical tacrolimus in 10 dogs. Can Vet J 41:623-7, 2000
5. Patricelli AJ, Hardie RJ, McAnulty JE: Cyclosporine and ketoconazole for the treatment of perianal fistulas in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1009-1016, 2002.
47. PERINEAL HERNIA
John T. Silbernagel, D.VM., M.S., Dip A.C.VS.
Patricia A. Heine, D.VM., Ph.D.
1. What is the perineal region?
The perineal region is the area between the base of the tail and scrotum (in the male) or the
most caudal mammary glands (in the female). The area is bound laterally by the semimembra-
nosus muscles. The perineum is the tissue (muscle and connective tissue) deep to this perineal
Tegion, primarily composed of the pelvic diaphragm.
2. What is the pelvic diaphragm?
The pel vic diaphragm is the major component of the perineum. It consists of the levator ani
and coccygeal muscles, along with their fascial coverings. It is attached to the caudal vertebrae
dorsally and pelvis ventrally, affording a stable closure to the pelvic outlet.
 3. What are the major neurovascular structures pertinent to perineal hernia surgery?
· Pudendal nerve—-Dorsolateral to the internal obturator, coccygeus, and levator ani muscles
· Sciatic nerve—Craniolateral to the sacrotuberous ligament
· Caudal rectal nerve—Caudal border of the levator ani muscle
· Caudal gluteal artery and vein—Lateral to the internal obturator muscle
· Internal pudendal artery and vein—Dorsolateral to the internal obturator, coccy geus, and
levator ani muscles
· Caudal rectal artery and vein—Caudal borders of the levator ani muscles
4. What causes perineal herniation?
associated with older intact male dogs. Overrepresented breeds include Boston terriers, boxers,
collies, Kelpies, Old English sheepdogs, and Pekingese.
Perineal Hernia
181
DORSAL
Levator ani muscle
Coccygeus muscle
External anal sphincter.
Caudal gluteal artery
Anal sac
Superficial gluteal muscle
MEDIAL
LATERAL
'Pudendal artery and nerve
 Internal obturator muscle
Caudal rectal artery and nerve
VENTRAL
Figure 47-1 Important surgical landmarks for perineal hemiorrhaphy.
5. List the typical clinical signs seen with perineal hernia.
·Perineal swelling
·Tenesmus
·Constipation
·Dyschezia
·Hematochezia
·Diarrhea
·Fecal incontinence
·Flatus
6. What is the prevalence of perineal hernia?
·0.1-0.4% in dogs.
·Rare in cats.
 7. Is medical management an option for animals with perineal hernia?
Yes, but not a good one. Medical and dietary treatments including high-fiber and high-
moisture diets, bulk-forming laxatives, docusates, and hormone therapy, are better adjuncts to
surgical management than sole treatments.
8. What surgical options are available for repair of perineal hernia?
· Standard herniorrhaphy
· Internal obturator muscle transposition
· Transposition of the superficial gluteal muscle
·Semitendinosus muscle flap
· Small intestinal submucosa used as a patch
 9. List the advantages of internal obturator transposition over other surgical techniques.
+ Less tension is placed on the repait.
· Less lateral deviation of the external anal sphincter.
182
Perineal Hernia
·Procedure aids in closure of the ventral aspect of the hernia, typically the region most
difficult to close.
10. What are the most commonly found hernial contents?
·Rectal sacculation or flexure
·Prostate gland
·Fluid
·Omentum
·Fat
· Urinary bladder
11. What secondary rectal abnormalities can be seen in conjunction with perineal hernias?
·Rectal deviation: Sigmoid curvature of the rectum.
· Rectal diverticulation: Mucosal protrusion within the pelvic canal resulting from separa-
tion of the muscular coat.
·Rectal sacculation: Unidirectional outpouching of the rectal wall usually toward the side
of the hernia with all layers intact (most common).
12. What are the major postoperative complications of perineal hernia repair?
· Surgical site infection and abscess formation
· Rectal prolapse
· Hernia recurrence
· Fecal incontinence
·Hemorrhage
· Sciatic nerve entrapped in a suture
· Suture placed in the rectal lumen or anal sac
· Urethral damage
13. Which factors contribute to the recurrence of a hernia?
·Relative size of the defect when compared with the remaining levator ani, coccygeal, and
ex ternal anal sphincter muscles
· Surgeon's inexperience
· Previous perineal surgery
· Males remaining sexually intact
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Bellenger CR, Canfield RB: Perineal hemia. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smalt animat surgery, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2002, W.B. Saunders, pp 487-498.
2. Hosgood G: Perineal hemiorrhaphy: Perioperative data from 100 dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:331-342,
1995.
3. Krahwinkel DJ Ir: Rectal diseases and their role in perineal hemia. Vet Surg 12:160-165, 1983.
4. Marretta SM, Matthiesen DT: Problems associated with the surgical treatment of diseases involving the perineal
region. Prob Vet Med April 1:215-242, 1989.
5. Matthiesen DT: Diagnosis and management of complications occurring after perineal hemiorrhaphy in dogs.
Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 11:797-822, 1989.
6. Welches CD et al: Perineal hemia in the cat: A retrospective study of 40 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:431-
438,1992.
48. ANAL SAC DISEASE
John T. Silbernagel, D.VM., MS, Dip A.C.VS.
Patricia A. Heine, D.VM., Ph.D.
1. What are the anal sacs (versus anal glands)?
The anal sacs are paired mucosal diverticula located at approximately 4 and 8 o'clock with
respect to the anus in all carnivores. They are situated between the internal and external anal
sphincter muscles, each connecting to the skin surface by a duct that opens at the level of the
anocutaneous junction.
The anal glands are found in the anal sacs and in several locations in the perianal region.
sacs produce only an apocrine secretion; however, in cats, both sebaceous and apocrine secretions
are produced in the anal sacs.
2. What are the functions of the anal sacs?
The ex act function is unknown, although their putrid contents may play a role in social com-
munications, sexual attraction, and delineation of territory by releasing pheromones. They also
play a role in defense in skunks and stripe-necked mongooses.
3. What are the three classifications of nonneoplastic anal sac disease?
· Impaction
·Sacculitis
·Abscessation
4. Describe the pathophysiology of nonneoplastic anal sac disease and predisposing
factors.
tions (i.e., impaction) in the sacs may be the initiating factor. Cats rarely have impacted anal sacs,
suggesting that the sebaceous secretions in cats may provide enough lubrication to prevent
impaction. In dogs, secondary bacterial infection leads to sacculitis and abscessation in many
cases. Contributing factors include diarrhea, glandular hypersecretion, and poor muscle tone of
the anal sphincter in small and obese dogs.
5. List common clinical signs of anal sac disease.
·Tenesmus
·Discomfort when sitting
· Licking or biting the anal area
·Tail chasing
·Scooting
·Perianal discharge
6. What are the differential diagnoses for animals with anal sac disease?
·Vaginitis
· Proctitis
·Ectoparasites
·Endoparasites
184
Anal Sac Disease
·Flea allergy
·Perianal fistulae
· Perianal tumor
7. What is the most common tumor of anal sacs?
Adenocarcinoma of the apocrine glands. These tumors tend to be highly malignant, invade
surrounding soft tissues, and frequently metastasize to regional lymph nodes. This is most
commonly seen in old female dogs.
8. What constitutes conservative therapy for anal sac disease?
· Manual expression of anal sac contents
· Anal sac irrigation with saline or dilute antiseptic
· Intraductal instillation of a corticosteroid antibiotic preparation
· Oral broad-spectrum antibiotics for cellulitis or abscessation
9.List the indications for anal sacculectomy.
· Recurrent episodes of impaction, sacculitis, or abscessation
·Neoplasia
· Perineal fistulas (adjunctive surgical treatment)
10. What two types of procedures are used for anal sacculectomy?
1. Open: The anal sac is incised via a groove director and scalpel or scissors through its duct
before complete removal by sharp and blunt dissection.
 2. Closed: A vertical incision is made over the anal sac, and it is dissected out intact.
11. When should each technique be used?
The open technique should always be used in cases of neoplasia. The open and closed tech-
niques are equally effective for the treatment of non-neoplastic anal sac disease.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
NEOPLASTIC
NONNEOPLASTIC
 Tenesmus
Yes
Yes
Licking
No
Yes
Scooting
No
Yes
Tail chasing
No
Yes
 Perianal discharge
No
Yes
 Hypercalcemia
Yes
No
 Rectal mass
Yes
No
 Change in fecal shape
Yes
No
12. What are the major postoperative complications of anal sacculectomy?
· Fecal incontinence resulting from damage of the external anal sphincter muscle, pudendal
nerves, or caudal rectal nerves
· Chronic draining tracts resulting from retained glandular tissue
· Tenesmus and dyschezia resulting from scar tissue formation
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Aronson L: Rectum and anus. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smatl animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003,
W.B. Saunders, pp 697-701.
Adrenalectomy
185
2. Bennett PF, DeNicola DB: Canine anal sac adenocarcinomas: Clinical presentation and response to therapy. J Vet
Intem Med 16: 100-104, 2002.
3. Hill LN, Smeak DD: Open versus closed bilateral anal sacculectomy for treatment of non-neoplastic anal sac
disease in dogs: 95 cases (1969-1994). Am Vet Med Assoc 221: 662-665, 2002.
49. ADRENALECTOMY
Elaine R. Capiar, D.VM., Dip. A.B.VP, Dip. A.C.VS
1. Where are the adrenal glands located?
Craniomedial to the ipsilateral kidney in the retroperitoneal space. The left adrenal lies
between the aorta and the left kidney, and the right adrenal is between the caudal vena cava and
the right kidney (from Latin ad, near, ren, kidney).
2. What is the blood supply to the adrenal gland?
Branches of the aortic, phrenic, renal, accessory renal, lumbar, and phrenicoabdorminal
the left renal vein, or both can empty into phrenicoabdominal veins.
3. What substances are secreted by the adrenal cortex?
+Cortisol
· Mineralocorticoids
·Androgens
· Estrogens
 4. What is secreted by the adrenal medulla?
Catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine) are synthesized by hydroxylation and
decarboxylation of phenylalanine and tyrosine.
5. List the indications for adrenalectomy.
· Hyperadrenocorticism caused by adrenocortical adenoma or carcinoma.
Tumors of the adrenal medulla (pheochromocytoma).
·Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (controversial, not frequently performed)
6. What is the most common cause of hyperadrenocorticism in the dog?
 Pituitary microadenomas, which secrete excessive ACTH and result in bilateral adrenal
nyperplasia.
 po puo ppe a u pno ou so si ad ro sondosu a '
dog?
Carcinoma, based on most recent literature.
 8. Which adrenal gland is most frequently affected with a tumor?
Right and left adrenal glands are equally affected.
Adrenalectomy
185
2. Bennett PF, DeNicola DB: Canine anal sac adenocarcinomas: Clinical presentation and response to therapy. J Vet
Intem Med 16: 100-104, 2002.
3. Hill LN, Smeak DD: Open versus closed bilateral anal sacculectomy for treatment of non-neoplastic anal sac
disease in dogs: 95 cases (1969-1994). Am Vet Med Assoc 221: 662-665, 2002.
49. ADRENALECTOMY
Elaine R. Capiar, D.VM., Dip. A.B.VP, Dip. A.C.VS
1. Where are the adrenal glands located?
Craniomedial to the ipsilateral kidney in the retroperitoneal space. The left adrenal lies
between the aorta and the left kidney, and the right adrenal is between the caudal vena cava and
the right kidney (from Latin ad, near, ren, kidney).
2. What is the blood supply to the adrenal gland?
Branches of the aortic, phrenic, renal, accessory renal, lumbar, and phrenicoabdorminal
the left renal vein, or both can empty into phrenicoabdominal veins.
3. What substances are secreted by the adrenal cortex?
+Cortisol
· Mineralocorticoids
·Androgens
· Estrogens
 4. What is secreted by the adrenal medulla?
Catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine) are synthesized by hydroxylation and
decarboxylation of phenylalanine and tyrosine.
5. List the indications for adrenalectomy.
· Hyperadrenocorticism caused by adrenocortical adenoma or carcinoma.
Tumors of the adrenal medulla (pheochromocytoma).
·Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (controversial, not frequently performed)
6. What is the most common cause of hyperadrenocorticism in the dog?
 Pituitary microadenomas, which secrete excessive ACTH and result in bilateral adrenal
nyperplasia.
 po puo ppe a u pno ou so si ad ro sondosu a '
dog?
Carcinoma, based on most recent literature.
 8. Which adrenal gland is most frequently affected with a tumor?
Right and left adrenal glands are equally affected.
186
Adrenalectomy
 9. List clinical presentations that are associated with canine adrenal medullary tumors
(pheochromocytoma).
·Hypertension (epistaxis, seizures, cerebrovascular accidents)
·Panting
·Dyspnea
·Tremors
·PU/PD
·Anorexia
·Tachycardia
·Murmur
·Arrhythmias
·Dilated pupils
· Signs associated with partial obstruction of the vena cava (ascites, rear leg edema,
distention of the cauda epigastric veins)
10.List clinical presentations that are associated with canine adrenal cortical tumors.
·PU/PD
· Pendulous abdomen
·Hepatomegaly
·Skin atrophy
·Hair loss
·Polyphagia
·Muscle weakness
·Anestrus
·Obesity
· Muscle atrophy
·Comedones
·Excessive panting
● Testicular atrophy
·Calcinosis cutis
·Facial dermatosis
·Facial nerve palsy
· Secondary bacterial infections
· Thromboembolism
·Diabetes mellitus
 11. What clinical signs and associated organ findings can be seen in the ferret with an
adrenal tumor?
· Bilaterally symmetric alopecia
·Enlarged vulva in spayed females
· Prostatic or paraurethral cysts in males
· Splenic enlargement
·Cardiomyopathy
· Concurrent pancreatic beta cell tumors 
12. Which imaging modalities are helpful in the diagnosis of adrenal tumors?
·Survey radiography (adrenal calcification)
·Abdominal ultrasound
·CT
·Adrenal gland scintigraphy
·MRI
· Caudal vena cava venography (invasion by a pheochromocytoma)
Adrenalectomy
187
13. What laboratory tests are used to diagnose canine adrenal cortical and medullary
tumors?
Adrenal cortical tumors:
· CBC
·Serum chemistry
·Urinalysis
· ACTH response test
· Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
·Urine cortisol-to-creatinine ratio
Pheochromocytomas:
· Indirect blood pressure profilometry
· Catecholamines and their metabolites (vanillylmandelic acid) in urine and plasma
·DHEAS (dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate)
· Plasma chromogramin A
· Nuclear scintigraphy using MIBG, NP-59, and 111-indium-pentetreotide and chemical
shift resonance imaging techniques
14. How are adrenal tumors diagnosed in ferrets?
· Physical examination
·History
·Signalment
·Abdominal ultrasound
· Androgen steroid panel
·Abdominal exploratory surgery
15. What is the recommended preoperative treatment for pheochromocytoma patients?
Phenoxybenzamine hydrochloride (o-adrenergic blocker).
Propranolol (β-adrenergic blocker should be administered with phenoxy benzamine to avoid
severe hypertension).
Esmolol (β-blocker)
16. Why is preoperative treatment recommended?
 Preoperative medical therapy minimizes ad verse effects of catecholamines (car diac arthyth-
mias and hypertension).
17. Which anesthetic agents should be avoided in patients with suspected
pheochromocytoma?
·Atropine—tachycardia often already present
· Ketamine—increases circulating catecholamine levels, heart rate, and blood pressure.
· Xylazine—increases the myocardial sensitivity to catecholamines and arrhythmias.
· Halothane—greater myocardial sensitivity to catecholamines and arrhythmias than
isoflurane
18. What drug can be administered to treat acute hypertension associated with
Phentolamine.
19.  List perioperative considerations for dogs with hyperadrenocorticism.
·Diabetes mellitus.
·Hypokalemia (muscle weakness, bradycardias, ventricular dysrhythmias, hypotension).
· Osteoporosis (careful handling of patients).
188
Adrenalectomy
·Muscle weakness (hypoventilation during surgery).
·Blood loss.
· Postoperative mineralocorticoid or glucocorticoid replacement
20. Describe two surgical approaches for adrenalectomy.
Ventral midline:
1. Facilitates a complete exploratory procedure to evaluate both adrenal glands and check
organs for metastasis.
2. Can be combined with a paracostal celiotomy for better access to liver, lymph nodes, and
bilateral adrenalectomies.
3. A potential for dehiscence in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism.
Retroperitoneal:
1. Avoids damaging an enlarged fatty liver.
 2. Less likely to result in wound dehiscence.
 3. Avoids pancreatitis from excessive manipulation to expose the right adrenal gland.
 4. Allows for adequate exposure of the right adrenal gland.
5. Easier to deal with large quantities of fat in Cushing's disease patients.
 6. Incomplete abdominal exploratory surgery to identify metastases.
21. Describe the surgical technique for adrenalectomy.
1. After a complete exploratory (especially liver and lymph nodes) procedure, the area around
the adrenal is isolated with moistened laparotomy pads and self-retaining retractors.
 2. Gentle dissection of the adrenals is performed with moistened sterile cotton swabs.
 3. Hemostatic clips are used to ligate separately arteries and veins (avoiding blood supply
to the kidney).
 4. Temporary partial occlusion and venotomy of the vena cava may be required to remove
tumor thrombus.
 5. All biopsy specimens are submitted for histopathology.
22. What organs should be examined for potential metastases?
· Liver and regional lymph nodes for metastasis
· Adjacent vena cava, aorta, and ipsilateral renal artery and vein for tumor thrombus
23. What suture material is recommended for abdominal wall closure after adrenalectomy
for hyperadrenocorticism?
Nonabsorbable suture material.
24. Can the vena cava be occluded if necessary?
Yes. Vascular clamps are required so as not to damage the vessel wall. The caudal vena cava
has been clamped for an hour in a ferret without causing clinical effects.
25. Name contraindications to adrenalectomy.
·Presence of extensive tumor metastasis.
·Invasion into the caudal vena cava and surrounding tissues, which makes complete
excision unlikely
· Concurrent diabetes mellitus (lack of catecholamines may result in difficulty regulating)
 26. What is the prognosis for dogs with adrenocortical tumors and adrenomedullary
tumors?
mately 80-90%.
Pancreatectomy
189
· Removal of a pheochromocytoma has provided long-term control in about 50% of
patients.
27. What is the perioperative mortality rate and common complications for dogs under-
going unilateral adrenalectomy for treatment of adrenocortical tumor?
· Mortality rate can be as high as 20%. Common causes of perioperative death include
hemorrhage, untreated hypocortisolemia, peritonitis, renal failure, infection, thromboem-
bolism, and pancreatitis.
ulation test is done 24-48 hours postoperatively.
· Electrolyte balance must also be maintained
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Anderson CD, Birchard SJ: Surgical treatment of adrenocortical tumors: 21 cases (1990-1996). J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 37:93-97, 2001.
2.Birchard SJ: Adrenalectomy. In Slatter D,editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002,
W.B. Saunders, pp 1694-1699.
3. Fossum TW: Surgery of the adrenal and pituitary glands. In Fossum TW, editor: Small animat surgery,ed 2, St
Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp 487-497.
4. Locke-Bohannon LG, Mauldin GE: Canine pheochromocytoma: diagnosis and management. Comp Contin Educ
Pract Vet 23:807-814, 2001.
5. Page R: Adrenal gland neoplasia. In Withrow SJ, MacEwan EG, editors: Smalt animat clinicat oncology, ed 3
Philadelphia, 2001, W.B. Saunders, pp 433-436.
50. PANCREATECTOMY
Elaine R. Caplan, D.VM., A.B.VP., Dip. A.C.VS
1. When is surgery indicated for acute pancreatitis?
· Uncertain diagnosis, deteriorating patient
· Traumatic injury to parenchyma and excretory ducts
· Pancreatitis associated with infection and necrosis
2. List the surgical principles involved with severe pancreatitis and necrosis.
·Debridement and resection of necrotic tissue
· Preservation of major vessels, nerves, and ducts unaffected by disease
· Extensive lavage of abdominal cavity with warm sterile saline
· Drainage with sump drains or open peritoneal drainage
3. What is the postoperative care in patients with acute necrotizing pancreatitis?
· NPO for 2-5 days
· Broad-spectrum anti biotics
· Intravenous fluids, colloids, electrolytes, plasma (to replenish antiproteases)
· Aseptic bandage changes for drains or open peritoneal drainage
Pancreatectomy
189
· Removal of a pheochromocytoma has provided long-term control in about 50% of
patients.
27. What is the perioperative mortality rate and common complications for dogs under-
going unilateral adrenalectomy for treatment of adrenocortical tumor?
· Mortality rate can be as high as 20%. Common causes of perioperative death include
hemorrhage, untreated hypocortisolemia, peritonitis, renal failure, infection, thromboem-
bolism, and pancreatitis.
ulation test is done 24-48 hours postoperatively.
· Electrolyte balance must also be maintained
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Anderson CD, Birchard SJ: Surgical treatment of adrenocortical tumors: 21 cases (1990-1996). J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 37:93-97, 2001.
2.Birchard SJ: Adrenalectomy. In Slatter D,editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002,
W.B. Saunders, pp 1694-1699.
3. Fossum TW: Surgery of the adrenal and pituitary glands. In Fossum TW, editor: Small animat surgery,ed 2, St
Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp 487-497.
4. Locke-Bohannon LG, Mauldin GE: Canine pheochromocytoma: diagnosis and management. Comp Contin Educ
Pract Vet 23:807-814, 2001.
5. Page R: Adrenal gland neoplasia. In Withrow SJ, MacEwan EG, editors: Smalt animat clinicat oncology, ed 3
Philadelphia, 2001, W.B. Saunders, pp 433-436.
50. PANCREATECTOMY
Elaine R. Caplan, D.VM., A.B.VP., Dip. A.C.VS
1. When is surgery indicated for acute pancreatitis?
· Uncertain diagnosis, deteriorating patient
· Traumatic injury to parenchyma and excretory ducts
· Pancreatitis associated with infection and necrosis
2. List the surgical principles involved with severe pancreatitis and necrosis.
·Debridement and resection of necrotic tissue
· Preservation of major vessels, nerves, and ducts unaffected by disease
· Extensive lavage of abdominal cavity with warm sterile saline
· Drainage with sump drains or open peritoneal drainage
3. What is the postoperative care in patients with acute necrotizing pancreatitis?
· NPO for 2-5 days
· Broad-spectrum anti biotics
· Intravenous fluids, colloids, electrolytes, plasma (to replenish antiproteases)
· Aseptic bandage changes for drains or open peritoneal drainage
061
Pancreatectomy
4. Name the short-term perioperative complications of acute necrotizing pancreatitis.
·Hypoproteinemia
·Disseminated intravascular coagulation
·Acute renal failure
·Acute respiratory distress
·Sepsis
·Endotoxemia
 5. Name the long-term complications of acute necrotizing pancreatitis.
·Exacerbation of acute illness
· Glandular fibrosis and pancreatic insufficiency
 6. What are complications of chronic pancreatitis and the surgical treatment for these
complica tions?
COMPLICATION
SURGICAL TREATMENT
Bile duct obstruction
Cholecystoenterostomy
Pyloric or duodenal obstruction
Gas troduodenostomy, gastrojejunos tomy,
resulting from fibrous tissue
subtotal or total pancreatectomy
encroachment
Subtotal or total pancreatectomy is less commonly perfomed because of technical difficulty and endocrine and
exocrine insufficiency.
7. What is a pancreatic anatomic difference between the cat and dog?
The cat has a common opening of the bile and pancreatic ducts.
8. What is the prognosis for pancreatic abscess?
Mortality rate is 50%; major complication is recurrence.
9. List the goals of trea tment for pancreatic abscess.
· Preoperative stabilization with fluids and electrolytes, antibiotics, and plasma
· Debnidement of necrotic debris
· External sump drain or OPD (open peritoneal drainage)
· Enteral hyperalimentation with jejunostomy tube or total parenteral nutrition
10. What is a pancreatic pseudocyst?
A collection of pancreatic fluid from ruptured ductules surrounded by a wall of granulation
tissue that lacks an epithelial wall; it may be associated with trauma or recurrent acute pancreatitis.
11. How is pancreatic pseudocyst treated?
12. Which is the most common malignant tumor of the pancreas in dogs and cats?
Exocrine pancreatic adenocarcinoma (most metastasize by time of diagnosis)
13. Why do patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma develop abdominal effusion?
Effusion forms as a result of tumor metastatic lesions on the peritoneum or compression of
the caudal vena cava.
Pancreatectomy
161
14. How is exocrine pancreatic adenocarcinoma diagnosed?
· Abdominocentesis with cytologic evidence of malignant cells
·Exploratory surgery
Staging includes serum chemistry (bilirubinemia if common bile duct occlusion), CBC, uri-
nalysis, thoracic and abdominal radiography, and abdominal ultrasound.
15. What is the surgical treatment for exocrine pancreatic adenocarcinoma?
Evaluate metastasis to lymph nodes, liver, and peritoneum and biopsy all suspected metasta-
tic lesions. Partial pancreatectomy can be performed. Total pancreatectomy is not recommended
16. Does the presence of multiple small nodules on the pancreas indicate a poor prognosis?
Not necessarily; could be pancreatic nodular hyperplasia or pancreatic adenomas, both of
which are benign.
17. Why is total pancreatectomy difficult and dangerous?
duodenum. Palliative gastrojejunostomy is a short-term option for duodenal obstruction.
18. Describe methods for partial pancreatectomy and advantages of each.
parenchyma and ligating ducts and vessels. (Reduced operative time.)
· Dissection and ligation technique—ligature is tied around individual vessels and ducts,
and tissue is removed after ducts and vessels are transected. (Fewer inflammatory
19. How do pancreatic wounds heal?
By epithelialization, protein synthesis, and fibrin polymerization.
20. Where are the left and right lobes of the pancreas located?
· The left pancreatic lobe is in the deep leaf of the greater omentum.
· The right lobe is in the mesoduodenum.
 21. What vascular supply might be affected when performing a partial pancreatectomy on
the left pancreatic lobe?
Vessels of the gastrosplenic artery (potential interruption of blood supply to the spleen).
22. Are impaired endocrine and exocrine functions expected after extensive partial
pancreatectomy?
Even after removal of 80-90% of the pancreas, no impairment of carbohydrate or fat metab-
olism is expected as long as the duct to the remaining portion is left intact
23. Name four types of pancreatic islet cells.
1.A cells secrete glucagon.
2. B cells secrete insulin
3. D cells secrete somatostatin.
 4. F or P cells secrete pancreatic polypeptide.
24. Insulin-secreting islet cell tumors (insulinomas) result in hyperinsulinemia and
hypoglycemia. List differential diagnoses for this disease in the dog.
·Hypoadrenocorticism
·Sepsis
· End-stage liver disease or cirrhosis
192
Pancreatectomy
·Hunting dog hypoglycemia
· Starvation or cachexia
· Hepatic glycogen storage disease
· Portosystemic shunt
· Extrapancreatic tumors, including lymphoma
· Hepatoma
·Hepatocellular carcinoma
·Multiple myeloma
·Toxicities (ethanol, salicylates, propranolol)
25. What is Whipple's triad?
1. Clinical signs associated with hypoglycemia
 2. Fasting blood glucose <60 mg/dl at the time the animal is symptomatic
 3. Relief of clinical signs by administration of dex trose
 26. Compare common findings with insulin-secreting islet cell tumors for dogs and for
ferrets.
DOGS
FERRETS
Seizures
Hypersalivation
 Hindlimb or generalized weakness
Weakness
Collapse
Lethargy
 Muscle tremors
Collapse
Ataxia
Seizures less common
 Slowly progressive and episodic
27. How are B-cell islet cell tumors diagnosed?
· A high immunoreactive insulin level in a dog with hypoglycemia (<60 mg/dl) strongly
 suggests insulinoma.
· The most reliable diagnostic tool is abdominal exploratory surgery and biopsy with histo-
pathology of suspicious lesions of the pancreas, liver, lymph nodes, duodenum, mesen-
tery, omentum, and spleen.
28. What is the indication for methylene blue injection for insulinomas?
Administration (3 mg/kg, IV 30 minutes before exploratory surgery) helps identify
abnormal tissue to resect neoplastic tissue completely, prolonging remission of clinical signs.
29. List complications of methylene blue injection.
· Inadequate uptake by islet cells
·Pseudocyanosis
· Regenerative anemia
·Acute renal failure
30. List complications after surgical removal of insulinoma.
·Pancreatitis
· Hyperglycemia (as a result of suppression of normal beta cells by tumor-derived insulin)
· Diabetes mellitus
·Hypoglycemia
Splenectomy
193
31. What is the prognosis for dogs after surgery with insulinoma?
Mean survival is 12 months. Dogs with distant metastasis have shorter survival times
32. List the features of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome resulting from a non-beta cell
pancreatic tumor (gastrinoma)producing excessive gastrin.
· Excessive hydrochloric acid secretion from the parietal cells of the stomach
· Hyperplasia and edema of the gastric mucosa
Duodenal ulceration from gastnic hyperacidity
· Villous atrophy and edema of the small intestine
·Diarrhea with malabsorption
33. Why do dogs with gastrinoma have hypocalcemia?
Gastrin stimulates calcitonin secretion.
 34. What is the most valuable nonsurgical diagnostic technique for gastrinoma?
35. What is the best therapy for gastrinomas?
· Medical management of hypergastrinemia and hyperchlorhydria with Hz-blockers,
proton-pump inhibitors, and somatostatin analogues.
36. What is the prognosis in dogs with gastrinomas?
75% metastasize by diagnosis; survival averages 4.8 months; highly malignant
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Fossum TW: Surgery of the pancreas. In Fossum TW, edlitor: Small animat surgery,ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby,
pp 501-516
2. Meleo KA, Caplan ER: Treatment of insulinoma in the dog, cat, and ferret. In Kirk RW, edlitor: Current veterinary
therapy, ed 13, Philadelphia, 2000, W.B. Saunders, pp 357-361
3. Page R: Neoplasia of the endocrine pancreas. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG, editors: Small animat clinicat
oncotogy, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2001, W.B. Saunders, pp 436-444
4. Thomson M: Alimentary tract, liver, pancreas. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2002, W.B. Saunders, pp 2368-2377.
5.Withrow SJ: Exocrine cancer of the pancreas. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG, editors: Small animat clinicat
oncology, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2001, W.B. Saunders, pp 321-323
51. SPLENECTOMY
Ioseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VM
1. List the functions of the spleen.
· Hematopoiesis
· Storage of platelets and red blood cells
· Selective filtration of old, abnormal red blood cells
●Antibody (IgM) production by B cells
· Trapping and processing of bacteria
Splenectomy
193
31. What is the prognosis for dogs after surgery with insulinoma?
Mean survival is 12 months. Dogs with distant metastasis have shorter survival times
32. List the features of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome resulting from a non-beta cell
pancreatic tumor (gastrinoma)producing excessive gastrin.
· Excessive hydrochloric acid secretion from the parietal cells of the stomach
· Hyperplasia and edema of the gastric mucosa
Duodenal ulceration from gastnic hyperacidity
· Villous atrophy and edema of the small intestine
·Diarrhea with malabsorption
33. Why do dogs with gastrinoma have hypocalcemia?
Gastrin stimulates calcitonin secretion.
 34. What is the most valuable nonsurgical diagnostic technique for gastrinoma?
35. What is the best therapy for gastrinomas?
· Medical management of hypergastrinemia and hyperchlorhydria with Hz-blockers,
proton-pump inhibitors, and somatostatin analogues.
36. What is the prognosis in dogs with gastrinomas?
75% metastasize by diagnosis; survival averages 4.8 months; highly malignant
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Fossum TW: Surgery of the pancreas. In Fossum TW, edlitor: Small animat surgery,ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby,
pp 501-516
2. Meleo KA, Caplan ER: Treatment of insulinoma in the dog, cat, and ferret. In Kirk RW, edlitor: Current veterinary
therapy, ed 13, Philadelphia, 2000, W.B. Saunders, pp 357-361
3. Page R: Neoplasia of the endocrine pancreas. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG, editors: Small animat clinicat
oncotogy, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2001, W.B. Saunders, pp 436-444
4. Thomson M: Alimentary tract, liver, pancreas. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2002, W.B. Saunders, pp 2368-2377.
5.Withrow SJ: Exocrine cancer of the pancreas. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG, editors: Small animat clinicat
oncology, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2001, W.B. Saunders, pp 321-323
51. SPLENECTOMY
Ioseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VM
1. List the functions of the spleen.
· Hematopoiesis
· Storage of platelets and red blood cells
· Selective filtration of old, abnormal red blood cells
●Antibody (IgM) production by B cells
· Trapping and processing of bacteria
194
Splenectomy
 2. What are the most common splenic diseases in dogs and cats?
Dogs:
· Hemangiosarcoma
· Hyperplastic nodules
·Hematomas
Cats:
· Mast cell tumor
·Lymphosarcoma
 3. What are indications for splenectomy?
anemia, congestion, and lymphoproliferative diseases
·Splenic infarct
4. Why is splenectomy frequently performed?
Abnormalities of the organ are readily identified by palpation and diagnostic imaging; the
organ is accessible following a midline celiotomy; minimal mesenteric attachments and identifi -
able vasculature promote uncomplicated ligations, resection, and removal (see Figure 51- 1)
 5. What hematologic changes occur in normal dogs after splenectomy?
·Leukocytosis
· Regenerative anemia
· Increased Howell-Jolly bodies
· Nucleated red blood cells, target cells, and platelets
· Decreased red blood cell turnover
·Anemia in dogs with Hemobartonelffa canis
6. What are Howell-Jolly bodies?
Unimportant nuclear fragments found in newly released erythrocytes.
7. What are target cells?
Red blood cells with abnormal cellular membrane swelling, resulting from increased lipid
content, which appear as a target; also called codocyte; clinically insignificant
 8. What laboratory changes have been documented in sick (e.g., torsion, congestion,
neoplasia) dogs?
None consistently identified; 35% of aerobic bacterial cultures of splenic tissue were posi
tive (Staphyfococcus), although the clinical significance of this finding was unknown.
9. List complications of splenectomy.
·Hemorrhage
·Ventricular tachycardia
·Traumatic pancreatitis (rare)
·Gastric fistula (rare)
10. How is partial splenectomy performed?
Suturing (resection followed by a continuous oversew) or stapling; the latter reduces opera-
tive time and omental adhesions. Ultrasonic cutting devices and a carbon dioxide laser can also
be used.
Splenectomy
195
 Right gastric artery
Short gastric arteries
Right
gastroepiploic
Stomach
artery
Hepatic
Left
gastroepiploic
artery
artery
Left lobe of 
pancreas
7
Splenic
Splenic hilar 
artery
Aorta
arteries
Speen
Figure 51-1  Vascular anatomy of the spleen and stomach illustrating major vesse]s for ligation.
(From Hosgood G, Bone DL: Splenectomy in the dog by ligation of the splenic and short gastric
arteries. Vet Surg 18: 1 10-113, 1989, with permission.)
11. For total splenectomy, would ligation of the gastric and splenic arteries produce gastric
necrosis?
 No. Ligation of the splenic, short gastric, and left gastroepiploic arteries does not compromise
stomach blood flow but does reduce operative time compared with splenic hilar vessel ligations.
12. What are the major clinical signs of splenic hemangiosarcoma?
·Acute collapse
· Pale mucous membranes
·Abdominal distention
·Hemoperitoneum
13. In dogs with splenic hemangiosarcoma, which two other organs need to be evaluated?
Liver and right atrium.
14. Which useful diagnostic tools can be used to evaluate a dog with suspected splenic
neoplasia?
Ultrasound-guided fine needle aspirate or fine needle biopsy.
196
Splenectomy
15. Although related to tumor staging, in general, what are the median survival times for
dogs and cats with splenic hemangiosarcoma?
·Dogs: 2-3 months (chemotherapy may double these figures)
· Cats: 4-5 months
16. Which chemotherapeutic agents have been used to prolong recovery in dogs affected
with splenic hemangiosarcoma?
·Doxorubicin
·Vincristine
· Cyclophosphamide
CONTROVERSY
17. What is the law of two-thirds for splenomegaly?
patients have hemangiosarcoma. Mentioned, but not cited, is the addendum that two thirds of
these dogs with hemangiosarcoma have microscopic regional and distant metastasis at the time
of presentation. Contrary to this law, published data from samples submitted for histologic
revealed two thirds of splenic lesions to be malignant.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Hanson JA, Papageorges M: Ultrasonographic appearance of splenic disease in 101 cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
42:441-445, 2001.
 2. Hosgood G, Bone DL: Splenectomy in the dog by ligation of the splenic and short gastric arteries. Vet Surg
18:110-113, 1989.
3. Morrison WB: Cancer in dogs and cats, ed 1, Baltimore, 1998, Williams & Wilkins, pp 705-715.
 4. Neath PJ, Brockman DI: Retrospective analysis of 19 cases of isolated torsion of the splenic pedicle in dogs. J
Sm Anim Pract 38:387-392, 1997.
5.Richardson EF, Brown NO: Hematological and biochemical changes and results of aerobic bacteriological
culturing in dogs undergoing splenectomy. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:199-210, 1996.
6. Spangler WL, Culbertson MR: Prevalence, type, and importance of splenic diseases in dogs: 1,480 cases (1985.
1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:829-834, 1992
7. Spangler WL, Culbertson MR: Prevalence and type of splenic diseases in cats: 455 cases (1985-1991). I Am Vet
Med Assoc 201:773-776, 1992.
8. Spangler WL, Kass PH: Pathologic factors affecting postsplenectomy survival in dogs. I Vet Intem Med 11:166-
171, 1997.
9. Waldron DR, Robertson J: Partial splenectomy in the dog: A comparison of stapling and ligation techniques. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:343-348, 1995.
D2.RENAL NEOPLASIA AND CALCVLI
Dennis E. Oisen, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. How common are primary tumors of the kidneys?
·In dogs, 0.3-2.5% of all tumors
· In cats, 0.6%-2.5% of all tumors (variability due to controversy regarding inclusion of
 2. Which are more common—-primary tumors or metastases?
Metastases because of high blood flow through the kidneys and the rich capillary network
 3. List the most common types of tumors.
· Renal tubular adenocarcinomas (54-70% in canine; 40-68% in feline)
· Transitional cell carcinomas
· Squamous cell carcinomas
·Hemangiosarcoma
· Nephroblastoma
·Lymphoma (feline)
4. What is the biologic behavior of renal tumors?
Greater than 90% are malignant. At the time of diagnosis metastasis may be seen in up to
48% of renal adenocarcinoma. Reports indicate that nearly all cats and approximately 30% of
5. What is the general signalment of animals with renal tumors?
Older animals (except nephroblastoma); more male canines with primary renal carcinoma
than females; the only canine breed known to have a predisposition for renal neoplasia is the
German Shepherd dog. No feline gender or breed dispositions.
6. Describe the clinical presentation of a renal tumor
The reported classic triad of signs—hematuria, a palpable abdominal mass, and pain in the
flank region—is rarely seen (<15% of cases).
Clinical signs are generally nonspecific, such as anorexia, weight loss, vomiting, and
possible lameness secondary to hypertrophic osteopathy.
7. What are some diagnostic procedures and possible findings?
· Careful palpation: mass, possibly painful, in the cranial aspect of the abdomen
·Hematology: changes not always present; may see mild anemia resulting from alterations in
erythropoietin or chronic hematuria; polycythemia and hypercalcemia have also been seer
· Diagnostic imaging: survey and contrast radiography, computed tomography, and
ultrasonography
· Needle aspiration or biopsy: with ultrasound
· Surgical exploration: diagnosis and therapy (removal)
8. What types of therapies are available for renal tumors?
1. The treatment of choice for unilateral renal tumors that have not metastasized is com-
plete nephrectomy. If possible, early venous ligation should be attempted to diminish
198
Renal Neoplasia and Calculi
the potential of releasing tumor emboli into the systemic circulation. The kidney and
ureter as well as perinephric fat and, if necessary, sublumbar musculature should be
removed.
 2. Chemotherapy for lymphoma may be very effective, but protocols used for other tumors
generally have equivocal results.
9. What is the prognosis?
Many tumors have metastasized at the time of diagnosis, and metastatic disease is often the
cause of death soon after diagnosis. Generally, if a dog survives surgical removal of the carcino
10. How common are renal calculi (nephroliths)?
· In dogs, 1-4% of all urolith cases
·In cats, 2.8-5% of all urolith cases
11. Is there an association of nephroliths with uroliths in other locations?
Between 25% and 50% of dogs with nephroliths also have uroliths in another location of the
urinary tract. Cats have uroliths in other locations 15% to 17% of the time.
12. List dog breeds that are at greater risk to develop kidney stones.
·Miniature schnauzers
· Shih Tzus
·Lhasa apsos
· Yorkshire terriers
·Female pugs
·Dalmatians
· Male basset hounds
13. How does nephrolithiasis in cats compare with nephrolithiasis in dogs?
·Cats slightly higher nisk
·Age: similar to dogs; mean 8.5 years
· Gender: no clear distnibution whereas in dogs, >6
· 9% bilateral occurrence versus 19% in dogs
·Incidence increasing
·May see hypercalcemia with calcium oxalate stones
14. What types of stones are commonly seen?
The most common type in the female canine seems to be struvite, whereas calcium oxalate
is most common in the male. The most common type of feline nephroliths are calcium oxalate
followed by calcium phosphate.
15. What are the clinical manifestations of nephrolithiasis?
Without obstruction or infection, renal calculi are asymptomatic and incidentally diagnosed
obstruction results in hydronephrosis, which may cause abdominal pain. Unilateral renal calculi
can ex hibit recurrent urinary tract infection if the stone is infected. Bilateral urinary obstruction,
even partial, often leads to reduced renal function and signs of uremia.
16. How is a diagnosis of nephrolithiasis confirmed?
Laboratory test results are variable: Pyuria, hematunia, bacteriuria, an active sediment con-
taining casts and crystals, and impaired concentration of urine may be noted on urinalysis with
Renal Neoplasia and Calculi
661
infection or obstruction. Blood chemistry may show evidence of renal dysfunction with an
presence of calculi within the kidney.
17. What procedures should be performed before definitive therapy?
·Nuclear scintigraphy to quantify kidney contribution to overall renal function.
· Urinalysis, culture, and radiology can help in predicting the mineral composition of the
stone.
18. Discuss the treatment options.
Therapy of as ymptomatic renal calculi that are incidentally found during diagnostics for
unrelated conditions is controversial. It is prudent to evaluate renal function, to begin medical
stone. Surgical removal of nephroliths should be considered when there is continued risk for loss
of renal function beyond that created by surgical intervention. Also, when stones are not
considered. Shock-wave lithotripsy (fragmentation of stones) has the advantage of inducing less
readily available in veterinary medicine.
19. What surgical techniques are available?
·Pyelolithotomy if the renal pel vis is dilated
· Nephrectomy in unilateral cases in which contralateral renal function is adequate
20. What is the technique for nephrolithotomy via laparotomy?
Temporary occlusion of arterial blood flow to the kidney. The convex surface is incised, and
the dissection site should be ligated and divided. The stone is removed and all diverticuli are gently
explored. A catheter should be inserted into the ureter and flushed to ensure patency. The kidney
21. What are the potential complications of nephrolithotomy?
· Recent work has shown that nephrotomy does not compromise renal function to the
degree once thought. Administration of mannitol prior to temporary vascular occlusion
may contri bute to lessened renal damage.
· Failure to remove all of the stones from the kidney because of inaccessible location or
increased patient risk
22. What is pyelolithotomy?
when there is pelvic dilation secondary to obstruction, which will allow an incision in the
is limited. After removal of the stone, the pelvis is flushed, and a catheter is used to ensure
patency of the ureter. The renal pelvis is meticulously closed without placing sutures within the
lumen.
23. How are bilateral conditions treated?
 A choice is made between removal of the stones from both kidneys during one surgery or
performing staged unilateral procedures. This decision is based on renal function, presence of
200
Ectopic Ureters
infection, degree of urinary obstruction, and overall health. Staged unilateral surgery can be
performed when urine flow is not obstructed. The kidney that is least likely to be compromised
and will support the patient should be selected for the first procedure. Renal function should be
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Adams LG, Senior DF: Electrohydraulic and extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim
Pract 29:293-302, 1999
2. Rawlings CA, Bjorling DE: Kidneys. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery,ed 3, Philadelphia,
2003, W.B. Saunders, pp 1606-1618.
3. Ross SJ, Osbome CA,Lulich JP, et al: Canine and feline nephrolithiasis: Epidemiology, detection, and
management. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 29:231-250, 1999.
4. Stone EA: Surgical therapy for urolithiasis. In Stone EA, Barsanti JA, editors: Urologic surgery of the dog and
cat, Philadelphia, 1992, Lea & Febiger, pp 174-181
5. Withrow SJ: Tumors of the urinary system. In Withrow SJ, MacEwan EG, editors: Small animat clinicat
oncology, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2001, W.B. Saunders, pp 490-500.
6. Henry CJ, Tumquist SE, Smith A, et al: Primary renal tumours in cats: 19 cases (1992-1998). J Feline Med Surg
1:165-170, 1999.
7. Lanz OL, Waldron DR: Renal and ureteral surgery in dogs. Clin Tech Sm Anim Pract 15:1-10, 2000.
8. Stone EA, Robertson JL, Metcalf, MR: The effect of nephrotomy on renal function and morphology in dogs. Vet
Surg 31:391-397, 2002
53. ECTOPIC URETERS
Mary K. Ouinn, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is an ectopic ureter?
A congenital anomaly in which one or both ureters empty beyond the bladder. The ureter
may be intraluminal or ex traluminal in position.
2. List common sites of ectopic ureter termination.
·Vagina (most frequent)
·Urethra
· Neck of bladder
·Uterus
3.What is the difference between anintraluminal andextraluminal ectopicureter?
·Extraluminal ureters completely bypass the bladder.
· Intraluminal ureters course submucosally within the bladder wall before emptying into
the urethra or vagina.
·Intraluminal ureters are more common.
4. What is the cause of ectopic ureter?
An abnormal differentiation of the mesonephric (embryonic kidney) and metanephric
(definitive kidney) ducts.
 5. List other urinary abnormalities that are associated with ectopic ureter.
·Hydroureter
·Hydronephrosis
200
Ectopic Ureters
infection, degree of urinary obstruction, and overall health. Staged unilateral surgery can be
performed when urine flow is not obstructed. The kidney that is least likely to be compromised
and will support the patient should be selected for the first procedure. Renal function should be
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Adams LG, Senior DF: Electrohydraulic and extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim
Pract 29:293-302, 1999
2. Rawlings CA, Bjorling DE: Kidneys. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery,ed 3, Philadelphia,
2003, W.B. Saunders, pp 1606-1618.
3. Ross SJ, Osbome CA,Lulich JP, et al: Canine and feline nephrolithiasis: Epidemiology, detection, and
management. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 29:231-250, 1999.
4. Stone EA: Surgical therapy for urolithiasis. In Stone EA, Barsanti JA, editors: Urologic surgery of the dog and
cat, Philadelphia, 1992, Lea & Febiger, pp 174-181
5. Withrow SJ: Tumors of the urinary system. In Withrow SJ, MacEwan EG, editors: Small animat clinicat
oncology, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2001, W.B. Saunders, pp 490-500.
6. Henry CJ, Tumquist SE, Smith A, et al: Primary renal tumours in cats: 19 cases (1992-1998). J Feline Med Surg
1:165-170, 1999.
7. Lanz OL, Waldron DR: Renal and ureteral surgery in dogs. Clin Tech Sm Anim Pract 15:1-10, 2000.
8. Stone EA, Robertson JL, Metcalf, MR: The effect of nephrotomy on renal function and morphology in dogs. Vet
Surg 31:391-397, 2002
53. ECTOPIC URETERS
Mary K. Ouinn, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is an ectopic ureter?
A congenital anomaly in which one or both ureters empty beyond the bladder. The ureter
may be intraluminal or ex traluminal in position.
2. List common sites of ectopic ureter termination.
·Vagina (most frequent)
·Urethra
· Neck of bladder
·Uterus
3.What is the difference between anintraluminal andextraluminal ectopicureter?
·Extraluminal ureters completely bypass the bladder.
· Intraluminal ureters course submucosally within the bladder wall before emptying into
the urethra or vagina.
·Intraluminal ureters are more common.
4. What is the cause of ectopic ureter?
An abnormal differentiation of the mesonephric (embryonic kidney) and metanephric
(definitive kidney) ducts.
 5. List other urinary abnormalities that are associated with ectopic ureter.
·Hydroureter
·Hydronephrosis
Ectopic Ureters
201
· Functional bladder or urethral abnormalities
+Bladder hypoplasia
·Ureteroceles
·Double ureteral openings
·Vestibulovaginal abnormalities
·Ureteral trough(elongated opening)
6. Is ectopic ureter an inherited condition?
This has not been established. A familial predisposition occurs in Siberian huskies, retriev-
ers, and poodles. The mode of transmission is unknown.
7. Is there a gender predilection for ectopic ureter?
Possibly. The ratio of affected females to males is 20:1. Affected males, however, may be
less commonly diagnosed because of a longer urethra, urethral-vesicular reflux, and external ure-
thral sphincter pressures (all prevent dribbling).
8. What is the most common sign associated with ectopic ureter?
Constant or intermittent urinary incontinence after weaning. Norrmal voiding may occur with
intermittent dnbbling. Incontinence may occur less commonly in male compared with female dogs.
9. How do ectopic ureters in cats differ from those in dogs?
The majority of dogs (70-80%) have unilateral abnormalities. Intramural ureters are the
most common. Ectopic ureters are less common in cats, but they are more likely to have bilateral
abnormalities.
10. How is ectopic ureter diagnosed?
Excretory urography is the method of choice for confirming ectopic ureters and defining
associated urogenital abnormalities. The size and shape of the kidneys, ureters, and bladder;
termination of the ureters; and any other urinary abnormalities are noted. Excretory urography is
Ultrasonography was compared with excretory urography and the results found to be
similar, although ultrasonography was more accurate in identifying normal ureteral anatomy.
Cystoscopy may be a reliable method as well.
11. What laboratory evaluations are important in patients with ectopic ureter?
· Complete blood count
· Chemistry profile
· Urinalysis and urine culture
12. How are patients with ectopic ureters treated?
The choice of the surgical procedure should be based on the functional capability of both
kidneys, presence of infection, or other pathologic changes in any portion of the urinary tract.
Ureterovesical anastomosis should be considered in the following situations:
· Normal function of the kidney drained by an ectopic ureter
· Bilateral ureteral ectopia
·Hypofunction of both kidneys
Ureteronephrectomy should be performed if the kidney drained by the ectopic ureter is non-
functional or an intractable infection is present, provided the remaining kidney has adequate function.
13. What is neoureterostomy?
Formation of a new opening for intraluminal ectopic ureters. A ventral cystotomy incision is
made near the urethra. Pressure applied to the urethra facilitates identification of the intraluminal
202
Ectopic Ureters
ectopic ureter, which appears as a swelling or ridge within the bladder wall. A 3- to 5-mm longi-
tudinal incision is made through the bladder mucosa into the lumen of the ureter. Small
bladder. A 3.5 or 5 French catheter is introduced into the distal ureter. Just distal to the new ureter-
al stoma, two nonabsorbable sutures (3-0 to 4-0) are passed from the serosal surface around the
tube staying beneath the bladder mucosa. These sutures are tied, after removal of the catheter, to
ligate the distal ureter.
14. What is a ureteroneocystostomy?
Reconnection into the bladder for extraluminal ectopic ureters. The ureter is resected and
Teimplanted into the bladder lumen. A stay suture is placed through the proximal end of the
transected ureter. After a ventral cystotomy, an incision is made through the bladder mucosa, and
a short oblique submucosal tunnel is created in the bladder wall. Using the stay suture, the ureter
is pulled through the bladder wall into the lumen. The ureter is spatulated and sutured to the
15. Why is it important to handle the bladder gently?
The bladder responds to trauma by becoming edematous. Edema can occlude the ureteral
openings.
16. What type of suture material should be used in the bladder?
Absorbable suture such as polyglactin 910 (Vicryl), polyglycolic acid (Dexon), polydiox-
anone (PDS), or polyglyonate (Maxon) should be used in the bladder. Nonabsorbable suture
material may promote calculus formation or infection. Small suture (4-0 or 5-0) is preferred to
suture the ureter to the bladder mucosa.
17. What is the prognosis for surgical treatment of ectopic ureters?
After surgery, 30-55% of patients continue to show some degree of urinary incontinence.
Repair of extraluminal ureters (terminating in urethra, uterus, or vagina) and patients with
hydroureter have a poor prognosis.
Urethral sphincter incompetence may also be present. Cystometrographic studies and
urethral pressure profiles can be used to detect functional abnormalities before surgery.
  ad oo d o a q  sip a 
· Phenylpropanolamine (o-adrenergic agonist) to increase urethral sphincter tone.
· Diethylstilbestrol to increase sensitivity of c-receptors and enhance urethral mucosal
sealing, collagen content, and vascularity
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Anderson CC, Cook CR: What is your diagnosis? Ectopic ureter. I Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1321-1322, 1999.
 2. Fossum TW: Surgery of the kidney and ureter. In Fossum TW, edlitor: Smatt animat surgery, ed 2, St. Louis, 2002,
Mosby, pp 558-564.
223,1998
4. Rawlings CA: Ureter. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in small animat surgery, ed 4, Baltimore, 1998,
Williams & wilkins, pp 445-449.
54. URETERAL TEARS AND CALCULI
Dennis E. Oisen, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. How often are traumatic ureteral tears diagnosed?
Rarely in small animals because the ureter is well protected from injury by the sublumbar
musculature and spine. Iatrogenic damage during surgical procedures of the female reproductive
tract may be one of the most common causes. Trauma from misplaced clamps and sutures has
been implicated in causing ureteral necrosis and leakage. Blunt abdominal trauma is also a
Teported cause of ureteral rupture. Increasing use of minimally invasive surgical technology and
endoscopic techniques may contribute to the incidence of ureteral trauma.
2. What are the clinical manifestations of a ureteral tear?
· A clinical history of abdominal trauma, abdominal surgery, or urolithiasis should raise
index of suspicion.
· Sterile urine in the retroperitoneum or peritoneum does not cause immediate clinical signs
· Urine accumulation in the retroperitoneum can lead to a sublumbar cellulitis and
potentially urinoma formation, which may manifest as abdominal tenderness and a
palpable mass in the dorsal abdominal region. Urine accumulation within the abdominal
cavity may lead to abdominal distension and peritonitis
· Infected urine will result in a more acute presentation.
3. How are tears in the ureter diagnosed?
· Laboratory findings: inconclusive on early presentation. Chronic leakage will induce
serum electrolyte abnormalities such as low sodium and chloride concentrations and
increased potassium. Azotemia will also be noted.
· Abdominocentesis: increased creatinine compared with serum concentrations (only if in
abdominal cavity)
· Diagnosis imaging: Survey radiography—Loss of retroperitoneal detail, with or without
soft tissue mass effect caudal to the kidneys. Hydroperitoneum, if leakage into the peri-
toneal cavity. Contrast radiography—contrast extravasation into the retroperitoneum or
 peritoneum. Intravenous urography may not be diagnostic, and direct infusion of contrast
material into the ureter through antegrade pyelography or retrograde ureterography (endo-
scopically guided) may be required. Ultrasonography—possible hydronephrosis or cyst-
like structure(urinoma)
· Exploratory laparotomy: direct visualization. Infusion of vital dye (e.g, fluorescein)
through catheter placed into the ureteral orifice within the bladder may facilitate
localization.
4. What are the treatment options for a ureteral tear?
heal completely without surgical intervention or catheter placement. However, because there is
no information concerning the results of unassisted healing, most if not all cases of ureteral lacer-
ation are surgically approached.
If a clamp or suture inadvertently placed during ovariohysterectomy is removed quickly
(within 60 minutes), 90% of the resulting strictures resolve by 12 weeks. If the obstruction is
204
Ureteral Tears and Calculi
Temoved by l week and the ureter is repaired, nomal renal and ureter function can be regained.
 If the obstruction has been present for 4 weeks or longer, renal function is completely lost.
5. List surgical techniques used for ureteral tears.
·Transureter stenting catheters
·Primary closure
· Nephroureterectomy
· Ureteroneocystostomy
· Ureteral replacement
· Renal autotransplantation
· Bladder-tube flap ureterostomy (Boari flap)
· Ureteral anastomosis
·Temporary urinary diversion
6. What is renal descensus?
Mobilization and caudal displacement of the kidney to reduce tension on the ureter.
7. What is psoas cystopexy?
Cramial displacement and attachment of the bladder to the psoas fascia/muscle in an effort
8. What are the principles of ureteral surgery?
1. Avoid disruption of ureteral vascularity.
 2. Provide accurate apposition.
 3. Avoid tension on the anastomosis site
 4. Spatulate ends of the ureter prior to anastomosis.
 5. Avoid urine leakage from repair site.
9. What are the potential complications of ureteral tears and of surgical repair?
· Urine leakage/urinoma formation/cellulitis/uroabdomen/peritonitis
· Ureteral stricture formation and partial or total obstruction
· Loss of functional renal tissue
10. What are some postoperative protocols?
1. Repeated contrast urograms or ultrasound examinations (or both) can be done to
determine the presence of leakage, stricture formation, and recurrence of calculi.
 2. Fluid and nutritional support may be required because of postoperative anorexia.
 3. Proper antimicrobial therapy should be selected based on culture and sensitivity samples
obtained from the site.
 4. Renal function should be closely monitored to determine the degree of recovery or detect
evidence of deterioration.
11. How common are ureteral calculi?
In a large retrospective study of dogs, ureteral calculi were seen with renal calculi in 0.3%
of urolithiasis cases and ureteral calculi alone in O.7%. In cats, incidence may be increasing.
12. What types of stones are commonly seen?
The mineral composition of ureteroliths reflects the composition of nephroliths. Struvite and
type is calcium ox alate.
Ureteral Tears and Calculi
205
13. What are the clinical manifestations of ureteral calculi?
Depression, lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, dysuria. All may be due to pain. When urine flow
is obstructed azotemia and renal compromise may be seen.
14. How is a diagnosis of ureteral calculi confirmed?
·Radiography: dense calculi, enlarged kidney, hydronephrosis, and hy droureter (contrast),
·Ultrasonography: hyperechoic shadows, dilation of ureter.
· Surgical exploration: visualization and palpation.
· Possible increase in serum calcium levels in cats.
·Hematuria, gross or microscopic, is common.
15. What special procedures should be performed prior to definitive therapy?
·Monitor transit of calculus.
· Evaluate renal function: nuclear scintigraphy (glomerular filtration) or contrast studies
(iohexol).
·Evaluate entire tract for stones.
16. What are the treatment options?
·Inducing diuresis
· Treatment with analgesics and/or smooth muscle relaxants
·Lithotripsy—not in cats
·Surgical removal
17. What surgical techniques are available?
· Nephroureterectomy: avoid if possible when kidney function is present, especially when
the function of the affected kidney is essential to maintain life
·Pyelotomy or ureterotomy
· Ureteroneocystostomy: mucosal apposition, mobilization of kidney or bladder
· Ureteral resection and anastomosis
18. What are the indications for surgical intervention?
 Indications include lack of transit through the ureter with evidence of obstruction and renal
dysfunction especially if accompanied by infection.
19. Can ureteral calculi be medically dissolved?
Medical dissolution is unlikely to be successful because stones are not bathed in urine or are
of nondissolvable composition.
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Adams LG, Senior DF: Electrohydraulic and extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim
Pract 29:293-302, 1999
2. Kyles AE, Stone EA, Gookin J: Diagnosis and surgical management of obstructive ureteral calculi in cats: 11
cases (1993-1996). I Am Vet Med Assoc 213:1150-1156, 1998.
3. McLoughlin MA: Ureters. In Slatter D, edlitor: Textbook of smatl arimal surgery,ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003, W.B.
Saunders, pp 1619-1628
Anim Pract 43:2213-216, 2002.
5. Smith TG 3rd, Gettman M, Lindberg G, et al: Ureteral replacement using porcine small intestine submucosa in a
porcine model. Urology 60:931-934, 2002.
6. Weisse C, Aronson LR, Drobatz K: Traumatic rupture of the ureter: 10 cases. J Am Anin Hosp Assoc 38:188-
192,2002
55. URINARY BLADDER CALCULI AND
NEOPLASIA
Trevor N. Bebchuk, D.VM., Dipl. A.C.VS.
1. What are common urinary calculi in the dog and cat?
·Calcium oxalate monohydrate and dihydrate
·Magnesium ammonium phosphate hex ahydrate struvite
·Ammonium and sodium urates
·Cystine
·Silicone dioxide
·Xanthine
2.  Are there any breed-associated uroliths?
BREED
UROLITH
OCCURRENCE(%)
 Dalmatian
Ammonium and sodium urate
98
Miniature schnauzer
Calcium ox alate
28
Struvite
67
Bichon frise
Struvite
90
English bulldogs
Ammonium and sodium urate
35
Cystine
42
Yor kshire terriers
Calcium oxalate
45
 3. Which stone composition is most common in the dog and cat?
Dogs
·Struvite
·Calcium oxalate
Cats
·Calcium oxalate
·Struvite
 4. Is there an association between a specific type of urolith and urinary tract infection
(UTI)?
Struvite uroliths are most commonly associated.
 5. List the different types of urolith in order of radiographic density, from most
radiodense to least radiodense.
· Phosphate (apatite, struvite)
·Calcium oxalate
·Cystine
·Urates
Urinary Bladder Calculi and Neoplasia
207
6. Which types of calculi can be managed with dietary changes?
1. Struvite uroliths are the most responsive to dietary management (reduced protein,
phosphorus, and magnesium). The diets also commonly have increased sodium chloride
to stimulate thirst and polyuria
 2. Ammonium urate uroliths may also be managed by diet (purine-restricted alkalinizing
diet with no supplemental sodium).
 3. Cystine urolithiasis may also be managed with diet because the urine composition can be
modified to contain less cystine.
 4. Calcium oxalate uroliths may be decreased by feeding diets high in protein, sodium, potas-
sium, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, and moisture; and diets low in carbohydrates.
 7. What systemic metabolic conditions are associated with urolithiasis?
Dalmatian dogs have a decreased ability to oxidize uric acid to allantoin. This results in the
excretion of high levels of uric acid in the urine, which predisposes Dalmatians to urate urolithi-
asis. Dogs with portal vascular anomalies or hepatic microvascular dysplasia are also predisposed
to urate urolithiasis because the blood is shunted around the liver, preventing the conversion of uric
acid to allantoin. Cystinuria leading to cystine uroliths is an inborn error of metabolism, but the
8. Is it important to know what types of calculi are present?
evidence of a systemic metabolic abnormality. Also, the dissolution diets used for some stones
(struvite) may predispose to the formation of others (calcium oxalate)
 9. What tests can be used to determine the type of urolith present?
· Urinalysis, including visual analysis of crystals present. This may not be accurate,
· Imaging studies, radiographs, pneumocystography, double contrast radiography, and
ultrasonography. These provide information on the size, shape, radiopacity, location, and
number of stones detected, which may give clues to mineral composition.
· Surgical removal and stone submission for analysis, the only guaranteed means of
accurate mineral composition analysis.
10.  What potential problems can be associated with urolithiasis?
Obstruction of the renal pelvis, ureter, trigone, or urethra. If the obstruction is persistent,
hydronephrosis, hydroureter, and even urethral rupture may occur. Chronic UTIs may also be
sequelae.
11. Is urolithiasis an emergency?
Yes, if the animal has a urinary tract obstruction as a result of lodging of the urolith in a
ureter, bladder neck, or urethra (post-renal azotemia). This obstruction has systemic metabolic
effects (uremia) and could lead to ureteral, bladder, or urethral rupture if urinary obstruction is
severe and allowed to persist for several days.
12. What are the indications for cystotomy and urolith removal?
·Obstructive uropathy
· Calcium oxalate, calcium phosphate, silica, and sometimes cystine uroliths
· Uroliths that are refractory to medical dissolution
· Contraindications to medical management (nutritional concerns)
·Anatomical defects predisposing to UTI (urachal diverticulum)
· Male gender because medical dissolution of urinary calculi carries with it a greater risk
of urethral obstruction
208
Urinary Bladder Calculi and Neoplasia
13. If a dog has urethral stones, what technique can be used to attempt to move them into
the bladder for removal via cystotomy?
Retrograde urohydropropulsion. This technique should be employed if voiding
urohy dropropulsion has failed. A cystotomy is a much more benign procedure than urethrotomy
or urethrostomy. This techmique invol ves pulsatile sterile saline infusion into a urethral catheter
with the catheter tip and inflated balloon located just distal to the stone. This urethra is distended
and the stone flushed retrograde. If required, pressure can be placed on the urethra proximal to
the stone per rectum to cause more urethral dilation. Heavy sedation or general anesthesia is
necessary to perform this, and local anesthesia of the urethra with lidocaine gel may help prevent
urethrospasm. Complications include urethral and bladder rupture.
凸
B
Figure 55-1  (A) A 6-year-old male Bichon Frise with stranguria and radio-
graphic evidence of radiopaque urethral calculi just caudal to the os penis.
(B) The same dog following urohydropropulsion to advance the stones retrograde
into the bladder for removal via cystotory. Note the twin areas of negative con-
trast and the indistinct bladder margins. One of the stones does not appear to be
to exuberant urohydropropulsion.
UrinaryBladderCalculiandNeoplasia
209
14. What are the surgical approaches to the bladder for urolith removal?
The bladder can be approached via a caudal ventral midline abdominal incision. In male
dogs, the incision begins at the umbilicus and curves peripreputially. Branches of the caudal
superficial epigastric vessels are ligated, and the abdomen is entered on ventral midline. The
bladder should be elevated out of the abdomen and isolated with moistened laparotomy sponges.
A stay suture is then placed at the apex of the bladder at the cranial end of the proposed incision
with another stay suture at the caudal end of the proposed incision. The ventral bladder incision
should be made in a relatively avascular area, and the trigone must be avoided.
15. What methods have been described for the closure of the urinary bladder?
the mucosal layer, taking care to place minimal suture material within the bladder lumen. The
Lembert pattern
patterns, have also been proposed. In normal canine bladders, the single-layer closure provides
as good a seal as the two-layer, inverting pattern. In a thickened bladder wall, it is often difficult
    poe s e p  si  e d o
anatomic defects that may predispose to UTI exist, they should be corrected before cystotomy
closure.
16. Discuss the types of suture material that are best suited for urinary bladder surgery.
The ideal suture material would have strength at least as great as that of normal bladder
tissue, and it would retain that strength for the 14-21 days it takes injured bladder tissue to retain
100% of prewound strength. It should be absorbable suture material to avoid acting as a nidus for
stone formation. Two synthetic braided absorbable suture materials, polyglycolic acid (Dexon)
and polyglactin 9l0 (Vicryl), have sufficient tensile strength and maintain that strength for an
adequate period, with all the strength 1ost by 28 days. They degrade over 3-6 weeks, but this may
occur faster for polyglycolic acid in the face of UTl. Two monofilament suture materials, poly-
dioxanone (PDS) and modified polyglycolic acid (Maxon), have 20% greater tensile strength
than similar synthetic braided materials, less tissue drag, and prolonged decay. The first two
 properties are useful, but the prolonged decay may lead to a suture nidus and stone formation.
17. What techniques can be used to ensure that all uroliths are surgically removed from a
bladder?
· Preoperative radiography notes the number and location of the radiodense uroliths.
  s    e    o    
to evaluate for the presence of stones in the urethra. Alternatively, a catheter can be placed
retrograde in the urethra and a nonsterile assistant can flush sterile saline retrograde into
the bladder. This helps to flush stones from the urethra into the bladder, where they can
be removed.
· Postoperative radiography of the abdomen helps ensure that stones were not retained in
the bladder or urethra.
18. What is the incidence of bladder cancer in the dog and cat?
Less than 1% of all cancers. It is more common in the dog than the cat, and malignant
tumors are more common clinically than benign ones. The most common histologic types are
transitional cell carcinoma, followed by squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma; however,
hemangiosarcoma has also been noted. Primary sarcomas are rare, and young dogs can have a
are fibromas, leiomyomas, and papillomas.
210
Urinary Bladder Calculi and Neoplasio
19. What is the biologic behavior of the most common tumors?
Malignant bladder carcinomas, especially transitional cell carcinomas, are locally invasive
and, in >50% of cases, metastasize to the regional lymph nodes and lungs.
20.  What clinical signs are most commonly associated with bladder neoplasia?
·Chronic signs of hematuria, dysuria, and pollakiuria
·Hypertrophic osteopathy, especially in cases of botryoid rhabdomyosarcoma
·Any cystitis refractory to medical therapy (warrants further diagnostic evaluation)
21. Describe the techniques of urinary diversion to deal with nonresectable bladder
neoplasia or tumors of the trigone region.
If a bladder tumor is not resectable and the trigone is invol ved, two different diversion tech-
miques have been reported:
1. Ureterocolonic anastomosis or trigonal-colonic anastomosis has had limited success in
dogs. Complications associated with this procedure include pyelonephritis, ureteral
only 4 months. When the morbidity of the procedure and metastatic rate are considered,
this treatment is rarely indicated.
2. As a palliative technique, a prepubic cystostomy catheter can be placed, allowing for
Tesectable.
22. Can bladder tumors be resected?
The bladder can be partially resected, but the tri gone must be left for normal function to con-
tinue. Nearly 80% of the bladder can be removed with a return to normal or near-normal volume
ent a bigger challenge. Transitional cell carcinomas frequently involve the trigone and ureters.
Because of the high metastatic rate of the malignant carcinomas, an exploratory laparotomy,
including examination of the sublumbar lymph nodes, should be made to identify metastases
before tumor resection. Surgery tends to be palliative rather than curative for carcinomas.
23. What are options for bladder reconstructions?
The main reconstructive techniques for the bladder involve the isolation of a portion of the
small intestine on its vascular supply and using this bowel segment to enlarge the bladder
Teser voir. In the dog, a modified cup-patch ileocystoplasty has been described in which a segment
of ileum was used to reconstruct the bladder after removal of all but the bladder neck and trigone.
The intestine should be denuded of its mucosa to prevent mucus production and secondary
urinary obstruction and to allow uroepithelial migration from the remaiming bladder neck.
24. What are the possible complications associated with bladder tumor excision?
·Urinary leakage resulting from small bladder volume or poor healing of the bladder
closure because of incomplete tumor margins.
this instance, instead of removing the tumor, the surgeon actually facilitates its spread. For
this reason, a surgeon should use a different set of instruments and new gloves for closure,
and all contact between tumor and healthy tissues should be minimized.
25. Are there any chemotherapeutic options for bladder neoplasia?
· The use of cisplatin, or a combination of cisplatin and radiation, seems reasonable
· Local infusion of chemotherapeutics is an option, but previous work suggests that the
drug would not penetrate beyond the submucosa.
Urethrostomies
211
alone.
· A nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug, piroxicam, may provide several months of
palliation.
 26. What adjuvant therapies can be employed with surgery for the treatment of bladder
neoplasia?
·Chemotherapy
· Hyperthermic therapy
·Immunotherapy
·Radiation
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Lekcharoensuk C, Osbome CA, Lulich JP, et al: Associations between dietary factors in canned food and
fomation of calcium oxalate uroliths in dogs. Am J Vet Res 63:163-169, 2002.
2. Osbome CA, editor: Science of canine urolithiasis. Vet Clinics North Am Sn Aninal Pract 29:1-304, 1999.
outcome in 11 dogs. J Sm Animal Pract 37:480-485, 1996.
4. Waldron Dr: Urinary bladder. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002,
W.B. Saunders, pp 1629-1637.
5. Withrow SJ: Tumors of the urinary system. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG, editors: Smal animat clinicat
oncology, Philadelphia, 1996, W.B. Saunders, pp 380-389
56. URETHROSTOMIES
Katherine L. Wells, D.VM
1. What is a urethrostomy?
Creation of a permanent or temporary (nonsutured) opening in the urethra.
2. What are the indications for urethrostomy in the dog?
· Calculi that cannot be removed by urethrotomy or retrograde flushing into the bladder
· Recurrent calculi production that cannot be managed medically
· Urethral strictures distal to the scrotum from calculi, trauma, or urethrotomy
· Severe penile trauma or neoplasia of the prepuce or urethra when penile amputation is
necessary
· Congenital diseases (hypospadias, deficiency in penile or preputial length) that require
amputation of the penis or prepuce (or both) and formation of a more proximal urethral
opemng
3. Where is the most common location for urethral obstruction in the dog?
Calculi most frequently lodge just caudal to the os penis.
4. In the dog, at what levels can urethrostomy be performed?
·Prescrotal
·Scrotal
·Penineal
· Prepubic or antepubic
Urethrostomies
211
alone.
· A nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug, piroxicam, may provide several months of
palliation.
 26. What adjuvant therapies can be employed with surgery for the treatment of bladder
neoplasia?
·Chemotherapy
· Hyperthermic therapy
·Immunotherapy
·Radiation
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Lekcharoensuk C, Osbome CA, Lulich JP, et al: Associations between dietary factors in canned food and
fomation of calcium oxalate uroliths in dogs. Am J Vet Res 63:163-169, 2002.
2. Osbome CA, editor: Science of canine urolithiasis. Vet Clinics North Am Sn Aninal Pract 29:1-304, 1999.
outcome in 11 dogs. J Sm Animal Pract 37:480-485, 1996.
4. Waldron Dr: Urinary bladder. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002,
W.B. Saunders, pp 1629-1637.
5. Withrow SJ: Tumors of the urinary system. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG, editors: Smal animat clinicat
oncology, Philadelphia, 1996, W.B. Saunders, pp 380-389
56. URETHROSTOMIES
Katherine L. Wells, D.VM
1. What is a urethrostomy?
Creation of a permanent or temporary (nonsutured) opening in the urethra.
2. What are the indications for urethrostomy in the dog?
· Calculi that cannot be removed by urethrotomy or retrograde flushing into the bladder
· Recurrent calculi production that cannot be managed medically
· Urethral strictures distal to the scrotum from calculi, trauma, or urethrotomy
· Severe penile trauma or neoplasia of the prepuce or urethra when penile amputation is
necessary
· Congenital diseases (hypospadias, deficiency in penile or preputial length) that require
amputation of the penis or prepuce (or both) and formation of a more proximal urethral
opemng
3. Where is the most common location for urethral obstruction in the dog?
Calculi most frequently lodge just caudal to the os penis.
4. In the dog, at what levels can urethrostomy be performed?
·Prescrotal
·Scrotal
·Penineal
· Prepubic or antepubic
212
Urethrostomies
5. How is a site selected for a urethrostomy?
Based on the site of the obstruction and the surgeon's preference. If a choice exists and the
patient can be castrated, scrotal urethrostomy is preferred. Obstruction of the proximal urethra
above the scrotum requires perineal or prepubic urethrostomy.
6. List the advantages of a scrotal urethrostomy.
·Wide, superficial urethra
·Less cavernous tissue (hemorrhage)
· Direct exit for calculi
· Less urine scalding
 7. Describe how to perform a scrotal urethrostomy using the simple continuous suture
technique.
The dog is placed in dorsal recumbency and the surgery site and scrotum are clipped and
prepped. An elliptic, full-thickness skin incision is made around the base of the scrotum. If the
sected and retracted laterally to expose the spongiosum urethrae. A urinary catheter is passed ret-
Tograde and the ventral midline of the urethra is incised over the catheter. The incision is enlarged
-u oo sn us  on psode s eo n s  un o t on  o
absorbable suture material. Each suture pass comprises three tissue bites. The first bite includes
2 mm of urethral mucosa. The needle is then passed through a 2-mm bite of fibrous tumica
albuginea and finally through 2 to 3 mm of split-thickness skin.
 s          
closure of a canine scrotal urethrostomy?
· Control of hemorrhage
· Strength of closure (incorporating tunica albuginea)
· Technical ease and speed
9. Discuss the complications that may occur with scrotal urethrostomy.
1. Hemorrhage commonly occurs when the dog gets excited or urinates and can persist
intermittently for 7-10 days after surgery. It is usually self-limiting, and sedation is
helpful to prevent this risk.
 2. Licking and self-mutilation may occur and can be controlled with an Elizabethan collar.
 3. Bruising and swelling of the skin around the urethrostomy may indicate leakage of urine
into the subcutaneous tissues. If this occurs, an indwelling catheter may be necessary for
3-5 days, or surgical intervention may be indicated.
10. What are indications for a prescrotal urethrostomy in the dog?
Removal of urethral calculi, tumors, or strictures lodged caudal to the os penis; owner
refusal for scrotal urethrostomy and castration.
11. What major complications can occur with prescrotal urethrostomy?
·Leakage of urine into the scrotum, which may lead to cellulitis
· Hemorrhage in unsutured incisions
· Painful erection and ejaculation
12. Why is perineal urethrostomy seldom used in the dog?
· Urine scalding
·Profuse hemorrhage (cavernous tissues)
·Deep location of urethra (suture line tension)
Urethrostomies
213
13. What is a subpubic urethrostomy?
A subpubic urethrostomy exteriorizes the urethra caudal to the brim of the pubis, unlike a
prepubic urethrostomy, which exposes the urethra cranial to the pubic brim.
Perineal urethrostomy is the procedure of choice in male cats when urethral obstruction
stoma just cranial to the caudal aspect of the bulbourethral glands. The internal diameter of the
urethra at the level of the bulbourethral glands is nearly twice that of the penile urethra. Intact
male cats must be castrated.
15. What are some preoperative considerations when performing a perineal urethrostomy?
Cats that have been obstructed are poor anesthetic risks. After unblocking, diuresis should
may be necessary to stabilize the ill patient before urologic surgery.
16. Describe the classic Wilson and Harrison technique for perineal urethrostomy.
The cat is positioned in dorsal or ventral recumbency. After placement of a purse-string
suture in the anus, an elliptical incision is made around the scrotum and prepuce, and the cat is
castrated. The penis is isolated, the ischiocavernous muscles are exposed, and the ischial attach-
ments of these muscles are severed. The fibrous ventral band to the penis is identified and cut.
Careful blunt dissection ventrally and digital elevation of the penis and pelvic urethra from the
pelvic floor permit mobilization and posterior displacement of the penis and pelvic urethra. The
loose tissue near the penis is carefully excised to expose the retractor penis muscle, bulbocav-
ernous muscle, and bulbourethral glands. The retractor penis muscle is transected near the ex ter-
nal anal sphincter muscle, dissected from the urethra, and excised. Careful dissection dorsal and
lateral to the urethra is performed to avoid damage to the pelvic nerves. The penile urethra is
incised on its dorsal surface to the level of the bulbourethral glands. At this point, the urethral
opening is about 4 mm in diameter. The incised pelvic urethra and two thirds of the penile urethra
are sutured to the skin using small, monofilament nylon or synthetic absorbable suture material
The remaining skin incision is closed routinely. The purse-string suture is removed.
17. Discuss the postoperative care for perineal urethrostomy.
The purse-string suture in the anus is removed, and analgesics are administered. Elizabethan
collars are used to prevent licking and self-mutilation. Indwelling urinary catheters are avoided
because of the increased risk of ascending infection and stricture formation. Maintaining hydra-
tion and alimentation is important. Electrolytes should be monitored, especially potassium. Clots
and debris obstructing the new opening should be gently removed postoperatively (some clini
cians apply a dollop of Panolog ointment in the urethral meatus to reduce swelling and prevent
encrustation). Shredded paper is used in the litter pan. Ointment can be used to protect the per-
ineum. Bladder function is monitored; it is manually expressed because bladder atony can occur
after obstruction.
18. What are common complications of a perineal urethrostomy?
line and stricture formation (closure of the orifice).
19. What are other problems after surgery?
·Hemorrhage
· Ascending cystitis resulting from underlying uropathy or alteration of urethral meatus
214
Pyometra
· Subcutaneous urine leakage and incisional dehiscence
· Urinary and fecal incontinence caused by dissection injury to nerves
 20. Preservation of lower urinary function in cats to prevent postoperative dysuria may be
enhanced by what procedure?
Minimal dissection dorsal to the urethra to avoid trauma to the pelvic plexus and pudendal
nerve.
21. How are strictures after perineal urethrostomy managed?
 Dilation is rarely successful. Surgery to remove the scarred area of the urethra, further
mobilization of the urethra, and suturing of the urethra to the skin are necessary. If further
mobilization cannot be done, antepubic urethrostomy is indicated
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Baines SJ: Prepubic urethrostomy: A long-tem study in 16 cats. Vet Surg 30:107-113, 2001
2. Bjorling DE: The urethra. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smalt animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002, W.B.
Saunders, pp 1638-1651.
3. Newton JD, Smeak DD: Simple continuous closure of canine scrotal urethrostomy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
32:531-534, 1996.
4. Smeak DD, Newton JD: Canine scrotal urethrostomy. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in smatl animat
surgery, ed 4, Baltimore, 1998, Williams & Wilkins, pp 465-467.
5. Wilson GP, Harrison JW: Perineal urethrostomy in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 169:1789-1793, 1971.
57. PYOMETRA
Robin H. Holtsinger, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is pyometra?
Collection of purulence within the uterus. Open pyometra is characterized by vaginal
discharge (versus closed).
2. Which two hormones are implicated in the pathogenesis of pyometra in cats and dogs?
Progesterone and estrogen.
3. How does progesterone affect the uterus?
Stimulates the growth and secretory activity of the endometrial glands, while decreasing
myometrial activity.
 4. Which bacteria is cultured most frequently from the uterus in pyometra?
Escherichia cofi.
5. When is pyometra most frequently diagnosed?
·1-4 weeks after estrus in intact female cats
· 4-8 weeks after estrus in intact female dogs
 6. What conditions in male dogs have been associated with the development of pyometra?
· Pseudohermaphroditism
· Sertoli cell tumors
214
Pyometra
· Subcutaneous urine leakage and incisional dehiscence
· Urinary and fecal incontinence caused by dissection injury to nerves
 20. Preservation of lower urinary function in cats to prevent postoperative dysuria may be
enhanced by what procedure?
Minimal dissection dorsal to the urethra to avoid trauma to the pelvic plexus and pudendal
nerve.
21. How are strictures after perineal urethrostomy managed?
 Dilation is rarely successful. Surgery to remove the scarred area of the urethra, further
mobilization of the urethra, and suturing of the urethra to the skin are necessary. If further
mobilization cannot be done, antepubic urethrostomy is indicated
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Baines SJ: Prepubic urethrostomy: A long-tem study in 16 cats. Vet Surg 30:107-113, 2001
2. Bjorling DE: The urethra. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smalt animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002, W.B.
Saunders, pp 1638-1651.
3. Newton JD, Smeak DD: Simple continuous closure of canine scrotal urethrostomy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
32:531-534, 1996.
4. Smeak DD, Newton JD: Canine scrotal urethrostomy. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in smatl animat
surgery, ed 4, Baltimore, 1998, Williams & Wilkins, pp 465-467.
5. Wilson GP, Harrison JW: Perineal urethrostomy in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 169:1789-1793, 1971.
57. PYOMETRA
Robin H. Holtsinger, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is pyometra?
Collection of purulence within the uterus. Open pyometra is characterized by vaginal
discharge (versus closed).
2. Which two hormones are implicated in the pathogenesis of pyometra in cats and dogs?
Progesterone and estrogen.
3. How does progesterone affect the uterus?
Stimulates the growth and secretory activity of the endometrial glands, while decreasing
myometrial activity.
 4. Which bacteria is cultured most frequently from the uterus in pyometra?
Escherichia cofi.
5. When is pyometra most frequently diagnosed?
·1-4 weeks after estrus in intact female cats
· 4-8 weeks after estrus in intact female dogs
 6. What conditions in male dogs have been associated with the development of pyometra?
· Pseudohermaphroditism
· Sertoli cell tumors
Pyometra
215
 7. Name the most common acid-base abnormalities associated with pyometra.
·Respiratory alkalosis
·Metabolic acidosis
8. List the types of renal dysfunction that have been reported to occur in dogs with
pyometra.
· Prerenal azotemia
●Primary glomerular disease
· Decreased renal tubular concentrating capacity
· Tubular interstitial disease
· Decreased glomerular filtration rate without concomitant azotemia
· Concomitant renal disease
· Combinations of these
9. What coagulation disorder is most frequently associated with pyometra?
Disseminated intravascular coagulation caused by circulating thromboplastins, tissue hypo-
perfusion or hypoxia, and vascular endothelial damage.
10. What histopathologic condition of the uterus typically precedes the development of
pyometra?
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia. It develops secondary to progesterone influences and results
from glandular proliferation and enlargement.
11. Why is the incidence of pyometra so much lower in queens than in bitches?
luteum formation and progesterone secretion usually occur only after mating. In this situation,
queens are usually pregnant—they do not usually have prolonged exposure to progesterone
during nonpregnancy, a feature of the canine cycle.
12. What is the most consistent clinical chemistry finding in patients with pyometra?
Elevated serum alkaline phosphatase is present in 50-75% of cases; occasionally, serum ala-
nine transferase concentrations are mildly elevated. These changes reflect hepatocellular damage
in response to toxemia or decreased hepatic circulation secondary to dehydration.
13. What is the recommended treatment for pyometra in dogs and cats?
The traditional therapy for pyometra in bitches and queens is surgical (ovariohysterectomy).
e sissod se uoos se ped sg inous Ans yanoe yois sre sned ssn go As
diagnosis, patients should be stabilized for surgery with intravenous fluids and broad-spectrum
antibiotics. Medical management of pyometra should be reserved for metabolically stable,
valuable breeding animals.
14. Is a closed pyometra a true surgical emergency?
Yes. "The sun should never set on a closed pyometra."
15. What intraoperative problems have been described in animals with pyometra?
·Hemorrhage
·Penitonitis
· Utenine torsion
· Entrapment of the pyometra in an inguinal hernia
·Uterine tumors
216
Episiotomy and Episioplasty
16. Name two common postoperative problems in pyometra patients.
Inappetence and hypothermia.
17. Name a common concurrent problem in patients with pyometra.
Urinary tract infection.
18. What are the most common clinical signs noted by owners in cats with pyometra?
·Vaginal discharge (may not be noticed because of cats² grooming habits)
·Anorexia
·Lethargy
19. How is the diagnosis of pyometra confirmed?
Abdominal radiographs or abdominal ultrasonography.
20. What is a stump pyometra?
Uterine stump pyometra may occur after incomplete ovariohysterectomy during which a
segment of the uterine body or horns and a portion of the ovarian tissue are not removed or if
exogenous progestational compounds have been given.
(aj e sdopaaap puned enaud aeiadonsod e jn padsns nos Pnos peua iz
neurologic signs, or lameness?
Bacterial septicemia with thromboemboli, polyarthritis, or both.
22. What is the treatment for bacterial septicemia?
23. What is the prognosis for patients with pyometra?
In general, good with ovariohysterectomy, if abdominal contamination is avoided, shock and
sepsis are managed appropriately, and renal insult is reversed with aggressive fluid therapy and
elimination of bacterial antigens.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Hedlund CS: Pyometra. In Fossum TW, editor: Small animat surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp 639-644.
2. Kenney KJ, Matthiesen DT, Brown NO: Pyometra in cats: 183 cases (1979-1984). J Am Vet Med AssoC
191:1130-1132, 1987
3. Sevelius E: Pyometra in the dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:33-38, 1990.
58. EPISIOTOMY AND EPISIOPLASTY
Robin H. Holtsinger, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What is an episiotomy?
An incision of the vulvar orifice to allow access to the vestibule and the vagina.
2. What are the indications to perform an episiotomy?
·Surgical exploration of the vagina
·Excision of vaginal masses
216
Episiotomy and Episioplasty
16. Name two common postoperative problems in pyometra patients.
Inappetence and hypothermia.
17. Name a common concurrent problem in patients with pyometra.
Urinary tract infection.
18. What are the most common clinical signs noted by owners in cats with pyometra?
·Vaginal discharge (may not be noticed because of cats² grooming habits)
·Anorexia
·Lethargy
19. How is the diagnosis of pyometra confirmed?
Abdominal radiographs or abdominal ultrasonography.
20. What is a stump pyometra?
Uterine stump pyometra may occur after incomplete ovariohysterectomy during which a
segment of the uterine body or horns and a portion of the ovarian tissue are not removed or if
exogenous progestational compounds have been given.
(aj e sdopaaap puned enaud aeiadonsod e jn padsns nos Pnos peua iz
neurologic signs, or lameness?
Bacterial septicemia with thromboemboli, polyarthritis, or both.
22. What is the treatment for bacterial septicemia?
23. What is the prognosis for patients with pyometra?
In general, good with ovariohysterectomy, if abdominal contamination is avoided, shock and
sepsis are managed appropriately, and renal insult is reversed with aggressive fluid therapy and
elimination of bacterial antigens.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Hedlund CS: Pyometra. In Fossum TW, editor: Small animat surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp 639-644.
2. Kenney KJ, Matthiesen DT, Brown NO: Pyometra in cats: 183 cases (1979-1984). J Am Vet Med AssoC
191:1130-1132, 1987
3. Sevelius E: Pyometra in the dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:33-38, 1990.
58. EPISIOTOMY AND EPISIOPLASTY
Robin H. Holtsinger, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What is an episiotomy?
An incision of the vulvar orifice to allow access to the vestibule and the vagina.
2. What are the indications to perform an episiotomy?
·Surgical exploration of the vagina
·Excision of vaginal masses
Episiotomy and Episioplasty
217
· Repair of vaginal lacerations
· Modification of congenital defects or strictures
· Exposure of the urethral papilla
·Facilitation of manual fetal extraction
3. What is vulvar stenosis?
Abnormal fusion of the genital folds or genital swellings. Vulvar stenosis can occur in the
body of the vestibule but more commonly in the vulva. Dogs have pain or difficulty mating. It is
most commonly described in collies and Shelties.
4. How is vulvar stenosis treated?
Via partial episiotomy to enlarge the vulvar opening.
5. What causes a persistent hymen?
Failure of the paramesonephric ducts to unite or to cannulate with the urogenital sinus.
6. List the clinical signs associated with vaginal septa.
· Chronic vaginitis
·Urine pooling
· Difficulties in whelping or breeding
7.How are vaginal septa diagnosed?
·Digital vaginal examination
·Vaginoscopy
· Positive contrast vaginography
8. How are vaginal septa treated?
By episiotomy and resection of the bands at their attachments. Dogs without clinical signs
need not be treated or may be treated by ovariohysterectomy alone.
9. List the clinical signs associated with vestibulovaginal stenosis.
·Urinary tract infection
· Urinary incontinence
· Chromic vaginitis
·Failure to mate
10. How is vestibulovaginal stenosis treated in the dog?
Vaginoplasty, in which the episiotomy incision is closed in a T fashion to enlarge the diame
ter of the vaginal lumen. This techmique is technically demanding, and the results of surgery have
been poor.
11. What is vaginal hyperplasia?
estrus cycle. This mucosa becomes thickened and edematous and is prolapsed through the vulva.
It arises just cranial to the urethral papilla.
12. What breeds are most commonly affected?
Brachycephalic breeds.
13. What is another condition that might be mistaken for vaginal hyperplasia?
Vaginal prolapse. This usually follows parturition and is characterized by complete eversion
of the vagina. It is typically donut-shaped.
218
Episiotomy and Episioplasty
14. What is the treatment of choice for vaginal hyperplasia?
Episiotomy followed by resection of affected tissue. It is important to identify and
catheterize the urethral papilla to protect it during excision. Ovariohysterectomy prevents future
occufterlces.
15. What are the most common tumors of the vulva and vagina in the dog?
·Leiomyomas and fibromas are reported most frequently.
· Leiomyosarcomas and transmissible venereal tumors are the commonest malignant
tumors.
·Benign tumors occur most frequently in intact animals, and malignant tumors are seen
more commonly in ovaniohysterectomized animals.
16. How are vulvar and vaginal tumors treated?
Surgically by episiotomy and local resection. Extensive tumors can be treated with vulvo-
vaginectomy and urethrostomy. The entire vagina and vulva can be safely resected, whereas the
17. What is an episioplasty?
around the vulva that cause perivul var dermatitis.
18. What is another disorder that necessitates episioplasty?
Vulvar hypoplasia or infantile vulva, which is recognized most frequently in spayed females.
The infantile vulva is retracted into perineal skin folds, resulting in recurrent vestibulitis and cystitis.
19. Describe is the procedure for performing an episioplasty.
The patient is placed in sternal recumbency with the hind end elevated. After purse-string
suture placement, the excessive skin folds are pinched between thumb and index finger to deter-
mine the amount of tissue to be removed to exteriorize the vulva. Two parallel crescent-shaped
incisions are made around the folds. The skin and subcutaneous fat between the two incisions are
excised. Sutures are preplaced at 9, 12, and 3 o'clock, and if the vulva is still recessed, additional
tissue is excised. Hemorrhage is controlled, and the incision is closed in two layers.
·Antibiotics are continued as necessary for the pyoderna.
· An Elizabethan collar is placed until suture removal.
·Weight reduction is recommended.
21. When is episioplasty recommended in cats?
To treat conditions of skin-fold pyoderma after perineal urethrostomy.
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Harmel SP: Results of vulvoplasty for treatment of recessed vulva in dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:79-83,
2002.
2. Hedllund CS: Episiotomy and episioplasty. In Fossum TW, editor: Smatl animat surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2002,
Mosby, pp 625-626.
3. Lightner BA: Episioplasty for treatment of perivulvar dermatitis or recurrent urinary tract infections in dogs with
excessive skin folds. J Amm Vet Med Assoc 219:1577-1581, 2001.
59. MASTECTOMY
Elaine R. Capian, D.VM., D.A.B.VP., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the prevalence of mammary gland tumors (MGTs) in the bitch?
The most common tumor of the female dog.
2. What is the relationship of developing MGTs and ovariohysterectomy (OHE)?
Risk of developing MGTs:
· 0.05% if spayed before the first estrous cycle.
·8.0% if spayed after the first estrous cycle.
+ 26% if spayed after the second cycle.
· OHE within 2 years of developing MGTs have improved survival.
· Cats with OHE before 6 months of age are 82% less likely to develop mammary
carcinoma.
3. How are hormone receptors in dogs involved with MGTs?
· <50% of malignant MGTs are receptor (estrogen or progesterone) positive.
+ 70% of benign MGTs are receptor positive.
·Rare occurrence of receptors in metastases.
4. What is the likelihood that a MGT is malignant in the dog or the cat?
saop u! %05-S ·
·80% in cats
5. How many pairs of mammary glands are present in the dog and cat?
·Five pairs in the dog.
· Four pairs in the cat.
Pairs are numbered cranial to caudal.
6. In which mammary glands do most tumors occur in the dog?
Mammary glands 4 and 5.
7. What is an inflammatory mammary carcinoma?
A poorly differentiated, fast-growing MGT that invades lymphatics and appears as an
inflamed, edematous, and ulcerative mass.
8. How do you differentiate between an inflammatory carcinoma and mastitis?
· Inflammatory carcinomas are firm with diffuse swelling.
· Mastitis is more localized and usually seen after estrus or pseudocyesis.
· Biopsy provides definitive diagnosis.
9. List the elements of the diagnostic workup for a MGT?
· Physical ex amination, including rectal palpation to evaluate internal iliacs
·CBC
· Serum chemistry
· Three-view thoracic radiographs to evaluate lungs (2s-50% metastases in dogs with
malignant MGTs) and sternal lymph nodes
220
Mastectomy
·Abdominal radiographs
·Abdominal ultrasound
·Urinalysis
10. Why is a coagulogram recommended for a suspected inflammatory carcinoma?
 Inflammatory carcinoma is associated with disseminated intravascular coagulopathy.
11. Is fine-needle aspirate and cytology a valuable tool to differentiate between a benign
and malignant MGT?
No; it is an insensitive test, and results do not change surgical treatment. Excisional biopsy
results in definitive diagnosis.
12. Is fine-needle aspirate and cytology ever beneficial in the diagnostic workup for MGT?
Yes; to evaluate lymph nodes for metastasis and for inflammatory carcinomas.
13. How are MGTs staged in dogs?
World Health Organization TNM Staging System
N (REGIONAL LYMPH NODE
M (DISTANT
T(TUMOR SIZE)
METASTASIS)
METASTASIS)
T1: <3 cm
NO: no histologic metastasis
MO: no distant metastasis
T2: 3-5 cm
N1: nodal metastasis
M1: distant metastasis
T3: > 5 cm
14. What is the treatment of choice for MGTs?
Surgery.
15. List the types of mastectomies.
·Simple mastectomy—removal of a single gland
· Regional mastectomy—excision of involved and adjacent glands
· Unilateral mastectomy—removal of all glands and subcutaneous and lymph tissues on
one side of the midline
· Bilateral mastectomy-staged or simultaneous removal of both mammary chains and
associated tissues
16. What are the treatment options for inflammatory carcinoma?
·Radiation
· Chemotherapy (doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, or carboplatin)
·Very poor prognosis
17. Does radical mastectomy result in better survival times compared with lumpectomy in
the dog?
No difference in recurrence rate or survival time.
18.
What is the goal of surgery in canine patients with MGTs?
Remove all tumors by the simplest surgical procedure.
Mastectomy
221
19. What determines the surgical dose for canine MGTs?
·Size
· Fixation to surrounding tissue
·Number of lesions
20. What is the indication for nodulectomy and lumpectomy?
A 0.5-cm firm, superficial, nonfixed nodule.
21. When is mammectomy performed?
· Lesion >l.0 cm
· Lesion centrally located within the gland
· Fixation to skin of lesion or fascia.
22.What are indications for unilateral orbilateral mastectomy?
Multiple tumors or several small tumors when this procedure is faster than multiple lumpec-
tomies or mammectomies.
23. What is tamoxifen, and is it generally used for canine MGTs?
An antiestrogen drug; no.
24. List significant prognostic factors for canine MG Ts.
· Nuclear differentiation (grade)
·Histologic type
· Degree of invasion
· Tumor size
·Age at diagnosis
· Positive lymph nodes
· Hormone receptor activity
·Ulceration
25. Name common metastatic sites for malignant MGTs in the dog.
·Lung
· Sublumbar lymph nodes
·Liver
·Bone
·Kidney
·Heart
·CNS
26. How do MGTs differ in the cat?
·Prevalence is 17%
· Positive association between progesterone drugs and development of mammary masses in cats.
· Lower number of progesterone and estrogen receptors compared with the dog.
27. To what organs do malignant MGTs metastasize in the cat?
· Lymph nodes
·Lungs
·Pleura
·Liver
· Diaphragn
·Adrenal glands
·Kidney
222
Mastectomy
28. Does an enlarged, erythematous, necrotic mammary gland indicate inflammatory
carcinoma in the cat?
No. This is a benign condition called fibroepithelial hyperplasia, which occurs 1-2 weeks
after estrus. Ovariohysterectomy prevents its recurrence.
29. How does pulmonary metastasis appear on thoracic radiographs in a cat?
Interstitial densities or miliary lesions with pleural effusion.
30. What is the surgical dose for malignant feline MGT regardless of size?
· Complete unilateral mastectomy if one side is affected
·Staged or simultaneous bilateral mastectomy when tumors are bilateral.
31.Is ovariohysterectomy recommended in the cat at the time of MGT removal?
·Does not decrease recurrence rate
· Perhaps useful with concurrent ovarian or uterine disease
 32. What is the prognosis for malignant MGTs in the cat?
Median survival time is 11-12 months.
33. What are significant prognostic indicators in the cat?
Mean survival times:
· Tumor >3 cm, 4-6 months
·Tumor 2-3 cm, 2 years
·Tumor <2 cm,3 years
Histologic grade:
· Well-differentiated tumor with few mitotic figures increases survival time.
·Extent of surgery.
· Lymph vessel infitration: 18 months without and 7 months with.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Hedlund CS: Manmary neoplasia. In Fossum TW, editor: Small aniat surgery,ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp
632-638.
2. Morrison WB: Canine and feline mammary gland tumors. In Morrison WB, editor: Cancer in dogs and cats,
Philadelphia, 1998, Lippincott, Williams, and Wilkins, pp 591-598
3. Overly B, Sherer D, et al: Case-control study of homonal influences on the development of feline mammmary
gland carcinoma. In Proceedings VCS 22"d Annual Conference, 2002, p 36.
4. Ozawa S, Minami T, et al: Study on histopathological prognostication of mammary gland tumor in cats (97
cases). In Proceedings VCS 22"4 Annual Conference, 2002, p 12.
5. Rutteman GR, Withrow SJ, MacEwen: Tumors of the mammary gland. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG, editors:
Small animat clinicat oncology, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2001, W.B. Saunders, pp 455-473
60. PROSTATIC DISEASES
MaryAnn Radlinsky. D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)?
Spontaneous enlargement of the prostate gland that occurs in male dogs as they age. There is
an increase in the number and size of epithelial cells, so that both hyperplasia and hypertrophy occur.
An altered androgen-to-estrogen ratio has been postulated as a cause of BPH. Male dogs castrated
early in life do not develop prostatic hyperplasia, and castration results in the regression of prostatic
2. If BPH is a benign condition, why is it of clinical concern?
·Constipation
·Tenesmus
·Dyschezia
·Ribbon-like stool
·Dysuria
· Strangury
·Hematuria
· Discharge from the penile urethra
· Decreased libido
· Reluctance to breed
● Hemospermia and locomotion abnormalities
3. How is BPH diagnosed?
A presumptive diagnosis of BPH may be based on the signalment, history, and physical
examination findings in an otherwise healthy, male dog. Abdominal radiographs show
with symmetric prostatic enlargement, history, clinical pathologic results, and radiographic and
ul trasonographic findings consistent with BPH should respond to castration.
If alleviation of prostatomegaly and clinical signs does not occur after castration, repeat
evaluation and prostatic fine-needle aspirate or preferably biopsy should be performed.
4. What are the treatment options?
● Castration: Permanent involution of the prostate takes a minimum of 2-3 weeks.
· Hormone manipulations: Synthetic progestins can alleviate signs associated with BPH in
dogs, but relapses occur and side effects of the drug should be considered.
 5. How common is prostate cancer?
1nq 'sseosp onensid 1e yo %s Apeuixoidde susssidei eiseidon %9'0 0n 67'0 :sao -
15% of prostatic disorders prompt diagnostic evaluation.
·Cats:rare.
6. List common types of tumors.
·Adenocarcinoma (most common)
·Undifferentiated carcinoma
224
Prostatic Diseases
·Transitional-cell carcinoma
· Squamous-cell carcinoma
·Leiomyosarcoma
·Fibromyoma
·Leiomyoma
7. Is failure to castrate a predisposing factor for prostate cancer?
No.
8. What clinical signs may be associated with prostatic neoplasia?
1. Animals with prostatic cancer are usually 8-10 years of age with clinical signs of
obstruction of the intestinal or urinary tract by the enlarged prostate gland or by local
invasion of the tumor.
 2. Signs include tenesmus, constipation, dyschezia, dysuria, hematuria, penile urethral
discharge, and strangury.
3. Metastatic lesions may cause pain or lymphatic or venous obstruction, leading to lumbar
pain, pelvic limb lameness or weakness, and pelvic limb swelling.
9. What should be included in the diagnostic plan for prostatic neoplasia?
·Rectal examination
·Complete blood count
· Chemistry profile
·Radiography
· Ultrasound
· Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspirates
·Prostatic biopsy
10. Discuss types of therapy available for prostatic tumors.
Most prostatic tumors have metastasized at the time of diagnosis. The goal of therapy
becomes temporary control of the tumor. For tumors localized to the prostate gland, prostatec-
tomy and irradiation are possible modes of therapy. Prostatectomy results in urinary incontinence
from decreased maximum urethral closure pressure and detrusor instability. Radiation can be pal-
liative, and orthovoltage may result in a median survival of 114 days. Chemotherapy combined
with total or partial prostatectomy or intraoperative radiation results in 3- to 5-month survival.
Best results are obtained if the tumor is localized to the prostate.
11. What is the prognosis of prostatic neoplasia?
Poor. Patients often die of local disease or metastasis 3-5 months after diagnosis, although
survival to 29 months has been reported.
12. What is a prostatic cyst?
There are four different types of prostatic cysts:
1. Multiple cysts associated with BPH
2. Prostatic retention cysts (communication with urethra)
4. Paraprostatic cysts
13. Because a prostatic cyst is just a collection of fluid, is there any clinical significance?
Cysts may cause any of the clinical signs associated with prostatomegaly or the presence of
a caudal abdominal mass causing encroachment of the urinary or gastrointestinal tracts.
Secondary ascending urinary tract infection resulting in abscessation may result in life-threat-
ening sepsis.
Prostatic Diseases
225
14. How is a prostatic cyst diagnosed?
· Rectal examination
· Fine-needle aspiration
·Radiography
·Ultrasound
15. Discuss treatment options for prostatic cysts.
The goal of therapy is to remove, reduce, or drain the prostatic cyst. Castration is used to
Cystic prostatic hyperplasia responds to cas tration. Cysts associated with squamous metaplasia
require removal of the source of estrogen (discontinuation of administration or castration for
sia, and paraprostatic cysts are treated by cyst excision, excision and omentalization, excision and
partial prostatectomy, and marsupialization. A recent report described ultrasound-guided percuta-
neous fine-needle drainage of cysts in dogs.
16. What is marsupialization?
Creation of a permanent stoma for drainage of the cyst and an orifice for lavage (from the
Latin marsupium—pouch).
17. What is omentalization?
Packing of affected tissues with omentum to promote angiogenesis, enhance lymphatic
drainage, create adhesions, and resolve chronic infection.
18. Are there any special postoperative concerns with the surgical treatment of prostatic
cysts?
· Chronic urinary tract infections
· Recurrence if incomplete excision
·Urinary incontinence
·Abscessation
19. What causes infection of the prostate?
An ascending infection from the urinary or reproductive tracts; however, hematogenous
seeding of the prostate is possible. The adjacent urethra has a normal flora with defenses against
infection, including mechanical flushing of the tract with urination, zone of high positive pres-
sure, surface characteristics of the mucosal lining, and normal urethral peristalsis. Zinc-associated
antibacterial factors are present within prostatic secretions, providing a local defense within the
prostate. Loss of any of these protective functions may result in urethritis, cystitis, and ascending
prostatitis.
20. What are the most commonly isolated pathogens?
·Escherichia coli (most common)
·Proteus
·Staphylococcus
·Streptococcus
·Pseudomonas
·Brucelfa canis
21. What special concern is associated with B. canis?
 B. canis has zoonotic potential, and dogs showing any signs should be tested and owners
notified of results.
226
ProstaticDiseases
22. How serious is prostatic infection?
sepsis, shock, and death
 2. Chronic prostatitis may be asymptomatic, or the dog may have intermittent episodes of
dysuria and hematuria.
3. Infertility may also be the presenting complaint.
23. How is prostatitis diagnosed?
· Pain during rectal palpation
· Leukocytosis with a left shift
· Elevated serum alkaline phosphatase, alanine aminotransferase, bilirubin, prothrombin
time, activated partial thromboplastin time, and fibrin degradation products
·Hematuria, bacteriuria, and pyuria
·Prostatomegaly with mineral densities (radiography)
·Fibrosis, mineralization, cavitation, and hyperechogenicity (ultrasonography)
24. What are the treatment options for dogs with prostatitis?
Antibiotics with a high pKa (erythromycin, clindamycin, and potentiated sulfas) or a high
lipid solubility (chloramphenicol, macrolides, potentiated sulfas, and fluoroquinolones).
25. Describe the surgical techniques that are available for prostatic abscessation.
Drainage via passive or active drains, partial prostatectomy, or omentalization. The gland
should be isolated from the abdomen with laparotomy sponges, and dorsal dissection should be
allows identification and preservation of the urethra. After drainage and culture of the abscess.
any defects in the urethra may be sutured, or urinary diversion with an indwelling urethral
catheter or tube cystostomy and closed collection system should be instituted.
The cavities within each lobe or in the entire prostate are digitally dissected and copiously
bilateral incisions in the ventrolateral prostate to encircle the prostatic urethra. Care is taken to
the urethra. Alternatively, Penrose drains or closed suction drains may be placed in the prostate
and the caudal abdomen bandaged after surgery.
26. Describe nonsurgical techniques available for prostatic abscesses and cysts
Ultrasound-guided, multiple percutaneous drainage using spinal needle.
27. What is subtotal prostatectomy?
Intracapsular electroscalpel dissection of the prostate proceeds with sequential half-moon
incisions, ultimately retaining 2-3 mm of parenchyma adjacent to the urethra. Alternatively, a
laser (neodymium-yttrium-aluminum-garnet) may be used to ablate all ventrolateral parenchyma,
be used to perform intracapsular subtotal prostatectomy in dogs. The advantage of the aspirator
is the preservation of nerves and vessels within the prostate.
28. What is total prostatectomy?
The neurovascular structures and as much urethra as possible must be preserved, followed
Total prostatectomy for prostatic abscessation is technically difficult and rarely performed.
Ectopic and Neoplastic Testicles
29. Are there any special postoperative concerns with surgical treatment of prostatic
abscesses?
· Urinary incontinence
· Urinary tract infection
· Recurrent abscessation
30. What is the prognosis?
Approximately 50%; dogs with sepsis, shock, or cardiopulmonary failure have a poor
prognosis.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Basinger RR, Robinette CL, Hardie EM, et al: The prostate. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat
surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003, W.B. Saunders, pp 1542-1557.
 2. Boland LE: Ultrasound-guided percutaneous drainage for prostatic abscesses and cysts in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 39:151-159, 2003.
3. Caney SM, Holt PE: Prostatic carcinoma in two cats. J Sm Anim Pract 39:140-143, 1998.
4. Gobello C: Noninfectious prostatic diseases in dogs. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 24:99-107, 2002.
 s  5  so   n oe s  is   t  
1227,1996
6. Rawlings CA, Mahaffey MB, Barsanti JA, et al: Use of partial prostatectomy for treatment of prostatic abscesses
and cysts in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:868-871, 1997.
m dogs. Vet Surg 24:390-395, 1995.
61, ECTOPIC AND NEOPLASTIC TESTICLES
Holly S. Mullen, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What are ectopic testicles?
 Testicles located somewhere other than in the scrotum; also called undescended testicles.
 2. What is cryptorchidism?
A developmental defect characterized by the failure of one (unilateral cryptorchid) or both
(bilateral cryptorchid) testes to descend into the scrotum.
 3. Where may ectopic testicles be located?
· Intraabdominal—between the kidney and inguinal ring
· Subcutaneous—between the inguinal and prescrotal areas
4. How do the testicles descend into the scrotum?
The gubernaculum (from the Latin for helm, or something that guides), a fetal ligament
attached to the caudal epididymis and testis and the bottom of the scrotum guides the descent of
the testes into the scrotum; it atrophies at the time of birth.
5. What is monorchidism?
The rare condition of having only one testicle. The ductus deferens, cremaster muscle, tes-
ticular artery, and vein are usually present on the affected (missing) side.
Ectopic and Neoplastic Testicles
29. Are there any special postoperative concerns with surgical treatment of prostatic
abscesses?
· Urinary incontinence
· Urinary tract infection
· Recurrent abscessation
30. What is the prognosis?
Approximately 50%; dogs with sepsis, shock, or cardiopulmonary failure have a poor
prognosis.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Basinger RR, Robinette CL, Hardie EM, et al: The prostate. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat
surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003, W.B. Saunders, pp 1542-1557.
 2. Boland LE: Ultrasound-guided percutaneous drainage for prostatic abscesses and cysts in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 39:151-159, 2003.
3. Caney SM, Holt PE: Prostatic carcinoma in two cats. J Sm Anim Pract 39:140-143, 1998.
4. Gobello C: Noninfectious prostatic diseases in dogs. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 24:99-107, 2002.
 s  5  so   n oe s  is   t  
1227,1996
6. Rawlings CA, Mahaffey MB, Barsanti JA, et al: Use of partial prostatectomy for treatment of prostatic abscesses
and cysts in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:868-871, 1997.
m dogs. Vet Surg 24:390-395, 1995.
61, ECTOPIC AND NEOPLASTIC TESTICLES
Holly S. Mullen, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What are ectopic testicles?
 Testicles located somewhere other than in the scrotum; also called undescended testicles.
 2. What is cryptorchidism?
A developmental defect characterized by the failure of one (unilateral cryptorchid) or both
(bilateral cryptorchid) testes to descend into the scrotum.
 3. Where may ectopic testicles be located?
· Intraabdominal—between the kidney and inguinal ring
· Subcutaneous—between the inguinal and prescrotal areas
4. How do the testicles descend into the scrotum?
The gubernaculum (from the Latin for helm, or something that guides), a fetal ligament
attached to the caudal epididymis and testis and the bottom of the scrotum guides the descent of
the testes into the scrotum; it atrophies at the time of birth.
5. What is monorchidism?
The rare condition of having only one testicle. The ductus deferens, cremaster muscle, tes-
ticular artery, and vein are usually present on the affected (missing) side.
228
Ectopic and Neoplastic Testicles
6. How does monorchidism occur?
· Congenital testicular agenesis—-testicle never develops.
· Congenital testicular hypoplasia—testicle develops, then undergoes regression before
birth, probably because of intrauterine torsion of the testicle.
7. What is anorchidism?
Having no testicles. This term refers to castrated males because congenital anorchidism has
not been reported.
8. Is cryptorchidism an inherited trait?
·Definitely in some breeds; probably in most.
· In dogs, it is a sex-linked autosomal recessive occurring most frequently in small-breed dogs.
· In cats, it is presumed to be a similar trait, although less common.
9. Which is more common, unilateral or bilateral cryptorchidism?
· Dogs—-Unilateral; right side retained twice as frequently
· Cats—both sides retained with the same frequency
10. Are there breed predispositions for cryptorchidism?
Dogs
·Miniature schnauzer
· Poodle
· Pomeranian
·Chihuahua
+ Yorkshire terrier
·Siberian husky
· Shetland sheepdog
Cats
·Persian
11. At what age should the testicles be descended?
At, or shortly after, birth. Evidence suggests that testicles not located in the scrotum by 2-3
12. What are some characteristics of the retained testicle?
·Smaller than normal size
·Loss of exocrine function (infertile) because of exposure to body heat
·Normal endocrine function (produces testosterone)
· More prone to neoplasia and torsion than normal testicle
13. Can the scrotal testicle of a unilateral cryptorchid be considered normal?
No. There is a higher incidence of disturbed function and increased incidence of testicular
neoplasia of more than one histologic type even in the scrotal testicle.
14. Is there any medically effective therapy to bring down a retained testicle?
No.
15. How accurate is palpation for detection of a retained testis?
Not very. Palpation of retained abdominal testicles is almost impossible. Prescrotal testicles
are felt easily, but retained inguinal testicles can be reliably palpated only about 50% of the time
in cats and slightly more often in dogs.
Ectopic and Neoplastic Testicles
229
16. What physical examination finding helps in determining the intact nature of a young
adult stray male cat with an empty scrotum?
Examine the penis. Penile barbs, or spines, are present. Barbs develop only when testos-
terone is present in the body. The cat is bilateral cryptorchid.
17. What is a method of detecting a retained, unpalpable testicle in a dog or cat with an
empty scrotum who is showing signs of testosterone influence?
HCG stimulation test—to see if there is an increase in endogenous testosterone production
(usually from a retained testicle, but cannot rule out a tumor).
18.  Describe the best method for castration of a unilateral cryptorchid.
Dog
Make a prescrotal incision for normal testicle removal; it may be possible to retrieve a
caudad inguinal retained testicle from the same incision. If not, make an incision directly over the
retained inguinal testicle. If an abdominal testicle, make a parapreputial skin incision on the
affected side, lateral to the tip of the prepuce; separate muscle layers and enter the peritoneum;
90% of the time the testicle is found at this point in the abdomen.
Make a scrotal incision for the normal testicle; make a caudad abdominal skin incision, and
expose the inguinal ring on affected side. If the ductus deferens exiting the ring is seen, follow it
until the testicle is found in the subcutis. If no ductus, make a caudad abdominal, ventral midline
incision, and look along the dorsolateral abdominal wall.
19.  Describe the best method for castration of a bilateral cryptorchid.
Dog
Make a lateral parapreputial skin incision, reflect the prepuce, and enter the abdomen
through a ventral midline linea incision that starts at about the tip of the prepuce; look laterally
along the right and left dorsal abdominal wall.
20. What structure may be confused for the ductus deferens and injured during
abdominal castration?
Ureter.
21. What can the surgeon do if he or she is having trouble locating a retained abdominal
testicle?
Find the ductus deferens at the level of the prostate and follow it down to the testicle.
22. Do cats have a prostate, and, if so, is it easily identified?
Yes, and no.
23. How common are testicular tumors in the dog and cat?
·Dog—testicular tumors make up 5-15% of all tumors.
·Cat—veryrare.
24. List the tumor types that have been reported in the testicles.
· Sertoli cell
● Interstitial (Leydig) cell
· Granulosa cell
230
Ectopic and Neoplastic Testicles
·Sarcoma
·Seminoma
·Hemangioma
· Embryonal carcinoma
·Metastatic (rare)
 25. What are the three most common testicular tumor types in the dog?
Sertoli, seminoma, and interstitial-cell tumors occur with equal frequency in descended
testes. In retained testes, 60% of tumors are Sertoli cell, and 40% are seminomas. Two or more
tumor types can occur in the same testicle.
26. How do these three tumors behave in the dog?
1. Sertoli—10-20% metastasize, 20-50% cause feminization (of these, 15% develop
estrogen-induced bone marrow suppression).
2. Seminoma—<5% metastasize, do not feminize.
3. Interstitial—-unlikely to metastasize, rarely may cause feminization.
27. What tumors are commonest in cats?
Not enough information exists to be sure. One study suggests Sertoli and interstitial-cell
tumors, followed by carcinoma and seminoma. All have been reported to metastasize except
interstitial-cell tumor.
28. How common are testicular tumors in undescended testicles?
Occur 13 times more frequently (and in younger dogs) in retained testicles. They are twice
as common in inguinal versus abdominal testicles.
29. List clinical signs of testicular neoplasia.
· Scrotal asymmetry
·Testicular firmness
·Feminization
· Acute abdomen associated with torsion of a retained abdominal testicular tumor
·Palpable testicular mass
·Painful testicle
· Abdominal or inguinal mass (retained testicle)
 30. Name the differential diagnoses for testicular tumors.
·Testicular torsion
·Trauma (hematoma)
· Scrotal hernia
·Orchitis
·Epididymitis
·Spermatocele
· Scrotal neoplasia (rare)
31. Name some signs of hyperestrogenism in a dog with a feminizing testicular tumor.
·Attraction to other males
· Contralateral testicular atrophy
·Prostatomegaly (BPH)
· Gynecomastia
· Pendulous prepuce
· Bone marrow suppression
Ectopic and Neoplastic Testicles
231
·Alopecia
· Pigmentary changes
 32. Besides estrogen, are other feminizing hormones secreted by neoplastic testicles?
 Progesterone from a Sertoli-cell tumor has been reported to cause nonpruritic alopecia in a dog.
 33. What is the best treatment for testicular neoplasia?
effects ofbonemarrowsuppression.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Boothe HW: Testes and epididymides. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smalt animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia,
2003, W.B. Saumders, pp 1325-1336.
2. Crane SW: Orchiectomy of descended and retained testes in the dog and cat. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current
techniques in small animat surgery, ed 4, Baltimore, 1998, williams & wilkins, pp 517-523.
3. Millis DL, Hauptman JG, Johnson CA: Cryptorchidism and monorchidism in cats: 25 cases (1980-1989). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 200:1128-1130, 1992.
4. Richardson EF, Mullen HS: Cryptorchidisn in cats. Conp Cont Educ Pract 15:1342-1345, 1993.
Section III
Orthopedic Surgery
62. PRINCIPLES OF FRACTURE REPAIR
Robert M. Radasch, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the goal of fracture fixation?
An early return to nomal limb function.
2. How is this goal obtained?
· Functional or anatomic reconstruction of damaged bone column
· Maintenance of proximal and distal joint alignments
· Preservation of neurovascular elements, periosseous soft tissue, and bone structures
·Rigid (early) fracture stability
3. Which bones in dogs are most frequently fractured (or presented for treatment)?
According to the Veterinary Medical Data Bank at Purdue (1980-1990):
·Pelvis 22%
·Femur 19%
·Radius/ulna 10%
·Tibia/fibula 9%
·Humerus 8%
·Hind/forefeet 6%
·Scapula 2%
 4. List the common factors that determine location and pattern of a fracture.
· Nature and magnitude of the disruptive forces (compression, bending, shear, tension,
torsion)
· Material properties (cortical or cancellous) of the bone, porosity, rate of bone loading, and
orientation of the bone's microstructure
·Age, size, and shape of bone
·Concomitant bone defects or disease
5. What are the five basic forces that cause bone fractures?
1. Compression
2.Tension
3.Bending
4. Shear (transverse)
5. Torsion
Principles of Fracture Repair
233
6. What typical fracture pattern develops in a bone subjected to these loads?
LOADING MODE
FRACTURE PATTERNS
 Compression
Short oblique*
Tension
Transverse
Shear
Short oblique
Bending
Transverse, or short oblique with butterfly fragment on
compression surface
Torsion
Oblique spiral fracture
Combined
Complex fracture with comminutions, fissures, and fracture lines
+Occasionally, a transverse fracture occurs in a vertebral body or growth plate.
tCombined bending and compressive loading accentuates the obliquity of fracture lines on the compression
surface, resulting in a butterfly fragment.
7. Most fractures occurring in vivo are a result of which forces?
A combination of three or more loading forces.
8. Which disruptive forces most commonly affect repaired diaphyseal fractures during
the postoperative period?
Bending, compression, and torsional disruptive forces are present as a result of normal
weight-bearing and muscular contractions. Depending on the bone and fracture location, tensile
and shear forces may also be present.
9. What is strain?
Change in bone dimension (as a result of loading) compared with the bone's oniginal
dimension (strain = change length/original length).
10.  Define the interfragmentary strain theory.
Pluripotential cells located at a fracture are sensitive and responsive to the degree of
deformation or strain present at the fracture gap. Different cell lines withstand varying levels of
strain, beyond which the cells are incapable of survival.
11. How much strain can granulation tissue, cartilage, fibrous tissue, and bone tolerate
and still heal?
Granulation tissue—100%
Fibrous tissue—20%
Cartilage—10%
Bone2%
12. What factors should be considered when choosing an implant system to repair a fracture?
· Patient factors (e.g., age, health) and characteristic of the fracture (transverse, spiral, etc.)
· Owner compliance and patient's environment
·Available orthopedic equipment and expertise of surgeon
·Expense of treatment
13. What is the fracture-assessment score?
A scale of 1 through 10 representing mechanical (size of dog, character of fracture, number
of affected limbs), biologic (patient and tissue healths), and clinical (postoperative care) factors
234
Principles of Fracture Repair
that affect treatment outcome. Low numbers (<4) reflect guarded prognosis and imply selection
of technically demanding techniques and implants. High numbers (>8) suggest a good prognosis
for easily treatable and recoverable injuries and involve less complex procedures.
14. List common implant systems used to repair long-bone fractures.
●Intramedullary (IM) pins
· Rush pins
· Cerclage/hemicerclage and Kirschner wires
· Linear external fixators
·Circular external fixators
·Hybrid external fixators
·Interlocking nails (IN)
·Plates and screws
15. What are the capabilities of primary fixation devices to neutralize disruptive fracture
forces?
DISRUPTIVE FORCE
FIXATION DEVICE
TENSION
COMPRESSION
SHEAR
BENDING
TORSION
Cast/'splint
+
+
 Single IM pin
±
+
 Multiple IM pins
一
±
+
±
 Bone plate
+
+
+
+
+
 Plate-rod
+
+
+
IN
+
 Linear external fixator
+
+
+
+
 Circular external fixator 
*+
+
+
 Hybrid external factors 
+*
+
+
+
+ = effective; - = ineffective; ± = potentially effective.
*Narrow, tensioned w ires pemit controlled axial micromotion.
16. What are the functions of auxiliary implants?
Cerclage/hemicerclage, Kirschner wires (K-wires), and (lag) screws provide fragmentary
alignment. They are susceptible to disruptive forces and require protection (from failure) by use
of primary implants.
17. Which three implant systems provide excellent biomechanical stability, biologic
preservation, and complementary support?
1. IN and screws
2. IM pin and plate construct
3. IM pin and external fixation (connected)
18. How do bone fractures heal?
· Indirect union occurs with unstable (pins, wires) implants and is composed of fracture
gaps filled with (in sequence) a hematoma, granulation tissue, fibrocartilage, cancellous
bone, and cortical bone. A periosteal callus is visible radiographically
Principles ofFractureRepair
235
· Direct bone union occurs with a stable implant (plate) producing cortical contact or small
(200 μ) gaps. Bone formation develops directly through haversian remodeling without
fi brocartilage formation. Radiographs reveal little callus and loss of fracture lines.
19. How do fractures heal after stabilization with an external fixator?
Combination of endosteal uniting and periosteal callus formation based on the character of
20. What is dynamization and staged disassembly?
Dynamization is the concept of allowing free axial loading creating “axial micromotion" of
a fracture while controlling bending, shear, and rotational forces. Circular external fixators may
allow axial micromotion at a fracture to stimulate early callus formation.
Staged disassembly is the technique of manipulating and destabilizing an implant system
used to repair a fracture. This allows controlled axial load sharing by the fracture, while prevent-
ing excessive bending and rotational disruptive forces. Staged disassembly is believed to stimu
late early callus formation. Linear external fixators are easily disassembled during the PO period
21. Is there a specific time when staged disassembly should be performed?
Yes. To be effective, staged disassembly of a fixator should be performed 6-8 weeks postop-
eratively, often before radiographic evidence of callus formation is present.
22. What implant systems can be dynamized?
Virtually any system by removal of screws or pins. Because of their external location, linear,
circular, and hybrid fixators lend themselves best to this process.
23. How are open fractures classified?
· Grade I—bone fragments penetrate the muscle and skin from within, minimal soft tissue
damage.
· Grade II—external trauma causes a penetrating wound of the soft tissues with exposure
of the bone,moderate soft tissue damage.
· Grade Ill—external trauma causes a penetrating wound of the soft tissue and exposure of
bone, severe soft tissue and bone damage.
24. How likely are grade I, II, and IlI open fractures to develop postoperative osteomyelitis?
· Grade I and ll open fractures, if properly managed, are no more likely to develop
osteomyelitis than a closed fracture.
· Grade Ill open fractures, because of the extensive soft tissue damage, vascular impair-
ment, and contamination, are likely to develop osteomyelitis.
 25. Can open reduction and internal fixation be performed if bacterial contamination of a
fracture is present?
therapy initiated).
26. What is biologic osteosynthesis?
surgical approach to a comminuted fracture with mimimal mampulation of the fracture fragments.
local biology) and distribution of interfragmentary motion to a level that favors bone healing.
Spatial realignment of the limb (joint surfaces) is achieved and the fracture buttressed with an
appropriate implant, such as a pin-plate combination, IN, or external fixator. Anatomic recon-
struction is sacrificed; however, healing times are reduced and complications are minimized.
236
PrinciplesofFracture Repair
27. Does an end-threaded trocar pin have any advantages over a smooth trocar pin?
No. The end-threaded trocar pin was initially developed to have improved holding power in
cancellous bone. Because the thread is cut into the pin shank (negative-profile), however, no
a significant loss of strength occurs and predisposes the pin to cycle and break at that point.
28. When using an IM pin to repair a fracture, what diameter of pin should be selected?
The ability of an IM pin to resist bending is directly proportional to its radius raised to the
fourth power. Filling the medullary cavity at the fracture site maximizes the resistance to bending
and horizontal shear forces; however, it can result in damage to the medullary blood supply. It is
generally recommended to choose an IM pin diameter that fills approximately 60-70% of the
medullary cavity
29. What is a Rush pin and how is it used?
A form of IM pin that is designed to be driven into bone with special instruments. A true
Rush pin has a beveled or sled point. The pin enters the bone distal to the fracture, crosses the
fracture, deflects and glides off the opposite inner cortex traveling up the medullary cavity, and
becomes seated in the proximal end of the bone. This provides three-point fixation under spring-
s
30. What is stack pinning?
An IM pinning technique in which multiple small-diameter pins are placed down the
medullary cavity rather than a single larger pin.
31. Biomechanically, does stack pinning have any benefit over using a single IM pin?
Probably not. Stack pinning improves rotational stability (contact between pins and
endosteal cortex). Clinical studies have shown a greater than 50% complication rate and generally
unsatisfactory results with the use of stack pinming
32. What is a Trilam nail?
It is a stainless steel intramedullary fixation device. A Trilam nail has three lamellae running
along its length—in cross section it is an equilateral triangle. The points of the triangle (the
lamella) cut into the inner cortical bone, preventing rotational instability.
· Length of the fracture is two times the diameter of the bone.
·Wires should be used only if the full cylinder of bone can be reconstructed.
· No more than two fragments and two fracture lines should be present.
· 18- or 20-gauge wires should be used.
· Wires should be tight and avoid soft-tissue entrapment.
· Wires should be perpendicular to the long axis of the bone.
  Is  s s  o o   s 
·At least two to three wires should be used.
34. List the basic types of knots used to tighten a cerclage wire.
· Looped knot
· Twist knot
· Granny knot
35. Is one form of knot better than another?
Yes. Generally, loop and twist knots work well in clinical cases, and granny knots do not.
Principles ofFracture Repair
237
36. What are the advantages of each type of knot used to tighten a cerclage wire?
· Looped knot: 40-60% more static tension than twist knot, more bone compression, less
soft tissue imitation
· Twist knot: Resists knot slippage and distraction better than looped, requires greater
tensile force to break
37. What is the tension band principle?
An engineering principle in which tensile or distractive forces are converted into
compressive forces at the fracture site. It is most often accomplished by the use of 2 K-wires or
tendons, or ligaments results in distraction of bone fragments.
38. Name three functions of a bone plate.
(1) Compression, (2) neutralization, or (3) buttress of the fracture.
 39. Do different types of plates serve as compression plates, neutralization plates, or
butt ress plates?
tress plate. The difference is how the plate and screws are applied and the type of fracture.
40. What type of fracture should be stabilized by a compression, neutralization, or
butt ress plate?
· Neutralization plate—comminuted fracture anatomically reconstructed
41. What are the ways in which the bending stiffness and strength of a plated fractured
bone can be maximized?
· Using wide and thick plates
· Using the largest screws possible
·Filling all holes of the plate with a screw
· Using a plate-rod construct
42. The tension band principle also applies to bone plating. Plates placed on the tension
band surface of long bones are intended to convert tensile forces into compressive
forces. What is the tension band surface of the femur, tibia, humerus, and radius?
· Femur: cramiolateral surface
· Tibia: cramiolateral surface
· Humerus: craniomedial surface
·Radius: cranial surface
43. What is the minimum number of screws placed on each side of a fracture when using
a bone plate?
Enough screws should be used so that six cortices on each side of the fracture are engaged
by screws. Three screws could be used if each screw engages two cortices.
44. What is an LC-DCP implant, and what are its potential benefits over a DCP plate?
LC-DCP = Limited contact dynamic compression plate. The bottom of the plate is contoured
(undercut between screw holes) to reduce contact between the plate and bone.
Benefits of the LC-DCP:
238
Principles of Fracture Repair
· Results in less bone porosis under the plate
· Screw holes are less of a stress compared to DCP
· Compression of fracture can be done at several levels and in different directions
· Undercutting of plate allows greater screw angulation (up to 40° as compared to 12.50
with a DCP)
45. What are the advantages of titanium over 316 L stainless steel plates?
· Lower modulus of elasticity making the plate more flexible
· Less fatigue failure over physiologic ranges of cycling
·More biocompatible
· Less corrosion
·Lighter
46. What is a plate-rod construct?
The combination of a bone plate and an IM pin that occupies approximately 35-40% of the
bone because anatomic reconstruction was not or could not be performed.
47. What biomechanical advantages does a plate-rod construct have over a buttress plate?
1. Combining an IM pin with a bone plate reduces the bending strain in the plate by half.
2. The IM pin increases the fatigue life of the plate tenfold.
48. What is an IN?
A large-diameter pin with holes to accept screws. The nail is placed into the medullary
cavity of a fracture bone and locked to the bone by inserting screws through the holes in the IN
and corresponding holes drilled into the cis-cortices and trans-cortices of the bone.
49. What biomechanical advantages does an IN have over an IM pin or plate?
1. An IN is placed along the neutral axis of the bone similar to an IM pin instead of
eccentrically located like a bone plate.
 2. An IN provides superior bending stiffness, resistance to torsional forces, axial stability,
and lower implant failure rates than IM pins or bone plates.
50.  The holes in an IN are mechanically the weakest part of the nail. What rule of thumb
should be followed when placing a nail to prevent the IN from breaking at a screw
hole?
A screw hole in the nail should be 2 cm or more away from the fracture to minimize the
stress riser effect, nail fatigue, and breakage.
51. When applying an interlocking nail to stabilize a fracture, which screw should be
inserted first?
The distal one. Inserting the distal screw first "locks" the distal end of the implant into the
bone and clinically reduces the chance of missing the other holes in the nail while drilling and
inserting screws.
52. List the factors that affect stiffness and strength of an external fixator.
· Frame geometry
·Number and size of pins
· Pin design (threaded versus nonthreaded, negative versus positive profile pins)
· Spatial orientation of fixation pins
· Number of pins inserted into each bone fragment
· Distance between bone and clamps (working length of pin)
Principles of Fracture Repair
239
· Distance between clamps
· Orientation of clamps
· Size, number, and length of interconnecting rods
· Material property of interconnecting rod (metal versus acrylic or epoxy)
· Method of pin insertion (hand chuck versus slow and fast power insertion)
 53. List the four basic frame configurations of linear external fixators.
1-A = unilateral—uniplanar
1-B = unilateral—biplanar
II = bilateral—uniplanar
III = trilateral—biplanar
54.What does the term KE fixator refer to?
Kirschner-Ehmer external fixation splint, developed in Seattle in the 1940s by Ehmer, a
Washington State veterinarian, and the Kirschner manufacturing company.
55. What is a half and full pin?
Half pin—penetrates one skin surface and both cortices
Full pin—-penetrates two skin surfaces and both cortices
56. What diameter of acrylic tubing equals the strength of a medium external fixator
stainless steel interconnecting rod?
2 cm (approximately 3/4 inch)
 57. What damaging physical phenomenon occurs when using acrylic to form an intercon-
necting external fixation rod?
As acrylic polymerizes, it creates an exothermic reaction, which can generate high temper-
atures at the pin-bone interface, creating thermal necrosis of bone. This can result in premature
pin loosening. Bathing the acrylic bar or fixation pins in saline-cooled sponges minimizes heat
conduction from the acrylic to the fixation pin and bone.
58. What are the two most common complications associated with linear external fixation?
·Pin loosening
· Pin tract drainage/sepsis
59. What type of pin offers the best resistance to pull-out when applying an external fixator?
A positive-profile, end-threaded pin. This is a pin in which the threads have been rolled onto
the pin shank.
60. Is external fixa tion pin insertion speed important?
Yes. If a smooth or threaded pin is inserted at a high RPM, heat generation at the bone-pin
interface occurs, causes thermal necrosis of the bone, and leads to premature pin loosening and
pin tract drainage.
61. If using power equipment, what speed of pin insertion should be used?
Less than 150-200 RPMs.
62. What is predrilling, and what benefit does it have?
A technique used for external fixation pin insertion to reduce microfractuning of bone and
minimize thermal necrosis during pin insertion. A drill bit (smaller in diameter than the threaded
ESF pin) is used to predrill a hole through the bone before fixation pin insertion. After the hole
has been predrilled, the external fixation pin is inserted by hand or slow-speed power.
240
Principles of Fracture Repair
63. When choosing a transfixation pin, what rule in pin diameter selection should be followed?
The diameter of the transfixation pin should not be greater than 20-30% of the bone
the pin insertion site.
64. List other basic rules of linear external fixation pin insertion.
· Pin spacing relative to the ends of the bone and fracture site should be far-near-near-far
(pins inserted near joint surfaces and near fracture)
·Pins should be 1-2 cm from fracture line/fissure.
· Cancellous profile pins are only to be used in proximal humerus, proximal tibia, and distal femur.
· Pins should be inserted perpendicular to bone axis, and the trocar point exits the far cortex
for a distance of 2-3 mm.
65. What is a circular external fixator?
The rings are connected to the bone by the use of narrow wires, which are placed under tension.
66. Who was Iizarov?
A preeminent Russian orthopedist (1921-1992) who developed the external fixator (in
Siberia) to treat complex and infected fractures as well as shortened, deformed limbs. After his
successful treatment in 1967 of Olympic high jumper Valerie Brumel's chronically infected
nonunion fractures of both legs, Ilizarov's reputation soared into national medical prominence.
67. What is a hybrid fixator?
 It is a combination of a circular and a linear fixator. Often a ring or arch is attached to a
hybrid post. The ring is secured to the bone with narrow wires and the posts are secured using
half or full pins.
68. Do circular external fixators have any benefit in the treatment of fractures?
Yes. In highly comminuted fractures, circular fixators enhance the rate of healing. Because
osteosynthesis.
69. What unique and advantageous biomechanical characteristics do circular external
fixators possess?
Circular external fixators are attached to the fractured bone with narrow-tensioned wires.
These wires allow controlled (<lmm) axial micromotion at the fracture site during weight-
bearing, which stimulates early bone healing by distraction osteogenesis.
70. What is an olive wire?
A narrow-diameter pin (similar to a K-wire) with a bead on its shank. It is used with circular
external fixators as a transfix ation wire holding the device to the bone. Use of olive wires imparts
resistance to bone translation. It can also be used to move bone segments or fragments to improve
bone alignment.
71. List the parameters of a circular external fixator that can be altered to change the
degree of rigidity (or elasticity) in a fracture.
·Ring diameter and wire length
· Number of rings above and below the fracture
· Spatial orientation of rings in relationship to the fracture
·Diameter of transfixation wires
Principlesof Fracture Repair
241
·Wire tension
●Position of the bone within the rings
· Number of wires used
·Angle of wire intersection
72. What are major complications of fracture repair?
· Nonunion
· Malunion
·Delayed union
· Acute or chronic osteomyelitis
·Fracture disease
73. What is fracture disease?
A set of soft-tissue complications secondary to a fracture or the results of a fracture repair:
1. Adhesions (periosseous) preventing the normal gliding motion of muscles and tendons
 2. Excessive periarticular capsular fibrosis resulting in reduced joint range of motion
3. Disuse atrophy of articular cartilage leading to secondary degenerative joint disease
74. What is stress protection or stress shielding?
A sequela to the use of an excessively rigid implant, such as a bone plate. The rigid implant
prevents the bone from responding to normal physiologic stresses as a result of a mismatch of
stiffness between the implant and bone, leading to thinning of the surrounding cortical bone. It is
particularly common in toy breeds, in which forelimb bone plate repair has been performed. It
can result in near-complete bone resorption under a plate and a secondary pathologic fracture.
Any implant system can result in stress protection.
75. How can stress protection be avoided?
·Use of limited contact plates
· Reducing construct stiffness by removing bone screws or fixator pins during healing (6
weeks postsurgery)
76. What is the triple A score for postoperative evaluations of fracture repair?
·Activity (osteogenesis, bone healing)
·Alignment (apposition of fragments)
·Appliance (apparatus or implant stability)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Farese JP, Lewis DD, Cross AR, Collins KE, Anderson GM, Halling KB: Use of IMEX SK-circular extemal
fixator hybrid constructs for fracture stabilization in dogs and cats. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:279-288, 2002.
2. Hach V: Initial experience with a newly developed medullary stabilization nail (Trilam nail). Vet Comp Orthop
Traumato1 13:109-114, 2000.
3. Hulse DA, Johnson AL: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and fracture management. In Fossum TW, editor:
Small animal surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp 821-900.
4. Lewis DD, Bronson DG, Sanchukov ML: Biomechanics of circular extemal skeletal fixation. Vet Surg 27:454-
464, 1998.
5. Marcellin-Little D: Extemal skeletal fixation. In Slatter, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2003, W.B. Saunders, pp 1818-1834.
6. Palmer R: Biological osteosynthesis. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 29:1171-1186, 1999.
7. Roe S: Intemal fracture fixation. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animal surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003,
W.B. Saumders, pp 1798-1816, 2002.
8. Piermattei DL, Flo GL: Fractures: classification, diagnosis, and treatment. In Piemattei DL, Flo GL, editors: Hand-
book of small animat orthopedics and fracture treatment, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997,W.B.Saunders, pp 24-146.
9. Radasch RM: Biomechanics of bone and fractures. Vet Clin North Am Sm Animal Pract 29:1045-1082, 1999.
63. MANDIBULAR AND MAXILLARY FRACTURES
Kristi M. Sandman, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What are the common causes for jaw fractures in the dog and cat?
Trauma
·Vehicular trauma
· Fights with other animals
·Kicks
· Gunshot wounds
· High-rise syndrome in cats
Pathologic
· Periodontal disease
·Oral neoplasia
·Metabolic derangements
 2. Where do fractures of the mandible commonly occur?
In dogs:
·Premolar
·Molar
·Symphyseal
In cats:
·Symphyseal
 3. What are important preanesthetic considerations for an animal with a jaw fracture?
· Patent airway
· Hemorrhage from facial and oral injuries
· Cardiac dysrhythmias
·Brain trauma
· Pneumothorax and hemothorax
·Pulmonary contusions
· Diaphragmatic hernia
4. What is the primary goal of jaw fracture repair?
Restoration of proper dental occlusion.
5. Why would it be advantageous to perform a pharyngostomy to administer anesthesia
for repair of jaw fractures?
In mandibular and maxillary fracture repairs, frequent closure of the mouth (without tube
interference) during surgery is necessary to assess proper dental occlusion. Temporary tra-
cheostomy is also an option.
6. Name some other important principles of jaw fracture repair.
· Stable anatomic or functional fixation of fracture fragments
· Avoidance of soft tissue entrapment and dental trauma
·Assessment of tissue viability
Mandiblar and Maxillary Fractures
243
·Avoidance of excessive soft tissue elevation from bone surfaces
· Coverage of exposed bone with soft tissues
· Rapid restoration of oral functions
 7. What are common complications of mandibular fracture repair?
Dog
· Dental malocclusion
·Osteomyelitis
· Nonunion and malunion
·Appliance failure
Cat
·Dental malocclusion
· Soft-tissue infection
· Temporomandibular degenerative joint disease
·Nonunion
 8. List treatment options for jaw fractures.
·Tape muzzles
·Circumferential wiring
·Interarcade wiring
· Dental composite
·Interosseous wiring
·Partial mandibulectomy
·Interdental wiring
·Acrylic splints
·External skeletal fixation
·Intramedullary pinning
·Bone plating
9. What is the fracture assessment score?
Use of information from the patient's mechanical, biological, and clinical parameters to
bone healing and return to function.
10. How does one select among treatment options?
Fracture - Assessment Score
SCORE
FIXATION
0-3
 Closed reduction and external fixator application
Plate and screw fixation
 Tape muzzle for vertical ramus
4-7
Interfragmentary wire
Bone plate and screws
External skeletal fixation
8-10
Tape muzzle
Interdental wiring
Interfragmentary wiring
 Cerclage wires (symphyseal fractures)
244
Mandiblar and Maxillary Fractures
11. What principles should be followed when using external skeletal fixators on
mandibular/maxillary fractures?
·Use largest diameter pin feasible for bone size
· Use threaded pins versus smooth pins
· Engage both cortices
· Place a minimum of two pins in each fracture segment
· Evenly space pins in each fragment
·Avoid tooth roots
· Use acrylic bars for ease of application and alignment
12. Where is the tension side of the mandible?
The al veolar margin.
13. Which neurovascular structures may be damaged with jaw fractures?
The maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve innervates the cutaneous muscles of the head
and nasal and oral cavity and muscles of mastication. It passes rostrally through the alar canal
and can be damaged with maxillary fractures. The mandibular alveolar nerve passes through the
mandibular canal and is sensory to the teeth of the mandible. The mandibular alveolar artery
supplies the cortical and alveolar bone and teeth of the mandible; it passes along with the
mandibular alveolar nerve in the canal. Although these structures can be damaged in mandibular
fractures, clinical signs may not be evident.
14. Which fractures may be amenable to tape muzzles?
·Minimally displaced or nondisplaced fractures
· Highly comminuted fractures with the opposite hemimandible intact
·Verticalramus fractures
· Adjunctive treatment to internal reduction
15. What are tape muzzles?
sive, practical, noninvasive, and generally well tolerated by dogs.
16. What is the best treatment method for articular fractures of the temporomandibular
joint?
Removal of the mandibular condylar head to create a pseudarthrosis (similar to femoral head
ostectomy in the hip joint).
17. Do all maxillary fractures require surgical treatment?
No. If there is not severe displacement, healing quickly occurs. Maxillary fractures that
should be surgically treated include lesions causing malocclusion, large areas of oronasal com-
munication, facial deformity, and obstruction to airflow through the nasal cavity.
18. How does the direction of obliquity in longitudinal fractures of the mandible affect the
stability of the fracture?
The combined effects of the masseter, pterygoid, and temporalis muscles tend to displace
caudad fragments dorsally. This force is resisted by the rostral fragment if the fracture line is dor-
socaudal to rostroventral.
19. Which of the following interdental fixations is strongest: metal, metal with acrylic rein-
forcement, or acrylic alone?
Metal with acrylic reinforcement
Fractures of The Scapula
245
CONTROVERSY
20.How should teeth in the fracture line be handled?
A stable tooth in the fracture line should remain in place and be extracted only if there are
clinical complications. Teeth help with anatomic alignment and stability of the fracture repair.
 Increased infection may occur when damaged or loose teeth are retained in the fracture line,
and early antibiotic therapy is recommended by some clinicians. Diseased teeth should be
removed from the fracture site to facilitate healing in animals with pathologic fractures secondary
to peniodontal disease.
The answer may also depend on the clinician: orthopedic surgeons tend to treat the bone
fractures primarily and address dental problems later, whereas veterinary dentists focus on dental
lesions in the initial assessment.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Bennett JW, Kapatkin AS, Manfra Marretta S: Composite for the fixation of mandibular fractures and luxations
in 11 cats and 6 dogs. Vet Surg 23:190-194, 1994.
2. Davidson JR, Bauer MS: Fractures of the mandible and maxilla. Vet Clin North Am 22:109-119, 1992.
3. Kem DA, Smith MM, Grant JW, et al: Evaluation of bending strength of five interdental fixation apparatuses
applied to canine mandlibular. Am J Vet Res 54:1177-1182, 1993.
4. Sandman KM, Smith CW, Marretta SM: Comparison of pull-out resistance of Kirschner wires and Imex
64. FRACTURES OF THE SCAPULA
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. How common are fractures of the scapula?
They have been reported to range from 0.5% to 2.4% of all fractures identified at veterinary
teaching hospi tals.
2. What is the anamnesis for the injury?
Vehicular trauma in most cases, affecting young (<4 years of age), intact male dogs with
most of the lesions involving the left scapula.
 3. What other injuries can occur concurrently?
· Thoracic trauma (pulmonary contusions, pneumothorax)
· Other forelimb or hindlimb orthopedic injuries
·Soft-tissue wounds
● Nerve (brachial plexus, spinal cord) damage
4. Are scapular fractures easily diagnosed?
No. Many lesions are overlooked because of:
· Difficulty in palpation of a bone surrounded by extensive muscular elements.
● Missing a lameness in a patient who is completely nonambulatory or ambulatory with a
mild injury.
structures.
Fractures of The Scapula
245
CONTROVERSY
20.How should teeth in the fracture line be handled?
A stable tooth in the fracture line should remain in place and be extracted only if there are
clinical complications. Teeth help with anatomic alignment and stability of the fracture repair.
 Increased infection may occur when damaged or loose teeth are retained in the fracture line,
and early antibiotic therapy is recommended by some clinicians. Diseased teeth should be
removed from the fracture site to facilitate healing in animals with pathologic fractures secondary
to peniodontal disease.
The answer may also depend on the clinician: orthopedic surgeons tend to treat the bone
fractures primarily and address dental problems later, whereas veterinary dentists focus on dental
lesions in the initial assessment.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Bennett JW, Kapatkin AS, Manfra Marretta S: Composite for the fixation of mandibular fractures and luxations
in 11 cats and 6 dogs. Vet Surg 23:190-194, 1994.
2. Davidson JR, Bauer MS: Fractures of the mandible and maxilla. Vet Clin North Am 22:109-119, 1992.
3. Kem DA, Smith MM, Grant JW, et al: Evaluation of bending strength of five interdental fixation apparatuses
applied to canine mandlibular. Am J Vet Res 54:1177-1182, 1993.
4. Sandman KM, Smith CW, Marretta SM: Comparison of pull-out resistance of Kirschner wires and Imex
64. FRACTURES OF THE SCAPULA
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. How common are fractures of the scapula?
They have been reported to range from 0.5% to 2.4% of all fractures identified at veterinary
teaching hospi tals.
2. What is the anamnesis for the injury?
Vehicular trauma in most cases, affecting young (<4 years of age), intact male dogs with
most of the lesions involving the left scapula.
 3. What other injuries can occur concurrently?
· Thoracic trauma (pulmonary contusions, pneumothorax)
· Other forelimb or hindlimb orthopedic injuries
·Soft-tissue wounds
● Nerve (brachial plexus, spinal cord) damage
4. Are scapular fractures easily diagnosed?
No. Many lesions are overlooked because of:
· Difficulty in palpation of a bone surrounded by extensive muscular elements.
● Missing a lameness in a patient who is completely nonambulatory or ambulatory with a
mild injury.
structures.
246
Fractures of The Scapula
5. Which radiographic projections are useful in diagnosis?
· Lateral view with the affected limb cranially extended
· Caudocranial view (patient is in dorsal recumbency and limb is pulled cranially)
·Distoproximal view (patient is in dorsal recumbency and leg is pulled caudally)
Patient is heavily sedated or anesthetized for all views.
6. Which (indirect) radiographic projection has been used frequently to diagnose a
scapular fracture retroactively?
Lateral and ventrodorsal projections of the thorax.
 7. How are scapular fractures classified?
Traditionalschemebasedonlocation
·Body
· Spine and acromion
· Neck including glenoid region
Biomechanical scheme
·Stable extraarticular
· Unstable extraarticular
·Intraarticular
8. How are scapular fractures treated?
1. Stable extraarticular lesions can be treated with cage rest or bandage (e.g., Velpeau,
spica) support.
implants, such as wires, pins, bone plate (stainless steel or plastic), and screws.
9. What types of stainless steel plates are useful for repair of scapular fractures?
Small fragment or miniplates with angled (L) or T configurations.
10.Which orthopedic principle needs to be followed for repair of supraglenoid tubercle or
acromion fractures and avulsions?
Tension band principle with figure-8 wire and pins or bone screw, with or without pin, to
counteract the distractive forces of the biceps brachii tendon of origin or acromial head of del.
toideus muscle.
11. What type of bone plate is useful for stabilizing horizontal fractures of the scapular
body?
spine.
12. How are articular (glenoid) fractures classified?
As Y or T fractures based on the configuration of the lesion.
Craniolateral approach with osteotomy of the acromion and tenotomy of the infraspinatus
muscle.
14. What is the metacromion?
A caudally projecting protuberance on the feline scapular spine, located 1-2 cm proximal to
247
15. What important structures need to be identified and preserved during repair of
glenoid fractures?
Suprascapular artery, vein, and ner ve.
16. What is the prognosis after treatment of scapular fractures?
Although based on the degree of injury, bone healing is favored by periosseous muscular cov-
erage and vasculature and cancellous bone in the body of the scapula. Complex articular fractures
failures. Scapulohumeral arthrodesis may be an alternative, although lameness persists. Amputation
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Cook JL, Cook CR: Scapular fractures in dogs: Epidemiology, classification, and concurrent injuries. I Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 33:528-532, 1997.
2. Harari J, Dunning D: Fractures of the scapula in dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 6:105-108, 1993
3. Johnston SA: Articular fractures of the scapula in the dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:157-164, 1993.
4. Jerram RM, Herron MR: Scapular fractures in dogs. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 20:1254-1259, 1998
5. Roush JK, Lord PF: Clinical application of a distoproxinal (axial) radiographic view of the scapula. J Am Anin
Hosp Assoc 26:129-132, 1990.
65. FRACTURES OF THE HUMERUS
Spencer A. Johnston, VM.D., Dip. A.C.VS
1. Do fractures of the humerus occur less commonly than fractures of the femur?
Yes. Because many fractures occur as a result of dogs and cats being struck by automobiles,
the proximity of the front legs to vital structures (skull and thorax) results in a high incidence of
fatalities when forelimbs are injured.
2. What is the most likely diagnosis for lameness and a swollen elbow in a puppy after a fall?
A Salter-Harris IV fracture of the lateral aspect of the humeral condyle.
3.Why does this fracture occur?
Because of the shape of the distal humerus and relationship of the radial head to the humeral
condyle. The lateral aspect of the humeral condyle is offset from the axis of the humerus. This is also
the portion of the humeral condyle that articulates with the radial head. When excessive force is trans-
mitted up the radius (as the puppy lands), the force is transfetred to the humeral condyle. The shearing
force is sufficient to cause a fracture through the middle of the condyle and the lateral epicondylar crest
4. Does the humerus contain medial and lateral condyles?
No. According to Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, the humerus has only one condyle, with
medial and lateral epicondyles.
5. What is the best way to repair these fractures?
With a lag screw placed from the lateral aspect of the humeral condyle to the medial aspect
of the humeral condyle and an antirotational pin placed from the lateral epicondyle into the shaft
screw has been described, it is not the optimal method of fixation.
247
15. What important structures need to be identified and preserved during repair of
glenoid fractures?
Suprascapular artery, vein, and ner ve.
16. What is the prognosis after treatment of scapular fractures?
Although based on the degree of injury, bone healing is favored by periosseous muscular cov-
erage and vasculature and cancellous bone in the body of the scapula. Complex articular fractures
failures. Scapulohumeral arthrodesis may be an alternative, although lameness persists. Amputation
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Cook JL, Cook CR: Scapular fractures in dogs: Epidemiology, classification, and concurrent injuries. I Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 33:528-532, 1997.
2. Harari J, Dunning D: Fractures of the scapula in dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 6:105-108, 1993
3. Johnston SA: Articular fractures of the scapula in the dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:157-164, 1993.
4. Jerram RM, Herron MR: Scapular fractures in dogs. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 20:1254-1259, 1998
5. Roush JK, Lord PF: Clinical application of a distoproxinal (axial) radiographic view of the scapula. J Am Anin
Hosp Assoc 26:129-132, 1990.
65. FRACTURES OF THE HUMERUS
Spencer A. Johnston, VM.D., Dip. A.C.VS
1. Do fractures of the humerus occur less commonly than fractures of the femur?
Yes. Because many fractures occur as a result of dogs and cats being struck by automobiles,
the proximity of the front legs to vital structures (skull and thorax) results in a high incidence of
fatalities when forelimbs are injured.
2. What is the most likely diagnosis for lameness and a swollen elbow in a puppy after a fall?
A Salter-Harris IV fracture of the lateral aspect of the humeral condyle.
3.Why does this fracture occur?
Because of the shape of the distal humerus and relationship of the radial head to the humeral
condyle. The lateral aspect of the humeral condyle is offset from the axis of the humerus. This is also
the portion of the humeral condyle that articulates with the radial head. When excessive force is trans-
mitted up the radius (as the puppy lands), the force is transfetred to the humeral condyle. The shearing
force is sufficient to cause a fracture through the middle of the condyle and the lateral epicondylar crest
4. Does the humerus contain medial and lateral condyles?
No. According to Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, the humerus has only one condyle, with
medial and lateral epicondyles.
5. What is the best way to repair these fractures?
With a lag screw placed from the lateral aspect of the humeral condyle to the medial aspect
of the humeral condyle and an antirotational pin placed from the lateral epicondyle into the shaft
screw has been described, it is not the optimal method of fixation.
248
Fractures of The Humerus
6. If the fracture is not severely displaced, can a soft padded bandage or splint be used to
provide stabilization (then refer it in 3-6 weeks if it does not heal)?
Only if you want to doom the patient to a lifetime of discomfort resulting from a severely
dysfunctional joint. Although this fracture involves the articular surface, the prognosis is good if
repair is done soon after the injury. If the fracture is left untreated, there is irreversible damage to
the articular surface, loss of identifying interdigitation of the fracture fragments, and periarticular
fibrosis. Attempts to reestablish articular congruity and provide a functional joint this long after
injury are usually frustrating. Arthrodesis or amputation may be the only options.
7. How soon should these fractures be repaired?
Within 3-5 days of the injury, sooner if possible.
8. Do these fractures occur only in young dogs?
No, they can occur in older patients, usually cocker or Brittany spaniels. This may be due to
condyle in this breed, predisposing the dog to fracture secondary to minimal trauma.
9.How does a T or Y fracture differ from a fracture of the lateral aspect of the humeral
condyle?
 T or Y fractures involve fracture of the medial and lateral epicondylar crests as well as the
articular surface. There is communication with the supratrochlear foramen from both the medial
and lateral sides.
10.  Are these fractures difficult to repair?
Yes. Repair can be achieved by a variety of methods but basically requires reconstruction of
the condyle with a lag screw, then attachment to the humeral shaft by pins or plates. If com
minution is present, it is difficult to obtain satisfactory alignment and reduction. Posttraumatic
osteoarthritis may affect limb function despite near anatomic reduction in some cases.
11. Why is that so difficult?
Because of the exposure, difficulty in obtaining reduction, and amount of bone available for
implant placement. Attachment of the flexors (medially) and extensors (laterally) distract
fractured portions of the condyle, and visualization may be impaired by blood clots and torn and
swollen tissues. Because of the proximity to the articular surface and shape of the humerus,
plating techniques are limited by the ability to contour the plate and place screws with sufficient
purchase to secure the plate. Pins are easier to place but have limitations with respect to rotational
stability. One should not try to repair these fractures, unless one has a real love, talent, and
patience for orthopedic surgery.
12. What type of approach is used to repair these fractures?
ment of the elbow and visualization and manipulation of the medial aspect of the humerus. This
is frequently necessary when repairing T or Y fractures. Tenotomy of the triceps tendon can also
be performed for exposure of T or Y fractures.
13. Do all fractures of the distal humerus involve the articular surface?
invol ve the articular surface, can also occur. Supracondylar fractures occur more commonly than
condylar fractures in cats, but not in dogs.
Fracturesof The Humerus
249
14. List examples of biologic fixations of comminuted humeral fractures.
· Intramedullary pin and plate combination
· Interlocking nail (with screws)
·Intramedullary and external fixation (connected externally)
15. List the advantages of biologic fixations.
· Biomechanical stability
· Decreased soft-tissue dissection (infection, avascularity)
· Technical ease and reduced operative time
·Complementary implants
16. Discuss some factors that must be considered when selecting a method of repair for
humeral shaft fractures.
The location of the fracture, the configuration and degree of comminution of the fracture
the size of the bone, and the forces that will be acting on the fracture repair (bending, rotation,
shear, compression) must all be considered when choosing a method of fixation.
1. The humerus is a highly contoured bone that does not lend itself readily to fixation. It is
difficult to fill the medullary cavity with pins because the medullary cavity is relatively
 broad proximally and has a relatively narrow isthmus in the distal third.
 2. The contour of the bone sometimes makes plate application problematic because of the
need to contour the plate in three planes to adapt to the surface of the bone (at least when
the plate is applied to the lateral side).
 3. The contour of the bone can also make cerclage wire application problematic because the
tapering nature of the proximal and distal portions of the humerus predisposes the wire
to slipping as it is tightened.
 4. The narrowing of the distal humerus and division into lateral and medial epicondyles
sometimes make interlocking nail application difficult because the width of the medial
epicondyle can limit the size of nail used.
5. It is difficult to avoid overlying muscle with external fixator pins, and care must be taken
to avoid the radial nerve when transfixation pins are applied to the distal third of the bone.
 6. The muscle mass of the humerus also requires that the clamps be placed relatively far
from the axis of the humerus, making the external fixator relatively weak.
7. In addition to the above-listed factors, the approach to the humerus is more diffcult than the
approach to the other long bones because of the overlying musculature and proximity of nerves.
17. Discuss specific problems with the surgical approaches to the humerus.
The lateral approach to the shaft of the humerus requires ligation or avoidance of the cephalic
and axillobrachial veins; elevation of the deltoideus, superficial or deep pectoral muscles, and
lateral head of the triceps; and retraction of the brachialis muscle and radial nerve.
The medial approach provides access to the midportion and distal portion of the humerus
which have straight and flat surfaces and lend themselves to plate application. The brachial artery
and vein, along with the median, musculocutaneous, and ulnar nerves, must be avoided. Identifi-
good access to the proximal third of the bone.
18. Are there differences in humeral fracture repair in dogs and cats?
Cats
Cats have supracondylar fractures more frequently than condylar fractures. Cats also have a
straighter humerus than dogs, and this makes fixation with an intramedullary pin easier than in
dogs. The distal humerus of the cat is slightly different from that of the dog. The median nerve
and brachial artery pass through the supracondylar foramen. Also, the ulnar nerve lies under the
medial head (short portion) of the triceps muscles.
250
Fractures of TheHumerus
Dogs
Condylar fractures are more common than supracondylar fractures. Fixation with an
intramedullary pin is more difficult in dogs.
19. What nerve is of greatest concern with fractures of the humerus?
The radial nerve is most commonly injured with fractures of the distal portion of the humerus,
where the nerve courses cranially and laterally along with the brachialis muscle. Long oblique frac-
tures in this area or comminuted fractures with long sharp fragments of bone are most commonly
associated with radial nerve injury. The radial nerve is important because the ability to extend the
elbow is necessary for front limb ambulation. Although damage to the ulnar, median, and muscu-
locutaneous nerves can occur, loss of these nerves does not cause severe limb dysfunction.
20. How is radial nerve injury identified?
Lack of pain sensation in the dermatome (dorsal surface of the paw) associated with the
radial nerve. Sometimes the nerve is found to be transected at the time of surgery.
21. Why is the appearance of a dog with a humeral fracture sometimes misleading?
to place pressure on the dorsum of the paw). Nerve sensation should be evaluated.
22. If the radial nerve is transected, should the leg be amputated?
Not necessarily. It is important to determine at what level the injury has occurred. If the
nerve is transected distal to the branches of the triceps, the dog will still have the ability to extend
and fix the elbow. In this case, injury to the distal portion of the nerve results in lack of extensor
functions, and the major defect is an inability to extend the carpus. Many dogs develop an ability
to swing the limb forward, extending the carpus and placing the palmar surface of the foot appro-
priately. If the radial nerve is transected proximal to the branches innervating the triceps, amputa-
tion should be considered.
23. Do fractures of the proximal humerus occur commonly?
No. Salter-Harris fractures (usually type I or II) do occur through the proximal physis.
24.
What about fractures of the proximal humerus in mature dogs?
Although these can occur secondary to trauma, the possibility of pathologic fracture
associated with osteosarcoma or other tumor should always be considered. This is particularly
true if the signalment (large-breed dog, middle-aged or older) is associated with a history of no
or minimal trauma.
25. Can external coaptation be used for fractures of the humerus?
No. The proximal location of the humerus does not lend itself to external coaptation, with
the exception of a spica (over the body) splint. A spica splint is not good for long-term manage-
ment, but it is useful for short-term immobilization to provide comfort to the patient while await-
ing definitive repair.
26. Should spica bandages be used postoperatively to reduce weight-bearing?
No. It is best to avoid the combination of internal fixation and external coaptation because this
can lead to decreased range of motion of the elbow or shoulder. If a fracture repair is somewhat
bandage), which allows motion of the elbow and shoulder, yet prevents the stress of weight-bearing
on the fracture repair.
Fractures of The Radius and Uina
251
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Cook JL, Tomlinson JL, Reid AL: Fluoroscopically guided closed reduction and intemal fixation of fractures of
the lateral portion of the humeral condyle: Prospective clinical study of the technique and results in ten dogs. Vet
Surg 28:315-321, 1999.
 2. Gordon WJ: Frequence of post-traumatic osteoarthritis in dogs after repair of a humeral condylar fracture. Vet
Comp Orthop Traumatol 16:1-5, 2003.
3. Guerin SR, Lewis DD, Lanz Ol: Comminuted supracondylar humeral fractures repaired with a modified type I
extemal skeletal fixator construct. J Sm Animal Pract 39:525-532, 1998.
4. Larsen LJ: Microangiography of the humeral condyle in cocker spaniel and non-cocker spaniel dogs. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumato1 12:134-137, 1999.
5. Marcellin-Little DJ, DeYoung DJ: Incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle in spaniels. Vet Surg 23:475
487,1994
6.Piemattei DL,Flo GL: Brinker, Piermattei, and Fto's handbook of smallaninat orthopedics and fracture repair,
ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997, W.B. Saunders, pp 261-287.
7. Sturgeon C. Triceps tenotomy and double plating of canine humeral condyle fractures. Vet Comp Orthop
Traumato1 13:34-38, 2000
66. FRACTURES OF THE RADIUS AND ULNA
Ioseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1.How common are radial and ulnar fractures?
Estimates range from 8% to 18% of all fractures in dogs and cats
2. What are some important anatomic considerations for repair of radial and ulnar
fractures?
· The radius is the major weight-bearing bone of the forearm and is more frequently
repaired than ulnar fractures.
· Open injuries occur frequently because of paucity of soft tissue (muscle) coverage in the
mid and distal aspects of the bones.
·● Fractures in the distal third of the radius heal poorly in small dogs.
is the compression side.
· Limb shortening and angulation can occur secondary to proximal or distal physeal
trauma.
fractures?
· A hanging limb preparation permits ease in application of external fixators and promotes
alignment.
· Dorsal recumbency and pulling the limb caudally provides medial and lateral access to
the bones.
 on yoeoidde pesiop e apiaoid unus pue pey sun yo jodns pue ouequnoi penuea -
bones with reduced technical assistance required.
 4. Name some indications for repair of ulnar fractures.
· Fractures of the olecranon
· Monteggia lesions
Fractures of The Radius and Uina
251
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Cook JL, Tomlinson JL, Reid AL: Fluoroscopically guided closed reduction and intemal fixation of fractures of
the lateral portion of the humeral condyle: Prospective clinical study of the technique and results in ten dogs. Vet
Surg 28:315-321, 1999.
 2. Gordon WJ: Frequence of post-traumatic osteoarthritis in dogs after repair of a humeral condylar fracture. Vet
Comp Orthop Traumatol 16:1-5, 2003.
3. Guerin SR, Lewis DD, Lanz Ol: Comminuted supracondylar humeral fractures repaired with a modified type I
extemal skeletal fixator construct. J Sm Animal Pract 39:525-532, 1998.
4. Larsen LJ: Microangiography of the humeral condyle in cocker spaniel and non-cocker spaniel dogs. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumato1 12:134-137, 1999.
5. Marcellin-Little DJ, DeYoung DJ: Incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle in spaniels. Vet Surg 23:475
487,1994
6.Piemattei DL,Flo GL: Brinker, Piermattei, and Fto's handbook of smallaninat orthopedics and fracture repair,
ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997, W.B. Saunders, pp 261-287.
7. Sturgeon C. Triceps tenotomy and double plating of canine humeral condyle fractures. Vet Comp Orthop
Traumato1 13:34-38, 2000
66. FRACTURES OF THE RADIUS AND ULNA
Ioseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1.How common are radial and ulnar fractures?
Estimates range from 8% to 18% of all fractures in dogs and cats
2. What are some important anatomic considerations for repair of radial and ulnar
fractures?
· The radius is the major weight-bearing bone of the forearm and is more frequently
repaired than ulnar fractures.
· Open injuries occur frequently because of paucity of soft tissue (muscle) coverage in the
mid and distal aspects of the bones.
·● Fractures in the distal third of the radius heal poorly in small dogs.
is the compression side.
· Limb shortening and angulation can occur secondary to proximal or distal physeal
trauma.
fractures?
· A hanging limb preparation permits ease in application of external fixators and promotes
alignment.
· Dorsal recumbency and pulling the limb caudally provides medial and lateral access to
the bones.
 on yoeoidde pesiop e apiaoid unus pue pey sun yo jodns pue ouequnoi penuea -
bones with reduced technical assistance required.
 4. Name some indications for repair of ulnar fractures.
· Fractures of the olecranon
· Monteggia lesions
252
Fractures of The Radius and Utna
·Styloid fractures and avulsions.
5.  Which orthopedic principle forms the basis for repair of olecranon and styloid fractures?
Tension band stabilization with pins, screws, or wires to counteract the distractive forces of
the triceps muscle proximally or lateral collateral ligament distally.
6. What is a Monteggia lesion?
head; first described in people in I814 by Monteggia, an Italian surgeon.
7. How is a Monteggia fracture-dislocation treated?
The ulnar fracture can be repaired with intramedullary pins, cerclage or figure-8 wires, and
bone plate and screws. The radial head dislocation is stabilized with annular ligament repair o1
transfixation to the ulna with pins, screw, or wire.
8. If necessary, how are ulnar shaft fractures treated?
Intramedullary pin, or bone plate and screws (large dogs) applied caudolaterally.
9. How are radial shaft fractures treated?
      g n    g s
(provide only caudal support) are not recommended.
· Bone plate and screws applied in a neutral, compression, or buttress fashion along with
cancellous bone grafting.
· Alternatively, biologic osteosynthesis using external skeletal fixation with minimal
surgical invasiveness and cancellous grafting.
10. How are plates applied to mid or distal radial diaphyseal fractures?
Traditionally, plates are applied to the cranial (tension) surface after a craniomedial or dorsal
surgical approach. Medial plate application has been used successfully because of thick medio
lateral bone diameter, use of more screws placed per fragment, avoidance of extensor tendons,
and biomechanical stability
11.  Why are fractures of the distal aspect of the radius and ulna in small dogs predisposed
to the high complication rates of inadequate bone healing (nonunion and delayed union)?
·Biomechanical instability of fracture site
·Decreased intraosseous vascular supply
· Reduced soft tissue coverage and extraosseous blood supply
· Persistent cartilage forrmation at the fracture site
·Weak implant holding capabilities of the bones
· Excessive periosseous dissection during surgery
·Reduced stimulation of osteogenesis because of limited weight-bearing by patients
        s     
attached to through-and-through pins) and Ib (unilateral, biplanar) are the most popular.
13. What option should be considered for fixation of proximal and distal metaphyseal
radial fractures?
Hooked or T plates for internal fixation; temporary transarticular fixation with skeletal fixa
tors, including stabilization of the ulna proximally. Cross pins, cerclage wire, and casting or Rush
253
pinning have been less frequently described for distal shaft and metaphyseal injuries. Experi-
1.6-mm Kirschner wires).
14.  Which external fixator pins are useful for treatment of radial fractures in small dogs?
Acrylic or miniature external fixator pins; these are small (1-2 mm shank diameter), double
trocar pins with a threaded end and a central roughened area to enhance acrylic gripping.
15. Limb disuse after external fixation or splinting of radial and ulnar fractures in small
dogs produces what radiographic features?
Osteopenia (disuse atrophy) of the distal ulna and, possibly, the carpal and metacarpal
bones.
CONTROVERSIES
16. Which fixation method, internal with a bone plate and screws or external with a
skeletal fixator, is preferred for treatment of radial fractures?
The answer may be more related to clinical experience, opinion, and prejudice than
scientific data. Plates require more extensive dissection, provide immediate stability, do not
Tequire extensive postoperative management, can induce osteopema from stress protection, can
conduct cold environmental temperatures, and require a second surgery for removal.
External skeletal fixation provides less rigid stability, is more biologic for healing, is less
and requires more intensive postoperative care.
Costs between ex ternal and internal fix ation may be similar.
17. Is intramedullary pinning of radial fractures an acceptable treatment option?
 Intramedullary pinning of radial fractures has consistently been associated with more com-
plications in healing than either bone plating or external skeletal fixation. Causes of failure
Many practitioners persist in using this technique. Few references to support the procedure are
documented in the veterinary literature.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Binnington AG, Miller CW: Fractures of the radius and ulna. In Brinker AO, Olmstead ML, editors: Manuat of
internat fxation in small animats, ed 2, Berlin, 1998, Springer, pp 142-148.
2. Larsen LJ, Roush JK: Bone plate fixation of distal radius and ulna fractures in small and miniature breed dogs. J
Amm Anim Hosp Assoc 35:243-250, 1999.
3. Linn LL, Rochat MC: Extraction resistance of 2.7 mm mediolateral screws compared to 2.7 mm and 3.5 mm
craniocaudal screws in canine cadaver radii. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 14:1-6, 2001.
4. Muir PM: Distal antebrachial fractures in toy-breed dogs. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 19:137-145, 1997.
5. Piemnattei DL, Flo GL: Handbook of small animal orthopedics, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997, W.B. Saunders, pp 321
343.
6. Sardinas J, Montavon PMI: Use of a medial bone plate for repair of radius and ulna fractures in dogs and cats. Vet
Surg 26:108-113, 1997.
 7. Schwarz PD, Schrader SC: Ulnar fracture and dislocation of the proximal radlial epiphysis (Monteggia lesion) in
the dog and cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc 185:190-194, 1984
8. Thomson MJ, Read RA: Comparative strengths of orthopaedic staples versus a 2.7 mm T plate in the stabilization
of distal radial osteotomies. Vet Comp Orthop Traumato1 11:100-104, 1998.
67. TRAUMATIC INIURIES OF THE CARPUS AND
METACARPUS
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the carpus?
A compound joint composed of seven bones arranged in two transverse rows, plus a small
medial sesamoid bone.
2. Where is the greatest joint movement in the carpus?
The antebrachiocarpal joint.
3. What are common injuries of the forepaw?
· Traumatic luxations or subluxations
·Hyperextension
· Shearing lesions
· Fractures involving the numerous bones and joints of the region
4. List diagnostic tests that are useful in delineating the location and severity of the injury.
·Physical examination to determine the degree of weight-bearing
· Palpation to evaluate dorsal/palmar and medial/lateral instabilities
· Stressed lateral and oblique radiographic projections to examine joint stability (including
position of accessory carpal bone), fractures, and periosteal reactions
 5. What problems of forepaw surgery should be addressed and managed to reduce
complications?
 Decreased visibility and increased operative time can occur secondary to constant hemorth-
age from highly traumatized vascularized tissues; a forelimb tourniquet is useful in reducing
blood flow.
Postoperative swelling secondary to the injury and surgery affecting lymphatic and yenous
drainage can be controlled by heavily padded limb bandages for 24-72 hours, before application
of casts or splints.
6. How should a tourniquet be applied?
Ideally, exsanguination of the limb by elevation or an Esmarch bandage should be performed for
5 minutes before application of a pneumatic cuff proximally with pressures not exceeding lo0 mm Hg
above systolic pressure for less than 3 hours.
Realistically, sterilized elastic bandage is tightly applied to the forelimb for 60-90 minutes,
and incisions are made through the bandage. Although controversial, some surgeons recommend
concurrent intravenous corticosteroid medication (e.g., methylprednisolone, prednisolone sodium
and subsequent edema all related to the initial trauma, surgery, or tourniquet.
7. What is an Esmarch bandage?
Named after a German surgeon (Johann Friedrich August von Esmarch, 1823-1908) and
originally composed of rubber tubing, it is now a circumferential wrap of the distal aspect of the
TraumaticInjuries of The Carpus and Metacarpus
255
8. Which ligamentous injuries occur most frequently in the carpus?
INSTABILITY
LESION
Lateral subluxation of radiocarpal joint
Tearing of medial (radial) collateral ligament
Dorsomedial middle carpal joint
Tearing of dorsomedial ligaments and joint
sublux ation
soimonns Sunioddns reujed pue sojnsdeo
Hyperextension of the carpus
Tearing of palmar ligaments and fibrocartilage
9. How are ligament sprains classified?
· First degree—mild injury; minimal pathology; treatment not usually necessary
· Second degree—moderate injury; damaged fibers and hematoma present; external
splintage required
· Third degree—severe injury; interstitial disruption or bone avulsion; surgical stabilization
required
10. What is a common clinical feature of carpal hyperextension or palmar carpal breakdown?
Plantigrade stance following a history of falling or jumping
11. Which joint space is most frequently affected in hyperextension injury?
Carpometacarpal or middle carpal (both reported).
12. What surgical treatments are recommended for palmar carpal breakdown?
Pancarpal or partial carpal arthrodesis of the middle and distal joints, with bone plates,
debridement, autogenous cancellous bone grafting, and external supports are mandatory.
13. Which carpal bones are most frequently fractured and treated surgically?
· Radiocarpal chip or slab fractures associated with jumps or falls in athletic dogs
· Accessory carpal bone fractures in racing greyhounds
14. What are some characteristics of accessory carpal bone fractures in greyhounds?
· Strain-avulsion fractures associated with ligamentous or tendinous attachments and
classified type I (most common) through V based on location of the fracture.
· Most frequently identified in the right carpus and associated with stresses of racing in a
counterclockwise direction.
15. How are these injuries usually treated to obtain performance levels similar to the
pretrauma state?
Open reduction and stabilization with bone screws.
16. Discuss the usual treatment of shearing injuries of the carpus.
Most frequently, the medial aspect of the joints is affected and necessitates stabilization
debridement and open wound management of contaminated lesions, synthetic collateral suture
may take 1-3 months, including multiple rechecks.
patients, in cases of failed stabilization, or because of financial constraints of the owner.
256
TraumaticInjuries of The Carpus and Metacarpus
17. When is internal fixation with small pins or bone plate and screws recommended for
treatment of metacarpal fractures?
· Fractures of the weight-bearing digits (metacarpals IlI and IV)
·Fractures of all four metacarpal bones
· Single bone (large) fractures in performance animals
 Internal fixation with plates improves axial alignment of the bones more than pin fixation or
external coaptation do; because progressive healing occurs with all stabilization methods, the
displaced or malaligned lesions. Third metacarpal bone fractures have been described with dor-
ery occurred without the need for surgery.
18. Which sesamoids have been reportedly associated with clinically significant fractures?
The second and seventh proximal sesamoids in racing greyhounds and young rottweilers.
19. What is the treatment for these fractures involving carpal laxity sesamoids?
Surgical excision.
20. Nontraumatic carpal laxity syndrome has been described in which breeds?
· Immature German shepherds, Great Danes
· Doberman pinschers
21. What is the treatment for nontraumatic carpal laxity syndrome?
animals recover within I-2 months.
proximal aspect of the radial styloid process?
Unknown. Historical evidence of trauma, localized pain, and joint instability are inconsis-
CONTROVERSIES
23. Should injuries of the middle and distal carpal joints be treated with pancarpal or
partial arthrodesis?
 Panarthrodesis produces highly satisfactory clinical results with most dogs having improved
pl ating equipment is required.
not require a bone plate and screws, and maintains the integrity and motion of the radiocarpal
joint preserving normal limb function; conversely, unrecognized lesions (chronic or acute) of the
radiocarpal joint and the theoretical possibility of increased stress, as a result of fusion of the
middle and distal joints, may cause subsequent proximal joint breakdown and necessitate
panarthrodesis.
24. Where should a plate be applied for pancarpal arthrodesis?
Technically and ideally, plate application should be performed on the palmar or tension side
because of reduced neurovascular and tendon structures. In this latter instance, external support
(splints, casts) is mandatory for 2-4 months, until bone healing is apparent clinically and
radiographically.
Pelvic Fractures
257
25. When should arthrodesis be performed for severe carpal shearing injuries?
Traditionally, treatments have focused on soft-tissue injuries and temporary stabilization of
joints. A recent study described excellent clinical results using immediate arthrodesis with
 trans articul ar ex ternal fi xation.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Benson JA, Boudrieau RI: Severe carpal and tarsal injuries treated with immediate arthrodesis. I Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 38:370-380, 2002
 2. Guilliard MJ: Enthesiopathy of the short radial collateral ligaments in racing greyhounds. J Small Anim Pract
39:227-230, 1998.
3. Johnson KA: Carpal injuries. In Bloomberg MS, Dee JIF, editors: Canine sports medicine and surgery, ed 1,
Philadelphia, 1998, W.B. Saunders, pp 100-119.
4. Muir P, Norris JL: Metacarpal and metatarsal fractures in dogs. J Sm Anim Pract 38:344-348, 1997.
5. Piemattei DL, Flo GL: Handbook of smatt aninat orthopedics, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997, W.B. Saunders, pp 344.
394.
6. Whitelock RG, Dyce J: Metacarpal fractures associated with pancarpal arthrodesis in dogs. Vet Surg 28:25-30,
1999.
68. PELVIC FRACTURES
Iuan M. Marti, M.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the pelvis?
Ossa coxarum (ilium, ischium, pubis, and acetabulum), sacrum, and first caudal vertebrae.
2. How are fractures of the pelvis classified?
Based on location:
·Sacroiliac joint
·Ilium
·Acetabulum
·Ischium
●Pelvic symphysis/pubis
3. How common are pelvic fractures?
Approximately 20-30% of all fractures involve the pelvis.
4. When pelvic fractures and displacement occur, how many bones are affected?
The pelvis is similar to a rectangular box. For displacement to occur with pelvic fractures,
the pelvis must be broken in at least two places.
5. What other evaluations are performed on patients with pelvic fractures?
·Abdominal—bladder, urethra
·Thoracic—pulmonary and cardiac contusions, pneumothorax, rib fractures,
diaphragmatic hernias 
· Neurologic—-voluntary leg movement; deep pain perception; withdrawal reflex, patellat,
femoral, anal sphincter reflexes
· Other long bones and vertebrae—polytrauma
· Rectal palpation—canal compromise, perforations
Pelvic Fractures
257
25. When should arthrodesis be performed for severe carpal shearing injuries?
Traditionally, treatments have focused on soft-tissue injuries and temporary stabilization of
joints. A recent study described excellent clinical results using immediate arthrodesis with
 trans articul ar ex ternal fi xation.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Benson JA, Boudrieau RI: Severe carpal and tarsal injuries treated with immediate arthrodesis. I Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 38:370-380, 2002
 2. Guilliard MJ: Enthesiopathy of the short radial collateral ligaments in racing greyhounds. J Small Anim Pract
39:227-230, 1998.
3. Johnson KA: Carpal injuries. In Bloomberg MS, Dee JIF, editors: Canine sports medicine and surgery, ed 1,
Philadelphia, 1998, W.B. Saunders, pp 100-119.
4. Muir P, Norris JL: Metacarpal and metatarsal fractures in dogs. J Sm Anim Pract 38:344-348, 1997.
5. Piemattei DL, Flo GL: Handbook of smatt aninat orthopedics, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997, W.B. Saunders, pp 344.
394.
6. Whitelock RG, Dyce J: Metacarpal fractures associated with pancarpal arthrodesis in dogs. Vet Surg 28:25-30,
1999.
68. PELVIC FRACTURES
Iuan M. Marti, M.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the pelvis?
Ossa coxarum (ilium, ischium, pubis, and acetabulum), sacrum, and first caudal vertebrae.
2. How are fractures of the pelvis classified?
Based on location:
·Sacroiliac joint
·Ilium
·Acetabulum
·Ischium
●Pelvic symphysis/pubis
3. How common are pelvic fractures?
Approximately 20-30% of all fractures involve the pelvis.
4. When pelvic fractures and displacement occur, how many bones are affected?
The pelvis is similar to a rectangular box. For displacement to occur with pelvic fractures,
the pelvis must be broken in at least two places.
5. What other evaluations are performed on patients with pelvic fractures?
·Abdominal—bladder, urethra
·Thoracic—pulmonary and cardiac contusions, pneumothorax, rib fractures,
diaphragmatic hernias 
· Neurologic—-voluntary leg movement; deep pain perception; withdrawal reflex, patellat,
femoral, anal sphincter reflexes
· Other long bones and vertebrae—polytrauma
· Rectal palpation—canal compromise, perforations
258
Pelvic Fractures
6. What radiographic evaluations are necessary for proper diagnosis and treatment of
pelvic fractures?
Ventrodorsal, lateral, and oblique views. The oblique view is important in assessing
acetabular fractures.
 7. List some biologic and mechanical characteristics of pelvic fractures.
· Excellent healing resulting from periosseous vascularity and cancellous bone content
· Effective muscular support of bones
· Difficult reduction of fragments because of muscular contractions
·Transient nerve damage
· Difficult anatomic reduction and stabilization of small fragments
· Closed injuries most common
· Clinical recoveries usually within 4-6 weeks
· Implants not removed
+Low rates of infections
 8. Which pelvic fractures are considered nonsurgical?
· Fractures with little or no displacement and intact acetabula
· Fractures with minor disruption of pelvic ring continuity
·Fractures affecting non-weight-bearing structures (pubis, ischium)
9. How are nonsurgical pelvic fractures managed?
·Cage rest
·Limited activity
· Well-padded area
· Monitoring defecation and urination
· Sling support of the animal in rising and ambulation
10. List pelvic fractures that are considered surgical.
·Acetabular
· Disruption of the weight-bearing arch (sacroiliac joint, ilium, acetabulum)
· Markedly decreased size of pel vic canal
· Unstable hip segment
· Compromised sciatic nerve or urethra
11. When is the best time to repair pelvic fractures?
Within 3-4 days pending resolution of other more pressing, life-threatening problems (e.g., pulmonary
contusions, pneumothorax, traumaic myocarditis, hypovolemia, acid-base and electolyte disorders)
12. In repairing fractures, which areas of the pelvis are of major consideration?
·Sacroiliac joint
· Ilium
·Acetabulum
If these are reduced and stabilized, other bones often are realigned or have little effect on
weight-bearing.
13. What specific nerve injuries can occur with pelvic fractures?
· Sciatic—sacroiliac luxations, ilial shaft fractures, acetabular fractures, ischial fractures.
· Obturator—pubic fractures. Signs: no limb adduction.
·Pudendal/pelvic—sacral fractures. Signs: urinary/fecal incontinence.
Pelvic Fractures
259
14. When is reduction stabilization of fracture-dislocation of the sacroiliac joint
necessary?
· Unstable hemipelvis in medium and large dogs
· Inability to stand or ambulate in bilateral luxations
· Persistent pain and nerve deficits (a return to function may not occur after repair)
15. What approaches are recommended for the reduction and stabilization of the
sacroiliac joint?
· Dorsolateral—gluteal roll down, better visualization of sacrum.
·Ventrolateral—gluteal roll up, digital palpation of sacrum.
16. How are sacroiliac luxations stabilized?
Two-point fixation with pins and screws.
17. What are the most common problems associated with screw stabilization of sacroiliac
luxations?
Accurate reduction and placement of the screw is challenging because, in the average-size
dog, the area for purchase of the sacral body with a screw is about l cm. Common errors include
incomplete reduction and screw misplacement, including inadequate depth (<60% of sacral body
width).
18. List possible locations of misplaced screws in stabilization.
·Lumbar articular process
· Lumbosacral disk space
· Seventh lumbar vertebra
19. What fixation methods are useful for ilial shaft fractures?
+Pin and wire fixation for oblique fractures in small patients
20. What neurovascular structures are encountered when performing a lateral approach
(gluteal roll up) to the ilium?
· Lateral circumflex femoral artery and vein located just craniad to the acetabulum
· Cranial gluteal artery, vein, and nerve located mid way
·Iliolumbar artery and vein located at the caudal ilial spine
21. When can acetabular fractures be treated conservatively?
Acetabular fractures, especially in young animals, with no displacement on lateral and
ventrodorsal radiographs, can be treated with cage rest. Application of an Ehmer sling or a non-
ment of the fracture may occur; recheck radiographs should be performed early (<7 days) during
convalescence.
22. What approach is used to repair acetabular fractures?
· Dorsal approach via trochanteric osteotomy (Gorman approach)
· Dorsal approach via gluteal myotomies (limited exposure), or gluteal tenotomies
23. What two muscles are cut to permit better exposure to the posterior acetabulum and
ischium and used to retract the sciatic nerve?
External rotators—gemellus and internal obturator muscles.
260
Pelvic Fractures
24. What treatment is recommended for comminuted fractures of the acetabulum with
ventral coxofemoral luxation?
Femoral head and neck excision. Reconstruction of the acetabular weight-bearing surface is
usually unsuccessful, and ventromedial luxation recurs because of the damaged acetabular fossa
(collapse and failure of the medial wall of the acetabulum).
25. What fixation methods are best for stabilization of acetabular fractures?
rotation can be successful.Screw and wire fixation with polymethyl methacrylate has been
described.
26. What is the treatment of choice for acetabular fractures that cannot be reconstructed?
Femoral head and neck excision.
 27. When are pubic fractures managed surgically?
·Soft tissue impingement of the urethra.
· Tearing of the prepubic tendon and herniation of abdominal viscera
28. When are ischiatic fractures managed surgically?
Fracture and distal displacement of the ischiatic tuberosity (attachment of biceps femoris,
tension band fix ation using pins and a dorsal wire. Rarely necessary.
 29. How are pelvic malunions that cause compromise of the pelvic canal treated?
Carefully with:
· Pubic symphysiotomy and distraction with implants
·Ilial osteotomy
·Triple pelvic osteotomy
30. In cats with acquired pelvic stenosis secondary to trauma, what is the prognosis after
pelvic osteotomy?
Surgical widening is effective if obstipation and tenesmus are less than 6 months’ duration
and megacolon is not present.
CONTROVERSY
31. What is the treatment of choice for a caudal one-third acetabular fracture?
joint surface is intact, open reduction and stabilization may not be necessary for displaced seg-
ments. Others recommend stabilization of any acetabular fracture because of the high incidence
occurs after natural and surgical trauma to the joint.
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Bookbinder PF, Flanders JA: Characteristics of pelvic fractures in the cat. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 5:122-
127,1992
 2. Boudrieau RJ, Kleine LJ: Nonsurgically managed caudal acetabular fractures in dogs: 15 cases (1979-1984).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:701-705, 1988.
joint. Vet Surg 14:131, 1985.
4. Houlton J, Dyce J: Management of pelvic fractures in the dog and cat. Walthan Focus 4:17-25, 1994.
5. Hulse DA: Pelvic fractures—conservative and surgical management. Vet Med Rep 2:267-278, 1990.
261
6. Kuntz CA, Waldron D: Sacral fractures in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:142-150, 1995.
7. Lewis DD, Stubbs WP: Results of screw/wire/polymethylmethacrylate fixation of acetabular fractures. Vet Surg
26:223-234, 1997.
8.Piermattei DL,Flo GL:Brinker, Piermattei and Flo's handbook of small animat orthopedics and fracture
repair, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997, W.B. Saunders, pp 395-421.
9. Schrader SC: Pelvic osteotomy for obstipation in cats with acquired pelvic canal stenosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
200:208-209, 1992.
10. Tomlinson JL: Fractures of the pelvis. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia,
2003, W.B. Saunders pp. 1989-2001.
11. Verstraete FM, Lambrechts NE: Diagnosis of soft tissue injuries associated with pelvic fractures. Comp Contin
Educ Pract Vet 14:921-930, 1992.
69. FRACTURES OF THE FEMUR
Spencer A. Johnston, VM.D., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the capital physis?
The growth plate of the femoral head. It separates the neck from the epiphysis of the femoral
head.
2. In which dogs does fracture through the capital physis occur?
Young dogs (usually <10 months) in which the growth plate has not yet completely closed.
Once the dog is skeletally mature, fractures tend to occur through the femoral neck instead of the
closed physis.
3. Do capital physeal fractures occur in cats?
Traumatic injuries, similar to those in dogs, have been described. Recently, spontaneous
lesions in heavy, adult, neutered males have been reported.
4. When should these fractures be repaired?
this usually means within 3-5 days or earlier.
5.How are these fractures repaired?
Typically, by placing multiple (two to four) Kirschner wires from the femur into the capital
screw can be placed from the lateral aspect of the femur into the femoral head, perpendicular to
the growth plate. If a lag screw is used, an additional Kirschner wire can be placed to aid in pre-
venting rotation. Placement of a lag screw prevents further growth of the femoral neck, although
the growth potential from the capital physis is probably severely compromised by the initial
injury. In cats and small dogs, the amount of available bone for purchase by the implants is
limited. Because these patients typically do well with femoral head and neck excision, that proce-
dure is commonly chosen as the most practical method of treatment.
6.  Are these fractures difficult to repair?
be difficult to identify, particularly if the fracture is more than a few days old. The bone is soft in
this area and tends to lose identifying features if there is motion between the metaphysis and
capital physis. There is only a small amount of bone for purchase of implants into the epiphysis
261
6. Kuntz CA, Waldron D: Sacral fractures in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:142-150, 1995.
7. Lewis DD, Stubbs WP: Results of screw/wire/polymethylmethacrylate fixation of acetabular fractures. Vet Surg
26:223-234, 1997.
8.Piermattei DL,Flo GL:Brinker, Piermattei and Flo's handbook of small animat orthopedics and fracture
repair, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997, W.B. Saunders, pp 395-421.
9. Schrader SC: Pelvic osteotomy for obstipation in cats with acquired pelvic canal stenosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
200:208-209, 1992.
10. Tomlinson JL: Fractures of the pelvis. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia,
2003, W.B. Saunders pp. 1989-2001.
11. Verstraete FM, Lambrechts NE: Diagnosis of soft tissue injuries associated with pelvic fractures. Comp Contin
Educ Pract Vet 14:921-930, 1992.
69. FRACTURES OF THE FEMUR
Spencer A. Johnston, VM.D., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the capital physis?
The growth plate of the femoral head. It separates the neck from the epiphysis of the femoral
head.
2. In which dogs does fracture through the capital physis occur?
Young dogs (usually <10 months) in which the growth plate has not yet completely closed.
Once the dog is skeletally mature, fractures tend to occur through the femoral neck instead of the
closed physis.
3. Do capital physeal fractures occur in cats?
Traumatic injuries, similar to those in dogs, have been described. Recently, spontaneous
lesions in heavy, adult, neutered males have been reported.
4. When should these fractures be repaired?
this usually means within 3-5 days or earlier.
5.How are these fractures repaired?
Typically, by placing multiple (two to four) Kirschner wires from the femur into the capital
screw can be placed from the lateral aspect of the femur into the femoral head, perpendicular to
the growth plate. If a lag screw is used, an additional Kirschner wire can be placed to aid in pre-
venting rotation. Placement of a lag screw prevents further growth of the femoral neck, although
the growth potential from the capital physis is probably severely compromised by the initial
injury. In cats and small dogs, the amount of available bone for purchase by the implants is
limited. Because these patients typically do well with femoral head and neck excision, that proce-
dure is commonly chosen as the most practical method of treatment.
6.  Are these fractures difficult to repair?
be difficult to identify, particularly if the fracture is more than a few days old. The bone is soft in
this area and tends to lose identifying features if there is motion between the metaphysis and
capital physis. There is only a small amount of bone for purchase of implants into the epiphysis
262
Fractures of The Femur
7. What surgical approach is used?
A craniolateral approach to the hip provides satisfactory exposure. If additional exposure is
 8. What is the prognosis associated with this type of fracture?
Relatively good overall, although the prognosis is worse if the patient is less than 4 months old.
osteoarthritis in that joint. The radiographic appearance of these fractures a few weeks after
treatment typically demonstrates a unique remodeling of the femoral neck, called an apple cor6
appearance. This is due to increased vascularity to the femoral neck associated with healing. This
appearance is common and does not indicate failure of repair or future collapse of the femoral neck.
9. How do femoral neck fractures differ from capital physeal fractures?
The amount of bone available for repair. There is usually more bone available for purchase
by the implants in the case of a femoral neck fracture compared with a capital physeal fracture.
 The method of fixation is essentially the same (lag screw or multiple small pins). Screw fixation
 se s y s go usso sno oy u y  d s
stability of the repair. The greater amount of bone available for screw purchase also makes screw
application techmcally easier.
10. What approach is used to repair a midshaft femoral fracture?
Craniolateral approach most commonly. This allows exposure of the entire lateral aspect of
the femur. If it is necessary to expose the distal portion of the femur, a branch of the caudal
femoral artery needs to be identified and ligated.
11. What is the best way to repair a midshaft femoral fracture?
The location and configuration of the fracture, the degree of comminution, the size of the bone,
the forces that will be acting on the fracture repair (bending, rotation, shear, compression), the
degree of soft-tissue disruption, and the signalment of the patient must all be considered when
choosing a method of fixation. Plates provide the most stable repair, but this does not mean all
midshaft femoral fractures need to be plated. Pins and wire are satisfactory for oblique fractures if
the shaft can be reconstructed. Interlocking nails are an alternative to plates for comminuted frac-
pin. Pin-and-plate constructs are useful for treating highly comminuted diaphyseal fractures.
12. What is a pin-and-plate combination?
stability in the treatment of comminuted shaft fractures.
13. List the advantages of the pin-and-plate combination.
· Biomechanical stability and protection of implants (similar to interlocking nails and
screws or IM pins and external fixators)
· No need for fragmentary reconstructions (high strain) and soft-tissue dissections (reduced
surgery time)
or bicortical screws
·Biologic healing with callus formation
14.Discuss some common mistakes with internal fixation of a femoral fracture.
Misuse of IM pins and cerclage wire. For IM pins and cerclage wire to be used satisfactorily
as the sole method of treatment, the fracture must be able to be reconstructed so that the forces
FracturesofTheFemur
263
are not useful for transverse fractures, and use of a single IM pin for repair of a comminuted,
trans verse, or short oblique fracture may result in rotational instability, leading to nonunion. The
common mistakes with cerclage wire are insufficient size or improper application (number and
locations of wires) to counteract rotational forces; also the fractures may not be properly recon-
structed to allow transmission of forces across the fracture without disrupting the repair.
15. What is the landmark for introduction of an IM pin into the proximal aspect of the femur?
trochanter with the tip of the pin, then walking the pin off the medial aspect of the greater
trochanter. Care is taken to align the pin with the shaft of the bone before driving the pin distally.
Initial penetration of the proximal femur by the pin may be difficult, but once the medullary
cavity is entered, the pin should advance easily
16. When repairing a femoral fracture with pins, how much of the femoral shaft should be
occupied by the pin?
Because the femur is a curved bone that is wider proximally and distally and has an isthmus
in the midportion, it is not possible to fill the entire medullary cavity with pins. Instead the size
of the pins depends on the width of the isthmus, and this area should be filled to the greatest
degree. Although there were once concerns regarding disruption of the endosteal blood supply by
large implants, this can be reestablished quickly after trauma of pin placement, and, in the
interim, blood supply increases from periosteal and muscular sources. Filling the medullary
cavity provides strength to resist bending and shear forces. Because there is a natural curvature
to the femur, it may be easier to fill the shaft of the femur with multiple pins instead of one large
pin. Practically speaking, 80% or more of the medullary cavity should be filled at the isthmus.
17. How far distally should an IM pin be placed into the femur?
Because of the natural curvature of the canine femur, IM pins typically exit just proximal to
the femoral trochlea. If the fracture is overreduced (so that there is a gap at the caudad aspect of
the fracture site, effectively straightening the femur), an IM pin can be seated more deeply into a
condyle. It is important to maximize seating of the pin for fractures of the distal diaphysis. It is
less important to risk penetration of the articular surface if the fracture is in the midshaft or
proximal one third.
18. How can joint penetration be avoided or identified?
  g s se  s pe n y  go ns d n s
pin of identical length available and using these landmarks, an IM pin can be driven the appro-
priate distance without penetrating the joint. Once the pin is driven, the joint can also be extended
and flexed to determine if there is any crepitus (rubbing of the pin on articular cartilage). If there
Aiune lus e uod on nsoq sh nl 'uof sun oun ud sun jo uoenud supeai ngnop si
for direct visualization. The morbidity associated with arthrotomy is minimal compared with a
pin entening the joint and damaging the patella.
19. Should pins with threaded ends be used to increase holding power and prevent migration?
No. Because IM pins are seated in cancellous bone, a threaded pin does not provide any
threaded pins is breakage at the pin-thread junction.
20. To which side of the femur should a bone plate be applied?
Typically, to the lateral aspect because this is the tension side and has less overlying muscu-
lature and neurovascular elements than other regions of the bone
264
21. Discuss problems associated with applying external fixators.
There is a tendency for soft-tissue irritation at the pin insertion sites because of muscle pene
tration, trauma from injury, and motion around the pins, particularly near the stifle. Also, to avoid
the soft tissues, the clamps and connecting bar are placed relatively far from the axis of the bone,
a biomechanical disadvantage. Problems with soft-tissue morbidity and weak constructs can be
avoided by using new SK fixators, which are stronger than traditional KE fixators
22. Can a femur fracture be repaired with a cast?
No. One of the principles of casting is to immobilize the joint above and below the fracture.
This cannot be done effectively for a long enough period of time with a cast, even if it is placed
in a spica (up and over the body) fashion.
23. Can a fracture of the distal femoral growth plate be treated with a Robert Jones
bandage?
any femoral fracture. The bandage tends to make the leg act as a fulcrum so that it bends at the
fracture site. Attempted treatment in this manner is not effective and results in malalignment; the
delay in repair makes internal fixation more difficult and the development of quadriceps contrac
ture more li kely.
24. How should fractures of the distal femur be treated?
   d        x  
into the distal fragment, across the fracture line, and bouncing off the opposite cortex). Use of
reconstruction plates has also been described for repair of these fractures.
25. Are these Salter-Harris I or II fractures?
They tend to be Salter-Harris II fractures in dogs and Salter-Harris I fractures in cats. This
difference is due to the amount of undulation of the growth plate in each species. Dogs have a
without including some of the metaphysis.
26. Does it matter if it is a Salter-Harris I or II fracture?
Not clinically; only in rounds or examinations.
27.  To which side (metaphyseal or epiphyseal) are the cells with growth potential attached?
Phy seal fractures as originally described by Salter and Harris were thought to occur between
the hypertrophic zone and the zone of provisional calcification. Growth potential remains with
the epiphyseal fragment, and this surface should not be disrupted during repair. One study of
naturally occurring physeal fractures in dogs suggests that more severe disruption of the physis
actually occurs, limiting growth potential after fracture repair.
28. Discuss complications with fractures of the distal femur.
Because the fracture occurs through the growth plate, the potential for loss of bone growth
exists, although shortening of the limb does not seem to be a common problem. A more serious
complication is the development of fracture disease (quadriceps contracture), in which fibrous
change of the quadriceps mechanism eventually results in an inability to flex the stifle. This typi-
cally occurs within 1 month of fracture repair.
29. How can quadriceps contracture be prevented?
 It is always difficult to predict which patients will develop this devastating complication, and
specific recommendations for prevention are difficult to make. Minimal disruption of muscle
Fractures ofThe Femur
265
of-motion exercises to help maintain joint and muscle pliability are beneficial. Avoiding immo-
bilization of the stifle after fracture of the distal femur is prudent, although some surgeons prefer
temporary early postoperative splintage of the joint in flexion to overcome extensor nigdity.
 30. Can internal fixation be combined with external coaptation (spica bandage or a
Schroeder-Thomas splint) for treatment of a femur fracture?
Only if you want to treat quadriceps contracture.
CONTROVERSIES
31. Should anatomic reconstruction be the goal of all femoral fracture repairs?
Anatomic reconstruction is important for articular fracture repair. For shaft fractures, current
concepts of fracture repair suggest that the entire fracture environment must be considered during
repair and that there is frequently a trade-off between disruption of vascular supply and obtaining
rigid fixation. If satisfactory stability can be obtained with a treatment (interlocking nails, exter
nal fixators, buttress plates, pin-and-plate combinations) providing minimal disturbance of the
fracture environment, it may be preferred to obtaining anatomic alignment and reduction at the
expense of disrupting the fracture environment. Some surgeons use anatomic reconstruction for
noncomminuted lesions wherein cortical realignment for load sharing can be obtained, whereas
comminuted fractures are treated biologically with minimal dissection or implantation at the
fracture sites. Elastic osteosynthesis using cuttable plates and few screws in young dogs with
femoral shaft fractures has also been described.
32. When using IM pins to repair a long oblique midshaft femoral fracture, should the
pins be placed in a normograde or retrograde fashion?
According to some surgeons, normograde (starting from the proximal end of the bone and
driven distally). Pins started at the fracture site and retrograded proximally can exit from or near
the femoral head, are difficult to cut because of location, and can impinge on the sciatic nerve
Others believe that during retrograde pinning, adduction of the proximal segment and placement
in the caudomedial aspect of the femoral canal avoids proximal bone and joint problems.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Cabassu JP: Elastic plate osteosynthesis of femoral shaft fractures in young dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
14:40-45, 2001.
2. Chico AC: Trochlear femoral fractures in cats. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 14:51-55, 2001.
3. Dueland RT, Johnson KA, Roe SC: Interlocking nail reatment of diaphyseal long-bone fractures in dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 214:59-66, 1999.
4. Gibson KL, van Ee RT, Pechman RD: Femmoral capital physeal fractures in dogs: 34 cases (1979-1989). I Am Vet
Med Assoc 198:886-890, 1991.
5. Lorinson D, Millis DL, Bright RM: Determination of safe depth of pin penetration for repair of distal fenoral
physeal fractures in inmmature dogs: A comparison of nomograde and retrograde pin placement. Vet Surg 26:467-
471, 1997.
6. McNicholas WT: Spontaneous femoral capital physeal fractures in adult cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:1731-
1736,2002
7.Piemattei DL,Flo GL: Brinker, Piermattei,and Fto's handbook of smalt animat orthopedics and fracture repair
ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997, W.B. Saunders, pp 469-515.
70. FRACTURES OF THE TIBIA AND FIBULA
Ioseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. How common are tibial fractures?
10-20% of all fractures in dogs and cats.
2. What are the causes of tibial fractures?
·Vehicular trauma
· Gunshot injuries
·Falls
·Fights
 3. List the most common types of tibial fractures.
· Closed diaphyseal spiral
· Closed diaphyseal oblique
4. What are some important anatomic considerations for repair of tibia and fibula
fractures?
· Surgical treatments are usually restricted to the tibia because it is the main weight-bearing
bone, and fibular fractures often become realigned after reduction of the tibial lesion.
· The main vascular supply is the caudal tibial artery located at the caudolateral proximal
third of bone.
· A generous amount of intramedullary vascularity, proximal cancellous bone, and a
periosseous muscular envelope contribute to progressive fracture healing.
· Despite tissue paucity distally, delayed healing of distal fractures is not common com-
pared with radial fractures in small dogs.
· The medial approach to the tibial shaft is most frequently used for repair of diaphyseal or
metaphyseal fractures.
· Although tensile forces have been recorded along the cranial and lateral aspects of the
bone, external fixators and bone plates have been traditionally applied to the medial bone
surface.
· The proximal growth plates contribute 40% to bone length, and the distal growth plates
contribute 60%.
 5. Which postinjury and surgery protocol is extremely useful in reducing soft-tissue
swelling and providing bone and limb support for tibial fractures?
Application of a Robert Jones bandage.
 6. Which proximal tibial injuries can occur frequently in immature patients?
[n peuixoid sun jo uogeiedes-inoy pue (sistydode) Aisonegm leign su jo uoisina
physis.
 7. How are these apophyseal and physeal injuries repaired?
The tibial tuberosity is stabilized with pins and figure-8 wire or bone screw using the tension
band technique to counteract the distractive bones of the patellar tendon. Physeal separations are
stabi lized with angled cross pins.
Fractures of The Tibia and Fibula
267
8. What is an apophysis?
A traction physis that is the site of origin or insertion of muscle groups; it contributes to bone
shape and not longitudinal growth. The name is derived from the Greek apo (from) and pausis
(growth) (i.e., an offshoot or growth from the bone).
9. How are diaphyseal fractures treated?
TREATMENT OPTIONS
REASONING
 Closed repair
Incomplete, interlocking, aligned, or highly comminuted
fractures in young patients. Natural, biologic repair
Open repair
Minimal dissection only (to preserve tissues, vascularity)
for grafting, realigning major fragments, pin
placement. Wide dissection for application of bone
plates for stability
External skeletal fixation
Minimal surgical invasiveness, staged disassembly,
 postoperative care important, various frames
Intramedullary IM pin
Normograde pinning, axial alignment, combined with
fixator or wires, or bone plate
Interlocking nail
Special instrumentation, stable, less dissection than plate
Bone plating
 Extensive dissection, stable, early recovery, minimal
postoperative care, complications necessitate second
surgery; useful when combined with pin
Kirschner and cerclage wires
Ancillary devices, placement errors lead to complications
with healing
10.  List the factors on which decision making regarding fracture treatment is based.
· Nature of the injury (patient-fracture assessment score)
· Clinical expertise or prejudice of the surgeon
· Postoperative environment
· Owner's finances
11. What are advantages of autogenous, cancellous grafting during repair of tibial
diaphyseal fractures?
Enhancement of fracture healing by osteoinduction, osteoconduction, and osteogenesis
12. What is an alternative to a fresh, autogenous cancellous graft?
Commercially prepared demineralized bone matrix containing bone morphogenetic proteins
13. What is biologic osteosynthesis?
A more normal (biologic) repair of comminuted fractures characterized by minimal dissec-
tion to preserve tissues and vascularity; stabilization (external fixator, pin/plate combo, or inter-
locking nail) avoids central comminutions and laborious anatomic reconstruction (bone plate,
screws, pins, and wires).
14. What is a clamp-on-plate?
A small (3-4 mm length) plate with two pairs of crimp arms that encircle a long bone already
aligned with an IM pin. They require minimal dissection and provide less stability than standard
plates.
268
Fractures ofThe Tibia and Fibula
15. Which important neurovascular elements need to be preserved during a medial
approach to the tibial diaphysis?
· Cranial branch of the medial artery and vein
·Saphenous nerve
16. Which fibular fractures require stabilization?
Proximal (head) and distal (lateral malleolus) fractures involving attachment sites of lateral
collateral ligaments and causing varus instabilities.
17. How are these fractures repaired?
Following the tension band principle with the use of pins and figure-8 wires or screws to
counteract the distractive forces of the lateral collateral ligaments.
18.  How are proximal and distal tibial metaphyseal fractures repaired?
·T plates
· Rush pins
· Static or dynamic cross pins
19. How are distal tibial physeal fractures repaired?
With the placement of cross pins retrograde through the medial and lateral malleoli.
20. What is a useful preoperative and intraoperative protocol for application of an
external fixator to an injured tibia?
Use of a hanging limb preparation—attachment of the paw to an intravenous stand or ceiling
hook while the patient is placed in dorsal recumbency and the table lowered to produce a 2- to
4-cm gap between the table surface and body.
21. List the advantages of the hanging limb preparation.
· Limb alignment and parallelism of proximal and distal joints
· Circumferential access to the bone
· Lack of manual assistance required to stabilize or support the limb
· Reduction of muscular contraction
 22. In which breed of dogs have spontaneously occurring distal tibial articular fractures
been described?
Racing greyhounds; open anatomic reduction and rigid screw fixation were performed,
although few dogs returned to racing.
23. What are some general healing rates for tibial fractures?
TYPE OF FRACTURE
HEALING TIME (MO)
Phy seal fractures
1
Diaphyseal fractures treated with
Casts
1
Pins and wires
1-2
External fix ator
2-3
Bone plate and screws
2-4
 NOTE: Variably based on the nature of injury, patient age, and method of fixation
TraumaticInjuries ofThe Tarsus and Metatarsus
269
24. What are some trends in healing rates of tibial fractures?
Closed wounds or closed reductions were associated with shorter healing rates compared
CONTROVERSY
25. How should an IM pin be placed for repair of a tibial diaphyseal fracture?
Normograde, in a slightly caudolateral direction, medial to the patellar tendon midway along
ligament, medial meniscus, femoral condyle, and joint capsule.
Less frequently described options:
· Craniomedially directed retrograde pins seated below the articular surface
· IM pin exiting (retrograde pinning) or entering (normograde pinning) the cranial border
of the tibial tuberosity
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Coetzee GL: Long bone fracture fixation with an intramedullary pin and C-clamp-on plate in dogs. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatol 12:26-32, 1999.
 2. Dudley M, Johnson AL: Open reduction and bone plate stabilization, compared with closed reduction and
1997.
3. Dueland RT, Johnson KA: Interlocking nail treatment of diaphyseal long-bone fractures in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 214:59-66, 1999.
4. Harari J, Seguin B: Closed repair of tibial and radial fractures with extemal skeletal fixation. Commp Cont Educ
Pract Vet 18:651-665, 1996.
 5. Pardo AD: Relationship of tibial intramedullary pins to canine stifle joint structures: a comparison of nomograde
and retrograde insertion. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:369-374, 1994.
6. Piemattei DL, Flow GL: Handbook of small animat orthopedics, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997, W.B. Saunders, pp
581-606
7. Pratt JIN: Avulsion of the tibial tuberosity and separation of the proximal physis in 7 dogs. Vet Rec 149:352-356,
2001
71. TRAUMATIC INIURIES OF THE TARSUS AND
METATARSUS
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the tarsus?
by collateral ligaments, intertarsal ligaments, plantar ligaments, and fibrocartilage.
2. What are the components of the collateral ligaments?
The long part of the medial collateral ligament originates on the medial malleolus and firmly
attaches to the first and central tarsal bones. The short parts run under the long section and attach
caudally to the talus and the first tarsal and metatarsal bones. The long part of the lateral collateral
ligament passes from the lateral malleolus to the base of the fifth metatarsal and attaches, along
its course, to the calcaneus and fourth tarsal bone. The underlying short parts attach to the tuber
calcaneus and talus.
TraumaticInjuries ofThe Tarsus and Metatarsus
269
24. What are some trends in healing rates of tibial fractures?
Closed wounds or closed reductions were associated with shorter healing rates compared
CONTROVERSY
25. How should an IM pin be placed for repair of a tibial diaphyseal fracture?
Normograde, in a slightly caudolateral direction, medial to the patellar tendon midway along
ligament, medial meniscus, femoral condyle, and joint capsule.
Less frequently described options:
· Craniomedially directed retrograde pins seated below the articular surface
· IM pin exiting (retrograde pinning) or entering (normograde pinning) the cranial border
of the tibial tuberosity
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Coetzee GL: Long bone fracture fixation with an intramedullary pin and C-clamp-on plate in dogs. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatol 12:26-32, 1999.
 2. Dudley M, Johnson AL: Open reduction and bone plate stabilization, compared with closed reduction and
1997.
3. Dueland RT, Johnson KA: Interlocking nail treatment of diaphyseal long-bone fractures in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 214:59-66, 1999.
4. Harari J, Seguin B: Closed repair of tibial and radial fractures with extemal skeletal fixation. Commp Cont Educ
Pract Vet 18:651-665, 1996.
 5. Pardo AD: Relationship of tibial intramedullary pins to canine stifle joint structures: a comparison of nomograde
and retrograde insertion. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:369-374, 1994.
6. Piemattei DL, Flow GL: Handbook of small animat orthopedics, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997, W.B. Saunders, pp
581-606
7. Pratt JIN: Avulsion of the tibial tuberosity and separation of the proximal physis in 7 dogs. Vet Rec 149:352-356,
2001
71. TRAUMATIC INIURIES OF THE TARSUS AND
METATARSUS
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the tarsus?
by collateral ligaments, intertarsal ligaments, plantar ligaments, and fibrocartilage.
2. What are the components of the collateral ligaments?
The long part of the medial collateral ligament originates on the medial malleolus and firmly
attaches to the first and central tarsal bones. The short parts run under the long section and attach
caudally to the talus and the first tarsal and metatarsal bones. The long part of the lateral collateral
ligament passes from the lateral malleolus to the base of the fifth metatarsal and attaches, along
its course, to the calcaneus and fourth tarsal bone. The underlying short parts attach to the tuber
calcaneus and talus.
270
Traumatic Injuries of The Tarsus and Metatarsus
Fibul
Tibia
Talocalcaneal
joint
Tarsocrura!,
nau
talocrural, or
tibiotarsal joint
Talus
Calcaneoquarta!
Talocalcaneocentra!
joint
Central
joint
T4
tarsal bone
T3T2T1
Tarsometatarsal
MT5MT4MT3MT2
Figure 7 1-1  Relationships of bones and joints in the canine hock.
3. What are the functions of these components?
1. The long parts stabilize the joint in ex tension.
 2. The short parts stabilize the joint in extension and flexion.
4. What are the most common injuries of the tarsus?
 Traumatic luxations and subluxations of one or several joints, bone fractures, and shearing
wounds.
 5. List the diagnostic procedures useful in determining the nature of a tarsal injury.
· Physical examination of gait during weight-bearing
·Palpation to detect instability
· Oblique and stressed radiographs to identify fractures and instabilities
6.
 Which surgical protocol is useful in reducing intraoperative hemorrhage and surgical
time during surgery of the tarsus?
Use of a tourniquet.
 7. Which joint of the tarsus is responsible for the greatest degree of movement?
Talocrural joint (also called tarsocrural or tibiotarsal joint).
8.  Tarsocrural luxation is often associated with which lesions?
·Rupture of collateral ligaments
· Joint capsule tearing
· Fractures of the malleoli
9. How are collateral ligament instabilities treated?
pattern under screws and washers, through bone tunnels, or with bone anchors. Placement follows
the origins and insertions of short and long components of the collateral ligaments.
TraumaticInjuries of The Tarsus and Metatarsus
271
10.For tarsocrural arthrodesis, what is the dorsal angle for stabilization of the joint?
In general, the hock angle of the contralateral (normal) limb is the best example to follow
· For dogs, 135°
·For cats, 120°
11. How is tarsocrural arthrodesis performed?
Bone screws, multiple pins, bone plate, or external skeletal fixation. In all cases, cancellous
bone graft, cartilage debridement, and external support should be used.
12. What are the clinical results of pantarsal arthrodesis?
· Pantarsal arthrodesis with a dorsally applied plate provides the greatest stability to the
limb for return of near-normal function.
· Implant failures are common.
· Incomplete bone fusion of the middle and distal joints may be apparent radiographically
13. Which surgical protocol is useful when applying a bone plate dorsally on the compres-
sion side of the tarsus during panarthrodesis?
Tibiotarsal pinning (IM) to protect the plate.
14. In comparing the biomechanical properties of an acrylic versus metal external fixator
for hock arthrodesis, which findings are noted?
The acrylic external fixator is biomechanically comparable to the stainless steel external
ing joint angles.
15. Name the most common shearing injury of limbs.
Medial aspect of the tarsometatarsal area.
16. With shearing injuries of the medial tarsus, which technique, prosthetic collateral liga-
ment placement or transarticular external fixation, is superior with regard to patient
recovery?
 Neither of the techniques is better in terms of healing rates, regaining limb function, or final
clinical outcome.Both treatments produce nearly 75% excellent or good recovery rates within 2-
3 months.
17. Which joint spaces make up the proximal intertarsal joint?
Laterally the calcaneoquartal and medially the talocalcaneocentral joint spaces.
18. Which breeds are predisposed to proximal intertarsal luxation or subluxation?
The Shetland sheepdog and the collie.
19. How is calcaneoquartal arthrodesis performed?
A laterally applied bone plate or tension band wire technique.
20.  How is a talocalcaneal luxation treated?
A bone screw placed from talus to calcaneus.
21. Which treatment is recommended for tarsometatarsal luxation or subluxation?
Arthrodesis with pins or a laterally applied bone plate
272
Traumatic Injuries of The Tarsus and Metatarsus
22. What are important characteristics of tarsal injuries in cats?
· The degree of soft-tissue trauma greatly influences final clinical outcome.
· Collateral ligament and intertarsal injuries can be easily treated.
recoveries using early stabilization and patient mobilization
·Talar neck fractures can be successfully treated with traction and closed external fixation.
23. Which bones of the tarsus are frequently fractured?
The calcaneus and the central tarsal bone.
24. Which breed most frequently sustains tarsal fractures?
Greyhound
25. Which principle must be critically followed during repair of calcaneal fractures?
The tension band principle must be used to counteract the distractive forces of the common
calcaneal tendon (Achilles’ tendon); implants used can be pins and figure-8 orthopedic wire or a
are also useful in promoting bone healing.
26. What is the Achilles' tendon?
The confluence of structures attaching to the tuber calcanei, including the tendons of the
gastrocnemius muscle, superficial digital flexor muscle, biceps femoris muscle, semitendinosus
muscle, and gracilis muscle.
27. How are central tarsal bone fractures treated?
Internal repair with bone screws is recommended based on the grade (I-V) or severity of
injury (available bone stock). Highly comminuted fractures are externally coapted. Synthetic
(titanium) replacement has also been descnbed.
28. Which is the most common type of central tarsal bone fractures in racing greyhounds?
Type IV fracture, composed of dorsal and medial slabs.
29. In racing greyhounds, which hindlimbs have the highest incidence of distal paw
fractures?
Fractures of the right tarsus (central bone) and the third metatarsal; these have been related
to stresses from multiple turns, racing counterclockwise on circular or elliptical tracks.
30. What orthopedics principles are useful for treating metatarsal fractures?
e (saop slien) sugeid suog pue suuuid Aiennpuenui 'sanmoey jedieoeeu on reius -
reserved for multiple (three or more bones), displaced, or weight-bearing (third and fourth
metatarsal) bone fractures.
· Fractures of the lateral or medial bones proximally should be stabilized if valgus or varus
deformation of the tarsometatarsal region exists
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Beardsley S, Schrader SC: Treatment of dogs with woumds of the limbs caused by shearing forces. I Am Vet Med
Assoc 207:1071-1075, 1995.
2. Boemo CM: Injuries of the metacarpus and metatarsus. In Bloomberg MS, Dee JF, editors: Canine sports
medicine and surgery, Philadelphia, 1998, W.B. Saunders, pp 150-164.
3. Dianond Dw, Besso J: Evaluation of joint stabilization for treatment of shearing injuries of the tarsus in 20 dogs.
J Amm Hosp Assoc 35:147-153, 1999.
PhysealFractures
273
4. Dyce J, Whitelock RG: Arthrodesis of the tarsometatarsal joint using a laterally applied plate in 10 dogs. J Sm
Anim Pract 39:19-23, 1998
5. McCartney WT, Camichael S: Talar neck fractures in 5 cats. J Sm Anim Pract 41:204-206, 2000
6. Muir P, Norris JL: Tarsometatarsal subluxation in dogs: Partial arthrodesis by plate fixation. J Am Anin Hosp
Assoc 35:155-162, 1999.
7.Piemattei DL, Flo GL: Handbook of small animat orthopedics and fracture repair, ed 3,. Philadelphia, 1997,
W.B. Saunders, pp 607-658.
9. Schmokel HG, Ehrismann G: Surgical treatment of talocrural luxation in 9 cats. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
14:46-50, 2001
72. PHYSEAL FRACTURES
Randy I. Boudrieau, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What are the basic principles of treatment for physeal fractures?
·Preservation of the blood supply
·Accurate anatomic reduction
· Stable skeletal fixation
2. What are the primary concerns with a physeal fracture?
Prevention of angular deforrmities and limb shortening. Client commumication is critical so
that potential long-term problems are anticipated because 100% success is unlikely. A reasonable
or treat a leg deformity or shortening.
3. How does longitudinal bone growth occur?
By endochondral ossification (the process by which cartilage is resorbed and replaced by
bone).
4. Discuss the anatomic basis of endochondral ossification at the physis or growth plate.
The physis is traditionally divided into four zones:
1. Reserve zone—located adjacent to the epiphysis and composed of scattered chondro-
cytes and abundant cartilage matrix. Random cell division and matrix production occur
in this zone.
 2. Proliferating zone—chondrocyte division occurs in a linear fashion (cells closest to the
epiphysis, at the base of each cell column, are true germinal cells of the physis). Cellular
division occurs in columns extending away from the epiphysis. Additionally, these cells
change shape from round or oval to broad and flat as they move away from the epiphysis;
matrix production is maximum.
3. Hypertrophic zone—the flattened chondrocytes gradually enlarge to a more cuboidal
shape (8x increase in volume). There is a corresponding decrease in the amount of matrix
surrounding these cells; biochemical changes begin to occur in the matrix that prepare it
for subsequent calcification.
4. Provisional calcification zoneseeding of the matrix with amorphous calcium phos-
phate leads to hydroxyapatite crystal formation and subsequent calcification of the longi-
subsequent vascular invasion and a scaffold for bone deposition from the metaphysis o1
PhysealFractures
273
4. Dyce J, Whitelock RG: Arthrodesis of the tarsometatarsal joint using a laterally applied plate in 10 dogs. J Sm
Anim Pract 39:19-23, 1998
5. McCartney WT, Camichael S: Talar neck fractures in 5 cats. J Sm Anim Pract 41:204-206, 2000
6. Muir P, Norris JL: Tarsometatarsal subluxation in dogs: Partial arthrodesis by plate fixation. J Am Anin Hosp
Assoc 35:155-162, 1999.
7.Piemattei DL, Flo GL: Handbook of small animat orthopedics and fracture repair, ed 3,. Philadelphia, 1997,
W.B. Saunders, pp 607-658.
9. Schmokel HG, Ehrismann G: Surgical treatment of talocrural luxation in 9 cats. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
14:46-50, 2001
72. PHYSEAL FRACTURES
Randy I. Boudrieau, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What are the basic principles of treatment for physeal fractures?
·Preservation of the blood supply
·Accurate anatomic reduction
· Stable skeletal fixation
2. What are the primary concerns with a physeal fracture?
Prevention of angular deforrmities and limb shortening. Client commumication is critical so
that potential long-term problems are anticipated because 100% success is unlikely. A reasonable
or treat a leg deformity or shortening.
3. How does longitudinal bone growth occur?
By endochondral ossification (the process by which cartilage is resorbed and replaced by
bone).
4. Discuss the anatomic basis of endochondral ossification at the physis or growth plate.
The physis is traditionally divided into four zones:
1. Reserve zone—located adjacent to the epiphysis and composed of scattered chondro-
cytes and abundant cartilage matrix. Random cell division and matrix production occur
in this zone.
 2. Proliferating zone—chondrocyte division occurs in a linear fashion (cells closest to the
epiphysis, at the base of each cell column, are true germinal cells of the physis). Cellular
division occurs in columns extending away from the epiphysis. Additionally, these cells
change shape from round or oval to broad and flat as they move away from the epiphysis;
matrix production is maximum.
3. Hypertrophic zone—the flattened chondrocytes gradually enlarge to a more cuboidal
shape (8x increase in volume). There is a corresponding decrease in the amount of matrix
surrounding these cells; biochemical changes begin to occur in the matrix that prepare it
for subsequent calcification.
4. Provisional calcification zoneseeding of the matrix with amorphous calcium phos-
phate leads to hydroxyapatite crystal formation and subsequent calcification of the longi-
subsequent vascular invasion and a scaffold for bone deposition from the metaphysis o1
274
Physeal Fractures
formation of the primary spongiosa (woven bone). The primary spongiosa consequently
undergoes further remodeling to secondary spongiosa (lamellar bone). The latter
becomes the trabecular architecture of the metaphysis and gradually becomes the more
dense cortical bone of the diaphysis.
5. Describe the blood supply to both sides of the physis.
nutritional needs to the reserve and proliferative zones of the physis. The metaphysis is supplied
by the metaphyseal vessels and their anastomosis with the terminal branches of the medullary
circulation (originating from the nutrient artery). The metaphyseal vessels provide the access for
subsequent ossification of the calcification zone and the primary spongiosa.
6. Why should one care about the anatomic configuration of the physis and its blood
supply?
 Understanding the anatomy helps delineate fracture location through the physis and
determines prognosis (continued or arrested growth, shortened limb or angular deformity).
Interruption of the epiphyseal blood supply results in necrosis of the germinal cells and cessation
of growth (irreversible); interruption of the metaphyseal blood supply results in a temporary
cessation of ossification, which resumes once the blood supply is restored (reversible).
7. Where is fracture through the physis most likely to occur?
The cartilaginous physis is weaker than surrounding bone and ligaments, making it most
suscepti ble to injury. The weakest area of the physis is the junction between the hypertrophic and
proliferative zones. The hypertrophic zone has the largest difference of cell-to-matrix ratio that
weakens its structure. There is a difference in mechanical or material properties at this level
between these two zones that results in an area of stress concentration. The result is a fracture that
occurs through the hypertrophic zone.
8. Why is the specific fracture location in the physis significant?
A fracture through the hypertrophic zone does not affect the reserve or proliferating zones,
preserving proliferation of the germinal cells, which permits further longitudinal bone growth.
9. Does knowledge of the anatomy and vascular supply have any bearing on the Salter.
Harris classification of physeal fractures?
Yes. It helps to determine the prognosis or potential for remaining longitudinal bone growth.
10.What is the Salter-Harris classification scheme?
Classification of physeal fractures based on anatomic location and correlated with
prognosis.
Metaphysis-
11
Physis—
-r1
Epiphysis-
Jointsurface-
Figure 72-1
PhysealFractures
275
11. Describe the types of Salter-Harris fractures.
· Type I—fracture or separation through the physis.
(enogieenun) sisAydide pue sisAyd sun yo uogod e yanon uogeedes o simoe—ll sd -
· Type IV—fracture or separation through a portion of the physis, metaphysis, and epiph-
ysis (intraarticular)
· Type V—a crushing injury of the physis
12. Where are the most common physeal fracture locations for each of the individual
Salter-Harris categories?
TYPE
LOCATION
Femoral head (capital physis)
Distal femur
III
Proximal tibia
IV
Distal humerus
V
 Distal ulna
13. Is there a Salter-Harris type VI fracture?
 Salter and Harris did not originally describe this fracture classification; in a subsequent pub-
lication, they added it as a variant of the Salter-Harris type V fracture. In this instance, trauma to
the physis results in some bridging of new bone across one side of the growth plate (effectively
of iatrogenic trauma, which can cause this to occur, is with the use of a large-diameter pin to
stabilize (bridge) the physis.
14. What is the prognosis for continued longitudinal bone growth based on each of the
Salter-Harris classifications from type I to V?
The best prognosis (potential for continued longitudinal bone growth) is for a type I fracture
There is a progression of worsening prognosis from type I to V, with a type V fracture resulting
in a cessation of physeal growth.
a type IlI or IV fracture?
No. The Salter-Hamis classification does not take into consideration the specific bone
invol ved or location of the fracture (e.g., proximal versus distal femur). The age of the animal and
remaining growth potential of the bone involved also are critical.
In general, types I and II fractures have a better prognosis than types III and IV fractures.
The latter fracture types may have damage to a portion of the germinal cells and consequently
is an intraarticular component that may result in the subsequent development of degenerative
joint disease (DJD). Type V fractures, because they are crushing injuries to the physis and by
definition affect the germinal cells, result in cessation of growth and have the poorest prognosis.
16. What is the contribution of the blood supply to the prognosis for continued longitudi-
nal bone growth?
Despite the proposed prognosis based on the Salter-Harris classification, damage to either
the epiphyseal or the metaphyseal blood supply also affects continued growth. A traumatic event
276
Physeal Fractures
sufficient to cause a fracture through the physis also is likely to cause damage to the supplying
vasculature—resulting in an irreversible injury to the germinal cells. The germinal cells undergo
This vascular injury may occur as a result of the initial trauma or the subsequent surgical
intervention to stabilize thefracture.
17. Discuss the effect of fracture location on prognosis.
The best example is the comparison of proximal (type I) and distal physeal injury (type II) of
the femur. In cases with significant remaining growth, the proximal femoral physeal injury has the
interruption of the epiphyseal blood supply. Necrosis of the germinal cell layer occurs, and growth
femoral neck, coxofemoral joint laxity with subluxation, and the eventual development of degen
erative joint disease (DID). Alternatively, the distal femoral epiphysis receives its blood supply
s  s   e  sie  s ns  su 
18. What is the significance of patient age at the time of trauma?
a significant problem related to a short limb or an angular deformity. A puppy with a type I
proximal femoral physeal fracture at 3-4 months of age has significant growth remaining, and
injury causes cessation of femoral neck growth, resulting in subluxation of the femoral head and
growth has occurred, and subsequent DJD problems are unlikely. With distal femoral physeal
fractures, injuries after 5 months of age do not cause clinically significant limb shortening
19. How might the age of the animal, and the relationship to its final adult size, make a
difference with the prognosis?
Smaller breeds of dogs arrive at their adult height relatively sooner than larger breeds; the
same physeal fracture in a chihuahua, as compared with a Great Dane, at 5 months of age has a
markedly different outcome.
20. Why does limb shortening, in which only 80% of bone length is achieved, not result in
a clinical problem?
Lack of functional impairment has to do with the flexed limb stance of dogs and cats. A
discrepancy.
21. Does the specific bone in which trauma occurs make a difference regarding prognosis?
10-12 and 6-7 months. The latter helps to explain why, despite a Salter-Harris type IV classifica-
tion of most distal humeral fractures in young dogs, there is a good prognosis for return to func
is the radius and ulna paired bone system.
22. What is significant about the paired bone system of the radius and ulna?
The differential rates of growth that occur at each end of the respective bones: The radius and
Physeal Fractures
limb deformities because of the constraint now present from the bone no longer keeping pace with
continued growth of the remaining physes (the other bone in this paired system).
23. Why is the distal ulnar physis most often affected with a type V fracture?
A shearing force to the distal radius and ulna results in compression to the distal ulnar physis
because of its conical shape, causing a crushing injury, or a type V fracture. The same shearing
forces to the distal radius usually results in a fracture through the hypertrophic zone, or a type I
fracture. The end result is distal ulnar growth arrest only.
24. Does a single bone growth arrest result in angular limb deformities?
Rarely, unless the growth arrest affects only a portion of the physis.
Rarely.
26.  What is the overall prognosis for an animal with a physeal fracture?
 In general, a guarded prognosis should be given for all fractures of a physis, regardless of
the Salter-Harris classification, because there are many factors that contribute to the ultimate
success or failure of treatment. If the animal has minimal growth potential remaining, the
prognosis is quite good provided that accurate fracture repair (anatomic reduction and stable
fix ation) is obtained.
27. What are the effects of the fixation devices on continued physeal growth?
Fixation devices that bridge the physis, such as an external skeletal fixator or a plate and
screws, prevent further longitudinal bone growth. Implants that cross the physis directly (pins and
screws) also can cause damage to the physis in the area of their penetration. The threads of a
screw (or a threaded pin) can engage in the cartilage and prevent continued longitudinal growth.
angle with the long axis of the bone is maintained.
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Johnson AL: Correction of radial and ulnar growth deformities resulting from premature physeal closure. In
Bojrab MJ, editor: Current technigues in veterinary surgery,ed 4, Philadelphia, 1998, Lea & Febiger, pp 1094-
1101.
2. Piemattei DL, Flo GL: Treatment of premature physeal growth arrest. In Piemattei DL, Flo GL, editors:
Handbook of small aninat orthopedics and fracture repair, ed 3,. Philadelphia, 1997,W.B. Saunders, pp 689-
712.
3. Salter RB, Harris WR: Injuries involving the epiphyseal plate. I Bone Joint Surg Am 45:587-622, 1963.
73. ORTHOPEDIC COMPLICATIONS
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What is a surgical complication?
A secondary condition developing during treatment of a primary disease. A complication
appears unexpectedly and causes a change in existing plans, methods, or attitudes. Complications
arise as a consequence of failure in following established guidelines and principles.
2. What is the goal of orthopedic repairs?
A rapid return of limb functions, similar to the preoperative or normal state, based on early
rigid internal or external fixation, bone alignment, and preservation of periosseous soft tissues.
3.  What are common complications of fracture fixation?
Abnormal limb function or disuse resulting from:
· Inappropriate bone union
· Implant failure
·Infection
· Soft-tissue compromise
● Neurovascular damage
· Degenerative osteoarthritis (articular fractures)
· Growth arrest (physeal fractures)
4. Define inappropriate bone unions (healing).
·Delayed unions are due to instability, infection, avascularity, and tissue atrophy.
· Nonunions never achieve healing because of mechanical instability or lack of osteogenesis.
· Malunions produce shortened, angular, or rotational bone deformations.
5. What is an elephant's foot callus?
A radiographic diagnosis of a nonunion characterized by abundant (hypertrophic) callus
associated with inadequate fracture stabilization.
6. What is a horse's hoof callus?
a plate, and screw or plate failure associated with inefficient fracture stabilization.
7. Define a pseudarthrosis.
bone ends bathed in synovial-like (serum) fluid and surrounded by a fibrous joint capsule-like
structure; motion is present at the fracture site.
8. What is the difference between oligotrophic and atrophic fracture healing?
Oligotrophic nonunions have biologic activity (vascular fibrous tissue), whereas atrophic
nonunions lack tissue viability.
9. How are inappropriate unions treated?
Based on the underlying causes of the lesion:
·Implant removal or replacement—restabilization
Orthopedic Complications
279
· Autogenous cancellous bone grafting—osteogenesis
· Antibiotic therapy—systemic or sustained local delivery
· Bone debridement—resect necrotic bone, open medullary cavity
· Z-plasties—overcome contractures
· Physical therapy—restore limb function
·Arthrodesis—salvage modified limb function
· Amputation—adequate quality of life
10. Why do implants fail?
· Misapplication and inability to counteract distractive fracture site forces (compression,
tension, bending, rotation).
· Normal cycling or fatigue failures of the metals over time.
11. List specific complications of plates and screws.
· Inappropriate size selection leading to breakage (bone, implant) or stress protection and
weakening of bone (too large, stiff implant)
· Inadequate load sharing by bone or ancillary implants
· Malpositioned plate
· Inadequate screw fix ation
12. What are specific complications of pins and wires?
· Inadequate placement, number, and size of the implants
· Inadequate stability
·Migration into neighboring joint
13. What are specific complications of interlocking nails?
 Nail breakage at screw hole (proximal hole, distal fragment) resulting from undersized nail
Or proximity to fracture site.
14. List specific complications of external fixation.
· Pin tract sepsis—excessive pin and skin motion
· Fixator problems—confi guration, pins, and clamps
· Soft tissue impalement—neurovascular elements, muscles, and tendons
15. List specific complications of external splintage.
· Inadequate stability or fracture reduction
· Soft tissue compromise causing sores and stiff joints
· Cast or splintage soilage and/or breakage
16. Define fracture disease.
Disuse atrophy of bone, cartilage, joint capsule, ligaments, and muscles secondary to exces-
sive immobilization after fracture repair, trauma, or external splintage. Fracture disease is most
frequently associated with inadequate repair of femoral fracture (quadriceps contracture) in
young dogs or humeral condyle lesions. In the former, the hindlimb is held in extension, whereas
in the latter, the forelimb is in a mildly flexed position.
17. How can fracture disease be avoided?
Rigid stabilization and rapid return to limb functions; temporary postoperative flexion
(hindlimb) or extension (forelimb) bandages to counteract muscle contractions, followed by
physical therapy.
280
Growth Deformities
18. Which neurovascular elements can be damaged with specific orthopedic conditions?
NEUROVASCULAR ELEMENT
ORTHOPEDIC CONDITIONS
 Radial nerve
Humeral diaphyseal fractures, lateral approach
Sciatic nerve
 Ilial shaft, acetabular fractures; femoral pinning by
greater trochanter
 Median artery
Interosseous branches skewered by external fixator
pins
 Caudal tibial artery
Skewered by external fix ator pins
Brachial artery; median, ulnar,
Medial approach to humeral shaft
and musculocutaneous nerves
19. How can complications be prevented?
· Avoid “getting by" in surgery and "giving it (suspected complication) some time" as a
treatment.
· Follow established and accepted perioperative protocols.
· Preoperatively, warn clients of potential complications (if they arise, they are not an
unexpected problem, but rather a treatable event wisely predicted by the surgeon).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Martinez SA: Fracture management and bone healing. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 29:1029-1274, 1999.
2. Newton CD: Fracture repair. In Lipowitz AJ, Caywood DD, editors: Complications in small animal surgery,
Philadelphia, 1996, Williams & Wilkins, pp 563-599
3. Olmstead ML: Fracture commplications. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 21:641-872, 1991
74. GROWTH DEFORMITIES
Juan M. Marti, M.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. Why do growth deformities most frequently affect the antebrachium?
Because of the paired bone system and the unique shape of the distal ulnar physis.
Synchronous growth of the radius and ulna in the dog is essential for the development of a
forelimb and requires normal functioning of the proximal and distal physes of the radius and ulna.
 2. Which physis contributes the greatest percentage of bone length in the paired radius
and ulnar system?
· The radius receives 40% ofits length from the proximal physis and 60% from the distal physis.
· The ulna receives 85% of its length from the distal physis and 15% from the proximal physis.
3. At what age are dogs most susceptible to developing a curvature after premature
physeal closure?
Although variable and based on breed, growth accelerates rapidly during the fifth to seventh
months and tapers off during the ninth to tenth months. Toy-breed dogs may be finished growing
by 6 months of age, whereas giant-breed dogs can continue to grow to 10 and 11 months of age
280
Growth Deformities
18. Which neurovascular elements can be damaged with specific orthopedic conditions?
NEUROVASCULAR ELEMENT
ORTHOPEDIC CONDITIONS
 Radial nerve
Humeral diaphyseal fractures, lateral approach
Sciatic nerve
 Ilial shaft, acetabular fractures; femoral pinning by
greater trochanter
 Median artery
Interosseous branches skewered by external fixator
pins
 Caudal tibial artery
Skewered by external fix ator pins
Brachial artery; median, ulnar,
Medial approach to humeral shaft
and musculocutaneous nerves
19. How can complications be prevented?
· Avoid “getting by" in surgery and "giving it (suspected complication) some time" as a
treatment.
· Follow established and accepted perioperative protocols.
· Preoperatively, warn clients of potential complications (if they arise, they are not an
unexpected problem, but rather a treatable event wisely predicted by the surgeon).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Martinez SA: Fracture management and bone healing. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 29:1029-1274, 1999.
2. Newton CD: Fracture repair. In Lipowitz AJ, Caywood DD, editors: Complications in small animal surgery,
Philadelphia, 1996, Williams & Wilkins, pp 563-599
3. Olmstead ML: Fracture commplications. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 21:641-872, 1991
74. GROWTH DEFORMITIES
Juan M. Marti, M.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. Why do growth deformities most frequently affect the antebrachium?
Because of the paired bone system and the unique shape of the distal ulnar physis.
Synchronous growth of the radius and ulna in the dog is essential for the development of a
forelimb and requires normal functioning of the proximal and distal physes of the radius and ulna.
 2. Which physis contributes the greatest percentage of bone length in the paired radius
and ulnar system?
· The radius receives 40% ofits length from the proximal physis and 60% from the distal physis.
· The ulna receives 85% of its length from the distal physis and 15% from the proximal physis.
3. At what age are dogs most susceptible to developing a curvature after premature
physeal closure?
Although variable and based on breed, growth accelerates rapidly during the fifth to seventh
months and tapers off during the ninth to tenth months. Toy-breed dogs may be finished growing
by 6 months of age, whereas giant-breed dogs can continue to grow to 10 and 11 months of age
Growth Dejormities
281
 4. What unique anatomic shape of the distal ulnar physis is responsible for its frequent
involvement in growth deformities in the dog?
The cone shape of the distal ulnar physis prevents physeal separation during injury Instead,
forces applied to the limb cause a Salter-Harris type V crushing injury, which damages the physis
and resultsin completeclosure
5. What are the sequela to premature closure of the distal ulnar physis?
· Shortening of the ulna
·Cranial bowing
· Carpal valgus angulation
·External rotation of the paw
· Shortening of the radius
· Varying amounts of elbow and carpal incongruity
 6. How is premature closure of the distal ulnar physis diagnosed?
 Premature closure of a physis is suspected after injury to the immature forelimb, or the dog
may be presented with an obvious forelimb curvature. Radiographs are necessary for definitive
diagnosis. Craniocaudal and lateral views of the affected forelimb are made. Each radiograph
should include the radius, ulna, elbow, and carpus. Radiographs of the opposite normal limb serve
as a control for determining the normal length of the radius and ulna and the normal anatomy of
the forelimb. In early cases of premature closure of the distal ulnar physis, a discrepancy in ulnar
lengths may be determined before there is obvious deformity of the forelimb. Measurements of
bone length and angular limb deformity should be made from the radiographs to establish a pre-
operative standard against which the results of treatment are compared.
 7. Can curvature after a premature physeal closure be prevented by splinting or casting
the limb?
No. The restraining effect of a short bone with a prematurely closed physis on the growing
of the affected bone) is necessary to remove the restraint on physeal growth of the paired bone
and should be done as soon as possible in an immature dog with significant growth potential.
8. How is premature closure of the distal ulnar physis treated in the growing dog?
The goal of treatment is to regain unrestricted growth of the normal physes of the radius and ulna,
which allows for maximal limb development and, in some cases, correction of the angular deformity.
An ulnar ostectomy is used to release the constraint placed on the radius by the ulna and may be coupled
with the placement of a free autogenous fat graft to prevent premature union of the ulnar segments.
9. For show dogs, can the results of ulnar ostectomy be guaranteed?
 Prognosis for normal appearance and function is guarded. Much of the outcome depends on
the growth potential of the radial physes. With favorable conditions, an animal may achieve
normal length of the limb and some correction of valgus angulation. Rotational deformities are
not corrected. Owners must be informed of the possibility that additional surgical procedures may
be necessary for complete recovery.
10. What deformities occur with premature closure of the distal radial physis?
· Symmetric complete closure of the distal radial physis results in a shortened but straight
radius, incongruity of the elbow, and a varus or no angulation of the carpus.
depends on the location of the closure. The most common is a caudal lateral closure of
the physis, resulting in a valgus deformity of the carpus. The normal anatomy of the
carpus may be disrupted.
282
Growth Dejormities
11. How is partial premature closure of the distal radial physis treated in the growing dog?
The goal of treatment is to allow unrestricted growth of the normal portion of the distal
radial physis. Tomographic examination or direct palpation by needles of the distal radial physis
may help define the area of the physis that is closed and bridged with bone. The animal is treated
with a resection of the bone-bridged area of the physis and placement of a free autogenous fat
graft in the defect to prevent reestablishment of the bone bridge
12. How is complete premature closure of the proximal or distal radial physis treated in
the growing dog?
The goals of treatment are to allow unrestricted growth of the normal physes of the radius
and ulna and to restore and maintain congruity of the elbow. A radial ostectomy and free autoge-
nous fat graft is performed to allow continued growth of the ulna.
13. How effective are an ostectomy and fat graft if the radial and ulnar distal physes have
closed and the immature dog has a significantly shortened forelimb?
An ostectomy and fat graft does not work for these patients. The preferred treatment is a
radial and ulnar osteotomy and an external fixation, which allows continuous distraction of the
bone ends. The circular fixator is best suited for controlled distraction to restore bone length and
can be used to correct angular deformity simultaneously.
14. How is a radius curvus resulting from premature closure of the distal ulnar physis
treated in the mature dog?
If the dog has not lost a significant amount of limb length, the goals of treatment are to cor-
rect angular and rotational deformities, while preserving as much length of the limb as possible
during the corrective osteotomy procedure. The procedure most frequently used is the oblique
radial and ulnar osteotomy with repositioning of the distal radial segment and stabilization with
an external fixator. If there is significant loss of limb length, a circular fixator can be used to
distract the bones after an acute corrective osteotomy. The circular fixator can also be used to
correct angular deformities and lengthen the bone. Circular external fixation is a complex proce-
dure and requires a trained surgeon along with attentive clients.
15. What are the priorities when treating a case of antebrachial growth deformities?
·Restoration of joint congruity (especially elbow)
· Correction of angular limb deformities
· Restoration of limb length
          n  og
length discrepancy, but the osteoarthritis that ensues if joint congruity is not restored limits return
to function.
16. What is the prognosis for function and appearance after a corrective osteotomy?
ease resulting from incongruent joints
17. What techniques can be used to restore congruity of the elbow caused by premature
closure of the radial or the ulnar physes?
An alternative approach, in dogs with minimal limb-length discrepancies, to treatment of
incongruity of the elbow caused by premature closure of the radial physis is an oblique ostectomy
of the proximal ulna above the interosseous ligament. A small Steinmann pin is inserted in the
bone to maintain alignment of the ulna and prevent distraction by the pull of the triceps muscle.
The dynamic (weight-bearing and muscular contractions) shortening of the ulna allows the radial
head to make contact with the capitulum of the humerus.
Bone Grafting
283
Treatment for elbow congruity caused by premature closure of the distal ulnar physis with
minimal limb-length discrepancy or angular deformity is a proximal ulnar osteotomy. A small
intramedullary Steinmann pin is used to maintain alignment of the ulna. The dynamic distraction
of the proximal ulna caused by the pull of the triceps muscles allows the olecranon to contact the
distal humerus.
18. What is pes varus?
A distal tibia deformity described in dachshunds and associated with asymmetric closure of
the distal physis.
19. How is pes varus treated?
Corrective osteotomy and external skeletal fixation of the tibia
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Forell EB, Schwartz PD: Use of extemal skeletal fixation for treatment of angular defommity secondary to
premature distal ulnar physeal closure. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:460-476, 1993.
osteotomy. Vet Surg 18:114-122, 1989.
3. Johnson AL: Correction of radial and ulnar growth deformities resulting from premature physeal closure. In
Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in small animat surgery, ed 4, Baltimore, 1998, Williams & Wilkins, pp
1094-1101.
4. Johnson SG, Hulse DA: Corrective osteotomy for pes varus in the dachshund. Vet Surg 18:373-379, 1989.
5. Marcellin-Little DJ, Ferretti A, Roe SC,et al: Hinged Ilizarov extemal fixator for correction of antebrachial
defommity. Vet Surg 27:231-245, 1998
6. Salter RB, Harris WR: Injuries involving the epiphyseal plate. J Bone Joint Surg 45:587-622, 1963.
and distal radial physes in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:183-188, 1990
Ilizarov method. Vet Clin Orthop Traumato1 11:59-67, 1998
75. BONE GRAFTING
Katherine L. Wells, D.VM., M.S.
1. List the most common types of bone grafts
·Cancellous
· Cortical
· Corticocancellous
 2. List the properties of bone grafts and discuss these properties.
·Osteogenesis
· Osteoinduction
· Osteoconduction
·Mechanical support
Osteogenesis is the formation of bone by living cells. The cells may come either from a
transfer or from pluripotential cells of the host. Osteoinduction is the process whereby host mes-
enchymal cells differentiate to form bone. Bioactive factors stimulate osteoblasts, osteoclasts,
endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and a variety of other cells to form new bone. Osteoconduction is
the process whereby a template is provided for ingrowth of new host bone. Osteoconduction is
Bone Grafting
283
Treatment for elbow congruity caused by premature closure of the distal ulnar physis with
minimal limb-length discrepancy or angular deformity is a proximal ulnar osteotomy. A small
intramedullary Steinmann pin is used to maintain alignment of the ulna. The dynamic distraction
of the proximal ulna caused by the pull of the triceps muscles allows the olecranon to contact the
distal humerus.
18. What is pes varus?
A distal tibia deformity described in dachshunds and associated with asymmetric closure of
the distal physis.
19. How is pes varus treated?
Corrective osteotomy and external skeletal fixation of the tibia
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Forell EB, Schwartz PD: Use of extemal skeletal fixation for treatment of angular defommity secondary to
premature distal ulnar physeal closure. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:460-476, 1993.
osteotomy. Vet Surg 18:114-122, 1989.
3. Johnson AL: Correction of radial and ulnar growth deformities resulting from premature physeal closure. In
Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in small animat surgery, ed 4, Baltimore, 1998, Williams & Wilkins, pp
1094-1101.
4. Johnson SG, Hulse DA: Corrective osteotomy for pes varus in the dachshund. Vet Surg 18:373-379, 1989.
5. Marcellin-Little DJ, Ferretti A, Roe SC,et al: Hinged Ilizarov extemal fixator for correction of antebrachial
defommity. Vet Surg 27:231-245, 1998
6. Salter RB, Harris WR: Injuries involving the epiphyseal plate. J Bone Joint Surg 45:587-622, 1963.
and distal radial physes in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:183-188, 1990
Ilizarov method. Vet Clin Orthop Traumato1 11:59-67, 1998
75. BONE GRAFTING
Katherine L. Wells, D.VM., M.S.
1. List the most common types of bone grafts
·Cancellous
· Cortical
· Corticocancellous
 2. List the properties of bone grafts and discuss these properties.
·Osteogenesis
· Osteoinduction
· Osteoconduction
·Mechanical support
Osteogenesis is the formation of bone by living cells. The cells may come either from a
transfer or from pluripotential cells of the host. Osteoinduction is the process whereby host mes-
enchymal cells differentiate to form bone. Bioactive factors stimulate osteoblasts, osteoclasts,
endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and a variety of other cells to form new bone. Osteoconduction is
the process whereby a template is provided for ingrowth of new host bone. Osteoconduction is
284
Bone Grafting
characterized by ingrowth of capillaries, perivascular tissues, and osteoprogenitor cells from the
recipient bed that leads to bone formation. Lastly, depending on the type of graft, it can provide
var ying degrees of mechanical support.
3. List bone graft types based on their origin.
·Autograft-bone transferred from a donor site to a recipient site in the same individual
s
· Xenograft—-bone transferred between species
4. What is bone morphogenic protein?
Bone morphogenic protein (BMP) is an osteoinductive polypeptide found in bone. It pro
motes bone formation by inducing the transformation of recipient perivascular mesenchymal
cells to chrondroblasts, which produce bone by endochondral ossification.
 5. List common sources for autogenous cancellous bone graft in veterinary patients.
·Proximal humerus
·Proximal tibia
·Ilial wing
· Subtrochanter of femur
6.  Describe how to harvest a cancellous autograft.
The proximal humerus and tibia usually contain quantities sufficient for most applications.
The site is aseptically prepared at the same time the patient is being prepared for surgery. The
   si in s  ns d  yo d e pd si is
selected location and cortical penetration is performed using a drill bit or Steinmann pin. A bone
curette is used to harvest the cancellous bone. Once the bone has been harvested, routine closure
of the soft tissues can be perfomed.
7. How should a cancellous autograft be stored prior to use?
The graft should be placed in a bloody sponge or sterile bowl containing blood. Cancellous
grafts should not be stored in saline or antibiotics and need to be clearly marked on the operating
table to avoid inadvertent disposal.
8. Describe differences between an autogenous cancellous bone graft and an allograft.
Autogenous cancellous bone grafts are the most commonly used grafts in veterinary med
icine. These grafts are collected surgically and several different sites are available. The collection
procedure may increase surgical anesthetic time, risk of infection (rare), and intraoperative blood
loss (rare). In addition, adequate quantities may not be available or may necessitate multiple
donor sites, which could result in unacceptable patient morbidity. Autogenous grafts provide
viable cells, promote rapid healing, and eliminate histocompatibility problems. Allografts elicit a
greater immune response because of foreign cellular antigens of the allograft and the reaction of
the host immune system. Donor screening and tissue processing can be expensive and labor inten.
sive. Allografts have a limited shelf life, and bone banking is impractical for most veterinary prac
tices. Commercial availability of allografts offers greater opportunities for veterinary surgeons.
9. What is demineralized bone matrix?
Demineralized bone matrix is prepared by extracting the mineral component from bone.
Removal of the mineral component and acid-soluble proteins isolates acid-resistant bone mor-
phogenic proteins and other growth factors, which remain in the matrix and induce bone forma
tion. It is quickly revascularized (osteoconductive) and moderately osteoinductive (due to bone
which increases surface contact area with the recipient tissue.If kept at room temperature for
BoneGrafting
285
more than 24 hours, it becomes biologically inactive. This product is used in humans to fill non-
weight bearing gaps, for arthrodesis, for periodontal and maxillofacial reconstructive surgery to
replace alveolar bone and to provide bony contour. Osteoinductive properties may be inactivated
when it is implanted with common orthopedic substances such as polymethylmethacrylate.
10.  Describe bone healing with an autogenous cancellous bone graft.
Hematoma formation occurs in the initial phase with inflammation and some cell death.
Vascular buds invade the graft in conjunction with plasma cells, lymphocytes, and monocytes
Trabecular bone is lined by osteogenic cells derived from mesenchymal cell differentiation
Osteoblasts deposit osteoid and eventually become mineralized to form bone. Osteoclasts resorb
necrotic bone while hematopoietic bone marrow elements accumulate within the remodeled graft.
Once the graft has been completely resorbed, the new host bone is remodeled into cortical bone
in response to mechanical forces applied to the graft. Osteoconduction can last up to several
rapidly with autogenous cancellous grafts that mechanical strengthening usually does not occur.
11. List methods used to sterilize allografts.
biomechanical properties.
strength and incorporation of cortical allografts.
12. Do repeat freeze-thaw cycles affect biomechanical properties of canine cortical bone?
Yes, there is a significant decrease in destructive torsional strain with repeated freezing.
Maintaining water content of bone is a principal factor in preserving its biomechanical properties.
As bone dehydrates, it becomes stiffer and more brittle. At freezing temperatures above -28°℃,
made to ensure proper hy dration, repeated freezing will alter the mechanical properties of canine
cortical bone.
13. List indications for each bone graft technique.
· Autogenous cancellous graft: This graft is chosen when rapid bone formation is desired.
 It is also used when optimal healing is not anticipated (delayed union, nonunion, geriatric
patients, cortical defects) or to promote bone formation in infected fractures.
· Cortical bone autograft: The most common use of this graft is the transplantation of a rib
to form a segmental strut for mandibular fractures. Harvest of the autograft (ribs, ilial
wing, distal ulna, fibula) is done during fracture repair, and the graft is incorporated into
  ed un iy nsn e   o s io  s e e i 
same implant used to stabilize the fracture.
· Cortical bone allograft: These are available commercially or can be harvested and
transplanted immediately. These are most commonly used for limb-sparing procedures
n pep p i og i o n u sn n u ing
nonunions.
14. Describe harvesting of cortical allografts.
Cortical allografts are used whenever mechanical strength is needed during fracture healing
Donor site (rib, ilial wing, distal ulna/fibula) should not adversely affect limb function. Absolute
aseptic surgical technique is required. Donors are placed under anesthesia and a standard
approach to the selected bone is used. An oscillating bone saw is used to cut the bone. The graft
is stripped of all soft tissue attachments and the medullary contents are removed. The medullary
cavity is cultured and the graft is placed in a sterile container. The graft should be marked indi-
cating left or right, with the name of the bone, segment of bone, date of harvesting, and donor
286
Bone Grafting
identification. The container and the graft are immediately placed in a freezer with a temperature
of -20'C. These grafts can be stored for up to 1 year.
15. How are cortical allografts incorporated into fracture sites?
Fracture healing with cortical allografts consists of filling host-graft interfaces with bone,
followed by graft vascularization, graft resorption, and graft replacement with host bone. Host-
graft interfaces heal within 1 to 3 months, but graft remodeling can take months to years.
16.  Describe radiographic healing of cortical allografts.
Host-graft interfaces initially fill with cancellous bone. As resorption and remodeling
to porous, cancellous bone. With time, the cancellous bone remodels into cortical bone. Plate
removal should not be considered until definitive radiographic evidence of remodeling of the
entire graft is noted.
17. How do you determine the time of plate removal in cortical allograft placement?
Plate removal should not be considered until definitive radiographic evidence of remodeling
of the entire graft is noted. Waiting 18 to 36 months after implantation is generally recommended;
although most bone plates are never removed.
18. List factors that affect successful outcome of cortical bone allograft implantation.
·Correct sizing
· Resolution/control of infection
· Good graft-host contact and stability
·Rigid internal fixation
· Use of cancellous bone autograft
19. List complications associated with cortical allografts.
· Infection—due to contamination
·Graftrejection—rare
· Failure of fracture repair—surgical errors
· Graft fracture—following implant removal
20. Discuss the preferred form of preservation for cortical allografts.
Freezing is preferred, although fresh-frozen cortical allografts are most commonly used in
years can be expected), but can drastically weaken the mechanical properties.
21. List physical forms of allograft material that are available.
·Powder—may have better availability of bioactive proteins with faster vascularization and
incorporation than other forms
·Particulate—larger particles and easier to handle
· Chips—moldable; provides cancellous scaffolding for osteoconduction
· Cortical sections/struts—used to fill defect or as an onlay, inlay, or stent for further
mechanical support and osteoconduction
· Blocks/wedges—for mechanical support and incorporation as strut or inlay graft in spinal
fix ati on
· Cortical section—used as an anatomic mechanical replacement of bone loss secondary tc
trauma or neoplasia
Developmental Bone Disease
287
22. Can FeLV-infected cats be used as donors for cortical allografts?
Allografts collected from FeLV-infected cats and sterilized with 98% glycerol solution stil1
transmitted the retrovirus to recipients. Allografts sterilized with ethylene oxide did not transmit
the retrovirus because of denaturation of DNA. Quantities of provirus in ethylene oxide-treated
donor bone grafts were reduced (but not eliminated), indicating that these grafts may be a viable
option for donor allografts.
23. What is an onlay graft?
An onlay graft is a cortical section of bone placed on the periosteal surface for additional
support in fracture repair and arthrodesis. They have osteoinductive and osteoconductive proper-
ties and incorporate over time.
24. List future options for bone grafts.
·Growth mediators—these are osteoinductive
· Bone substitutes (synthetic implants)—these are osteoconductive
·Bone marrow transfer
· Vasculanized bone transfer
· Ceramics—coralline is porous hydroxyapatites derived from the calcium carbonate
structure of sea coral
· Composite graft—combination of materials including both osteoconductive matrix and an
osteogemic or osteoinductive material (bovine collagen and calcium ceramic combination)
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Boutros CP, Trout DR, Kasra M, et al: The effect of repeated freeze-thaw cycles on the biomechanical properties
of canine cortical bone. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 13:59-64, 2000.
2. Coranado GS, Swenson CL, Martinez SA, et al: Effects of a 98% solution of glycerol or sterilization with
ethylene oxide on FeLV in bone allografts and effects on bone incorporation of allografts in cats. Am J Vet Res
61:665-671, 2000.
3. Fitch R, Kerwin S, Sinibaldi KR, et al: Bone autografts and allografts in dogs. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 19:
558-575, 1997.
4. Hulse DA, Johnson AL: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and fracture management. In Fossum TW, editor:
Small animat surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp 821-893.
5. Sinibaldi KR: Bone grafting principles and techniques. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in small animat
surgery, ed 4, Baltimore, 1998, williams & wilkins, pp 901-907
76. DEVELOPMENTAL BONE DISEASE
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What are developmental disorders of bone?
Condi tions unrelated to trauma, infection, or immune-mediated causes but rather associated
with abnormal growth in immature animals; conditions may be present at birth (congenital) or
have a genetic basis (hereditary).
 2. List some common skeletal developmental diseases described in dogs.
 In decreasing frequency based on the National Veterinary Medical Data Base System (1980-
1989):
·Hip dysplasia
Developmental Bone Disease
287
22. Can FeLV-infected cats be used as donors for cortical allografts?
Allografts collected from FeLV-infected cats and sterilized with 98% glycerol solution stil1
transmitted the retrovirus to recipients. Allografts sterilized with ethylene oxide did not transmit
the retrovirus because of denaturation of DNA. Quantities of provirus in ethylene oxide-treated
donor bone grafts were reduced (but not eliminated), indicating that these grafts may be a viable
option for donor allografts.
23. What is an onlay graft?
An onlay graft is a cortical section of bone placed on the periosteal surface for additional
support in fracture repair and arthrodesis. They have osteoinductive and osteoconductive proper-
ties and incorporate over time.
24. List future options for bone grafts.
·Growth mediators—these are osteoinductive
· Bone substitutes (synthetic implants)—these are osteoconductive
·Bone marrow transfer
· Vasculanized bone transfer
· Ceramics—coralline is porous hydroxyapatites derived from the calcium carbonate
structure of sea coral
· Composite graft—combination of materials including both osteoconductive matrix and an
osteogemic or osteoinductive material (bovine collagen and calcium ceramic combination)
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Boutros CP, Trout DR, Kasra M, et al: The effect of repeated freeze-thaw cycles on the biomechanical properties
of canine cortical bone. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 13:59-64, 2000.
2. Coranado GS, Swenson CL, Martinez SA, et al: Effects of a 98% solution of glycerol or sterilization with
ethylene oxide on FeLV in bone allografts and effects on bone incorporation of allografts in cats. Am J Vet Res
61:665-671, 2000.
3. Fitch R, Kerwin S, Sinibaldi KR, et al: Bone autografts and allografts in dogs. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 19:
558-575, 1997.
4. Hulse DA, Johnson AL: Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and fracture management. In Fossum TW, editor:
Small animat surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp 821-893.
5. Sinibaldi KR: Bone grafting principles and techniques. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in small animat
surgery, ed 4, Baltimore, 1998, williams & wilkins, pp 901-907
76. DEVELOPMENTAL BONE DISEASE
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What are developmental disorders of bone?
Condi tions unrelated to trauma, infection, or immune-mediated causes but rather associated
with abnormal growth in immature animals; conditions may be present at birth (congenital) or
have a genetic basis (hereditary).
 2. List some common skeletal developmental diseases described in dogs.
 In decreasing frequency based on the National Veterinary Medical Data Base System (1980-
1989):
·Hip dysplasia
288
Developmental Bone Disease
· Osteochondrosis
· Patella luxation
·Panosteitis
 3. List some of the less common developmental diseases in dogs.
· Craniomandibular osteopathy
· Hypertrophic osteodystrophy
· Osteochondromatosis
·Elbow dysplasia
·Retained ulnar cartilage cores
4. What is meant by the term dysplasia?
From the Greek dys (abnormal) and plassein (to form), meaning abnomality of development.
 5. Define panosteitis.
A spontaneous, self-limiting, painful condition of the diaphyses and metaphyses of long
s0p jo speng 1uea 1o saiei suimoia Xipidei suno u1 suog
6. Describe the pathophysiology of panosteitis.
Fatty degeneration of the bone marrow is followed by cellular proliferation and osteoid pro-
duction. Vascular congestion secondary to osteoid synthesis leads to endosteal and periosteal reac
tions, subsequent bone resorption, and reestablishment of normal vascularity and adipose tissue.
7. List some pathognomonic features of panosteitis.
· Multiple limb pain
· Pyrexia, depression, and anorexia
· Increased intramedullary, multifocal densities identified in radiographs of long bones
8. What does the term pathognomonic mean?
From the Greek patho (disease) and gnomonikos (fit to give judgment), meaning distinct
characteristics of a particular disease.
9. What are the recommended treatments for panosteitis?
Antiinflammatory "analgesic" (carprofen, etodalac deracoxib, aspirin) therapy and
supportive care during periods of discomfort. The disease is self-limiting with complete recovery
by 1 to 2 years of age.
10.  Are glucocorticosteroids or vitamin C useful in treating panosteitis?
No.
11. What is craniomandibular osteopathy?
A proliferative hereditary disease of the mandi ble and tympanic bullae seen in young terriers
exhibiting oral discomfort.
12. What is the pathophysiologic basis for the condition?
Bilateral resorption of lamellar bone and replacement by woven (immature) bone along
endosteal and peniosteal surfaces occurning in cyclic phases during growth.
13. How is this condition diagnosed?
·Signalment
· Clinical signs
· Radiographic features of bone proliferation
Developmental Bone Disease
289
14. What are the treatments for craniomandibular osteopathy?
Symptomatic therapy to alleviate discomfort, soft diet, pharyngostomy, esophagostomy, or
gastrotomy intubation to maintain normal nutritional status. The condition is self-limiting by 12
months of age (skeletal maturity).
15. Define hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HoD).
A painful, debilitating disturbance of metaphyseal bone in the long bones of young large and
gi ant breeds of dogs.
16.  Describe the pathophysiology of HOD.
An unknown cause of metaphyseal blood supply disruption leads to failure in ossification,
bone necrosis, microfractures, and inflammation as well as penosteal new bone fomation.
17. How is HOD recognized?
·Signalment
·Lameness
·Swollen metaphyseal regions of bones
· Radiographic changes of metaphyseal lucency and circumferential periosteal new bone
formati on
18. How is HOD treated?
Correction of dietary imbalances and cessation of any vitamin or mineral supplementation;
analgesic and supportive fluid and nutritional treatments and padded kennels
19. What is the prognosis for HOD?
Mildly or moderately affected animals recover from the episodic nature of the condition;
to correct limb deformation may be required.
20.  Define osteochondromatosis.
Also termed multiple cartilaginous exostoses, this condition is characterized by multiple
ribs. An unusual tracheal osteochondromatosis in Alaskan malamutes has also been reported
21. What is the difference between dogs and cats having this condition?
· In dogs, the disease may be familial and the ossified nodules cease growth at skeletal
matunity
· In cats, the condition may be a viral-associated (sarcoma) malignant transformation
22. How is osteochondromatosis diagnosed?
Palpation of multiple, nonpainful, firm swellings and radiography revealing multiple
pedunculated or sessile excrescences arising from bone surfaces.
23. What are the treatments for osteochondromatosis?
· Surgical excision if masses produce pain or dysfunction
· Neutering of dogs
· Monitoring and treating for signs of FeLV in cats
24. What is the prognosis for osteochondromatosis?
Good in dogs if the extent of the lesions are limited; in cats, it may be guarded and based on
FeLV status.
290
Developmental Bone Disease
25. What are retained ulnar cartilage cores?
An uncommon and variably painful lesion of the distal ulnar physes of young large and giant
dogs.
26. Describe the pa thophysiology of osteochondromatosis.
An unknown factor delays endochondral ossification in the distal ulnar physes, leading to
ulnar growth arrest and restraint of radial development.
27. How is the condition diagnosed?
Clinical signs of angular limb deformity not associated with trauma, in young large dogs;
radiography reveals radiolucent cartilage cases in the center of the physis and extending
proximally into the metaphysis.
28. What are the treatments for retained ulnar cartilage cores?
· Cessation of any nutritional supplementation and feeding of a balanced diet.
oia peipei pue 1eun uo juensuoo sonpi on sunjeia pey pue Auonoiso ieuin pegied -
· In mature patients, corrective radial osteotomy may be necessary to treat angular limb
deformity.
 29. What is the prognosis for retained ulnar cartilage cores?
Variable; based on severity of the condition
30. What is elbow dysplasia?
Abnormal development of the elbow joint associated with:
· Traumatic physeal closures of the radius or ulna
· Hereditary disproportionate radial and ulnar growth in chondrodysplastic breeds
· Congenital lateral luxation in small breeds
31. List some chondrodysplastic breeds.
·Bulldog
·Pug
· Dachshund
·Beagle
·Welsh corgi
· Basset hound
32. How is disproportionate (nontraumatic) radial and ulnar growth treated?
· Neutering and cessation of breeding in chondrodysplastic dogs
· Nothing if asymptomatic
· Corrective osteotomies of the radius and ulna to restore (if possible) congruity of the
elbow joint
33. List some corrective osteotomy procedures.
· Proximal dynamic ulnar osteotomy or ostectomy
· Radial osteotomy or ostectomy with or without distraction
·Distal ulnar ostectomy and fat grafting
 34. What is the prognosis after surgery?
Variable; based on the severity of the condition and success in restoring congruity to a
malformed joint.
Developmental Bone Disease
291
35. What is the surgical treatment for congenital elbow luxation?
Temporary pinning of the proximal ulna to the humerus to reduce the luxation and overcome
aplasia of the medial collateral ligament, hypoplasia of the proximal ulna processes, and a shal.
low humeral trochlear notch.
36. What is the prognosis?
Variable, based on the degree of malformations and ability to reduce the luxation.
37. What is Scottish fold osteodystrophy?
Skeletal malformations of the vertebrae and fore and hind paws, along with exostoses of the
distal aspect of the extremities in this breed of cats. The condition is heritable and characterized
by disturbed physeal ossification and actual secondary centers entrapping soft tissue structures.
38. What are the treatments for this condition?
·Neutering
·Breeding these cats only with straight-eared cats
·Exostectomy
·Arthrodesis
39. What is the prognosis?
40. What is Legg-Calve-Perthes disease?
Aseptic (or avascular) necrosis of the femoral head seen in young small breeds of dogs; may
be heritable in Manchester terriers. Named after three physicians (Arthur Legg in Boston,
Jacques Calve in France, and Georg Clemens Perthes in Germany), who independently
described the conditionin1910
41. Describe the pathophysiologic basis for the condition.
Vascular insult (unknown cause) to the proximal femoral epiphyseal and physeal bone
leading to necrosis, revascularization, resorption, and remodeling with subsequent collapse of the
head and neck when normally loaded.
42. List some pathognomonic clinical features of Legg-Calve-Perthes disease.
· Unilateral or bilateral hip joint-associated lameness in young small dogs
· Good recovery after femoral head and neck excision and physical therapy
43. What are some confounding clinical features of Legg-Calve-Perthes disease?
large dog disease.
·Patellar function needs to be evaluated in these patients.
· The debate between simultaneous or staged bilateral surgeries remains eternal.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Beck JA, Simpson DJ: Surgical management of osteochondromatosis affecting the vertebrae and trachea in an
Alaskan malamute. Aust Vet J 177:21-23, 1999.
821-833, 858-864, 892-899.
3. Harari J: Diseases of bone. In Morgan RV, editor: Handbook of small animat practice, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2003,
W.B. Saunders, pp 790-794.
4. Jacobsen LS, Kirberger RM: Canine multiple cartilaginous exostoses. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:45-51, 1996.
292
Osteochondrosis
5. Lewis DD, McCarthy RJ: Diagnosis of common developmental orthopedic conditions in canine pediatric
patients. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 14:287-298, 1992.
6. Matthews KG, Koblik PD: Resolution of lameness associated with Scottish fold osteodystrophy following
bilateral ostectomies and pantarsal arthrodesis. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:280-288, 1995.
7. Morgan JP, Wind AP: Bone dysplasias in the Labrador retriever: a radiographic study. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
35:332-340, 1999
8. Munjar TA, Austin CC: Commparison of risk factors for hypertrophic osteodystrophy, craniomandibular osteopathy
and canine distemmper. Vet Comp Orthop Traummatol 11:37-43, 1998
77. OSTEOCHONDROSIS
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. Who first described osteochondrosis?
Wade Brinker, at Michigan State, may have been the first to identify osteochondrosis
(humeral head lesion) retrospectively in 1939, and Wilhelm Brass in Germany was the first to
report the condition in 1956.
2. Who was the first person to assimilate the various manifestations of osteochondrosis,
including the pathophysiology of the condition?
Sten-Erik Olsson from Sweden in 1976.
3. What is osteochondrosis?
A multifactorial disorder of maturing cartilage cells in the epiphyses and physes of long
bones in young, rapidly growing large dogs. Ischemia to the articular-epiphyseal complex leads
to focal failure in endochondral ossification and retention of cartilage instead of conversion to
bone. The cartilage becomes necrotic; weakens; and, after trauma, develops clefts, flaps, and
An articular cartilage defect along with a degradative enzyme milieu perpetuate a degenerative
subchondral bone sclerosis.
 4. List some of the inflammatory chemical mediators associated with arthritis.
·Cytokines
·Leukotrienes
·Metalloproteinase
·Prostaglandins
·Proteases
· Collagenases
·Stromelysin
5. List the causes of osteochondrosis.
·Normal trauma to weakened cartilage
·Excessive trauma to normal cartilage
· Hereditary predisposition
·Rapid growth associated with high-energy dietary intake
· Ill-defined source of vascular injury to physeal cells
292
Osteochondrosis
5. Lewis DD, McCarthy RJ: Diagnosis of common developmental orthopedic conditions in canine pediatric
patients. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 14:287-298, 1992.
6. Matthews KG, Koblik PD: Resolution of lameness associated with Scottish fold osteodystrophy following
bilateral ostectomies and pantarsal arthrodesis. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:280-288, 1995.
7. Morgan JP, Wind AP: Bone dysplasias in the Labrador retriever: a radiographic study. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
35:332-340, 1999
8. Munjar TA, Austin CC: Commparison of risk factors for hypertrophic osteodystrophy, craniomandibular osteopathy
and canine distemmper. Vet Comp Orthop Traummatol 11:37-43, 1998
77. OSTEOCHONDROSIS
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. Who first described osteochondrosis?
Wade Brinker, at Michigan State, may have been the first to identify osteochondrosis
(humeral head lesion) retrospectively in 1939, and Wilhelm Brass in Germany was the first to
report the condition in 1956.
2. Who was the first person to assimilate the various manifestations of osteochondrosis,
including the pathophysiology of the condition?
Sten-Erik Olsson from Sweden in 1976.
3. What is osteochondrosis?
A multifactorial disorder of maturing cartilage cells in the epiphyses and physes of long
bones in young, rapidly growing large dogs. Ischemia to the articular-epiphyseal complex leads
to focal failure in endochondral ossification and retention of cartilage instead of conversion to
bone. The cartilage becomes necrotic; weakens; and, after trauma, develops clefts, flaps, and
An articular cartilage defect along with a degradative enzyme milieu perpetuate a degenerative
subchondral bone sclerosis.
 4. List some of the inflammatory chemical mediators associated with arthritis.
·Cytokines
·Leukotrienes
·Metalloproteinase
·Prostaglandins
·Proteases
· Collagenases
·Stromelysin
5. List the causes of osteochondrosis.
·Normal trauma to weakened cartilage
·Excessive trauma to normal cartilage
· Hereditary predisposition
·Rapid growth associated with high-energy dietary intake
· Ill-defined source of vascular injury to physeal cells
Osteochondrosis
293
6. How common is osteochondrosis?
5.2 cases per 1000 veterinary medical teaching hospital patients; nearly 60% of the patients
had a lesion involving the shoulder joint (Veterinary Medical Data Base System)
7. Where does osteochondrosis occur?
Unilaterally or bilaterally in the:
· Humeral head (caudal aspect)
· Humeral condyle (medial aspect)
· Trochlear ridges of the talus (medial more than lateral)
· Femoral condyles (lateral more than medial)
8. How is osteochondrosis diagnosed?
1.
History: recurrent lameness in one or more joints not associated with trauma or
systemic disease.
 I1.Physical examination: painful arthropathy, including swelling, crepitation, and reduced
motion.
IIl. Diagnostic imaging:
A. Survey radiography: effusion, osteochondral; defect, joint mice, osteophytes, bone
sclerosis
B. Contrast arthrography: cartilage and filing defects
C. CT: osteochondral fragments
D. MRI: cartilage and subchondral bone lesions
E. Scintigraphy: arthritis
IV. Arthrocentesis: nearly normal, nonseptic, non-immune mediated
V.Arthroscopy: atraumatic, confirmatory for diagnosis and treatment
9. Discuss treatment options for osteochondrosis.
Arthroscopy or arthrotomy is performed for resecting diseased cartilage, and subchondral
bone curettage is performed to stimulate fibroplasia and retrieval of loose osteochondral frag-
ments. Antiarthritic medications, such as aspirin, glucocorticosteroids, carprofen, etogesic, poly
sulfated glycosaminoglycans, hyaluronan, glucosamine, and chondroitin sulfate, are also used.
10.  What are the surgical approaches for treating osteochondrosis of the humeral head?
Craniolateral with tenotomy of the infraspinatus muscle, caudolateral with dissection
between the acromial and scapular parts of deltoideus (with or without teres minor tenotomy),
and caudal approach between deltoideus and triceps muscles. All usually require techmical assis-
tance for limb manipulations to examine humeral head lesions.
11. What is osteochondritis dissecans?
The combination of an articular cartilage cleft and flap (dissecting lesion) and synovitis
From the Latin dissec, to separate.
12. What is a joint mouse?
A loosened cartilage flap ossified via nourishment from synovial fluid and either free-floating
within the joint or attached to the synovium. Joint crepitation during palpation or ambulation,
associated with these fragments, is said by some clinicians to resemble a squeaking noise.
13. What is an important clinical consequence of humeral head osteochondrosis?
Bicipital tenosynovitis secondary to migration of cartilaginous or osseous fragments from
the shoulder joint into the biceps tendon sheath.
294
Osteochondrosis
14. How is bicipital tenosynovitis diagnosed?
Not easily at times, because of subtlety of signs: lameness and pain during palpation of the
intertubercular groove and tendon. Survey and contrast radiography may reveal fragments, filling
defects, and synovial irregularities. Ultrasonography of the tendon and sheath may reveal abnor
15. How is bicipital tenosynovitis treated?
· Rest and local glucocorticosteroid (prednisolone acetate) injection for early inflammatory
lesions
· Resection of the tendon from the supraglenoid tubercle and transfixation (tenodesis) to
the medial aspect of the greater tubercle with a bone screw and spiked washer or suturing
techniques
16. What is the prognosis for bicipital tenosynovitis?
Prognosis is good after surgery and fair with medical treatment.
17.With removal of cartilage lesions on the humeral head for treatment of osteochondro-
sis, should the edges of the defect be perpendicular or beveled?
Cartilage defects fill more completely with fibrocartilage after curettage or forage if the
edges remain perpendicular to the joint surface.
18. What is the success rate for surgical treatment of osteochondrosis in the shoulder
joint?
Excellent, after a convalescence of 1-2 months.
19. What is the commonest complication of the surgery?
Seroma from excessive patient activity and inadequate hemostasis or tissue apposition
during closure.
20. What lesions are associated with osteochondrosis of the elbow joint?
Osteochondrosis of the medial aspect of the humeral condyle is frequently identified in
joints with ununited anconeal process and fragmented medial coronoid process.
21. What is the prognosis after cartilage resection and bone curettage for osteochondrosis
of the elbow joint?
Good if degenerative osteoarthritis has not developed in the joint; however, large clinical
fragmented medial coronoid process) are lacking.
22. What is ununited medial epicondyle?
An equivocally painful ossicle located within the origins of the flexor tendons in young dogs
(Labrador retrievers) without a history of trauma; suspected to be either an osteochondrosis lesion
or ectopic calcification. Treatment is via surgical excision.
23.  What is the prognosis for osteochondrosis of the stifle joint?
Most authors report a guarded prognosis for large lesions in young dogs; small lesions or eas
ily retneved joint fragments have a better prognosis, although large case numbers are not evident.
  po so  p   a s p   g
joint?
·Rottweilers
·Labradorretrievers
Osteochondrosis
295
25. What is the prognosis after surgical treatment for tibiotarsal osteochondrosis?
Convalescence usually requires 1 month; residual lameness may be common. Pericapsular
fibrosis secondary to arthritis and instability and periodic antiarthritic treatments may be features
duringrecovery.
 26. List the five recommended surgical approaches to the hock joint for treatment of
osteochondrosis.
·Plantaromedial
·Caudal
· Dorsomedial
·Dorsolateral
·Plantarolateral
27. Which dietary components are related to development of osteochondrosis?
Excessive feedings with high-energy, fat- and calcium-containing food.
28. What are some useful recommendations to reduce the effect of improper nutrition on
the development of osteochondrosis?
· Limit food intake based on calculated energy requirements.
· Dietary fat content should be 8-12%.
· Dietary calcium content should be 1-1.5%.
·Avoid vitamin or mineral supplementation.
29. How is the resting energy requirement (RER) calculated?
RER (kcal/dog) = (30 x wt in kg) + 70
CONTROVERSIES
 30. Which is the best surgical approach for treatment of humeral head osteochondrosis?
Studies have revealed greater surgical exposure with the craniolateral versus caudolateral
approach, although weight-bearing on the affected limb and joint range of motion may be less.
separating the muscles. The caudal approach gives excellent exposure to the caudal cul-de-sac for
removal of joint fragments, although major neurovascular elements (caudal circumflex humeral
artery and vein, axillary nerve) must be identified and preserved. Although surgeons debate the
merits of each approach, arthroscopists are rewarded with better visualization of the joint and
reduced postoperative morbidity.
 31. Is surgery beneficial for dogs with osteochondrosis of the tarsal joint?
 Probably, but not absolutely, if the patient is young, has minimal degenerative changes in the
joint, and undergoes a minimally invasive or arthroscopic procedure for a small lesion or free.
floating fragment in a relatively stable joint. Progressive postoperative arthritic changes, as eval-
of lameness.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Harari J: Osteochondrosis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28:1-195, 1998.
2.Piermattei DL,Flo GL:Handbook of small animat orthopedics and fracture repair,ed 3,Philadelphia,1997,
W.B. Saunders, pp 192-197, 300-317.
3. Read RA: Osteochondrosis and elbow arthrosis in youmg dogs. Waltham Focus 3:2-10, 1993.
4. Schenck RC, Goodnight JMI: Osteochondritis dissecans. J Bone Joint Surg Am 78:439-454, 1996
5. Stobie D, Wallace LJ: Chronic bicipital tenosynovitis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:201-207, 1995
78.ELBOW DYSPLASIA
Mary K. Ouinn, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is elbow dysplasia?
A group of developmental diseases of the cubital joint, which are thought to be forms of
osteochondrosis. These conditions include:
· Ununited anconeal process (UAP)
· Osteochondrosis of the humeral condyle
· Fragmented medial coronoid process
· Ununited medial epicondyle (included by some authors)
2. What are the typical signalment and clinical signs of affected patients?
·Young, large-breed, rapidly growing dogs with unilateral or bilateral forelimb lameness.
· Signs may be acute or gradual in onset
·Affected animals may warm out of the lameness or may be worse after exercise because
of secondary degenerative joint disease.
3. Discuss the cause of elbow dysplasia.
There is a positive association with growth plate trauma caused by rapid or long periods of
growth and the development of elbow dysplasia. There is evidence to suggest that the group of
 4. Discuss the role of elbow incongruity in developmental elbow disease.
Studies by Dt. A. Wind revealed that incongruity of the elbow is a consistent finding in dogs
with elbow dysplasia. Abnormal development of the trochlear notch of the ulna results in an
contact points in the area of the anconeal and medial coronoid processes.
5. What is UAP?
Failure of the ossification center of the anconeal process to fuse with the olecranon.
Normally the fusion is complete by 5 months of age. This disease is seen primarily in large-breed
dogs, with the Geman shepherd, basset hound, and St. Bernard being overtepresented. Instability
or detachment of the process leads to inflammation and eventual osteoarthritis.
6. What are the clinical signs of UAP?
· Usually clinical signs are not apparent before 5-8 months of age.
· There is decreased range of motion at the elbow joint limiting the swing phase of the gait.
· Often the dog stands with the paw externally rotated.
7. How is UAP diagnosed?
Both elbows should be radiographed (lateral-to-medial view) with the joint in acute flexion
ditions. Fusion of the process does not occur before 5 months of age.
Elbow Dysplasia
297
8. List treatment options for UAP.
· Surgical excision following lateral arthrotomy
·Lag screw fixation
9. Which ridge of the humeral trochlea is most commonly affected with osteochondrosis?
Medial aspect of the humeral condyle.
11. What are the typical clinical signs?
· Forelimb lameness and a stiff gait, which can worsen with exercise or after rest.
· Joint swelling may be palpated between the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and the
olecranon.
· Pain may be elicited over the medial collateral ligament or by stressing the ligament
(flexing the carpus 90" and rotating the foot laterally).
12. How is osteochondrosis diagnosed?
A triangular subchondral defect on the medial aspect of the humeral condyle may be evident
13. What are the surgical approaches to the elbow to remove the lesion?
· Lateral approach through anconeus muscle
· Muscle separating technique between the pronator teres and the flexor carpi radialis muscles
· Longitudinal myotomy of the flexor carpi radialis
·Epicondylar osteotomy
· Arthroscopy, which provides access for diagnosis and treatment with minimal morbidity
14. What is FCP?
Fragmented medial coronoid process of the ulna. The breeds affected, clinical signs, and
etiopathology are similar to those for osteochondrosis. Rottweilers are unique in that, often, the
coronoid is still attached, but a fissure is present instead of a fragment.
15. What is a kissing lesion?
A cartilage abrasion of the medial aspect of the humeral condyle caused by the loose coro
noid process rubbing against the humerus. Typically the lesion is approximately 2 mm wide and
extends practically the entire length of the articular surface. In younger dogs, the lesion may be
narrower than in osteochondrosis. In older dogs, the two lesions appear similar.
16. What are the radiographic findings for FCP?
· Craniocaudal, lateral, and flexed lateral views should be obtained to rule out UAP,
osteochondrosis, and unumited medial epicondyle.
· Often, excessive osteoarthritis makes identification of the coronoid process difficult
·Early in the disease process, osteophytes on the anconeal process may be evident.
· On the craniocaudal view, osteophytes may also appear medially on the coronoid process
and the humeral condyle.
·Although radiographic signs may be suggestive of FCP, definitive diagnosis often requires
arthrotomy or arthroscopy.
298
Elbow Dysplasia
17. Discuss alternative imaging modalities.
A CT scan may show the separated coronoid or the fissured coronoid in affected
Rottweilers. The technique should be used judiciously because overinterpretation occurs if loose
osteophytes are present.
MRI has also been evaluated for usefulness in diagnosis of FCP. Compared with
radiography, MRI was useful for detection of nondisplaced fragmented or fissured coronoid
processes. The images correlated well with surgical findings
18. Describe the surgical treatment for FCP.
same as previously mentioned for osteochondrosis. Sharp adduction and internal rotation of the
antebrachium improves exposure. Placing a fulcrum on the lateral aspect of the elbow is also
at the fissure line. The operation can be performed bilaterally in young dogs, even if unilaterally
lame. Older arthritic dogs probably benefit from surgery of the lame limb only because the pro-
phylactic benefit has already been lost.
19. What is the prognosis for FCP?
The prognosis for function is good if the FCP is removed before degenerative joint disease
is severe. Radiographically the arthritis is known to progress, but most dogs improve postopera-
     s o  s   
Temoval of loose elbow fragments has been shown to resolve lameness even in older dogs with
severe radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis.
20. What is ununited medial epicondyle?
Detached ossified bodies located at either the medial joint line or caudally just distal to the
medial humeral epicondyle; believed to be a form of osteochondrosis in which fragments of
cartilage avulse with the tendon. Over time, the cartilage changes to bone and enlarges. Lameness
results when bone fragments rub against the humerus or ulna. In the mature dog, the fragments
are just outside the articular surface and cause little irritation. Surgical removal of the fragments
is usually helpful if there is no other coexisting elbow condition. Some clinicians believe this con-
dition to be the result of two types of calcification within the flexor tendons at their attachment
to the medial epicondyle. One, which can be unilateral or bilateral, is associated with elbow
incongruity. The second form is a result of traumatic separation of the epicondyle with the
attached flexor tendons.
21.1
Discuss the role of elbow incongruity.
Wind found that developmental incongruity of the trochlear notch of the ulna was associated
with the development of UAP, osteochondrosis, and FCP. In affected animals, a slightly elliptic
trochlear notch with a decreased arc of curvature develops. This arc is too small for the humeral
trochlea, which causes major points of contact in the area of the anconeal process and medial
coronoid process. The result is increased weight-bearing forces and constant micromotion result-
ing in UAP and FCP. Osteochondrosis results from interference of endochondral ossification
caused by excessive pressure generated by the abnormal height of the medial coronoid process.
22. What is the role of elbow arthroscopy?
Arthroscopy of the elbow joint allows systematic inspection of the humeral condyle, medial
and lateral coronoid processes, the head of the radius, and olecranon. Evolution of equipment and
imaging or arthrotomy for the diagnosis and treatment of many lesions of the elbow.
Hip Dysplasia
299
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Boulay JP: Fragmented medial coronoid process of the ulna in the dog. Vet Clin North Am 28:51-74, 1998.
2. Kippenes H, Johnston G: Diagnosis imaging of osteochondrosis. Vet Clin North Am 28:137-160, 1998.
3. Krotscheck U, Hulse DA: Ununited anconeal process: lag-screw fixation with proximal ulnar osteotomy. Vet
Comp Orthop Traumato1 13:212-216, 2000.
4. Meyer-Lindenberg A, Fehr M: Short- and long-temn results after surgical treatment of an ununited anconeal
process in the dog. Vet Comp Orthop Traumato1 14:101-110, 2001.
Comp Orthop Traumato1 15:35-43, 2002.
6. Sjorstrom L: Ununited anconeal process in the dog. Vet Clin North Am 28:75-86, 1998
surgical findings in dogs with elbow dysplasia. Am J Vet Res 58:1367-1370, 1997.
coronoid process. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 13:135-140, 2000.
28:161-189, 1998.
79. HIP DYSPLASIA
Ron McLaughlin, D.VM., D.VSc., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is hip dysplasia?
 A skeletal developmental defect that occurs commonly in dogs and rarely in cats. It is char-
acterized by hip joint laxity early in life leading to joint degeneration. It occurs most often in
large, rapidly growing breeds of dogs and usually affects both hip joints.
2. What is the cause of hip dysplasia?
A combination of genetic (polygenic) and environmental factors that lead to laxity of the
immature hip joint. The joint laxity leads to subluxation and poor congruence between the
femoral head and the acetabulum. The resultant abnormal forces across the joint interfere with
normal development and cause overload of articular cartilage. With time, degeneration (capsular
fibrosis, articular erosion, subchondral bone sclerosis, osteophytosis) of the joint occurs.
 3. List some environmental factors that affect the development and progression of canine
hip dysplasia.
· Rapid weight gain in growing animals
·A high plane of nutrition (excessive caloric intake)
·Reduced pelvic muscle mass
· A mismatch between skeletal and muscular developments
4. List the clinical signs in a dog with hip dysplasia.
· Decreased activity
·Difficulty rising
· Reluctance to run or climb stairs
· Intermittent, hindlimb lameness
·Bunny hopping
·Swaying gait
·Narrow stance
· Hip pain
Hip Dysplasia
299
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Boulay JP: Fragmented medial coronoid process of the ulna in the dog. Vet Clin North Am 28:51-74, 1998.
2. Kippenes H, Johnston G: Diagnosis imaging of osteochondrosis. Vet Clin North Am 28:137-160, 1998.
3. Krotscheck U, Hulse DA: Ununited anconeal process: lag-screw fixation with proximal ulnar osteotomy. Vet
Comp Orthop Traumato1 13:212-216, 2000.
4. Meyer-Lindenberg A, Fehr M: Short- and long-temn results after surgical treatment of an ununited anconeal
process in the dog. Vet Comp Orthop Traumato1 14:101-110, 2001.
Comp Orthop Traumato1 15:35-43, 2002.
6. Sjorstrom L: Ununited anconeal process in the dog. Vet Clin North Am 28:75-86, 1998
surgical findings in dogs with elbow dysplasia. Am J Vet Res 58:1367-1370, 1997.
coronoid process. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 13:135-140, 2000.
28:161-189, 1998.
79. HIP DYSPLASIA
Ron McLaughlin, D.VM., D.VSc., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is hip dysplasia?
 A skeletal developmental defect that occurs commonly in dogs and rarely in cats. It is char-
acterized by hip joint laxity early in life leading to joint degeneration. It occurs most often in
large, rapidly growing breeds of dogs and usually affects both hip joints.
2. What is the cause of hip dysplasia?
A combination of genetic (polygenic) and environmental factors that lead to laxity of the
immature hip joint. The joint laxity leads to subluxation and poor congruence between the
femoral head and the acetabulum. The resultant abnormal forces across the joint interfere with
normal development and cause overload of articular cartilage. With time, degeneration (capsular
fibrosis, articular erosion, subchondral bone sclerosis, osteophytosis) of the joint occurs.
 3. List some environmental factors that affect the development and progression of canine
hip dysplasia.
· Rapid weight gain in growing animals
·A high plane of nutrition (excessive caloric intake)
·Reduced pelvic muscle mass
· A mismatch between skeletal and muscular developments
4. List the clinical signs in a dog with hip dysplasia.
· Decreased activity
·Difficulty rising
· Reluctance to run or climb stairs
· Intermittent, hindlimb lameness
·Bunny hopping
·Swaying gait
·Narrow stance
· Hip pain
300
Hip Dysplasia
·Atrophy of thigh muscles
· Hypertrophy of shoulder muscles
· Crepitus and decreased hip joint motion
5. How is hip dysplasia diagnosed?
· A tentative diagnosis is based on signalment, history, clinical signs, and physical exami-
nation findings.
· In most cases, hip joint laxity (positive Ortolani sign or Bardens test) is palpable.
· Joint looseness may not be present in chronic cases because of periarticular fibrosis.
·A definitive diagnosis requires radiographic identification of hip joint laxity or secondary
6. What are the Ortolani sign and Bardens test?
· Ortolani sign: Dorsal coxofemoral lux ation followed by abduction of the femur results in
a click as the femoral head is reseated in the acetabulum. (Ortolani was an Italian pedia-
trician who identified a palpable and audible click while examining a 5-month-old infant
in Ferrara, Italy, in 1935.)
· Bardens test: Elevation of the femoral shaft produces lateral displacement of the greatel
trochanter. (Bardens and Hardwick, Indiana veterinarians, descri bed lateral displacement
of the femur in dogs in 1968.)
7. What are the typical radiographic findings of hip dysplasia?
Joint subluxation
· Incongruity between the femoral head and acetabulum
Degenerative joint disease
· Flattening of the femoral head
· Thickening of the femoral neck
· Shallow acetabulum
· Irregular acetabular margin
·Enthesiophyte formation at the joint margins
· Sclerosis of the subchondral bone
· Increased density of the periarticular soft tissues
Hip dysplasia usually affects both hips, and one side may appear radiographically to be more
severely affected than the other.
8. The Orthopedic Foundation for Animals (OFA) has a registry program to evaluate
pelvic radiographs and grade hip conformation. What is the radiographic positioning
method recommended by the OFA?
Dogs are usually heavily sedated and radiographed in dorsal recumbency with the pelvis
symmetric. Both hips are fully extended (hip-extended position), the femurs are parallel, and the
stifles are rotated internally to place the patellae on the midline.
9. How are pelvic radiographs evaluated?
Radiographs are evaluated for hip joint congruity and evidence of degenerative disease and
given a score:
·Normal (excellent, good, fair)
·Borderline dysplastic
·Dysplastic (mild, moderate, severe)
Hip Dysplasia
301
10. PennHip is another registry program to evaluate hip radiographs and grade hip
conformation. What is the radiographic positioning method advocated by PennHip?
 Distraction/compression radiographic views are obtained with the dog under heavy sedation
Or general anesthesia and in dorsal recumbency. The hindlimbs are in a neutral position (hips not
a compression view with the femoral heads fully seated into the acetabula. The second view is a
distraction view obtained by placing a custom-made device between the legs at the level of the
ventral pelvis to create maximal lateral displacement of the femoral heads. The relative amount
of femoral head displacement (joint laxity) is quantified to obtain a distraction index (DI).
11. How is the DI used in radiographic evaluation?
The DI ranges from 0 to l and is calculated by dividing the distance that the geometric
center of the femoral head moves laterally from the center of the acetabulum by the radius of the
femoral head.
· A DI of 0 indicates a fully congruent joint.
· A DI of 1 indicates a complete luxation with little or no acetabular coverage of the
femoral head.
12. Does the estrus cycle have an effect on coxofemoral joint laxity as evaluated by the
OFA and PennHip techniques?
No.
13. What other radiographic views for evaluating hip dysplasia have been described?
· Dorsolateral hip testing using radiography and CT of patients in sternal recumbency and
a kneeling position
· Pelvic stress radiography with dogs in dorsal recumbency, with femurs angled at 60° and
manually pushed craniodorsally
14. List the treatment options available for dogs with hip dysplasia.
1. Immature dog with joint laxity and no degenerative joint disease:
o sd s e   o so ro n no d  -
osteoarthritis
· Medical management
· Medical management 
· Femoral head and neck excision or total hip replacement if unresponsive to medical
treatment
3. Mature dog with degenerative joint disease:
·Medical management
· Total hip replacement or femoral head and neck excision
15. List the factors that must be considered when selecting treatment for a dog with hip
dysplasia.
· Dog's age, size, and activity
· Degree of laxity
· Degree of osteoarthritis
· Quality and depth of acetabulum
·Femoral head shape
· Clinician's preferences
· Home environment
· Medical and surgical costs
302
Hip Dysplasia
16. What is included in the medical treatment of hip dysplasia?
· Controlled activity
·Weight loss
·Physical therapy
·Antinflammatory and anal gesic medications
· Disease-modifying osteoarthritic agents
17. What is a TPO?
A corrective surgical procedure that reorients the acetabulum (following three
osteotomies—pubic, ischial, and iliac) to establish congruity between the femoral head and
acetabulum. It increases acetabular coverage of the femoral head to eliminate subluxation
and improve joint stability. The rotated acetabulum is stabilized with an angled bone plate
and screws.
18. What are the indications for performing a TPO to treat hip dysplasia?
Young dogs (6-12 months old) with radiographic evidence of joint laxity, minimal or no
degenerative joint disease, and clinical signs of hip dysplasia are considered candidates for TPO.
To be successful, the procedure must be performed early in the disease process, before
of a more congruent joint. Early correction of the abnormal biomechanical forces acting on the
joint may minimize the progression of osteoarthrosis and may allow development of a more
normal joint as the dog matures.
19. List complications that have been described after TPO surgery.
·Excessive narrowing of pelvic canal
· Temporary constipation
·Sciatic nerve injury
· Implant failures
·Persistent joint incongruity
· Wound infection
20. When is a total hip replacement used to treat hip dysplasia?
Total hip arthroplasty is the replacement of the femoral and acetabular components of the
coxofemoral joint with prosthetic implants. In dogs with hip dysplasia, total hip arthroplasty is
generally reserved for dogs with severe degenerative joint disease unresponsive to medical thera-
pies. A cemented modular system composed of a polyethylene acetabular cap, a cobalt-chrome
femoral head, a titanium femoral stem, and polymethylmethacrylate cement is frequently used.
21. List the complications of total hip replacement surgery.
·Infection
·Luxation
· Persistent lameness
· Implant loosening
·Sciatic nerve injury
· Femoral fracture
22. When is a femoral head and neck excision arthroplasty used to treat hip dysplasia?
This is a salvage procedure used when significant degenerative joint disease is present and
goal is to eliminate hip pain by removing the femoral head and neck and initiating the develop
ment of a fibrous pseudarthrosis that permits ambulation. The procedure can be perfomed in
dogs of all sizes; however, results are usually better in smaller, lighter dogs (<20 kg).
Hip Dysplasia
303
23. What is a biceps sling?
remaining proximal femur and acetabulum during femoral head and neck excision.
24. What is a femoral neck-lengthening procedure?
A surgical procedure that involves creating a longitudinal split in the proximal femur.
Wedges are inserted to increase the distance from the greater trochanter to the femoral head,
effectively lengthening the femoral neck and reducing subluxation. The use of the procedure is
controversial.
25. What is juvenile pubic symphysiodesis (JPS)?
JPS is a surgical procedure used in immature dogs to prematurely close the pubic synphysis.
Following a ventral approach to the pubis, electrocautery is applied every 2-3 mm along the sym-
physis at 40 watts for 12-30 seconds.
 26. How does JPs benefit dogs with hip dysplasia?
Premature closure of the pubic symphysis results in ventrolateral rotation of the acetabulum,
which increases acetabular ventroversion and the acetabular angle to improve coverage of the
femoralhead.
27. At what age should JPs be performed?
Improvement in hip conformation is greater when the procedure is performed in dogs between
3 and 4 months of age. When JPS was performed in dogs at 15 weeks of age, the acetabular angle
was increased by 16°. However, when JPS was performed in dogs at 20 weeks of age, the increase
in acetabular angle was only 8°. Dogs over 6 months of age do not benefit from the procedure.
28. Are there complications associated with JPS?
Few. A reduction in the pelvic inlet circumference area and width occurs, but may not cause
clinical problems in dogs.
CONTROVERSIES
 29. Discuss the controversy between the OFA system and the PennHip systems for the
radiographic diagnosis of hip dysplasia.
The OFA system has been the standard for many years. A scientific study comparing radio-
graphic techniques found the distraction method used in PennHip to be 2.5 times more sensitive in
Tate in detection of hip dysplasia once secondary changes occur but is less accurate in detecting joint
laxity alone. The grading system used by OFA is subjective, and the repeatability of the scores has
been questioned. One report found an examiner variability of 48-75% using the OFA scoring
system. The PennHip system is better able to show joint laxity, and this looseness, as measured by
the Dl, is strongly correlated with the future development of osteoarthritis in some breeds.
30. Do polysulfated glycosaminoglycans (PSGAG) help dogs with hip dysplasia?
Given to puppies susceptible to hip dysplasia, PSGAG improved radiographic, laboratory,
and necropsy evaluations. Given to adult dogs with hip dysplasia, PSGAG failed to improve sig
nificantly (statistically) orthopedic scores compared with controls. Nonsteroidal antinflam
matory drugs, such as carprofen and etodolac, have been documented to improve limb function
 31. Is a TPo indicated for a young patient with palpable laxity and no clinical signs?
Some surgeons prefer to operate only on symptomatic patients, whereas others believe the
complications of surgery are outweighed by the benefits, especially in breeds predisposed to
304
Hip Dysplasia
and prefer total hip replacement (or femoral head excisions) later in life for the animal. An
absolute correct and scientifically valid decision may be elusive; clinical and professional
preferences (or prejudices) may be important influences.
32. Can femoral head and neck excision arthroplasty be used successfully in large dogs?
Successful recovery from femoral head and neck excision surgery depends on the evaluator.
Although few clinicians would argue about reduced weight-bearing and range-of-motion charac
pain-free limb usage has been described by owners and authors in large, active dogs that have
been stimulated to use the limbs early during convalescence.
33.  Are there other surgical procedures that have been used to treat hip dysplasia?
Several once-common procedures are not currently recommended, including pectineal
myotomy, BOP shelf arthroplasty, and intertrochanteric osteotomy.
·Pectineal myotomy (or myectomy) may temporarily alleviate muscular or pericapsular
 pain, although it has little effect on the progression of joint disease.
· The BOP shelf arthroplasty procedure failed to promote a new dorsal acetabular shelf of
bone to reduce subluxation (autogenous iliac bone transfer may be more realistic).
· Intertrochanteric osteotomy, used to improve coxofemoral biomechanics by varization,
normoversion, and medialization of the femoral head and neck, has not prevented
Recently, joint capsule denervation has been prescribed to actviate pain and lameness.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Adams WM, Dueland RT: Early detection of canine hip dysplasia: Comparison of two palpation and five
radiographic methods. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:339-346, 1998.
 2. Bardens J, Hardwick H: New observations on the diagnosis and causes of hip dysplasia. VM/SAC 63:238-245,
1968.
3. Cook JL, Tomlinson JL: Pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment of canine hip dysplasia. Comp Contin Educ
Pract Vet 18:853-865, 1996.
26:217-222, 1997.
5. Farese JP, Todhunter RJ: Dorsolateral subluxation of hip joints in dogs measured in a weight-bearing position
with radiography and computed tomography. Vet Surg 27:393-405, 1998.
6. Flickiger MA, Friedrich GA: A radiographic stress technique for evaluation of coxofemoral joint laxity in dogs.
Vet Surg 28:1-9, 1999.
 7. Johnson AL, Smith CW: Triple pelvic osteotomy, effect of limb function and degenerative joint disease. J Am
Animm Hosp Assoc 34:260-264, 1998.
 8. Lust G: An overview of the pathogenesis of canine hip dysplasia. I Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1443-1450, 1997.
9. Kinzel S: Evaluation of canine hip joint capsule denervation: retrospective study of 117 dogs. Vet Comp Orthop
Traumatol 15: 51-56, 2002.
10. Oakes MG, Lewiss DD: Evaluation of shelf arthroplasty as a treatment for hip dysplasia in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 208:1838-1845, 1996.
11. Ortolani M: Congenital hip dysplasia in the light of early diagnosis. Clin Orthop 119:6-10, 1976
12. Patricelli AJ, Dueland RT, Adams WM, et al: Juvenile pubic symphysiodesis in dysplastic puppies at 15 and 20
weeks of age. Vet Surg 31: 435-44, 2002.
13. Rasnussen LM, Kramek BA: Preoperative variables affecting outcome of triple pelvic osteotomy. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 213:80-85, 1998
14. Smith GK: Advances in diagnosing canine hip dysplasia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1451-1462, 1997.
80. TRAUMATIC JOINT LUXATIONS
Ron McLaughlin, D.VM., D.VSc., Dip. A.C.VS
1. Why is a complete physical examination so important in a patient suspected of having
a traumatic joint luxation?
Concurrent injuries are common in patients receiving sufficient trauma to lux ate a joint.
2. List possible concurrent injuries.
·Fractures
·Diaphragmatic hernias
·Abdominal hernias
· Bladder ruptures
· Pulmonary contusions
· Neurologic deficits
·Traumatic myocarditis
· Ligamentous injuries
 3. Which is the most commonly luxated joint in dogs?
The coxofemoral joint.
4. What causes coxofemoral luxation?
Trauma, although severe hip dysplasia can also lead to complete luxation of the joint.
5. In a coxofemoral luxation, the femoral head is displaced in which direction?
Most hip luxations are craniodorsal (approximately 75%). This is due, in part, to the pull of
the gluteal muscles on the greater trochanter. The remainder of hip luxations are ventral or
caudad.
6.  List the clinical signs of a coxofemoral luxation.
·Severe lameness (often non-weight-bearing)
· External rotation of the limb (stifle outward, hock inward)
·Asymmetry of the hips
· Apparent shortening of the luxated limb
 7. What is the examination technique for palpating the hip joint to identify a coxofemoral
luxation?
 The thumb displacement test. The clinician's thumb is positioned in the palpable depression
between greater trochanter and ischial tuberosity. As the limb is externally rotated, the greater
trochanter moves caudally, and the clinician's thumb is displaced from the depression if the hip
joint is reduced. When the hip is luxated, the femoral head slides cranially along the ilium when
the limb is externally rotated and the clinician's thumb is not displaced.
8. Why is it important to radiograph the hips when a coxofemoral luxation is
suspected?
To confirm and characterize (craniodorsal, ventral, or caudad) the luxation. Radiographs
also allow the clinician to evaluate the pelvis for acetabular or femoral head fractures and concur-
rent hip disease.
306
TraumaticJoint Luxations
9. How soon after injury should the coxofemoral luxation be reduced?
As soon as possible, to minimize destruction of cartilage and to decrease muscle spasticity
and fibrosis. It is important that the patient be stable and able to undergo anesthesia safely before
Teduction is attempted. Closed reduction is usually successful if performed in the first several
days after luxation.
10.  Describe the technique for closed reduction of a craniodorsal coxofemoral luxation.
General anesthesia (or sedation and an epidural) is usually required. The patient is placed in
lateral recumbency (with the luxated limb up), and an assistant stabilizes the pelvis using a towel
grasps the hindlimb at the hock and stifle. The limb is externally rotated and pulled distally. The
limb is then internally rotated and abducted to reduce the joint. Once the joint is reduced, firm
medial pressure is applied to the trochanter as the limb is manipulated through a full range of
motion. This process removes blood clots, joint capsule, and other soft tissues from the acetabu
firmed by palpation and radiography
11. Once a closed reduction is achieved, how is the joint stabilized to prevent reluxation?
Application of an Ehmer sling.
12. How does an Ehmer sling work to stabilize the joint and prevent reluxation?
Not well. The sling is designed to prevent weight-bearing and positions the femoral head
deeply within the acetabulum by holding the limb in an internally rotated and abducted position
Ehmer slings are able to prevent reluxation in only about 50% of cases.
13. List the potential complications of using an Ehmer sling after closed reduction.
·Reluxation of the coxofemoral joint before, during, or after application of an Ehmer sling
· Gradual loosening of the sling, which can also lead to reluxation of the joint several days
Tater.
· Swelling of foot and soft tissue injuries caused by the tape.
Articular fractures of the femoral head or acetabulum.
15. List the indications for open reduction and stabilization of a coxofemoral luxation.
·Articular fractures
·Unsuccessful closed reduction
· Joint reluxation
· Chronic luxation
·Joint examination
· Internal fixation
 16. What surgical approaches are commonly used for open reduction of a coxofemoral
luxation?
A craniolateral approach to the hip is used most commonly. A trochanteric osteotomy can
be used to increase exposure. When reattaching the greater trochanter, it may be positioned cau
dodistally to increase the medial pull of the gluteal muscles and abduct and internally rotate the
femur, increasing joint stability.
17. What is the extracapsular suture method for stabilizing a coxofemoral luxation?
Occasionally, after the femoral head is reduced, the joint capsule can be sutured. In many
cases, the joint capsule is damaged and cannot be sutured completely. In these cases, two screws
TraumaticointLuxations
307
(with washers) are placed in the dorsal acetabular rim (at approximately the 10 o'clock and 1
o'clock positions). Suture (nonabsorbable) material is woven from the femoral neck to the
18. What is the trochanteric rotation suture method for stabilizing a coxofemoral
luxation?
Placement of nonabsorbable suture between the greater trochanter and ventral wing of the
ilium to internally rotate the proximal femur and seat the head into the acetabulum.
19. What is the Devita pin method of stabilizing a coxofemoral luxation?
Placing an intramedullary pin from ventral to the ischium over the femoral neck and embed-
ding it into the ilium. The pin provides dorsal acetabular support to prevent reluxation.
20. List potential complications of the Devita pin technique.
·Pin migration
· Injury to the sciatic nerve during pin placement
·Damage to the femoral head
·Reluxation
21. Describe the toggle pin technique for stabilizing coxofemoral luxations.
A hole is drilled through the femoral neck and head, and another hole is drilled through the
medical acetabular wall. A strand of nonabsorbable suture material is attached to a small metal
rod (toggle rod). The toggle rod is then inserted through the acetabular hole to anchor the suture.
suture is tied laterally below the greater trochanter by passing it through another bone tunnel
drilled in the femur by using a sterile surgical button. The suture effectively replaces the ligament
of the head of the femur and provides stability.
22. How does triple pelvic osteotomy help stabilize a luxated (reduced) hip joint?
 It allows the acetabulum to be reoriented to enhance the dorsal coverage of the femoral head.
It would be useful only when stabilizing craniodorsal hip luxations.
23. What options are available if both closed and open techniques are unsuccessful in
stabilizing a coxofemoral luxation?
Femoral head and neck excision arthroplasty or total hip replacement may be used
Transarticular pinning has been infrequently described in the literature, although joint disease and
patient size are limiting factors.
24. Are shoulder luxations congenital or caused by trauma in dogs?
Both. Shoulder luxations are relatively uncommon in the dog, but when they do occur, they are
usually a result of trauma. Lateral luxati ons are more prevalent in large-breed dogs. Small dogs, par-
ticularly toy poodles and shelties, can have medial shoulder luxation with no evidence of trauma
25. Are all congenital shoulder luxa tions reducible?
No. If diagnosed early, the joint may be surgically reconstructed and stabilized. Some con-
genital luxations are irreducible because of malformations of the glenoid and humeral head.
Severe erosion of the glenoid may be present in cases of chromc luxation. Excision of the glenoid
26. What are the common clinical signs of a traumatic shoulder luxation?
Dogs are often non-weight-bearing and hold the limb flexed at the elbow. Palpation reveals
the relative malpositioning of the acromial process and the greater tubercle of the humerus.
308
TraumaticJointLuxations
27. After closed reduction of a traumatic shoulder luxation, what type of external coapta-
tion may be used to provide stability?
· A Velpeau sling is preferred for stabilizing medial luxations (it distracts the humeral head
later ally).
· A non-weight-bearing sling or Spica splint is preferred for stabilizing lateral luxations.
28. What surgical techniques are used to provide stability after open reduction of a
shoulder luxation?
Once the joint is reduced, the joint capsule, glenohumeral ligaments, and surrounding soft
tissues are imbricated. The tendon of the biceps brachii can be transposed to provide additional
support. For medial lux ations, the tendon is transposed medially; for lateral luxations, the tendon
ment or replace the glenohumeral ligament.
has also been described and is currently under evaluation for use in dogs.
29. What are the clinical signs of a traumatic elbow luxation?
·Acute non-weight-bearing lameness
·Pain
·Soft tissue swelling
· Reduced range-of-motion at the elbow joint
The limb is carried with the elbow flexed and adducted, while the foot and antebrachium are
abducted.
 30. Are elbow luxations more often medial or lateral?
Almost always lateral because of the restrictive size and shape of the medial humeral epi-
condyle. Because the elbow is an inherently stable joint, luxation often includes rupture (midsub
Radiography of the joint is imperative.
31. Can closed reduction of an elbow luxation be successful?
 Yes. Closed reduction is successful in most cases if performed within the first few days after
luxation. A limb bandage helps reduce soft tissue swelling and assists in the reduction; patients
open reduction.
32. Describe the technique for closed reduction of an elbow luxation.
General anesthesia is required, and muscle relaxants may help. Reduction can be achieved
by applying medial pressure to the radial head and the olecranon with the elbow maximally
flexed. Alternatively the elbow is flexed, and the antebrachium is abducted. The ulna is then
Totated to engage the anconeal process within the condylar ridge of the humerus. The limb is then
extended and internally rotated to reduce the radiohumeral joint. Flexion of the elbow should
complete the reduction.
33. How is joint stability assessed after closed reduction?
Careful palpation of the elbow after reduction is important to evaluate the collateral
ligaments. The elbow and carpus are flexed to 90°, and the paw is rotated medially and laterally.
If the collateral ligaments are intact, the paw rotates laterally to approximately 45° and medially
to approximately 70°. If the lateral collateral ligament is damaged, the paw rotates medially to
140°. If the medial collateral ligament is torn, the paw rotates laterally to approximately 90°.
Physical comparison to the contralateral normal elbows is helpful along with posttreatment
radiographs.
TraumaticJoint Luxations
309
34. List the indications of open reduction of an elbow luxation.
· Joint fractures
· Unstable joint
·Unsuccessful reduction
· Visualization of joint structures
35. What treatments are used for open reduction?
· Collateral and annular li gament repairs
·Temporary transarticular fixation
·Postoperative coaptation
36. In which breeds of dog does congenital elbow luxation occur?
·Pekingese
·Yorkshire terriers
· Boston terriers
·Shelties
·Dachshunds
·Bassets
 37. What are the clinical signs of congenital elbow luxation?
and flexion of the elbow with the antebrachium pronated.
 38. List the surgical techniques available for repairing damaged collateral ligaments in
tarsocrural luxations.
1. Direct suturing of the ligament using a locking loop suture pattern and nonabsorbable
suture material
 2. Prosthetic ligament replacement using screws and washers and nonabsorbable suture
 3. Replacement of the long and the short components of the collateral ligament (preferred
technique)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Bardet JF: Diagnosis of shoulder instability in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:42-54, 1998.
2. Dassler CL, Vasseur PB: Elbow luxation. In Slatter D,editor: Textbook of small animat surgery,ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2002, W.B. Saunders, pp 1927-1952.
3. Evers P, Johnston GR: Long-term results of treatment of traumatic coxofemoral joint dislocation in dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 210:59-64, 1997.
4. Haburjak J, Lenehan T, Harari J, et al: Treatment of traumatic coxofemoral luxation with triple pelvic osteotomy
m 19 dogs (1987-1999). Vet Commp Orthop Traumatol 14:69-77, 2001.
5. Piemattei DL, Flo GL: Orthopedic conditions of the fore and hind limbs. In Piermattei DL, Flo GL, editors
Handbook of small animal orthopedics and fracture treatment,ed 3, Philadelphia,1997, W.B.Saunders, pp 228-
260, 288-320.
6. Talcott KW, Vasseur PB: Luxation of the scapulohumeral joint. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smalt aninat
surgery,ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002, W.B. Saunders, pp 1897-1904.
81. PATELLAR LUXATIONS
Michael I. Singer, D.VM.
C.W. Smith, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What is patellar luxation?
Lateral or medial displacement of the patella out of the trochlear groove of the distal femur.
2. Which type of patellar luxation is the most common?
· Medial patellar luxations are more common in all sizes and breeds of dogs and cats (75-
80% of all cases).
· Large-breed dogs have an increased risk of lateral luxations, but medial luxations still
predominate.
·Bilateral invol vement occurs in 20-25% of cases.
3.  What are the typical abnormal features in a stifle with a patellar luxation?
·A shallow trochlear groove
·Bowing of the distal femur
· Rotational abnormality of the proximal tibia leading to displacement of the tibial
tuberosity
 4. Why does the trochlear groove fail to develop in animals with early-onset patellar
luxations?
The articular cartilage grows in response to increases and decreases in pressures. Increased
pressure retards growth, and decreased pressure accelerates growth. When the patella is not in the
groove is responsible for the formation of the depth of the groove.
5. What causes patellar luxations?
Patellar luxations can be congenital or traumatic. Most luxations are congenital and are
related to the hip joint, quadriceps mechanism, and pelvic limb conformation. It has been sug
gested that the abnormal bowing of the femur is a result of the abnormal pull of the quadriceps
and patella luxation and not a cause of the lux ation.
6.  What is the grading system used to characterize the degree of luxation and deformity
in patellar luxations?
Grade 1—The patella is found in the groove on palpation. It can be manually luxated, but
when released, it returns to the trochlear groove. There is minimal deviation of the tibial
tuberosity or minimal rotation of the tibia.
deviation of the tibial tuberosity, and approximately 30° of medial tibial rotation.
Grade 3—The patella is out of the trochlear groove on palpation. It can be manually reduced
into the groove, but when released, it immediately luxates. The tibial tuberosity is moder
ately deviated, and there is 30-60° of tibial rotation.
Grade 4—The patella is found out of the groove and cannot be reduced into the groove
manually. There is severe rotation of the tibial tuberosity, 60-90° of tibial rotation, and
PatellarLuxations
311
there is frequently severe varus or valgus deformity of the distal femur. These animals
usually have not developed a trochlear groove.
7.  How do animals with patellar luxations present clinically?
Clinical signs vary with the degree of luxation, age of the patient, and degree of degenerative
joint disease (DJD) present.
Grade I—These animals are symptomatic or have mild intermittent lameness.
Grade 2—These animals typically have a persistent lameness. It is common for these
animals to present with a history of having a lameness characterized by episodes of non-
weight-bearing lameness and a normal gait (when the patella spontaneously reduces).
Grade 3—These animals have a persistent lameness, often non-weight-bearing.
held in a flexed position.
8. List other musculoskeletal abnormalities that occur with patellar luxations.
·Coxa vara (medial luxation)
·Coxa valga (lateral luxation)
(      n   
●Torsion and bowing of the distal femur (varus or valgus)
· Femoral epiphysis dysplasia
·Rotational instability of the stifle
· Tibial deformities
9. What are coxa vara and valga?
Varus—decreased (<13s°) angle of inclination (angle between femoral neck and shaft in a
ventrodorsal radiographic projection)
Val gus—increased (>145°) angle of inclination
10. What is the Q angle, and how does it relate to patellar luxations?
group, the patella, and the patellar ligament. Using MR1, animals with grade 2 and 3 patellar luxa-
tions have larger Q angles than normal animals or those with a grade 1 patellar luxation.
11. Is there an association between hip dysplasia and patellar luxations?
No. Hip dysplasia, coxa valga, and lateral patellar lux ations have not been consistently docu-
mented as concurrent or causative conditions.
12. Why are torsional and angular deformities associated with media patellar luxations?
Torsional and angular deformities are caused by abnormal pressure exerted on the growth
plates because of the displacement of the quadriceps muscle group. Increased pressure on the
medial side of the femoral growth plate slows growth, and decreased pressure on the lateral side
accelerates growth. This leads to lateral bowing of the femur. Tibial deformation occurs with
the same types of forces acting on the tibial growth plates. These forces lead to medial dis-
placement of the tibial tuberosity, medial bowing of the proximal tibia, and lateral torsion of the
distal tibia.
13. If a middle-age to older-age animal presents with an acute onset of hindlimb lameness,
is the patellar luxation the likely cause of the lameness?
No. It is more likely that the animal has sustained another concomitant injury, most likely a
312
Patellar Luxations
14. How frequently does a ruptured cruciate ligament occur in dogs with chronic medial
patellar luxations?
In 15-20% of cases
15. Why would patellar luxation predispose a dog to cruciate ligament failure?
· Loss of quadricep muscles in reducing cranial drawer motion
·Abnormal stifle joint development causing stress of ligaments
·Concomitant degeneration of CrCL with age
16. What are the treatment principles used to surgically correct patellar luxations?
· Create or deepen the trochlear groove—trochleoplasty techmiques
· Modify the surrounding soft tissue structures to aid in reduction of the luxation—soft
tissue releasing and imbricating techniques
17. What are the different trochleoplasty techniques, and what are the potential benefits
or problems with each?
Trochlear sulcoplasty—Removing the articular cartilage and underlying subchondral bone
to create a new groove. The resultant defect fils in with fibrocartilage, not as good as
hyaline cartilage for articular surfaces.
Trochlear chondroplasty—A cartilage flap is elevated, the subchondral bone is removed, and
o suou g nnoge) saop suno ut pesn sq uo ueo snbuon s poidi si de s
age) before the articular cartilage becomes more adherent to the underlying subchon-
dral bone.
Trochlear wedge recession—An osteochondral wedge of bone is removed, additional
subchondral bone is removed, the defect is widened, and the wedge is replaced. This
allows for the replacement of the hyaline cartilage. There may be an increased risk of
reluxation in stifle extension due to the limited amount of subchondreal bone removed at
the proximal aspect of the wedge.
Trochlear block recession—-An osteochondral block of bone is removed, subchondral bone
is removed, and the block is replaced. This technique is thought to decrease the incidence
of luxations in stifle extension since the proximal aspect of the groove is deepened better
than the wedge recession. It has been shown experimentally in a cadaver study that the
block recession increased proximal patellar depth, increased the amount of the groovey
patellar contact, recessed a larger portion of the groove, and better resisted luxation in an
extended stifle as compared with the wedge recession technique.
18. What is the advantage of preserving the hyaline articular cartilage?
By preserving the hyaline cartilage, the amount of fibrocartilage deposited in the joint is
minimized. Articular cartilage is a much better substance for articular surfaces. This allows for a
quicker return to normal function.
19. What is a potential complication of a wedge recession?
Displacement of the wedge fragment and a resulting free bone fragment in the stifle.
20. How (generally) is a tibial tuberosity transposition performed?
The tibial tuberosity is freed from the tibia. Care is taken to leave the distal attachment of the
patellar tendon intact. A small piece of cortical bone is removed from the recipient site (lateral or
medial depending on the direction for the luxation). The tibial tuberosity fragment is levered into
its new position and secures with l or 2 Kirschner wires engaging the caudal cortex of the tibia
Patellar Luxations
313
21. Why is it important to keep the distal attachment intact, and what should be done if it
cannot be preserved?
The distal patellar tendon attachment acts as a tension band and aids in the stability of the
transposed fragment, and opposes the proximal pull of the quadriceps group. If this attachment
is lost, a tension band of orthopedic wire should be used to stabilize the fragment.
22. List soft tissue reconstruction techniques that are used to help stabilize the patella.
· Overlap tightening of the lateral or medial retinaculum
·Fascia lata overlap
· Medial sartorius muscle release
·Patellar and tibial antirotation sutures
· Desmotomy of medial or lateral retinaculum
·Quadnceps release
23.  What is the most common cause of failure for the surgical treatment of patellar luxations?
Trying to overcome skeletal malformations by soft tissue reconstructive techniques alone
All grade 2 and higher luxations need realignment of the quadriceps mechamism via a tibial
tuber osity transpositi on.
24. Is congenital patellar luxation hereditary?
Yes, medial patellar luxations are thought to be inherited; affected animals should be surgi
cally sterilized and removed from the breeding pool.
25. In small dogs with medial patellar luxation, does surgery reduce the progression of
DJD?
 No. In studies of dogs with bilateral lesions, progression of DJD was noted in both treated
and control groups. Increasing age at surgery was the only factor to correlate positively with the
seventy of joint degeneration.
26.  How is a lateral patellar luxation treated?
opposite side of the joint (lateral release, medial imbrication, medial tuberosity transposition).
27. What is a frustrating complication of patellar luxation repair?
Causing a medial patellar luxation to become lateral luxation (or vice versa). It is important
to check the adequacy of your repair prior to closing the skin.
28. Is it common for a patella to reluxate after surgical repair?
If the repair breaks down, reluxation is likely. It is not uncommon for animals to have a persist-
29. Discuss characteristics of patellar luxations in the cat.
Medial luxations are more common than lateral luxations. Devon Rex and Abyssinian catS
are overrepresented. Angular and torsional deformities are not as common in the cat. Diagnosis
is most frequently made in younger cats. Many cats are asymptomatic. Affected cats usually are
good postoperatively
BIBLIOGRAPHY
dogs: 124 cases (1982-1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:716-720, 1994
314
CruciateLigamentInjuries and Treatments
2. Johnson AL, Probst CW: Conparison of trochlear block recession and trochlear wedge recession for canine
patellar luxation using a cadaver model. Vet Surg 30:140-150, 2001.
3. Kaiser S, Comely D: The correlation of canine patellar luxation and the anteversion angle as measured using
magnetic resonance images. Vet Radio1 Ultrasound 42:113-118, 2001.
4. L'Eplattenier H, Montavon P: Patellar luxation in dogs and cats: pathogenesis and diagnosis. Comp Contin Educ
Pract Vet. 24:234-240, 2002
Pract Vet 24:292-298, 2002.
6. Remedios AM, Basker A: Medial patellar luxation in 16 large dogs. Vet Surg 21:5-9, 1992.
7. Roy R, Wallace L: Retrospective evaluation of stifle osteoarthritis in dogs with bilateral medial patellar luxation
and unilateral repair. Vet Surg 21:475-479, 1992.
8.Vasseur PB: The stifle joint. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery,ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002, W.B.
Saumders, pp 2090-2132.
82. CRUCIATE LIGAMENT INJURIES AND
TREATMENTS
Robert M. Radasch, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1.  What are the origin and insertion points of the cranial cruciate ligament (CrCL)?
· Origin—medial surface of the lateral femoral condyle
· Insertion—craniomedial surface of the tibial plateau beneath the intermeniscal ligament
2.  Is the CrCL one solid ligamentous structure?
No. It is divided into a small craniomedial and large caudolateral bands, which spiral around
each other as the CrCL courses distally and medially
3. What is the function of the CrCL?
To prevent craniocaudal movement of the tibia relative to the femur. It also limits excessive
internal rotation of the tibia and, with the caudal cruciate ligament, provides a limited degree of
varus-valgus support to the stifle joint during flexion.
4. Do the two distinct CrCL bands have any clinical importance?
Yes. Each band has a different function depending on the stifle joint flexion or extension.
Animals can rupture one band (partial CrCL tear), while the other remains intact.
5. What is the function of each CrCL band?
The craniomedial band is taut during all phases of flexion and extension, whereas the
caudolateral band is taut only in extension and becomes lax during flexion. The craniomedial
band is the primary check against craniocaudal drawer motion.
6. With partial CrCL injuries, does one band tear more commonly than another?
Yes. The smaller craniomedial band ruptures more frequently than the caudolateral band.
This results in subtle drawer motion in flexion but not in extension.
7. Why does the CrCL rupture?
·Excessive internal rotation of the tibia causes the CrCL to become twisted, subjecting the
ligament to injury from the caudomedial edge of the lateral femoral condyle.
314
CruciateLigamentInjuries and Treatments
2. Johnson AL, Probst CW: Conparison of trochlear block recession and trochlear wedge recession for canine
patellar luxation using a cadaver model. Vet Surg 30:140-150, 2001.
3. Kaiser S, Comely D: The correlation of canine patellar luxation and the anteversion angle as measured using
magnetic resonance images. Vet Radio1 Ultrasound 42:113-118, 2001.
4. L'Eplattenier H, Montavon P: Patellar luxation in dogs and cats: pathogenesis and diagnosis. Comp Contin Educ
Pract Vet. 24:234-240, 2002
Pract Vet 24:292-298, 2002.
6. Remedios AM, Basker A: Medial patellar luxation in 16 large dogs. Vet Surg 21:5-9, 1992.
7. Roy R, Wallace L: Retrospective evaluation of stifle osteoarthritis in dogs with bilateral medial patellar luxation
and unilateral repair. Vet Surg 21:475-479, 1992.
8.Vasseur PB: The stifle joint. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery,ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002, W.B.
Saumders, pp 2090-2132.
82. CRUCIATE LIGAMENT INJURIES AND
TREATMENTS
Robert M. Radasch, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1.  What are the origin and insertion points of the cranial cruciate ligament (CrCL)?
· Origin—medial surface of the lateral femoral condyle
· Insertion—craniomedial surface of the tibial plateau beneath the intermeniscal ligament
2.  Is the CrCL one solid ligamentous structure?
No. It is divided into a small craniomedial and large caudolateral bands, which spiral around
each other as the CrCL courses distally and medially
3. What is the function of the CrCL?
To prevent craniocaudal movement of the tibia relative to the femur. It also limits excessive
internal rotation of the tibia and, with the caudal cruciate ligament, provides a limited degree of
varus-valgus support to the stifle joint during flexion.
4. Do the two distinct CrCL bands have any clinical importance?
Yes. Each band has a different function depending on the stifle joint flexion or extension.
Animals can rupture one band (partial CrCL tear), while the other remains intact.
5. What is the function of each CrCL band?
The craniomedial band is taut during all phases of flexion and extension, whereas the
caudolateral band is taut only in extension and becomes lax during flexion. The craniomedial
band is the primary check against craniocaudal drawer motion.
6. With partial CrCL injuries, does one band tear more commonly than another?
Yes. The smaller craniomedial band ruptures more frequently than the caudolateral band.
This results in subtle drawer motion in flexion but not in extension.
7. Why does the CrCL rupture?
·Excessive internal rotation of the tibia causes the CrCL to become twisted, subjecting the
ligament to injury from the caudomedial edge of the lateral femoral condyle.
Cruciate LigamentInjuries and Treatments
315
· Hyperextension of the stifle causes the roof of the femoral intercondylar notch to sever the CrCL.
e yo nnsi e se s un o yuns  ue pns yo ssn uoi 
predisposes the CrCL to rupture from nontraumatic causes.
· Conformational (breed dependent) abnormalities result in straight standing stifle angles
and the roof of the intercondylar notch gradually cuts away or causes tearing of the cran
iomedial band of the ligament.
·Anti-collagen antibodies and immune complexes may weaken the ligament.
to rupture.
8. List the three most common clinical presentations associated with CrCL injury.
1. Acute tear—sudden non-weight-bearing or partial weight-bearing lameness, which may
improve slightly over 3-6 weeks.
 2. Partial tear—a cyclical, recurrent mild weight-bearing lameness that resolves with rest or
antiinflammatory drugs. Eventually the CrCL completely tears, and a non-weight-
bearing lameness occurs. These animals often have significant degenerative joint disease
of the stifle by the time the CrCL completely tears.
3. Chronic tear—acute exacerbation (severe lameness) of a chromic problem (mild
lameness) and degenerative joint disease.
9. Do all dogs and cats with CrCL tears require surgery?
No. Dogs weighing <10 kg and cats often have adequate clinical function without surgery.
Some surgeons believe conservative nonsurgical treatment in small dogs and cats may provide a
good short-term clinical outcome but may predispose these patients to more severe progressive
formed. Concomitant or subsequent (unstable stifle) meniscal injury may require surgery.
10. List typical physical examination findings for an animal with an acute CrCL rupture.
· Cranial drawer motion, increased internal tibial rotation
· Joint effusion
· Possible meniscal click
· Pain elected on flexion and extension of joint
11. What tests can be performed clinically to identify stifle joint laxity and diagnose a
CrCL tear?
·Positive cranial-drawer test (stifle palpation)
·Positive tibial-compression test (stifle and hock palpation)
12.List typical physical examination findings for an animal with a partial CrCL tear.
· Subtle drawer motion, with the joint in flexion, if the craniomedial band of the CrCL has
torn. If the caudolateral band has torn or there is an incomplete interstitial tear of the
CrCL, no instability is detected regardless of joint position.
· Crepitation on flexion and extension of the stifle.
·Pain on hyperextension of the joint.
● Medial joint buttress: periarticular joint fibrosis and osteophyte formation near the medial
collateral ligament.
·Joint effusion.
13. How often can cranial drawer motion (either in flexion or extension) be detected in
patients with a partial CrCL tear?
In a study of 25 patients with partial CrCL tears, only 50% of the patients had abnormal
cranial drawer motion
316
Cruciate Ligament Injuries and Treatments
14. List typical physical examination findings for a chronic CrCL tear.
· Crepitation on flexion and extension of stifle
· Thigh musculature atrophy
· Partial or intermittent lameness
· Possible meniscal click
·Possible anterior drawer motion
·Periarticular joint capsule fibrosis (medial buttress)
15. Can an animal have a complete CrCL tear and no anterior drawer motion?
Sure. Severe degenerative joint disease and periarticular joint fibrosis can make detection of
anterior drawer difficult. Some animals in which the caudal pole of the medial meniscus is folded
preventing drawer motion.
16. Is cranial drawer motion normal in immature patients?
Yes. Often young animals (<1 year old) have increased joint laxity (puppy drawer) with 3-
5 mm of drawer present and an intact CrCL. A distinct end point is palpated as the tibia is moved
crani ally.
17. Do animals with bilateral CrCL tears have unusual clinical signs?
They appear as neurologic patients. The animal will not stand (crouched stance) unless
forced to walk (on eggshells).
18. Is it common for a dog with CrCL reconstruction to injure the contralateral
ligament?
Yes. Approximately 30-40% of dogs rupture the opposite CrCL within 12-18 months. This
percentage increases (60%) if there is radiographic evidence of degenerative joint disease
19. What is the signalment for an animal at a higher than average risk for a contralateral
CrCL tear?
·Large, active animals
· Rottweiler breed
· Middle-age to older, spayed, female patients
· Overweight patients
20. In patients with an intermittent, non-weight-bearing lameness, pain on flexion and
extension of the joint, and no drawer motion, are there any noninvasive, beneficial
diagnostic tests?
Yes. These tests support, but cannot always confirm, CrCL injury. A definitive diagnosis
usually requires joint exploration (or arthroscopy).
· Synovial fluid analysis (increased joint fluid quantity and elevation in total WBC
count)
·Radiography (osteophytes along the femoral trochlear ridge, the tibial plateau and fabella,
joint effusion, displacement of fat pad)
·Nuclear scintigraphy (joint inflammation)
· MRI (anatomic defects)
     e    d   a  
·Large breed (rottweilers, Newfoundlands, retrievers, mastiffs, akitas)
· Neutered dogs (hospital population)
·Weight (>22kg)
Cruciate LigamentInjuries and Treatments
317
22. What percentage of dogs develop progressive osteoarthritis after a CrCL rupture has
been surgically reconstructed?
Nearly 100%. However, the degree of osteoarthritis that develops may be dependent on the
surgical procedure utilized (i.e., TPLO versus extracapsular repair).
23. What are the two general categories of CrCL reconstruction techniques?
1. Extracapsular (outside of the joint)
2. Intracapsular
24. List some commonly performed extracapsular techniques.
·Lateral (with or without medial) retinacular stabilization: Large, monofilament
nonabsorbable sutures are placed from around the lateral (with or without medial) fabella
through a hole in the proximal tibial crest.
· Imbrication technique: Multiple imbrication sutures (Lembert or mattress pattern) are
placed along the lateral or medial joint capsule and fascia to stabilize the joint (often
combined with retinacular sutures).
· Fibular head transposition: The fibular head and lateral collateral ligament are advanced
cranially resulting in tension in the lateral collateral ligament and elimination of drawer
motionl.
· Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO): A cylindrical osteotomy of the proximal tibia
is performed, and the tibial plateau is rotated, leveled, and stabilized with a bone plate to
eliminate cranial tibial thrust.
 25. List some commonly performed intracapsular techniques.
· Over-the-top procedure: An autogenous graft of tissue is passed through the stifle joint,
over the top of the lateral femoral condyle to mimic biomechanically the function of the
CrCL. The graft is usually harvested from the patellar ligament and may contain a small1
· Under-and over technique: A 1-2 cm strip of fascia lata (with or without patellar tendon)
is harvested and left attached to the proximal tibia, is passed under the intermeniscal
ligament and through the joint, and is secured over the lateral femoral condyle.
· Paatsama technique: A 1-2 cm wide strip of fascia lata is harvested and left attached to
the proximal tibia. The graft is then passed through bone tunnels created in both the
proximal tibia and distal femur, which are placed at the anatomic origin and insertion
points of the CrCL
· Arthroscopic placement of an artificial synthetic CrCL: This has been performed in a
limited number of clinical cases yielding impressive results.
26. What is a notchplasty?
A technique, often performed in humans, in which a stenotic intercondylar fossa of the
femur is enlarged. The CrCL, CdCL, and fat are in the fossa.
27. Why would a notchplasty be performed?
· Because veterinary surgeons would try anything to improve the results of CrCL
reconstructions.
· If there is stenosis of the ICF resulting from degenerative changes caused by a CrCL tear,
placement of a ligament substitute in an orthotopic position may be difficult. Enlargement
of the ICF permits better positioning and reduces trauma of the graft.
· There is some speculation that certain breeds or individual animals may have congenital
ICF stenosis. If this is true, a prophylactic notchplasty might reduce the potential for
CrCL rupture in these patients.
318
Cruciate Ligament Injuries and Treatments
28. When using an extracapsular fabellotibial suture technique, does the type of knot used
to secure the monofilament suture matter?
 ou y-y us e no s ons e on nodns si no ss e Adxg 
recently developed crimp-clamp system has been shown to be superior to all knotting methods.
29. Does placing a clamp across the first throw of a square knot used to secure the
fabellotibial suture significantly weaken it?
Probably not, assuming adequate material was chosen in the first place. A study showed
clamping the square knot had no adverse effects on the material properties of nylon polybutester,
polypropylene, and nylon fishing line. This technique increased the stiffness of 27-kg leader
fishing line.
 30. Does the sterilization technique alter the strength of monofilament fishing lines
Depends on the matenial and manufacturers. Both steam sterilization and ethylene oxide
have minimal effects on, and are suitable for, nylon leader line. Steam sterilization and ethylene
oxide weakened standard nylon fishing line; ethylene oxide resulted in less weakening of the
nylon in one study. Another study found that steam did not significantly alter the strength of
fishing line but resulted in more elongation of the material. Overall, ethylene oxide is the
preferred method of sterilization.
31. How many throws should be placed when using monofilament fishing line to perform
an extracapsular repair?
 32. Monofilament fishing line has become a popular material to perform extracapsular
repairs. Is one type of fishing line better?
Yes. Monofilament nylon leader line has been found to be stiffer and resists higher loads
than the standard nylon fishingline.
33. When performing a fabellotibial extracapsular reconstruction, what is the weakest
part of the repair?
Assuming adequate size monofilament suture is used, the weakest point is where the monofil-
ament suture passes around the fabella through the femoral-fabella ligaments. Often the monofila
ment suture can saw through the soft tissue, resulting in recurrence of antenior drawer motion.
34. A crimp-clamp system has become available for monofilament loop fixation when
performing a fabellotibial extracapsular repair. Is this technique biomechanically
superior to tied knots?
Possibly. The crimp-clamp system was found to be superior (experimentally) to knotted
loops in all single load and cycled parameters tested, which include load to failure, initial loop
tension, loop elongation, mode of failure, and point of failure. This assumes the weak link of the
Tepair is the knot or crimp and not the anchor point of the suture around the fabella.
35. Which type of suture has been associated with pericapsular infections and draining
tracts?
Large, braided (multifilament) suture.
36. List the most common complications associated with fibular head transportation
(FHT).
·Iatrogenic fracture of the fibular head and neck
Cruciate LigamentInjuries and Treatments
319
· Postoperative seroma fomation over the proximal lateral tibia
· Meniscal pathology and cranial drawer motion (experimentally)
37. What nerve is in the vicinity of the surgical approach for FHT?
The peroneal nerve passes caudally and below the fibular head.
38. What are the signs of inadvertent peroneal nerve injury?
· Overextension of the tarsus
· Knuckling of the digits
· Sensory loss over the dorsal aspect of the paw or the lateral aspect of the limb
 39. When performing an autograph replacement for CrCL reconstruction, does harvest
location of the graft affect its strength?
Yes. A graft based on the lateral third of the patellar tendon and fascia lata was found to be
superior to other har vested grafts. Grafts taken from the central and lateral portions of the patella1
tendon are biomechanically superior. Lateral grafts failed sequentially (versus abruptly as in
central or medial grafts), which may allow recoverability of function if traumatically overloaded.
The lateral graft is also wider and more accessible than a central graft.
40. When an autograft is harvested from dogs, is it as strong as the normal CrCL?
No. The CrCL can withstand approximately 3.5-9.5 times more load before failure and is 3-
6 times stiffer than grafts taken from the central, middle, or lateral third of the patellar tendon.
This is in contrast to human studies, which have shown that some autogenous grafts are stronger
than the intact CrCL; this exemplifies why one cannot always extrapolate veterinary information
from human data.
41. After an autograft is harvested, is its blood supply damaged?
Yes. After the graft is harvested, it is completely avascular and requires 5-6 months for the
Tevascularization process. During this time, the graft undergoes ischemic necrosis, which
compromises its material properties, making it susceptible to failure.
42. After an autograft revascularizes, will it ever be as strong as a normal CrCL?
No. Even after 26 weeks, when the graft reaches its maximum strength, it is only 28% that
of a normal CrCL.
43. Can an extracapsular and intracapsular repair be combined?
support the stifle during the graft's revascularization period, minimizing graft failure.
44. What does TPLO stand for?
Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy
45. What is cranial tibial thrust (CrTT)?
CYTT is a cranially oriented force resulting from: (l) tibial compression generated during
weight-bearing and (2) contraction of the quadriceps muscle group and (3) the gastrocnemius
muscle group.
46. How does a TPLO stabilize a CrCL-deficient stifle?
When the tibial plateau is leveled, the joint surface becomes perpendicular to the tibial
functional axis. The tibial plateau slope assumes a cranial orientation during the stance phase of
320
Cruciate Ligament Injuries and Treatments
the gait, converting the previous cranial tibial thrust into caudal tibial thrust. The caudal cruciate
ligament then becomes the primary stabilizer of the stifle in a craniocaudal orientation.
47. After a TPLO is performed, will the stifle be palpably stable?
No. Cranial drawer motion will always be present. With this technique, cranial tibial thrust
is eliminated by leveling the tibial plateau, but no replacement of the CrCL is performed
48. Is there a difference in the tibial plateau slop (TPS) between dogs with CrCL rupture
and normal unaffected dogs?
Some controversy exists! Several studies have suggested that dogs with CrCL rupture have
greater TPS (23-25") than normal unaffected dogs (TPS 18"). Other studies have not been able to
substantiate this claim.
49. What is the ideal degree of tibial plateau leveling?
Tibial plateau leveling angle: 3.5 to 6.5°. This minimal tibial plateau rotation angle provides
adequate stifle stability without causing excessive strain on the CdCL
50. What is the potential detrimental effect of overrotation of the tibial plateau?
Overrotation could result in excessive strain on the CdCL resulting in its subsequent rupture.
51. Is the position of the osteotomy important?
You bet. If the osteotomy is positioned too anterior, the tibial crest will be weakened and
potentially fracture. Ideally, the osteotomy arch should be centered over the intercondylar
tubercles of the tibia while the distal end of the osteotomy is perpendicular to the caudal tibial
cortex.
52. What is the best method of preventing tibial internal rotation when performing TPLO?
When rotating the osteotomy, be sure it is completely reduced and do not intentionally align
the medial cortices during rotation. If a step exists between medial cortices, the plateau should be
medially translated or the proximal cortex of the distal fragment should be shaved down to
provide a flat surface for plate application.
53. What is the most common angular limb deformity reported following a TPLO?
Internal rotation of the tibia, although varus, valgus, and external rotations have been
reported.
54. What is a meniscal release?
A technique in which the caudal meniscoti bial ligament of the medial meniscus is transected
to allow the caudal pole of the medial meniscus to move independently of the tibia
55. Are there situations in which a TPLO should not be considered?
Yes, if the dog's CrCL is normal or the measured tibial plateau slope requires >12 mm of
rotation (using a 24-mm biradial saw blade) to level it. Performing a TPLO with rotations >12
mm of the tibial plateau isolates the tibial tubercle and may predispose it to fracture from the pull
of the quadriceps tendon.
56. If a dog has a tibial plateau slope requiring >12 mm of rotation, is there anything else
that can be done?
Yes: combining a TPLO with a cranial closing wedge osteotomy of the cranial surface of the
tubercle doesn't fracture. These surgeons feel there is a high complication rate with the cranial
Cruciate Ligament Injuries and Treatments
321
57. List potential complications associated with a TPLO.
·Plate breakage
· Screw breakage or loosening
· Tibial tubercle fracture
· Implant infection
·Seroma
·Nonunion
● Overrotation of the tibial plateau, resulting in subsequent damage to the caudal cruciate
ligament
 58. How effective has the TPLO procedure been?
Retrospective evaluation of 394 patients having a TPLO performed for either a complete o1
partial CrCL tear found normal function and activity returned for an excellent results in 73% of
the cases, good function in 21%, fair result in 3%, and poor results in 2%. These evaluations were
performed 1-8 years postoperatively. There is not a controlled study (yet) that compares the
TPLO to other intracapsular and extracapsular procedures. Surgeons report the TPLO procedure
has provided earlier return to function (often 2-4 weeks postoperatively) and better long-term
results in dogs weighing <60 lb, compared with other techniques.
59. How much osteoarthritis should be expected after performing a TPLO?
Very little! Informal studies have documented that the TPLO procedure effectively slows the
months to I year following surgery.
60. What parameters influence the postoperative outcome after a CrCL reconstruction?
·Degree of preoperative osteoarthritis
· Absence or presence of a torn meniscus
· Patient's body weight
· Surgical procedure used (i.e., TPLO versus extracapsular retinacular stabilization in a
50-kg dog)
· Rehabilitation (physical therapy)
 61. What lifestyle changes may be beneficial in recovering animals?
· Swimming activities to strengthen parapatellar support structures, maintain joint motions,
and avoid concussive effects on damaged cartilage
· Avoidance of leaps out of pick-up trucks and decks or marathons on concrete surfaces
62. What are the origin and insertion points of the caudal cruciate ligament?
● Origin—intercondyloid fossa of the craniolateral (inside) surface of the medial femoral
condyle
· Insertion—popliteal notch of the tibia
63. What is the function of the caudal cruciate ligament?
To prevent caudal translation of the tibia during flexion. It acts in concert with the CrCL to
64.How often do isolated ruptures of the caudal cruciate ligament occur?
Rarely.
322
Cruciate Ligament Injuries and Treatments
65. Why is isolated rupture rare?
· The caudal cruciate ligament is positioned in the joint such that loads sufficient to cause
ligament damage are directed toward the CrCL.
· The caudal cruciate ligament is stronger than the CrCL
·The direction of force needed to cause a caudal cruciate ligament tear is seldom clinically
encountered.
66. What type of injury causes an isolated caudal cruciate ligament tear?
A cranial-to-caudal blow directed against the proximal tibia, most often a result of an
automobile injury or the result of falling on the limb with the stifle flexed.
67. What physical examination findings are common with a dog presented with an isolated
caudal cruciate ligament tear?
· Subtle caudal drawer motion (if palpation begins correctly with the joint in a neutral
position)
· Mild intermittent, non-weight-bearing lameness
68. Do all isolated tears of the caudal cruciate ligament need to be repaired?
No. Retrospective clinical and experimental studies found the prognosis to be good
regardless of how or if the patient was treated. Long-term prospective studies for efficacy of
caudal cruciate ligament repairs have not been performed. Some surgeons recommend surgical
Teconstruction for large-breed dogs and athletic animals.
69. List surgical options that are currently available to reconstruct a torn caudal cruciate
ligament.
· Suture stabilization—large monofilament sutures placed from the caudomedial corner of
the tibia and fibular head to the proximal patellar tendon. Imbrication of the caudal and
lateral joint capsule is also performed.
· Caudal redirection of the medial collateral ligament using a bone screw and spiked washer
to eliminate caudal drawer motion.
· Tenodesis, or entrapment, of the popliteal tendon on the caudolateral aspect of the joint
with a bone screw and spiked washer placed into the caudal tibia.
70. What is the terrible triad injury?
Combination of (1) CrCL, (2) caudal cruciate ligament, and (3) medial collateral ligament
of injury is often the result of an automobile injury or being kicked by a large animal. Total stifle
used to describe the combination of lesions.
71. List treatment options for traumatic stifle derangement.
· Resection or suturing (peripheral) of torn menisci
· Repair of collateral ligament instabilities
· Repair of cruciate ligament instabilities
· Repair of capsular and retinacular tears
·External splintage (2-4 weeks) followed by physical therapy
· Transarticular pin stabilization with or without transarticular fixation for 4-6 weeks
· Stifle-joint arthrodesis or hindlimb amputation in severe, irreparable cases
72. What is the prognosis for treatment of traumatic stifle-joint derangement?
Good to fair based on the severity of the injury and ability to repair individual lesions. Limb
Cruciate Ligament Injuries and Treatments
323
CONTROVERSIES
73. Is one form of CrCL reconstruction more successful than another?
One of the most frequently (and intensely) debated questions at surgery meetings during the
past 15 years. Multiple studies have failed to prove (objectively) that one technique is superior to
another; in general, success rates of 80-90% have been described for everything. However, the
TPLO is rapidly gaining popularity and becoming the technique of choice in many veterinary
teaching hospitals and referral surgical centers
74. Do many dogs with CrCL rupture have concurrent immune-mediated synovitis?
Possibly. The debate is whether the lymphoplasmacytic synovitis is an immune-mediated
arthropathy, causing weakening of the CrC'L and eventual rupture, or if the chronic instability and
joint degeneration with a CrCL tear lead to the lymphoplasmacytic synovitis.
75. When and why would a meniscal release incision be performed?
It should be performed duning TPLO in animals with an intact caudal pole of the medial
meniscus. Because a TPLO does not prevent cranial drawer, if an intact medial meniscus is left
in place, the patient may develop a subsequent tear.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Chauvet AE, Johnson AL: Evaluation of fibular head transposition, lateral fabellar suture, and conservative
treatment of cranial cruciate ligament rupture in large dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:247-254, 1996.
2. Duval JM, Budsberg SC: Breed, sex, and body weight as risk factors for rupture of the CrCL in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 215:811-814, 1999
3. Morris E, Lipwitx AJ: Comparison of tibial plateau angles in dogs with and without cranial cruciate ligament
injuries. J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:363-366, 2001.
4. Nwadlike BS, Roe SC: Mechanical comparison of suture material and knot type used for fabello-tibial sutures.
Vet Comp Orthop Traumato1 11:47-52, 1998.
5. Reif U, Hulse DA, Hauptman JG: Effect of tibial plateau leveling on stability of the canine cruciate-deficient
stifle joint: an in vitro study. Vet Surg 31:147-154, 2002.
 6. Sicard GK, Hayaski K, Manley PA: Evaluation of five types of fishing material, two sterilization methods, and
a crimp-clamp system for extra-articular stabilization of the canine stifle joint. Vet Surg 31:78-84, 2002.
7. Slocum B, Devine T: Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy for repair of cranial cruciate ligament rupture in the
canine. Vet Clin North Am Smal1 Anim Pract 23:777-795, 1993
8. Vasseur PB: Stifle joint. In Slatter D, edlitor: Textbook ofsmatt aniat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002, W.B.
Saunders, pp 2090-2132.
thrust in canine cranial-deficient stifles: an in vitro experimental study. Vet Surg 30:278-286, 2001.
10.WheelerJL,Cross AR: The effect of tibial plateau leveling osteotomy angle and osteotomy reduction technique
on angular and rotational limb defomities during the tibial plateau leveling osteotomy procedure. Proceedings
VOS, Park City, Utah: 32: March 2002.
83. MENISCECTOMY
Elizabeth J. Laino, D.VM., D.VSc., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What is a meniscus?
A plate of fibrocartilage that divides a joint cavity into two parts
2. List three functions of a meniscus.
 2. Absorbs shock and transmits load across articular surfaces
3. Increases stifle joint stability
 3. How many menisci are in the dog?
Six. Two in each stifle (medial and lateral) and one in each temporomandibular joint.
4. What causes a meniscal injury?
In most cases, meniscus injuries occur concurrent with or secondary to cranial cruciate liga-
ment (CrCL) injury.
5. Is this a common problem?
Among dogs and cats with stifle injuries, yes. Reported incidence ranges from 10% in
small dogs and cats with acute CrCL instability to >90% in large or obese dogs with chronic
instability.
6. Which meniscus is more commonly injured?
 The medial meniscus, specifically the caudal portion.
7. Why?
The medial meniscus is more firmly attached to the tibia by the joint capsule and medial
collateral ligament. In patients with CrCL instability, increased cranial drawer motion and inter-
nal stifle rotation places the femoral condyle in contact with the caudal horn of the medial
meniscus. The increased pressure on the caudal meniscal rim causes longitudinal shearing and
 compression injuries. The lateral meniscus is more mobile and less prone to injury.
8. List the various types of meniscal injuries.
· Longitudinal or bucket-handle tears of the medial meniscus are the most common.
· Compression or crushing of the caudal horn of the medial meniscus; these injunies may
progress to longitudinal tears if left untreated.
· Peripheral detachments usually occur after severe stifle trauma and usually have
concurrent cruciate and collateral ligament tears and joint capsule disruption.
· Miscellaneous other injuries:
Axial fringe tears
Transverse tears
Discoid menisci
Calcified menisci
Meniscectomy
325
9. Is the type of injury important?
Yes and no
· For the novice surgeon, knowing the common sites of injury increases the chance of
recognizing and subsequently treating these injuries at surgery.
· For the patient, the type of tear has little bearing on prognosis.
10. What physical findings are suggestive of a meniscal injury?
Meniscal injuries should be suspected in every animal presenting with CrCL instability,
especially those with a persistent lameness that does not improve with time, rest, and antinflam-
matory medication. The amount of drawer motion can sometimes decrease after a meniscal tear
if the torn portion becomes wedged between the cranial femoral condyle and the tibia. Gently
pushing caudally on the tibial tubercle to replace the meniscus may allow better evaluation of
drawer motion in these cases.
11. What is a meniscal click?
An audible or palpable snap produced when the torn piece of meniscus slips between the
tibia and femoral condyle during stifle flexion or drawer motion.
12. Is a meniscal click pathognomonic for a meniscal injury?
No. Just as a meniscal tear may be seen but not heard, a stifle click may not necessarily indi-
cate a torn meniscus. Other causes include crepitus from osteophytes or surgical sutures, cruciate
ligament tags rubbing between articular surfaces, and luxation of the long digital extensor tendon.
13. What diagnostic (other than arthrotomy) tools may be useful?
·Diagnostic arthroscopy
·Contrast arthrography
·MRI
Unless calcified, menmiscl are not visible on survey radiographs
14. What is the recommended treatment for a meniscal injury?
Surgery: a partial or complete meniscectomy. The relative merits of partial versus total exci-
sion are subject to debate.
15. What surgical approach is most useful?
Surgeon's preference. A medial parapatellar arthrotomy provides the best view and access
to the medial meniscus. Others prefer a lateral approach, despite the increased challenge to visu
alization, because it is easily incorporated into an extracapsular CrCL repair.
16.  How can visualization of the medial meniscus be enhanced?
· Placement of the patient in dorsal recumbency with the affected leg extended caudally,
and the surgeon standing at the end of the table
· Cranial displacement of the tibia, either by an assistant or by placing a curved hemostat
or Hohmann retractor into the popliteal fossa and gently levering the tibia forward
· Judicious use of self-retaining Gelpi retractors to open the joint space vertically and
horizontally
· Partial removal of the fat pad, avoiding the small blood vessel contained therein
·Arthroscopy
17. When should one consider performing a primary meniscal repair?
irreparable meniscal damage. Chronic or severe tears, especially if confined to the avascular
 portion of the meniscus, do not heal well and are better treated with meniscectomy.
326
Meniscectomy
18. What structures can be damaged during a meniscectomy?
·Articular cartilage
· Caudal cruciate ligament
·Medial collateral ligament (when working medially)
19. What is the prognosis after a meniscectomy?
The more meniscal tissue removed, the greater the risk of subsequent articular cartilage
degeneration and secondary osteoarthritis. This should not dissuade the surgeon from the proce
dure, however, because considerable relief of pain and lameness can be achieved by removing a
severely damaged meniscus.
20. How can the prognosis be improved?
Physical therapy. Although the optimum timing and techniques have yet to be determined,
dogs undergoing CrCL repair and medial meniscectomy show a clear benefit from postoperative
rehabilitation.
CONTROVERSIES
21. Is there any benefit in removing the entire meniscus when just a portion of it is torn?
Yes, at least in theory. Total meniscectomy removes any potential pathology, such as com-
pression injury, in the intact portion of the meniscus that may have otherwise been overlooked at
surgery. Also, by incising along the outer vascularized meniscal rim, this procedure may facilitate
future meniscal regeneration. Finally, it is often technically easier for the novice surgeon to
Temove the entire portion rather than just the caudal horn.
22. What is the disadvantage of total meniscectomy?
The patient loses the spacer function of the meniscus, resulting in increased contact stress to
the articular surfaces and potentially ex acerbating the development of degenerative joint disease.
Total meniscectomy has experimentallybeen shown to produce more degenerative articular
 cartilage changes than partial meni scectomy.
23. What is vascular access channeling?
incised from the synovial attachment to the inner edge, theoretically allowing active pluripo-
tential cells arising from the synovium to reach the damaged inner section of the meniscus and
achieve healing. In experimental cases, menisci undergoing this procedure had increased regen-
eration when compared with menisci undergoing partial excision alone. It has not been evaluated
in the clinical setting.
24. What is a meniscal release?
The caudal horn of the medial meniscus is incised at or near its lateral attachment on the
intercondyloid eminence, to allow the caudal horn more freedom of movement during stifle
motion and avoid the crushing effect of the femoral condyle. It is recommended for intact menisci
in conjunction with tibial plateau leveling osteotomy, to minimize postsurgical memiscal damage
after CrCL repair. Although of theoretic interest, its use has not been evaluated in conjunction
with other methods of stabilization, and its long-term effects are unknown.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Jackson J, Vasseur PB, Griffey S, et al: Pathologic changes in grossly nomal menisci in dogs with rupture of the
cranial cruciate ligament. J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:1281-1284, 2001
2. Marsolais GS, Dvorak G, Conzemius MG: Effects of postoperative rehabilitation on limb function after cranial
cruciate ligament repair in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1325-1330, 2002
Tendon Injuries
327
3. Moses PA: Technique for surgical repair of peripheral tears and detachments of the canine medial meniscus. Vet
Comp Orthop Traumato1 15:92-96, 2002.
4. Ralphs SC: Arthroscopic evaluation of menisci in dogs with cranial cruciate ligament injuries: 100 cases (1999-
2000). J Amm Vet Med Assoc 221:1601-1604, 2002.
5. Slocum B, Devine Slocum TD: Meniscal release. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in small animat
surgery, ed 4, Baltinmore, 1998, Williams & Wilkins, pp 1197-1199.
6. Vasseur PB: Stifle joint. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animal surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002, W.B.
Saunders, pp 2090-2133
84. TENDON INIURIES
Ron McLaughlin, D.VM., D.VSc., Dip. A.C.VS
1. Is there such a disease as biceps bursitis in the dog?
No. Anatomically, there is no bursa associated with the biceps tendon as it traverses the
shoulder joint. It is common for the tendon and its enveloping synovial sheath to become
inflamed (bicipital tenos ynovitis).
2. What causes bicipital tenosynovitis?
 Inflammation of the biceps tendon and its synovial sheath may result from a strain injury to
biceps, direct trauma to the tendon, or irritation from an osteochondrosis-related joint mouse
Adhesions between the tendon and the sheath may eventually limit shoulder joint motion. Recent
evidence indicates that inflammation of the tendon and sheath is not a consistent finding, suggest-
ing that a degenerative process within the tendon may contribute to the disease in some dogs
 3. What are the typical signalment and clinical signs of a dog with bicipital tenosynovitis?
Signaiment
· Medium to large breed
·Middle age
·Hunting and active dogs
Clinical signs
· The onset of clinical signs is usually gradual.
· Initially, the lameness is mild, interrmittent, and associated with exercise.
· The dogs willingly bear weight on the limb but are reluctant to flex and extend the
shoulder joint (pain is induced as the tendon slides through the groove).
·Eventually the shoulder muscles atrophy
● Pain can be elicited by applying digital pressure to the tendon region and manipulating
the shoulder joint.
4. How is bicipital tenosynovitis diagnosed?
·Relevant history
·Clinical signs
·Radiography
·Ultrasonography
Radiographs may rule out other causes of shoulder lameness and, in more chronic cases,
reveal calcification of the tendon and osteophytes on the intertubercular groove. Ultrasonographic
evaluation may reveal irregularities in the tendon body, tendon ruptures, synovial hyperplasia,
Tendon Injuries
327
3. Moses PA: Technique for surgical repair of peripheral tears and detachments of the canine medial meniscus. Vet
Comp Orthop Traumato1 15:92-96, 2002.
4. Ralphs SC: Arthroscopic evaluation of menisci in dogs with cranial cruciate ligament injuries: 100 cases (1999-
2000). J Amm Vet Med Assoc 221:1601-1604, 2002.
5. Slocum B, Devine Slocum TD: Meniscal release. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in small animat
surgery, ed 4, Baltinmore, 1998, Williams & Wilkins, pp 1197-1199.
6. Vasseur PB: Stifle joint. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animal surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002, W.B.
Saunders, pp 2090-2133
84. TENDON INIURIES
Ron McLaughlin, D.VM., D.VSc., Dip. A.C.VS
1. Is there such a disease as biceps bursitis in the dog?
No. Anatomically, there is no bursa associated with the biceps tendon as it traverses the
shoulder joint. It is common for the tendon and its enveloping synovial sheath to become
inflamed (bicipital tenos ynovitis).
2. What causes bicipital tenosynovitis?
 Inflammation of the biceps tendon and its synovial sheath may result from a strain injury to
biceps, direct trauma to the tendon, or irritation from an osteochondrosis-related joint mouse
Adhesions between the tendon and the sheath may eventually limit shoulder joint motion. Recent
evidence indicates that inflammation of the tendon and sheath is not a consistent finding, suggest-
ing that a degenerative process within the tendon may contribute to the disease in some dogs
 3. What are the typical signalment and clinical signs of a dog with bicipital tenosynovitis?
Signaiment
· Medium to large breed
·Middle age
·Hunting and active dogs
Clinical signs
· The onset of clinical signs is usually gradual.
· Initially, the lameness is mild, interrmittent, and associated with exercise.
· The dogs willingly bear weight on the limb but are reluctant to flex and extend the
shoulder joint (pain is induced as the tendon slides through the groove).
·Eventually the shoulder muscles atrophy
● Pain can be elicited by applying digital pressure to the tendon region and manipulating
the shoulder joint.
4. How is bicipital tenosynovitis diagnosed?
·Relevant history
·Clinical signs
·Radiography
·Ultrasonography
Radiographs may rule out other causes of shoulder lameness and, in more chronic cases,
reveal calcification of the tendon and osteophytes on the intertubercular groove. Ultrasonographic
evaluation may reveal irregularities in the tendon body, tendon ruptures, synovial hyperplasia,
328
TendonInjuries
and joint mice. High-frequency linear ultrasound transducers (7.5-10 MHz) are used to identify
Synovial fluid analysis, nuclear scintigraphy, and contrast arthrography are rarely used, but
may help confirm a diagnosis of bicipital tenosynovitis.
 5. Discuss treatment of bicipital tenosynovitis.
Results are better if the disease is treated early before degenerative joint or groove disease
develops. The initial treatment is rest (6 weeks) and nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs. Intra-
articular or local prednisolone acetate injections (20-40 mg) are often successful (about 70%) if
tendon is removed from the intertubercular groove and reattached to the humerus using a screw
and spiked washer. Approximately 50-60% of dogs regain full use of the limb and a normal gait
disease. A recent technique recommended for treatment of bicipital tenos ynovitis is arthroscopic
bipolar radiofrequency electrosurgical unit) under arthroscopic guidance. Clinical results have
thus far been promising, with most dogs regaining good to excellent function.
6. What is infraspinatus contracture?
An uncommon cause of lameness in hunting dogs resulting from acute trauma causing
partial rupture and scarring of the infraspinatus muscle and tendon.
7. What are the clinical signs associated with infraspinatus contracture?
· Dogs generally develop an acute lameness while hunting.
· The initial lameness resolves but is replaced in 3-4 weeks by a chronic lameness
characterized by an inability to internally rotate (pronate) the shoulder joint.
· Attempts to pronate the shoulder during examination cause the scapula to lift away from
the body wall.
· The dogs are not painful during palpation, and the elbow is adducted while the paw is
abducted.
· The limb is circumducted during ambulation.
· The condition can affect both forelimbs.
8.  What is the treatment for infraspinatus contracture?
Tenotomy and excision of the insertion of the muscle on the proximal humerus. A craniolat-
eral approach to the shoulder joint is used. The dog's gait should return to normal almost imme-
diately after surgery.
9. Can mineraliza tion of the supraspinatus tendon cause lameness in dogs?
greater tubercle of the humerus. Overuse or repetitive trauma may lead to degeneration of the ten.
don and dystrophic calcification, similar to calcifying tendinopathies seen in humans.
10. How is mineralization of the supraspinatus tendon differentiated from mineralization
associated with bicipital tenosynovitis?
Dogs with mineralization of the supraspinatus tendon are typically not painful when flexing
the location of the calcification.
TendonInjuries
329
11. What structures comprise the common calcaneal tendon (Achilles tendon)?
·Gastrocnemius tendon (largest component)
·Superficial digital flex or (SDF) tendon
· Common tendon of the biceps femoris, semitendinosus, and gracilis muscles
12. What clinical signs are associated with avulsion of the gastrocnemius tendon from its
insertion on the calcaneus?
· Dogs are usually lame immediately after the injury and have a painful swelling proximal
to the calcaneus.
●A defect in the tendon may be palpable or demonstrated ultrasonographically.
· With time, weight-bearing resumes, and a characteristic stance develops: The stifle is
extended, the hock is moderately flexed, and the digits are flexed.
13. What causes the gastrocnemius tendon to avulse?
Degeneration of the tendon-bone junction is postulated as the cause in older, overweight
fermales. Although an uncommon clinical entity in cats, traumatic rupture of the tendon has been
Teported.
14. Why do the digits flex during weight-bearing after avulsion of the gastrocnemius tendon?
Because of the added weight applied to the intact SDF tendon (as it passes over the
calcaneus).
15. What are the origin and insertion of the SDF tendon?
The SDF tendon originates on the lateral fabella of the stifle joint, courses distally along
ing on the digits.
16. Luxation of the superficial digital flexor tendon is a cause of lameness reported most
commonly in what breeds of dogs?
·Shelties
· Collies
17. What is the most common luxation of the SDF tendon?
The SDF tendon is held in place by a medial and a lateral retinaculum as it passes over the
tip of the calcaneus. The medial attachment is smaller and weaker and more likely to rupture,
allowing the tendon to lux ate laterally.
luxation of the SDF tendon?
In many Sheltie and collie dogs with SDF luxation, the calcaneus is slender, the calcaneal
groove is shallow, and the tip of the calcaneus is slanted distolaterally.
19.  What are the clinical signs associated with luxation of the SDF tendon?
·A mild, intermittent lameness and swelling near the tip of the calcaneus
· A popping sensation that may be palpated over the calcaneus as the tendon luxates and
Teduces
20. Discuss the recommended treatment for luxation of the SDF tendon.
stabilization is indicated and consists of replacing the tendon in the calcaneal groove and
imbricating the torn retinaculum. Polypropylene mesh has been used for surgical failure and
revisions of imbrication.
330
Tendon Injuries
21. What are clinical signs of deep digital flexor tendon injuries?
Penetrating wounds to the palmar or plantar aspects of the distal limb producing variable
lameness and hyperextension of the digits.
22. List the basic principles of tendon surgery.
· Atraumatic and aseptic techniques
· Strict hemostasis
· Anatomic, end-to-end anastomosis with monofilament, nonabsorbable suture using
patterns designed specifically for tendon repair
23. List some suture patterns that are used for tendon repairs.
·Mason-Allen
·Krackow
· Modified Kessler (locking loop)
· Three-loop pulley horizontal mattress
+Modified Bunnell-Mayer
24. How do tendons heal?
Via extrinsic and intrinsic (epitenon) mechanisms charactenized by inflammation,
phagocytosis, fibroplasia, and collagen deposition. Passive motion and controlled mobilization
Realistically, in veterinary patients, external splintage and immobilization are used for 6 weeks
after injury or surgery.
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Gilley RS, Wallace LJ, Hayden DW: Clinical and pathological analysis of bicipital tenosynovitis in dogs. Am J
Vet Res 63:402-407, 2002.
 2. Guerin S, Burbridge H: Achilles tenorrhaphy with a modified surgical technique and cranial half cast. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumato1 11:205-210, 1998.
3. Kramer M, Gerwing M, Sheppard C, Schmike E: Ultrasonography for the diagnosis of diseases of the tendon
and tendon sheath of the biceps brachii muscle. Vet Surg 30:64-71, 2001.
4. Mauterer JV, Prata RG, Carberry CA, et al: Displacement of the tendon of the superficial digital flexor muscle
in dogs: 10 cases (1983-1991). I Am Vet Med Assoc 8:1162-1165, 1993.
 5. Mughannam A, Reinke J: Avulsion of the gastrocnemius tendon in three cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:550-
556, 1994.
6. Piemmattei DL, Flo GL: Diagnosis and treatment of orthopedic conditions of the fore and hindlimbs. In
Handbook of smaltanimat orthopedics and fracture treatment,ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997, W.B.Saunders.
7. Reinke JD, Mughannam AJ, Owners JM: Avulsion of the gastrocnemius tendon in 11 dogs. J Am Anin Hosp
Assoc 29:410-418, 1993
8. Stobie D, Wallace LJ: Chronic bicipital tenosynovitis in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 207:201-207, 1995.
9. Wall CR, Taylor R: Arthroscopic biceps brachitenotomy as a treatment for canine bicipital tenosynovitis. A Am
Animn Hosp Assoc 38:169-175, 2002
10. Williams N, Payne JT: Deep digital flexor tendon injuries. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 19:853-861, 1997.
85. TRAUMATIC MYOPATHIES
Randall B. Fitch, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What is the prevalence of muscle injuries in the dog?
The true prevalence in dogs is unknown, but it is probably underestimated. Skeletal muscle
constitutes approximately 50% of the total body mass in the dog, but only 5% of reported injuries.
The low frequency of muscle injuries in dogs and cats may be due to failures in reporting and
diagnosing injuries, especially when they accompany more apparent or severe injuries.
 2. List the major mechanisms of muscle injury.
· Contusion
· Laceration
· Rupture
·Strain
·Compartment syndrome
·Ischemia
·Denervation
3. How does muscle heal?
By the same mechanisms as all tissues:
·Inflammation
·Debridement
·Repair and remodeling
The type and severity of injury determine whether the muscle heals by regeneration of func-
tional myofibrils or scar formation. The extracellular matrix that surrounds and organizes muscle
fibers also provides a scaffolding for regenerating myofibers and the building blocks (mucopoly-
saccharides, proteoglycans, and collagen) required for repair. The orientation and structure
maintained by the extracellular matrix are essential for muscle contraction.
4. Is fibrosis beneficial or detrimental in the healing of muscle?
Although fibrous scar tissue provides tensile strength and plays a part in normal muscle
healing, excessive scar tissue impedes muscle fiber regeneration and interferes with muscle con-
traction. Healing by scar tissue may decrease the muscle's functional ability to produce tension
by 50%. Resection of devascularized or fibrotic muscle may be required to regain functional
characteristics of the muscle. Apposition and immobilization of tissue edges minimize scar tissue
formation and allow penetration of regenerating muscle fibers.
5. What type of suture patterns should be used in muscle?
Ideally, none. The holding strength of muscle is poor, and muscle, being a dynamic organ,
should take advantage of surrounding tendons and aponeuroses for suture purchase. Sutures can
be placed in muscle sheaths using a mattress pattern or tension-relieving sutures (e.g., near-far-
far-near suture pattern) with absorbable, monofilament suture, which may require bolstering with
stents or fascia lata. Multiple sutures may be preplaced so that the repair can be progressively
tightened to overcome natural muscle contraction.
332
Traumatic Myopathies
6. When should physical therapy be initiated after muscle repair?
Mobility across the healing muscle should not begin until the remodeling stage of healing is
reached. Premature mobilization of muscle after injury or surgery increases granulation and scar
tissue production, resulting in poor penetration by regenerating muscle fibers and disruption of
the repair. Prolonged immobilization results in irregular orientation of muscle fibers, decreased
tensile strength, and excessive scar contraction. Controlled motion and stress during later stages
of healing are required to promote functional parallel orientation of regenerating muscle. For
optimal function, complete immobilization is recommended for the first 3 weeks after repair or
injury. The immobilization period is followed by controlled mobilization (restricted activity with
for an additional 3-6 weeks, then a gradual return to normal activity over several weeks.
7. What is a muscle strain injury?
Injury during athletic activities from overstretch and overuse resulting in disruption of
muscle fibers, most commonly near the muscle-tendon junction. These injuries are characterized
by inflammation, followed by healing with marked fibrosis.
· Grade I muscle strains (the least severe) invol ve teaning of a few muscle fibers with pain
and local spasm.
· Higher grades indicate increased structural damage, pain, and hemorthage, with grade IV
being complete muscle rupture.
8. Does muscle strain injury affect muscle function?
Strength of muscle contraction is greatly affected by strain injury, but recovery appears to
be rapid. Muscle disruption and minor hemorrhage are present immediately after injury.
Inflammation becomes pronounced in the days following, and by 1 week, the inflammation is
Teplaced by fibrous tissue. Some muscle fibers regenerate, but normal histology is not restored,
and scar tissue persists depending on the degree of injury. Healing of muscle by fibrous scar
tissue predisposes it to reinjury and possible muscle contracture.
to avoid reinjury?
this is lacking. Stretching may be difficult to initiate in pets. Muscle is viscoelastic; warm-up
exercise or simply warming up the temperature of the muscle has a protective effect in muscle
injury.
10. Which is the most commonly injured region of muscle?
Musculotendinousjunction.
11. What muscle strain injuries have been reported in the dog?
FORELIMB
HINDLIMB
Rhomboideus
Iliopsoas
 Serratus ventralis
Tensor fascia lata
Biceps
Sartorius
 Pectorals
 Pectineus
Triceps
Gracilis
Flex or carpi ulnaris muscles
 Achilles mechanism
Traumatic Myopathies
333
12. How are muscle strain injuries diagnosed?
· Mature, athletic dogs are most commonly affected and are presented with varying degrees
of lameness, focal swelling, subcutaneous hemorrhage, palpable muscle displacement,
and pain.
· Further confirmation can be provided through direct specific palpation (shaving the
sonographic imaging, and MRI.
13. How is muscle strain injury treated?
· Ice packs during the first 24 hours posttrauma
· Warm compresses after 24 hours
·Compressive wraps
·Antiinflammatory medications
·Analgesic medications
· Muscle relaxants
·Rest
·Controlled physical therapy
·Surgery
Although acute, minor injuries appear to respond well to nonaggressive treatment, chronic
and severe muscle injuries may not. Severe muscle strains may require a more aggressive
approach invol ving surgical debridement, repair, or tenomyectomy.
14. What is muscle contracture?
Muscle is replaced by a noncompliant, nonfunctional fibrous tissue that restricts normal
most common muscle contractures in the dog include the infraspinatus, quadriceps, gracilis,
supraspinatus, and semitendinosus muscles.
15. Discuss treatment of muscle contractures.
Based on the location of the lesion.
Infraspinatus contracture results in tethering of normal shoulder motion, producing an
unusual limb action characterized by circumduction of the leg. Treatment is by infraspinatus
tenotomy, which releases the infraspinatus tendon pull and restores a nearly normal gait.
Quadriceps muscle contracture occurs primarily in young dogs after fractures of the distal
femur resulting in voluntary or enforced immobilization of the limb and eventual fibrous anky-
losis of the stifle joint. Initially, many of these changes are reversible, but they become permanent
after several weeks. Advanced quadriceps contracture has a poor prognosis even with treatment
and commonly results in a nonfunctional leg. Treatment should be directed toward prophylaxis
s o i uo sn go uogoo e p (s -e iog ds ux o)
lization and early return to function are critical to preventing the condition. Resection of fibrotic
tissues, restabilization of femoral fractures, and active physical therapy may help chronic
conditions.
 Gracilis muscle contracture occurs in active, middle-age German shepherd dogs. Affected dogs
(resection of affected muscle) initially alleviates the lameness, but recurrence has been reported
several months after surgery. Both conservatively and surgically treated dogs remained active and
healthy with no progression of the disorder, although the abnormal gait remained unchanged.
Fibrotic myopathy of the semitendinosus muscle also is reported in the German shepherd
dog, resulting in restrictive fibrotic bands in the muscle producing a characteristic gait abnor-
mality with hyperflexion of the stifle joints. Surgical resection of these fibrous bands produces
334
Traumatic Myopathies
16. Discuss myositis ossificans.
Myositis ossificans results in mineralization within muscle possibly producing discomfort
and lameness. This condition has been described in several locations in the dog, including mus
cles of the caudal hip region, shoulder, quadriceps, and cervical musculature. Large, middle-age,
ference caused by the mineralized mass; the size and location of the mineralization plays an
important role in the severity of lameness. Surgical excision of the mass is curative; local
injection of antinflammatory medications, including steroids, is usually unrewarding.
17. What is compartment syndrome?
Pressure-induced injury to muscle resulting from swelling or hemorrhage within a confined
osteofascial space. Elevated interstitial pressure impairs microvascular perfusion and produces
neuromuscular injury with pain, swelling, and eventual necrosis of muscle. Three general mecha
misms exist for increasing the compartmental pressure:
1. Hemorrhage or injection into the compartment
 2. Postischemic tissue swelling within the compartment
3. External pressure from a bandage or cast
18. What are the clinical symptoms and locations of compartment syndrome in the dog?
suoduis
· Nonresolving swelling
·Pain
· Tense muscle
Locations
· Craniolateral crus
·Caudal crus
· Caudal antebrachium
·Quadriceps (cranial femur)
19. How is compartment syndrome diagnosed?
By measuring compartmental pressure using a pressure catheter (Wick catheter, Slit
catheter, transducer-type catheter, and hypoderrmic needle connected to a three-way stopcock and
clinically significant and result in necrosis of skeletal muscle if the duration is >8 hours.
 20.  Are there common muscle injuries that occur in humans that may be undiagnosed in
the dog?
Yes. An example is delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS). In this common condition,
muscle pain occurs 24-72 hours after vigorous exercise. Muscle weakness may persist for several
days after resolution of soreness.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. de Haan J, Beale BS: Compartment syndrome in the dog: Case report and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 29:134-140, 1993.
2. Laitinen OM, Flo G: Mineralization of the supraspinatus tendon in dogs: a long-tem follow up. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 36:262-267, 2000.
3. Lewis D: Gracilis or semitendinosus myopathy in 18 dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:177-188, 1997.
4. Montgomery R, Fitch R: Muscles and tendons. In Slatter D, editor: Texbook of smalt animat surgery, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2002, W.B. Saunders, pp 2264-2271.
86. ARTHRODESIS
Trevor N. Bebchuk, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What are the differences among arthrodesis, fusion, and ankylosis?
Arthrodesis is surgical fixation of a joint designed to accomplish fusion of the joint surfaces
by promoting the proliferation of bone cells. Fusion of a joint is the end result of arthrodesis, but
it may occur naturally after severe joint disruption (comminuted intraarticular fractures).
Arthrodesis should be distinguished from ankylosis, which is the immobility or consolidation of
a joint because of disease or injury and is usually a result of periarticular contracture and fibrosis.
2. For which joints has arthrodesis been described?
·Carpus
·Tarsus
·Metacarpophalangeal
·Metatarsophalangeal
·Stifle
·Elbow
·Shoulder
+ Intervertebral joints
3. What is the purpose of bone graft in arthrodesis?
The bone graft hastens the rate of bone fusion (cancellous graft) and, in some instances, pro-
vides structural support (cortical graft).
4. What are the different properties of cancellous, cortical bone, and substitute grafts?
CANCELLOUS BONE GRAFT
CORTICAL BONE GRAFT
CERAMIC GRAFT WITHBMP
Osteoconductive properties
Osteoconductive properties
Osteoconduction
 Osteoinductive properties
Structural support
Osteoinduction
 Osteogenic properties
 Osteogenesis
BMP, bone morphogenetic proteins.
 5. Which type of bone graft is used most often in arthrodeses?
Cancellous bone graft is the gold standard for arthrodesis; cortical grafts have been used as
inlay grafts for additional structural support.
6. What sites can be used for harvest of cancellous bone graft?
· Proximal lateral humerus
·Proximal medial tibia
·Iliac crest
 In the mature animal, the proximal humerus provides the most accessible and greatest quan-
bone with high osteogenic potential.
336
Arthrodesis
 7. How should bone graft be treated during harvest and transfer?
The graft should be collected before application and placed in a sterile metal bowl immersed
with the patient's blood. It must be protected from dehydration, and graft chips should be <2-3
mm in diameter to maximize graft nutrition by diffusion. Graft should be placed loosely at the
site on viable bone and healthy soft tissues closed over the wound.
8.  List the means of stabilization for arthrodesis.
·Dynamic compression plate
· Transarticular lag screws
·Cross pins
· Pins and tension band wire
·External skeletal fixators
Figure 86-1 Lateral projection of a pantarsal arthrodesis performed using a plantar approach and a
2.7/3.5 hybrid dynamic compression plate.
 9. Is rigid internal fixation alone adequate for successful arthrodesis?
No. In many situations, the fixation is placed on the compression side rather than the tension
side of an arthrodesis. A region that normally has motion and is now fixed is less mechamically
stable than a bone with proper rigid internal fixation. Fixation, regardless of its stiffness, is in a
mechanically compromised position. For these reasons, it is advisable to use supplemental
support, such as a cast, splint, or non-weight-bearing sling, in most arthrodeses.
10.  What are the major considerations for selecting a method of arthrodesis?
·Amount of motion at the joint
·Stability of the fixation
 For a joint with a large amount of normal mobility, more rigid fixation is required than for
a less mobile joint.
Arthrodesis
337
Figure 86-2  Lateral projection of a stifle arthrodesis performed
using a 3.5 broad dynamic compression plate and crossed Kirschner
wires. Note that the angle of arthrodesis is 135°, which is slightly larger
than the opposite stifle standing angle of 145°.
Yes. The cartilage should be removed to leave congruent bone surfaces of subchondral can-
cellous bone to facilitate fusion. Any areas of cartilage not removed can lead to delayed fusion.
Drilling (or forage) into subchondral bone (medullary cavity) also aids in osteogenesis.
12. Which planes must be evaluated during an arthrodesis?
·Flexion-extension
·Varus-valgus
· Axial or rotational alignment
13.  List the basic principles of successful arthrodesis.
· Complete removal of all articular cartilage
· Autogenous cancellous bone grafting
·Rigid internal fixation
· Supplemental external fixation
·Functional angle of fusion
14. What adjustments may need to be made to normal stifle angle when perforrming stifle
arthrodesis?
During stifle arthrodesis, femoral and tibial osteotomies (to remove the articular cartilage
and provide congruency for stabilization) cause limb shortening. Leg length can be recovered by
(o)  n n (sx o  i- e ue u n  nss
standing sti fle angle.
338
Arthrodesis
15. Which types of injures are appropriately treated by arthrodesis?
In general, the procedure is indicated for conditions that result in pain, instability, and loss
· Acute severe joint derangements involving loss of bone or ligamentous structures such
that joint integrity cannot be reestablished
·Chronic joint instability not amenable to reconstructive surgery
·  Painful intraarticular or periarticular malunion or nonunion
·Painful degenerative joint disease not amenable to medical therapy
· Severe growth deformities and congenital luxations
· Peripheral nerve injury that results in loss of function of a distal joint
16. List contraindications for arthrodesis.
·Fulminating infection
·Previously fused, contralateral joints (elbow and stifle)
17. Discuss complications and morbidity associated with arthrodesis.
Delayed union, malalignment, and implant complications. Limb disuse is the major
manifestation of morbidity. The more distal the joint, the less likelihood of morbidity after
arthrodesis because distal joints are less mobile than proximal joints. Other sources of morbidity
include implant breakage, loosening, and osteomyelitis.
18. How does a bone plate affect the bone proximal and distal to an arthrodesis?
Stress risers at the plate ends proximal and distal to the arthrodesis can lead to fractures. This
is a risk in the metacarpals and metatarsals after pancarpal or pantarsal arthrodesis because the
bones are small and the plates are larger than normal to accommodate the radius or tibia.
Increasing the length of the metacarpal bone covered by the plate and decreasing the screw hold
diameter may decrease the risk of fractures.
19.1
How long does it generally take an arthrodesis to achieve joint fusion?
Fusion is radiographically evident after 8-20 weeks. The range is based on:
·Type of injury
·Patient age
· Quality and quantity of graft material
· Type of fixation
 20. What are the appropriate angles of arthrodesis for the shoulder, elbow, carpus, and
tarsus?
 In all joints, this angle should be (measured with a goniometer) equal to the opposite limb
in a standing position. If this is not possible, the following guidelines (canine) may be used:
·E1bow—130°-140°
·Carpus—170°
·Shoulder—105°-110°
·Tarsus—135°-145°
21. Is the functional outcome after successful arthrodesis acceptable?
pa piu yim qu sn-uied ‘euonouny e spiaoid snsien pue sndieo su yo sispos -
abnomalities.
· Arthrodesis of the elbow, shoulder, and stifle results in a more obvious gait disturbance;
most dogs use the leg with pain-free function at slower gaits and when standing
· Amputation may be an option in some dogs.
Osteomyelitis
339
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Cofone MA, Smith GK, Lenehan TM: Unilateral and bilateral stifle arthrodesis in eight dogs. Vet Surg 21:299.
303, 1992.
  1 s              
Med Assoc 203:1705-1707, 1993.
3. de Haan JJ, Roe SC, Lewis DD: Elbow arthrodesis in twelve dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumato1 9:115-118, 1996.
4. Li A, Gibson N, Carmichael S: Thirteen pancarpal arthrodeses using 2.7/3.5 mm hybrid dynamic compression
plates. Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 12:102-107, 1999.
5. Piemattei DL, Flo GL: Principles of joint surgery. In Piemattei DL, Flo GL, editors: Brinker Piermartei and
Flo's handbook of small animal orthopedics and fracture repair, Philadelphia, 1997, W.B. Saunders, pp 201-220.
Surg 28:25-30, 1999.
Comp Orthop Traumato1 13:28-33, 2000.
87. OSTEOMYELITIS
Ioseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is osteomyelitis?
Inflammation of the periosteum, cortex, and medullary cavity of bone; most frequently asso
ciated with bacterial infections, although nonsuppurative osteomyeliti des associated with skeletal
mycotic infections or reactions to metal implants have been described.
2. Name the causes of osteomyelitis.
· Trauma or operative procedures (most common)
· Contiguous extension from soft tissue structures
·Hematogenous spread from distant focus (diskospondylitis)
 3. What are the pathophysiologic events of septic osteomyelitis?
· Bacterial colonization, replication
· Vascular stasis, tissue ischemia
· Capillary permeability, neutrophilic infiltration, and engulfment of bacteria
· Neutrophil lysis, enzymes release, tissue destruction
● Focal abscessation (Brodie's abscess) if adequate host defenses or periosseous invasion
and inflammation leading to bone destruction
4. What is a sequestrum?
Dead bone invol ved as a midus for inflammation or infection.
5. What is an involucrum?
Zone of sclerotic bone surrounding inflammatory or septic bone disease.
6. List clinical signs of osteomyelitis.
·Focal pain, swelling, discharge at wound site
· Limb dysfunction
·Leukocytosis, nonregenerative anemia
·Pyrexia (infrequent)
Osteomyelitis
339
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Cofone MA, Smith GK, Lenehan TM: Unilateral and bilateral stifle arthrodesis in eight dogs. Vet Surg 21:299.
303, 1992.
  1 s              
Med Assoc 203:1705-1707, 1993.
3. de Haan JJ, Roe SC, Lewis DD: Elbow arthrodesis in twelve dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumato1 9:115-118, 1996.
4. Li A, Gibson N, Carmichael S: Thirteen pancarpal arthrodeses using 2.7/3.5 mm hybrid dynamic compression
plates. Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 12:102-107, 1999.
5. Piemattei DL, Flo GL: Principles of joint surgery. In Piemattei DL, Flo GL, editors: Brinker Piermartei and
Flo's handbook of small animal orthopedics and fracture repair, Philadelphia, 1997, W.B. Saunders, pp 201-220.
Surg 28:25-30, 1999.
Comp Orthop Traumato1 13:28-33, 2000.
87. OSTEOMYELITIS
Ioseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is osteomyelitis?
Inflammation of the periosteum, cortex, and medullary cavity of bone; most frequently asso
ciated with bacterial infections, although nonsuppurative osteomyeliti des associated with skeletal
mycotic infections or reactions to metal implants have been described.
2. Name the causes of osteomyelitis.
· Trauma or operative procedures (most common)
· Contiguous extension from soft tissue structures
·Hematogenous spread from distant focus (diskospondylitis)
 3. What are the pathophysiologic events of septic osteomyelitis?
· Bacterial colonization, replication
· Vascular stasis, tissue ischemia
· Capillary permeability, neutrophilic infiltration, and engulfment of bacteria
· Neutrophil lysis, enzymes release, tissue destruction
● Focal abscessation (Brodie's abscess) if adequate host defenses or periosseous invasion
and inflammation leading to bone destruction
4. What is a sequestrum?
Dead bone invol ved as a midus for inflammation or infection.
5. What is an involucrum?
Zone of sclerotic bone surrounding inflammatory or septic bone disease.
6. List clinical signs of osteomyelitis.
·Focal pain, swelling, discharge at wound site
· Limb dysfunction
·Leukocytosis, nonregenerative anemia
·Pyrexia (infrequent)
340
Osteomyelitis
7. List radiographic signs of osteomyelitis.
· Soft tissue swelling
· Irregular periosteal reactions
· Implant failure
·Delayed healing
·Cortical lysis
· Increased medullary density
8. When do radiographic changes become evident?
At a minimum, 10-14 days after injury or surgery.
9. How is osteomyelitis diagnosed?
· Clinical history of trauma or surgery
· Clinical signs
·Radiographic changes
· Cytologic and microbiologic evaluations of wounds
·Nuclear scintigraphy (increased uptake)
10. Which aerobic bacteria have been associated with osteomyelitis?
·Staphytococcus (most common)
·Escherichia coli
·β-Hemolytic Streptococcus
·Proteus
·Pseudomonas
·Corynebacterium
·Pasteurella
·Klebsiella
11. Which anaerobic bacteria have been associated with osteomyelitis?
·Bacteroides
·Peptostreptococcus
·Clostridium
·Fusobacterium
·Actinomyces
12.List characteristics of anaerobic infections.
· Polymicrobial Gram staining results
· Persistent exudative lesions
·Failure in antibiotic treatment or aerobic bacterial isolation
13. Why are anaerobic infections of osteomyelitis difficult to identify?
· True low rates of incidence
· Sampling, transport, or isolation errors
· Overlooked in polymicrobial infections invol ving more common aerobes
14. What are important considerations for antibiotic therapy of osteomyelitis?
1. What are the likely causative organisms?
 2. What is the susceptibility of these microbes?
Osteomyelitis
341
3. Will drug therapy provide effective local concentration?
4.What are untoward effects of the drug therapy?
15. List characteristics of mycotic infections.
· Geographic distri bution
· Hematogenous dissemination after spore inhalation
·Multicentric lesions
· Possible underlying immunodeficiency
16. Which mycotic agents have been identified with osteomyelitis?
·Coccidioides immitis
·
Blastomyces dermatitidis
·Histoplasma capsulatum
·Cryptococcus neoformans
17. What are cryptic infections?
Chronic, recurrent, or dormant bacterial proliferation associated with plates or screws and
often not producing overt clinical signs. Causative agents produce a peribacterial mucopolysac-
charide film (glycocalyx) promoting adherence to implants and covering the microbes as a barrier
to cellular and humeral defense mechanisms and antimicrobial therapy.
18. What is bacterial slime?
The glycocalyx or biofilm composed of matrix and serum proteins, ions, cellular debris, and
carbohy drate.
19. How is osteomyelitis treated?
·Debridement of necrotic bone and soft tissues
· Lavage with isotonic solutions
· Open wound drainage, closure via second intention
· Removal of failed implant and fracture restabilization
· Cancellous bone grafting
●Appropriate antimicrobial therapy
20. Name the benefits of using autogenous cancellous grafts in the treatment of
osteomyelitis.
· To fill in osteomyelitic bone cavity
· To substitute for resected nonviable bone
· To promote healing of a motion-associated, septic nonunion
 21. List some commonly used antibiotics.
·Amoxicillin-clavulanate
· Cefazolin
· Ciprofloxacin or enrofloxacin
· Clindamycin
·Cloxacillin
·Metronidazole
· Potentiated sulfas
342
Osteomyelitis
22. What are the spectra of activity of commonly used antimicrobial drugs?
DRUG
GRAM-POSITIVE
GRAM-NEGATIVE
ANAEROBES
AEROBES
AEROBES
Amoxicillin-clavulanate
++
++
Cefazolin
+
+
+
 Clindamycin
++
++
 Cloxacillin
++
+
 Enrofloxacin
+
++
Potentiated sulfas
+
+
+
23.1
How long should bacterial infections be treated?
Minimum of 2-4 weeks; continued even after cessation of overt clinical or radiographic
si gns.
 24. What is the Papineau technique for treatiment of chronic osteomyelitis?
· Open drainage after debridement (saucerization)
·Delayed internal fixation and autogenous, cancellous bone grafting
· Second intention wound healing or secondary closure
25. What are some novel approaches to treatment of osteomyelitis?
· High local wound concentration delivery via gentamicin-impregnated polymethyl-
methacrylate beads.
· Local, biodegradable (polylactic acid polymers, collagen) implants containing ampicillin,
gentamicin, or cephazolin
· Regional or intravascular perfusion via pumps or direct injections
26. How can osteomyelitis be avoided?
·Aseptic and biologic surgical techniques
· Appropriate prophylactic or therapeutic antimicrobial therapy
· Early detection and aggressive intervention to prevent bone necrosis and implant failures
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Demell wS: Treatment of severe orthopedic infections. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 29:1261-1274, 1999.
2. Johnson KA: Osteomyelitis in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:1882-1887, 1994.
3. Lew DP, Waldvogel FA: Osteomyelitis. N Eng J Med 336:999-1007, 1997.
4. Muir P, Johnson KA: Anaerobic bacteria isolated from osteomyelitis in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 21:463-466, 1992.
5. Rochat MC: Preventing and treating osteomyelitis. Vet Med 96:678-684, 2001.
6. Tobias KM: Schneider RK: Use of antimicrobial-impregnated polymethy1 methacrylate. J Am Vet Med Assoc
208:841-845, 1996.
88. OSTEOARTHRITIS
Spencer A. Johnston, VM.D., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is osteoarthritis (OA)?
The gross and histopathologic, biochemical, and biomechanical alterations (including
deterioration) in articular cartilage and periarticular tissues leading to decreased joint function.
Clinically, it is characterized by joint pain, tenderness, limitation of movement, crepitus, occa-
sional effusion, and variable degrees of local inflammation. The term degenerative joint disease
is often used synonymously with OA.
2. Describe the alterations in articular cartilage.
Articular cartilage is composed primarily of chondrocytes and cartilage matrix and is a
smooth surface that serves to distribute load over and provide nearly frictionless movement
between the ends of the bones. The cartilage matrix contains mainly collagen, proteoglycans, and
this tissue. The earliest changes of osteoarthritis are characterized by disruption and loss of the
collagen fibrils and proteoglycans. This eventually leads to gross changes ranging from fibril-
lation and fissures to complete loss of surface cartilage, exposing underlying bone. As these
changes occur, cartilage loses its ability to distribute forces over the surface of the joint, and there
is decreased smooth joint motion.
3.Discuss causes of OA.
OA usually occurs secondary to some type of injury to the cartilage. This injury may occur
as the result of direct trauma to the cartilage, such as a fracture involving the articular surface.
Alternatively, cartilage trauma may result from abnormal biomechanics associated with the loss
of ligamentous support, such as cruciate ligament rupture. OA may also result from abnormal
cartilage development whereby chondrocytes in the abnormal cartilage are injured by normal
forces, as in the case of osteochondritis dissecans.
 In nearly all instances, some type of injury or abnormality of the chondrocyte initiates the
Telease of prostaglandin E, and proteoglycan and collagen fragments. The synovial membrane is
1, interleukin-6, and tumor necrosis factor-α) and more prostaglandins. The cytokines stimulate
the anabolic and catabolic function of the chondrocytes, so that there is increased production of
collagen, proteoglycans, and metalloproteinases (which break down collagen and proteoglycans)
If this cycle of increased anabolic and catabolic function continues, the anabolic capacity is
eventually exhausted, and catabolic processes prevail, leading to deterioration of the articular car-
tilage and periarticular fibrosis.
4. Do joints wear out as the result of overuse?
Not really. Articular cartilage has limited ability to repair itself after injury. It is a metabol-
there is evidence to suggest that a high level of activity does not cause OA unless that activity
places a supraphysiologic force on the joint.
344
Osteoarthritis
5. Will a dog with an acetabular fracture, cruciate ligament rupture, or hip dysplasia
develop OA?
Yes.
·With articular fractures, an injury to the cartilage is sustained, initiating a complex series
of biochemical changes that result in further damage to the joint.
· With cruciate ligament rupture, the articular cartilage experiences abnormal forces that
initiatethesamechange
·Although genetic factors have a large role in the development of hip dysplasia, the clinical
manifestations of hip dysplasia in the mature dog are due to the osteoarthritic changes that
result from this complex condition.
6. Do all patients suffering an injury to cartilage develop severe OA that requires
treatment?
No.Articular cartilage has a variety of control mechanisms to limit cartilage destruction
These products include tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase (TIMP) and various growth factors
restored (anatomic alignment and reduction of an articular fracture), further cartilage injury may
be reduced or avoided. If other factors can be modified to reduce stress placed on an injured joint,
it is less likely that further chondrocyte injury will occur. OA can range from being mild (not
7. If OA is a disease of articular cartilage and articular cartilage is aneural, why do
patients experience pain with this condition?
Although OA is defined primarily by changes in the articular cartilage, it is not the only
tissue affected. In addition to articular cartilage, there are changes in the synovial membrane,
ed) sidoiou go Kiddns you e sey snsdeo sunof su uog lepuoans pue nsdeo juo
receptors), and the subchondral bone also contains nociceptors, although to a lesser degree.
as owing to alterations in biomechanics and stresses placed on the periarticular tissues results in
pain associated with movement, leading to the discomfort typically associated with OA. Pain
does not come from the articular cartilage itself but is a consequence of the cascade of changes
associated with damage to this normally smooth, nearly frictionless surface.
8. Which is worse-loss of motion or pain associated with OA?
Pain is usually considered to be the major complaint associated with OA. Loss of function,
 s   sn    o     a
forming at a high athletic level. For the typical pet, pain relief is the primary goal.
9. What is the best way to treat OA?
Specific recommendations vary in each case.
· Therapy common to all patients with OA includes modification of exercise patterns to
include regular periods of exercise that does not place excessive strain on the affected
joint (instead of irregular periods of highly strenuous exercise) and weight loss, if
appropniate.
· The next level includes treatment with nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
· The last level involves surgery to replace or eliminate the joint.
10. Why exercise a painful joint that has altered biomechanics?
One of the ways that the joints are spared excessive loads is through the support of the
muscles, ligaments, and tendons surrounding the joint. If a joint is not used, these tissues atrophy,
which results in less support for the already abnormal joint. This causes the already abnormal
cartilage to experience more force, contributing to further damage to the articular surface and
Osteoarthritis
345
resulting in more pain. Moderation of exercise, so that pericapsular muscle mass is maintained
(without causing excessive loads on the articular cartilage), is considered beneficial.
11. How much exercise is appropriate?
Common sense needs to prevail here. Some patients are good about limiting their activity,
whereas others run and jump until they cannot use the limb anymore. For patients that exercise
hard and suffer pain and stiffness, the owners must try to limit the amount of strenuous activity
through leash restriction or controlled duration and type of activities (especially on hard surfaces)
12. Does obesity cause OA?
Obesity alone is unlikely to cause OA. Obesity causes increased stress on joints. If these
joints are abnormal to begin with, either because of previous injury or because of congenital pre-
disposition (hip dysplasia), obesity exacerbates the changes and clinical signs associated with
OA. Often the clinical signs of OA can be substantially alleviated by weight reduction.
13. How do NSAIDs work?
By inhibiting prostaglandin production, decreasing the low level of peripheral inflammation
present in OA. NSAIDs also provide analgesia by inhibiting prostaglandin production in the cen-
tral nervous system.
14. Do NSAIDs cure OA?
No. NSAIDs are useful for treating the pain associated with OA and increasing the patient's
levels of comfort and function.
15. Discuss the role of CoX-2 inhibitors.
Cyclooxy genase (COx) is the major enzyme responsible for the conversion of arachidonic
acid (produced as the result of cell membrane damage) to prostaglandins. Prostaglandins, specif-
ically prostaglandin Ez, increase the sensitivity of nociceptors to stimuli and are important
mediators of pain in the osteoarthritic joint. Other prostaglandins produced as the result of
cyclooxygenase activity include prostaglandin E,, prostacyclin, and thromboxane. These
prostaglandins have important physiologic functions.
In the early 1990s, two forms of cyclooxygenase were discovered and named COx-1 and
COX-2. COx-1 is thought to be responsible for the production of prostaglandins associated with
normal physiologic function and is found in such tissues as the stomach, kidney, and platelets.
COx-2 was thought to be induced as the result of inflammation and responsible for producing
prostaglandins such as prostaglandin E2. It was hypothesized that if COx-2 could be inhibited
without inhibiting COX-1, many of the side effects associated with NSAID use could be avoided.
Although the entire story regarding the use of NSAIDs is not as straightforward as the
description of COx-1 and COx-2 would lead one to believe, there is evidence to suggest that
COX-2-specific inhibitors do decrease the number of serious side effects (especially related to the
that they are any more effective for the palliation of painful symptoms associated with OA or that
16. What NSAIDs are approved for use in dogs?
·Phenylbutazone
· Meclofenamic acid
· Carprofen
·Etodolac
·Deracoxib (new COX-2 inhibitor)
·Meloxicam
· Tepoxalin (combination cyclooxygenase/lipoxygenase (COX/LOX) inhibitor)
346
Osteoarthritis
All of these drugs except phenylbutazone and meclofenamic acid have undergone study in
Aspirin has been used for many years in dogs, but is not approved by the U.S. FDA for this
putpose.
17. Which NSAID is the most effective for alleviating the painful symptoms of OA?
There have not been any studies in veterinary medicine comparing NSAIDs for efficacy in
treating OA. There is evidence from human studies to suggest that a specific NSAID may be more
indicate superior efficacy of any single NSAID. It is reasonable to believe that if one NSAID is
   '  e o si     d e y  
response does not mean that all NSAIDs will be ineffective for that patient.
18. What side effects are associated with NSAIDs?
  n          s
threatening bleeding or gastric ulceration and perforation. Although consistent difference among
NSAIDs has not been noted with respect to efficacy, there is a well-recognized difference among
NSAIDs with respect to ability to cause GI bleeding and ulceration in humans. Other GI effects
include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and gastric pain. Although GI toxicity is recognized with
event with use of the various NSAIDs in dogs has not been performed in a large clinical
population.
19. What about hepatotoxicity?
Carprofen has been reported to cause hepatotoxicity in a small percentage of dogs that
receive it. This condition is characterized by hepatocellular necrosis. Hepatotoxicity, regardless
of the NSAID involved, seems to be an idiosyncratic reaction and is perhaps due to unusual
metabolism of the drug in certain patients whereby toxic metabolites of the drug result from
hepatic metabolism. An alternative hypothesis is that hepatotoxicity is due to an immune-
mediated phenomenon. Most patients that develop hepatotoxicity recover from the condition if
 the drug is discontinued and they receive supportive care.
20. What about nephrotoxicity?
NSAIDs work by inhibiting prostaglandins, and prostaglandins are important for vasodi lation
in the kidney. In animals that are normovolemic, there is little prostaglandin activity in the kidney
and the effect of NSAID admimistration seems to be negli gible. There is little evidence to suggest
that long-term administration of NSAIDs to healthy animals results in renal failure. NSAIDs
21. What are the treatments for OA in cats?
·Environmental modifications to reduce leaping and climbing
·Weight reduction if obese patient
·Aspinin
·Meloxicam
· Possibly butorphanol or corticosteroids
· Possibly oral nutritional supplements (glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate)
CONTROVERSIES
22.  Are glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate efficacious?
have not undergone the scientific scrutiny of pharmaceuticals such as NSAIDs. As a result, con-
vincing evidence of their efficacy is not necessary for them to be sold.
Osteoarthritis
347
There is a growing body of evidence that indicates glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate can
modulate the metabolism of chondrocytes in vitro. This modulation often includes an increase in
of well-controlled, double-blind studies indicating the effectiveness of these products clinically.
Some evidence (studies in humans) is beginning to emerge that the products may be effective for
treating symptoms associated with low grades of OA, but it is not yet clear that the products
modulate the actual progression of OA.
23. What are the most effective dose and formulation of glucosamine and chondroitin
sulfate?
different formulations available. The actual content of glucosamine or chondroitin sulfate in these
products may vary. Scientific dose-efficacy studies have not been performed to determine the
most effective dose for many of these products.
24. Discuss the role of polysulfated glycosaminoglycans (PSGAGs).
Although there is in vitro information suggesting that PSGAGs may be effective in
stimulating proteoglycan production, increasing hyaluronan production, and decreasing
degradative enzyme activity in isolated chondrocytes or cartilage explants, results of various
studies have been inconsistent. A beneficial effect has been reported in the cruciate ligament
transection model (acute injury) of canine OA. Although there are many anecdotal reports
regarding efficacy of this product, there are no published studies involving a large number of
clinically affected dogs that confirm the efficacy of this product. A study by Lust et al. showed a
25. Do glucosamine, chondroitin sulfate, or PSGAGs cause any harm?
Although minor alterations in clotting profiles have been reported, they do not have a major
clinical impact, unless another disease process that also affects clotting is present. Minor
gastrointestinal upset has been anecdotally reported for glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate in a
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Budsberg SC, Johnston SA, Schwarz PD: Efficacy of etodolac for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the hip joints
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:206-210, 1999
2. Dassler CL: Histological features of osteoarthritic canine cartilage after prolonged administration of carprofen.
Vet Comp Orthop Traumato1 16:32-37, 2003.
3. Impellizeri JA: Effect of weight reduction on clinical signs of lameness in dogs with hip osteoarthritis. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 216:1089-1091, 2000.
4. Johnston SA: Osteoarthritis. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 27:699-953, 1997.
5. Lust G, Williams AJ, Burton-Wurster N: Effects of intrammuscular administration of glycosaminoglycan
polysulfates on signs of incipient hip dysplasia in growing pups. Am J Vet Res 53:1836-1843, 1992.
6. MacPhail C, Lappin MR, Meyer DJ: Hepatocellular toxicosis associated with administration of carprofen in 21
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 212:1895-1901, 1998.
7. Reimer ME, Johnston SA, Leib MS: The gastroduodenal effects of buffered aspirin, carprofen, and etodolac in
healthy dogs. J Vet Intem Med 13:472-477, 1999.
8. Sevalla K: Effect of polysulfated glycosaminoglycan on DNA content and proteoglycan metabolism in nomal
and osteoarthritic canine articular cartilage explants. Vet Surg 29:407-414, 2000.
9. Lascelles BD,.Henderson AJ, Hackelt IJ. Evaluation of the clinical efficacy of meloxicam in cats with painful
locomotor disorders. J Smal1 Anim Pract 42:587-593, 2001.
Section IV
Neurosurgery
89. INTERVERTEBRAL DISC DISEASE
Ron McLaughlin, D.VM., D.VSc., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is the name of the outer, fibrous portion of the intervertebral disc?
Annulus fibrosus.
 2. What is the name of the central, gelatinous portion of the intervertebral disc?
Nucleus pulposus.
3. What is Hansen type I disc degeneration?
Occurs primarily in chondrodystrophic breeds of dogs. Chondroid metaplasia (more
collagen, less proteoglycans, less water) of the nucleus pulposus and weakening of the annulus
fibrosus begin at 2-9 months of age. As the disease progresses, routine spinal movement can
result in prolapse of the nucleus pulposus through the degenerative annulus. The herniated disc
disc herniation at 3-6 years of age.
4. What is Hansen type II disc degeneration?
Occurs in nonchondrodystrophic dogs, including large breeds. Fibroid metaplasia occurs
within the disc and leads to protrusion or bulging of the disc. The result is a chronic, slowly
(e yo siesA 2I-s) saop 1pio un AedogAu sisssiod
5. What causes the neurologic dysfunction associated with disc herniation?
· Dynamic force of the herniated disc material injuring the spinal cord
· Physical displacement of the spinal cord by disc material in the epidural space (mass effect)
· Hypoxic changes caused by pressure on the vascular system within the cord
· Ischemia and edema within the cord
· Increased pressure caused by cord swelling within the confines of the dura and vertebral canal
· Inflammatory response to the herniated disc material
6. What are the goals of the neurologic examination?
Determination of the location and severity of the spinal lesion.
7. What is the difference between paresis and paralysis (plegia)?
·Paresis is a partial deficit in motor function.
·Plegia indicates complete loss of voluntary movement.
Some authors use plegia (paralysis) to indicate voluntary motor and sensory (deep pain) losses
8. What is a useful grading system for neurologic signs?
Increasing severity with higher number:
· Grade 1—spinal pain
Intervertebral Disc Disease
349
· Grade 2—mild ataxia (proprioception deficits)
·Grade 3—severe ataxia,no weight-bearing
· Grade 4—no voluntary motor function
·Grade 5—no motor function or deep pain perception
 9. What is meant by the term upper motor neuron (UMN) disease?
UMNs are the motor systems in the brain that control the lower motor neurons and are
responsible for initiation and maintenance of movement and tone in the extensor muscles of the
with exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia) and increased extensor tone. UMN disease of the hind-
limbs indicates a lesion cranial to L4 and is commonly seen with thoracolumbar disc herniation.
UMN disease to the forelimbs suggests a lesion cranial to C6. Atrophy after UMN injury is mild
and gradual and a result of disuse.
10. What is meant by the term lower motor neuron (LMN) disease?
LMNs are the efferent neurons connecting the central nervous system to the muscles. They
nerves. LMN disease is characterized by paralysis, decreased muscle tone, and decreased reflexes
occur after disc herniation affecting the brachial or pelvic intumescence.
11. What are clinical signs in a dog with thoracolumbar disc herniation?
· The forelimbs and cranial nerves are normal.
chromicity of the herniation, the hindlimbs may be paretic or paralyzed. If ambulatory, the
patient is often ataxic and has hyperreflexic femoral and patellar reflexes.
· Other signs might include focal hyperpathia along the spine, bowel or bladder
dysfunction, reluctance to jump or climb stairs, crying in pain, and an arched back
(kyphosis).
12. What clinical signs might be seen in a dog with cervical disc herniation?
· The cranial nerves are normal
· Dogs have neck pain, are reluctant to move their head or neck, cry out in pain, and have
few neurologic deficits.
· Neurologic signs, if present, are usually consistent with UMN disease (including paresis,
ataxia, and hyperreflexia affecting the hindlimbs, forelimbs, or both)
· Paralysis of the limbs is uncommon after cervical disc hermiation, but can occur.
13. What is a root signature?
In some cases, dogs are presented for forelimb lameness (hold limb in flexion) or associated
nerve roots (C6-T2 cord segments between C4-5 to T1-2 vertebrae) innervating the forelimb.
14. What are the differential diagnoses for intervertebral disc disease?
·Fibrocartilaginous emboli
· Spinal trauma (fracture or luxation)
· Primary or metastatic neoplasia of the spinal cord or vertebrae
·Myelomalacia
·Myelitis
· Meningitis
· Discospondylitis
·Endocrine neuropathies
350
Intervertebral Disc Disease
·Degenerative myelopathy
·Vertebral anomalies and spinal dysraphism
·Demyelinating diseases
· Peripheral neuropathies
15. What are the most common sites for cervical disc herniation?
C2-3 and decreasing caudally
16. What are the most common sites for thoracolumbar disc herniation?
T11-12 to L1-2 (75%).
17. Why does thoracolumbar disc herniation occur infrequently cranial to T10?
An intercapital ligament courses dorsally over the discs from T2 to T10 and helps prevent
hermiation of disc material into the epidural space.
18. List the typical survey radiographic findings of intervertebral disc herniation.
· Narrowing or wedging of an intervertebral disc space
·Narrowing of the space between facets
· Mineralized disc material visible in the spinal canal
19. How accurate are survey radiographs for identifying the site of thoracolumbar disc
herniation?
Evaluation of these films may fail to determine the site of herniation accurately in 30-40%
ofpatients.
20. How accurate are survey radiographs for identifying the site of cervical disc
herniation?
The overall accuracy rate of survey radiographs for correctly identifying the site of cervical
disc extrusion is approximately 35%.
21. What are the typical myelographic signs of intervertebral disc herniation?
· Extradural compression, including loss or deviation of the contrast column over the disc
space.
· Spinal cord may appear widened on the orthogonal radiographc view
22. How accurate is myelography?
Evaluation correctly identifies the site in 85-95% of patients.
23. What other imaging modalities may be helpful in diagnosing disc herniation?
MRI and CT are beneficial and available in a limited number of hospitals.
24. How does one evaluate a patient for conscious deep pain sensation?
The clinician firmly pinches the patient's digits with a forceps and assesses the response
Conscious perception of pain is indicated by the patient crying out, or attempting to bite
attempting to get away; in some cases, the response may be limited to dilation of the pupils. With
drawing the foot without conscious recogmition of pain is a reflex and suggests only loss of deep
pain sensati on.
25. What is progressive myelomalacia?
Also called hematomyelia or progressive, hemorrhagic myelomalacia. Although the exact
cause is uncertain, it is likely the result of severe ischemia caused by trauma, hemorrhage,
Intervertebral Disc Disease
351
vasospasm, and hypoxia within the damaged spinal cord. Massive catecholamine release may be
necrosis and complete nervous tissue destruction. The autocatalytic process causes ascending and
descending necrosis of motor neurons and sensory fibers. Clinical signs include LMN dysfunc
S    d         
usually die of respiratory failure within days of injury.
26.  When is medical therapy indicated for treatment of disc herniation?
In patients with pain alone (no neurologic deficits) or with a first episode of mild ataxia.
Medical treatment is also recommended in patients when the prognosis is grave with or without
m 9ou no sinou 8t ioy uooai ud dop go sson e ym ssoun se yons iins
myelomalacia.
27. What is the appropriate medical therapy for disc herniation?
· The most important part of medical therapy is strict confinement.
·Analgesics and antiinflammatory medications are often given but may have minimal
effect on the disease.
· For paralyzed patients, care should include prevention of decubital ulcers, proper bladder
care, and physical ther apy.
28. What surgical procedures are used for treatment of disc herniation?
Disc herniation is generally treated by decompressive surgery. Cervical disc herniations can
be decompressed by performing a ventral slot procedure. Thoracolumbar herniations are usually
decompressed by performing a hemilaminectomy or foraminotomy procedure. The herniated disc
 material is removed from the epidural space.
29. What are the advantages of a hemilaminectomy compared with a dorsal laminectomy?
· Allows complete removal of the herniated disc material
·Less invasive
·Less traumatic to the cord
· Less likely to result in a postoperative scarring that can compress the spinal cord
30. What is a laminectomy membrane?
decompressive surgery.
31. How is a laminectomy membrane avoided?
· Retaining lateral facets and lamina during dorsal laminectomy
· Placement of absorbable gelatin sponge or fat in bone defects
·Meticulous closure of overlying muscles and fascia
32. What is the prognosis after surgery?
Variability in clinical signs, treatments, and postoperative follow-up evaluations makes it
difficult to provide definitive, scientifically valid statements. In general, dogs with deep pain
loss of deep pain sensation before surgery are 25-75%.
33. Which perioperative variable is most useful as a prognostic indicator for time to
ambulation after surgical decompression for intervertebral disc herniation?
intervertebral disc herniation return to ambulation more rapidly if they have voluntary motor
function after surgery
352
Intervertebral Disc Disease
34. What are indications of recovery?
Reverse order of preoperative signs:
·Deep pain perception
·Voluntary motor function
· Ataxia—proprioception deficits
·Weight-bearing, ambulation
35. How common are recurrences after disc surgery?
After decompresive thoracolumbar disc surgery, recurrent neurologic signs occur in 35-
42% of patients. Reoperations were described in 6% of dogs, primarily dachshunds.
36. When is a durotomy indicated?
Many surgeons believe a durotomy is rarely, if ever, helpful. Some surgeons perform a
stances, gross visualization of myelomalacia assists in providing a true prognosis to the owner.
37.
What is meant by the term UMN bladder?
Injury to the spinal cord between the brain stem and L7 (cranial to the innervation to the
bladder) can result in detrusor areflexia and sphincter hypertonus (UMN bladder). The bladder
becomes distended and is difficult to express manually. Permanent damage to the detrusor muscle
can occur if the condition is not treated properly.
38. What is the appropriate therapy after surgery for a disc herniation?
·In paralyzed patients, frequent bladder expression or closed urinary collection systems are
used to keep the bladder decompressed and to minimize the development of cystitis.
·Physical therapy is used to prevent decubital ulcers and minimize muscle atrophy.
·Analgesics are indicated for the first several days after surgery.
· Steroid therapy is controversial and is likely to have minimal effect 24 hours after surgery.
· Complications of steroid use (primarily gastrointestinal complications) are common and
may preclude the use of steroids for more than the imitial perioperative peniod.
39. List other (nonsurgical) treatments for disc disease.
· Chemonucleolysis—percutaneous, fluoroscopically guided, intradiscal injection of
collagenase
· Thermal ablation—fluoroscopically guided YAG laser
· Acupuncture—for mildly affected patients
CONTROVERSY
40. When are corticosteroids used for treatment of disc herniation?
Most studies indicate corticosteroids are helpful in controlling spinal disease only if admin-
istered before spinal injury, which is difficult to do in a clinical situation. Most clinicians use
steroid therapy in disc cases. Methylprednisolone sodium succinate (30 mg/kg) is administered
intravenously and followed by a continuous infusion (5 mg/kg/hr for 24 hours). Others prefer to
administer two subsequent doses of 15 mg/kg every 8 hours rather than an infusion. Steroid
administration >24 hours after injury is unlikely to have therapeutic effect
41. When is surgery indicated for treatment of disc herniation?
Many dogs respond, at least initially, to medical treatment. Surgery is likely to yield better
Tesults than medical treatment in patients with multiple episodes of ataxia and paresis, those with
moderate or severe neurologic deficits, and those that have not responded or have worsened with
Discospondylitis
353
improve after surgery than with medical therapy. Whenever surgery is considered, early surgica
decompression is the key to success.
42. When is intervertebral disc fenestration indicated?
The procedure involves opening the annulus fibrosus and removing the nucleus pulposus to
Teduce the incidence of future disc rupture. To date, no studies have definitively shown that the
warrant this as a primary surgical procedure. Many surgeons perform a disc fenestration proce-
dure on the surrounding discs after primary decompressive surgery at the herniated site. Some
surgeons complete the procedure in the cervical region (easy to perform), but do not fenestrate
discs in the thoracolumbar region, where it is more difficult.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Davis GJ, Brown DC: Prognostic indicators for time to ambulation after surgical decompression in
nonambulatory dogs with acute thoracolumbar disk extrusion: 112 cases. Vet Surg 31:513-518, 2002.
 2. Dhupa S, Glickman N: Reoperative neurosurgery in dogs with thoracolumbar disc disease. Vet Surg 28:421-428,
1999.
3. Jerram RM, Dewey CW: Acute thoracolumbar disk extrusion in dogs: Parts I, I1. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet
21:922-930, 1037-1046, 1999.
4. Rayward RM: Feline intervertebral disc disease: a review of the literature. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 15:137.
144,2002
5. Schultz KS, Walker M, Moon M: Correlation of clinical, radiographic, and surgical localization of intervertebral
disc extrusion in small-breed dogs: A prospective study of 50 cases. Vet Surg 27:105-111, 1998.
6. Somerville ME, Anderson SMI: Accuracy of localization of cervical disk extrusion using survey radiography in
dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:563-572, 2001.
7. Toombs JP, Waters DJ: Intervertebral disc disease. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2002, W.B. Saunders, pp 1193-1208.
90. DISCOSPONDYLITIS
James M. Fingeroth, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is “discospondylitis"?
matory process of the intervertebral disc and the adjacent vertebral bodies. Another term that has
been used in the veterinary literature in an effort to demystify the disease is "intradiskal
osteomyelitis,” but it has never come into widespread use. All documented cases involve an
infectious etiology.
2. What are the signs of discospondylitis?
The disease can have many of the same manifestations as other skeletal infections. These
include fever, pain, draining tracts, and decreased function of the affected portion of the skeleton.
The unique feature of discospondylitis is the proximity of the infection/inflammation to the spinal
cord and the spinal nerve roots. Consequently, signs referable to compression or inflammation of
these structures may also form a part of the clinical syndrome. Most dogs with discospondylitis
are presented because of malaise, spinal pain, and reluctance to move norrmally
Discospondylitis
353
improve after surgery than with medical therapy. Whenever surgery is considered, early surgica
decompression is the key to success.
42. When is intervertebral disc fenestration indicated?
The procedure involves opening the annulus fibrosus and removing the nucleus pulposus to
Teduce the incidence of future disc rupture. To date, no studies have definitively shown that the
warrant this as a primary surgical procedure. Many surgeons perform a disc fenestration proce-
dure on the surrounding discs after primary decompressive surgery at the herniated site. Some
surgeons complete the procedure in the cervical region (easy to perform), but do not fenestrate
discs in the thoracolumbar region, where it is more difficult.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Davis GJ, Brown DC: Prognostic indicators for time to ambulation after surgical decompression in
nonambulatory dogs with acute thoracolumbar disk extrusion: 112 cases. Vet Surg 31:513-518, 2002.
 2. Dhupa S, Glickman N: Reoperative neurosurgery in dogs with thoracolumbar disc disease. Vet Surg 28:421-428,
1999.
3. Jerram RM, Dewey CW: Acute thoracolumbar disk extrusion in dogs: Parts I, I1. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet
21:922-930, 1037-1046, 1999.
4. Rayward RM: Feline intervertebral disc disease: a review of the literature. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 15:137.
144,2002
5. Schultz KS, Walker M, Moon M: Correlation of clinical, radiographic, and surgical localization of intervertebral
disc extrusion in small-breed dogs: A prospective study of 50 cases. Vet Surg 27:105-111, 1998.
6. Somerville ME, Anderson SMI: Accuracy of localization of cervical disk extrusion using survey radiography in
dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:563-572, 2001.
7. Toombs JP, Waters DJ: Intervertebral disc disease. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2002, W.B. Saunders, pp 1193-1208.
90. DISCOSPONDYLITIS
James M. Fingeroth, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What is “discospondylitis"?
matory process of the intervertebral disc and the adjacent vertebral bodies. Another term that has
been used in the veterinary literature in an effort to demystify the disease is "intradiskal
osteomyelitis,” but it has never come into widespread use. All documented cases involve an
infectious etiology.
2. What are the signs of discospondylitis?
The disease can have many of the same manifestations as other skeletal infections. These
include fever, pain, draining tracts, and decreased function of the affected portion of the skeleton.
The unique feature of discospondylitis is the proximity of the infection/inflammation to the spinal
cord and the spinal nerve roots. Consequently, signs referable to compression or inflammation of
these structures may also form a part of the clinical syndrome. Most dogs with discospondylitis
are presented because of malaise, spinal pain, and reluctance to move norrmally
354
Discospondylitis
3.If the infection is in the disc and vertebral body, why do neural structures become
involved?
These infections are equivalent to spinal abscesses and can expand outward. They also
induce reaction in adjacent structures such as periosteum, so that these may hypertrophy and
become more active. The consequences may be development of a mass effect dorsally and/or
dorsolaterally, which would impinge on the dural tube containing the spinal cord and the
emerging nerve roots as they exit the intervertebral foramina.
4. How does the infection occur?
Most cases are presumed to be the result of hematogenous seeding of microorganisms from
a wound or infection site elsewhere in the body. In some cases there can be direct inoculation by
external wounding, iatrogenic contamination (such as during the course of a spinal operation
involving the intervertebral disc space), or migration of motile plant parts such as the infamous
grass awnis.
 5. Is there any special reason that a blood-borne microorganism would localize in the
vertebrae?
It is postulated that the vascular anatomy of the vertebral endplate (metaphyseal zone)
of the vertebral body are forced to make hairpin turns as they enter into sinusoidal (nonvalved)
veins without anastamosing among the loops. At these sites blood flow is more sluggish. Bacteria
will tend to accumulate at these sites and colonize them. Infecting agents arrive from arterioles
as opposed to retrograde flow from the venous system.
 6. What types of infections have been reported?
Bacterial infections are the most common, and of these, the most prevalent have been
Staphylococcus sp., Streptococcus sp., E. coli, and Brucella canis. Fungal disease is more com-
 mon in immunocompromised animals, with the most often reported pathogens being Aspergillus
and Paecilomyces. In enzootic areas, coccidiomycosis has been implicated as a cause of
discospondylitis.
7. What is the source of these infections?
A common source is the urogenital tract, and dogs with suspected discospondylitis should
screened for brucellosis via card tests or titers, especially if they are sexually active or living in
crura of the diaphragn, so they most often cause signs at Lz-Ls and Ls-L4
8. Beside male dogs harboring testicular Brucella, are there any other predispositions?
lence in young (4 months to 4 years), medium-to-large (>25-30 kg) animals. Males are diagnosed
with discospondylitis twice as often as females. Some infections are intrauterine, embolize the
intercostal arteries, and result in a congenital kyphosis of the thoracic spine. This is most com
monly seen in the Doberman breed and gives affected pups (usually evident around 3-4 months
cats, but can occur.
9. What diagnostic tests should be performed?
The key diagnostic modality is imaging of the spine, usually via roentgenograms (survey
x-rays). Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are also excellent
spinal imaging technologies, but most cases of discospondylitis can be diagnosed without these
Discospondylitis
355
advanced, cross-sectional studies. As alluded to above, urine cultures and Brucella screening may
also be useful. Radiographic lesions can be subtle or obscured by superimposition of other
anatomic structures such as ribs. If in doubt, have the films reviewed by a board-certified
10. What are the radiographic signs of discospondylitis?
The inflammatory process in the endplate zones of the vertebral bodies results in aggressive
degradation and lysis of the endplate/intervertebral disc interface. This is appreciated as an
irregular appearance of this area, as opposed to the usual smooth margins. With chronicity there
may be associated sclerosis in this zone, and the disc space itself may look partially collapsed
because of lysis of the disc. With more chronicity there is evidence of subperiosteal new bone
along the ventral margins of the involved vertebrae. This spur formation is a fairly nonspecific
with instability in the ventral elements (intervertebral disc and adjacent vertebral bodies),
11. Are spondylosis and discospondylitis synonyms?
NO! Spondylosis (or spondylosis deformans) is a condition that probably develops because
of chronic degenerative intervertebral disc disease (no inflammation or infection). It is most
finding. It can be distinguished from discospondylitis in that the endplates are smooth and non-
ragged with spondylosis. However, it is possible to have both spondylosis and discospondy litis at
the same level. This is most commonly seen in the lumbosacral area of middle-aged and older
patients.
12. What is ankylosing spondylitis, spondylolisthesis, and spondylolysis?
Other than sharing the Greek root for vertebral body (spondyfo-), these are all different
diseases. Ankylosing spondylitis is a noninfectious, inflammatory, immune-mediated disease
causing bridging spondylosis over several or many adjacent spinal segments ("bamboo spine"),
with no evidence of underlying disc disease. It is poorly documented in dogs. Spondylolisthesis
(shifting or slipping of adjacent vertebrae) and spondylolysis (separation of the articular facets,
often resulting in spondylolisthesis) are also entities that have really not been documented in dogs,
("wobbler's") disease in large-breed dogs. Vertebral osteomyelitis can occur without involvement
of the disc space (direct infection from foreign bodies such as grass awns being the most common
etiology), and vertebral physitis has been reported (radiographic widening, then collapse, of the
growth plate without involvement of the epiphysis (vertebral endplate) or disc space).
13. For discospondylitis, are there any predilected sites?
Spinal infections can occur anywhere. The most commonly reported level is L7-S 1, and this
may be especially true in dogs with brucellosis. The reason for this is obscure, but may be related
to vascular anatomy/proximity to the site of the origin in the urogenital tract, as well as the high
level of motion at this spinal segment. Survey films are warranted of the cervical, thoracic, and
lumbar spine. Lesions are most common in the lumbar spine, followed by the thoracic spine, and
least commonly documented in the cervical spine. As alluded to above, pediatric Doberman
awn migration may be most likely to be affected between Lz and L4.
14. Once the diagnosis of discospondylitis is established radiographically, how should it be
treated?
with appropriate antimicrobial drugs, and discomfort should be managed with analgesics, typi-
cally NSAIDS.
356
Discospondylitis
15. What antimicrobial drugs should be selected?
Ideally, all cases would be managed based on positive cultures and in vitro sensitivity
testing. Having a positive urine bacterial culture or positive Bruceffa test would greatly assist in
the decision making. However, many cases will lack these useful data. Therefore, the most
"usual suspects.” With Staphylococcus being the most often reported germ causing dis-
cospondylitis, many will initially treat with a first-generation cephalosporin. Geography may
play a role here, too, since a differing prevalence of causative agents may be noted based on loca-
tion. This may alter your first line of treatment.
16. How long is the treatment?
If there is an initial response, a 6-week course of antibiotics is recommended. Monitoring can
be by radiography. Once the infection is resolved, the associated inflammatory response should
subside as well, and the endplates should become smoother again. The spondyle (spur) formation,
however, will probably not regress and may go on to complete bridging because of the instability
left by the damage to the intervertebral disc. Some sclerosis of the endplates may also persist.
17. How are initial treatment failures handled?
If there is a failure to respond within 5-7 days of initiating treatment, or if signs recur during
treatment, the antimicrobial regimen probably needs to be changed. This can be done empirically
again, but it may also be worth harvesting specimens from the affected site(s) for specific deter-
mination of causative agent. This can be done percutaneously with adequate means of imaging
guidance (fluoroscopy or CT), or via a surgical procedure. In the latter instance, consideration
surgery, in addition to the diagnostic value.
CONTROVERSY
18. Should steroids be used in a dog with paresis or ataxia?
The role of steroids for compressive myelopathies in general is controversial, and one has to
be especially cautious in the face of infectious disease because of the potential immunosuppres-
sive effects. Pain alone can cause signs of apparent immobility; initial treatment is with nons-
teroidal antinflammatory drugs. However, if there are clear signs of neurologic deficits, it would
be appropriate to perform myelography or MRI to determine if the lesion is compressive or if
there has been breaching of the dura and resultant meningitis or myelitis.
19. Is there ever a role for surgical treatment of discospondylitis?
If myelopathic (proprioceptive deficits, weakness) signs are severe, it may be necessary to
operate to achieve decompression of the spinal cord, along with curettage/drainage of the
epidural abscess. If there is gross instability of the affected segment it may be necessary to stabi-
motion segment, and produce signs related to the cauda equina; this is the most common
indication for surgical treatment of discospondylitis. Curettage of infected sites (with or without
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Auger J, Dupuis J, Quesnel A, et al: Surgical treatment of lumbosacral instability caused by discospondylitis in
four dogs. Vet Surg 29:70-80, 2000.
2. Crock HV, Goldwasser M: Anatomic studies of the circulation in the region of the vertebral end-plate in adult
greyhound dogs. Spine 9:702, 1984.
3. Davis MJ, Dewey CW, Walker MA, et al: Contrast radiographic findings in canine bacterial discospondylitis: A
Cervical Vertebral Instability
357
4. Fischer A, Mahaffey MB, Oliver JE: Fluoroscopically guided percutaneous disk aspiration in 10 dogs with
diskospondylitis. J Vet Intem Med 11:284, 1997.
5. Kraft SL, Mussman IM, Smith T, et al: Magnetic resonance imagining of presunptive lumbosacral
diskospondylitis in a dog. Vet Radio1 Ultrasoumd 39:9-13, 1998.
6. Thomas WB: Discospondylitis and other vertebral infections. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 30:169-182,
2000.
91. CERVICAL VERTEBRAL INSTABILITY
Thomas R. Fry, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What is cervical vertebral instability (CVI)?
A condition of large-breed dogs in which abnormalities of the cervical vertebrae and discs
lead to spinal cord or nerve root compression resulting from mass effect, instability, or both.
Chronic and progressive compression leads to demyelination and malacia.
2. What are synonyms for CVI?
· Cer vical malformation-malarticulation syndrome
·Cervical spondylopathy
· Cervical spondylolisthesis
· Cervical spondylomyelopathy
·Wobbler syndrome
3. What is the signalment?
Great Danes, Doberman pinschers, and Basset hounds are predisposed, but other large
breeds are affected. Young Great Danes and Dobermans and middle-aged to older male
 Dobermans make up two distinct populations.
4. What is the pathogenesis of CVI?
1. Congenital osseous malformation:
Pedicles, arches, or facets become malformed. This syndrome occurs in young Great Danes
and Doberman pinschers. Levels C3-7 are affected.
2. Cervical vertebral instability with chronic degenerative disc disease:
Chronic disc herniation leads to annular hypertrophy and static or dynamic spinal cord com-
pression. This syndrome occurs in middle-aged male Dobermans. Levels C5-7 are predisposed.
3.Vertebral tipping:
Dorsal displacement of the cranial vertebral body into the spinal canal occurs, caused by or
leading to disc degeneration. This type of abnormality is seen in middle-aged male Dobermans.
C5-7 lesions are most common.
4. Ligamentum flavum disease or vertebral arch malformations:
Instability leads to hypertrophy of the ligamentum flavum. Also, with vertebral arch or facet
malformations, static or dynamic dorsal compression of the spinal cord may occur. Young Great
Danes at dorsal C4-7 are predisposed. Malformations may be due to heritable tendencies, nutri-
tional imbalances, trauma, or osteochondroses.
5. Hourglass compression:
Ligamentum flavum, dorsal annulus, and facet hypertrophy lead to simultaneous ventral,
 e sea nn suno un snooo ose uy su issndoo pioo lds pso pe ‘
levels of the cervical spine.
Cervical Vertebral Instability
357
4. Fischer A, Mahaffey MB, Oliver JE: Fluoroscopically guided percutaneous disk aspiration in 10 dogs with
diskospondylitis. J Vet Intem Med 11:284, 1997.
5. Kraft SL, Mussman IM, Smith T, et al: Magnetic resonance imagining of presunptive lumbosacral
diskospondylitis in a dog. Vet Radio1 Ultrasoumd 39:9-13, 1998.
6. Thomas WB: Discospondylitis and other vertebral infections. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 30:169-182,
2000.
91. CERVICAL VERTEBRAL INSTABILITY
Thomas R. Fry, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What is cervical vertebral instability (CVI)?
A condition of large-breed dogs in which abnormalities of the cervical vertebrae and discs
lead to spinal cord or nerve root compression resulting from mass effect, instability, or both.
Chronic and progressive compression leads to demyelination and malacia.
2. What are synonyms for CVI?
· Cer vical malformation-malarticulation syndrome
·Cervical spondylopathy
· Cervical spondylolisthesis
· Cervical spondylomyelopathy
·Wobbler syndrome
3. What is the signalment?
Great Danes, Doberman pinschers, and Basset hounds are predisposed, but other large
breeds are affected. Young Great Danes and Dobermans and middle-aged to older male
 Dobermans make up two distinct populations.
4. What is the pathogenesis of CVI?
1. Congenital osseous malformation:
Pedicles, arches, or facets become malformed. This syndrome occurs in young Great Danes
and Doberman pinschers. Levels C3-7 are affected.
2. Cervical vertebral instability with chronic degenerative disc disease:
Chronic disc herniation leads to annular hypertrophy and static or dynamic spinal cord com-
pression. This syndrome occurs in middle-aged male Dobermans. Levels C5-7 are predisposed.
3.Vertebral tipping:
Dorsal displacement of the cranial vertebral body into the spinal canal occurs, caused by or
leading to disc degeneration. This type of abnormality is seen in middle-aged male Dobermans.
C5-7 lesions are most common.
4. Ligamentum flavum disease or vertebral arch malformations:
Instability leads to hypertrophy of the ligamentum flavum. Also, with vertebral arch or facet
malformations, static or dynamic dorsal compression of the spinal cord may occur. Young Great
Danes at dorsal C4-7 are predisposed. Malformations may be due to heritable tendencies, nutri-
tional imbalances, trauma, or osteochondroses.
5. Hourglass compression:
Ligamentum flavum, dorsal annulus, and facet hypertrophy lead to simultaneous ventral,
 e sea nn suno un snooo ose uy su issndoo pioo lds pso pe ‘
levels of the cervical spine.
358
Cervical Vertebral Instability
5. What are typical clinical signs of CVI?
· Signs of radiculopathy include neck pain, root signature, or both.
·Signs of myelopathy include ataxia, rear limb weakness followed by forelimb weakness,
and ambulatory tetraparesis progressing to nonambulatory tetraparesis. Dogs (as should
the veterinarian) avoid dorsiflexion if a dynamic lesion is present
6. How is CVI diagnosed?
·Survey radiographs do not allow for accurate diagnosis.
·Because of the potential dynamic nature of lesions, myelography is critical. Standard
(lateral, ventrodorsal, oblique) and stress (linear traction, ventroflexed, and dorsiflexed)
myelographic views are indicated.
· CT and CT myelography may be used but are not critical for diagnosis and surgical
decision making
7. What is the differential diagnosis for CVI?
Young dogs: atlantoaxial subluxation, arachnoid cyst, synovial cyst, syringohydromyelia,
neoplasia, inflammatory spinal cord diseases, discospondylitis, and trauma.
Old dogs: disc herniations, degenerative myelopathy, neoplasia, trauma, and fibrocartilagi-
nous emboli.
8. When should surgical intervention be recommended?
medical management is common, so it is critical for the veterinarian to examine patients serially
during conservative therapy.
9. Discuss surgical treatments for CVI.
Decompression includes dorsal laminectomy and ventral slot. Both approaches allow for
spinal cord decompression, but they do not address dynamic lesions completely. Ventral slot may
be combined with stabilization procedures indicated for dynamic compressive lesions. Ventral
slot is used for single-level or two-level chronic disc herniation. It is ineffective for treatment of
a dorsal component. Ventral slot may provide less than ideal decompression because of limited
intervertebral disc herniation and vertebral tipping because there is a primary dorsal compressive
component to the disease. Some surgeons treat greater than two-level herniations with dorsal
laminectomy.
Stabilization procedures include use of cortical bone grafting of interspaces combined with
polyvinylidine spinal plating, ventral Harrington rods, pins and methylmethacrylate, bone screw
 placed under traction to reduce compression from a dynamic lesion, and implants are used to
stabilize the spine until osseous fusion occurs. With these techniques, most of the decompression
the more direct decompression afforded by the slot of laminectomy procedures.
10. What factors affect the prognosis?
1. Number of spinal levels involved: Lesions involving more than two levels dramatically
lower the prognosis.
2. Anatomic abnormality: Congenital osseous malformations do not have a favorable
prognosis compared with chronic discs.
 3. Static versus dynamic lesions: Static lesions may have a more favorable prognosis than
dynamic lesions.
o y e  sis pn i  no oe ud ss o  t
favorable prognosis than nonambulatory tetraparesis.
Cervical Vertebral Instability
359
5. Timing of surgical intervention is critical: Success is more likely if surgery is performed
before chronic changes (demyelination) have occurred.
11. What is the prognosis for CVI in general?
Animals that are moderately to severely tetraparetic, particularly with multiple spinal levels
of involvement, have a guarded-to-poor prognosis. Dogs that are presented with single-level
invol vement in which surgical intervention is elected early have a good-to-excellent prognosis.
Success rates approaching 80% are possible with early surgical intervention.
12. What postoperative care is necessary?
· Appropriate postoperative analgesic therapy is essential.
· Discontinue steroids and provide excellent nursing care to nonambulatory patients.
· Frequent turning, padding to avoid decubital ulcers, bathing, and prevention of urinary
tract infection are critical.
exercise.
· Provide hydrotherapy and physical therapy (passive flexion and extension exercises) as
necessary
· Neck braces are required after Harrington rods and polyvinylidine plate surgeries for 6
weeks postoperatively.
·Vigorous activity should be avoided for 8 weeks postoperatively
· Support via construction of carts is possible in some cases.
13. List the complications of surgery for wobbler's syndrome.
Intraoperati ve
·Hemorrhage
Nerve trauma
·Hypotension
· Cardiac dysrhythmia or arrest
Immediate postoperative
· Graft or implant failures
·Worsening neurologic signs
Long-term
· Further instability (domino effect)
· Urinary tract infection
·Pressure sores
14. How common are subsequent neurologic lesions after surgery?
fused segment within 5 years of surgery.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Dixon BC, Tomlinson JL: A modified distraction-stabilization technique
using an interbody
polymethylmethacrylate plug in dogs with CV1. I Am Vet Med Assoc 208:61-68, 1996.
2. McKee WM, Butterworth SJ: Management of cervical spondylopathy-associated disc protrusions using metal
washers in 78 dogs. J Small Anim Pract 40:465-472, 1999.
3. McKee WM, Sharp NIH: Cervical spondylopathy. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2002, W.B. Saunders, pp 1180-1193.
d s  so 7  as   e  s u s    
1237-1250
360
Vertebral Fractures and Luxations
5. Walker TL: Use of Harrington rods in caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy. In Bojrab MI, editor: Current
techniques in small animat surgery, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1998, Lea & Febiger, pp 830-832.
6. Wheler SJ, Sharp NIH: Smatl animat spinat disorders diagnosis and surgery, London, 1994, Mosby-Wolfe, pp
135-155.
92. VERTEBRAL FRACTURES AND LUXATIONS
Otto I. Lanz, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What are the initial evaluations of a dog or cat with suspected vertebral column
fracture?
 1. Life-threatening injuries should be dealt with accordingly.
 2. The next priority is immobilization of the spine to prevent further displacement of an
unstable spinal fracture-luxation. The animal should be placed onto a flat board and
taped in lateral recumbency.
3. A neurologic examination should be performed to localize and determine the severity of
the lesion. Palpation of the spine and assessment of spinal cord reflexes, pain perception,
and cranial nerves should be performed.
2. What medications should be administered if a spinal injury is suspected?
Once the neurologic assessment has been made, opioids can be administered as an anal gesic.
Methylprednisolone sodium succinate or prednisolone sodium succinate is the treatment of
choice. The protocol is 30 mg/kg IV bolus, followed by a 15 mg/kg bolus 2 hours later. Additional
15 mg/kg IV bolus doses are continued every 6 hours for 24 hours. Starting treatment >8 hours
after spinal trauma is detrimental by causing inhibition of neuronal sprouting and neuronal
glucose uptake. Cimetidine and misoprostol have been used for treatment of gastric ulceration if
steroids are administered. Fluid therapy should be used to maintain blood pressure in patients
with spinal cord trauma.
3. What diagnostic tests should be performed?
·Radiographs
Lateral and horizontal beam (ventrodorsal projection) radiographs of the suspected
fracture
Thoracic radiographs to rule out pulmonary contusions, diaphragmatic hernia, and
pneumothorax.
· A complete blood count
·Serum chemistry analysis
·Urinalysis
4. Discuss the three-compartment theory.
The canine vertebrae are divided into three regions defined by anatomic structures
1. The dorsal compartment contains the articular facets, laminae, pedicles, spinous
processes, and supporting ligamentous structures (A).
and the dorsal vertebral body (B)
3. The ventral compartment contains the remainder of the vertebral body, the lateral and ven-
tral aspects of the annulus, nucleus pulposus, and the ventral longitudinal ligament (C)
360
Vertebral Fractures and Luxations
5. Walker TL: Use of Harrington rods in caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy. In Bojrab MI, editor: Current
techniques in small animat surgery, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1998, Lea & Febiger, pp 830-832.
6. Wheler SJ, Sharp NIH: Smatl animat spinat disorders diagnosis and surgery, London, 1994, Mosby-Wolfe, pp
135-155.
92. VERTEBRAL FRACTURES AND LUXATIONS
Otto I. Lanz, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What are the initial evaluations of a dog or cat with suspected vertebral column
fracture?
 1. Life-threatening injuries should be dealt with accordingly.
 2. The next priority is immobilization of the spine to prevent further displacement of an
unstable spinal fracture-luxation. The animal should be placed onto a flat board and
taped in lateral recumbency.
3. A neurologic examination should be performed to localize and determine the severity of
the lesion. Palpation of the spine and assessment of spinal cord reflexes, pain perception,
and cranial nerves should be performed.
2. What medications should be administered if a spinal injury is suspected?
Once the neurologic assessment has been made, opioids can be administered as an anal gesic.
Methylprednisolone sodium succinate or prednisolone sodium succinate is the treatment of
choice. The protocol is 30 mg/kg IV bolus, followed by a 15 mg/kg bolus 2 hours later. Additional
15 mg/kg IV bolus doses are continued every 6 hours for 24 hours. Starting treatment >8 hours
after spinal trauma is detrimental by causing inhibition of neuronal sprouting and neuronal
glucose uptake. Cimetidine and misoprostol have been used for treatment of gastric ulceration if
steroids are administered. Fluid therapy should be used to maintain blood pressure in patients
with spinal cord trauma.
3. What diagnostic tests should be performed?
·Radiographs
Lateral and horizontal beam (ventrodorsal projection) radiographs of the suspected
fracture
Thoracic radiographs to rule out pulmonary contusions, diaphragmatic hernia, and
pneumothorax.
· A complete blood count
·Serum chemistry analysis
·Urinalysis
4. Discuss the three-compartment theory.
The canine vertebrae are divided into three regions defined by anatomic structures
1. The dorsal compartment contains the articular facets, laminae, pedicles, spinous
processes, and supporting ligamentous structures (A).
and the dorsal vertebral body (B)
3. The ventral compartment contains the remainder of the vertebral body, the lateral and ven-
tral aspects of the annulus, nucleus pulposus, and the ventral longitudinal ligament (C)
Vertebral Fractures and Luxations
361
Figure 92-1Cranioventral chip fracture of
Lz and subluxation.
Figure 92-2 Lateral view of vertebrae
Radiographs are assessed to evaluate which of the three compartments are damaged. When
two or three compartments are fractured or displaced, the fracture is considered unstable. If only
one compartment is involved, the fracture is considered stable. (See Figures 92-2 and 92-3.)
5. When is myelography performed for spinal fractures?
· Myelography is usually not performed if the spinal fracture can be treated conservatively
stabilization.
· Myelography should be performed in animals with marked neurologic deficits and normal
or equivocally abnormal radiographs. In these cases, myelography can identify persistent
spinal cord compression resulting from an extruded disc, which may need surgical
decompression.
· Myelography can also detect occult spinal lesions (20% of animals with spinal trauma)
and spinal cord transection in animals with no deep pain.
362
Vertebral Fractures and Luxations
Figure 92-3 Cross-sectional view of
vertebrae.
6. What are the advantages of performing preoperative CT and MRI scans on animals
with spinal fractures?
CT
·Visualizes osseous abnormalities, such as vertebral fractures
· Accurately identifies fracture stability by determining which compartments are involved
· Helps surgeon plan surgery and determine which means of fixation will be used through
three-dimensional reconstruction of the vertebral fracture
MRI
· Offers superior soft tissue definition, which is helpful when evaluating the spinal cord.
7. Where do most spinal fracture-luxations occur?
 In the junction of a mobile and immovable (static/kinetic) vertebral segment. In dogs and
cats, these areas include:
· Lumbosacral junction
· Thoracolumbar junction
· Cervicothoracic junction
·Atlantoaxial junction
· Atlantooccipital junction
8. What are the primary forces responsible for causing vertebral fracture-luxations?
The forces responsible are bending (extension, flexion), torsion (rotation), and compression
(axial loading). Flexion injuries of the spine are the most common type of injury and usually
cause the most severe neurologic dysfunction.
 9. List the elements of nonsurgical management.
· Strict cage rest for 4-6 weeks
· Back braces or body casts
· Cessation of steroids, use of analgesics
· Serial neurologic examinations (deterioration warrants reevaluation, with or without
surgery or euthanasia)
Vertebral Fractures and Luxations
363
10. List the indications for surgical intervention of spinal fracture-luxations.
·Substantial neurologic deficits
· Evidence of spinal cord compression based on radiographs, myelogram, or CT scans
· Stable fracture that is responding poorly to conservative therapy
· Deteriorating neurologic status after conservative management
· Vertebral instability (two or three affected compartments) demonstrable on radiographs or
CT scans
11. What factors must be considered when selecting a surgical technique for stabilization
of vertebral fracture-luxations?
· Location of the lesion
· Presence of a compressive lesion within the canal
·Size of the animal
·Equipment available
· Experience of the surgeon
12. List surgical techniques for stabilization of vertebral fractures-luxations.
· Pins and polymethylmethacrylate
·Vertebral body plating
· Spinous processes plating
· Pins and wires
·External fixators
·Relative ease of application
· Versati lity for most regions of the spine
· Affords good stabilization
· Is stronger than dorsal fixation
·● No special instrumentation needed
·Relatively inexpensive matenials
14. What is the optimal number and configuration of pins when using pins and
polymethylmethacrylate?
two vertebral bodies are directed in a caudoventral direction, and the pins in the caudal two vertebral
bodies are directed in a cranioventral direction. Pins are placed on both sides of the vertebral body.
15. What pin configuration is necessary if only four pins are used?
If a four-pin configuration is used, the pins should be angled toward the fracture site. The
pins in the cranial vertebral body are angled caudoventrally and the pins in the caudal vertebral
body are angled cranioventrally
16. List the advantages and disadvantages of spinous process plating.
Advantages
· Inherent stability provided by the articular facets; supraspinous and interspinous
ligaments preserved.
· Can be combined with other techniques (vertebral body plating or pins and
methylmethacrylate).
Disadvantages
· Plate slippage and fracturing of the spinous processes in the postoperative period.
· Spinous processes must be large and the bone compact to support the plate.
364
VertebralFractures andLuxations
· A minimum of two spinous processes on each side of the fracture-luxation must be
engaged with the plate and the plate placed close to the base of the spinous process.
17. How many cortices should be engaged when using a vertebral body plate for
stabilization of spinal fracture-luxations?
At least four cortices engaged cranial and caudal to the fracture-luxation. Stabilization of
two adjacent vertebral bodies is recommended; however, if a midbody vertebral fracture is
encountered, three vertebral bodies should be spanned with the vertebral body plate.
18. Describe the anatomic landmarks for placing pins or screws in a vertebral body.
· When placing screws or pins from a dorsolateral approach to the thoracic spine, the
tubercle of the ribs and the base of the accessory processes are used as landmarks.
· In the lumbar vertebrae, the accessory processes and transverse processes are used as
landmarks. Pins and screws placed in the thoracic vertebrae or lumbar vertebrae should
be directed at a 45° angle relative to the spinous processes.
in a dorsolateral direction at a 30°-35° angle from the ventral midline of the vertebral body
19. What kind of joint is the atlantoaxial joint?
A diarthrodial joint that lacks the support of an intervertebral disc. This joint depends
entirely on the fibrous joint capsule and surrounding ligaments for stability
20. What causes atlantoaxial instability?
A congenital or developmental problem resulting in instability of the atlantoaxial joint
Instability may result from fracture, absence, hypoplasia, or malformation of the odontoid
process, resulting in a nonfunctional attachment of the li gamentous structures supporting the atlas
and axis. Rupture or laxity of the alar, apical, transverse, or dorsal atlantoaxial ligaments may
also result in laxity between the atlas and axis.
21. What is the usual signalment and history of an animal presented for atlantoaxial
instability?
presented with clinical signs of atlantoaxial instability at an older age have instability since birth,
The history of an animal with atlantoaxial instability is one of progressive tetraparesis, inco-
ordination, and neck pain. Acute presentation usually occurs after minor trauma.
 22. List problems with dorsal fixation of atlantoaxial luxations using a loop of orthopedic
wire, nonabsorbable suture material, or autogenous graft (nuchal ligament).
·Failure of the suture or bone during initial fixation
· Tearing of the suture or wire through the dorsal arch of C1 or spinous process of C2
· Continued micromotion of C1-2 leading to fatigue and failure of the suture or orthopedic wire
process
23. List the advantages of ventral stabilization techniques for the surgical repair of
atlantoaxial luxations.
· Accurate anatomic reduction of C1-2 for adequate decompression of the spinal cord.
· Pins placed in the most solid portion of C1-2.
· C1-2 can be arthrodesed through a ventral approach.
· Odontoidectomy can be performed through a ventral approach, if necessary
Vertebral Fractures and Luxations
365
24. What is the most common complication after ventral cross-pinning for stabilization of
atlantoaxial luxations?
Early pin migration in the postoperative period. Placing polymethylmethacrylate bone
25. Describe the proper pin placement for ventral cross-pinning of C1-2.
Two pins should be started close to the midline on the caudoventral surface of C2. Each pin
should be directed medially toward the alar notch on the cranial edge of Cl with the point of the
pin directed ventrally. Pins placed in this manner minimize the chances of penetrating and
damaging the spinal cord.
 26. Discuss special postoperative care for animals recovering from surgical stabilization of
spinal fracture.
Animals should be encouraged to lie in a sternal position; if they are in lateral recumbency, they
sores and decubital ulcer forrmation. Water beds can also be used to decrease the chances of
decubital ulcer formation. Urinary incontinence (urine retention) is ideally managed by manual
expression of the bladder every 8 hours. If the animal cannot be expressed manually, an
indwelling urinary catheter is sterilely inserted and connected to a close collection system.
and supports should be used with caution in the early postoperative period, especially in large-
 ng  go no   n  e  
hygiene. Passive physiotherapy should be instituted three times daily, taking each joint through a
complete range of motion.
CONTROVERSY
 27. Should a neck brace be used in the postoperative management of surgically stabilized
atlantoaxial luxations?
Some surgeons believe neck braces inadequately stabilize C1-2 and are impractical for use
in veterinary medicine. Others report that regardless of whether a ventral or dorsal technique is
used for the stabilization of Cl-2, a neck brace should be placed on the animal. Because the goal
is either obtaining a fibrous union of C1-2 (dorsal approach) or arthrodesis of C1-2 (ventral
approach), rigid immobilization is important. Neck braces should be placed on the animal for a
period of 4-6 weeks or until radiographic evidence of union has occurred. The neck brace should
be checked weekly. Strict cage confinement should be part of the postoperative therapy.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Carberry CA, Flanders JA: Nonsurgical management of thoracic and lumbar fractures/luxations in the dog and
cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:43-53, 1989.
2. Hawthome J, Blevins WE: Cervical vertebral fractures in 56 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:135-146, 1999.
220,1995.
4. Schulz KS, Waldron DR: Application of ventral pins and PMMA for treatment of atlantoaxial instability in 9
dogs. Vet Surg 26:317-325, 1997.
5. Selcer RR, Budd WJ, Walker TL: Management of vertebral column fractures in dogs and cats: 211 cases (1977-
1985). J Amm Vet Med Assoc 198:1965-1968, 1991.
6.Walker TM, Pierce WA: Extemal fixation of the canine lumbar spine. Vet Surg 31:181-188, 2002.
93. NEOPLASMS OF THE SPINE
Otto I. Lanz, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What are the three basic tumor types that affect the spine?
PRIMARYNEURALTUMORS
SECONDARY TUMORS
METASTATICTUMORS
 Spinal cord
Bone
Mammary adenocarcinoma
Astrocytomas
Osteosarcoma
Lymphos arcoma
Ependymomas
Fibrosarcoma
Hemangiosarcoma
Medulloepithelioma
 Chondrosarcoma
Prostatic adenocarcinoma
Sarcoma
Meningioma tissue
 Spinal ner ves 
Meningioma
Neurofi broma
Fibrosarcoma
Neurofi brosarcoma
2. What are the clinical signs in patients presented with spinal tumors?
LOCATION OF LESION
FORELIMBS
HINDLIMBS
OTHER
Cervical (C1-5)
UMN
UMN
Ataxia in all four limbs
Cervicothoracc (C6--T2)
LMN
UMN
Ataxia in all four limbs
Thoracolumbar (T3-L3)
Normal
UMN
 Hind limb ataxia ± forelimb
extensor rigidity
Lumbosacral (L4-S3)
Normal
LMN
 LMN signs in perineal
structures or tail
 UMN = upper motor neuron, LMN = lower motor neuron.
 3. Do tumors symmetrically involve the spinal cord and nerves?
No. Animals may present with asymmetric signs of spinal-cord or nerve-root involvement.
Hemiparesis or hemiplegia may be seen with asymmetric cervical and cervicothoracic lesions.
Monoparesis or monoplegia may be seen with tumors affecting only the brachial plexus on one
side and in the hindlimb with an asymmetric lumbosacral involvement. Neurofibromas of the
nerve roots cause asymmetric signs early in the course of the disease. These animals may be
exhibiting much discomfort (radicular pain) in only one limb. Animals with extradural or
intradural extramedullary lesions are usually painful, whereas animals with intramedullary
masses may not be presented with spinal hyperesthesia.
4. List the anatomic locations of spinal tumors.
·Intramedullary
·Intradural (extramedullary)
·Extradural
Neoplasms of The Spine
367
 5. Describe the myelographic appearances of spinal cord tumors.
· Extradural tumors compress the spinal cord, causing the contrast column to deviate away
from the mass, resulting in a widening of the epidural space.
· Intradural, extramedullary tumors act as a wedge displacing the dura mater abaxially and
the spinal cord axially. As the contrast material surrounds the tumor, a golf tee configura-
tion is formed.
· Intramedullary tumors cause compression of the spinal cord from within, resulting in a
circumferential enlargement of the spinal cord. The swelling of the spinal cord results in
diverging attenuation of the contrast material in all views.
·Multiple radiographic views (ventrodorsal, lateral, and oblique) are necessary to show the
exact location of the mass. Further imaging modalities, such as CT or MRI scans, are
helpful in localizing the tumor.
Intradural-Extramedullary
Mass
Figure 93-1  Myelography of a C1-2 tumor.
 6. What are the most common intradural extramedullary tumors found in the dog?
Meningiomas and nerve sheath tumors.
 7. What is the most common spinal tumor diagnosed in cats?
Lymphos arcoma.
 8. What tumors have been shown to have a propensity for CNS metastasis?
· Mammary adenocarcinoma
·Melanoma
·Hemangiosarcoma
· Lymphosarcoma
·Prostatic adenocarcinoma
 9. Discuss abnormalities that are seen in CSF analyzed from animals with spinal tumors.
Sometimes, none. Albuminocytologic dissociation (increased protein in the absence of
the tumor has invaded the subarachnoid space; an inflammatory response is more commonly
observed in CSF from animals with spinal tumors. Elevated CSF pressures have also been
368
Neoplasms otTheSpine
pleocytosis
10. Where is the best location, relative to the spinal mass, for a diagnostic spinal tap?
Caudal to the suspected tumor.
11. When is myelography contraindicated?
cal signs or spread of the infection within the CNS
12. List characteristics of contrast agents to perform myelography.
Characteristics of an ideal myelographic contrast agent are:
· Nontoxic
· Miscible with CSF
·Water-soluble
·Radiopaque
·Absorbable
·Inexpensive
13. What myelographic contrast agents are specifically recommended?
·Iopamidol (Isovue)
·Iohexol (Omnipaque)
14. What are the radiographic findings of vertebral multiple myeloma?
15. Where does spinal cord compression secondary to spinal tumors occur, compared with
disc-associated compression, when viewed on a myelogram?
Within the body of the vertebrae, whereas cord compression caused by intervertebral disc
disease is dorsal to the intervertebral disc space.
16.  Discuss the surgical approach recommended for the removal of spinal tumors.
The surgical approach is based on the location of the tumor and can be aided with enhanced
diagnostic imaging (CT or MRI). Tumors with a ventral location in the thoracic or lumbar spine
may be approached through a hemilaminectomy. Hemilaminectomies of the cervical spine have
been reported in the veterinary literature; however, dorsal laminectomies are most often perform-
ed for tumors located in the cervical spine. Dorsal laminectomies may be used for tumors with a
lateral location in the thoracic or lumbar spine. If exploration does not reveal evidence of a spinal
tumor, a biopsy specimen of epidural fat should be obtained to rule out lymphosarcoma or myx -
osarcoma. A durotomy should also be performed to rule out an intradural extramedullary or
intradural tumor. In this case, the dura should also be submitted for histopathology.
17. What adjunctive therapy can be combined with surgery for animals with spinal tumors?
· Chemotherapy (steroids) has been used for animals with spinal lymphosarcoma.
· Radiation therapy after surgical decompression and tumor removal increases surgical time
in dogs with spinal tumors. Response to radiation therapy depends on tumor type
histologic grade, tumor extent, anatomic location, and metastasis.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Levy MS, Kapatkin AS, Patnaik AK: Spinal tumors in 37 dogs: Clinical outcome and long-temm surgical resull
(1987-1994). J Amm Aninn Hosp Assoc 33:307-312, 1997
Lumbosacral Disease
369
 2. Demell wS, Van Kechten BJ: Outcome following treatment of vertebrae tumors in 20 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 36:245-251, 2000.
Philadelphia, 1999, Lippincott, pp 655-667.
4. Prata RG: Diagnosis of spinal cord tumors in the dog. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 7:165-185, 1997.
37:150-153, 1996.
94. LUMBOSACRAL DISEASE
Lisa Klopp. D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VI.M. (Neurology)
1. Outline the functional neuroanatomy of the lumbosacral spinal cord and nerve
roots.
SPINAL CORD SEGMENTS AND
NERVE ROOTS
MOTOR INNERVATION
L4-6
 Femoral nerve
Quadriceps femoris m.
 Sartorius m.
 Iliopsoas m.
Obturator ner ve
 Pectineus m.
Adductor m.
Gracilis m.
 External obturator m.
L6-S2
Cranial gluteal nerve (L6, L7, S1)
 Middle and deep gluteal mm.
 Tensor fascia lata m.
Sciatic nerve (L6, L7, S1, ±-S2)
Biceps femoris m.
Branches of the sciatic nerve
Common peroneal n.
Cranial tibial m.
Lateral digital extensor m.
Long digital extensor m.
 Peroneus longus m.
Tibial nerve
 Deep and superficial digital
flexor mm.
 Popliteus m.
Gas trocnemius m.
 Semimembranosus m.
Semitendinosus m.
Caudal gluteal nerve (L7, S1, S2)
 Middle and superficial gluteal mm.
S1-3
Pudendal nerve
 External anal sphincter
Urethralis m. (external urinary sphincter)
 Pelvic nerve (parasympathetic)
Detrusor m. (bladder muscle)
Lumbosacral Disease
369
 2. Demell wS, Van Kechten BJ: Outcome following treatment of vertebrae tumors in 20 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 36:245-251, 2000.
Philadelphia, 1999, Lippincott, pp 655-667.
4. Prata RG: Diagnosis of spinal cord tumors in the dog. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 7:165-185, 1997.
37:150-153, 1996.
94. LUMBOSACRAL DISEASE
Lisa Klopp. D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VI.M. (Neurology)
1. Outline the functional neuroanatomy of the lumbosacral spinal cord and nerve
roots.
SPINAL CORD SEGMENTS AND
NERVE ROOTS
MOTOR INNERVATION
L4-6
 Femoral nerve
Quadriceps femoris m.
 Sartorius m.
 Iliopsoas m.
Obturator ner ve
 Pectineus m.
Adductor m.
Gracilis m.
 External obturator m.
L6-S2
Cranial gluteal nerve (L6, L7, S1)
 Middle and deep gluteal mm.
 Tensor fascia lata m.
Sciatic nerve (L6, L7, S1, ±-S2)
Biceps femoris m.
Branches of the sciatic nerve
Common peroneal n.
Cranial tibial m.
Lateral digital extensor m.
Long digital extensor m.
 Peroneus longus m.
Tibial nerve
 Deep and superficial digital
flexor mm.
 Popliteus m.
Gas trocnemius m.
 Semimembranosus m.
Semitendinosus m.
Caudal gluteal nerve (L7, S1, S2)
 Middle and superficial gluteal mm.
S1-3
Pudendal nerve
 External anal sphincter
Urethralis m. (external urinary sphincter)
 Pelvic nerve (parasympathetic)
Detrusor m. (bladder muscle)
370
Lumbosacral Disease
2. What is unique about the anatomy of the lumbosacral region?
A differential growth rate of the spinal cord and vertebral column results in termination of
the spinal cord at the L6 vertebra in the dog and L7 in the cat. For this reason, lesions affecting
the lumbosacral joint generally affect the cauda equina (CE) and not the spinal cord.
3. What is the difference between lumbosacral and CE syndromes?
· Lumbosacral syndrome encompasses spinal cord segments L4-S3
· CE syndrome reflects the peripheral nerve roots in the caudal lumbar and sacral spinal
canal. In essence, CE syndrome is a neuropathic disease rather than a spinal cord disease.
4. What does the term lower motor neuron (LMN) mean?
LMNs that supply muscles of the pelvic limbs arise from L4-S2 spinal cord segments. Injury to this
area of the spinal cord, peripheral nerves, or nerve roots may result in LMN signs in the pelvic limbs:
·Flaccid paresis or plegia
·Hyporeflexia to areflexia
·Neurogenic atrophy
5. What does the term upper motor neuron (UMN) mean?
UMNs arise from motor centers in the cerebrum (corticospinal tracts) and brain stem
(rubrospinal, medullary and pontine reticulospinal, vestibulospinal tracts). These neurons influ-
ence and modify LMNs. UMN signs involve:
· Normal tonicity to spastic paresis or plegia
·Normoreflexia to hyperreflexia
· Disuse atrophy if dysfunction is severe and prolonged
6.  What is lumbosacral stenosis?
Narrowing of the L7 and sacral spinal canal secondary to congenital malformation or
acquired degenerative changes.
7. What does the term lumbosacral disease encompass?
· Degenerative disc disease, type I or II
· Congenital stenosis, malformation, or malarticulation
· Degenerative changes and hypertrophy of:
Ligamentum flavum
Dorsal longitudinal ligament
Articular facet joint capsule
8. What is spondylosis?
A common radiographic finding in asymptomatic middle-age to older dogs characterized by
ventral bone bridging between vertebrae. It rarely interferes with neural structures, unless severe
lateral spondylosis causes nerve-root impingement near the intervertebral foramen.
9. What is the signalment of dogs most commonly affected by lumbosacral disease?
Young to middle-age, large-breed and working male dogs.
10. List the common signs of lumbosacral disease.
· Lumbosacral pain
· Intermittent or persistent hindlimb lameness
· Mild paraparesis
· Proprioceptive deficits
· Tail paresis
·Incontinence
Lumbosacral Disease
371
11. Why is it important to assess hock flexion specifically when performing the withdrawal
reflex?
The tarsus can passively flex with flexion of the stifle and hip. Lumbosacral disease often
affects the nerve roots that supply sciatic innervation to the distal musculature of the limb
Manual pressure in front of the stifle keeps it from flexing and allows evaluation of hock flexion
specifically, which may be found to be depressed or absent with sciatic nerve dysfunction
12. Why is the patellar reflex spared?
The sensory and motor components of the patellar reflex are supplied by the femoral nerve
that arises from spinal cord and nerve roots L4-6. The last nerve root contributing to this reflex
exits in the L6-7 intervertebral foramen.
13. List some methods to evaluate dogs for lumbosacral pain.
· Deep lumbosacral palpation
· Dorsal elevation of the tail base
·Pelviclimb wheelbarrow reaction
14. What condition is critical to rule out for dogs with lumbosacral disease?
Osteoarthritis of the hip joints.
15. What is pseudohyperreflexia?
A term used for an exaggerated patellar reflex secondary to loss of antagonistic muscles
supplied by the sciatic nerve.
16. What is intermittent claudication?
From the Latin claudicato—limping. A complex of symptoms characterized by absence of
pain or discomfort in a limb at rest and the commencement of pain, tension, and weakness during
exercise. Exercise increases metabolic demands for oxygen and nutrients by the spinal cord and
cauda equina. The radicular arteries passing through the stenotic intervertebral foramen become
compressed and cannot meet the metabolic demands of the nervous system. Nerve root ischemia
results in radicular pain, which is referred to the back, perineum, and extremities.
17. What is paresthesia?
Abnormal sensation resulting from nerve root injury or compression. Signs of licking, chew-
ing, and self-mutilation represent behavioral manifestations of paresthesia in animals
18. What is dysesthesia?
An unpleasant, abnormal sensation with normal stimuli, such as touch or mild mampulation.
19. What is the source of pain in animals with lumbosacral disease?
Compressive ischemia to a peripheral nerve produces dysfunction in large-caliber (heavily
myelinated) nerve fibers first. Compression of sensory roots results in mechanical depolarization
perceived by the central nervous system as radiating pain. Discogenic pain also plays a role
 20. List common traumatic lesions of the lumbosacral area in dogs and cats.
· Lumbosacral fracture and luxations
·Pelvic fractures
·Sacroiliac luxation
· Sacrocaudal fracture and avulsion
372
Lumbosacral Disease
21. List other diseases that affect the lumbosacral spine and spinal cord, peripheral
nerves, and CE in dogs.
·Discospondylitis
· Fibrocartilaginous emboli
· Spina bifida
·Neoplasia
· Neuropathies
22. List other diseases that affect the lumbosacral spine and spinal cord, peripheral
nerves, and CE in cats.
· Aortic thromboembolism
· Diabetic neuropathy
· Metastatic neoplasia
· Sacrocaudal dysgenesis
· Traumatic ischemic myelopathy
23. What imaging procedures are used for lumbosacral disease?
·Survey radiography
·Myelography
·Epidurography
·Discography
·CT
· MRI
24. Which imaging procedures are best?
CT provides the best bone detail, whereas MRI is most accurate for soft tissue lesions
25. What electrodiagnostic studies are helpful in the diagnosis of lumbosacral disease?
Needle electromyography is used to determine if there is normal muscle physiology and
integrity of muscle membrane and physiology.
26. How is lumbosacral syndrome treated medically?
Most dogs with pain alone respond to antiinflammatory medications and short-term (4-6
weeks) exercise restriction. Slow return to more normal activity over a few months is recom-
mended. Perrmanent lifestyle changes, including no jumping, climbing stairs, or excessive physi
cal activity, are also helpful.
27. Discuss surgical options for lumbosacral disease.
Dorsal laminectomy or hemilaminectomy at L7-S1. Unilateral and bilateral facetectomy or
foraminotomy may be used when pathology involves the lateral recesses or intervertebral fora-
hypertrophied ligaments, and fibrous scar tissue. Diskectomy can be performed via this approach.
28.When is decompressive surgery indicated?
When animals are not responsive to medical (conservative) therapy or have multiple recur-
rologic dysfunction are surgical candidates. Adequate postoperative rest and convalescence is
imperative for a positive outcome.
29. What are the complications of surgical treatment of lumbosacral disease?
·Injury to nerve roots and excessive hemorrhage.
· Dogs are often in pain and clinically worse for a few days (application of epidural
LumbosacralDisease
373
anesthesia, e.g., morphine or morphine and medetomidine, before surgical closure is
30.What is the recommended aftercare for surgical treatment of lumbosacral disease?
Strict rest with leash walks only for 6-8 weeks. Minimal controlled activity is warranted to
provide physical therapy. Passive and active pelvic limb physical therapy is recommended for
animals with neurologic dysfunction. After the initial 6-8 weeks of limited activity, it is best to
Tetrain slowly and increase activity over 3-4 months. If it is not necessary for animals to work
(jump, climb, hunt), permanent lifestyle restrictions are encouraged.
31. What determines the prognosis of animals with lumbosacral disease?
are more resistant to injury than the spinal cord. Dogs with signs of back pain, mild neurologic
function or autonomic dysfunction warrant a guarded-to-poor prognosis.
CONTROVERSY
32.  Discuss controversial issues regarding surgical treatment of lumbosacral disease.
Dorsal fusion and fixation entails distraction of the dorsal aspect of the lumbosacral laminae,
pin placement through the articular facets of L7 and S1, and bone graft over the dorsal laminae.
compressive radiculopathy, and stabilize the lumbosacral articulations. This procedure has merit
secondary to disc extrusion and fibrous proliferation of soft tissues in the lumbosacral joint.
canal may not truly address the primary pathology. Complications with this procedure include
Iracture of articular facets, pin migration, and improper pin placement.
     a       
prognosis?
No. In two studies, imaging findings were not directly related to either disease severity o1
postoperative outcome.
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Danielsson F, Sjostrom L: Surgical treatment of degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in dogs. Vet Surg 28:91-98,
1999.
 2. DeRisio L, Sharp NJH: Predictors of outcome after dorsal decompressive laminectomy for degenerative
lumbosacral stenosis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:624-628, 2001
3. Janssens LA, Moensy Y: Lumbosacral degenerative stenosis in the dog. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 13:97-103,
2000
4. Jones JC, Banfield CM: Association between postoperative outcome and results of MRI and CT in working dogs
with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis. I Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1769-1774, 2000.
 5. Mayhew PD, Kapatkin AS: Association of cauda equina compression in MRI and clinical signs in dogs with
degenerative lumbosacral stenosis. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:555-562, 2002.
6. Ramirez O, Thrall DE: A review of inaging techniques for cauda equina syndrome. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
39:283-296, 1998.
London, 1994, Mosby-Wolfe, pp 122-134.
95.PERIPHERALNERVESURGERY
C.W. Dewey. D.VM., M.S., D.A.C.VS., D.A.C.VI.M. (Neurologu)
1. How frequently is peripheral nerve surgery performed in veterinary patients?
Notoften.
2. What are indications for peripheral nerve surgery?
· The most common indication is a diagnostic procedure: nerve biopsy for suspected neu-
Topathies.
· Less frequently, perineural dissection has been performed for patients with sciatic
neuropathy resulting from fibrous tissue entrapment subsequent to trauma in the region of
the proximal femur. In such cases, it is important to find normal, nonentrapped nerve and
establish a dissection plane between nerve and fibrous tissue. Microsurgical equipment
and magnification head loupes are used for this type of delicate surgery
· Uncommonly, the brachial plexus area is explored if a nerve sheath tumor in the axillary
region is suspected.
· Surgical procedures for reanastomosis (neurorrhaphy) of major nerve trunks are well
described in the veterinary literature, but rarely per formed.
3. How does one perform a nerve biopsy?
A readily accessible nerve, such as the ulnar or common peroneal, is selected for biopsy. A
           
segment is cut using a No. 1l blade or fine iris scissors.
 4. Discuss surgical procedures that are recommended for brachial plexus avulsions
Typically, the procedure of choice in complete brachial plexus avulsions is thoracic limb am-
putation. Nonavulsion or cranial plexus (radial nerve spared) injuries are uncommon. The prognosis
for salvaging a functional limb is poor in most brachial plexus injuries. Surgical reestablishment of
innervation at the point of injury with nerve grafts, nerve transfers, or nerve root reimplantation into
the spinal cord has been suggested. Even if this type of difficult surgery is successfully performed,
the chance for functional recovery in a veterinary patient is quite low because the distance the axons
must regrow to reach target muscles is considerable. Most likely, the target muscles will become
fibrotic before the axons reach them. Also, recovery of a dog or cat's thoracic limb function is
translated into weight-bearing, and this degree of functional recovery is unrealistic, compared with
the degree of recovery that is considered successful in human cases.
With suspected brachial plexus avulsion, it is appropriate to provide time (4-6 months) for
during this period the patient excoriates or begins to self-mutilate the foot, amputation of the
dysfunctional limb should be performed. Dogs and cats, with few exceptions, do well with three legs.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Rodkey WG, Sharp NIH: Surgery of the peripheral nervous system. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small anina
surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2002, W.B. Saunders, pp 1218-1226
2. Shores A: Peripheral nerve injury and repair. In Bojrab MJ, Elison GW, Slocum B, editors: Current techniques
in small animat surgery, ed 4, Baltimore, 1998, williams & wilkins, pp 73-82.
96. BRAIN TUMORS
C.W. Dewey. D.VM., M.S., D.A.C.VS., D.A.C.VI.M. (Neurologu)
1. What types of brain tumors affect dogs and cats?
Primary brain tumors arise from brain parenchyma, cells that line the brain tissue, or
vascular elements of the brain:
·Meningiomas
●Gliomas (astrocytoma, oli godendroglioma)
+ Choroid plexus tumors
· Ependymomas
 Secondary brain tumors arise from structures that are not intrinsic to the brain and are less
common:
·Pituitary tumors
· Invasive nasal-frontal sinus tumors
·Calvarial tumors (e.g., multilobular osteochondrosarcoma)
·Metastatic neoplasia
2. Name the most common primary brain tumor encountered in dogs and cats.
Meningiomas. Cats are unlikely to develop brain tumors other than meningioma
3.  Are these patients typically older animals?
Yes. The median age for dogs with brain tumors is 9 years and >10 years for cats.
4.Describe clinical signs in dogs and cats with brain tumors.
Most brain tumors are in the front part of the brain (cerebrum, diencephalon), and clinical
signs such as seizures, circling, head-pressing, visual disturbances, and behavioral changes are
common. Palpable neck pain is also common with forebrain tumors.
 Dogs and cats with more caudally located (midbrain through medulla) tumors tend to have
severe disturbances of consciousness, gait, and cranial nerve deficits (other than visual or CN II
dysfunction). Animals with cerebellar tumors display intention tremors and hypermetria.
5.What is hemineglect or heminattention?
In dogs and cats with structural forebrain (cerebrum-diencephalon) masses, the animal ignores
environmental cues from the side opposite the tumor. Such a patient tends to eat from one side of
6. How is a brain tumor diagnosed?
Advanced imaging (CT, MRI) is needed to make the diagnosis. Imaging also provides
some institutions, a stereotactic CT-guided biopsy device is used to obtain a sample of the neo-
plasm at the time of imaging
7. How are brain tumors treated?
Supportive therapy for secondary effects (edema, seizures) of tumor:
·Prednisone
376
Brain Tumors
·Anticonvulsants (phenobarbital, potassium bromide)
 Definitive therapy to destroy tumor cells:
· Chemotherapy (nitrosoureas for gliomas)
· Surgery with or without irradiation
· Cobalt-60 irradiation for deep-seated lesions
·None (metastatic lesions, invasive nasal-frontal sinus carcinomas)
8. Discuss the surgical approach used for brain tumor removal.
 For rostral tumors (olfactory bulb), a transfrontal craniectomy and limited lateral craniectomy
are performed. Often the orbital ligament is transected near its attachment to the zy gomatic process
of the frontal bone on one or both sides of the craniectomy to remove the medial wall of the orbit.
The eyeball, in its protective orbital sheath, can be gently retracted laterally once this ligament is
not stop with application of a hemostatic agent (Surgicel), the sinus can be ligated at this rostral
location. This approach necessitates invasion of the frontal sinus. It is imperative to create a barrier
between the brain and frontal sinus during any craniotomy-craniectomy. One option is to pack the
The dural defect is closed with temporalis fascia or synthetic dura. Failure to separate the brain
from the frontal sinus area can lead to encephalitis or pneumocephalus.
A caudal approach is used to remove cerebellar masses. One of the trans verse sinuses can
be sacrificed (bone wax into these areas to occlude the vessel) to remove a tumor at the cere-
bellomedullary angle. Attempts to ligate this sinus lead to further hemorrhage. With a caudal
approach, the confluens sinuum (where the two trans verse sinuses converge) can be lacerated if
the surgeon carries the craniectomy too far dorsally
9. How does one get the tumor out?
·Gentle traction (feline meningioma)
· Microsurgical brain tumor instrumentation
· Suction and bipolar cautery
· Cavitron ultrasomic aspirator
10. List difficult aspects of the postoperative convalescence.
· Extensive hospital and home aftercare
· Pharyngeal dysfunction and aspiration pneumonia (1-2 days postoperatively)
· Pulmonary atelectasis (recumbency) and subsequent pneumonia
· Acute idiopathic anemia (feline patients, 1-3 days postoperatively)
· Overmedication (confusing dementia with pain)
11. What is the prognosis for the brain tumor patient?
With supportive therapy alone, most dogs and cats with brain tumors either die or are
euthanized because of worsening neurologic dysfunction within 3 months of initial presentation.
vival times of about 2 years. The prognosis for canine brain tumor patients treated with various
definitive therapies is considerably more vague. Radiation therapy alone, for gliomas and menin-
giomas, may provide median survival times of approximately 10 and 12 months. Lomustine
therapy may be effective in treating canine gliomas. Reported survival times for dogs with
gliomas treated with lomustine vary between 7 and 1l months. Several canine meningioma
patients treated by the author with a combination of surgery and radiation therapy have lived
well beyond a year. The longest median survival times for dogs with intracranial menin-
median survival time was 16.5 months. In another the median disease-free interval was
30 months.
Brain Tumors
377
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Brearley MJ, Jeffery ND, Phillips SM: Hypofractionated radiation therapy of brain masses in dogs: A
retrospective analysis of survival of 83 cases (1991-1996). J Vet Intem Med 13:408-412, 1999.
 2. Dewey CW, Coates JR, Bahr A: How I treat primary brain tumors in dogs and cats. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet
22:756-762, 2000.
3. Lecouteur RA: Current concepts in the diagnosis and treatment of brain tumors in dogs and cats. J Sm Anin Pract
40:411-416, 1999.
4. Theon AP, LeCouteux RA, Carr EA: Influence of tunior cell proliferation and sex-homone receptors on
effectiveness of radiation therapy for dogs with incompletely resected meningiomas. J Am Vet Med Assoc
216:701-707, 2000.
5. Axlund TW, McGlasson ML, Smith AN: Surgery alone or in conmbination with radiation therapy for treatment of
intracranial meningiomas in dogs: 31 cases (1989-2002). I Am Vet Med Assoc 221:1597-1600, 2002.
Section V
Oncologic Surgery
97. PRINCIPLES OF ONCOLOGIC SURGERY
Bernard Seguin, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What are the different types of goals of surgery in the oncologic setting?
Surgery can be performed for various goals:
·Surgery for prevention of cancer development
· Surgery to obtain a diagnosis (biopsy)
· Surgery to achieve a cure
· Surgery for palliative purposes
·Cytoreductive surgery
· Ancillary surgical procedures to indirectly improve quality of life
2. What can be done to decrease the risk of developing mammary tumors in dogs and cats?
Performing ovariohysterectomy. In dogs, when the procedure is done before the first heat,
the relative risk of developing mammary tumors is 0.5%, between the first and second heat the
relative risk is 8%, and between the second and third heat the relative risk is 26%. After 2.5 years
of age there is no more protective benefit. However, it is believed that intact dogs that develop a
hormone-dependent mammary tumor later on in life will benefit in tems of survival by being
spayed around the time of having the mammary tumor removed. In cats, the risk of developing a
 3. Why is it so important to perform a biopsy in patients suspected of suffering from cancer?
Without knowing what the disease is, it is very easy to administer inadequate, inappropriate,
cancer, you must know "who the enemy is."
4. Why not treat every lump as a malignancy?
Because patients with benign tumors would end up being overtreated. This increases mor-
bidity, risks of complications, and costs.
5. Why not treat every lump as a benign tumor and come back with more aggressive
treatments once it is known to be a malignancy?
Because most often the first surgery is the best chance for a cure. When a surgery is
performed, tissue planes are disrupted and tumor cells can be seeded away from the primary
tumor. If an incomplete excision was performed the first time, it may not even be possible to per-
odoid e j ue uoisu eae yonul e seo m Aolns pos u 1o ns puoos e ug
wide excision was done the first time around. In the end this creates increased morbidity to the
patient and increased costs.
Fine needle aspirate (FNA), incisional biopsy, and excisional biopsy.
Principles of Oncologic Surgery
379
7. What are the seven tumors that can usually be easily diagnosed with an FNA?
Lymphoma, plasma cell tumor, histocytoma, mast cell tumor, melanoma, transmissible
venereal tumor, and lipoma.
 8. What is an incisional biopsy?
A procedure that involves incision into the tumor to remove a section that appears most
representative with minimal disruption of the remainder of the tumor or surrounding tissue.
9. What is an excisional biopsy?
A procedure where the entire suspected tumor mass is excised with no attempt made to
obtain generous margins of adjacent normal tissue.
10. What is the advantage of an excisional biopsy?
It can be both diagnostic and therapeutic if the mass is a benign tumor.
11. What is the disadvantage of an excisional biopsy?
It may compromise the chance of a cure if it is a malignant tumor.
12. When is an incisional or excisional biopsy performed?
Whether to perform an excisional or incisional biopsy depends on the answer to this
question: "If I perform an excisional biopsy, will I compromise the chance for a cure if I need to
   s          
tumor over the distal aspect of a limb.
13. When is a preoperative biopsy not usually performed?
A preoperative biopsy should not be performed when the biopsy procedure is as difficult and
· Lung lobectomy for lung tumor (as invasive and difficult).
in dogs).
· Castration (same surgery for biopsy and treatment),
·Splenectomy for splenic mass (as invasive and difficult).
· Canine thyroid tumors should not be biopsied with a keyhole incision; thyroid tumors can
be highly vascular and dogs can die from bleeding out after a biopsy.
14. What are the guidelines to performing a biopsy?
· First plan the site properly. It should be planned such that it will be easy to include the
biopsy tract in the definitive resection or radiation field.
· Pay close attention to hemostasis and obliteration of dead space. Avoidance of seromas
and hematomas will minimize local contamination of the biopsy site with cancer cells.
However, avoid use of drains, as their tracts can also become contaminated with tumor
cells.
● If a biopsy is performed on the tail or legs, the incision should be longitudinal and not
transverse.
· The junction between the normal and abnormal tissue is the best area for the pathologist
to see differences and invasiveness. However, bone tumors are best biopsied in the middle
· The larger the sample, the more likely it is to be diagnostic. Tumors are usually
more likely to provide a diagnosis.
380
Principles of Oncologic Surgery
· Avoid obtaining a biopsy with electrocautery, as it tends to deform cellular architecture.
It is better to use electrocautery for hemostasis after blade removal of the biopsy sample.
· Care should be taken not to traumatize the sample with forceps or other handling
instruments prior to fixation.
· If excisional biopsy was performed, mark the margins with a suture or, better yet, ink the
surgical margins (e.g., India ink).
· If indicated, acquire other samples at the same time as the biopsy, such as samples for
culture.
· It is best to use "uncontaminated” instruments (instruments that were not used for
acquiring the biopsy sample) when closing the biopsy tract.
snssn jed I um uy png oot ut pexy inusa si snsst iea s uoexy iodod -
to 10 parts fixative. If more than one lesion has been biopsied, each should be submitted
in a different container. Tissue should not be thicker than 1 cm in the fixative or it will not
fix deeply. Large masses can be sliced like a loaf of bread, leaving inked margins intact.
·A veterinary-trained pathologist is preferred over a pathologist trained in human diseases
Also provide a complete signalment and accurate history with the sample. As a general
Tule: "garbage in, garbage out!"
15. What are the “doses" of surgery that can be applied to neoplasms?
The "doses" of surgery refer to the aggressiveness of the excision when performing surgery
for a cure
Intracapsular excision: piecemeal removal of a mass. Dissection plane is intracapsular
When performed on a neoplastic disease, intracapsular removal results in microscopic
and/or macroscopic disease left behind and tumor recurrence. Examples of indications:
curettage of a bone cyst
Marginal excision: removal just outside or on pseudocapsule of tumor, "shelling out." For
most malignant tumors, marginal excision results in microscopic disease left behind and
tumor recurrence. Examples of indications: lipoma, sebaceous adenoma.
Wide excision: Tumor and pseudocapsule never entered. Normal tissue surrounds tumor.
Usually 2-3 cm of normal tissue around tumor (lateral margins) and one tissue plane below
tumor (deep margin). Examples of indications: soft tissue sarcomas, mast cell tumors
Radical excision: entire compartment or structure containing tumor is removed. Examples:
amputation, lung lobectomy, splenectomy.
16. What are the principles of curative surgery?
· Never puncture or rupture the tumor. Therefore manipulate and handle the tumor with
great care.
● Ligate the vascular supply before transecting (controversy regarding which to ligate first,
artery or vein?).
· Remove previous drainage and biopsy tract
·Use sharp dissection.
· Use monofilament suture material.
· Isolate (pack off) the tumor from the rest of the surgical wound.
· Irigate as needed with sterile saline
·Avoid touching ulcerated areas of the tumor with gloves or instruments.
· Remove the tumor with adequate margins (lateral and deep).
· Use separate instruments, gloves, and drapes for closure and reconstruction and also when
removing another mass.
·Adhesions should be removed en bloc with the tumor.
· Avoid placing surgical drains, or if a drain is necessary, place it such that it will not
· Place hemoclips into the surgical wound before closing.
Principles of Oncologic Surgery
381
· Lavage the wound bed or body cavity (some controversy exists regarding the validity and
risk of lavaging after tumor excision).
17. Why should the tumor never be punctured and separate instruments and gloves be
used for closure?
Because tumor cells are contaminants that can seed and spread. Many principles of biopsy
seeding."
With wide excision, a 2- to 3-cm margin of normal tissue is taken on all sides of the tumor
(lateral margins, go for quantity). However, for cutaneous/subcutaneous tumors, the deep margin
is provided by a fascial layer that is not penetrated by the tumor. That fascial layer is removed en
bloc with the tumor. It may not be 3 cm deep from the tumor, but it most often is an adequate
dence to show that fascial layers act as biologic barrier against cancer.
19. What is meant by the “second surgery” in oncologic surgery?
The second surgery refers to the instance where the first surgery did not accomplish com-
plete excision and therefore neoplastic cells have been left behind (referred to as microscopic
disease). Because neoplastic cells could have been seeded anywhere in the wound bed during the
first surgery, the second surgery must remove the entire previous incision line and tumor bed with
a margin of normal tissue. It is removed en bloc, meaning in one piece without penetrating the
previous wound bed/area.
20. What is cytoreductive surgery?
Cytoreductive surgery refers to a planned incomplete removal of a tumor. The only
efficacy of other treatment modalities. As a general rule, chemotherapy and radiotherapy work
best on the smallest amount of disease. Therefore if the disease can be "downstaged”" with sur-
gery, then the other therapies may work better. Ideally, the surgeon should remove all of the gross
disease and leave only microscopic disease in the patient.
21. What is palliative surgery?
 Palliative treatment refers to improving quality of life without trying to prolong survival.
Quality of life may be improved either from pain relief or improved function. This type of surgery
for osteosarcoma in dogs.
Surgeons may be called upon to perform ancillary procedures that do not directly treat the
tumor but enhance quality of life for the patient. Examples include placement of vascular access
ports for delivery of fluids, chemotherapy, anesthesia, or for blood draws, and placement of
feeding tubes such as esophagostomy, gastrostomy, or jejunostomy tubes.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Withrow SI: Biopsy principles. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG,editors: Small animat clinicat veterinary oncology,
ed 3, Philadelphia, 2001, W.B. Saunders, pp 63-76.
2. Gilson SD, Stone EA: Principles of oncologic surgery. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 12: 827-838, 1990
98. BONE TUMORS
Bernard Sequin, D.VM., M.S., Dip. A.C.VS
1. What are the four most common primary bone tumors in dogs?
·Osteosarcoma (OSA)
· Chondrosarcoma
·Fibrosarcoma
·Hemangiosarcoma
 2. Which one is the most common, and what percentage of primary bone tumors are of
this particular type in dogs?
Osteosarcoma; about 85%.
3. What sizes of dogs are mostly affected by OSA?
Large and giant breeds.
4. What is the major difference between OSA arising in a small-breed dog and that
arising in a large-breed dog?
Location; large-breed dogs usually have the appendicular skeleton affected, whereas small-
breed dogs usually have the axial skeleton affected.
 5. What are the two most common locations for OSA?
Distal radius and proximal humerus.
6. What percentage of dogs with OSA have metastases at the time of initial diagnosis?
Over 90% of dogs have metastases at the time of initial presentation. Although less than 10%
have detectable metastases with the current diagnostic tests, the vast majority have
micrometastases.
7. What are the two most common anatomic sites for metastasis with OSA?
Lungs and bones. Therefore the diagnostic tests with the highest yield to find evidence of
metastasis are chest radiographs and bone scintigraphy. However, because bone metastases are
not very common (10 to 15%) and scintigraphy is not readily available, bone scintigraphy is not
s
 8. If over 90% of dogs with OSA have metastasis at initial presentation, why even bother
with staging the patient?
Because it greatly changes the prognosis. Dogs with micrometastasis (i.e., nondetectable
metastasis) can have their survival prolonged with chemotherapy, whereas those with detectable
metastasis on staging diagnostic tests are highly unli kely to benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy
and will therefore live a shorter period of time.
 9. What are the treatment approaches with canine OSA?
There are two approaches: curative and palliative.
Bone Tumors
383
10. Is curative an appropriate term to use with canine OSA?
No. Although the goal may be to cure the dog, more than 90% will die from the OSA.
in cases of canine OSA implies that prolonging survival is one of the intended goals.
11. When are each of these approaches used?
The curative-intent approach is used when (l) the owners do want to prolong the survival of
the dog, (2) there is no evidence of detectable metastasis upon staging of the dog, and (3) the dog
is otherwise relatively healthy, with no other major health issue. The palliative approach is used
when (l) prolonging survival is not one of the owner's goals, (2) there is evidence of metastasis
or heart failure).
12. What is the treatment when the curative intent approach is chosen for appendicular
OSA?
There are two issues to address. One is the local disease, that is, the OSA in the leg, and the
second issue is the metastatic disease. To treat the local disease, amputation remains the standard
of care, although limb-sparing surgery can be performed if possible. For the metastatic disease,
chemotherapy is admimstered.
13. What are the best cases to perform limb-sparing in terms of tumor location?
The best anatomic sites amendable to limb-sparing are ulna, scapula, and distal radius. How-
ever, both ulnar and scapular sites are uncommon locations for OSA.
14. What are the ideal criteria to qualify for a limb-sparing surgery?
No evidence of metastasis, amendable anatomic site, tumor involves <50% of the length of
fracture
15. What are the three most common complications of limb-sparing surgery?
Infection, implant/graft failure, and local recurrence of the tumor.
16.  Is the prognosis for survival different if limb-sparing surgery is performed instead of
amputation?
Buueds-qu pue uogendue Xq pen sop ioy sues su st peaiains ioy sisouloid su
infection. Dogs that have limb-sparing surgery are much more likely to get an infection than dogs
with an amputation. Developing an infection is the factor that provides the survival advantage.
The reasons why infection provide a survival advantage remain undetermined.
17. Is it true that an amputation should not be performed on a giant-breed dog because of
its size?
 No, this dogma is false. Giant-breed dogs can have an excellent quality of life on three legs
even when it is a thoracic limb being amputated. Size of the dog alone is not a reason not to per-
form an amputation.
18. What is the current standard of care to prolong survival in dogs with OSA?
The administration of chemotherapy.
19. What are the three chemotherapeutic agents most commonly used to treat dogs with
OSA?
Cisplatin, carboplatin, and doxorubicin.
384
Bone Tumors
20. What is the prognosis for survival when chemotherapy is administered versus not?
With chemotherapy, the median survival is 10-12 months; without chemotherapy, the
median survival is 3-5 months.
21. Which chemotherapeutic protocol, including protocols that combine different
chemotherapeutic agents, is the best at prolonging survival?
combination protocols, including that for cisplatin/dox orubicin given on 2 consecutive days every
3 weeks, have failed to prove superior. The important point to remember is that most veterinary
studies are based on very few patients, rendering the survival statistics vulnerable to aberrant
fluctuations.
22. What are the different treatments available for the palliative approach?
The different treatments include palliative radiation therapy, use of analgesic drugs such as
opioids and nonsteroidal antinflammatories, and administration of anti-osteoclastic-activity
23. What is the prognosis for cats suffering from OSA?
        s         
survival was 49 months. However, in a more recent study, mean survival was 11.8 months.
24.What should one be concerned about when a cat has been diagnosed with a chondroma
or chondrosarcoma?
The cat may be suffering from osteochondromatosis, also known as multiple cartilaginous
exostosis. Although this terminology is also used in the dog, this refers to a completely different
disease in the cat. The cat may be presented with a single lesion, but this is a polyostotic disease
and therefore the clinician should look for other bones being affected. Most cats are feline
leukemia virus positive. The prognosis is grave because no chemotherapy is known to be effective
and amputation is at best palliative.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Demell wS, Straw RC, Withrow SJ: Tumors of the skeletal system. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG, editors: Smatt
animal clinical veterinary oncology,ed 3, Philadelphia, 2001, W.B. Saunders, pp 378-417.
 2. Heldmann E, Anderson MA, Wagner-Mann C: Feline osteosarcoma: 145 cases (1990-1995). J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 36:518-521, 2000.
3. Ramirez O, Dodge RK, Page RL, et al: Palliative radliotherapy of appendicular osteosarcoma in 95 dogs. Vet
Radio1 Ultrasound 40:517-522, 1999
4. Green EM, Adams WM, Forrest LJ: Four fraction palliative radiotherapy for osteosarcoma in 24 dogs. J Am Anin
Hosp Assoc 38:445-451, 2002
5. O'Brien MG, Withrow SJ, Straw RC: Recent advances in the treatment of canine appendicular osteosarcoma.
Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 15: 939-945, 1993
6. Bitetto WV, Patnaik AK, Schrader SC, Mooney SC: Osteosarcoma in cats: 22 cases (1974-1984). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 190: 91-93, 1987.
99. SOFT TISSUE SARCOMAS
Bernard Seguin, DVM, MS, Dip ACVS
1. What are soft tissue sarcomas?
Soft tissue sarcomas (STSs) are a family of tumors that share some common biologic
behavior features. Soft tissue sarcomas most commonly arise in the cutaneous/subcutaneous area,
although they can also arise from other organs such as the gastrointestinal tract, the genitourinary
tract, and the spleen.
2. What are the biologic features shared by STSs?
1. They possess a pseudocapsule and are therefore locally invasive.
2. They do not metastasize very frequently (overall metastatic rate around 20%).
3. When they do metastasize, they do so preferentially to the lungs and rarely to the regional
lymph nodes.
3. What are the classic STSs in dogs that follow these features?
Fibrosarcoma, myxosarcoma, undifferentiated sarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma,
hemangiopericytomas, schwanoma, neurofibrosarcoma, and malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor.
4. What are less common STSs in the dog?
Liposarcoma, lymphangiosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, synovial cell
sarcoma.
 5. Is splenic hemangiosarcoma considered a classic STS?
6. What is the treatment of choice for STSs?
Wide surgical excision; because STSs are locally invasive, they require a 3-cm margin of
normal tissue laterally and one fascial plane deep to the tumor.
 7. When surgery alone is used to treat STSs in dogs, what is the single most important
factor to predict local recurrence?
Status of the surgical margins; with an incomplete excision, the dog is 10.5 times more
likely to have local recurrence.
 8. What diagnostic test can be performed before surgery to help achieve a complete
excision?
Computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging. An alternative test would be ultra-
sonography. Without prior imaging, the likelihood of achieving a complete excision is greatly
compromised. Performing advanced imaging prior to surgery is referred to as planned excision
and is the standard of care in human medicine.
9. Is radiation therapy alone an appropriate treatment for STSs?
No. Soft tissue sarcomas are relatively radioresistant. Soft tissue sarcomas that show a
response are the exception, and when there is a response, it is most often short-lived.
386
Soff TissueSarcomas
10. What can be done if an incomplete excision has been performed/achieved?
therapy. If the tumor was in a location on the body that allows wider, more aggressive excision,
then that can be performed. If a wider excision is not possible, adjuvant radiation therapy should
against microscopic disease when dealing with STSs
11. What can be done if a relatively large STS is located on a limb and owners refuse to
amputate yet want to prevent local recurrence?
The treatment is to perform a marginal excision of the tumor (minimal normal tissue excised
with tumor) and adjuvant radiation therapy. Whether presurgical or postsurgical radiation is better
is unknown and still highly debated.
12. What is the prognosis for local recurrence when adjuvant radiation therapy is
performed?
Rates of local recurrence vary between 17% and 43% when treating canine STSs.
13. Is chemotherapy alone an appropriate treatment for STSs?
No. As with radiation therapy, STSs that show a response to chemotherapy are the exception,
and when there is a response, it is most often short-lived.
14. In what capacity is chemotherapy used in patients with STSs?
·As a palliative measure where the tumor is nonresectable.
· Patients that have a high-grade STS and are therefore more likely to metastasize
is very unlikely.
15. What chemotherapeutic agents have been used with some degree of success in
dogs?
Dox orubicin, mitox antrone, and VAC protocol (vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide).
16. Do cats suffer from STSs like dogs do?
Yes. However, cats also suffer from vaccine-associated sarcomas. Vaccine-associated
sarcomas are more locally invasive and more likely to recur following treatment than non
vaccine-associated and non-vaccine-associated sarcomas in cats because of the significant
differenceinprognosis.
17. Are vaccines the only agents that can cause the development of a sarcoma?
No. Sarcomas developing at the sites of antibiotic and lufenuron administration have been
Teported. It is now believed that virtually anything that produces local inflammation has the
potential to cause the development of a sarcoma in susceptible cats. Because the incidence is
Telatively low and vaccines are the compounds that are given to most cats in the population with
enough frequency to allow a correlation, vaccines have received the most attention as potential
causative agents.
18. What is the incidence of vaccine-associated sarcoma in cats?
The incidence has been reported to be between 1 per 1000 to 1 per 10,000 vaccines adminis-
vaccines administered. Therefore the incidence is now believed to be 1 case per 10,000 to 30,000
cats vaccinated.
SoffTissueSarcomas
387
19. After a vaccine has been administered in a cat and a lump is detected at the site, when
should it be biopsied?
A biopsy should be performed when any one of these three situations is encountered:
· A mass persists at the injection site for more than 3 months after injection
· A mass is present and is larger than 2 cm, regardless of time since injection
· A mass is stil increasing in size 1 month after injection
              
(granuloma), what should be the ideal approach?
First the cat needs to be staged to find out if the tumor has metastasized, and the overall
health status of the cat should be evaluated (including complete blood count, chemistry panel, and
tumor to properly plan the treatment.
21. What is the local treatment for injection-site sarcomas in cats?
 For tumors on the trunk, wide surgical excision with radiation therapy is recommended;
whether presurgical or postsurgical radiation is better is unknown and still highly debated. For
tumors that are localized relatively distally on a limb, limb amputation without radiation is
recommended.
22. What is the prognosis for feline injection-site sarcomas in terms of local recurrence
when treatment is surgery and radiation therapy?
Local recurrence rates vary between 40% and 46%. The median disease-free interval varies
between 398 and 584 days.
23. What is the metastatic rate for feline injection-site sarcomas?
It has been reported to be between 10% to 24%
CONTROVERSY
24. Should chemotherapy be routinely administered to treat cats with vaccine-associated
sarcomas?
metastatic disease. There is no information regarding any effect of chemotherapy on metastatic
disease for feline injection-site sarcomas. There is evidence, however, that some gross tumors will
show some response to chemotherapy (either partial or complete response). Because of the very
the benefit of the doubt that their tumor will be chemosensitive, and these clinicians administer
chemotherapy to all cats suffering from injection-site sarcoma. If the tumor is chemosensitive,
then theoretically chemotherapy should help delay local recurrence. Typically, chemotherapy is
not given in the neoadjuvant setting to find out whether or to what drug the tumor is sensitive,
because this delays surgery or the start of radiation therapy. Also, a tumor may be more likely to
be sensitive in the microscopic setting than in the gross setting. Therefore chemotherapy is
usually administered after surgery and radiation therapy.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Kuntz CA, Demell ws, Powers BE, et al: Prognostic factors for surgical treatment of soft tissue sarcomas in
dogs: 75 cases (1986-1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:1147-1151, 1997.
2. Demell WS, Withrow SJ, Kuntz CA, Powers BE: Principles of treatment for soft tissue sarcoma. Clin Tech Small
Anim Pract 13:59-64, 1998.
3. Séguin B: Injection-site sarcomas in cats. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 32:983-996, 2002
4. MacEwen EG, Powers BE, Macy D, Withrow SJ: Soft tissue sarcomas. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG, editors:
Small animal clinical veterinary oncology, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2001, W.B. Saunders, pp 283-304.
100. ORAL TUMORS
Bernard Seguin, D.VM., M.S., Dip A.C.VS
1.List the four most common cancers of the mouth in dogs.
1.Malignant melanoma
2. Squamous cell carcinoma
3.Fibrosarcoma
4.Osteosarcoma
 2. List the two most common oral cancers in cats.
 1. Squamous cell carcinoma
2. Fibrosarcoma
 3. What other tumor arises from the periodontal ligament and is commonly found in dogs
but rarely in cats?
Epulides. There are three different types: (1) acanthomatous, (2) ossifying, and (3) fibroma-
tous. Some pathologists refer to these as ameloblastomas.
 4. Which of the four previously mentioned tumors developing on the jaw in the dog has
the highest metastatic rate?
Malignant melanoma.
5. Which of the four previously mentioned tumors in the dog has the highest local
recurrence rate?
Fibrosarcoma.
 6. Are there any concerns if a biopsy specimen from a mass in the mouth of a dog comes
back fibroma?
Yes. You may be dealing with a histologically low-grade yet biologically high-grade
fibrosarcoma. If the tumor is rapidly growing, recurrent, or invading bone, aggressive therapy is
indicated despite the histologic diagnosis.
 7. What is the treatment for the four most common oral neoplasms of the dog when they
are located on the gingiva?
Small lesions (<2 cm in diameter) that are fixed or minimally invasive into bone can be
treated with cryosurgery. Larger or more extensive lesions require mandibulectomy or maxillec-
tomy. A minimum 2-cm margin is advised to provide the best local control. Radiation therapy can
be used as an adjuvant after incomplete tumor removal. When used as the sole mode of treatment,
megavoltage irradiation has provided good median progression-free intervals for oral cancers (8
months for malignant melanoma, 26 months for fibrosarcoma, and 36 months for squamous cell
carcinoma). Because of the high metastatic rate of malignant melanomas, adjuvant chemotherapy
is indicated. Currently, platinum drugs appear to be the best option.
8.  What is the most serious complication of a maxillectomy?
Wound dehiscence because it can lead to an oronasal fistula. It occurs in 7-33% of cases.
389
9. List two factors that are known to promote wound dehiscence after maxillectomy.
1.Excessive tension on the suture line (caudad maxillectomies)
2. Use of electrocoagulation during the surgery
10. What are the positive prognostic factors specific for malignant melanoma in the dog?
●Lesions smaller than 2 cm
·Lesions treated with clean margins with the first attempt
· No evidence of metastasis
11. When performing a maxillectomy or mandibulectomy, does the prognosis depend on
tumor site?
Yes. Tumors in a rostral location have a better prognosis.
12. Do mandibular and appendicular osteosarcomas have a similar prognosis?
No
· Dogs treated with surgery alone for appendicular osteosarcoma have a l0% 1-year survival.
· Dogs with mandibular osteosarcoma treated with surgery alone have a 7l% 1-year
survival.
13. What is the age of dogs with papillary squamous cell carcinoma?
Young dogs, 2 months to 2 years old.
14. What is the treatment for papilary squamous cell carcinoma?
Surgical debulking and curettage followed by radiation. If the lesion is amenable to com-
plete resection, maxillectomy or mandibulectomy should be curative. No metastasis has been
reported, and long-term control is achieved.
15. List treatments for acanthomatous epulides.
·Mandibulectomy
·Maxillectomy
·Radiation therapy
16.  What is the prognosis after treatment for acanthomatous epulides?
Recurrence rate after surgery is less than 5%. Control rate greater than 90% is achieved with
irradiation. Malignant cancer developing in the irradiated site can occur in 20% of the cases,
especially when orthovoltage is used. It can take several years for these malignancies to develop.
17. What is the treatment for fibromatous or ossifying epulides?
Conservative blade excision. The base can be treated with electrocautery or cryosurgery if it
invades bone or if the lesion has recurred.
18. What is the most common primary neoplasm of the tonsils in dogs?
Squamous cell carcinoma.
19. What is the treatment for tonsillar squamous cell carcinoma?
· Tonsillectomy is rarely curative because greater than 90% of cases develop metastases
after tonsillectomy. Only l0% of animals survive for more than 1 year. Tonsillectomy
remains a palliative treatment in most cases and should be performed bilaterally because
of the high percentage of bilateral disease.
 s  s e    n  n    as
remains the problem.
· Chemotherapy provides limited success.
390
Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Tumors
20. What are the most common lingual tumors in dogs?
Squamous cell carcinoma, followed by granular cell myoblastoma, melanoma, mast cell,
and fibrosarcoma.
 21. Is squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue more likely to metastasize than gingival
squamous cell carcinoma?
Yes.
22. What percentage of the tongue can be removed for rostrally located tumors?
40-60%. It has been recently reported that dogs can adapt and be able to drink and eat fol-
lowing a complete ( 100%) glossectomy.
23. What is the treatment and prognosis for lingual granular myoblastoma?
The treatment is surgical resection, and the prognosis is good. The surgery requires only
conservative, close margins and is often curative (in >80% of cases). Local recurrence can be
treated by surgical resection again.
24.
What is the treatment for viral papillomatosis?
None in the majority of patients. Most patients undergo spontaneous regression of the
disease within 4-8 weeks.
25. What is the treatment for oral squamous cell carcinoma in cats?
There is no effective treatment at this time. Surgical excision followed by radiation therapy
locally invasive. One-year survival rarely exceeds l0% in the cat.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Berg J: Principles of oncologic orofacial surgery. Clin Tech Sm Anim Pract 13:38-41, 1998.
2. Dhaliwal RS: Oral tumors in dogs and cats. Comp Contin Educ Prac Vet 20:1011-1020, 1998.
3. Dvorak LD: Major glossectomy in dogs. Proc ACVS Annual Conf, San Diego, 2002, p 6.
4. Morrison WB: Cancers of the head and neck. In Morrison WB, editor: Cancer in dogs and cats, Baltimore, 1998,
Williams & wilkins, pp 511-519.
5. Withrow SJ: Tumors of the gastrointestinal system: A. Cancer of the oral cavity. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG,
101. CUTANEOUS AND SUBCUTANEOUS TUMORS
Bernard Seguin, D.VM., M.S., Dip A.C.VS
1.List the three classes of cutaneous and subcutaneous tumors based on cytology.
1. Epithelial
2. Mesenchymal
3. Round cell or discrete cell
2.  What is the basis for this classification?
The tissue of origin as well as certain cytologic features
390
Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Tumors
20. What are the most common lingual tumors in dogs?
Squamous cell carcinoma, followed by granular cell myoblastoma, melanoma, mast cell,
and fibrosarcoma.
 21. Is squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue more likely to metastasize than gingival
squamous cell carcinoma?
Yes.
22. What percentage of the tongue can be removed for rostrally located tumors?
40-60%. It has been recently reported that dogs can adapt and be able to drink and eat fol-
lowing a complete ( 100%) glossectomy.
23. What is the treatment and prognosis for lingual granular myoblastoma?
The treatment is surgical resection, and the prognosis is good. The surgery requires only
conservative, close margins and is often curative (in >80% of cases). Local recurrence can be
treated by surgical resection again.
24.
What is the treatment for viral papillomatosis?
None in the majority of patients. Most patients undergo spontaneous regression of the
disease within 4-8 weeks.
25. What is the treatment for oral squamous cell carcinoma in cats?
There is no effective treatment at this time. Surgical excision followed by radiation therapy
locally invasive. One-year survival rarely exceeds l0% in the cat.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Berg J: Principles of oncologic orofacial surgery. Clin Tech Sm Anim Pract 13:38-41, 1998.
2. Dhaliwal RS: Oral tumors in dogs and cats. Comp Contin Educ Prac Vet 20:1011-1020, 1998.
3. Dvorak LD: Major glossectomy in dogs. Proc ACVS Annual Conf, San Diego, 2002, p 6.
4. Morrison WB: Cancers of the head and neck. In Morrison WB, editor: Cancer in dogs and cats, Baltimore, 1998,
Williams & wilkins, pp 511-519.
5. Withrow SJ: Tumors of the gastrointestinal system: A. Cancer of the oral cavity. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG,
101. CUTANEOUS AND SUBCUTANEOUS TUMORS
Bernard Seguin, D.VM., M.S., Dip A.C.VS
1.List the three classes of cutaneous and subcutaneous tumors based on cytology.
1. Epithelial
2. Mesenchymal
3. Round cell or discrete cell
2.  What is the basis for this classification?
The tissue of origin as well as certain cytologic features
Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Tumors
391
3. Should a fine-needle aspirate be performed on cutaneous and subcutaneous masses?
Always. Although a fine-needle aspirate may not be able to identify an epithelial or mes-
enchymal tumor, it can usually identify round cell tumors.
4. What are the round cell tumors?
· Lymphoma
· Plasma cell tumor
·Histiocytoma
· Mast cell tumor
· Transmissible venereal tumor
·Melanoma
5. What if the fine-needle aspirate is nondiagnostic?
Biopsy is the next procedure. The biopsy can be excisional or incisional. The decision to per-
form one over the other depends on whether the results of the biopsy would change the thera-
peutic plan.
 6. What else should be performed in the diagnostic evaluation before definitive treatment?
If the tumor is known or suspected to be malignant, the patient needs to be evaluated for
metastases (radiography or ultrasound) and overall health (hematology and chemistry profiles).
7. List the tumors of epithelial origin.
· Basal cell tumor
·Sweat-gland tumors
· Trichoepithelioma
·Pilomatricoma
· Squamous cell carcinoma
· Papillomas
· Sebaceous-gland tumor
· Perianal-gland tumor
·Anal-sac adenocarcinoma
8. What are the tumors of mesenchymal origin?
·Soft tissue sarcomas
·Lipomas
·Hemangiomas/hemangiosarcomas
9. As a general rule, what is the treatment of choice for cutaneous and subcutaneous
tumors?
Surgical excision.
10. Define actinic keratosis.
A condition induced by solar radiation that occurs frequently in poorly haired, pale-skin
areas, such as the nose and the pinnas. It is not a neoplastic disease but can progress to become
squamous cell carcinoma. It is not possible to tell the two conditions apart grossly; a biopsy is
required. Because the potential exists for actinic keratosis lesions to progress into squamous cell
11.  What is squamous cell carcinoma in situ?
A superficial cluster of neoplastic keratinocytes confined to the epidermis, hair follicles, or
both. It may invade the basement membrane and dermis to become invasive squamous cell-
carcinoma with the potential for local invasion and distant metastasis.
392
Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Tumors
12. What are hepatoid tumors?
Tumors arising from the perianal glands, which are modified sebaceous glands. Most tumors
are located in the perineum, but lo% are at other locations, such as the base of the tail or
abdomen. Most are adenomas, but adenocarcinomas are possible.
13.  Discuss the treatment for perianal adenomas.
Because most dogs affected by these tumors are intact males, castration is the treatment of
choice. Estrogen therapy is also effective, but the risk of myelosuppression prohibits its use.
Ninety-five percent of adenomas regress after castration.
 If the tumor is large or in female dogs, surgical excision is necessary. Adenocarcinomas of
perianal glands do not regress after castration and need to be surgically excised.
The role of radiation therapy and chemotherapy when margins are dirty after surgical
excision, or when metastases are present, remains questionable.
14. Describe anal-sac tumors.
Anal-sac adenocarcinoma is the most common tumor of the anal sac. Adenocarcinomas
arise from apocnine glands in the anal sac. Some studies have reported these tumors being more
prevalent in female dogs, while others have failed to show a gender predilection.
15. What is the most common paraneoplastic syndrome associated with anal-sac
adenocarcinoma?
Hypercalcemia. The pathogenesis involves the tumor producing parathyroid hormone
related protein.
16. Describe the biologic behavior of cutaneous melanomas in dogs.
Cutaneous melanomas can be benign or malignant (>85% are benign). This distinction may
be hard to make because some crossover occurs 1n biologic behavior. Mitotic index seems to be
a good predictor of biologic behavior. Mali gnant melanomas can metastasize in >50% of patients,
preferentially to the regional lymph nodes and lungs.
17. What are the tumors of the digits in dogs?
· The most common is squamous cell carcinoma. It is locally invasive and can metastasize.
· The second most common is malignant melanoma. It is less likely to have local bony lysis
on radiographs than squamous cell carcinoma, but more likely to metastasize.
·The third most common is mast cell tumor.
18. What is the treatment for tumors of the digits?
Amputation is the treatment of choice for all three. Adjuvant chemotherapy is indicated for
malignant melanoma, but its benefit is questionable. Adjuvant chemotherapy for mast cell tumor
is indicated depending on the grade and stage of the disease.
19. Describe the biologic behavior of histiocytomas.
from the monocyte-macrophage cell line. Most spontaneously regress within weeks to 4 months.
20. How are histiocytomas treated?
If histiocytomas are not causing any problems, no treatment is the best approach at first. If
they become ulcerated or self-trauma occurs, they are surgically removed. Topical and systemic
corticosteroids have been reported to cause regression of multiple lesions.
Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Tumors
393
21. What is the most significant prognostic factor for cutaneous/subcutaneous mast cell
tumors in dogs?
The grade, which can only be determined with histopathology. There are two schemas in
veterinary medicine. The most commonly used is the Pathaik grading, where grade I is most
CONTROVERSIES
22. How are mast cell tumors staged, and what is the significance of the staging scheme?
Mast cell tumors preferentially metastasize to the regional lymph nodes, the spleen, the livet,
and the bone marrow. They rarely metastasize to the lungs. Staging involves looking for disease
in these areas by aspirating regional lymph nodes, performing ultrasound of the abdomen,
aspirating the spleen and liver, and performing a bone-marrow aspirate. A buffy coat examination
can also be performed, but most agree that the bone-marrow aspirate is more sensitive.
Controversy arises when mast cells are seen in the spleen or liver or when mastocytemia is
present. Normal dogs can have mast cells in the spleen or liver, and a report has shown that dogs
with mastocytemia are more likely to have a disease other than mast cell tumor. In an animal that
is presented with a mast cell tumor on the skin, does finding mastocytemia or mast cells in the
spleen or liver mean that the tumor has metastasized?
 23. What is the best treatment for a cutaneous/subcutaneous grade II mast cell tumor in
thedog?
Surgical excision with wide margins (2-3 cm) is the treatment of choice. However when a
complete excision is not possible, providing adjuvant radiation therapy has been shown to be very
effective. The controversy arises when a grade II mast cell tumor has been removed with "clean
by close" margins. The question is to provide an additional treatment, such as additional surgery
with wider margins or radiation therapy, or do nothing.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Thommas RC, Fox LE: Tummors of the skin and subcutis aggressive cancer surgery and aftercare. In Morrison WB
editor: Cancer in dogs and cats, Baltimore, 1998, Williams & Wilkins, pp 489-510.
2. Vail DM, Withrow SJ: Tumors of the skin and subcutaneous tissues. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG, editors: Smatt
animat clinicat oncology, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2001, W.B. Saunders, pp 233-260.
Section VI
Oral Surgery
102. EXODONTIA
Sandra Manfra Maretta, M.A., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS., Dip. A.VD.C
1. What is exodontia?
 The portion of dentistry that deals with the extraction of teeth.
 2. What is the most common indication for exodontia in dogs and cats?
· In dogs—advanced periodontal disease
· In cats—odontoclastic resorptive lesions
3. List other indications for exodontia in dogs and cats.
· Overly retained deciduous teeth
· Supernumerary teeth
·Dental crowding
· Fractured teeth with pulpal exposure (owners decline endodontic therapy)
·Teeth with fractured roots
· Teeth with severe dental caries
· Maloccluded teeth causing tissue trauma in which owners decline alternative therapy
4. Name three extraction techniques commonly used in dogs and cats.
1. Simple (small, single-rooted teeth affected by periodontal disease)
2. Multirooted (tooth sectioned into single-rooted segments)
 3. Complicated or surgical extraction (canine, mandibular first molar, maxillary fourth
premolar)
 5. List important steps of a surgical extraction.
 1. Creation of a mucoperiosteal flap
2. Location of the furcation and sectioning of a multirooted tooth
3. Removal of buccal alveolar bone as needed
4. Elevation and extraction of segments
5. Performance of an alveoloplasty
 6. Curettage and flushing of the alveolus and flap
7. Repositioning and closure of the mucoperiosteal flap
6.  How can tension on a mucoperiosteal flap be relieved before closure?
Tension on a mucoperiosteal flap when closing a surgical extraction site or an oronasal fistu-
la repair can be prevented by incising the innermost layer of the flap, the inelastic periosteum, at
the apical portion of the flap.
Exodontia
395
7. When performing a mucoperiosteal flap for the surgical extraction of the maxillary
fourth premolar, what structures should be carefully avoided?
When making the mesial (rostral) portion of the incision, the infraorbital artery, vein, and
nerve should be avoided as they exit the infraorbital canal immediately rostral to the
periapical bone of the mesiobuccal root of the maxillary fourth premolat.
When making the distal (caudal) part of the incision, the parotid and zygomatic salivary duct
papillae should be visualized and avoided.
8. What factors may lead to failures in extraction?
·Ankylosis
·Supernumerary roots
· Abnormal direction of the roots
· Hypercementosis with bulbous swelling on the apical portion of the root
9. How can extraction failures be avoided?
· Dental radiography
· Conversion to a surgical extraction
10. How should a case be treated when ankylosis is documented radiographically (absence
of periodontal ligament space)?
· Call the client and raise your estimate.
· Find a comfortable chair, complete the extraction using a surgical ex traction technique,
and cancel the next two to eight appointments, depending on how many teeth are anky-
losed and require extraction.
· Have your associate complete the extraction while you go out for a long lunch.
11. Discuss two approaches for surgical extraction of mandibular canine teeth.
n sn jo nodse pe  uo poi de nsdo e ss yoide p s
sent labially and lingually so that there is no advantage of one technique over the other with
regard to bone removal. The mental artery, vein, and nerve exit through the mental foramen
located near the labial aspect of the apex of this tooth. A lingual approach avoids potential dam
age to these structures.
12. What factors aid in the localization of broken root tips during exodontia?
·Adequate lighting
·Magnification
· Dental radiographs
· Conversion to a surgical extraction technique
13. What distinguishing characteristics can be used to differentiate fractured root tips
from surrounding alveolar bone?
· Color: The root tip is white and the bone is off-white.
· Blood: The hard tissue of the tooth does not bleed, whereas the bone does.
p e go dn s  p sa no pe y si dn ni s sp ss .
14. Once a fractured root tip is localized, how can it be removed?
Once the root is visualized and the periodontal space is located around the root, the dental
necessary, the root can be retrieved using a surgical extraction technique.
396
Palatal Defects
15. What ophthalmic complications may be associated with dental extractions?
· Penetration of the retrobulbar space with the potential for bacterial inoculation
· Laceration of periorbital vessels
· Perforation of the globe, including laceration of the retina or lens
· Postoperative corneal ulcers (may occur if the eyes are not adequately lubricated
intraoperatively or the cornea is inadvertently abraded during the dental procedure)
16. How can ophthalmic complications be prevented?
Use of a short finger stop (index finger positioned near the elevator tip) when ex tracting the
maxillary fourth premolars and the first and second molars
17. What factors predispose exodontia to ophthalmic complications?
· Periodontal or endodontic disease of the maxillary fourth premolars, first and second
molars may increase the risk of ophthalmic complications because the periapical bone can
be compromised.
· Brachycephalic breed dogs and cats have a shallow orbit, which is in close approximation
to the maxillary fourth premolars and molars, thus increasing the risk of ophthalmic
complications in these animals.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Manfra Marretta S: Dentistry and diseases of the oropharynx. In Birchard S, Sherding R, editors: Saunders
manual of small animal practice,ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, W.B. Saunders, pp 702-725
2. Smith MM: Lingual approach for surgical extraction of the mandlibular canine tooth in dogs and cats. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 32:359-364, 1996
3. Ramsey DT, Manfra Marretta S, Hamor RE, et al: Ophthalmic manifestations and complications of dental disease
in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:215-224, 1996
103. PALATAL DEFECTS
Sandra Manfra Marretta, M.A., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS., Dip. A.VD.C
1. Name two basic categories of congenital palatal defects and their location.
· Cleft hard palate—fissure along the midline of the hard palate usually extending from the
incisive papilla to the caudal edge of the hard palate 
· Cleft soft palate—fissure usually along the midline of the soft palate usually extending
from the caudal edge of the hard palate to the caudal edge of the soft palate
2. What relationship exists between hard and soft palate defects?
Although soft palate defects may occur when hard palate defects are absent, they are more
frequently identified when hard palate defects are present.
3. What are the causes of congenital palatal defects?
· The two palatine shel ves fail to fuse during fetal development.
· Incomplete closure of the palate is attnbuted to:
Inherited (recessive or irregular dominant, polygenic traits) factors
Nutritional factors
Hormonal factors (steroids)
396
Palatal Defects
15. What ophthalmic complications may be associated with dental extractions?
· Penetration of the retrobulbar space with the potential for bacterial inoculation
· Laceration of periorbital vessels
· Perforation of the globe, including laceration of the retina or lens
· Postoperative corneal ulcers (may occur if the eyes are not adequately lubricated
intraoperatively or the cornea is inadvertently abraded during the dental procedure)
16. How can ophthalmic complications be prevented?
Use of a short finger stop (index finger positioned near the elevator tip) when ex tracting the
maxillary fourth premolars and the first and second molars
17. What factors predispose exodontia to ophthalmic complications?
· Periodontal or endodontic disease of the maxillary fourth premolars, first and second
molars may increase the risk of ophthalmic complications because the periapical bone can
be compromised.
· Brachycephalic breed dogs and cats have a shallow orbit, which is in close approximation
to the maxillary fourth premolars and molars, thus increasing the risk of ophthalmic
complications in these animals.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Manfra Marretta S: Dentistry and diseases of the oropharynx. In Birchard S, Sherding R, editors: Saunders
manual of small animal practice,ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, W.B. Saunders, pp 702-725
2. Smith MM: Lingual approach for surgical extraction of the mandlibular canine tooth in dogs and cats. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 32:359-364, 1996
3. Ramsey DT, Manfra Marretta S, Hamor RE, et al: Ophthalmic manifestations and complications of dental disease
in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:215-224, 1996
103. PALATAL DEFECTS
Sandra Manfra Marretta, M.A., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS., Dip. A.VD.C
1. Name two basic categories of congenital palatal defects and their location.
· Cleft hard palate—fissure along the midline of the hard palate usually extending from the
incisive papilla to the caudal edge of the hard palate 
· Cleft soft palate—fissure usually along the midline of the soft palate usually extending
from the caudal edge of the hard palate to the caudal edge of the soft palate
2. What relationship exists between hard and soft palate defects?
Although soft palate defects may occur when hard palate defects are absent, they are more
frequently identified when hard palate defects are present.
3. What are the causes of congenital palatal defects?
· The two palatine shel ves fail to fuse during fetal development.
· Incomplete closure of the palate is attnbuted to:
Inherited (recessive or irregular dominant, polygenic traits) factors
Nutritional factors
Hormonal factors (steroids)
Palatal Defects
397
Mechanical factors (in utero trauma)
Toxic (viral) factors
 4. What are the two basic techniques used for the repair of congenital hard palate
defects?
 defect after the creation of bilateral releasing incisions along the upper dental arch.
 2. Overlapping-flap technique: A large mucoperiosteal flap is created unilaterally along the
dental arch and hinged at the edge of the palatal defect. It is placed beneath the other
edge of the defect through a mucoperiosteal flap raised from the edge of the defect and
held in place with vest-over-pants sutures.
5. List three reasons why the overlapping-flap technique is preferred.
1. Less tension on the suture line
 2. Suture line not located directly over the defect
 3. Larger area of opposing connective tissue resulting in a stronger scar
 6. Briefly describe the technique for closing midline soft palate defects.
tissue is divided into dorsal and ventral components. The two dorsal flaps are apposed and the
two ventral flaps are apposed until the soft palate edge reaches the midpoint or caudal end of the
tonsils and touches the tip of the epiglottis.
 7. List the causes of acquired palatal defects.
· Dental disease
· Blunt head trauma
·Bite wounds
· Electrical burns
· Gunshot wounds
· Foreign body penetration
·Pressure necrosis
8. Where are acquired palatal defects located?
Defects secondary to dental disease are located in the region of the dental arch, whereas
defects secondary to other agents may be located anywhere in the hard palate. Rarely, acquired
palatal defects may be located in the soft palate.
9. What clinical signs are associated with palatal defects?
·Sneezing
Acquired palatal defects are not life-threatening lesions. The acute inflammatory reaction
and the overall clinical status of the patient with acute trauma should be managed before surgical
inter vention of palatal defects.
11. What are the guidelines for successful palatal reconstruction?
· Treat only symptomatic animals.
· Choose the appropriate procedure based on location of the defect.
· Make flaps as large as possible.
· Suture cut edges together, not intact epithelial edges.
398
Palatal Defects
· Use two-layer closure when possible.
· Do not locate an incision over the defect, if possible.
· Maintain blood supply to the flap.
· Control hemorrhage with firm pressure, and avoid use of electrocautery.
·Avoid tension on suture lines.
12. List the various surgical techniques that can be used to repair acquired palatal defects.
·Buccal flaps
·Rotation flaps
·Advancement flaps
·Tongue flaps
· Split palatal U-flaps
·Island palatal flap
13. What are the indications for use of buccal flaps?
Closure of:
· Oronasal and oroantral fistulas
· Maxillectomy and mandibulectomy procedures
· Penipherally located palatal defects
14. What inelastic structure located in the mucoperiosteal flap, if not incised, may result
in tension across the incision line and dehiscence of the flap?
Periosteal layer of the mucoperiosteal flap.
15. What are the indications for use of rotation flaps?
Closure of small circular defects (especially defects located lateral to the midline)
16. What are the indications for advancement flaps?
Closure of wide defects of the caudal hard palate.
17. When are split palatal U-flaps recommended?
 To repair acquired hard palatal defects located in the caudal hard palate. The edges of the
palatal defect are debrided and a large U-shaped flap is created rostral to the defect. The major
palatine arteries are preserved during the creation of the U-flap. The U-flap is divided on the mid-
line. One side of the U-flap is rotated 90° into the defect and sutured in place. The second side of
the U-flap is rotated 90° and sutured to the previously rotated flap.
18. What is an island palatal flap?
A palatal flap based on the incorporation of the major palatine artery with complete separa-
tion of the flap from the surrounding palatal mucoperiosteal tissues; the flap is an island of tissue
that can be freely rotated around the major palatine artery.
19. What occurs postoperatively at the site on the palate from which mucoperiosteal flaps
are harvested?
The harvest site appears as denuded palatal bone. Within 2 to 3 weeks, this site is filled with
s
20. The ventral approach to the nasal cavity or nasopharynx involves the creation of a
midline palatal incision and, possibly, removal of midline palatal bone. What are the
indica tions for this infrequently used surgical approach?
·Removal of nonendoscopically retrievable, ventral nasal foreign bodies
· Biopsy and removal of ventral nasal tumors (previous nondiagnostic biopsy techniques)
Palatal Defects
399
· Surgery for nasopharyngeal stenosis in cats
· Surgery for choanal atresia
CONTROVERSIES
 21. Discuss the most appropriate treatment for hypoplasia or congenital absence of the soft
palate.
Various recommendations have been made ranging from surgical correction to euthanasia.
Surgical correction of this condition involves bilateral overlapping buccal mucosal flaps based at
the palatoglossal arches with the mucosal surface of flaps forming the caudal nasopharynx and
oropharynx. Surgical intervention, however, does not resolve the clinical signs associated with
this condition. Persistent clinical signs include sneezing, mucopurulent nasal discharge, and
chronic rhinitis. These clinical signs persist because the newly created soft palate lacks appro-
priate neurologic function. Euthanasia has been recommended as the treatment of choice for this
condition because of the poor prognosis even with surgical correction. This condition has been
successfully managed long-term with conservative medical management. Conservative treatment
includes feeding from an elevated platform, drinking from a water bottle, and treatment of
interrmittent rhinitis with antibiotics.
 22. What is the clinical indication for the use of tongue flaps, and how successful is this
procedure?
Treatment of large rostral palatal defects. This technique has a high incidence of dehiscence,
and alternative techniques are recommended whenever possible
BIBLIOG RAPHY
1. Harvey CE, Emily PP: Oral surgery. In Harvey CE, Emily PP, editors: Small animat dennistry, St. Louis, 1993,
Mosby, pp 312-377.
2. Hedlund CS: Congenital and acquired oronasal fistulas. In Fossum TW, editor: Smalt animat surgery, ed 2, St
Louis, 2002, Mosby, pp 285-297.
3. Manfra Marretta S: Maxillofacial surgery. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 28:1285-1296, 1998.
4. Nefen S, Sager S: Use of buccal mucosal flaps for the correction of congenital soft palate defects in three dogs.
Vet Surg 27:358-363, 1998
5. Smith MM: Island palatal mucoperiosteal flap for repair of oronasal fistula in a dog. J Vet Dent 2001 18:127-129.
SectionVIl
Veterinary Surgery as a Specialty
104. ACADEMIC VERSUS PRIVATE PRACTICE
Joseph Harari, M.S., D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS
Mark B. Parchman, D.VM., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. What are some of the major trends of the past 10 years in the development of small
animal surgery as a specialty field?
· Increasing residency training applications
· Increasing number of women in the field
· Increasing numbers of private practice positions
· Increasing movement of faculty surgeons away from academia and into private practice
2. Why do surgeons leave academia?
Perceived and real financial rewards in the private sector along with professional and personal
independence. Academia lacks respect and understanding of clinical specialists compared with
researchers. In the real world, the reverse situation exists; surgeons choose the path of least resistance.
3. Is this a bad situation?
No. Positive market forces reward surgeons (specialists) for their training and competence
Society, including animals, benefits from an ample supply of sophisticated veterinary surgical
care. Academic surgeons (as well as other specialists) will be recruited and retained at a higher
value than before as university administrators receive the wake-up call of competition.
4. What are the benefits of a surgical position in academia?
· Intellectual stimulation and prestige of a university environment
· Reduced influence of finances on salary, case management, and work schedule
· Off-clinic time devoted to personal development, research, and teaching
·Guaranteed salary, health and retirement benefits
· Academic rewards for teaching students and training young surgeons
· Ability to focus on and refine a narrow field of interest
·Ability to rise administratively and effect positive changes based on climical experiences
· Intraoperative assistance from students and trainees
·Access to a university library system and multimedia offices
· Protection from lawsuits based on the corporate powers of the university
 5. List the disadvantages of a surgical position in academia.
·Inefficient, nonclinical, bureaucratic system
· Reduced salaries compared with the private sector
·Unpredictable rewards system
demic specialists with little practical experience and large egos
· Rural geographic location of academic institutions
Academic Versus Private Practice
401
 6. List some advantages of a private practice position.
·Increased, direct, and controllable financial rewards
· Professional and personal freedoms not encumbered by university policies
· Increased efficiency, quality, and quantity of case management
·Desirable geographic locations
·Ability to establish a collegial multispecialty group
7. List some disadvantages of a private surgical practice.
· Lack of time for personal and professional development
·Persistent financial pressure to complete cases
·Variable technical assistance
· Inconsistent interaction with other specialists for intellectual stimulation
· Reduced access to a university library system and multimedia centers
8. Is there a middle ground between academic and private surgical practices in terms of
advantages and disadvantages?
the Animal Medical Center in New York City. These centers provide high-case exposure in a fre-
netic, quasiintellectual environment contained in a umique (nonacademic) bureaucratic system.
More recently, specialists are forming multiperson, group practices with advanced ser vices, com-
parable and sometimes superior to universities, available in large, affluent metropolitan regions.
9. Why should prospective surgeons seek training in a university setting?
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
Intellectual environment
Inefficient bureaucracy
Faculty diversity for training
Faculty with little practice or stagnant
university expeniences
 Introduction to writing, research, and teaching
Low salary for long work schedule,
 including emergencies
 Financial support for continuing-education
Unyielding hierarchical structure
programs
 Time off for personal development
Academic interest (classes, laboratories)
conflict with clinical interests
University prestige
Access to library and multimedia centers
10. Why should prospective surgeons seek training in a private referral setting?
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
 Efficient case management
Lack of faculty diversity
High surgical caseload
Mediocre ancillary training in anesthesia,
medicine, and pathology
Future job security (regionally)
Reduced time off for professional development
402
Surgeons in Industry
11. What types of academic positions are available for surgeons?
· Instructorships or fellowships following a residency
·Clinical (nontenured), renewable faculty positions
· Tenure-track (assistant, associate, and full professor) positions
· Temporary or visiting (non-tenure track, assistant, associate, and full professor) faculty
positions
12. What type of positions are available in a fixed or mobile private practice?
·Soloventure
· Small or large group containing other specialists 
·General practice
13. What types of private practices have become popular nationwide during the past 5
years?
A mobile practice delivering surgical care to individual general practices or emergency
centers; and multispecialty centers combined with an intensive care or emergency facility.
14. What is the future of small animal surgery as a specialty field?
 Bri ghter than ever; diverse employment opportunities are available around the world with
increasing salaries in referral practice, academia, and industry.
Employment Percentage of Surgeons
YEAR
ACADEMIA
PRACTICE
INDUSTRY
1980
65
32
1
1985
61
33
0
1990
60
30
5
1995
52
41
2
2000
41
51
2
2002
37
59
2
 Source: ACvS office, Bethesda, MD
105. SURGEONS IN INDUSTRY
Lynetta J. Freeman, D.VM, M.S., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. How many veterinary surgeons are employed in industrial positions?
According to inforrmation from the American College of Veterinary Surgeons, about 15 (2%)
of the ACvS diplomates are employed in industry.
2. Why consider a position in industry?
· Opportunity to learn new skills
· Potential to work on projects with a unique and far-reaching impact on animal and human
health
402
Surgeons in Industry
11. What types of academic positions are available for surgeons?
· Instructorships or fellowships following a residency
·Clinical (nontenured), renewable faculty positions
· Tenure-track (assistant, associate, and full professor) positions
· Temporary or visiting (non-tenure track, assistant, associate, and full professor) faculty
positions
12. What type of positions are available in a fixed or mobile private practice?
·Soloventure
· Small or large group containing other specialists 
·General practice
13. What types of private practices have become popular nationwide during the past 5
years?
A mobile practice delivering surgical care to individual general practices or emergency
centers; and multispecialty centers combined with an intensive care or emergency facility.
14. What is the future of small animal surgery as a specialty field?
 Bri ghter than ever; diverse employment opportunities are available around the world with
increasing salaries in referral practice, academia, and industry.
Employment Percentage of Surgeons
YEAR
ACADEMIA
PRACTICE
INDUSTRY
1980
65
32
1
1985
61
33
0
1990
60
30
5
1995
52
41
2
2000
41
51
2
2002
37
59
2
 Source: ACvS office, Bethesda, MD
105. SURGEONS IN INDUSTRY
Lynetta J. Freeman, D.VM, M.S., Dip. A.C.VS.
1. How many veterinary surgeons are employed in industrial positions?
According to inforrmation from the American College of Veterinary Surgeons, about 15 (2%)
of the ACvS diplomates are employed in industry.
2. Why consider a position in industry?
· Opportunity to learn new skills
· Potential to work on projects with a unique and far-reaching impact on animal and human
health
Surgeons in Industry
403
·Better research funding
· Better opportunities for advancement
3. How does one find out about positions in industry?
·Advertisements in professional journals
· Professional employment recruiters
· Employment opportunities posted on company Internet sites
· Net working with industry veterinarians
 4. Why do firms hire veterinary surgeons?
Medical device manufacturers evaluate the safety and efficacy of new devices and procedures
in animals to meet FDA regulatory requirements before they are used in human surgery. Veterinary
surgeons use their surgical skills to perform the procedure using a medical device on an animal, as
it would be performed in a human operating room. Veterinary surgeons participate in designing the
preclinical (animal) test protocols, conducting the studies, and reporting the results. They ensure
the minimum number of animals are used; alternatives to animals have been evaluated and the
highest standards of animal care are provided, as specified by the Animal Welfare Act.
 5. In addition to surgical skills, what other credentials are required?
Most positions in industry require previous research experience. From previous experi-
ence, one knows that the first step in conducting a research protocol is to design a small pilot
study, develop the procedures, and refine the test methods. Following this, a larger study with
statistical endpoints (such as the degree of postoperative adhesions) would be performed.
Managerial experience helps prepare one for a posi tion in industry. Ultimately, the industry
assume the responsibility for employee supervision and personal development on a long-term
basis.
Individuals having a high level of analytical, communication, and interpersonal skills are
rapidly in response to competitive pressures and the global environment. Communication and
interpersonal skills are essential because nearly all departments in industry seek to function as
high-performance teams.
6. What factors influence job satisfaction for veterinary surgeons in industry?
· Being an influential participant in establishing the standard of care in medicine and
surgery
· Seeing ideas go from bench-top to affecting animal and human health
· Developing cross-functional relationships with other professionals
· Interactions with physicians and scientists
·Focus and resources that enable one to move quickly with research
· Compensation and benefits
 7. What are the duties and responsibilities of veterinary surgeons in industry?
· Design, conduct, and report studies to evaluate devices, pharmaceutical agents, or surgical
procedures
· Validate product safety and efficacy for regulatory submissions
products and product improvements, and to support claims about existing products
· Provide strategic planning and scientific leadership
·Business unit management
· People development
404
Surgeons in Industry
8. How is performance determined and measured?
The corporate vision, mission, and strategic plan drive departmental or work-group goals.
sistent with the goals of the corporation. Employees then work with their supervisors to define
what level of performance is expected, above expected, and outstanding for each stated objective.
9. How do salary and benefits in industry compare to those in private practice and
academia?
Veterinarians in industry usually receive higher salaries than do those working in academic
or private practice positions.
The following table lists the starting salaries and mean professional income for private
practice, academic, and government and industry veterinarians.
Salaries for Veterinarians
MEAN STARTING SALARY FOR NEW
MEAN PROFESSIONAL
GRADUATE VETERINAR1ANS IN 1998
INCOME (1997)
 Private practice
$36,724
$65,844
 Academic position
$17,500
$75,984
 Government and military
$43,533
$68,153
Industry
Insufficient data
$109,941
According to the 1997 Compensation Survey by the American Association of Industrial
Veterinarians, the mean salary (including bonuses) was $ 105,664. This salary was associated with
s g isa ne ym ss oi is ne ioy Ansnui un (sie g is ne no) uoisod puee e
 in the present job. Post-Dv M training or board certification, the geographical area, and the nature
of the employer (e.g., whether a human pharmaceutical or device company or an animal health
company) may influence salaries.
The AVMA reported the 1999 salaries for veterinarians by the number of hours worked.
Table 105-2 lists the mean annual income by hours worked per week:
SMALL-ANIMAL
LARGE-ANIMAL
COLLEGE OR
EXCLUSIVE
EXCLUSIVE
INDUSTRY
UNIVERSITY
PRACTIVE OWNER
PRACTICE OWNER
 30-45 hours
$100,254
$73,000
$100,999
$95,005
46-59 hours
$111,502
$79,237
$116,355
$88,825
>60 hours
$122,378
$76,451
$104,884
$95,097
In 1999, a salary survey of laboratory animal veterinarians reported the total gross profes-
sional salary as $99,095 from the primary employer, with nearly half reporting secondary sources
of professional income averaging $15,006 from a secondary income source.
10. Do salaries increase with time in grade and increased responsibility?
Yes. According to data from the AVMA, salaries from 1995 to 1997 increased 14% for indi
viduals in private practice, 19% for those holding university positions, and 17% for industry
veterinarians. Salary growth in military and public health positions was consistent, tied to cost of
living and performance measures, and increased 4.3%.
Surgeons in Industry
405
11. What benefits are offered?
Most companies offer paid vacation time and may pay for professional liability, life, health,
and disability insurance. Individuals may participate in retirement programs with the company
provide educational assistance by paying for attendance at professional meetings, professional
dues and subscriptions, and tuition for continuing education. Industry positions may allow veteri
l0 uus nod ‘sneoi nnd mou ‘suondo yoons pue snuog un edinied on su
company stock purchase programs.
12. What are potentially negative aspects of working in industry?
· Need for expanded awareness of the capabilities of veterinary surgeons
· Potentially political environment
 sis  d p    t  on   
opportunity to develop their technical knowledge and skills, to contribute innovative ideas for
products that become commercialized, and to devote a portion of their time to pursuing personal
research interests. Senior techmical staff is expected to serve as role models and mentors for
young scientists.
Managerial positions include team leaders, managers, directors, and vice-presidents. The
     o   g   
may include diverse work areas. Directors usually oversee four to five team leaders or managers
Vice presidents oversee a group of directors.
14. What are future roles for veterinary surgeons in industry?
Because of the broad training offered in the professional curriculum and the skills developed
either on the job or prior to entering industry, veterinarians are well suited to assume increasing
levels of responsibility. Veterinarians may play an important role in any field in which problem
solving and influence management are key success factors, such as:
·Clinical trial design and management
· Regulatory affairs and compliances
· Applied research and development
·Marketing/business development
·Sales
· Leadership roles
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. American A ssociate of Industrial Veterinarians: 1997 compensation survey, 1998.
2. AV MA Centers for Infommation Management: Employment, starting salaries, and educational indebtedness of
1998 graduates of U.S. veterinary medical colleges. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:488-490, 1999.
3. Wise JK, Gonzalex ML: Veterinary income per hour, 1999. I Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1157-1158, 2002.
ASLAP/ACLAM economic survey of laboratory animal veterinarians. Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci 40:9-13,
2001
5. AVMA Centers for Information Management: 1997 Income of U.S. Veterinarians. J Am Vet Med Assoc
214:1489-1491, 1999.
6. Brown JP, Silvemman JD: The current and future market for veterinarians and veterinary medical services in the
United States: Executive summary, May 1999. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:161-183, 1999.
7. Gehrke BC, et al. AVMA Center for Infomation Management: Veterinary human capital—knowledge, skills,
and abilities that enhance employment opportunities outside private practice. I Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1781
1784,1998
406
Surgeons inIndustry
8. American College of Laboratory Aninmal Medicine: 1999 salary survey of laboratory animal veterinarians:
http:// www.aclam.org/PDF/Report.pdf.
9. American College of Veterinary Surgeons: About the ACVS: http://www.acvs.org/about.html.
10. Miller GY: Eamings, feminization, and consequences for the future of the veterinary profession. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 213:340-344, 1998.
11. Oeller DS: Veterinary careers in the U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps. I Am Vet Med Assoc
212:962-965,1998.
INDEX
A
Allografts (continued)
Abdoren, minimally invasive surgery for, 50, 51, 52
preservation for, 286
Abdominal cavity, 40
radiographic healing of, 286
Abdominal effusion, pancreatic adenocarcinoma
success of, 286
and, 190
material for, 286
Abscess, paraneural, 83
sterilization of, 285
Acanthomatous epulides, 389
Alovera, 36
Acepromazine, overdose of, 16
Alveolar-arterial gradient, 39
Acetabular fractures, 259, 260
Ameroid constrictor, 148, 149
Achilles' tendon, 272, 329
Amoxicillin, 10
ACT, 40
Anal sacs
Actinic keratosis, 391
anal glands v., 183
Actinomyces, 340
classifications of, 183
Addison's disease, 106
complications with, 184
Adenocarcinoma
differential diagnosis of, 183-184
salivary glands and, 86
function of, 183
treatment for, 86
pathophysiology of, 183
Adhesives, tissue, 45
sacculectomy of, 184
Adrenal cortex, 185
signs of, 183
Adrenal cortical tumors
therapy for, 184
diagnostic tests for, 187
umors of, 184, 392
mortality rate of, 189
Analgesia
prognosis of, 188-189
administration of, 21
Adrenal glands
-agonists production of, 21
blood supply to, 185
classes of, 21
ferrets and, 186, 187
multimodal, 20
location of, 185
preemptive, 20
pheochromocytoma, 186
supplemental, 21
tumor types in, 185, 188-189
Analgesic adjuncts, 21
Adrenal medulla, 185
Anesthesia, 18
Adrenalectomy, 185
acepromazine overdose，16
contraindications to, 188
brachycephalic patient and, 88
metastasis and, 188
cardiac dysrhythmias and, 15
retroperitoneal approach in, 188
diaphragmatic hernias and, 142
surgical technique for, 188
goals of, 15
suture material and,188
hypercalcemia and, 107
ventral midline approach in, 188
hypercapnea, 16
Afghans, 113
hyperthyroidism and, 104
Agonist-antagonists, 22
Jaryngeal paralysis of, 92
-Agonists, 16
pheochromocytomas and, 187
analgesia production by, 21
portosystemic shunts and,148
anticholinergic and, 16
trachea and, 100, 101
cardiac dysrhythmias and, 15
Anesthesia/analgesia epidural, 23, 24
Allografts, 284
Animals
cortical,285-286
older v. younger, 6
complications with, 286
pain and, 20
plate removal of, 286
physical therapy for, 26
407
408
Index
Ankylosing spondylitis, 355
Arthroscopy (continued)
Annulus fibrosus, 348
joint diagnoses with, 54-55
Anomalous vessel, occlusion of, 148
joint fluid during, 56
Anorchidism, 228
portal sites, 56-59, 57f, 58f, 59f, 60f
Anorectic patient, 30
positioning for, 60
Anticholinergic, 16
postoperative recovery for, 60
Antisepsis, disinfection v., 7
power shaver, 56
Aortic arch, right
procedure length of, 60
abnormalities of, 131
study of, 61
 breed predilections of, 131
surgical procedures, 55-56
definition of, 131
Articular fractures, 246
long-term outcome of, 134
Arytenoid cartilage lateralization, 94, 95
management of, 134
Asepsis, sterilization v., 8
operative site of, 133f
Aspergiltus, 354
postoperative care of, 134
Aspirin, 24
Aortic stenosis
Atlantoaxial joint, 364
anatomic anomaly in, 129
Atrophic fracture, healing of, 278
death and, 129
Atropine, 187
diagnosis of, 129
Autogenous tissues, thoracic wall closure with,
dogs and, 128
118
history of, 129
Axial flaps, 71, 72
incidence of, 128
management of, 129
B
physical examination findings in, 129
Back pain, acute, physical therapy for, 28
surgical treatments for, 129-130
Bacterial septicemia, 216
treatment of, 129
Bacterial slime, 341
Apnea, propofol and, 16
Bacteroides,10,340
Apophyseal injuries, 266
Bandages
Apophysis,267
adherent, 34, 35f
Arterial blood gas, analysis of, 38-39
application of, 36-37
Arthritis, inflammatory chemical mediators of,
biologic tissues as, 34
292
component of, 34
Arthrodesis
function of, 34
ankylosis and, 335
indications for, 34
bone graft and, 335
intermediate layer, 36
complications with,338
nonadherent, 34, 35f
contraindications for, 338
outer layer, 36
fusion and, 335
Robert Jones, 37
joint fusion and, 338
Schanz, 37
joints and, 335
types of, 34
method selection in, 336
Bardens test, 300
morbidity and, 338
Basset hounds, 198, 290, 309
outcome of, 338
B-cell islet cell tumors, diagnosis of, 192
rigid internal fixation for, 336
Beagles, 126, 290
stabilization of, 336
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)
Arthroscopy
concern of, 223
advantages of, 54
definition of, 223
arthroscope for, 61
diagnosis of, 223
complications of,60
treatment of,223
contraindications for, 60
Benzopyrone compounds, mechanisms of, 114-
disadvantages of, 54
115
equipment cost, 54, 56
Bernese mountain dogs, 297
fragmented coronoid process syndrome, 61
Biceps sling, 303
indications for, 54
Bichon frise, 12l, 206
Index
409
Bicipital tenosynovitis
Border collie, 121
causes, 327
Boston terrier, 87, 88, 126, 309
signs of, 327
Boxers, 87, 88, 128, 131
diagnosis of, 294, 327-328
BPH. See Benign prostatic hyperplasia
prognosis of, 294
Brachycardia, causes of, 19
treatment of, 294, 328
Brachycephalic syndrome
Bile peritonitis
anesthesia and, 88
prognostic factors of, 152
breeds with, 87
treatment for, 152
cats and, 90
Biliary tree
components of, 87
functions of, 150
definition of, 87
repair of, 151
evaluation of, 88
rupture of, 151
laryngeal collapse and, 90
Billroth, Theodore, 163
signs of, 87-88
Billroth 1/ll gastroenterostomy, 16l, 162
Brain tumors
Biopsy
diagnosis of, 375
excisional, 379
hemiinattention, 375
guidelines of, 379-380
hemineglect, 375
incisional,379
prognosis of, 376
Bladder
removal of, 376
cancer of, 209
signs of, 375
chemotherapeutic options for, 210-211
surgical approach to,376
chemotherapy and, 211
treatment of, 375-376
complications with, 210
types of, 375
 hyperthermic therapy and, 211
Branham reflex, 123
immunotherapy and, 211
Brinker, Wade, 292
radiation and, 210, 211
Brucetla canis, 225,354
resection of, 210
Buccal mucosal bleeding time
handling of, 202
(BMBT), 40
reconstruction of,210
Bulldog, 87, 88, 290
suture material for, 202
Bupivac aine, 23t
Bladder neoplasia.See Bladder
toxic doses of, 23
Btastomyces dermatitidis,341
Burke, John, 11
Blood pressure, 40
Burn wounds, 36
BMBT. See Buccal mucosal bleeding time
bandaging of, 76
BMP. See Bone morphogenic protein
causes of, 74
 Bone grafts
classification of, 74
arthrodesis and, 335
debridement for, 76
future options for, 287
electrolyte monitoring after, 75
indications for, 285
evaluation of, 77
properties of, 283-284
fluid shifts after, 75
types of, 283
Bone healing
inhalation injury, 76
lower airways and lungs, 76
abdominal,5
nutritional support and, 76
characteristics of, 4-5
Bone morphogenic protein (BMP), 284
potassium and, 75
recognization of,74-75
Bone plate, 237
reconstruction of, 77
Bone tumors
red blood cells and, 75
location of, 382
respiratory tract injury, 76
metastasis and, 382
treatment of, 382, 383
rule of nine, 74
sodium and, 75
types of, 382
Bones
systemic antibiotic therapy and, 76
developmental disorders of, 287
thermal injury in, 74
fracture of, 232, 234-235
treatment of, 75
410
Index
C
Cats(continued)
Calcaneoquartal arthrodesis, 271
gastric outflow obstruction in, 160
Cancellous autograft
humerus fractures and, 250
allograft v. autogenous, 284, 285
hyperthyroidism, 103, 104
harvesting of, 284
hypocalcemia in, 108
storing of, 284
Jaryngeal paralysis and, 92
Cancellous bone graft, properties of, 335
Jidocaine and, 23
Cancer. See Tumors, specific type
mammary gland tumors and, 221
Capillarity, 44
nephrolithiasis in, 198
Capital physis fractures
 opioid agonists and, 22
casts and, 264
 osteochondromatosis and, 289
cats and, 261
osteomyelitis in,346
definition of, 261
otopharyngeal polyps, 79, 80
dogs and, 261
pancreatic malignant tumor in,190
femoral neck fractures and, 262
parathyroid glands and, 105
prognosis of, 262
pericardial effusion in, 135
repair of, 261
portosystemic shunts and, 147
surgical approach to, 262
propofol and, 18
Carcinoma.See also specific type
prostate and, 229
ectopic thyroid, 135
pyometra, 216
metastatic, 135
splenic diseases of, 194
Cardiovascular systerm, 39
stenotic nares and, 89, 90
Carpal hyperextension, 255
surgical bullae osteotomy, 79, 80
Carpal laxity sesamoids, 256
telezol and, 17
Carprofen, 24
thyroid gland vascular supply in, 102
Carpus
thyroid tumors and, 102-103
bones of, 255
tracheal neoplastic disease in, 99
definition of, 254
traction-avulsion, 79, 80
joint movement in, 254
ureteral calculi and, 206
ligamentous injury of, 255
urethrostomy and, 213
shearing injury of, treatment of, 255
urinary function preservation in, 214
Cartilage
urine output of, 40
healing of, 5
vascular omental pedicle graft, 3
treatment of damaged, 5
Cauda equina (CE) syndrome, 370
Cast
Caudad cruciate ligament, 321
fiberglass, 37
Cavalier King Charles spaniel, 121
plaster of Paris, 37
CE. See Cauda equina syndrome
Castellated laryngofissure, 94
Cefazolin, 9, 10
Castration, 224, 229, 231
Central venous pressure, 39
Catgut suture, 42
Cephalexin, 10
Cats
Cerclage wire, 236,237
Cervical vertebral instability (CVl)
axial fap pattern in, 72
complications of, 359
bladder cancer in, 209
definition of, 357
blood pressure of, 40
diagnosis of, 358
brachycephalic breeds of, 87
differential diagnosis of, 358
 brachycephalic syndrome and, 90
pathogenesis of, 357
burn wounds and, 75
postoperative care of, 359
capital physis fractures and, 261
prognosis of, 358-359
with chylothorax, 114
sings of, 357, 358
with chylous effusion, 115
surgical treatment of, 358
cisterna chyli location on, 113
Charcot's triad, 151
episioplasty and, 218
Chemodectoma/aortic body tumors, 135, 136
gastric neoplasia and, 161
Chihuahua, 126,228
Index
411
Chlorhexidine diacetate solution, 10, 36
Colostomy, dogs and, 177
Cholecystenterotomy, opening for, 15 1 
Compartment syndrome, 334
Cholecystitis, 150
Congenital elbow luxation, 291
Charcot's triad and, 151
prognosis of, 291
dogs and, 151
Constipation, obstipation v, 173
Escherichia,151
Constrictive pericarditis, 137
indication for, 151
Cortical bone grafts, properties of, 335
Ktebsietla, 151
Corticosteroids, shock and, 15
Cholecystoduodenostomy, cholecystojejunostomy
Corynebacterium, 340
v,152
COX-2 inhibitors, osteoarthritis and, 345
Cholecystojejunostomy, cholecystoduodenostomy
Coxa valga, 311
v, 152
Coxa vara, 311
Choleliths, canine, 150
Coxofemoral joint, 305
Chondrosarcoma, 118, 382
Cranial cruciate ligament (CrCL)
prognosis of,118
band, 314
Chyle, definition of, 112
function of, 314
Chylothorax
injuries, 314
breed risk for, 113
insertion points of, 314
cats and, 114
origin of, 314
causes of, 113
repair of, 28
conditions of, 113
rupture of, 314-315
diagnosis of, 114
dogs and, 114
surgery on, 315
Cranial tibial thrust (CrTT), 319
idiopathic, 114, 115, 117
Craniomandibular osteopathy, 288
omentum and, 116
CrCL. See Cranial cruciate ligament
signs of, 114
Cricoarytenoideus, 91
Superglue and, 116
Chylous effusion, 112
Cricopharyngeal achalasia, 79
CRTT. See Cranial tibial thrust
characteristics of, 113
surgical approaches for, 115
Cruse, Peter, 11
Cisplatin,104,210
Cryptic infections, 341
Cisterna chyli, 113
Cryptococcus neoformans, 341
Clam shell bandage, 70
Cryptorchidism, 227, 228
Clamp-on-plate, 267
Crystalloid, shock and, 13-14
Claudication, 371
Curative surgery, 380-381
Clavulanate, 10
Cutaneous tumors
Clindamycin, 10
classification of, 390
Closed anesthesia, 18
fine-needle aspiration and, 391
Ctostridium, 340
CVl. See Cervical vertebral instability
Coagulation system, 40
Cyanoacrylates, 45
Coccidioides immitis,341
Cyanosis, differential, 122
Cocker spaniels, 126
Cyclophosphamide, 196, 211
Coherent wavelength, 47
Cytoreductive surgery, 38 1
Collagen,2
Collateral ligaments, components of, 269
function of, 270
Dachshund, 290, 309
instability, 270
Dalmatians, 147, 198, 206
Collimated wavelength, 47
Dehiscence, 4, 43
Colloid solution, shock and, 13, 14
factors of, 4
Colon
intestine and, 6
anatomy of, 172
occurrence of, 4
blood supply to, 172
sights of, 4
function of, 172
symptoris of, 4
megacolon. See Megacolon
treatments of, 4
nerve supply to, 172
Demineralized bone matrix, 284-285
412
Index
Deracoxib, 24
Dogs (continued)
Desflurane, 18
hyperadrenocorticism in, 185
Devita pin, 307
hyperparathyroidism, primary, 106
 Diaphragmatic advancement, 118
hyperparathyroidism and, 106
Diaphragmatic hernia. See Hernia, diaphragmatic
hypocalcemia in,108
Diaphyseal fractures, treatment of, 267
hypoplastic trachea and, 88
Diethylstilbestrol, 202
insulin-secreting islet cells and, 192
Diode, 45, 46f, 47
lateral bulla osteotomy, 82, 83
Disc herniation
lidocaine and, 23
corticosteroids for, 352
liver removal in, 145
myelography and, 350
menisci in, 324
neurologic dysfunction and, 348
mitral valve insufficiency and, 125
nonsurgical treatment of, 352
mucoceles and, 86
radiographic findings of, 350
neoplasms and, 111
sings of, 349
nephrolithiasis in, 198
sites for, 350
 oropharyngeal injuries in, 80
surgical procedures for, 351
osteochondromatosis and, 289
therapy after, 352
pancreatic malignant tumor in, 190
thoracolumbar, 350
paraneural abscess in, 83
treatment of, 351
parathyroid gland and, 106
parathyroid gland tumor palpation in, 107
Discospondylitis
definition of, 353
parathyroid glands and, 105
diagnostic tests for, 354-355
patent duct arteriosus and, 122
perineal urethrostomy in, 212
infection and, 354
radiographic signs of, 355
peritonitis and, 168
prescrotal urethrostomy in, 212
signs of, 353
pulmonary lobectomy tissue rermoval in, 1 10
sites of, 355
pulmonic stenosis and, 128
surgical treatment of, 356
pythiosis and, 161
treatment of, 355, 356
renal dysfunction in, 215
Disinfection, antisepsis v., 7
sight hounds, 17
Doberman pinschers, 256
skeletal developmental disease in, 287-288
Dogs
splenic diseases of, 194
aortic stenosis and, 28
splenic neoplasia and, 195
spontaneous pneumothorax in, 1 12
axial flap pattern in, 72
telezol and, 17
bladder cancer in, 209
thyroid gland vascular supply in, 102
blood pressure of, 40
thyroid tumors, 103
brachycephalic breeds of, 87
tonsillitis and, 80
burn wounds and, 75
tracheal neoplastic disease in, 99
capital physis fractures and, 261
ureteral calculi and, 206
cholecystitis and, 151
urethral obstruction in, 211
choleliths in, 150
urethrostomy and, 211
with chylothorax, 114
urine output of, 40
with chylous effusion, 115
Double-lumen tracheostormy tube, 97
cisterna chyli location on, 113
Doxorubicin, 104, 196, 211
colostomy and, 177
Drain, total ear ablation and, 83
digit tumors in, 392
Dressings. See atso Bandages
functional skills in, 29
burns and, 36
gastric dilatation-volvulus and, 152-153
topical,36
gastric neoplasia and, 161
Ductus arteriosus. See aiso Patent duct arteriosus
gastric outflow obstruction in, 160
(PDA)
gastrinoma and, 193
definition of, 120
heart-based masses and, 138
patent, 120
humerus fractures and, 250
shunt closure, 120
Index
413
Durotomy, indication of, 352
 English springer spaniel, 121
Dysesthesia, 371
Enrofloxacin, 10
Dysphagia, 78
Enteral nutrition, 31
Dysplasia, 288
 advantages/disadvantages of, 32
complications of, 33
E
Epidermal growth factor, 2
Ear canal
Epidural analegesia/anesthesia, 23
resection
 beneficial procedures for, 24
complications of, 82
Episioplasty
Jateral, 81
cats and, 218
vertical, 81, 82
procedure for, 218
total ablation, 81, 82, 83
Episiotomy
umors
definition of, 216
benign, 82
indications for, 216-217
inflammatory masses, 82
Epithelial origin, tumors of, 391
malignant, 82
Equipment
Ear infection, lateral ear canal resection for, 81
arthroscopy and, 54, 56
ECG,39
physical therapy clinic, 26-27
Ectopic thyroid carcinoma, 135
Escherichia coti,9,151, 214,225,340
Ectopic ureters
Esmarch bandage, 254
bladder and, 202
Esophageal foreign bodies
cause of, 200, 201
complications with, 140
definition of, 200
dehiscence from, 140
diagnosis of, 201
diagnosis of, 139
extraluminal, 200
esophagotomy closure for, 139
gender and, 201
esophogram and, 140
intraluminal, 200
nonsurgical removal of, 139
Jaboratory evaluation of, 201
postoperative care after, 140
signs of, 201
shape of, 139
surgical treatment of, 202
signs of, 139
termination, 200
surgical removal of, 139
treatment of, 201
Esophagostomy tube, 32
urinary incontinence and,202
Esophagotomy closure, 139
Ehmer sling, 37, 306
 advantages/disadvantages of, 140
Elbow
reinforcement of, 140
arthroscopy and, 54-55
Esophagus
joint portals, 56-58, 57f
dilated, 133, 134
surgical procedures, 55
holding layer of, 139
Ebow arthroscopy, role of, 298
Ethylene oxide, 11
Elbow dysplasia, 290
Etodolac, 24
cause of, 296
Eustachian tube, 77
definition of, 296
Eventration, 4
signs of, 296
Evisceration, 4
UAP and, 296
Exercises
Ebow incongruity, 298
active, 29
Electrolytes, burn wounds and, 75
passive, 29
Elephant's foot callus, 278
Exocrine pancreatic adenocarcinoma
Embryonic structures, parathyroid glands and,
diagnosis of, 191
105
surgical treatment for, 191
Empty abdomen syndrome, 144
Exodontia
En bloc resection, 117
definition of, 394
size of, 118
extraction of, 394
Endochondral ossification, 273-274
indications for, 394
English bulldogs, 126, 206
location of, 394
414
Index
External fixation, complications of, 279
Foreign bodies, gastrointestinal
External splintage, complications of, 279
anastomosis,159
Extrahepatic biliary system, obstruction of
bowel biopsy and, 159
anatomy of, 150
conservative management of, 158
causes of, 150
intestinal wound dehiscence and, 159
choleliths and, 150
linear. See Linear foreign bodies
coagulation profile and, 150
location of,158
neoplasia and, 150
radiographic findings of, 157
removal of, 158
resection,159
Facial nerve injury, 83
signs of, 157
FCP
treatment of, 159
definition of, 297
Forepaw
prognosis for, 298
injury of, 254
radiographic findings of, 297
problems of, 254
surgical treatment for, 298
Fractures
Feces, bloody, passage of, 173
IN and, 238
Feeding. See Nutrition
acetabular, 259, 260
Feline. See Cats
assessment score, 233-234
Fermoral neck fractures
auxiliary implants and, 234
bone plate and, 263
biologic osteosynthesis, 235
capital physis fractures and, 262
bone, healing of, 234-235
external fixators and, 264
bone plate and, 237
internal fixation and, 262-263
buttress plate, 238
midshaft, 262
capital physis. See Capital physis fractures
pin placement in,263
circular external fixator, 240
pin-and-plate combination, 262
classification of contaminated, 11
Femoral neck-engthening procedure, 303
complications with,241
Fermur fractures. See Capital physis fractures
diaphyseal, 267
complications with, 264
disease, 241, 279
quadriceps contracture and, 264-265
dynamization and, 235
treatment of, 264
femoral neck. See Femoral neck fractures
Fentany], 24t
fibula. See Fibula fractures
complications with, 23
fixation
patch,22-23
dogs and, 232
Ferrets
goal of, 232
adrenal tumor and,186,187
fixation of, complications with, 278
insulin-secreting islet cells and, 192
forces causing, 232, 233
FHT. See Fibular head transportation
humerus. See Hurmerus fractures
 Fibroblast and insulin-like growth factors, 2
hybrid fixator, 240
Fibrosarcoma, 382, 388
irmplant system for, 233, 234, 235
Fibrotic ring resection, 130
jaw.See Jaw fractures
complications with, 130
linea external fixators for, 239, 240
Fibula fractures
location of, 232
repair of, 266, 268
metacarpal, 256
stabilization of, 268
olecranon, 252
Fibular head transportation (FHT), 318-319
olive wire, 240
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA), 378, 379, 391
open, classification of, 235
Fistulas, postablation, 83
postoperative osteomyelitis and, 235
FNA. See Fine-needle aspiration
open reduction and internal fixation of, 235
Force feeding, 30
pattern of, 232, 233
Ford, Rosemary, 11
pelvis. See Pelvis fractures
Foreign bodies, esophageal. See atso Esophageal
pins and, 239, 240
foreign bodies, location of, 139
plate-rod construct, 238
Index
415
Fractures (continued)
Gastric outflow obstruction
pubic,260
in cats, 160
radius. See Radial fractures
causes of, 160
recovery enhancement of, 29
in dogs, 160
Rush pin and, 236
incision closure in, 162
scapula. See Scapula fractures
medical management of, 161
stabilization of, 238
Pithium insidiosum and, 160
stack pinning and, 236
signs of, 161
staged disassembly and, 235
surgical procedures for, 161
stress potential/shielding, 241
tests for, 161
styloid,252
treatment for, 161
tibial. See Tibial fractures
Gastrinoma
Trilam nail and, 236
hypocalcemia and, 193
triple A score, 241
prognosis of, 193
trocar pin and, 236
therapy for, 193
ulnar. See Unar fractures
Gastrocnemius tendon, avulsing of, 329
in vivo, 233
Gastroenterostomy, 163
Fredet, Pierre, 162
complications with, 163
Fredet-Ramstedt pylorormyotomy, 16 1, 162
Gastropexy
Fusobacterium, 340
circumcostal, 156
permanent,156
G
prophylactic,157
Gallbladder
GDV. See Gastric dilatation-volvulus syndrome
cholecystitis of, 150
Geriatric patients, rehabilitation for, 27
location of, 150
German shepherds, 86, 121, 126, 128, 131, 256
mucocele, 151
perianal fistulae and, 178
Gastrectomy, partial, 156
Glenoid fractures, 246, 247
Gastric dilatation-volvulus(GDV) syndrome,
Glucagon-secreting islet cells, 191
154f
Glutamine,32
decompression for, 155
Golden retriever, 128, 201, 297
definition of, 152
Grafts
diagnosis of, 153
bone. See Bone grafts
differential diagnosis of, 154-155
skin. See Skin graft
dogs and, 152-153
vascular omental pedicle, 3
fatality rate of, 156
Granulation tissue, 2
necrosis and, 155
Great Danes, 256
pathophysiology of, 153
Greyhounds
 postoperative complications with, 156
carpal bone fractures in, 255
pyloromyotomy and, 156
tarsal fractures and, 272
pyloroplasty and, 156
Growth deformities, antebrachium and, 280
radiographs for, 153, 154
risk factors of, 152-153
H
signs of, 153
Halothane, 18, 187
simple gastric dilatation and, 154
Halsted's principles, 3
splenectomy and,155
Hansen type I degeneration, 348
stomach rotation during, 153
Hearing, 83
surgery goals in, 155
Heart, masses of, in dogs, 138
surgery timing of, 157
Heineke, Walter Hermann, 162
treatment of, 155
Heineke-Mikulicz pyloroplasty, 161, 162
Gastric neoplasia
Hemangiosarcoma, 135, 136, 382
cats and, 161
Hematochezia, 173
prognosis of, 163
Hemilaminectomy, dorsal laminectomy and, 35 1
signs of, 161
β-Hemolytic Streptococcus, 10, 340
stomach and, 161
Hepatic artery, 146
416
Index
Hepatic duct, 146
Hirschsprung's disease, 173
Hepatoid tumors, 392
Histiocytomas, 392
Hepatotoxicity, 346
Histoptasma capsutatum,341
Hernia, diaphragmatic
Hock
anesthetic guidelines for, 142
arthroscopy and, 55
antibiotics for, 144
joint portals, 59, 60f
closure of, 144
surgical procedures, 56
complications of, 143
HOD. Hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HOD)
definition of, 141
Horse's hoof callus, 278
equipment for, 144
Howell-Jolly bodies, 194
etiology of, 141
Humerus fractures
healing of, 141
articular surface of, 248
 intrathoracic pressure and, 144
biologic fixation of, 249
medical management of, 143
cats and, 250
mortality rate of, 142
condyles and, 247
nitrous oxide and, 143
dogs and, 250
 postoperative monitoring of, 144
external coaptation for, 250
prognosis of, 142
fermur fractures v., 247
reduction of, 143
frequency of, 250
reperfusion injury in, 142
occurrence of, 247
signs of, 141
radial nerve and, 250
surgical management of, 143
repairing of, 247, 248, 249
spica bandages and, 250
tears in, 143
surgical approach to, 249
tests for, 142
Humidification, 97
thoracic radiography after, 141
Hyalin articular cartilage, preservation of, 312
thoracostormy tube for, 144-145
Hydrogels, 36
ventilation for, 143
Hernia, perineal
Hymen, persistent, 217
Hyperadrenocorticism
complications of, 182
in dogs, 185
contents of, 182
perioperative considerations of, 187-188
internal obturator transposition and, 181-182
Hypercalcemia
medical management of, 181
anesthesia and, 107
prevalence of, 181
causes of, 106
recurrence of, 182
Hyperparathyroidism
signs of, 181
dogs and, 106
surgical options for, 181
primary, 106, 107
Himalayans, 87, 89, 113
secondary, 107
Hip
 Hypertension, acute portal
arthroscopy and, 55
avoidance of, 148
joint portals, 58, 59f
detection of, 148
Hip dysplasia
Hyperthyroidism, 103, 104
arthroplasty and, 302
anesthesia and, 104
cause of, 299
hypoparathyroidism and, 104
definition of, 299
Hypertonic saline, 14
development of, 299
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HOD), 289
diagnosis of, 300
pathophysiology of, 289
patellar luxation and, 311
prognosis of, 289
polysulfated glycosaminoglycans and, 303
recognizing,289
progression and, 299
treatment of, 289
radiographic findings of, 300
Hypertrophic pyloric gastropathy, chronic
signs of, 299-300
definition of, 160
total hip replacement and, 302
gender and, 160
TPO and, 302
prognosis of, 163
treatment for, 301, 302
signs of, 160
Index
417
Hypoc alcemia
Inflammatory masses, tumors and, 82
cause of, 108
Infraspinatus contracture, 328
gastrinoma and, 193
signs of, 328
postoperative, 108
treatment of, 328
Hypoextension injury, 255
Instruments
Hypoparathyroidism
for minimally invasive surgery, 50-51
jatrogenic, 105, 106
sterilization of, 11
rebound,108
lnsulinomas. See atso Insulin-secreting islet cell
Hypoplastic trachea, 88
umors
clinical significance of, 88
methylene blue injection for, 192
treatment of, 88
Insulin-secreting islet cell tumors, 191-192
complications with removal of, 192
dogs and, 192
latrogenic hypoparathyroidism, 105
ferrets and, 192
identification of, 105-106
prognosis of, 193
ICP See Intracranial pressure
Intensive care unit (lCU), rehabilitation, 27
ldiopathic pericardial disease, 136
Interfragrmentary strain theory, 233
IER. See Illness energy requirement
Interlocking nails, complications of, 279
lleocolic valve, 174
Intervertebral disc disease, differential diagnoses
llizarov, 240
for, 349-350
Illness energy requirement (1ER), 33
Intestinal anastomosis, 165
lnfarction,85
Intestinal volvulus
Infection, control of
definition of, 167
animal infection rate, 7t
identification of, 167
antibiotic prophylaxis and, 9, 10
morbidity of, 168
antibiotic sensitivity assays, 12
pathology of, 167
antibiotics and, 9, 10
postresuscitation injury of, 168
bacteria and, 9-10
prognosis of, 168
bacterial cultures, 12
reperfusion of,168
bacterial sources, 8
surgical procedures of, 167
classification of, 7
treatments of, 167
contamination and, 7
Intestines
definition of, 7
 healing characteristics of, 4
evaluation of, 9
hypoproteinemic patient, 6
golden period, 11
Intracranial pressure (lCP), ketamine and, 17
human infection rate, 7t
Intravascular coil occlusion, 123
human patient factors, 8t
 advantages/disadvantages of, 124
instrument sterilization, 1 1
Intussusception
lavage solutions, 10-11
anastomosis for, 165
nosocomial infections, 10
cause of, 164
open wound fractures and, 11
definition of, 164
operative factors, 8t
differential diagnosis for, 164, 165
propofol and, 9
manual reduction for, 165
signs of, 7
medical management of, 165
surgery and, 9
resection for, 165
surgical preparation protocols, 10
signs of, 164
sutures and, 11
surgery and, 165
treatment of, 10
types of, 164
veterinary patient factors, 9t
lnvolucrum, 339
wound factors, 8
lrish settlers, 131
Inflammatory mammary carcinoma
lsoflurane,18
coagulogram for, 220
mastitis v., 219
J
treatment of,220
Jackson-Henderson ligation technique, 123
418
Index
Jaw fractures
Laryngeal paralysis (continued)
assessrment score, 243
cats and, 92
causes of, 242
cause of, 91-92
complications of, 243
con genital, 91
external skeletal fixators on, 244
definition of, 91
location of, 242
diagnosis of, 92
neurovascular damage with, 244
Jaryngoscopy and, 92
pharyngotomy and, 242
respiratory distress and, 93
preanesthetic considerations of,242
signs of, 92
repair of, 242, 243
tests for, 92-93
surgical treatment for, 244
trac heostomy for, 95
 'ue saz adel
Laryngeal rima glottis, opening of, 91
teeth and, 245
Laryngeal tie-back, 94, 95
temporomandibular joint, 244
Laryngectomy
treatment of, 243
advantages/disadvantages of, 93
Jejunostomy tube, 32
complications of, 93-94
Joint mouse, 293
contraindications of, 94
Joints
partial, 93
arthroscopy and, 44-46, 54
Laryngopharynx, 77
portals, 56-59, 57f, 58f, 59f, 60f
Laser
JPS. See Juvenile pubic symphysiodesis
absorption, 48, 49
Juvenile pubic symphysiodesis (JPS), 303
beam output, 46
choosing of, 46f, 48-49
K
cold, 47
Keeshoden, 121
components of, 45-46
Ketamine, 187
definition of, 45
intracranial pressure and, 17
delivery systems of, 46
mechanism of, 21
derivation of, 45
ventilation and, 17
electrosurgery devices and, 47
Ketoprofen, 24
helium neon, 47
Kidneys. See also Renal tumors
light characteristics, 47
hemangiosarcomas and, 197
photochemical reaction, 48
lymphoma and, 197
photodisruptive, 48
metastases and, 197
photomechanical,48
 nephroblastomas and, 197
photothermal laser-tissue interaction, 48
renal tubular adenocarcinoma and,197
radiation ermission of, 45, 46f
squamous cell carcinoma and, 197
safety standards, 47
stones of, 198
tissue interaction, 46, 47, 48
transitional cell carcinoma and, 197
uses for, 49
tumors of, 197
Laser pointers, 47
Kirschner-Ehmer fixator,239
Lateral bulla osteotomy, 82, 83
Kissing lesion, 297
Lateral intercostal thoracotomy, 109
Ktebsietla, 10, 151, 340
Lavage solutions, topical, 36
Knot security, 43
LC-DCP. See Limited contact dynamic
compression plate
L
Leff-Calve-Perthes disease, 291
Lacroix procedure, 81
Lhasa apso, 87, 198
Lactated Ringer's, 36
Lidocaine, 23t
Laminectomy, dorsal, hemilaminectomy and,
toxic doses of, 23
351
Ligaments
Laparotomy, nephrolithotomy via, 199
crush injury, 5
Laryngeal paralysis
pulmonary, 110
acquired, 91
sprain of, 255
anesthesia and, 92
Ligamentum, 133
Index
419
Limited contact dynamic compression plate (LC-
Mammary gland tumors (MGTs)
DCP), 237-238
cats and, 221, 222
Linear foreign bodies
diagnostic workup of, 219-220
definition of, 158
fine-needle aspirate and cytology for, 220
lodging of, 158
hormone receptors and, 219
pathophysiology of, 158
inflammatory mammary carcinoma and, 219
radiographic findings of, 158
location of, 219
Lingual tumors, 390
malignant, 219, 220, 221
Lister, Joseph, 11
metastatic, 221
Liver, removal of, 145
ovariohysterectomy and, 219
LMN. See Lower motor neuron disease
prevalence of, 219
Lobectomy
prognosis of, 222
hepatic
prognostic factors of, 221
hemorrhage and, 145, 146
pulmonary metastasis, 222
liver and, 145
staging of,220
partial, 145
surgery goal in, 220
stapling and, 146
surgical dose for,221, 222
total,145
treatment of, 220
 pul mon ary
Mandible, tension side of, 244
advantages/disadvantages of, 109
Mandibular duct, 84
complications, postoperative, 111
Mandibular gland, 84, 85
conventional,110
 Mandibular/maxillary fractures. See Jaw
dogs and, 110
fractures
indications for, 109
Marsupialization, 86, 225
lateral thoracotomy and, 109
Massage, techniques, 27-28
metastasectomy and, 111
Mastectomies
methods of, 109
radical, 220
monitoring techniques, postoperative, 111
types of, 220
partial lung, 1l0, 111
Mastiffs, 126
pneumonia and, 111
Maxillectomy, 388, 389
reexploration of, 111
McCoy, Louis, 37
stapling equipment for, 1 10
MCT. See Medium-chain triglycerides
surgical approaches for, 109
Meclofenamic acid, 24
total, 110, 111
Medatomidine, 15, 21
Low flow anesthesia, 18
Median sternotomy, 109
Lower motor neuron (LMN) disease, 349,370
Medium-chain triglycerides (MCT), 114
Lumbosacral epidural space, opioids and, 24t 
Megacolon
Lumbosacral spinal cord
causes of, 173
anatomy of, 370
definition of, 172
cauda equina syndrome and, 370
descending colon and, 174
disease, signs of, 370
diarrhea and, 175
nerve roots, 369
fetal incontinence and, 175
Lumbosacral stenosis, 370
ileocolic valve and, 174
Lumpectomy
postoperative care of, 174-175
mastectomy v., 220
prognosis of, 175
nodulectomy and, 221
signs of, 173
Lung lobe torsion, treatment of, 112
surgery and, 173, 174
Lungs, peeling of, 116
sutures and, 174
Lymphosarcoma,135
treatment of, 173
vessel transection and, 174
[M
 Megavoltage irradiation, 104
Macrophages, 2
Meloxic am, 24
Malignant melanoma, 388
Meniscal click, 325
Maltese, 121
Meniscal release, 326
420
Index
Meniscectomy
Mitral valve
prognosis after, 326
disease of, 125
structural damage during, 326
insufficiency of, 125
total, 326
diagnosis of, 125
Meniscus
dogs and, 125
definition of, 324
incidence of, 125
function of, 324
pathophysiology of, 125
injury to
surgery, 125
causes of, 324
repair of,125
surgical approach to, 325
replacement, 126
treatment of, 325
Monochromatic wavelength, 47
types of, 324
Monorchidism, 227, 228
Mesenchymal origin, tumors of, 391
 Monteggia fracture-dislocation, treatment of, 252
Mesh, for thoracic wall reconstruction, 119,
Monteggia lesion, 252
120
Morphine, 24t
Mesothelioma, 135, 136
Mucocele,85
Metacarpal fractures, 256
dogs and, 86
Metacromoin, 246
surgery complication, 86
Metastatic carcinomas, 135
treatment of, 86
Methoxyflurane, 18
Mucostasis, 101
Methylene Blue,108
 Multimodal analgesia, 20
administration of, 108
Muscle
complications with,192
contracture
for insulinomas, 192
definition of, 333
intravenous, 108
treatment of, 333
Metronidazole, 10
injury
MGTs. See Mammary gland tumors
common，332
 Microvascular dysplasia, portosystemic shunts
diagnosis of, 333
and, 147
fibrosis and, 331
Mikulicz-Radecki, Johann von, 162
healing of, 331
Miniature schnauzers, 126, 198, 206, 228
mechanisms of, 331
Minimally invasive surgery
physical therapy after, 332
advantages of, 50
strain,332
complications of, 53
suture patterns in, 331
contraindications for, 53
treatment of,333
cost-effectiveness of, 50
repair, 6
electrosurgery for, 51
Muscle-nerve pedicle transposition, 94
equipment investment for, 51, 52
Musculoskeletal injuries, treatment of, 28
indications for, 50
Muzzles, tape, fractures and, 244
instruments for, 50-51
Myelomalacia, 350-351
in sufflation gases for, 52
Myositis ossificans, 334
insufflator for, 51
learning curve for, 53
N
length of, 50
Nasoesophageal tubes, 32
 one-]ung ventilation for, 52
Nasogastric tubes, 32
positioning for, 52
 Nasopharyngeal meatus, 78
postoperative recovery, 53
Nasopharynx, 78
preparation for, 52
Neodymium, 45, 46f
pressures for, 52
Neoplasia, 85
profitability of, 50
Neoureterostomy, 201-202
references for,53
Nephrolithiasis
telescope size for, 51
in cats, 198
training for, S3
clinical manifestations of, 198
video camera and, 51
diagnosis of, 198-199
Index
421
Nephrolithiasis (continued)
Optical resonator, 45
in dogs, 198
Oral cavity, opening into, 85
surgical techniques for, 199
Oral tumors, types of, 388
treatment for,199
 Oropharyngeal swallowing, 78, 79
Nephrolithotomy
Orthopedic complications
complications of, 199
preventing, 280
via laparotormy, 199
surgical, 279
Nephroliths, 198
 Orthopedic Foundation for Animals (OFA), 300
Nephrotoxicity, 346
Ortolani sign, 300
Nerve, facial, 83
OSA.See Osteosarcoma
Neurologic system, 40
Osteoarthritis (OA)
New Methylene Blue (NMB), 108
acetabular fracture and, 344
thoracic duct ligation and, 115
articular cartilage and, 343
Newfoundland, 128
causes of, 343
Nitrous oxide, diaphragmatic hernia and, 143
COX-2 inhibitors and, 345
NMB. See New Methylene Blue
cruciate ligament rupture and, 344
NMDA. See N-methyl-D-asparate
definition of, 343
V-rmethyl-D-asparate (NMDA), 21
hip dysplasia and, 344
Nonadherent dressings, 34, 35f
non steroidal antinflammatory drugs and, 345,
 Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAlDs),
346
obesity and, 345
osteoarthritis and, 345, 346
rehabilitation for, 27
pain management and, 24
treatment of, 344
side effects of, 24
Osteochondritis dissecans, 293
Notchplasty, 317
Osteochondromatosis, 289
NSAlDs. See Nonsteroidal antinflammatory
cats and, 289
drugs
diagnosis of, 289, 290, 297
 Nucleus pulposus, 348
dogs and, 289
Nutrition, 30
pathophysiology of, 290
enteral,31
prognosis of, 289
goals of, 30
treatment of, 289
monitoring support of, 33
Osteochondrosis
paraenteral, 31
cause of, 292
Nutritional pharmacology, 32
definition of, 292
diagnosis of, 293
0
frequency of, 293
OA.See Osteoarthritis
humeral head, 293
Obstipation, constipation v., 173
location of, 293
OHE. See Ovariohysterectomy
surgical approaches for, 293
Olecranon fractures, 252
treatment of, 293
Oligotrophic fracture, healing, 278
Osteomyelitis
Olsson, Sten-Erik, 292
antibiotics for, 340-341
Omentalization, 225
avoidance of, 342
Oncologic surgery
bacteria and, 340
biopsy and, 378
cats and, 346
types of, 378
causes of, 339
One wound-one scar, 5
definition of, 339
Onlay graft, 287
diagnosis of, 340
Opioid agonists, 22
septic,339
Opioids, 16, 21
signs of, 339, 340
efficacy of, 22
treatment or, 341
lumbosacral epidural space and, 24t
Osteosarcoma (OSA), 118, 382, 388
potency of,22
prognosis of, 118
side effects of, 22
Osteosynthesis, biologic, 267
422
Index
Otitis, end-stage
Pancreatitis(continued)
characteristics of, 82
perioperative complications of, 190
treatment for, 82
postoperative care of, 189
Otitis externa, treatment for, 8 1
surgery indication for, 189
Ovariohysterectomy (OHE), mammary gland
surgical principles for, 189
umors and, 219, 222
chronic
Oxymorphone, 24t
complications of,190
surgical treatment for, 190
P
Panosteitis
Paecitomyces, 354
definition of, 288
Pain
glucocorticosteroids and, 288
acute postoperative, 20
pathognomonic features of, 288
animals and, 20
pathophysiology of, 288
nonsteroidal antinflarmmatory drugs and, 24
treatment of,288
 postoperative monitoring of, 38, 40-41
vitamin C and, 288
Palatal defects
Pantarsal arthrodesis, 271
advancement flaps, 398
Papineau technique, 342
buccal flaps, 398
Paralysis, paresis v., 348
causes of, 396-397, 397
Paraneural abscess, 83
hard v. soft, 396
 Parathyroid glands
island palatal flap, 398
embryonic structures and,105
location of, 397
function of, 105
 overlapping-flap technique and, 397
problems with, 105,106
reconstruction of, 397-398
mors, surgery of, 102
repair of, 397
umors of
rotation flaps, 398
absence of, 108
signs of, 397
ectopic tissue identification of, 108
types of, 396
palpation of, 107
 Palate, soft
 preoperative workup for, 107
excision,89
surgery for, 107-108
normal v. elongated, 88, 89
treatments of, 107
perioperative concerns with,89
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 105, 106
postoperative care, 89
Parathyroidectomy, postoperative concerns
Palatine tonsils, 78
following, 108
Palliative surgery, 381
Pare, Ambroise, 34
Palmar carpal breakdown, 255
 Parenteral nutrition, 31
Pancarpal arthrodesis, 256, 257
complications of, 33
Pancreas
Paresis, paralysis v., 348
lobes of, 191
Paresthesia, 371
nodules on, 191
Parotid duct, 84
wound healing of, 191
Parotid gland, 84
Pancreatectomy
Partial energy requirement (PER), 33
partial, 191
Partial paraenteral nutrition (PPN), 31
total, 191
advantages/disadvantages of, 31
Pancreatic abscess
indications for, 32
prognosis of, 190
Partial thromboplastin time (PTT), 40
treatment of, 190
Pasturetta mutticida,10,340
Pancreatic islet cells, 191
Patch graft valvuloplasty, 128
Pancreatic polypeptide-secreting cells, 191
complications with,128
Pancreatic pseudocyst
full-bypass, 128
definition of, 190
Patella, reflex of, 371
treatment of, 190
Patellar luxation
Pancreatitis
causes of, 310
acute
characterization of, 310-311
Index
423
Patellar luxation (continued)
Perianal fistulae (continued)
definition of, 310
surgery and, 179
features of, 310
tail amputation for, 179
frequent, 310
treatment of, 178, 179
musculoskeletal abnormalities of, 311
Pericardial disease
Q angle and, 311
idiopathic, 136
trochlear groove and, 310
manifestation of,135
Patent duct arteriosus (PDA)
surgery indication for, 137
breeds and, 121
surgical techniques for, 137
cardiac effects of, 120
Pericardial effusion, 135
circulatory pathways of, 121f
cats and, 135
clinical signs of, 121-122
diagnosis of, 136
complications of, 123
echoc ardiography for, 136
consequences of,120
effects of,135
dogs and, 122
electrocardiograph for, 136
Jiver and, 146
neoplasms causing, 135, 136
reverse, 121
signs of, 136
saline bubble test for, 122
thoracic radiography for, 136
surgery and, 124
Pericardial window, 137
treatment of, 122, 124
Pericardiectomy
uncorrection of, 120-121
 pleural effusion related, 137
Pathognomic, definition of, 288
prognosis of, 138
PDA. See Patent duct arteriosus
subtotal, 137
PDS.See Polydioxanone sulfate
thoracoscopic, 137-138
Pekingese, 87, 309
total, 137
Pelvic diaphragm, 180
Pericardiocentesis,136
Pelvic limb sling, 37
Pericarditis, constrictive, 137
Pelvis, definition of, 257
Pericardium
Pelvis fractures
definition of, 135
bones and, 257
disease of. See Pericardial disease
characteristics of, 258
effusion of. See Pericardial effusion
classification of, 257
functions of, 135
evaluation of, 257
Perineal adenomas, treatment for, 392
frequency of, 257
 Perineal region, 180
nerve injuries and, 258
herniation of, 180, 18lf. See atso Hernia,
nonsurgical,258
perinea]
radiographic evaluation of, 258
neurovascular structures of, 180
repair of, 258
 Peripheral nerve surgery, 374
sacroiliac joint and, 259
Peritoneum
surgical,258
drainage of, 170, 170f
PennHip, 301
function of, 168
Peptostreptococcus,340
Peritonitis
PER.See Partial energy requirement
abdominal cavity closure and, 170-171
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube, 32
aseptic,169
Perianal fistulae
bile
anal sacs and, 178, 180
prognostic factors of, 152
cause of, 178
treatment for, 152
deroffing and, 178
definition of, 168
fulguration, 179
dogs and, 168
German shepherds and, 178
laparoscopic treatment and, 171
lesions, 178
peritoneal tap, 169
medical management of, 179
prognosis of, 171
neoplasia and, 178
septic, 169, 171
stool softeners for, 179
signs of, 169
424
Index
Peritonitis (continued)
Pomeranian, 121, 228
surgery goals of, 169
Poodles, 86, 121, 201, 228
tests for, 169
Portal vein, 146
treatment of, 169, 171
Portosystemic shunts (PSS)
Peroneal nerve injury, 319
anesthesia and, 148
Persian cats, 87, 89, 228
cats and, 147
Persians, 131
characterization of, 146
Pharyngotomy tube, 32
development of, 147
Pharynx
extrahepatic, 146
diseases of, 78
fetal vessel and, 146
Eustachian tube, 77
intrahepatic, 146
laryngopharynx, 77
laboratory findings of, 147
 nasopharyngeal meatus, 78
location of, 148
nasopharynx,78
medical therapy for, 148
palatine tonsils, 78
microvascular dysplasia and, 147
portions of, 77
physical examination findings of, 147
swallowing and, 78
postoperative complications of, 149
Phenothiazine, 16
recovery from, 149
Phentolamine, 187
seizure and, 149
Phenylpropanolamine, 202
signs of, 147
Pheoc hromocytomas, 186
treatment of, 149
anesthesia and, 187
urinary calculi and, 147
diagnostic tests for, 187
vessel origin of, 146-147
treatment of, 187
 Postablation facial nerve injury, treatrment of, 83
Physeal fractures
Postoperative, monitoring, 38, 40-41
blood supply and, 274
abdominal cavity, 40
concerns of, 273
cardiovascular system, 39
location of, 274
ins and outs of, 40
prognosis of, 277
neurologic system, 40
Salter-Harris classification of, 274, 274f, 275
respiratory system, 38
treatment of, 273
Postoperative pain, physiologic effects of, 20
Physeal injuries, 266
Potassium, burn wounds and, 75
Physical therapists
Pouch flap, 72
intervention of, 25-26
Povidone-iodine, 10, 36
requirements for, 25
 PPN. See Partial paraenteral nutrition
Physical therapy, 25
Preemptive analgesia, 20
acute back pain, 28
drug combinations for, 21
animal benefits of, 25
Pringle maneuver, 145
equipment for, 26-27
Propofol, 9, 18
interventions, 26
apnea and, 16
session,26
biotransformation of, 17
Pins, complications with, 279
cardiopulmonary function and, 16
Pithium insidiosum,160
recovery from, 17
Platelet-derived growth factors, 2
respiratory arrest, 16
Plates, complications with, 279
Prostate
Pleural effusion, pericardiectomy and, 137
abscesses of, 226, 227
Pleurodesis, 115, 116
cats and, 229
Pneumothorax, spontaneous
cyst of, 224, 225
dogs and, 112
infection of, 225, 226
histopathologic findings in, 112
isolated pathogens of, 225
Polydioxanone sulfate (PDS), 43
Prostate cancer
Polyps, middle ear, 83
castration and, 224
Polysulfated glycosaminoglycans (PSGAGs),
diagnostic plan for, 224
303, 347
frequency of, 223
Index
425
Prostate cancer (continued)
Pyometra (continued)
prognosis of, 224
chemistry finding of, 215
signs of, 224
closed, 215
therapy for, 224
cystic endometrial hyperplasia and, 215
types of, 223-224
definition of, 214
Prostatectomy
diagnosis of, 214, 216
subtotal,226
disseminated intravascular coagulation and,
total, 226
215
Prostatitis
Escherichia coti,214
diagnosis of, 226
estrogen and, 214
treatment of, 226
incidence of, 215
Proteus,225,340
intraoperative problems of, 215
Prothrombin time (PT), 40
metabolic acidosis and, 215
Pseucomonas,225
postoperative problems of, 216
Pseudarthrosis, 278
progesterone and, 214
Pseudohermaphroditis, 214
prognosis of, 216
Pseudohyperreflexia, 371
 pseudohermaphroditism and, 214 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 10, 340
renal dysfunction and, 215
PSGAGs.See Polysulfated glycosaminoglycans
respiratory alkalosis and, 215
Psoas cystoplexy, 204
sertoli cell tumors and, 214
PSS. See Portosystermic shunts
signs of, 216
PT. See Prothrombin time
stump,216
PTH. See Parathyroid hormone
treatment of, 215
PTT. See Partial thromboplastin time
Pythiosis, dogs and, 161
Pubic fractures, 260
Pugs, 87, 198, 290
R
Pulmonary artery catheter, 39
Radial fractures
 Pulmonary complications, 29
anatomic considerations of, 251
Pulmonary ligaments, 110
diaphyseal, 252
Pulmonary lobectomy. See Lobectomy,
external fixators for, 252
pulmonary
frequency of, 251
Pulmonic stenosis, 126
metaphyseal, 252-253
anatomic anomaly in, 126, 127
plates and, 252
breeds and, 126
surgical considerations of, 251
diagnosis of, 127
treatment of, 252
dogs and, 128
Radiocarpal
history of, 127
arthroscopy and, 55
management of, 127
joint portals, 58, 58f
physical examination findings in, 127
surgical procedures, SS
treatment of, 127-128
Ramstedt, Wilhelm, 162
Pulse oximetry, 19, 38
Rectal tumors
Pyelolithotomy, 199
biopsy and, 176
Pyloric stenosis, 160
disease confirmation of, 176
definition of, 160
findings of, 176
prognosis of, 163
metastasis and, 176
signs of, 160
occurrence of, 175, 176
Pyloromyotomy
prognosis of, 177
complications with, 163
surgical resection of, 176-177
gastric dilatation-volvulus syndrome and, 156
tissue excision of, 177
Pyloroplasty, 162
Red blood cells, burn wounds and, 75
complications with,163
Refeeding syndrome, assessment of, 33
gastric dilatation-volvulus syndrome and, 156
Rehabilitation. See Physical therapy
Pyometra
Renal calculi, 198
 bacterial septicemia and, 216
Renal descensus, 204
426
Index
Renal tumors
Sequestrum, 39
biologic behavior of, 197
Seroma, definition of, 3
clinical presentation of, 197
Sertoli cell tumors, 214
diagnostic procedures for, 197
Serum calcium, elevated, 106
prognosis of, 198
Sevoflurane, 18
signs of, 197
Shar-pei, 87
therapy for, 197-198
Sheba lnus, 113
types of, 197
Shelties, 121, 309
RER. See Resting energy requirement 
Shetland sheepdog, 228
Respiratory system, 38
Shih Tzus, 198
Resting energy requirement (RER), 33, 295
Shock
Right aortic arch. See Aortic arch, right 
antibiotics and, 14
Robert Jones bandage, 37, 264
cardiogenic, 13
Root signature, 349
colloid solution, 13, 14
Rottweilers, 128,297
corticosteroids and,15
Round cell tumors, 391
crystalloid fluid and, 13-14
Rush pin, 236
definition of, 12
Rutin, mechanisms of, 1l4-115
distributive, 13
etiology of, 13
S
hypovolemic, 12, 13
Sacculectomy
monitoring of, 14
closed, 184
occlusive, 13
complications with, 184
organs and, 13
open, 184
 oxygen therapy, 14
Saccules everted laryngeal, 89
signs of, 13
appearance of, 89
treatment of, 13
treatment of, 89
types of, 12
Sacroiliac joint, 259
 Short-bowel syndrome, 166
Saline,10,36
Shoulder
Saline bubble test, 122
arthroscopy and, 54
Salivary glands, 84
joint portals, 56, 57f
adenocarcinoma and, 86
surgical procedures, 55
umor of, 86
Shunts
Salivary system, disease of, 85
active v. passive, 116
 Salter-Harris classification, of physeal fractures,
contraindication of, 116
274, 274f, 275
portosystemic. See Portosystemic shunts (PSS)
Salter-Harris 1/ll fractures, 264
Sialocele, 85
Samoyeds, 126, 128
Sialodenitis, 85, 86
Scapula fractures
Sialodenosis, 85, 86
anamnesis of injury for, 245
Sialolithiasis, 85
classification of, 246
Sialoliths, 86
diagnosis of, 245, 246
Siamese, 113, 131
frequency of, 245
Siberian huskies, 201, 228
plates and, 246
Sight hounds, thiopental and, 17
prognosis of, 247
Silver sulfadiazine, 36
treatment of, 246
Skeletal developmental diseases, in dogs, 287-288
Schanz bandage, 37
Skin flap
Schroeder-Thomas splint, 37, 265
axial, 71
Scottish fold osteodystrophy, 291
classification of, 71
prognosis of, 291
cutaneous attachment of, 73
treatment of, 291
definition of, 71
SDF. See Superficial digital flexor
dimensions,72, 73
Semiclosed anesthesia, 18
pouch,72
Semmelweis, lgnaz, 11
reconstruction using.73
Index
427
Skin flap (continued)
Soft tissue sarcomas (STSs) (continued)
reverse saphenous conduit, 73
prognosis of, 386
rotation of, 73
radiation therapy for, 385
skin fold advancement, 73
splenic hemangiosarcoma and, 385
skin graft v., 62
treatment of, 385
subdermal plexus, 71
types of, 385
sutures and, 72
Somatostatin-secreting islet cells, 191
transverse, 96
Spica splint, 37
vascular pedicle, 72
Spinal injury. See Vertebral column fracture
Skin graft
Spine, neoplasms of, 366
affixation of, 66
appearance of, 367
appearance of, 66
cats and, 367
bandages for, 66-67, 70
dogs and, 367
clam shell bandage, 70
involvement of, 366
dermal surface of, 64
location of, 366
donor site, 63, 69
myelography and, 368
donor site closure technique, 65
signs of, 366
epithelium removal, 63, 64f
spinal tap and, 368
far-near-near-far suture pattern, 70
surgical approach to, 368
granulation tissue, 63
Spleen
harvesting for, 63, 64
disease of. See Splenic diseases
healing of, 62
functions of, 193
hemangiosarcoma of, 195
location of, 62
vascular anatomy of, 19
maintaining of, 69
Splenectomy
materials for, 66-67
medications for, 66-67
complication of, 194
mesh, 63, 65, 66, 67, 70
gastric necrosis and, 195
hematologic changes after, 194
patient comfort and, 70
indications for, 194
paw pad graft, 69, 70
partial, 194
paw wounds and, 62
Splenic diseases
pinch/punch, 63, 68-69, 68f
of cats, 194
placement of, 66
of dogs, 194
preparation for, 63, 64
Splenomegaly, law of two-thirds for, 196
recipient site for, 69
 Splint
shape of, 64
Schroeder-Thomas, 37
skin flap v., 62
spica, 37
splint/bandage removal, 70
Spondylolisthesis, 355
stretching/relaxing technique, 62
Spondylolysis, 355
strip, 63, 67-68
Spondylosis,370
suture removal for, 67, 70
Squamous cell carcinoma in situ, 391
tissue for, 62
Staphylectomy, 89
towel pattern for, 64
Staphytococcus intermedius,9,225,340,354
traumatic wound management for, 63
Stapling, instruments for, 44-45
walking sutures, 65, 65f, 66
Starvation,30
wound pattern for, 63-64
Stenotic nares, 89, 90
Sling
Sterilization, asepsis v, 8
Ehmer, 37
Sternotomy, median, 109
pelvic limb, 37
Stifle
Velpeau, 37
arthroscopy and, 55
Sodium, burn wounds and, 75
joint portals, 58-59, 59f
Soft tissue sarcomas (STSs)
surgical procedures, 55
cats and, 386
Stomach
chemotherapy and, 386
rotation of, during gastric dilatation-volvulus,
definition of, 385
153
428
Index
Stomach (continued)
Tarsus
vascular anatomy of, 195
bones of, 272
Strain, 233
definition of, 269
Streptococcus, 225, 354
frequent injuries of, 270
STSs. See Soft tissue sarcormas
injury characteristics of, 272
Styloid fractures, 252
joint of, 270
Subclavian, aberrant left, 133
Teeth, jaw fracture and, 245
Subcutaneous tumors
Telezol, 17
classification of, 390
Temporomandibular joint, fractures of, 244 
fine-needle aspiration and, 391
Tendons
Subdermal plexus flaps, 71
crush injury, 5
axial flaps v., 71
healing of, 330
Sublingual gland, 84, 85
surgery of, 330
Superficial digital flexor (SDF), 329
suture patterns of, 330
Superglue, chylothorax and, 116
Tension band principle, 237
Surgeons, veterinary
Terriers, Boston, 87, 88, 126, 309
benefits of, 405
Testicles, ectopic
career path of, 405
definition of, 227
duties of, 403
location of, 227
employment of,402
retained, 228, 229
future roles of, 405
scrotum descent of, 227, 228
job satisfaction for, 403
umors of, 229, 230
performance of, 404
cats and, 230
positions for, 402, 403
diagnosis of, 230
responsibilities of, 403
hyperestrogenism and, 230-231
salary of, 404
signs of, 230
skills of, 403
treatment of, 231
Sutures
undescended testicles and, 230
absorbable, 42, 43
Thiobarbiturates, dysrhythmia, 17
catgut,42
Thiopenta]
classification of, 42
biotransforrmation of, 17
function of, 41
cardiopulmonary function and, 16
infected wounds and, 11
recovery from,17
 interrupted patterns of, 43-44
respiratory arrest, 16
material, 41, 42
sight hounds and, 17
monofilament, 42
Thoracic, minimally invasive surgery for, 50, 51, 52
multifilament, 42
Thoracic duct, surgery, 115
natural, 42
Thoracic duct ligation, 115
needles, 44
complications after, 116
negative effect of, 41
New Methylene Blue and, 115
nonabsorbable, 42, 43
preoperative/postoperative studies for, 115
placement of, 41
success rate of, 115
synthetic, 42
Thoracic percussion, 39
Swallowing, 78, 79
Thoracic wall
Swan-Ganz catheter, 14-15, 39
defect of, 119
Swenson pull-through procedure, 177
reconstruction of
autogenua tissues and, 118
diaphragmatic advancement in, 118, 119
en bloc resection in, 117, 118
Tail, amputation of, 180
goals of, 118
Tamoxifen, 221
indications for, 117
Tap water, 36
infections and, 120
Target cells, 194
mesh for, 119, 120
Tarsocrural arthrodesis, 271
muscle flap elevation in, 118
Index
429
Thoracic wall (continued)
Trachea (continued)
options for, 118
surgical approaches to, 99-100
synthetic materials for, 119
suturing of, 100
umors, 118
Tracheal lumen, incision into, 96
Thoracotomy
Tracheostomy
lateral intercostal, 109
aftercare for, 98
ligation via, 122-123
antibiotics and, 98
Three-compartment theory, 360-361
characteristics of, 97
Thyroid
complications of, 97
cancer treatment of, 104
damage minimization with, 97
surgery of, 102
definition of, 95
Thyroid carcinoma, ectopic, 135
double-lumen, 97
Thyroid gland, vascular supply to, 102
 as elective procedure, 97
Tibial fractures
indications for, 96
causes of, 266
laryngeal paralysis and, 95
diaphyseal, 267
maintenance of, 97
frequency of, 266
permanent, 98
healing rates of, 268, 269
respiratory tract drying and, 97
metaphyseal, 268
respiratory tree changes and, 96
repair of, 266
suctioning and, 97
types of, 266
suturing of, 98
Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO), 319
temporary, 96, 98
complications with, 321
ube placerment, 96
Tibial plateau slop (TPS), 320
Transcolonic scintigraphy, 148
Tibiotarsal osteochondrosis, 295
Transforming growth factors, 2
Tissue adhesives, 45
Transventricular valve dilation, 128
Tissues, holding strength of, 43
Traumatic elbow luxation, 307, 308
TIVA. See Total intravenous anesthesia
Traumatic joint luxation, 305
Tonsillitis, dogs and, 80
causes of, 305
Tonsils, palatine, 78
concurrent injuries in, 305
Total hip replacement, complications of, 302
reduction of, 306
Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA), 18
signs of, 305
Total paraenteral nutrition (TPN), 31, 114
Traumatic stifle derangement, 322
advantages/disadvantages of, 31
Tricuspid valve dysplasia, surgical treatment for,
indications for, 32
130
Tourniquet, 254
Trilam nail, 236
TPLO. See Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy
Tris-EDTA, 36
 TPN. See Total paraenteral nutrition
Trochleoplasty
TPO, 302
benefits of, 312
TPS. See Tibial plateau slop
problems with, 312
Trachea
Tumors
anastomosis of, 99, 100
bone. See Bone tumors
anatomy of, 99
brain. See Brain tumors
anesthesia and, 100
cutaneous. See Cutaneous tumors
anesthetic gases and, 100-101
of epithelial origin, 391
collapse of, 100
hepatoid,392
complications of, 101
lingual, 390
dehiscence of, 102
of mesenchymal origin, 391
lesion localization, 99
oral. See Oral tumors
neoplastic diseases of, 99
puncturing of, 381
oxygen and, 100-101
renal. See Renal tumors
 postsurgical stricture formation, 101
subcutaneous. See Subcutaneous tumors
resection of, 99
vagina, 218
ring removal, 100
vulva, 218
430
Index
U
Urethrostomy (continued)
UA P
complications with, 213
definition of, 296
preoperative care of, 213
diagnosis of, 296
stricture management after, 214
signs of, 296
postoperative complications with, 213-214
treatment of, 297
prescrotal
Ulnar cartilage cores, retained, 290
complications of, 212
prognosis of, 290
indications of, 212
Ulnar fractures
scrota]
anatomic considerations of, 25 1
advantages of, 212
external fixators for, 252
complications of, 212
frequency of, 251
simple continuous suture technique for, 212
repair of, 251-252
single-layer suture technique, 212
surgical considerations of, 251
site of, 212
treatment of, 252
subpubic, 213
UMN. See Upper motor neuron disease
Urinary bladder calculi, managenment of, 207
Unions, bone, 278
Urinary incontinence, 202
treatment of, 278-279
Urinary tract infection (UTl), uroliths and, 206
Ununited medial epicondyle, 294, 298
Urine, calculi of, 147
Upper motor neuron (UMN) disease, 349, 352,
Urolith
370
calcium ox alate, 206
Upper respiratory obstructive conditions,
cystine, 206
brachycephalics and, 87
phosphate, 206
Ureter
removal of, 207
surgery of, 204
urates, 206
tears of. See Ureteral tears
Urolithiasis
Ureteral calculi, 204
problems with, 207
cats and, 206
systemic metabolic conditions and, 207
clinical manifestations of, 205
Uroliths, 207
diagnosis of, 205
removal of, 208, 208f, 209
dissolving of, 205
tests for, 207
dogs and, 206
urinary tract infection and, 206
surgical techniques for, 205
 Uterus, progesterone and, 214
treatment of, 205
UTl. See Urinary tract infection
Ureteral tears
clinical manifestations of,203
complications of,204
Vagina, tumors of, 218
diagnosis of, 203
Vaginal hyperplasia
postoperative protocols of, 204
breeds of, 217
renal descensus and, 204
definition of, 217
surgical techniques of, 204
treatment of, 218
treatment of, 203-204
vaginal prolapse v., 217
Ureteroneocystostomy, 202
Vaginal septa
Urethral obstruction
diagnosis of, 217
dogs and, 211
signs of, 217
Jocation of, 211
treatment of,217
Urethrostomy
Vascular ring anomalies (VRAs), 131
cats and, 213
angiography for, 132
definition of, 211
contrast esophagraphy for, 132
dogs and, 211
endoscopic esophagraphy, 132
indication for, 211
fluoroscopic esophagraphy for, 132
levels of, 212
laboratory analysis for, 132
perinea]
preoperative medical therapy for, 132
complications of, 212
significance of, 131-132
Index
431
Vascular ring anomalies (VRAs) (continued)
Wedge recession, complication with, 312
signs of, 132
Weight bearing, postoperative, 28-29
thoracic radiograph for, 132
Welsh corgi, 290
treatment of, 132
Whipple's triad, 192
VATS. See Video Assisted Thoracis Surgery
Wires, complications with, 279
Vein, left hemizygous, 133
Wobbler's syndrome,359
Velpeau sling, 37
Wolff's law, 5
Vena cava, persistent left cranial, 133
Wound healing
Ventilation, ketamine and, 17
 antineoplastic therapy and, 6
Ventral midline laryn gotomy, 93
categories of, 2
Ventriculocordectomy, complications of, 93-94
causes of, 1
Vertebralcolumn fracture
characterization of, 1
diagnostic tests for, 360
controversies, 6
medications for, 360
defect closure, 2
myelography and, 361
definition of, 1
nonsurgical management of, 362
dehiscence,4
occurrence of, 362
epithelial migration, 2
pins and, 363
granulation tissue, 2
polymethylmethacrylate and, 363
growth-factors, 2
stabilization of, 363
local factor effect on, 2-3
surgical intervention of, 363
neovascularization, 2
three-cormpartment theory, 360-361
older animals v. younger, 6
Vestibulovaginal stenosis
strength,2
sings of, 217
systemic factor effect on,3
treatment of, 217
treatment of,3
Veterinary Endosurgery,53
understanding of, 1
Veterinary surgeon. See Surgeons, veterinary
Wounds
Veterinary surgery
lavage solutions for, 36
academia and, 400
strength of closed, 43
academic positions for, 402
fixed/mobile private practice, 402
X
future of, 402
Xylazine, 15, 21,187
 private practice position, 401
private referral setting for, 401
Y
specialty of, 400
Yorkshire terriers, 121, 198, 206, 228, 309
university setting for, 401
Y-U pyloroplasty, 161, 162
Video Assisted Thoracic Surgery (VATS), 52
Vincristine,196
Z
Viral papillomatosis, 390
Zepp procedure,81
VRAs. See Vascular ring anomalies
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 193
Vulva, tumors of, 218
Zygomatic duct, 85
Vulvar stenosis
Zygomatic gland, 84
definition of, 217
location of, 85
treatment of, 217
M
Walking sutures, 65
definition of, 65
material for, 65
placement of, 65, 65f
properties of, 66