Veterinary Anatomy
SPhysiology
2nd Edition
A CLINICAL
LABORATORY
MANUAL
Phillip E. Cochran
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
VeterinaryA
Anatom
SPhysiology
2nd Edition
A CLINICAL
LABORATORY
MANUAL
Joinusonthewebat
agriculture.delmar.cengage.com
Copyright 2010 C
VeterinaryA
Anatomy
SPihysiolgy
2nd Edition
ACLINICAL
LABORATORY
MANUAL
Phillip E.Cochran, MS,DVM
DELMAR
CENGAGELearning
This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
 some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed
 content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right 
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for
 materials in your areas of interest.
Editorial
DELMAR
CENGAGELearning"
Veterinary Anatomy and Physiology: A Clinical
 2011, 2004 Delmar, Cengage Learning
Laboratory Manual, 2e
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright
Phillip E. Cochran, D.V.M.
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by
Vice President, Career and Professional
any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited 
Editorial: Dave Garza
tion, information networks, or information storage and retrieval systems,
Director of Learning Solutions: Matthew Kane
except as permitted under Section 107 or108 of the 1976 United States
Acquisitions Editor: Benjamin Penner
Copyright Act, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Managing Editor: Marah Bellegarde
For product information and technology assistance,
Product Manager: Christina Gifford
contact us at
 Editorial Assistant: Scott Royael
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support,
1-800-354-9706
Vice President, Career and Professional
Marketing: Jennifer Baker
For permission to use material from this text or product, submit all 
requests online at www.cengage.com /permissions.
 Marketing Director: Debbie Yarnell
 Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
Marketing Manager: Erin Brennan
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Marketing Coordinator: Jonathan Sheehan
Library of Congress Control Number: 2010923883
Production Director: Carolyn Miller
ISBN-13: 978-1-4354-6433-9
Production Manager: Andrew Crouth
ISBN-10: 1-4354-6433-8
Content Project Manager: Katie Wachtl
Delmar
Senior Art Director: David Arsenault
5 Maxwell Drive
Clifton Park, NY 12065-2919
Technology Project Manager: Joe Pliss
USA
 Production Technology Analyst: Thomas Stover
 Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning
 solutions with ofce locations around the globe, including
Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan.
Locate your local office at: international.cengage.com /region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by
 Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Delmar, visit www.cengage.com/delmar
no ie io aois arallor leool snoa ie sionpoud ino jo Aue aseuoind
 preferred online store www.ichapters.com
NOTICE TO THE READER
the product information contained herein. Publisher does not assume,
and expressly disclaims, any obligation to obtain and include informa-
tion other than that provided to it by the manufacturer. The reader is 
 expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety precautions that might
be indicated by the activities described herein and to avoid all potential 
hazards. By following the instructions contained herein, the reader will-
ingly assumes all risks in connection with such instructions. The publisher
makes no representations or warranties of any kind, including but not
limited to, the warranties of ftness for particular purpose or merchant-
 ability, nor are any such representations implied with respect to the
 material set forth herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility with
eads Aue iot aiell ag rou leus lausand aue ielate yns ot iradsais
Printed in the United States of America
readers' use of, or reliance upon, this material.
12345671413121110
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
vili
Acknowledgments
xi
About the Author
xi
CHAPTER 1
THE TERMINOLOGY OF ANATOMY
1
Directional Terms
2
Positional Terms
3
Anatomical Terms
3
4
Terms of Movement
4
Planes of the Body
5
Clinical Significance 
6
Summary
10
CHAPTEr 2
The Use of the MIcroscope
11
Care of the Compound Microscope
12
Summary
17
CHAPTER 3
CELLULAr ANATOMY AND MOrPHOLOGY
19
The Anatomy of the Cell
20
 Clinical Significance 
29
Summary
29
CHAPTER 4
GENErAL PrINCIPLES OF HISTOLOGY
31
Preparation of Histological Sections 
32
Interpretation of Histological Sections
32
 Clinical Significance
38
Summary
39
CHAPTer 5
MIcroscopIc AnatomY Of tIssues
40
Epithelial Tissue Histology
41
Clinical Significance
83
Summary
84
Copyright 2010 Ceng
Editorial
vi
Table uf Cuolenls 
CHAPTer 6
The INTeGUmEntaRY SYSTeM
86
Clinical Significance
104
Veterinary Vignettes
105
Summary
106
CHAPTEr 7
ThE SKELETAL SYSTEM
108
Types of Bones
110
Projections, Processes, Depressions, and Foramina
110
Clinical Significance
143
Veterinary Vignettes
143
Summary
145
CHAPter 8
THE MuSCULAr SYSTEM
147
Clinical Significance
176
Veterinary Vignettes
177
Summary
178
CHAPTER 9
THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
180
The Structural Anatomy of the Alimentary Canal
181
Teeth
181
 Clinical Significance
203
Veterinary Vignettes
203
Summary
205
CHaPTer 1O THE CarDIOVaSCULAr SYSTem
206
Part One: The Heart
208
Part Two: The Vascular System
218
The Electrocardiogram
229
Clinical Significance
233
Veterinary Vignettes
234
Summary
235
CHAPTER 1 1
The ReSPIratOry SYStEM
237
Lung Volumes and Capacities
248
 Clinical Significance
250
Veterinary Vignettes
251
Summary
251
ChaPter 12 The UrInary SySteM
253
The Vascular Supply to the Kidneys
254
Clinical Significance
263
Veterinary Vignettes
264
Summary
265
Editorialrevi
Table uf Cuolenls 
vii
CHAPTEr 13 THe ENDoCrINE SYSTEM
266
Anatomy and Physiology of the Hypothalamus
 and Pituitary Gland
267
 Physiology of the Glands of the Endocrine System
269
 Clinical Significance
275
Veterinary Vignettes
275
Summary
276
CHAPTEr 14 THE REPrODUCTIVE SYSTEM
278
Anatomy of the Female Reproductive Tract
279
Anatomy of the Male Reproductive Tract
281
Physiology of the Female Reproductive System
282
Physiology of the Male Reproductive System
286
Clinical Significance
295
Veterinary Vignettes
295
Summary
297
Chapter 15 The Nervous System
298
The Nerve Impulse
302
The Cranial Nerves
309
The Autonomic Nervous System
309
Anatomy and Physiology of the Brain
312
 Clinical Significance
321
Veterinary Vignettes
322
 Summary
323
CHAPTEr 16 OrGANS OF SPECIAL SENSE
325
The Ear and the Mechanisms of Hearing and Equilibrium
326
Clinical Significance
337
Veterinary Vignettes
337
Summary
338
Chapter 17 Necropsy: The Postmortem
EXAMINATION
340
Necropsy Considerations
341
 Clinical Significance
352
Veterinary Vignettes
353
Summary
354
Bibliography
355
Index
357
Editorialrevie
PREFACE
This text is a laboratory manual for a detailed study  enhance the study of anatomy and physiology. In
 addition to text that explains both the anatomy
was written because there is no adequate laboratory
 and physiology of an organ system, there is at.
 manual on this subject currently in publication for
students of veterinary technology or pre-veterinary
beginning with Chapter 7, The Skeletal System.
medicine. There are a few laboratory manuals
 These exercises are designed to demonstrate a
currently in publication that describe methods for
 physiological principle that relates to the study of
the dissection of the cat; however, these guides are
the specific organ system covered in the chapter.
written as laboratory manuals for human anatomy
Some of these exercises also serve as a preview to
and physiology courses, and therefore the cat's ana-
a course in clinical laboratory medicine.
tomical nomenclature is humanized. For example,
 In each chapter there are words that are in
the pectoralis profundusmuscle is labeled the pectoralis
 burgundy bold print, blue bold print, or green
minor muscle in these laboratory guides. Most nota-
bold print. The purpose of this differentiation is
bly, there is no other manual on the market that.
to establish a hierarchy of importance with regards
 provides students with detailed dissection instruc-
to structures and functions of special emphasis
tions such as can be found in this edition.
that students should know.
In addition to the need for an anatomically
 The levels of special emphasis are listed as
correct dissection manual for the cat, there is a
follows:
need for a laboratory manual that compares the
 Burgundy bold print: the most important.
anatomies of the major species encountered in
names of functions, structures, and
the practice of veterinary medicine. Because this
physiological principles are listed in
manual is primarily aimed at students in veteri-
nary technology programs, or in pre-veterinary
burgundy bold print. If a structure is
listed in colored bold print, students
medicine anatomy and physiology courses, it does
should identify this structure and know
not approach either the scope or the depth of
it. Individual instructors may add struc-
tures they think are also important or
in a college of veterinary medicine.
eliminate structures they think are of
However, it is a valuable resource book for
minimal importance. If the same struc-
veterinary medicine in that it is perhaps the only
feline dissection manual that uses accurate veteri-
ture is to be located again later in the
exercise, then it is given in italics, unless
nary anatomical nomenclature.
At the beginning of each chapter there is a list.
it needs some special emphasis, in which
case it appears in blue bold print.
 of the major objectives students will learn. In addi-
tion, there is a list of materials needed to complete
Blue bold print: Words in blue bold
the chapter. This suggestedlist will help instructors
print are names of structures, functions,
purchase materials, anatomical models, instru-
and principles that need special empha-
ments, and supplies for students to use during the
sis, but are not. as crucial to know as
study of the organ system that the chapter covers.
words in burgundy bold print. Struc-
This laboratory manual is more than just a
tures included in optional dissections
dissection guide; it also contains information to
are listed in blue bold print.
vili
Editorialrevie
Prfic!
ix
Green bold print: Words in green bold
 the owners and animals are fctional as a courtesy
print identify structures, functions, and
to protect. their identity.
 principles that need emphasis, but not.
These stories are designed to help hold stu-
 as great as words in blue bold print.
 dents' interest in the subject matter, and again
Also, structures that were noted for
to show the clinical relevance of the material
identification previously in an exercise
presented. The anatomical and pathophysiologi
with burgundy bold or blue bold print.
 are listed in italics when noted again.
be used in similar stories for the non-veterinary
 In this case, students should identify
educated public. However, because the purpose
and know these structures.
 of this book is to help students learn and under-
stand veterinary anatomical and medical terms,
 In the chapters on microscopic anatomy and
their use in this text is applicable.
histology, areas for students to draw what. they see
This book is designed to accommodate all
through their microscopes are included. These
courses in anatomy and physiology at the veteri-
areas are represented by large white circles, which of
 nary technician or pre-veterinary level of educa-
course is what. would be seen when looking through
tion. Each instructor may choose the depth in
 a microscope. The illustrations included in the chap-
which he or she covers each topic, and the order
ter are not intended to serve as substitutes for these
in which it is covered.
drawings; rather, these are idealized drawings of tis-
The physiology lab exercises teach students
sue to represent the morphology of cells and tissues
being studied. What students view through their
they can be a lot. of fun. The intent of this book
 microscopes may not have the exact same appear-
 is to present the material in a sufficiently flexible
ance as the illustrations because of differences in
manner to accommodate all laboratory courses in
slides or histological sectioning. Students need to
 anatomy and physiology.
learn what their own slides look like because this is
Also Available for the Instructor:
the material on which they will be tested.
 It was important to add a section in each chap-
 Instructor Guide to Accompany Veterinary Anat-
ter, where applicable, on a topic of clinical signifi-
 omy and Physiology
cance. By the nature of the material, students may
ISBN: 1-4354-6433-8
occasionally feel that the information they are
asked to learn is more than they will ever use, and
ISBN 13: 978-1-4354-6433-9
this section illustrates the clinical relevancy of the
 information presen ted.
This Instructor Guide is broken up into two sec-
Also, the Veterinary Vignettes sections are true
 tions. The frst section contains a list of chapter
stories that. the author, Dr. Cochran, experienced
 objectives, materials list, and helpful tips for con-
when he owned his own practice, worked as a
ducting the exercises contained in the core text.
relief veterinarian, or encountered ill or injured
The second section contains the answer key to the
animals during his teaching years. The names of
 all new end of chapter review questions.
Editorialrevie
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 I would like to dedicate this book to my family: my parents, wife, son, and daughter. This dedication would
not be complete, however, without a special thanks to the College of Veterinary Medicine and its professors
at Colorado State University. I have always appreciated the quality of my veterinary education, and I try to
emulate it in my teaching today.
 Delmar and the author wish to thank the following individuals who devoted their time and professional
experience reviewing this manuscript:
Karen Kean-Hines, DVM
 Colorado Mountain College
Glendwood Springs, CO
Melvin Chambliss, DVM
Alfred State College
Alfred, NY
Charles M. Wolf
Cedar Valley College
Lancaster, TX
Terry A. Champney, DVM
Northern Virginia Community College
 Sterling, VA
Karen Alan Black, DVM
Cedar Valley College
Lancaster, TX
：
Editorial
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Phillip E. Cochran, M.S., D.V.M., is a graduate of
Oregon State University with a B.s. in Zoology, an
M.S. in Genetics with a minor in Biochemistry. He
received his Doctor ofVeterinary Medicine (D.V.M.)
degree from Colorado State University. He recently
retired from his position as Department Chair of
the Veterinary Technology Program at Portland
Community College in Portland, Oregon. He has
returned to private practice in small animal medi-
cine and surgery.
 Dr. Cochran is a published author and has several
veterinary appliances registered with the U.S. Patent.
office. He is listed in Who's Who in Veterinary Sci-
ence and Medicine (1992) and Strathmores' Who's
Who in America, Centennial Edition (2000). He is a
member of the American Veterinary Medical Asso-
ciation, the Oregon Veterinary Medical Association,
the Portland Veterinary Medical Association, and
the Oregon Veterinary Emergency Response Team
(OVERT). He is on the Oregon Veterinary Medical
Association's Leadership Council for Emergency
 and Disaster Planning and Relief. His non-veterinary
public service is with the United States Civil Air
Patrol, Oregon Wing, Washington County Compos-
ite Squadron, where he has the rank of Major and
has served as Deputy Squadron Commander.
xii
Editorialre
CHAPTER 1
THE TERMINOLOGY OF ANATOMY
OBJECTIVES
 begin to learn the terminology of anatomy in order to understand the descriptions of body parts and
their relative positions to one another
 be able to locate these various anatomical areas on an animal
 understand the terms used to describe body planes and sections in order to understand histological
sections of tissues
MATERIALS
 cat or dog skeleton, or model of an animal
3 10 8op
 muzzle, if necessary
INTRODUCTION
In the study of any field of science it is necessary to understand the language, or specialized
terminology, that is used. This is especially true in anatomy, where terms of direction,
position, and movement are used to describe both the position of organs in relation to one
another and the actions of muscles. In veterinary medicine, anatomical terminology varies 
significantly from that of human medicine because we are concerned with quadruped animals
(animals with four legs) rather than biped humans.
n recent years, veterinary anatomists have attempted to develop a system of terms that
better describes animals and eliminates some of the confusing terminology common to
human and animal medicine. The best example has been the virtual elimination of the words
anterior and posterior. Anterior, in human anatomy, means toward the front of the body (where 
the mammary glands are in males and females), and posterior means toward the back of
the body (where you can feel your backbone). In quadrupedal animals, the area where the
mammary glands are located is on the ventral part of the body, and the backbone is on the
head end of the body. but the current term cranial has been used for years. To eliminate the
possibility of confusion, cranial has almost completely replaced the term anterior. However, the
word anterior is still conditionally used, as in the anterior chamber of the eye and the anterior
pituitary gland. In addition, in radiography, veterinarians still occasionally use A-P (anterior-
posterior) when ordering radiographs of the limbs, rather than cranial-caudal or dorso-palmar
For this reason, technicians should know what these terms mean.
This chapter introduces students to the most important terms used in gross anatomy, which
is the study of body structures visible to the naked eye. The following is a list of veterinary
anatomical terms used to describe direction or position relative to body parts.
Editorialrevi
+
Chapterl
Directional Terms
(body part) . For example, the backbone is dorsal to
the belly. Dorsum is a noun that refers to the back
adjacent: Next to, adjoining, or close to. For exam-
area of the body.
ple, the tongue is adjacent to the teeth.
ventral: Pertaining to the belly or underside of a
 cranial: Pertaining to the cranium or head end of
quadruped or denoting a position more toward the
the body or denoting a position more toward the
belly (downward) than some other reference point
cranium or head end of the body than some other
(body part). For example, the kidneys are ventral to
reference point (body part) . For example, the head
the backbone. Ventrum is a noun that refers to the
is cranial to the tail. Craniad or cranially means in
belly area of the body.
the direction of the cranium or head end of the
lateral: Denoting a position farther away from the
body.
median plane of the body or of a structure, on the
caudal: Pertaining to the tail end of the body or
side or toward the side away from the median plane,
 denoting a position more toward the tail or rear of
or pertaining to the side of the body or of a struc-
the body than some other reference point (body
ture. For example, the lateral surface of the leg is
part). For example, the tail is caudal to the head.
the outside surface.
Caudad or caudally means in the direction of the
medial: Denoting a position closer to the median
caudal or tail end of the body (Figure 1.1).
plane of the body or of a structure, toward the mid-
cephalic: Pertaining to the head. This term is not used
dle or median plane, or pertaining to the middle or
as frequently in veterinary medicine as cranial. For
a position closer to the median plane of the body or
example, the top of the head is cephalic to the neck.
of a structure. For example, the medial surface of
rostral: Pertaining to the nose end of the head or
the leg is the inside surface.
toward the nose. For example, the nose is rostral to
oblique: At an angle or pertaining to an angle. For
the eyes.
example, the vein crossed obliquely from the upper
dorsal: Pertaining to the back area of the quad-
left side down to the lower right side.
ruped or denoting a position more toward the
superficial: Near the surface; not deep. For example,
 back (upward) than some other reference point.
the skin is superfcial to the underlying muscle.
 Superior
(cephalic)
Anterior
Posterior
Dorsal
Proximal
Caudal
Cranial
Inferior
Distal
Ventral
FlGURE 1.1: Anatomical terminology describing body direction: human vs. animal.
Editorialrevie
The Terminology of Anatomy
deep: Situated far beneath the surface; not superfi-
Anatomical Terms
cial. For example, the bones are deep to the skin.
peripheral: Pertaining to or situated near the outer
abdominal: Pertaining to the abdomen.
areas or surface of the body or a structure. For
antebrachium: The distal area of the front legs of an
example, the subcutaneous fat is peripheral to the
animal, below the elbow joint.
muscles.
proximal: Nearest to the center of the body rela-
appendicular: Related to the limbs and their attach-
tive to another body part, or a location on a body
ments to the axis of the body.
 part relative to another more distant location. For
axial: Related to the head, neck, and trunk or torso,
example, the femur is proximal to the tibia, and the
the axis of the body.
upper part of the humerus is the proximal part.
axillary: Pertaining to the armpit area or on the
distal: Farthest from the center of the body relative
medial aspect of where the front leg meets the torso.
to another body part, or a location on a body part.
brachial: Pertaining to the proximal area of the
relative to another closer location. For example, the
front legs of an animal, above the elbow joint.
tibia is distal to the femur, and the lower part of the
humerus is the distal part.
cervical: Pertaining to the neck area, the cervical
vertebrae (the first 7 vertebrae in the dog and cat)
superior: Above, directed above, or pertaining to
or the region around these vertebrae, and to the
that which is above. For example, the nasal cavity is
cervix in the female's reproductive system.
superior to the mouth.
coccygeal: Pertaining to the tail or vertebrae of the
inferior: Below, underneath, directed below, or
tail, the coccygeal vertebrae.
pertaining to that which is below. For example, the
mouth is inferior to the nasal cavity.
cranium: The part of the skull that encases the
brain.
crural: Pertaining to the rear legs of an animal.
Positional Terms
digital: Pertaining to the area of the foot where
the animal's toes or toe bones, the phalanges, are
caudal: Pertaining to the back side of the leg above
located.
the carpus and tarsus.
frontal: Pertaining to the forehead, or the area of
cranial: Can also be a positional term that means the
the head above the eyes where the frontal bone and
front side of the leg above the carpus and tarsus.
frontal sinuses are located.
dorsal: Can also be a positional term that applies to
inguinal: Pertaining to the groin or the medial
aspect of the rear leg where it is attached to the
the side of the leg opposite the palmar and plantar
sides or, in other words, the front side of the leg
torso of the body.
from the carpus and tarsus distally (down).
lumbar: Pertaining to the lumbar vertebrae (the
palmar (volar): The caudal surface of the front leg
part of the backbone between the thoracic ver-
from the carpus to the phalanges. This includes the
tebrae and the sacrum) or region around these
bottom surface of the front. foot. (see Figure 1.5).
vertebrae.
plantar: The caudal surface of the hind leg from the
mammary: Pertaining to the mammary glands (the
hock to the phalanges. This includes the bottom
 milk-producing glands).
surface of the hind foot.
nasal: Pertaining to the nose.
prone: To lie face down, in ventral recumbency.
oral: Pertaining to the mouth.
recumbent: Lying down. A modifying term is used
orbital: Pertaining to the bony eye socket. (the orbit).
 to describe the surface on which an animal is lying.
 patellar: Pertaining to the patella or knee cap.
For example, dorsal recumbency means the animal
is lying on its back, face up. Ventral recumbency
 pelvic: Pertaining to the pelvis or hip bones (which
refers to an animal lying on its ventral surface, or
are made up of four bones of each side of the pel-
its belly. If the animal is lying on its side, it is in
vis: the ilium, ischium, pubic bone, and acetabular
lateral recumbency. On the right side, it is called
bone, which are joined in the middle by a symphysis
right lateral recumbency and on the left side, left lateral
of the right and left pubic bones) .
recumbency.
perineal: Pertaining to the region between or sur-
supine: To lie face up, in dorsal recumbency.
rounding the anus and the external genitalia.
Chapter l
 peritoneal: Pertaining to the cavity inside the abdo-
lingual: Surface of the lower teeth that is next. to the
men and the membrane (the peritoneum) that.
tongue. As an adjective, lngual means pertaining to
 lines this cavity. The peritoneal cavity is the space
the tongue.
inside the abdomen between the organs and the
mesial: Surfaces of the incisor teeth that are toward
body wall.
the middle or median plane of the mouth (the
pleural: Pertaining to the cavity inside the chest and
medial surfaces), and the rostral surface of the
the membranes that line this cavity. The pleural cav-
canine, premolar, and molar teeth.
 ity is the space inside the chest between the lungs 
occlusal: Surface of the tooth that makes contact.
 and heart and the inside of the chest wall.
with the opposing tooth. It is the chewing or biting
popliteal: Pertaining to the caudal area or back of
surface. As a directional term, occlusal means toward
the true knee, the stifle joint, where the popliteal
the chewing or biting surface.
 Jymph node is located.
pubic: Pertaining to the bone located between the
Labial
Mesial
Mesial
 animal's rear legs, known as the pubic bone, which
7surface
is part of the pelvis.
Distal
quadrants: Arbitrary divisions of the abdominal
surface
cavity into four equal sections using the mid-
Palatal
 abdominal transverse and median planes as the
dividing lines.
Buccal 
Hard
sacral: Pertaining to the sacrum, the fused vertebrae
>Buccal
palate
by which the pelvis is attached to the backbone.
located 
here
scapular: Pertaining to the scapula or the shoulder
Contact
Occlusal
blade area.
 surface
surface
Maxilla
sternal: Pertaining to the region of the sternum, or
(upper)
Distal
breastbone.
Distal
Mandible
stifle: The true knee, the femorotibial joint.
(lower)
Tongue
thoracic: Pertaining to the thorax or chest, the tho-
Buccal
located
racic vertebrae (the part. of the backbone between
surface
here
the cervical and lumbar vertebrae), or the region
 Lingual
Lingual
around these vertebrae.
surface
umbilical: Pertaining to the umbilicus or navel (bel-
lybutton).
vertebral: Pertaining to the vertebrae or spinal column.
Anatomical Terms for the Mouth
and Teeth (Figure 1.2)
Labial Mesial
FIGURE 1.2: Positional terms pertaining to the teeth.
buccal: Surface of the tooth that is next to the
cheek. As a directional term, buccal means toward
Terms of Movement
the cheek.
contact: Surface of the tooth that is adjacent to the
abduction: Movement of a limb away from the
next tooth.
median line or middle of the body (Figure 1.3).
labial: Surface of the incisor teeth that is next to
adduction: Movement of a limb toward the median
the lips.
line or middle of the body (Figure 1.3).
 palatal: Surface of the upper teeth that is next to the
eversion: Turning outward or inside out.
hard palate.
extension: Straightening or the act of straightening.
distal (teeth position): Surfaces of the incisor teeth
as with a joint (Figure 1.4).
that. are away from the middle or median plane of
the mouth (the lateral surfaces), and the caudal sur-
flexion: Bending or the act of bending, as with a
faces of the canine, premolar, and molar teeth.
joint (Figure 1.4).
The Terminology of Anatomy
FlGURE 1.3: Abduction vs. adduction.
FlGURE 1.4: Flexion vs. extension.
pronation: The act. of turning the body or arm (leg)
median plane: Divides the body into left and right.
so the ventral aspect of the body or the palm is
halves, equally.
down.
 paramedian plane: Parallel to the median plane and
rotation: Turning about. an axis.
also divides the body into lef. and right parts, but.
supination: The act of turning the body or arm (leg)
 not. equally.
so the ventral aspect of the body or the palm is up.
sagittal plane: The same as a paramedian plane.
A midsagittal plane is the same as the median plane.
Planes of the Body
transverse plane: Divides the body cranially and
caudally, not necessarily in equal divisions. It also
 divides the leg into upper and lower parts, not nec-
dorsal plane: Divides the body dorsally and ven trally,
not necessarily in equal divisions (Figure 1.5).
essarily in equal divisions.
- Medial
Lateral
ostral
fentra
Oximal
Dorsal
L Sagittal planes 
planes
Transverse planes
Median plane
FIGURE 1.5: Planes of the body.
Copyright 2010 Ceng
Editorial
Chapter l
linical Significance
Veterinarians use positional and directional terms every day, as when they ask a technician to "put the
dog in right lateral recumbency." These anatomical, directional, and positional terms are the nomenclature
Used in veterinary radiography to describe views taken of the animal's body. If an animal is lying on its
back in dorsal recumbency on an x-ray table, an x-ray beam would enter the ventrum of the animal and
exit its dorsum prior to striking the cassette and fim to produce a radiographic image. This view is called
a ventral-dorsal view, or V-D view. The view is named according to how the x-ray beam penetrates the
animal's booy, in this case from ventral to dorsal.
If we fip the animal over and put it in ventral recumbency, the view is a D-V or dorsaf-ventral. An x-ray
entering the lateral side traversing to the medial side would be a lateraf-medial, but for simplicity's sake it is
just called a lateral or lateral view. An x-ray beam penetrating the front part of the leg and exiting the back part
above the carpus or tarsus (hock) is called a cranial-caudal. Itis also stil commonly called an anterior-posterior
In large animals, oblique views of the lower leg are also done in addition to the dorsopaimar (D-P)
and lateral. This is so a veterinarian can essentially view 360* around the leg radiographically.
Therefore, a view taken at a 45° angle with the x-ray machine between the front and the lateral side of
oblique, or a DL PM oblique (Figure 1.6). The fourth view of the lower front leg normally taken wouid be a
dorsomedial palmarolateral oblique. Can you picture these views in your mind, inc/uding where the x-ray
beam enters and exits the leg and where the machine and fim are placed in each of the four views?
Medial:
Lateral
X-ray
X-ray
cassette
cassette
Palmal
FIGURE 1.6: Radiographic anatomical directional terms for oblique views.
Copyright 2010 Ceng
Editorialrevie
The Terminology of Anatomy
EXERCISE 1.1
USING ANATOMICAL TERMS TO DESCRIBE BODY
STRUCTURES OR AREAS
Using an animal model or skeleton, and Figures 1.7 1.8 and 1.9 focate the following:
1. cranium
2. tail
3. cranial vs. caudal areas
4. dorsum
5.ventrum
6. dorsal vs. ventral areas
7. proximal aspect of the humerus (upper bone of the front leg)
 8. distal part of the humerus
9. carpus
10. elbow joint; describe the relationship of the elbow joint and the carpus using the terms proximal
and distal
11. lateral and medial sides of the leg
12. tarsus or hock
13. cranial and caudal aspects of the leg
14. dorsal and palmar/plantar aspects of the front and rear legs
Pirnna
 Scapula (shoulder blade)
Thoracic vertebrae
Lumbar
Forehead
vertebrae
Cervical
Spinie of
Ribs
Kidrieys
vertebrae
scapula
Bladder
Wing of the pelvis
CAUA
Descending colon
NOSE
Sacrum (sacral vertebrae)
Muzzle
 Tail head
Larynix and
Coccygeal
trachea
vertebrae
Jugular veini
of tail
 Shoulder joint
-Femur
Humerus
Lungs 
Stifle
(knee joint)
Costal cartilage
iver
Small
 Sternum
initestines
Fibula
Elbow joint --
Tibia
Radius-
Hock joint
Medial
at tarsal
UIna-
Carpal
saphenous
bones
Cephalic vein
 joint and
vein1
Patella
carpal
bones
(knee cap)
Metatarsal
Metacarpal bones
bones
Phalanges
Phalanges
Carpal pad
Metacarpal pad
Digital pads
FlGURE 1.7: Parts of the cat's body.
Editorial
K
Chapter 1
Belly
Rump
Forehead
Shoulder
Tail
Tail Head 
Back
Pinna
Neck 
Dorsum
Cheek
Flank
Muzzle
Chi
Knee
Chest
Ventrum
Hock
Area of
Elbow
Scapula
Stifle 
FGURE 1.8: Common names for body areas of small animals.
Crest
Poll
Cheek
Forehiead
Mane
Withers
 Paralumbar
Tailhead
fossa
Loin
Flank
Croup
Back
Throat
latch 
Muzzle
iShoulder
Barrel
Tail
StifleBelly
Gaskin
Elbow
Chest
Hock -
Chestnut~
Cannon
bone
Fetlock
Knee
(carpus)
106日
Hoof
Pastern
Coronary
band
FGURE 1.9: Common names for body areas of horses.
Editorial
The Terminology of Anatomy
EXERCISE 1.2
TOPOGRAPHICAL ANATOMY USING A DOG OR CAT
On a five dog or cat, perform the following:
1. Abduct, then adduct a leg.
 2. Flex the stifle joint, and flex the hock joint. Note that they flex together at. the same time and flex
in opposite directions. Now extend both of these joints.
 3. Place the animal in the following positions:
a. dorsal recumbency
b. ventral recumbency
c. left or right lateral recumbency
4. Find the following areas on the animal's body:
a. cervical region
b. thoracic region
c. lumbar region
d. sacral area
e. caudal vertebral or coccygeal region
f. perineum
g. popliteal area
h.axilla
i. inguinal area 
 j. brachium
 k. antebrachium
1. umbilicus
5. In the mouth, find the following:
a. buccal surface of the teeth
 b. lingual surface of the teeth
C. contact. surface of the teeth
d. occlusal surface of the teeth
e. mesial surface of the teeth
f. distal surface of the teeth
g. palatal surface of the teeth
h. labial surface of the incisor teeth
Editorial
10
Chapter 1
SUMMARY
ewojui sul auioipaw pue Awoieue jo sbenbuel aut weal oi unbag aaey noa laideuo siun u
tion will be particularly useful in chapters to come, especially when studying the dissection
of the cat and other selected organs. The words used more than any others are cranial, caudal,
dorsal, ventral, medial, lateral, proximal, and distal. These words give direction on all the planes of
the body. Even if you have had a course in medical terminology, reviewing the definitions in
this chapter will be most helpful.
REVIEW OUESTIONS
1.  For its use in radiography, if D-P means dorso-palmar in the front leg, what does D-P
stand for in the hind leg?
 2. Describe in anatomical terms where a saddle and cinch is placed on a horse.
 3.  If a veterinarian tells his technician to lay a dog on its right side, how would this be phrased
using correct anatomical terms?
4.
 Describe in anatomical terms the location of an injection into the muscles 1.5 cm to the
right of lumbar vertebra L3.
 5. Fill in the blanks: The stifle joint is
to the hip joint but
to the
hock joint.
6. Fill in the blanks: The inside of the upper teeth is called the
side, whereas
the inside of the bottom teeth is called the
side.
7. Would an adductor muscle be on the medial or lateral side of the leg?
8. What plane divides the body into its dorsal and medial halves?
9. Name and describe in anatomical terms the four views taken of a horse's fetlock joint
(the metacarpo-phalangeal joint), where the cassette is placed, and the direction of the
x-ray beam as it penetrates through the animal's leg.
10. What is the difference between gross anatomy and microscopic anatomy?
CHAPTER 2
THE USE OF THE MICROSCOPE
OBJECTIVES
identify the parts of the microscope, their purpose, and how they work
describe and demonstrate the proper care of the microscope
 demonstrate proper focusing technique
estimate the size of objects in a field
return to a specific site on a prepared slide using the vernier scales on a mechanical stage
MATERIALS
compound light microscope
immersion oil
lens paper
lens cleaner
 prepared blood smear slide
 prepared slide of grid, ruled in millimeters (grid slide)
INTRODUCTION
auo paialdwoo Apealle aaey Aboloisaud pue Awoieue uo sesinoo u! palloiua siuapnis iso
or more general biology courses. For students of veterinary technology and for graduate
technicians, the microscope is one of the most important diagnostic instruments used in their
smear, and urine sediment slides. The technician's work is to produce an accurate reading of
the previously listed specimens. Without a quality microscope and a working knowledge of its
use, this is not possible. Therefore, knowledge of a microscope's proper use, care, and safety
considerations is critical. For some students, much of this chapter's information on the use of
the microscope will be review. However, it may have been years since others took a biology
course; for this reason the following material is provided.
11
Editorialrevi
12
Chapter2
Care of the Compound Microscope
(if available) . If the stage is movable rather
than fixed, move it to its lowest. point.
The following is a list of operating procedures and
 5. Always begin focusing with the scanning
safety rules for using a microscope. These should
always be followed when transporting, cleaning.
objective lens; this is the lowest power
objective lens, usually the 4X objective.
using, and storing your microscope.
 Use the coarse adjustment knob only with
1. Always use two hands to carry and
the lowest power lens. Never focus using
tran sport a microscope; hold it in an
the high magnification or the oil immer-
upright position with one hand on
sion objective lens by moving the objec-
the arm and the other under the base.
tive lens and slide toward each other; this
Avoid jarring the microscope when
may cause breakage of the glass slide or,
setting it down.
far worse, scratch the lens. Once you have
focused the microscope with the lowest.
 2. Use only special grit-free lens paper for
power objective, then you may move a
cleaning microscope lenses. Do this
higher power objective into place.
 before using the microscope and before
6. When using oil, use the focusing method
putting it away.
listed previously or start with the objective
3. Always use a coverslip with wet-mount.
lens touching the oil, and use the
preparations so the liquid does not get on
fine adjustment knob to bring the slide's
the objective lens.
structure into view.
4. Before putting the microscope in the stor-
7. Always clean the oil completely from
age cabinet, be sure to remove the slide
the oil immersion objective lens and the
from the stage, rotate to the lowest power
microscope stage before switching to the
objective lens, and replace the dust cover
other lenses.
EXERCISE 2.1
IIDENTIFICATION OF THE PARTS OF THE MICROSCOPE
Using Figure 2. 1 and your microscope, identify the foffowing parts.
1. ocular (eyepiece): Microscopes are either monocular (has one eyepiece) or binocular (has two eye-
pieces). Each eyepiece, or ocular, consists of a tube containing the ocular lens that fits into a tube
at the top of the head or body tube of the microscope. The ocular lens is usually a 10X or 10-power
magnification lens (some are 15X). In other words, it increases the apparent size of the object by
10 times or 10 diameters. Usually one of the oculars contains a pointer, which can be rotated to
 indicate a specific area of concern to the viewer. If your microscope's oculars have no pointer, ask
the instructor if one can be added, or perhaps another microscope has a pointer in both oculars
and can be traded.
 2. objective lens: Scanning, low power, high power, and oil immersion (usually 4X, 10X, 40X, and
100X, respectively).To calculate the total magnification using each lens, multiply the power of the
eyepiece by the power of the objective lens:
10X x 40X = 400X
 3. base: The bottom support for the microscope on which it rests on the table. Some microscopes have
an inclination joint, which allows them to be tilted backward for viewing dry preparations.
 4. head (body tube): Supports both the oculars and the rotating nosepiece containing the objective
 lenses. Through a system of mirrors within, the body tube projects the image from the objective lens
to the eyepiece.
 5. arm: Vertical portion of the microscope connecting the base to the head.
 6. coarse adjustment knob: Used to make large adjustmen ts in the distance between the specimen and
the objective lens to focus on the specimen.
7. fine adjustment knob: Used to make small, or fine, adjustments in the distance between the speci
men and the objective lens to focus on the specimen. It is used for precise focusing once the coarse
focusing has been done.
The Use of the Microscope
13
8. condenser: Contains a lens that focuses light on the specimen. A height-adjustment knob that raises and
lowers the condenser (and lens) to vary the light delivery is present on all quality microscopes. Gener-
ally, the best position for the condenser is close to the botfom surface of the stage.
9. stage: This is the platform upon which the slide rests during viewing. There are two types of stages: a
mechanical stage and a stage equipped with spring clips to hold the slide in place. Most diagnostic-
quality microscopes have a mechanical stage to permit precise movements of the specimen.
10. nosepiece: This part contains three or four objective lenses, which are changed by rotating the
desired lens into proper position over the specimen. The nosepiece should be used to rotate the
lens rather than grabbing the lenses themselves.
11. iris diaphragm with lever: As the arm, or lever, attached to the condenser is moved, the iris dia-
phragm opens or closes to permit a variable amount of light to pass through the condenser. It
provides the best possible contrast for viewing a specimen.
12. filter: A blue flter (not shown in Figure 2.1) is placed between the illuminator and the condenser
to change the color of light from a yellow-white to a cooler blue-white. This is easier on the viewer's
13. in-base illuminator: Also known as the substage light (or is a mirror in low-tech microscopes), this
part. directs light. toward the condenser.
14. rheostat: Also known as the light control, this knob allows for variable degrees of light output by the
in-base illuminator.
Head or body tube
Ocular (Eyepiece)
Nosepiece
Objective lenses
Arm
Stage
Condenser
 Iris diaphragm with
lever
 Condenser
 On/off switch
adjustment knob
 Rheostat
Mechanical stage
Fine
adjustment knobs
adjustment knob
Base
Coarse
adjustment knob
In-base illuminatol
FlGURE 2.1: The compound light microscope.
Editorialrevie
14
Chapter 2
Use the foliowing steps for focusing your microscope using the 4X, 10X, and 40X objective fenses.
1. Determine if the microscope you are using has a movable stage (i.e., it moves up and down, toward
and away from the objectives) or if the objectives move (toward and away from a fixed stage).
2. Plug in the microscope's cord and turn it on. Adjust the rheostat or light control to the middle of
its range.
 3. Close the iris diaphragm completely; then open it halfway.
4. Raise the condenser to the fully up position.
5. Position the fine adjustment knob about halfway between the limits of its movement.
6. Make sure all the objectives are screwed in tightly.
 7. Rotate the 4X objective into the viewing position (you should feel it click into place). It is best. to
start with the 4X objective when focusing on an object.
 8. Obtain a microscope slide and place it snugly in the mechanical stage forks with the specimen side
up. Center it. exactly over the condenser.
9. Prior to looking through the eyepieces, observe the microscope from the side and turn the coarse
adjustment knob so the objective is positioned as close to the slide as possible. The specimen should
be brought into focus by turning the coarse adjustment. knob to move the objective and stage apart.
through the eyepiece; breakage of the slide or coverslip may occur.
10. Look into the eyepieces and close your left. eye. Bring the specimen into focus using the coarse adjust-
ment first, then the fine adjustment. The slide may have to be moved to bring it into the field of view.
one circular feld of view is visible with both eyes open. Make note of the distance so it. may be easily
set the next time you use the microscope
12. Now close your right eye and rotate the left-eyepiece focus adjustment (not the fine adjustment knob)
to obtain a sharp focus for the left eye alone.
illuminator for comfortable and clear viewing brightness. The microscope is now adjusted precisely
for your eyes and should provide the sharpest image possible.
14. Before changing to a higher-power objective lens, move the part of the specimen you are studying
to the exact center of the field of view.
15. Change to the 10X objective. If you centered your specimen properly, the part you chose to study
tions will be necessary when changing lenses. However, brightness and diaphragm adjustment may
 also be needed to produce a crisp image.
16. Now change to the 40X objective lens. If the part of the specimen you chose to study is not in view,
rather than searching around forit, go back to the 10X objective, re-center, and change back to the
40X objective. Again, slight corrections may be needed in the fine adjustment knob, the diaphragm,
and the illumination.
Method of Focusing Using the Oil Immersion Lens
The use of an oil immersion lens requires a drop of immersion oil to be in contact with both the slide
and the lens itself. If the oil is not in proper contact, light is refracted (bent) in such a way that some
is lost and the image becomes blurred. As the level of magnifcation increases, the working distance
With an oil immersion objective lens the working distance is very short, and thus care must be taken
when positioning the lens. Otherwise, broken slides, cracked coverslips, or even damage to the lens
surface may occur. Follow the following steps to view a specimen with an oil immersion lens.
The Use of the Microscope
15
1. Obtain a prepared slide of blood.
 2. Start with the scanning lens, progress to the high-power lens, and focus as previously described.
Find a part of the slide you would like to observe and center it.
3. Rotate the high-power lens aside, and place one drop of immersion oil on the slide over the light.
opening.
4. Rotate the oil immersion objective into position. The lens should touch the oil and be just short.
of touching the slide. Do not rotate the other objective lenses over the immersion oil.
5. Look through the eyepieces and move the iris diaphragm to adjust. the light. It also may be neces-
sary to adjust the condenser up and down. If the light is too bright, it will be difficult to distin-
guish the cells from the background.
6. Focus upward with the fine adjustment knob until the blood cells come clearly into view. Note the
red blood cells, which lack nuclei, and the white blood cells, which have nuclei.
 7. Remove the slide when you are done and clean it with lens cleaner and lens paper.
8. Wipe the oil from the oil immersion objective lens, and swing the scanning power objective back
into position.
In order to prevent damage and misalignment of the microscope's internal parts, always follow the
following steps when preparing it for storage.
1. Remove any slide from the microscope's stage.
 2. Clean the instrument, including the lenses, to remove any fluid from the specimens or any oil left
in contact. with the objectives.
 3. Open the iris diaphragm.
4. Raise the condenser to its highest position.
5. Move the scanning objective into viewing position, if not already done
 6. Center the mechanical stage so it has minimum projection on either side of the fixed stage.
7. If the stage is movable, lower it to its lowest position
8. Wrap the electric cord around the base.
9. If available, place a dust cover over the instrument.
EXERCISE 2.3 DETERMINING THE SIZE OF THE MICROSCOPE FIELD
During the previous exercise, you undoubtedly noticed that the size of the microscope feld decreased
as the magnification increased. It is useful to know how to determine the diameter of each of the micro
scope's felds. This information will allow you to make a fairly accurate estimation of the size of the
objects in any field of view. For example, if you know the field of view is 4 mm, an object. that takes up
approximately 1/4 of the field is about 1 mm in size.
Microscope specimens are measured in micrometers or microns (μm) or millimeters (mm).
A millimeter is 1/1,000 of a meter (10- m), and a micrometer or micron is 1/1,000,000 of a
meter (10-6 m).
Using your microscope, use the following steps to determine the size of a field.
1. Obtain a grid slide (a slide prepared with graph paper ruled in millimeters). Each grid section is
1-mm square. Using the lowest power objective (4X, scanning objective), bring the grid lines into
focus.
16
Chapter 2
 2. Move the slide so that one grid line touches the left edge of the feld; then count the number of
squares across the diameter of the field at its widest point (Figure 2.2) . On the right side, if only part
of a square is visible, estimate how much of the square can be seen and calculate the decimal equiva-
lent. to the portion of the square visible (i.e., if half the square can be seen, 0.5 mm is visible).
2.5mm
FlGURE 2.2: The grid scale.
 3. Repeat the procedure using the low power objective (10X objective), and record your observations
formula in step 4 below.
Summary Chart for Microscope #
Objective Lens Magnification
Total Magnification
Field Size
 Scanning
Low power
High power
Oil immersion
4. Complete the chart by computing the approximate diameter of the high-power and oil immer-
sion fields using the following formula (note the following abbreviations: HPF = high power feld,
LPF = low-power field, HP = high power, LP = low power).
 diameter of LPF × total magnification of the LP objective
diameter of HPF =
total magnification of the HP objective
Therefore, if the diameter of the LPF is 2 mm and the total magnification of the LPF is 100 (10 X 10),
and if the total magnification of the HP objective is 400 (10 × 40), then
2 mm × 100
diameter of HPF
0.50 mm
400
5. Find a nucleated white blood cell on the blood smear slide under the oil immersion lens and estimate
its size.
EXERCISE 2.4
IUSING THE VERNIER SCALES ON THE MECHANICAL STAGE
a specimen slide or to record where a certain cell or lesion can be found. Remembering landmarks
on the slide may be one way of doing this, but it is not precise. A more exact way is to use the verniers
to re-locate structures. Verniers are scales located on both the x and y axes of the mechanical stage.
A vernier consists of two parallel, graduated, sliding scales, one long and one short. The smaller scale
is 9 mm long and is divided into 10 subdivisions (0 to 10). The larger scale is several centimeters long
Editorialrevie
The Use of the Microscope
17
and is graduated in millimeters (e.g., O to 100 mm). Read the following steps to learn how to pinpoint.
locations using the vernier scale.
1. First, center the object of concern in the field of view.
2. Read the vernier scales on the x and y axes. To do this, locate the point at which the 0 line of the
small scale meets the large scale. In Figure 2.3, the 0 line on the small scale is located between 42
and 43 on the large scale. Now find the line on the small scale that coincides exactly with a line on
the large scale. Then, count on the small scale the number of spaces between O and the point of
coincidence. This number is your decimal point. In Figure 2.3, the line of coincidence is the sixth
line on the small scale; thus, it is 0.6. Therefore, the final reading for the location would be 42.6 on
the x or y axis, depending on which you were reading.
Large scale -
40
50
Small scale -
FIGURE 2.3: The small and large vernier scales.
 3. Using your blood slide again, locate an unusual-looking white blood cell and center it in the field
of view.
4. Using the technique described previously, record the location of this cell on the x and y axes in the
space provided below (note: units are in mm).
X axis =
y axis =
 5. Without removing the slide, move the mechanical stage so you are looking at the periphery of the
 blood smear or coverslip.
 6. Return to the cell found in step #3 by moving the mechanical stage controls until the verniers are
adjusted to the number recorded in step #4. The cell you observed previously should be somewhere
within the microscope's field of view.
SUMMARY
Because the microscope is one of the most often used and expensive pieces of equipment in
a veterinary hospital, knowledge of its care and use is vital to both veterinarians and veteri-
nary technicians. In this chapter you learned about the parts of the microscope and their use.
One of the most underused skills is logging a location on a slide and returning to it using the
vernier scales, and for this reason it was explained in this chapter.
18
Chapter 2
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. On what power lens should you use the coarse adjustment knob?
2. If you have a l0-power ocular and are on oil immersion (looX), what is the total magnifi-
cation?
 3. What is the purpose of the condenser, and what happens when it is raised and lowered?
4.What is the rheostat?
 5. Describe the method of focusing the microscope so that both eyes are in perfect focus.
6. What is the meaning of the word parfocal?
7. What might happen if oil were to be left on the oil immersion lens?
8. If you are using a microscope with 10X eyepieces, and the diameter of the LPF is 2.5
mm, the LP objective is l0X, and the HP objective is 40X, then what is the diameter of
the HPF?
9. Using a vernier scale on a microscope, the “o" on the small scale is located between 55
and 56, and the lines of the large and small scale line up on the small scale's 7. What
does the location number equal?
10. Would the answer to Question 9 be sufficient information to return to that exact location
on the slide?
Copyright 2010Ceng
Editorial
CHAPTER 3
CELLULAR ANATOMY
AND MORPHOLOGY
OBJECTIVES
 define, understand, and differentiate between a cellular organelle and an inclusion body
identify the cellular organelles in a cell model and in a diagram
understand the structure and function of the cellular organelles
 identify the major cellular organelles using prepared slides
MATERIALS
 three-dimensional model of an animal cell, complete with cellular organelles
 compound microscope
 prepared slide of a giant multipolar neuron
 prepared slide of a Golgi complex
INTRODUCTION
ajbuis e aq osje Aew leo au1 4poq s,jewjue ue jo uoiiezjuebio jo run 5iseq eul s! lao au1
celled life form, or cells can combine to make up organized tissue within a more complex
animal. Cells are extremely complex and are both the structural and functional unit of the
tissues they form. Cells have the ability to maintain their boundaries, metabolize and digest
nutrients, dispose of wastes, grow and reproduce, move, and respond to stimuli. Each cell
must perform certain functions to sustain its life. Cells are highly diverse; differences in size,
shape, and internal composition reflect their specific functions in the body.
19
reChapter(s
Editorialrevi
20
Chapter 3
The Anatomy of the Cell
Identification of the Parts of a Cell
Generally, a cell is composed of three major parts:
Using a cell model and Figure 3.2, identify the
the plasma membrane, the nucleus, and the cyto-
following parts of a cell.
plasm (Figure 3.1). All of these are readily observ-
able with a light microscope. Within the cytoplasm
1. plasma membrane: The plasma mem
brane is composed of bilayer phospholip-
are the organelles, which are either too small or
ids and globular protein molecules. This
require a special stain to be seen with ordinary
light microscopy. However, since the advent. of the
 arrangement of compounds is called the
fluid mosaic model of the plasma mem-
electron microscope, even the smallest. organelles
 brane, and the proteins are said to be
have been identified. Organelles, by definition, are
floating in a double layer of phospholip-
highly organized, living, subcellular structures, each
ids (see Figure 3.2). Some of the exter-
of which has a characteristic shape and function.
They are, in essence, the internal working parts of
 nally facing proteins and lipids have sugar
(carbohydrate) side chains attached to
the cell. They differ from inclusion bodies, which
them that are important in cellular inter-
are non-active masses within a cell.
actions.A few cholesterol molecules are
also dispersed in the fluid phospholipid
Plasma membrane
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
bilayer to help stabilize it. The proteins
 in the plasma membrane are also respon-
sible for its antigenicity.
The plasma membrane is a flexible,
elastic, protective barrier that separates
the cell's internal components from the
external environment. The plasma mem-
brane has selective permeability and thus
plays an active role in determining what.
enters and leaves the cell, and in what
quantity. Transport through the plasma
 membrane can occur in two basic ways:
actively and passively. In active transport,
FIGURE 3.1: Structural components of a cell.
the cell must provide energy in the form
Extracellular
Glycoprotein
fluid
Pore
Channel
 Peripheral protein
Glycolipid
 Phospholipids:
Polar head
(hydrophilic)
Fatty acid tails
(hydrophobic)
Cytosol
Polar head
(hydrophilic)
Peripheral protein
Cholesterol
Integral protein
Integral proteins
FGURE 3.2: Structure of the plasma membrane.
Copyright 2010 Ceng
Editorialrevi
Cellular Anatomy and Morphology
21
of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to power
 2. nucleus: The nucleus is a spherical or
the movement. of substances through 
oval structure and is the most promi-
the membrane. In passive transport, the
nent, visible feature inside the cell when
movement of substances is driven by con-
viewed with a light microscope because
 centration or pressure differences. The
of its con trasting, dark appearance.
plasma membrane is also able to maintain
Nuclei usually stain a dark blue or purple
a resting potential, which is absolutely
(Figure 3.3). Most. cells have one or more
necessary for cells that are excitable,
nuclei. For example, a red blood cell 
such as nerve or heart. cells. The resting
has a nucleus during its developmental
potential of a membrane is associated with
 stage, but the nucleus becomes pyknotic
the type and quantity of ions inside the
 and disappears when the cell becomes
cell and on the outside. These ions impart.
mature. In contrast, skeletal muscle cells
a potential difference across the mem-
have numerous nuclei; in other words,
brane; for example, a nerve cell mem-
they are multinucleated.
brane's resting potential is about -85 mV.
The nucleus is the control center of
These characteristics play a vital role in
the cell and is necessary for cell repro-
cell signaling and cell-to-cell interactions.
 duction. It is technically an organelle,
In addition, cells that are tightly joined
 but it is considered separately because of
together to form functional units of tissue
its numerous and diverse functions. On
connect to each other at cell junctions
the exterior of the nucleus is the muclear
 These contact points between plasma
envelope. It is similar to the plasma
membranes may serve one or more of
membrane in that it is a bilayered (has
the following three functions: (1) to
two layers) lipid structure. The outer
form fluid-tight seals between cells, (2) to
 membrane of the nuclear envelope is
anchor cells together or to anchor them
continuous with the rough endoplasmic
to extracellular material, or (3) to act. as
reticulum (ER), a membranous cytoplas-
channels that allow ions and molecules to
mic structure that is the site of protein
 pass from cell to cell within a tissue.
 synthesis, and is very similar in structure.
Nucleolus
Nuclear envelope
 Chromatin
 Nuclear pore
Polyribosome
Nuclear
Rough
endoplasmic
envelope
reticulum
、Nuclear
pore
FIGURE 3.3: Nucleus.
Editorialrevie
22
Chapter 3
The nuclear envelope is also perforated
into masses that are stored and used as
by numerous channels called nuclear
 required for metabolism. The cytosol is
pores. Each pore is made up of proteins
the site of many chemical reactions and
arranged in a circle, forming a central
 is the place where energy is produced
channel. This channel is approximately
and captured to drive the cellular activi-
10 times larger than the pore within a
ties necessary for life. The bulk of the
 protein in the plasma membrane. Nuclear
cytoplasm stains pink under a microscope
pores control the movement of substances
because of the basic (not. acidic) proteins
between the nucleus and the cytoplasm.
that. compose the cytosol.
Small molecules can pass via diffusion, but.
 larger molecules, such as RNA and other
4. organelles: The word organelles literally
sns ssa  so s, sa
proteins, must use active transport for pas
sage. This permits the selective transport.
are the machinery of the cell and are
of proteins from the cytoplasm into the
highly specialized to carry out specific
nucleus and of ribonucleic acid (RNA)
functions (Figure 3.4).
molecules produced in the nucleus into
a. ribosomes: Ribosomes are dense-
the cytoplasm.
staining, spherical bodies composed of
Another visible feature of the cell is
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and protein
the nucleolus, which is located within
 They are the actual sites of protein syn-
the nucleus. There may be one or more
thesis, or the places where a new amino
nucleoli per nucleus. It is spherical and
acid is added to the chain of amino
is composed of a cluster of proteins
acids in the protein being created.
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), and RNA.
Structurally, a ribosome consists of two
 It is not enclosed by a membrane. The
subunits, one about. half the size of the
nucleolus is where ribosomes, which play
other. These are formed separately
an important role in protein synthesis,
are assembled. Thus, nucleoli are quite
in the nucleolus; then they exit. the
nucleus to unite within the cytosol.
 prominent in cells that produce large
They may unite on the nuclear mem-
amounts of proteins, such as muscle and
liver cells. The nucleoli disperse during
brane or on the endoplasmic reticu-
cell division and reorganize when the new
lum. These are called membrane-bound
ribosomes. These ribosomes synthesize
cells are formed.
 proteins destined for insertion into
The bulk of the nucleus is made up
the plasma membrane or for export.
of chromatin, which may appear either
from the cell. Others may be free in
diffuse or granular when viewed through
 the cytosol, unattached to any structure
a light microscope. Chromatin is the
in the cytoplasm; these are called free
cell's genetic material, or chromosomes,
ribosomes. Primarily, free ribosomes
and is found in a dispersed, unorganized
synthesize proteins used inside the cell.
arrangement in the non-dividing cell. The
Ribosomes are also located within the
chromosomes and their component genes
mitochondria, where they syn thesize
control cellular structure and most cellu-
mitochondrial proteins. Sometimes
lar activities. The genes, of course, are the
10 to 20 ribosomes join together
hereditary material, and they ultimately
 in string-like arrangements called
control, among other things, the structure
polyribosomes.
and appearance of the animal.
b. endoplasmic reticulum (ER): The
 3. cytoplasm: Cytoplasm is composed of two
ER is a network of membranes that
components: (1) cytosol and (2) organ-
form flattened sacs or tubules called
elles. The cytosol is the fluid portion of
cisterns that extend from the nuclear
the cytoplasm and makes up 55% of the
envelope (as mentioned previously).
total cell volume. It varies in consistency
The ER is so extensive throughout.
and composition from one part. of a cell
the cytosol that it constitutes more
to another and is composed of 75% t0
than half of the membranous surfaces
90% water, with the balance consisting of
found within the cytoplasm of most.
various ions, glucose, amino acids, fatty
cells.
acids, proteins, lipids, ATP, and waste
There are two forms of endoplas-
products. Also located in the cytosol are
mic reticulum in cells: rough ER and
various organic molecules that aggregate
smooth ER. They differ in structure
Cellular Anatomy and Morphology
23
Cytosol
Lysosome
Glycosomes
Nucleolus
Centrioles
Peroxisome
Nuclear envelope
Centrisome
matrix
 Plasma
membrane
Microvilli
Nucleus
Intermediate
filaments
Rough
endoplasmic
reti culum
Microfilament
Ribosomes
Golgi
apparatus
Mitochondrion
Microtubule
、Secretion being
Smooth
released from cell
endoplasmic reticulum 
by exocytosis
Chromatin
FlGURE 3.4: The cell and its organelles.
and function. The membranous rough
potentially harmful substances, such as
ER is continuous with the nuclear
alcohol. In muscle cells, calcium ions
envelope and is studded with ribo
are released from a form of smooth
somes. Proteins synthesized enter the
ER, called the sarcoplasmic reticulum,
rough ER's cisterns for processing and
which triggers the contraction process.
sorting (Figure 3.5). As stated previ-
ously, these proteins will be exported
from the cell or be used in the plasma
membrane. In certain cells, enzymes
within the cisterns attach the proteins
to carbohydrates to form glycoproteins.
In other cells, the enzymes attach pro-
teins to phospholipids to form plasma
membranes or the membranes of
other organelles. Thus, the rough ER
 Nuclear
is re sponsible for synthesizing secretory
envelope
 proteins and membrane molecules.
Cisterns
The smooth ER extends off of the
rough ER at multiple sites to form
another network of membranous
tubules. It lacks the ribosomes of the
Ribosomes
rough ER, but it does contain unique
enzymes that. make it. more func.
tionally diverse than the rough ER.
Smooth ER is able to synthesize phos-
pholipids for membrane surfaces, and
also synthesizes fats and steroids, such
as estrogen and testosterone. In the
hepatic cells of the liver, the enzymes
of the smooth ER help release glu-
Smooth ER
Rough ER
cose into the bloodstream, and they
inactivate or detoxify drugs and other
FGURE 3.5: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
Editorial
24
Chapter 3
c. Golgi complex: The Golgi complex
enzymes capable of breaking down 
consists of 3 to 20 flattened, mem-
a variety of molecules. The enzymes
branous sacs stacked on top of one
tend to work best in an acidic pH, and
another, with both ends dilated
thus the lysosomal membrane actively
(Figure 3.6). The areas within these
transports hydrogen ions ( H) into the
sacs are also called cisterns (like the
lysosomes. The pH inside a lysosome is
similar areas found in the ER). The
about 5.0, compared to the pH of the
overall shape of the Golgi complex is
cytosol, which is neutral or 7.o. The lys-
cup-like because of the curvature of the
osomal membrane also allows the final
cisterns. Most cells only have one Golgi
 products of digestion, such as sugars
complex, although some may have
and amino acids, to be transported
several.
into the cytosol. The functions of the
 In cells that secrete many proteins
lysosomes are to (1) digest. substances
 into the extracellular fluid, the Golgi
that enter the cell via endocytosis,
complex is large and extensive. Its
(2) digest worn-out organelles, a pro-
function is to modify, sort, package,
cess called autophagy, (3) digest the
and transport products received from
entire cell if it. dies, known as autolysis,
the rough ER and form secretory
and (4) occasionally conduct extracel-
vesicles that discharge processed pro-
lular digestion, such as when sperma-
teins, via a process called exocytosis,
tozoa release enzymes to help them
into the extracellular fluid. The Golgi
 penetrate the surface of an ovum.
complex also replaces or modifies the
e. peroxisomes: Peroxisome vesicles are
existing plasma membrane and forms
lysosomes and peroxisomes.
smaller than lysosomes and contain
 one or more enzymes that can oxidize
d. lysosomes: Lysosomes are membrane-
(by removal of a hydrogen atom)
enclosed vesicles that form in the
various organic substances. Peroxi-
Golgi complex (Figure 3.7) . Inside
somes detoxify harmful substances
the lysosomes are as many as 40 dif-
and are therefore abundant in kidney
 and liver cells. In addition to being
ferent kinds of digestive or hydrolytic
Transport
vesicle from
rough ER 
 Entry or
cis face
 Medial
cistern 
Transfer 
vesicles
0
trans face
Secretory
vesicles
FlGURE 3.6: Golgi complex.
FlGURE 3.7: Lysosome.
Editorialrevie
Cellular Anatomy and Morphology 
25
produced by the Golgi complex, these
g. centrioles: The paired bodies of cen-
organelles can self-replicate.
trioles are cylindrical and are located
close to the nucleus in all animal cells
f. mitochondria: The mitochondria are
capable of reproducing themselves.
the powerhouses of the cell because of
They lie at right angles to each other.
their ability to produce ATP. A cell may
In ternally, each cylinder is composed of
have as few as i00 of them or as many as
nine triplets of microtubules, called a
several thousand. Cells that have high
9 + 0 array, because there are nine sets
 physiologic activity, such as those in the
 of microtubules in a circle without any
 muscles, liver, and kidneys, have many
in the center. The centrioles direct the
mitochondria because of their need for
 formation of the mitotic spindle during
energy in the form of ATP. Mitochon-
 cell division. They also form the basis
dria are found within the cytoplasm,
for cell projections called cilia and fla-
where the need for energy is greatest,
gella. A centrosome is the pericentriolar
such as between the contractile proteins
area plus the centrioles (Figure 3.9).
of muscle cells. Structurally, a mitochon-
drion is oval, like a small sausage. It is
h. cytoskeletal elements: Inside the cell,
bounded by two membranes, similar
within the cytosol, an internal scaffold-
to the plasma membrane. The outer
ing is formed that supports and moves
mitochondrion layer is smooth, but the
substances within the cell. This struc
 inner membrane is arranged in a series
ture is composed of several elements,
of folds called cristae. The center of the
including microtubules, which are slen-
mitochondrion, bounded by the inner
der tubules formed of proteins called
membrane and cristae, is fluid-filled and
tubulins. These tubulins have the ability
 to aggregate and disintegrate sponta-
called the matrix. The cristae's structure
neously. The centrosome serves as the
 provides a large inner surface area in
the mitochondria for the chemical reac-
tions in the aerobic phase of cellular
 Outer mitochondrial
respiration (Figure 3.8). The enzymes
membrane
that catalyze these reactions are located
Enzymes
Inner mitochondrial 
membrane
on the cristae and in the matrix. To
Mitochondrial DNA
reiterate, the main product of these
reactions is ATP.
Mitochondria also can self-
replicate, as often occurs during
Matrix
times of increased cellular demand.
Each mitochondrion has multiple
Cristae
identical copies of circular DNA. The
genes formed by this DNA, along
with the genes of the nucleus, control
the production of proteins that build
the mitochondrial components.
Because there are also ribosomes
inside the mitochondrial matrix,
Ribosome
some protein synthesis also occurs
within the inner membrane. In most.
cells the genes of the nucleus contain
two sets of DNA, one each from the
male and female parent. However,
mitochondrial genes are inherited
only from the female parent. This is
because the head of the sperm (the
only part that penetrates and fertil-
izes the ovum) normally lacks most.
organelles, such as mitochondria,
ribosomes, endoplasmic reticulum,
and Golgi complexes.
FGURE 3.8: Mitochondria.
Editorial
26
Chapter 3
initiation site for the assembly of the
of cells that are mobile or cells that.
microtubules. They grow outward from
have the ability to contract, such as
 the centrosome toward the periphery
muscle cells. A cross-linked network of
of the cell. The microtubules aid in
 microflaments braces and strengthens
intracellular transport of organelles,
the internal face of the plasma mem-
such as secretory vesicles, and form the
brane.
spindle for the migration of chromo-
somes during cell division. They also
 5. inclusions (inclusion bodies): Within the
act in the process of transporting mol-
 cytoplasm, various other substances and
ecules down the length of an elongated
structures exist; these are stored foods (gly-
cell, such as a neuron, and they help
cogen granules and lipid droplets), pigment.
 determine and maintain cell shape by
granules, crystals of various types, water
 providing rigidity to the cytosol. The
vacuoles, and ingested foreign materials.
intermediate filaments, another com-
 These are not active parts of the machinery
 ponent of the cell's internal scaffold-
 of the cell; rather, they are passive masses
ing, are stable proteinaceous flaments
and are therefore referred to as inclusions.
that act as internal guy wires to resist.
6. cilia and flagella: Cilia and flagella are
mechanical (pulling) forces that act.
 on the cells. Yet another component,
motile, cell-surface projections composed 
microfilarments, are ribbon or cordlike
of a 9 + 2 array of microtubule doublets
elements within a cell formed from
(nine in a circle with two in the center)
contractile proteins. Because they have
(Figure 3.10). Cilia are short and move
the ability to shorten and lengthen (by
fluids and debris over a cell's surface,
whereas flagella are long and can propel
relaxation), they are critical elements
the entire cell.
Cilium or
 flagellum
 Plasma 
/ membrane
Microtubules
(Triplets)
Doublet
Central pair of
microtubules
microtubules
Centrioles
Basal body
Pericentriolar
area
FIGURE 3.9: Centrosome.
FIGURE 3.10: Cilia and flagella.
Editorialrevie
Cellular Anatomy and Morphology 
27
EXERCISE 3.1
IDENTIFICATION OF THE PARTS OF THE CELL
Using a modef of a ceff pfus Figures 3. 1 through 3. 10, focate the folfowing parts of a ceffl:
1. plasma membrane
2. nucleus
3. nuclear membrane
4. nuclear pores
5. nucleolus
6. chromatin
7. cytoplasm
8. cytoskeletal elements
9.ribosomes
10. rough endoplasmic reticulum
11. smooth endoplasmic reticulum
12. Golgi complex
13. lysosome
14. peroxisome
15. mitochondria
16. cristae
17. centrosome/centrioles
18. cilia
19. flagella
20. inclusion body
EXERCISE 3.2
 IDENTIFICATION OF CELL PARTS USING A LIGHT MICROSCOPE
Follow the steps to complete the folfowing procedure:
1. First, examine the giant multipolar neuron smear slide using the 10X objective lens on your light.
 microscope. Locate a dark-blue, large motor neuron. Center the neuron in the feld of view and
change to the 40X objective.
 Note that various parts of the slide take on different colors. We use various stains to help identify
 different cells or different parts of a cell according to color. A common stain is the hematoxylin and
eosin combination stain. The hematoxylin tends to stain acidic portions of the cell dark blue or pur-
ple. These parts of the cell are called basophilic because they like or bond with basic stains. Because
acid and base chemicals tend to bond together, cell parts high in RNA and DNA, such as the nucleus
and nucleoli, attract basic stains and stain dark blue or purple. Using the same reasoning, eosin tends
e siare r p ae sed ps as ar r d an an o sd i s o
include the more basic proteins within the cell, which are located within the cytoplasm. Other stains
   a  s  si e s e  ae        a
on your microscope.
28
Chapter 3
Note that at the cell boundary there is a distinct separation between the blue and the pink back-
 ground. This, of course, is where the plasma membrane is located, but the details of this membrane
are not. visible using the light microscope. There are multiple cytoplasmic extensions, called cell
 processes, branching off the neuron's cell body. It is for this reason it is called a multipolar neuron.
Some of these processes were cut off during the sectioning of the tissue. Each cell, if sliced perfectly
down the middle, would have visible one very long process, called an axon, and numerous shorter
ones, called dendrites. At the center of the cell body is where the mucleus is located. Because the
 stain used for this slide stains the RNA darker, the nucleus (with mostly DNA) has a halo appear-
ance around the RNA-rich nucleolus. Therefore, the dark dot in the center of the nucleus is the
nucleolus. The nuclear membrane is either not visible or barely visible (Figure 3.11).
 Dendrite
 Dendrite
 Nucleolus
0
Nucleus
Axon
 Nuclear 
membrane
Dendrite
Dendrite
Nucleolus
Nerve cell
body
Axon
Axon
Axon
Nerve cell
hillock
hillock
body
A
B
FIGURE 3.11 A and B: llustration and photomicrograph of nerve cell body with processess.
In the space below, draw and label the parts of the neuron.
Think of the boundary of the circle below as the boundary of the microscope's field of view.
Editorialrevie
Cellular Anatomy and Morphology 
 2. Next, take out. the slide labeled Golgi complex. In the space below, draw and label the Golgi complex
and any other part. of the cell that. is visible.
linical Significance
There are numerous diseases specifically attributed to faulty cellular structure and function. Glycogen
storage disease is a congenital absence of lysosomes, which permits accumulation of glycogen in cells.
Vitamin A intoxication occurs when lysosomal enzymes are released to the exterior of cells, resulting in
production of a defective protein that fails to reach the plasma membrane. Because of its absence, the
plasma membrane is unabie to excrete chloride ions from the cell. This resuits in a thick mucus buiioup
 Outside the cells. In the lungs this causes difficulty in breathing, and elsewhere it resulits in improper secre-
tion of pancreatic enzymes for digestion.
SUMMARY
Because all pathological processes are ultimately the reflection of cellular dysfunction, under
standing the inner workings of the cell is crucial to understanding how and why cells and
tissues break down and cause disease. To understand pathology, it is first necessary to
understand normal physiology. Hence, we study the structure and function of the cell and
its organelles. This chapter began by explaining the structure of the cell's plasma membrane;
then it discussed the nucleus and its internal structures. Finally, it addressed the structure and
function of each individual organelle.
Editorial
30
Chapter 3
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is the difference between an organelle and an inclusion body?
 2. What is responsible for the plasma membrane's antigenicity?
3. Name the two basic ways molecules move through the plasma membrane.
4. What structures control the movement of substance between the nucleus and the
cytoplasm?
5. Where are the ribosomes assembled in the cell?
 7. What makes smooth endoplasmic reticulum so functionally diverse even though it lacks
ribosomes?
8. What are the dilated ends of the sacs of the Golgi complex called?
 9. What ion is actively transported into a lysosome, and why is this transport needed?
 10. In what two organs are peroxisomes found in abundance, and why?
11. What molecule does the mitochondria produce in abundance?
12. Why is the DNA in the mitochondria different from the DNA of the nucleus?
13. Where is the mitochondrial DNA located in this organelle?
14. What is the difference between a centrosome and a centriole?
15. Name the three cytoskeletal elements.
16. Which of the three cytoskeletal elements contains contractile proteins?
 e  i n e  s       
18. What is the meaning of a 9 + 2 array of microtubules of cilia and flagella?
19. What is the chemical composition of the microtubules?
20. Why is the nucleolus so rich in RNA?
Editorial
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
OF HISTOLOGY
OBJECTIVES
 define and understand the principles of histology
understand the methodology of preparing a histological section
 identify common artifacts occurring in histological sections
understand how to section and prepare a piece of tissue for fixation so it can be sent to a laboratory for
histopathological examination
MATERIALS
a three-dimensional model of a glomerulus and Bowman's capsule
 one apple and one lemon
INTRODUCTION
Histology is the study of tissues; more specifically, it is the study of the microscopic anatomy
of tissues. Thus, it complements the study of gross anatomy and provides the structural basis
 pue aunioniis 1eljwis jo aie jeui slleo jo dnoub e s! anss!l y AboloisAyd uebio jo Apnis aui 1oj
are united in the performance of a particular function. Tissues are organized into organs, such
as the intestines, heart, lungs, and kidneys. Most organs contain numerous types of tissues,
and the arrangement of the tissues determines the organ's structure and function.
31
Editorialr
32
Chapt er 4 
Preparation of Histological Sections
a resinous mounting medium. Finally, a cover slip is
placed on top.
Histological sections are very thin, usually from
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains were men-
0.5 to 10 micrometers (μm), or microns, thick. The
tioned in the previous chapter. The hematoxylin por-
tissue must be preserved to prevent autolysis. This
tion is the basic part of the stain; it. stains basophilic
can be done by fixing the tissue in a preservative or
(base-liking) areas of a tissue sample blue or purple.
by freezing it. Frozen tissues can be cut and observed
Also mentioned in Chapter 3 was that acid and base
 immediately, but. for a more permanent. preparation,
chemicals bond together. Thus acid molecules, like
the tissue must be infltrated with a supporting
 RNA and DNA, are basophilic, bind with hematoxy.
medium, cut into sections, and then mounted on
lin and stain blue or purple. The eosin portion is the
a slide. Tissues infiltrated with plastic can be as
acidic part of the stain; it stains acidophilic (acid-
thin as 0.5 μm and show superior detail. Paraffin
liking) areas red. Cytoplasm contains a number of
also can be used as the supporting medium and
 basic molecules and is thus acidophilic binding with
produces excellent preparations sectioned as thin as
the eosin and stains this area of the cell reddish in
2 or 3 μm. Slides are stained after mounting to
color. Other stain that are basic stains and act simi-
increase visibility and to differentiate between the
larly to hematoxylin are methylene blue, toluidine
various cellular and intracellular components.
blue, and basic fuchsin. Other acid stains similar to
Figure 4.1 outlines the stepsinvolved in producing
the eosin stain are orange G, phloxine, and aniline
 a stained histological slide via the paraffn proce-
blue. Other widely used stain combinations are useful
dure. This same process may be used to produce
for identifying certain elements of tissues. Trichrome
a histological section of normal tissue for study or a
procedures, such as Mallory trichrome stain, specifi-
histopathological section of diseased tissue for analy-
cally stain the collagen fbers of connective tissue.
sis and diagnosis. The study of the pathology of tis-
Orcein and Weigert's resorcin fuchsin are stains that.
 sues at. the microscopic level is called histopathology.
color elastic fibers. Some silver stains enable viewing
Tissue sections are obtained from animals, usul-
 of reticular fibers and nervous tissue components,
ally during a surgical procedure or during a
such as neurons, myelin, and cells of the neuro-
post-mortem examination or necropsy procedure.
glia. Finally, stains such as Wright's and Giemsa's
The pieces of tissue are placed into a fixative, such
(Romanovsky stains) are used for differentiating the
as buffered formalin or Bouin's fxative. These solu-
various cells found in blood and bone marrow.
tions preserve the normal morphology and facili-
tate further processing. To remove the water from
Interpretation of Histological Sections
the cells, after fixation the specimen is transferred
through a series of alcohols with successive increases
It is necessary to have an idea of the structure of the
 in concentration up to 100%. Then, the alcohol
 organ sectioned to comprehend the microscopic
is removed by placing the specimen in xylene or a
anatomy of the specimen under the microscope.
xylene substitute; this process is called clearing. It is
First, you need to know or learn what type of organ
necessary because paraffn and alcohol do not mix.
it is, its shape, whether it is solid or has a hollow
interior, and how the cut was made through the
bath heated to just above the melting point of the 
 organ to produce the sample. It is helpful to know
paraffin. Through this process of infiltration, the
whether it. was a cross section (x.s.), a longitudinal
paraffin completely replaces the xylene. The sample
section (l.s.), or an oblique slice through the organ.
is then transferred to an embedded mold of fresh
Also, knowing if the section shows the entire organ
paraffin, which is allowed to harden. The mold is
 or just a piece of it is beneficial.
 removed and the excess paraffin is cut away.
 Most prepared slides are labeled to indicate the par
A special instrument called a microtome is used
ticular orientation of the section. This is very impor
to make thin slices of tissue. The paraffin is attached
tant when considering symmetrical organs or those
to the microtome adjacent. to the microtome knife
with a hollow core, such as the urinary bladder or a
blade, and with each revolution of the instrument's
section of small intestine. These organs have radial
handle, a slice of tissue of a desired thickness is made.
symmetry and their appearance is affected by the
Because the paraffin tendsto stick to itself, aribbon of
direction of the cut. On the other hand, the appear
tissue sections is produced. The sections are floated
ance of an asymmetrical organ, such as the liver or
in a warm water bath, which softens the paraffin
spleen, is unaffected by the direction of the cut.
and flattens the section, eliminating wrinkles. Once
It is also important to know where the section
flattened, the desired section is placed on a slide
of tissue was taken in organs that have dramatically
and allowed to dry. Next, the paraffin is removed
different areas of tissue. The kidney's cortex, for
with xylene or another solvent, and the specimen is
example, is the area where the glomeruli, Bowman's
rehydrated. It is then stained, dehydrated, cleared
capsule, and the convoluted tubules of the nephron
(made transparent) with xylene, and covered with
are located; a sample section from the outer part
General Principles of Histology 
33
1. Remove organ
4. Sections with microtome
sample
 5. Straighten sections
in waterbath
2. Cut small pieces 
Fix
6. Transfer sections to slide
 3. Prepare specimens 
+
for sectioning
7. Dry on warmer
@ -0-=
Dehydrate
←
Clear
←
Embed
8. Stain
Mold with
Paraffin block
Trimmed
 specimen in
removed from
block
melted paraffin
mold 
9. Apply coverslip
FIGURE 4.1: Steps in producing a histology slide.
Editorial
34
Chapter 4
of the kidney would include the cortex but not the
and arrangement. Because cells themselves are
medulla.
three-dimensional and vary in size and shape, the
Therefore, it is necessary to consider the
way they appear on a slide is dependent on their
three-dimensional structure of organs and their
shape as well as how they were cut. Figures 4.2 and
 components when examining histological prepa-
4.3 show a variety of organs, the ways they might be
rations. This enables viewers to understand the
sectioned, and the ways the cells and tissues taken
 appearance of the cells in terms of their size, shape,
from them might appear.
FGURE 4.2: Appearance of cells and tissue when sliced.
Copyright 2010 Ceng
Editorial
General Principles of Histology 
35
EXERCISE 4.1
DEMONSTRATION OF SECTIONING METHODS
oo si adde u suno pe sanss norn ae si aznsa noa diaq n uoa no ade re lus
'uaio mooq e jo [pou e se poos si uowa[ e seaiaum 'ueaio pos e jo [apou e se 
 In steps l-4, an apple is cut in such a way as to demonstrate both the frontal and transverse s
sectlons
of an organ. In steps 5 and 6, a lemon is used to illustrate a longitudinal cut.
Imagine the flesh of the apple as the exterior portion of an organ (the cortex), and the apple's core
(the medulla) as the vascular center of the organ. Use the top of the apple, where the stem is located,
as the front. surface of the organ, and the bottom of the apple as the rear surface. We will consider the
Copyright 2010 Cengage Lea
Editorial
36
Chapter 4
front-to-rear dimension of the apple to be the longitudinal axis of the organ. Mark the top, or superior,
surface of the apple with a permanent marker or felt-tipped pen, and do the same to indicate the inferior
surface of the organ. As you perform the following cuts, notice how different slices through the apple look
when the cut surface is viewed.
1. Mid-frontal cross section: Cut the apple in the middle, midway between the stem end and the bottom
end, dividing it equally, front and back. Both the cortex (outer pulp) and the medulla (core) are visible
in our simulated organ (Figure 4.4).
the frst cut and parallel to it. This section shows mostly cortex; only part of the medulla is visible when
viewing the cut. surfaces of the two pieces (see Figure 4.4).
 3. Mid-transverse cross section: A transverse plane divides an organ into superior and inferior parts. Using
the front half of the apple, make a cut halfway between the top and bottom, dividing the apple equally.
 This cut should go through the stem of the apple. Both the cortex and medulla of our organ can be seen
in this section.
 4. Para-transverse cross section: Make another cut parallel to the previous cut, halfway toward the bottom
of the apple. This section only engages the cortex.
 5. Mid-sagittal longitudinal section: Take the lemon and cut it lengthwise, dividing it into left and right
halves (starting at the stem end and cutting toward the bottom). The fruit of the lemon represents the
cortex of an organ, and the white fbrous middle area the medulla. This cut is down the lemon's longi-
tudinal, or long, axis (Figure 4.5).
6. Para-sagittal longitudinal section: Take one half of the lemon and make a cut parallel to the frst. cut.
This section shows mostly cortex and no medulla
7. Take the remaining half of the lemon and remove the fruit, leaving only the skin. It now has the appear-
ance of a hollow organ, such as the urinary bladder. You could even imagine that the pointed end of
the lemon is the start of the urethra, and that the skin of the lemon represents the layers of cells lining
the bladder's cavity. The yellow exterior of the lemon would be the serosal surface, that is, the part of
the visceral peritoneum that gives the bladder surface its moist, shiny appearance inside the abdominal
cavity of an animal (see Figure 4.5).
FIGURE 4.4: Cross-sectioning using an apple.
FIGURE 4.5: Longitudinal or sagittal sectioning using a lemon.
General Principles of Histology
37
EXERCISE 4.2
LONGITUDINAL SECTION OF BOWMAN'S
CAPSULE USING A PLASTIC MODEL
1.
 Examine the plastic model of Bowman's capsule surrounding the glomerulus of the nephron of the
kidney. The simulated cut is a longitudinal section. Note that you are able to see the shape and rela-
tive sizes of the bisected cells that form this capsule when the model is viewed sagittally (Figure 4.6).
These cells are called simple squamous epithelial cells. Note that. they are only a single layer thick.
Macula densa ,
 Afferent arteriole
 Ascending limb of
> Juxtaglomerular cells
loop of Henle 
 Parietal layer of glomerular
(Bowman's) capsule (simple
squamous epithelial cells)
Efferent arteriole
Visceral layer of glomerular
capsule (simple squamous 
 epithelial cells with podocytes)
Capsular space
Endothelium of glomerulus
 Proximal convoluted
tubule
Glomerulus
FIGURE 4.6: The internal appearance of the renal corpuscle viewed through a microscope.
2. If you were to look at Bowman's capsule from the exterior surface rather than from the cut surface
(Figure 4.7), it would appear as a mosaic of cells in the shape of a ball, similar to a soccer ball. From the
exterior, we could not tell whether Bowman's capsule was hollow or how many layers of cells were pres-
ent. unless it were transparent.
Afferent
arteriole
External
Efferent
surface of
arteriole 
Bowman's
capsule
FIGURE 4.7: External view of the renal corpuscle.
Editorial
38
Chapter 4
Cross-Sectional Appearance of a Sheet
Bowman's capsule, you do not know how many lay-
of Cells
ers are present based on this superficial view. Think
of standing on a tile floor in a room. Looking at.
 Sometimes cells are arranged in sheets (epithelial
the tile, you cannot tell whether there is only one
cells are the best example of this) and appear as flat.
layer present. or if the builders layered the tile on
cells, as seen in Figure 4.8. As with the exterior of
top of a previous floor. To determine whether you
are observing one or many layers, a cross-section or
longitudinal section is necessary. In Figure 4.8, the
dark dots are the nuclei of the cells, the light purple
areas are the cytoplasm, and the borders are the cell
membranes. Note that each cell is equal in size.
Cross-section #l: This cross-section of a sheet. of
cells bisects each cell and its nucleus. Each cell is
of equal size and the nuclei can be observed to be
centered in each cell.
Cross-section #2: This cross-section does not
bisect the cells or nuclei equally; therefore, the
Cross-sections
cells no longer appear to be equal in size, and
some cells do not appear to have nuclei. The situa-
tion in cross-section #l rarely, if ever, occurs when
observing sectioned tissue under the microscope.
FGURE 4.8: Flat surface of squamous cells and 
Cross-section #2 is what an observer is likely to see
 their cross-sectional appearance.
 in real-life cellular histology.
Tinical Significance
Ofen, veterinarians want to look at tissues of tumors or other sites of pathology before sending the speci-
mens to the laboratory for histopathological analysis. One method of doing this is to make an impression
is then blotted dry on a clean paper towel and touched lightty several times in a row on a single glass
slide. It is then ready for staining.
An alternative method is to use a scaipel blade to scrape a freshly cut surface of the extracted tissue
so that an accumulation of cells collects on the blade surface. The tissue on the blade is then smeared
along approximately 3/4 of the surface of a glass slide (leaving room for the slide to be labeled).
Another technique for viewing abnormal tissue of an animal's body is a fine needle aspirate. A 25- or
 22-gauge needle is introduced into the mass, and negative pressure is applied to a syringe attached to the
the needle is removed from the syringe, and the syringe is filled with air and reattached. The celular con.
tents of the needle are then blown onto a clean glass slide. A squash-prep procedure is used to spread the
leaving a smear of cells and tissue fluid on both slides.
Editorialrevie
General Principles of Histology
39
SUMMARY
During surgery a veterinarian cannot stop to prepare a specimen for viewing or shipment, and
then go back to finish the surgical procedure. This is one reason why educated veterinary
technicians are so valuable in a veterinary hospital; they know how to do these procedural
tasks. In this chapter you have learmed what various sectioning techniques may look like
when viewed with a microscope.
BEVIEW OUESTLONS
1. Define histology.
2. Define histopathology.
3. What is the purpose of “fixation"?
4. What is the name of the instrument that cuts thin slices of tissue?
 5. True or False: Basic stains are acidophilic, and thus are attracted to DNA and RNA.
6. In a hematoxylin and eosin stain, the eosin stains tissue what color?
7.What do x.s. and l.s. mean on a slide label?
8. Which plane divides an organ into left and right halves?
9.
 Which are you more likely to see on a histology slide: cells of equal size or cells that vary
somewhat in size? Explain why.
10.
 Name three methods of making slides of tissues prior to sending the entire specimen
to a lab.
Editorialr
CHAPTER 5
MICROSCOPIC ANATOMY
OF TISSUES
OBJECTIVES
 define and describe the four types of tissues and their major subcategories
 describe the differences between simple, stratified, and pseudostratified layers of epithelial cells
identify all forms of epithelial tissue, their component cells, and other structures, from prepared slides
identify all forms of connective tissue (both connective tissue proper and special connective tissues),
their component cells, and other structures
identify the three forms of muscle tissue, their component cells, and other structures
identify a nerve cell and its component parts
 locate the various tissue types in an animal's body
MATERIALS
 compound light microscope
immersion oil
colored pencils
 prepared slides of the following types of epithelial cells: simple squamous (or use kidney section with
squamous (non-keratinized, such as tongue); stratified cuboidal; stratified columnar (or use urethra,
male); and transitional (or use lining of the urinary bladder)
three-dimensional model of a glomerulus and Bowman's capsule
 prepared slides of the following connective tissues: mesenchyme; loose irregular/areolar (or use loose
smear or subcutis of intestinal tract); dense irregular (or use dermis of skin); dense regular (or use
fibrocartilage; reticular connective tissue; blood smear; and compact bone
prepared slides of skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscle (longitudinal sections)
differential cell counter
INTRODUCTION
As stated in the previous chapter, a tissue is a group of cells of similar structure united in
'wnaunda (t) sada anss aewd noy aie aaul 'uoouny einohed e jo aouewoad au
(2) connective tissue, (3) nervous tissue, and (4) muscle. Each of these tissue types
has distinctive structures, patterms, and functions. Each type can be further divided into
subcategories, which we will cover in this chapter.
To perform specific body functions, tissues are organized into organs. The intestinal tract
absorbs nutrients through its lining cells, the heart muscle pumps blood throughout the body.
and liver cells detoxify the waste products of the body. All these are examples of the special
cellular functions that identify the nature of these organs. Because most organs contain
Editorialrevie
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues 
41
of the organ and how it functions. Only by understanding the normal cellular arrangement
of tissues are we able to recognize the abnormal when it presents itself. Also, to understand
the physiology of a particular organ, you need a mental picture and an understanding of
oi laueg e se sioe uiys aul moy aleioaidde ueo noy 'pabueie Aleinioniis s! uebio teul moy
thick and multilayered. Similarly, if you know that the lining of the respiratory system, where
the alveoli of the lungs are located, is only one cell layer thick, you can understand that this is
an easier portal for invasion.
Epithelial Tissue Histology
books, both published in the year 2000,
one author used the term apical surface,
The epithelia, or epithelial tissues, are a special
the other free surface.
group of tissues designed to cover the external sur-
 3. Supported by connective tissue: Epithelial
face and line the internal surfaces (including the
tissues are attached on the side opposite
tubules and vessels) of an animal's body. All epithe-
the free surface (the tissue side, also called
lial cells are supported by a basement membrane
the basal surface) to a basement mem-
that separates them from the underlying connective
tissues. Cells are the principle component. of epithe-
brane. The basement membrane is an
lial tissue. The intercellular substance is sparse and
amorphous material secreted by the basal
epithelial cells (basal lamina) and connec-
only consists of a very thin layer of material, located
between the cells, that helps hold them together.
tive tissue cells (reticular lamina) that lie
adjacent. to each other.
This is known as intercellular cement. Epithelial tis-
sues always have a free surface, which faces the exte-
4. Avascularity: Generally speaking, epithe-
rior of the body, the cavity of a hollow organ, the
lial cells have no blood supply; they are
lumen of a tubular organ, or the lumen of a duct or
avascular. There are no capillaries that.
vessel. All cells of epithelial tissues that. are only one
extend into the epithelium. Instead, epi-
cell layer thick line (touch) the free surface. In types
thelial cells are dependent on diffusion of
of epithelial tissues that are multilayered, most. of
nutrients from the underlying connective
the cells do not touch the free surface. Instead, only
tissue. The exception is glandular epithe-
the surface cells line the free surface. The free-sur-
lium, which is very vascular.
face cells may possess cilia, microvilli or stereocilia.
 5. Regeneration: If epithelial cells are well
The functions of the epithelium are to protect
nourished, they can easily regenerate
the body; absorb, filter, excrete, and secrete sub-
themselves. This is an important charac-
stances; and detect sensations. The cell's accessory
teristic considering where these cells are
structures also aid in their function. For example,
located and the trauma to which they are
the cilia attached to the epithelium lining the lungs
help sweep away dust and other foreign particles.
exposed.
The following are characteristics that distinguish
One method of classifying epithelial tissues is based
epithelia from other types of tissues.
on the number of layers each possesses. Simple epi-
thelium consists of a single layer of cells, whereas
1. Intercellular contacts: The cells fit closely
stratified epithelium contains two or more layers.
together, forming membranes, or sheets of
The second major method of classifying epithelia
cells, and are bound together by intercel-
is according to cell shape. Squamous cells are flat,
lular cement and specialized junctions.
thin, or scale-like. On cross section, they are usually
2. Surface cells: The membranes always
only as tall as their nucleus. Cuboidal cells are cube-
have one free surface, called the apical
like, equal in height and width. Columnar cells are
(or free) surface. (Note: Unfortunately,
column-shaped, much taller than they are wide.
in anatomy, as well as other disciplines of
These two classifications are combined to designate
medicine, it is not uncommon to fnd two
and classify most of the various types of epithelial
or three words meaning the same thing.)
tissue: simple squamous, simple cuboidal, simple
Either term is correct, and it is not uncom-
columnar, stratified squamous, stratified cuboidal,
mon to fnd two authors using different.
and stratified columnar. Note that stratified epithe
terms to mean the same thing. For exam-
 lium is named for the shape of the cells on its apical
ple, in two A&P (anatomy & physiology)
surface, rather than those on their basal surface.
Editorialrevie
42
Chapter 5
Two other types of epithelial cells are less easily
when the bladder is completely full. Therefore,
classified. Pseudostratified epithelium is actually a
 transitional epithelium appears, in the distended
form of simple columnar epithelium. All its cells
form, as though the number of cell layers it con
attach to the basement membrane, but because
tains has diminished.
the cells vary in height and some cells do not.
The epithelial cells that form glands are highly
extend to the free surface, and since their nuclei
specialized to remove compounds from the blood-
lie at different levels above the basement mem-
stream and manufacture them into new substances,
brane, it gives a false appearance of being strati-
which they then secrete. Endocrine glands lose their
fed. Pseudostratifed epithelium is usually ciliated
ducts as they develop in the fetus and secrete their
on its free surface. Transitional epithelium is a
product. into the blood or lymph directly. These
variation of stratified squamous epithelium and
glands produce hormones. Exocrine glands retain
is only found in the urinary bladder, proximal
their ducts and secrete onto an epithelial surface.
urethra, and distal ureters. When the bladder is
Exocrine glands can be found on the surface of the
not distended with urine, the cells are rounded.
body (sweat and oil glands) or internally, such as
However, when the bladder is flling, these cells
those found in the pancreas, which secrete their
have the ability to change shape and slide over one
 products through the pancreatic ducts onto the epi-
another, allowing the organ to stretch. The super-
thelial surface of the duodenum (the first part. of
fcial cells are flattened (like true squamous cells)
the small intestine).
EXERCISE 5.1
EPITHELIAL TISSUE HISTOLOGY
The procedure for this and subsequent exercises in this chapter is as follows:
 1. When viewing the recommended types of tissues, first go to low power, focus, and orient yourself
power and view the necessary cellular detail to understand the morphology of the tissue. To see
certain cells, such as blood cells, macrophages, mast cells, or plasma cells, it will be necessary to use
the oil immersion lens.
 2. For the types of tissues in these exercises, obtain the recommended slide(s) and locate all the things
you are instructed to view and that are labeled in the diagrams and photomicrographs featured as
figures throughout the chapter. Then, draw and label what you see in the space provided at the end
of each section. Items you will be instructed to find and observe will include a certain type of cell, its
nucleus and cytoplasm, the basement membrane, connective tissue fibers, and ground substance.
You should find all items labeled in the drawings. Structures to be identified are listed in colored
which may be listed in bold print or italics; they are of no less importance and therefore should also
be identified. For instance, when viewing the epithelial slides, the basement membrane is only in
colored bold under simple squamous epithelium. However, it is still important to try to find it in all 
the slides of epithelial tissue, even though it is difficult to see on certain slides.
Simple Squamous Epithelium
 SLIDEs REcoMMENDED: Slides labeled simple squamous epithelium (surface view), kidney, and/or air
sacs of lungs.
oval central muclei, and sparse cytoplasm. It is the thinnest of the epithelial tissues (Figure 5.1). Often it.
is hard to see the baserment mermbrane, but it is always present on the opposite side of the free surface.
vessels, lining of the heart, lymphatic vessels, lining the thoracic and peritoneal cavities, and on the
and the mesothelial cells are simple squamous in nature. The epithelial lining of the vascular system has
a special name: endothelium, or endothelial cells.
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues 
43
Basement
Nucleus of simple
membrane
squamous epithelial cell
X250
FlGURE 5.1: Cross section of simple squamous epithelial cells that make up the serosal surface of an
organ (i.e., the covering layer).
FuNcTion: Because it is composed of a thin, single layer of cells, simple squamous epithelium permits
 passage of materials by diffusion and filtration in sites where protection is not necessary. For example,
the mesothelial cells secrete a lubricating substance for the pleural and peritoneal cavities.
Slide: simple squamous epithelial cells (surface view]
This is a view of a sheet of epithelial cells looking both down on its surface and from the side. The
cells appear to have asymmetrical shapes (Figure 5.2). All cells may or may not appear to have nuclei,
depending on the level at which the cut was made. Making a cut so that each nucleus is visible within
the cell is easier when the nuclei are in the same location in each cell or when the cells are short rather
than tall.
Slide: kidney
There are several places to observe simple squamous epithelial cells easily. These include the kidney's
nephron (specifically Bowman's capsule) and the capillaries (Figure 5.3). In the section of kidney you
should easily find many large renal tubules. Look between these tubules and you will see a cross-sectional
cut of numerous smaller tubules formed from very thin cells. These tubules are the peritubular capillary
network of the kidneys. Each capillary is formed by two or three simple squamous epithelial cells linked
in a circle.
 In other parts of the kidney, note the rounded tufts of capillaries with a white space around them. On
the slide they may appear as islands of tissue. Each is called a glomerulus. On the perimeter of the white
space are the squamous epithelial cells that form Bowman's capsule. The cells may be so flat that they
only bulge where their nuclei are located. The white space is the inside of Bowman's capsule, where the
fluid filtered from the capillaries (called glomerular filtrate) enters the renal tubules. Also find these
cells and this space on the plastic model of the nephron.
Slide: air sacs of the lungs
The cells that form the walls of the air sacs, or alveoli of the lungs, are made of simple squamous
epithelial cells (Figure 5.4). On the slide you will note many large, white, irregularly shaped spaces.
FlGURE 5.2: Flattened epithelial cells.
Copyright 2010 Ceng
Editorialrevie
44
Chapter 5
Capillary of peritubular capillary
network (also'simple squamous epithelium)
Air sacs
Glomerulus
Kidney
Nucleus of
tubule
simple squamous
cell
epithelial cell of
 Simple squamous
Nucleus of
parietal layer of
 Bowman's capsule
 epithelial cell 
simple squamous
epithelial cell
FlGURE 5.3: Kidney epithelial tissue (Bowman's
FIGURE 5.4: Lung epithelial tissue, showing
capsule), showing simple squamous epithelium.
simple squamous epithelium.
These are the alveoli, which are lined with a thin monolayer of simple squamous epithelial cells.
Also look for small capillaries between the alveoli; these also are composed of simple squamous
epithelium.
 In the space below, using the slide that best represents simple squamous epithelial tissue, draw and
 label the parts of the tissue and cells.
Simple Squamous Epithelial Cells
Editorial
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues 
45
Simple Cuboidal Epithelium
SLIDES RECOMMENDED: simple cuboidal epithelium or kidney tissue.
spherical, centrally placed nuclei (Figure 5.5). Cytoplasm is abundant. The basement membrane, on
the opposite side of the free surface, can sometimes be observed.
LocATioN FouND: This type of tissue can be found in the kidney tubules, ducts and secretory portions
of small glands, and peripheral cells of the ovaries just deep to the serosal surface.
FuNcTion: Its function is secretion and absorption of fluid and electrolytes.
Slide: kidney or simple cuboidal epithelium
The best. examples of simple cuboidal epithelial cells (Figure 5.6) are the cells that form the tubules
of the nephron of the kidneys. In the section of kidney you should easily observe many large
tubules, some oval and some more elongated. Because these tubules are convoluted in structure
(look at the plastic model of the kidney's nephron), on a cut section some will be perfect cross sec-
tions and others will be more oblique, giving the appearance of an elongated tubule. Because these
cells are forming a tube, they are not perfectly square. Instead, they are usually a little narrower at.
the lumen of the tubule than at the basement membrane. Between the tubules are the capillaries
mentioned previously.
FlGURE 5.5: Simple cuboidal epithelial cells.
Simple cuboidal
Basement
 epithelial cell
membrane
of renal tubule
Large
Capillaries with
duct
red blood cells
within
Editorialrevie
46
Chapter 5
 In the space below, using the slide of simple cuboidal epithelial tissue, draw and label the parts of
the tissue and cells.
Simple Cuboidal Epithelial Cells
Simple Columnar Epithelium
SLIDEs REcOMMENDED: Slides labeled simple columnar epithelium or small intestine (duodenum,
jejunum, or ileum).
(Figure 5.7).The nuclei are located toward the base of the cell, rather than in the center or toward the
free surface. Cytoplasm is abundant. The basement membrane, on the opposite side of the free surface,
can sometimes be observed.
LocATIoN FoUND: Non-ciliated simple columnar epithelium lines most. of the digestive tract. (stomach
to anus), gallbladder, and the excretory ducts of some glands. Ciliated types line parts of the small ter-
tiary bronchi of the lungs, the oviducts, and the uterus.
 FuNcTion: This tissue's function is the absorption of nutrients and fluids and the secretion of mucus,
enzymes, and other substances. The ciliated types propel mucus (or reproductive cells) by ciliary
action.
FIGURE 5.7: Simple columnar epithelial cells.
Editorialrevie
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues 
47
Simple columnar 
 epithelial cells 
 Goblet cells
Basement
Simple columnar
membrane
epithelial cells
A
Striated border
Lumen
B
with goblet cells.
Slide: small intestine fjejunum) or simple columnar epithelium
The best examples of simple columnar epithelial cells are the cells that line the lumen of the intestinal
tract (Figure 5.8A). Search the slide until you find the place where the tissue section perfectly bisects 
the intestinal lining, and the cells and their nucleiform a single row, side by side. The border of the free
surface should appear as a thickened membrane; however, under oil immersion, if you look closely, you
will note that it actually appears striated because it has a brush-like surface. This is due to the presence
 of microvilli and is called a striated border. Microvilli increase the surface area and absorptive capac-
ity of the cells. As you look at the rows of columnar cells you will see oval areas between them. These
are goblet cells (Figure 5.8B), which are mucus-secreting, unicellular glands. On some slides they may
appear hollow, and on others they may contain a granular substance, which is mucus after processing.
In the space below, using the slide of simple columnar epithelial tissue, draw and label the parts of
the tissue and cells.
Simple Columnar Epithelial Cells
Editorial
48
Chapter 5
Pseudostratified Columnar Epithelium
SLIDEs REcOMMENDED: Those labeled pseudostratified columnar epithelium or trachea.
DEscRiPTioN: Pseudostratified columnar epithelium consists of a single layer of cells of varying
heights (Figure 5.9). All cells are attached to the basement membrane, which is sometimes vis-
ible. Not all cells, however, reach the free surface. The nuclei may be seen at different levels, and
some even appear to be stacked on top of one another. This gives the appearance that this tissue is
stratified, but it is not—hence the name pseudostratified. Most. of the cytoplasm is seen just below
the free surface and above the nuclei. Goblet cells also are seen interspersed between these cells.
Cilia are present on the free surface; therefore, this tissue is also called pseudostratified ciliated
columnar epithelium.
LoCATioN FouND: The ciliated type of pseudostratified columnar epithelium lines the trachea and con-
tinues down the respiratory tract to the first part of the tertiary bronchi. The non-ciliated type is found
in the male's sperm-carrying ducts and the ducts of large glands.
FUNcTion: This tissue is active in secretion, particularly of mucus, and in propulsion of debris out of the
respiratory system via ciliary action.
 Slide: trachea or pseudostratified columnar epithelium
Note that some prepared slides labeled ciliated columnar epithelium are, in fact, pseudostratifed
ciliated columnar epithelium. Find the free surface of the section of trachea (Figure 5.10). This is
best done by fnding the cells with the small, hair-like cilia on the surface. The epithelial cells lining
the respiratory (such as these from the trachea), digestive, and reproductive tracts are also known as
 Ciliated pseudostratified 
epithelial cell
Cilia
Basal
Basement membrane
cell
(approximate position)
FlGURE 5.10: Pseudostratified ciliated columnar
epithelial tissue from the trachea (not a perfect
FIGURE 5.9:
Pseudostratified ciliated  simple
cross section, not unusual, so there appears to be
 columnar epithelial cells.
more than one layer).
Editorialrevie
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues 
49
mucosal cells. Mucosal cells line mucous membranes. Note the numerous goblet cells present. On some
slides you may note that the goblet cells are releasing some of the mucus from inside the cell onto the
free surface.
 In the space below, using the slide of pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelial tissue, draw and
label the parts of the tissue and cells.
Pseudostratified Ciliated Columnar Epithelial Cells
Stratified Squamous Epithelium
SLIDEs REcoMMENDED: Those labeled stratified squamous, esophagus, or tongue.
DEscRIPTioN: Stratified squamous epithelium is a thick epithelial surface composed of multiple cell lay-
ers (Figure 5.11). It is named for the appearance of the cells on the surface, which are squamous. Only
the basal cells are attached to the basement membrane. The basal cells are cuboidal, or even columnar,
and they are metabolically active. Mitosis occurs in the first few layers above the basement membrane
and produces the cells to replace the cells of the more superficial layers as they die and slough off. The
nuclei are easily seen in the lower layers of cells, but they tend to become smaller and disappear as they
move toward the free surface where the cells are squamous.
of the mouth, esophagus, part of the stomach, the rumen, reticulum, omasum, and vagina. The kerati-
nized type forms the epidermis of the skin.
FuNcTioN: This tissue protects underlying tissues in areas subjected to abrasion.
Slide: tongue, esophagus, or stratified squamous epithelium
Locate the free surface of the tissue, where the cells appear more flattened or squamous in appear-
 e  s sos s a  a  s  t'g  
cell layers go all the way to the free surface, where moisture is present. If it were keratinized, there
would be two acellular layers of dry, cornified tissue, as is found in the epidermis of the skin. Consid-
ering the foods that contact the surface of these tissues, it is easy to understand why a thick, protec-
tive, mucosal surface is needed. The surface of the body also requires a thick layer of cells that are
capable of regeneration to protect the body from dehydration, cellular desiccation, and the ubiqui-
tous microorganisms of the external world. This is why the epidermis of the skin has extra layers of
cornified tissue for protection. We will study the histology of keratinized stratifed squamous epithe-
lium in Chapter 6.
Editorial
50
Chapter 5
 Stratified squamous
epithelial cells
Lumen 
Basement
Basal
membrane
layer
FIGURE 5.11:
 Stratified squamous  epithelial 
FIGURE 5.12: Stratified squamous epithelial tis-
cells.
sue from mucous membranes in the oral cavity.
 In the space below, using the slide of stratified squamous epithelial tissue, draw and label the parts
of the tissue and cells.
Stratified Squamous Epithelial Cells
Stratified Cuboidal Epithelium
SLIDEs REcoMMENDED: Those labeled stratified cuboidal, salivary glands, or esophagus.
DEscRIPTioN: Generally two layers of cuboidal cells form a stratified cuboidal epithelium (Figure 5.13)
Editorial
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues 
51
Lumen of duct
 Basement membrane
Bistratified cuboidal
epithelial cells
FIGURE 5.13:
Stratified   cuboidal
FIGURE 5.14: Stratified cuboidal epithelial tissue from
epithelial cells.
the ducts of sudoriporous glands.
-es pue 'spuela Are 'spue yeams jo sinp isare au u pmoy si ansshn si annon noiao
vary glands, and in the glands found in the esophagus.
 FuNcTioN: Their purpose is protection and the transportation of fluid.
Slide: salivary glands, esophagus, or stratified cuboidal epithelium
Search for ducts containing two layers of cuboidal cells (Figure 5.14) . They will have a relatively large
elliptical lumen surrounded by the bilayered, cube-shaped cells.
In the space below, using the slide of stratifed cuboidal epithelial tissue, draw and label the parts of
the tissue and cell.
Stratified Cuboidal Epithelial Cells
Stratified Columnar Epithelium
SLIDES REcOMMENDED: Those labeled stratified columnar or urethra.
DEscRipTioN: Stratified columnar epithelium appears to resemble both stratified columnar and
stratified cuboidal cells. The surface cells are columnar, but the basal cells and intermediate cells are
more cuboidal (Figure 5.15).
Editorialrevie
52
Chapter 5
Lumen
Stratified
columnar
epithelium
Basement
membrane
Basal
layers
FIGURE 5.15:
Stratified
FIGURE 5.16: Stratified columnar epithelial tissue from the
 columnar epithelial cells.
duct of a gland.
LocATIoN FouNn: This tissue is found in areas of the urethra of male animals and in large ducts of some
glands.
 FuNcTion: It functions in protection, secretion, and transporting fluid.
Slide: urethra or stratified columnar epithelium
On the free surface, look for a multilayered mucosal epithelium of tall columnar cells with numerous
layers of cuboidal-shaped cells beneath it, deep to the basement membrane (Figure 5.16). The muclei
of the superfcial columnar cells are at the same level in each cell, and they are centrally located. The
 deeper nuclei and their cells appear more random in their distribution.
 In the space below, using the slide of stratified columnar epithelial tissue, draw and label the parts 
of the tissue and cells.
Stratified Columnar Epithelial Cells
Editorial
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues
53
Transitional Epithelium
SLIDEs REcOMMENDED: Those labeled transitional epithelium or urinary bladder.
DEscRiPTioN: Transitional epithelium resembles both stratifed cuboidal epithelium (when
unstretched) and stratifed squamous epithelium (when stretched) (Figure 5.17). The basal cells
are cuboidal or slightly rounded. Remember, as stated previously, these cells have the ability to slide
across each other and flatten out to become squamous-like when the bladder flls with urine and the
wall stretches.
LoCATIoN FoUND: Transitional epithelium is found in the urinary bladder, and it lines the ureters and
part of the urethra.
 FuNcTioN: It participates in the storage of urine by readily permitting distention of the urinary bladder,
 and it supports the transporting of urine to the bladder through the ureters and out of the body via the
urethra.
Slide: urinary bladder or transitional epithelium
Find the surface cells that are dome-like, with centrally placed muclei (in the unstretched urinary
bladder, which is probably what your slide shows) (Figure 5.18). In contrast, find the smaller basal cells
and the basement membrane to which they are attached.
FGURE 5.17: Transitional epithelial cells.
 Transitional epithelium
Basement membrane
FlGURE 5.18: Transitional epithelial tissue, unstretched, from the urinary bladder
Editorialrevie
54
Chapter 5
 In the space below, using the slide of transitional epithelial tissue, draw it and label the parts of the
tissue and cells.
Transitional Epithelial Cells
EXERCISE 5.2
CONNECTIVE TISSUE HISTOLOGY
Connective tissue is found everywhere in the animal's body. It binds tissues together, supports other
types of tissues, and, in the case of blood, transports nutrients and oxygen. All connective tissues have
three common characteristics: (1) they contain cells, which are their living component; (2) they contain
fibers, which are produced by the cells; and (3) they contain a ground substance, which is composed
largely of glycoproteins and glycosaminoglycans. In connective tissue, the latter two components com-
pose the extracellular matrix, which predominates over the cellular elements. The ground substance
nective tissue. It varies in composition depending on the type of connective tissue, but generally it acts
as a reservoir for interstitial fluid, providing a medium through which nutrients, oxygen, and metabolic
by-products diffuse to and from cells between the connective tissue and the vascular system.
Connective tissue can be divided into three major types: embryonal, proper, and special connective
tissues. Mesenchyme and mucous connective tissue are classified as embryonal connective tissue. Con-
nective tissue proper (also known as proper connective tissue) includes the general types of connective
tissue: loose and dense; regular and irregular; and reticular, elastic, and adipose. Special connective
tissue includes tissues such as blood, cartilage, and bone.
There are three types of fibers found in connective tissue proper: (1) collagenous, (2) reticular,
and (3) elastic. Collagenous fibers are composed of the protein collagen (which is actually the protein
tropocollagen, which polymerizes to become collagen). Collagen is composed of strong, flexible fibers,
which may be fine or coarse. They are characteristically unbranched and somewhat. wavy, and they resist
of collagen; they are delicate, branching fbers possessing a coat of glycoproteins and proteoglycans.
Silver-containing stains are used to differentiate these fibers from other fibers in connective tissue. Elas-
tic fibers are formed from the protein elastin. They are typically fine fibers in areolar connective tissue,
but in other places they can be coarse. They sometimes stain darker pink with H&E stains, or other
special staining techniques also can be used to distinguish these fibers.
Editorialrevie
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues 
55
 Fibroblasts are the most numerous type of cells found in connective tissue proper. They are respon-
sible for producing the fibers and the ground substance.
Embryonal Connective Tissue, or Mesenchyme
SLIDEs REcoMMENDED: Those labeled either mesenchyme or embryonal connective tissue.
tissue (Figure 5.19 and 5.20). It has a sofft, gel-like ground substance containing fibers and stellate (star-
shaped) mesenchymal cells.
LoCATION FoUND: These cells are found primarily in the embryo.
FuNcTion: Serves as a precursor to all other connective tissue types.
Slide: mesenchyme or embryonal connective tissue
Note the many stellate mesenchymal cells with small nuclei located within (Figure 5.20). The clear
background between the cells and fibers is the fluid-like ground substance. Also notice how fine and
sparse the fibers are in this slide.
Embryonal
connective
tissue or
mesenchyme
FlGURE 5.19: An embryo, showing where embryonal connective tissue is located.
Mesenchymal
cell
Amorphous
 ground substance
FIGURE 5.20: Embryonal mesenchymal tissue from a mammal.
Editorialrevie
56
Chapter 5
 and tissue parts.
Embryonal Connective Tissue
Areolar or Loose Connective Tissue
SLIDES REcOMMENDED: Those labeled areolar connective tissue.
types of fbers (collagenous, elastic, and reticular fibers) are present (Figure 5.21). There are many types
of cells present, scattered about within the matrix. The majority of cells are fibroblasts, although mac-
rophages (also known as histiocytes or tissue monocytes, which are white blood cells that have moved
out of the bloodstream and into tissue), plasma cells (a type of tissue lymphocyte), and mast cells (cells
that develop in the bone marrow in separate cell lines from white blood cells) can also be found. Other
white blood cells, which include tissue eosinophils, neutrophils, basophils, and lymphocytes, can occa-
sionally be seen, but they are in an unchanged state from what can be observed in blood.
 LoCATIoN FouND: Areolar connective tissue is found under the mucosal epithelium in most places
of the body. It forms the lamina propria of mucous membranes, is found in the papillary layer of the
dermis of the skin, is the connective tissue that attaches the epithelial cells of the serosa to organs, and
surrounds capillaries.
Reticular fiber.
Mast cell-
Elastic fiber.
Macrophage
Nucleus
Nerve fiber.
Lymphocyte -
Collagen
fiber
 Fibroblast -
Capillary
Plasma cell-
Fat cell
 Neutrophil-
Ground
substance
FlGURE 5.21: Areolar, or loose, connective tissue.
Editorialrevie
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues 
57
 Possible plasma cell
 Collagen fiber
Reticular fiber
Fibroblast
Elasticfiber
 Mast cells
A
B
FIGURE 5.22: A. Areolar, or loose, connective tissue. B. Mast cells in areolar connective tissue (the dark
 granular cells).
tissue fluids, and its immune cells help fight off infection by phagocytizing bacteria and other cells.
Slide: areoiar connective tissue
Scan the slide and look for an area that contains the fibrous and cellular features found in this tissue:
a fibroblast, which has visible cytoplasm and is fusiform in shape (is spindle shaped); thick collagen
fbers; thin elastic fibers; hair-like reticular fibers; and, if you can find them, a mast cell a rmacrophage;
and a plasma cell (Figure 5.22A). Under H&E stain, the mast cell has many red granules, is irregularly
shaped, and has a dark blue, round nucleus. Orcein or toluidine blue stains the mast cell's granules
 purple and the nucleus blue (Figure 5.22B). The macrophage will be pinkish and elliptical to fusiform,
 trically placed nucleus in which the stained chromatin appears almost spoke-like.
 In the space below, using the slide of areolar connective tissue, draw and label the cells, fibers, and
tissue parts.
Areolar, or Loose, Connective Tissue
Editorialrevie
58
Chapter 5
Dense Irregular Connective Tissue
SLIDES RECOMMENDED: Those labeled skin.
DEscRiPT1on: Fibers predominate in dense irregular connective tissue. There are primarily irregularly
arranged cords of collagen fibers, with some elastic fibers interspersed (Figure 5.23). The major cell
type is the fibroblast.
LoCATIoN FouND: This tissue makes up the dermis of the skin, the submucosa of the digestive tract, the
FuNcrion: It supports the epidermis and provides the bulk of the strength for the skin, supports the
joints, and provides strength and protection for bones and joints.
Slide: skin
Find the purple stained epidermal cells (which are stratified squamous epithelium); deep to these epi-
thelial cells is where the dense irregular connective tissue is found (Figure 5.24). Note the pattern of
abundant bands of thick, red collagen fibers. Note the irregular wavy pattern in which these bundles
of collagen are weaved together. Also look for elastic fibers, which will appear thin. Locate the spindle-
shaped fibroblasts.
Joint capsule
FGURE 5.23: Fibrous joint capsule (from the elbow of a dog), where dense irregular connective tissue
is located.
 Epidermis
Dermis
Collagen fibers
Nucleus of a
ofdense irregular
fbroblast
connective tissue
FlGURE 5.24: Dense irregular connective tissue located in the dermis.
Editorialrevie
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues
59
 In the space below, using the slide of dense irregular connective tissue, draw and label the cells,
fibers, and tissue parts.
Dense lrregular Connective Tissue
Dense Regular Connective Tissue
SLIDEs RECOMMENDED: Those labeled tendon or ligament.
DEscRiPTioN: Dense regular connective tissue is characterized by parallel collagen fibers. Few elastic
fibers are present, and the major cell type is the fibroblast (Figure 5.25).
LoCATIoN FouND: This tissue is found in ligaments, tendons, and aponeuroses.
FuNcTioN: Tendons attach muscle to bone; ligaments attach bone to bone to support joints; and
 lar connective tissue can withstand great tensile stress when force is applied in one direction.
Collateral
ligament
FIGURE 5.25: Ligament, where dense regular connective tissue is located.
Editorial
60
Chapter 5
Nucleus of
Collagen fibers
fibroblast
oftendon
or ligament
FIGURE 5.26: Dense regular connective tissue of a ligament.
Slide: tendon or ligament
Notice that the predominant feature of this slide is layer upon layer of parallel collagen fibers, which
stain intensely pink (Figure 5.26). The muclei of the fibroblasts are thin and elongated and found
between the fbers; note that there are not very many in this tissue. Also, very little ground substance can
 be seen in this slide. The wave-like appearance is an artifact from processing; under natural conditions
 this tissue would be very linear in appearance.
In the space below, using the slide of dense regular connective tissue, draw and label the cells, fibers,
and tissue parts.
Dense Regular Connective Tissue
Editorial
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues
61
Elastic Connective Tissue
SLIDEs REcoMMENDED: Those labeled ligamentum nuchae or mammal elastic connective tissue.
DEscRIPTioN: Elastic connective tissue is characterized by numerous regularly and irregularly arranged
elastic fibers (Figure 5.27). The major cell type is the fibroblast.
nuchal crest of the skull to the dorsal spinous processes of the thoracic vertebrae in grazing animals. It
is also found in the vocal ligaments and in the walls of arteries and veins (Figure 5.28A).
 FuNcTion: Elastic connective tissue supports the neck and head, and is responsible for phonation (the
 production of sound).
Slide: mammal elastic connective tissue
This slide shows the intensely pink-stained elastic fibers. Note that they lie parallel to each other. In
comparison to a perfect. slide of tendon or ligament, in which the collagen fbers line up almost per-
fectly parallel, elastic fibers tend to be wavier, are not as parallel, and generally contain more fibroblasts
whose nuclei lie between the elastic fibers (Figure 5.28B).
Atlas
Funicular part
Ligamentum nuchae
Lamellar part
 Expansion at withers
Last cervical 
vertebra
First thoracic
vertebra
FGURE 5.27: Ligamentum nuchae (from a horse), where elastic connective tissue is located.
Editorialrevi
62
Chapter 5
Fibroblastnucleus
Elastic fibers
ElasticArtery
Vein
A
fibers
B
FGURE 5.28: A. Elastic connective tissue in the walls of arteries and veins with a special stain to show
nuchae.
 In the space below, using the slide of elastic connective tissue, draw and label the cells, fibers, and
tissue parts.
Elastic ConnectiveTissue
Adipose Tissue
SLIDES REcOMMENDED: Those labeled adipose tissue.
DEscR1PT1oN: Adlipocytes, better known as fat cells, are predominant in adipose tissue (Figure 5.29).
The nucleus of each cell is pushed to the side by the large intracellular vacuole containing the fat.
White fat cells contain one vacuole (called monolocular), whereas brown fat contains multiple vacuoles
(plurilocular). The matrix is similar to that of areolar connective tissue but is extremely sparse.
LoCATIoN FoUND: This tissue is found under the skin (subcutaneous fat), around the kidneys, within
the omentum, in and around the mesentery of the digestive tract, around the kidneys (retroperitoneal
fat), and in the mammary tissue. It also forms the marbling of muscle tissue.
Editorialrevi
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues 
63
Epidermis
Dermis
 Subcutaneous fat
FlGURE 5.29: Subcutaneous fat, where adipose tissue is located.
Vacuole in
adipocyte
(location of 
vacuole)
Adipocyte nucleus
FlGURE 5.30: Mammal adipose tissue.
sns pue ssot req isee snemi ose i oq aui re n aois oi pasn si anss ssodi noinng s
 and protects organs.
 Slide: adipose tissue
When viewing this slide, it may be necessary to dim your light or close down the condenser some to see the
fat cells (Figure 5.30). Focus on an area of the slide where you can see clear definition of the cell walls and
where the nuclei are visible. The large empty space between the cell walls is the vacuole that contains the fat.
The nuclei are small and compressed by the large fat vacuoles of the cells.
Editorialrevie
64
Chapter 5
In the space below, using the slide of adipose tissue, draw and label the cells and tissue parts.
Adipose Tissue
Reticular Connective Tissue
SLIDEs REcOMMENDED: Those labeled reticular con nective tissue. This slide should be a special stained
slide to demonstrate these cells and fibers.
DEscRiPTioN: The fbers of reticular connective tissue form a network of fine reticular fibers, which are
 made of collagen and possess a coat. of glycoproteins and proteoglycans (Figure 5.31). The fibers lie in
a loose ground substance, and the reticular cells lie within the network.
LocATIoN FouNn: This tissue is found in the liver, kidney, and lymphoid organs such as lymph nodes,
spleen, and bone marrow.
Popliteal
lymph node
HGURE 5.3 1: Popliteal lymph node of a dog, where reticular connective tissue is located.
Copyright 2010 Cer
Editorialrevi
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues 
65
 Stroma cells of
Reticular fibers (black)
 glandular or
FIGURE 5.32: Mammal reticular tissue.
FuNcTion: The fibers of reticular connective tissue form the internal support structure, called the
stroma, which supports the cells of these organs.
Slide: reticular connective tissue
Note the intensely dark-stained reticular fibers coursing between the bundles of cells. The reticular cells
are smaller than the other cells, which also stain very dark, and they are adjacent to the fibers (Figure 5.32).
The nuclei of the cells predominate, and there is little visible cytoplasm.
In the space below, using the slide of reticular connective tissue, draw and label the cells, fibers, and
tissue parts.
Reticular Connective Tissue
Copyright 2010 Cer
Editorial
66
Chapter 5
EXERCISE 5.3
SPECIAL CONNECTIVE TISSUE
Special Connective Tissue: Cartilage
Each type meets the same requirements as previously discussed types of connective tissue. However,
the cells found in cartilage are called chondrocytes and chondroblasts (which are an earlier state
destined to become chondrocytes; they produce the ground substance). The matrix is composed of
an amorphous ground substance, which is rich in sulfated glycosaminoglycans, chondroitin sulfate,
and hyaluronic acid. This is combined with an adhesion protein called chondronectin to form large
elastin. The matrix is frm yet flexible, so it can bend when necessary yet support weight and resist.
tensile stress.
Hyaline Cartilage
SLIDEs REcOMMENDED: Those labeled hyaline cartilage or trachea.
DEscRiPTioN: The ground substance makes up the bulk of hyaline cartilage tissue, and it can be
separated into pale and darkly stained areas called the interterritorial matrix and territorial matrix,
respectively (Figure 5.33).The latter, darker-staining areas contain a higher concentration of sulfated
within the matrix. Often within a single lacuna are two newly divided cells, called an isogenous group,
found with the matrix in a cluster of chondrocytes. The cartilaginous matrix is surrounded by a
chondrogenic, containing cells with the capacity to become chondroblasts.
LocATIoN FouND: This tissue is found in the cartilages of the trachea, nose, and larynx. In addition,
it. covers the ends of the long bones in synovial joints, forms the costal cartilage of the ribs, and forms
most. of the embryonic skeleton.
FUNcTion: Hyaline cartilage composes the skeleton that supports the body of the growing fetus; forms a
smooth surface for articular joints; forms the structure of the costal ribs, nose, and larynx; and supports
the structure of the trachea.
Slide: hyaline cartilage or trachea
Find the area of the slide where the cartilage is located. If you are viewing the trachea, it is the
cros-sectional area of the tracheal rings (Figure 5.34). You should see a large, round mass of solid,
pinkish-violet structure (the matrix) with numerous white holes (the lacunae) containing a cell within
(a chondrocyte). The nucleus of the cell is dark, and the cytoplasm is very light. The collagen and elastic
fbers are not visible because they blend imperceptibly within the matrix.
Epiglottis
Thyroid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
First three tracheal rings
FlGURE 5.33: Ventral view of the larynx and trachea of a dog, where hyaline cartilage is found.
Copyright 2010 Cer
Editorialrevie
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues
67
Lacuna
Matrix
Chondrocyte
in lacuna
sogenous
group
Chondroqenic
 perichondrium
Perichondrium
FIGURE 5.34: Mammal hyaline cartilage.
 In the space below, using the slide of hyaline cartilage or trachea, draw and label the cells and tissue
parts.
Hyaline Cartilage
Elastic Cartilage
SLIDES RECOMMENDED: Those labeled elastic cartilage.
 DEscRiPTion: The matrix forms the bulk of elastic cartilage tissue, and it contains many of the same
substances as hyaline cartilage except that it has a much larger amount of elastic fibers, for which it is
named (Figure 5.35). The chondrocytes are inside lacunae located within the matrix.
LocATioN FouND: This tissue is found in the cartilages of the epiglottis, parts of the larynx, and the
pinna of the ear.
FuNcTioN: It is able to support and maintain the shape of the structure while allowing great flexibility.
Editorialrevie
68
Chapter 5
Pinna
Chondrocyte Elastic fibers
in lacuna 
(thoughout
light pink area)
FIGURE 5.35: Pinna of a cat's ear, where
FIGURE 5.36: Mammal elastic cartilage from the
elastic cartilage is found.
pinna of an ear.
Slide: elastic cartilage
Find the area of the slide where the cartilage is located. The matrix is most recognizable because of
the large, dark-stained purple area within its center (Figure 5.36). Upon close examination, small red
elastic fibers may be seen at the periphery of the purple area and should appear to course transversely
across the cartilage. The chondrocytes'miclei and cytoplasm are viewable within the lacunae.
 In the space below, using the slide of elastic cartilage, draw and label the cells, fibers, and tissue parts.
Elastic Cartilage
Fibrous Cartilage (Fibrocartilage)
SLIDEs RECOMMENDED: Those labeled fbrocartilage.
DEscRiPTioN: Fibrous cartilage is distinctively different from the other cartilage types. It contains large
amounts of fbrous connective tissue in the form of collagen, which is embedded in a ground substance
Editorialrevie
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues 
69
Vertebra
Spinal cord
Nucleus
Intervertebral disc
palposus
(anulus fibrosus)
FGURE 5.37: Intervertebral disc (found between vertebrae), where fibrous cartilage is located.
 not unlike that of the other cartilages (Figure 5.37). The fibers are distributed linearly throughout the
 ground substance (i.e., they run in the same direction). The chondrocytes lie in the lacunae, which are
also distributed linearly throughout the matrix.
LoCATIoN FouND: Fibrocartilage is found in intervertebral discs, the pubic symphysis, discs of the knee
joint, and within some tendons close to where they attach to bone.
FuNcTioN: It has high tensile strength for support and to absorb compressive shock.
Slide: fibrocartilage
Note the large amount of collagen fibers located within this cartilage. Fibrous cartilage might be easily
 confused with dense irregular connective tissue if not for the large number of lacunae present with their
resident chondrocytes (Figure 5.38)
 Collagen fibers
Wall of the
lacuna
Chondrocyte
Matrix
FlGURE 5.38: Mammal fibrocartilage.
Editorialrevie
70
Chapter 5
In the space below, using the slide of fbrous cartilage, draw and label the cells, fbers, and tissue
part.s.
Fibrous Cartilage
Special Connective Tissue: Blood
This section will introduce you to the types of blood cells found in peripheral blood. Courses in clinical
laboratory procedures, including hematology, will go into this subject matter in more depth.
Blood is classified as a connective tissue that is composed of cells in a fluid matrix. Plasma is the fluid
portion, which is called serum when depleted of fibrinogen and other clotting factors. The formed ele-
ments include erythrocytes (red blood cells), leukocytes (white blood cells), and platelets (also known
as thrombocytes). Blood cells and platelets usually are studied using stained blood smears. After a drop
of blood is spread thinly on a glasslide and dried, it is stained with a Romanovsky-type stain such as
Giemsa or Wright's stain. On one end of the slide is a thin monolayer of cells that are more flattened
and less crowded. This is the area in which cell morphology should be studied. Blood smears should
be scanned using the high-power objective lens; then oil immersion can be used for studying specific
cells in detail or for performing a differential cell count of the leukocytes. The differential cell count is
done by counting the various cell types among the first 100 white blood cells encountered. The count.
is expressed as in the following example: segmented neutrophils: 66; band neutrophils: 3; lymphocytes:
expressed as a percentage (e.g., of the total white blood cells, 66% were segmented neutrophils) .
DEscRiPTioN: Mammalian erythrocytes are the largest in the dog (7.0 μm) and smallest in the goat.
(4.1 μm) . Mature red blood cells are anucleated. As the newly forming erythrocyte develops, it gradually
loses its nucleus. The presence of nucleated red blood cells (RBCs) in the peripheral blood is an indica-
fion that the bone marrow is working hard to produce new RBCs. Erythrocytes of birds, reptiles, and
 amphibians are nucleated. Leukocytes are larger, ranging in size from 6.0 μm in the smallest lympho-
and basophils) and agranulocytes (lymphocytes and monocytes) (Figure 5.39). Leukocytes tend to accu-
mulate along the periphery of blood smears, so they are more readily visible in these areas. Neutrophils
are the predominant leukocyte of the dog, cat, and horse, whereas lymphocytes are the predominant.
rather than as a neutrophil. The rest of the leukocytes are the same types as found in mammals.
Slide: human or dog blood smeai
You will notice numerous small, red non-nucleated erythrocytes. These cells are round with central,
biconcaved surfaces on the top and bottom. This makes them appear lighter in the center, which is
 known as having a central pallor. This is most. observable in dog and human blood; in other species it in
 not. as predominant. Scan the slide and find the various types of white blood cells. You should be able to
Editorialrevie
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues
71
find all of them, except perhaps the basophil, which is hard to find because they only stay in peripheral
blood for a short. time after leaving the bone marrow and before entering tissue.
The frst granulocytes to find are the segmented neutrophils (also known as segs) (Figure 5.40).
They have dark-purple-stained nuclei in which the lobes are separated by slight indentations or thin
strands of nucleoplasm. The stage of development prior to segmentation of the nucleus is called a band
neutrophil, which differs from the segs only in the shape of the nucleus. The band neutrophil nucleus
is U-shaped and is the same width throughout its entire length. As with seeing nucleated RBCs, seeing
many band neutrophils in peripheral blood indicates that the bone marrow is producing numerous
The eosinophil has a similar nucleus to that of the neutrophil, although it tends to be slightly less
dense and have fewer lobes. The most noticeable feature of the eosinophil is its predominant red,
reddish-purple, or lavender granules (depending on the stain and the species of animal blood used).
mented. The granules vary in size, number, and intensity of staining depending on the type of stain and
species of animal. They are often large and round to oval, and they stain reddish-purple to dark purple,
FlGURE 5.39: Capillary with red blood cell passing through it.
 Platelets
 Nucleated erythrocyte
Erythrocytes
 Eosinophil
 showing
A
rouleaux formation 
Erythrocytes
FIGURE 5.40: A. Cat blood with an eosinophil, platelets, and erythrocytes showing rouleaux formation.
B. Dog blood with erythrocytes and a nucleated red blood cell.
Continued
Editorialrevi
72
Chapter 5
Erythrocytes
 Platelets
Crenatederythrocytes
Small lymphocyte
D
Small lymphocyte
Erythrocyte
Segmented
 Eosinophil
Large
一
Monocyte
Erythrocyte
neutrophil
lymphocyte
FGURE 5.40, cont'd: C. Dog blood with erythrocytes and platelets. D. Blood showing crenated
with (from left to right) a segmented neutrophil, an eosinophil, and a large lymphocyte.
Continued
Editorial
Microscopic Anatomy Of Tissues 
73
Segmented
Platelet 
neutrophil
Segmented
Basophil
neutrophil
(broken up)
G
Nucleated
Lyrmphocyte
Heterophil
erythrocyte
FGURE 5.40, cont'd: G. Cat blood showing erythrocytes, platelets, and a segmented neutrophil.
H. Cat blood with a segmented neutrophil and basophil (on the feathered edge and is broken up, also
pooia pal paleelonu ytm poolg plia 'l '(epls awes uo sainueib slydouisoa ueui iayjep pajeadde sainuein
 cells, a lymphocyte and heterophil (Wright's stain).
Editorial
74
Ch a pt e r 5 
have many forms, these cells are also called polymorphonucleated leukocytes (known as polymorphs or
PMNs). However, these terms have come to be used synonymously for neutrophils.
The monocytes are the largest of the white blood cells (WBCs). The shape of their nucleus is highly
variable; it. can be oval, irregular, kidney-shaped, or horseshoe-shaped. The nuclear chromatin is diffuse
and lacy or patchy in appearance. The cytoplasm is generally a pale gray-blue and may contain small dust-
like azurophilic granules. A feature that helps distinguish this cellfrom the large lymphocyte is that it often
cally placed nucleus that is generally round, although it is oval in the pig, sometimes slightly indented in
the cat, and may be binucleated in the ruminants. Most of the lymphocytes of carnivores, horses, and pigs
are small, whereas the large type predominates in the ruminan ts. In the small lymphocyte, only a thin rim
of blue cytoplasm with a light perinuclear halo may be seen. The large lymphocyte has a less-dense nucleus 
with a pale blue, more-abundant cytoplasm. The nucleus may be round, oval, or kidney-shaped. In both 
types of lymphocytes, nonspecifc azurophilic granules may be seen in certain medical conditions.
Platelets are very small and occur singly or in clusters between the RBCs. They are pale blue and
contain purple central granules. They play an important role in hemostasis, the clotting of blood.
 Draw all the types of cells seen in peripheral blood and described previously in the spaces below.
Erythrocytes
Segmented and Band Neutrophils
Editorialrevie
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues 
75
Platelets
Eosinophil
Basophil
Copyright 2010 Cer
Editorial
76
Chapter 5
Lymphocyte
Monocyte
Special Connective Tissue: Bone
The skeletal system will be discussed in an upcoming chapter. A brief overview of the histology of com-
pact. bone will be covered here.
 DEscRiPTioN: Bone has a hard, calcifed matrix containing many collagen fibers and osteocytes that lie
within lacunae (Figure 5.4l). Bones are well vascularized. Bone is a dynamic tissue in that over time it. can
lose its strength and functional ability, and thus is continually resolved and replaced. This also occurs at.
a fracture site of a broken bone. Osteoclasts resorb old bone, and osteoblasts secrete new bony matrix in
which they become engulfed (similar to that of a chondroblast) forming lacunae with osteocytes within.
LocATIoN FoUND: The bones of the skeletal system.
(o) ‘uonnaid apaod (a) 'anns pe o apoq aul apod (n) :ii are suoy si nonng
provide a site of mineral storage, (4) act as the site of blood formation (for oxygen transport and
immune function), and (5) enable the body's leverage and mobility.
Slide: compact bone
 Observe the multiple circles of bone throughout the tissue; these are called osteons, and all of these
together make up the Haversian system of bone. At the center of each osteon is a central canal,
Editorialrevie
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues
77
Haversian or central canal
Canaliculi
Osteon
Lacuna
containing
osteocyte
FIGURE 5.41:
Bone tissue
from the femur of a cat.
FIGURE 5.42: Mammal compact bone.
which contains a blood vessel (Figure 5.42).The dark, linear dots of the osteon that encircles the
central canal are the lacunae, which contain the osteocytes. Note the thread-like lines that radiate
toward each lacuna; these are canaliculi, or tiny canals that link the lacunae together and provide
nutrition for the osteocytes.
 In the space provided, draw a section of compact bone and label the cells, canals, and other parts
discussed previously.
Compact Bone
Editorial
78
Chapter 5
EXERCISE 5.4
MUSCLE TISSUE HISTOLOGY
There are three types of muscle: skeletal, smooth, and cardiac. Muscle is a highly specialized tissue
designed to contract, and it produces most types of body movement.
Skeletal Muscle
Skeletal muscle is attached to the skeleton. It is under voluntary control, and its contractions move the
 limbs and other external body parts.
feature of this tissue is the transverse striations across each cell. Therefore, skeletal muscle is classified
as striated muscle (Figure 5.43).
Skeletal muscle
(striated)
FlGURE 5.43: Skeletal (striated) muscle attached to bone.
Nucleus
Striated muscle
(note cross-striations)
FlGURE 5.44: Longitudinal section of striated muscle cells.
Editorialrevie
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues 
79
LocATIoN FouND: Skeletal muscle can be found attached to bone and tendon, and in some areas, to skin.
FuNcTion: It allows for voluntary movement and locomotion, facial expression, and skin movement.
Slide: skeletal muscle
Note the long, red muscle cells with cross striations. On the outside of these cells, notice the numerous
nuclei (Figure 5.44).
 In the space provided, draw a section of skeletal muscle and label the parts of the cells.
Skeletal Muscle
Cardiac Muscle
Cardiac muscle is involuntary and makes up the heart's myocardium (or heart muscle).
DEscRiPTioN: Cardiac muscle cells are also striated, are generally uninucleated, and may be
branched. They are separated from one another by specialized junctions called intercalated discs
(Figure 5.45).
LoCATIoN FoUND: Located exclusively in the heart.
Craniodorsal aspect
Left ventricle
Heart muscle
or myocardium
| Right ventricle
Intercalated  Nucleus
Cardiac
disc
muscle cell
FIGURE 5.45: Cross section of myocardium of
FIGURE 5.46:
Longitudinal  section of cardiac
the heart.
muscle cells.
Editorialrevie
80
Chapter 5
Nucleus of smooth muscle cell
Inner circular
smooth muscle of
 Outer longitudinal-
 ascending colon 
smooth muscle
lleocolic
sphincter
Cecocolic
sphincter
lleum
Cecum
FGURE 5.47: Longitudinal view of an intestinal
FGURE 5.48: Longitudinal section of smooth 
tract, showing the layers of smooth muscle.
muscle.
FuNcTioN: Cardiac muscle contracts the atria and ventricles, moving blood into, through, and out. of
the heart.
Slide: cardiac muscle
The striations on cardiac muscle cells are not as noticeable as they are on skeletal muscle (Figure 5.46).
 Instead they appear as multiple, fine-lined, cross-striations in each cell. Note that the cells are separated
on each end by dark, heavy lines, which are the intercalated discs. Notice also that some of the cells
branch. The nuclei are large in relation to the cells and cannot be found in every cell because of the way
the slide sample was sectioned.
 In the space provided, draw a section of cardiac muscle and label the parts of the cells.
Cardiac Muscle
Smooth Muscle
Smooth muscle is involuntary and is found in organs that must contract to move fluids. It can also act as
a sphincter muscle to control the diameter of vessels, airways, or the openings between tubular organs.
Editorialrevie
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues 
81
DEscRiPr1oN: Smooth muscle cells are unstriated, have spindle-shaped cells with a central mucleus, and
are arranged closely to form sheets of tissue (Figure 5.47).
LoCATioN FouND: Smooth muscle is found in the walls of tubular organs, around bronchi, in the walls
of arteries and veins, and in the uterus, and it forms the precapillary sphincter muscles.
FuNcTion: The functions of smooth muscle are to propel fluids and substances (such as foodstuffs or
urine) along internal tubular passageways (such as the intestines). Smooth muscle also controls the
amount of fluid or air entering or leaving certain areas of the body.
Slide: smooth muscle or intestinal tract
Smooth muscle cells are long and thin and tapered at both ends. They course in the same directions
 but are not perfectly parallel in con figuration (Figure 5.48). The muclei are located within the cells and
 sometimes appear rippled if the cell is contracting.
In the space provided, draw a section of smooth muscle and label the parts of the cells.
Smooth Muscle
EXERCISE 5.5  NERVOUS TISSUE HISTOLOGY
Nervous Tissue
 The brain and spinal cord possess billions of neurons, or nerve cells (Figure 5.49). You already looked.
at a nerve cell in Chapter 3, Exercise 3.2.
DEscRiPTioN: Each neuron has a nerve cell body complete with a nucleus, and many short, thin processes
called dendrites come off of it. The dendrites collect electrochemical signals from other nerves and route
 o o ' aau nxau ai  oe ue p ay  e u pe o n a y a 
LoCATIoN FouND: In addition to being found in the brain and spinal cord, neurons are found in nerves
throughout. the body.
tors to the brain and from the brain to the effectors (muscles, organs, and glands) that con trol their activity
82
Chapter 5
Dendrites
Dendrite
Nucleolus
Nucleus of 
cell body
Nuclearmembrane
Nissl bodies
Nisslbodies
Axon hillock
Axon hillock-
Neurofibrils
Axon
Myelin sheath
Cytoskeletal
Axon
elerments
FIGURE 5.49: Nerve cells.
FlGURE 5.50: Mammalian motor neuron.
Slide: nerve cells fneurons], brain
Find the following structures (these were described previously in Chapter 3, Exercise 3.2): nerve cell body,
mucleus, nucleoli, axon, axon hillock, dendrite, Nissl bodies, cytoskeletal elements (Figure 5.50).
 In the space provided, draw a section of nervous tissue and label the parts of the cells.
Neuron Cell Body and Processes
Editorial
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues
83
linical Significance
The clinically significant part of this chapter is an exercise in performing a differential white blood cell
decrease in peripheral blood, it is necessary to obtain this information as quickly as possible. Performing
an in-house total white blood cell count and differential can be very helpful in obtaining a rapid diagnosis.
EXERCISE 5.6
DIFFERENTIAL WHITE BLOOD CELL COUNT
Take out your blood smear slide again and count the frst 100 recognizable leukocytes using a five-
punch differential cell counter to keep track. A bell should ring on the counter when 1o0 total cells
have been counted. (Keep track on paper if you do not have a cell counter.) Fill in your results
below:
segmented neutrophils:
monocytes:
band neutrophils:
eosinophils:
lymphocytes:
basophils:
cell counts rather than percentage counts (which is what the relative cell count is). The relative cell
count should be just. a means to obtain a total cell count; it has little interpretive value.
Assume the total white blood cell (leukocyte) count is 12,000 cells/μl (this count may be obtained by
performing manually a total white blood cell count using a hemocytometer or by an electronic blood
cell counter). Now multiply each of the previous values by the total leukocyte count. This will yield the
total cell count for each type of leukocyte, called the absolute cell count.
segmented neutrophils:
× 12,000 =
band neutrophils:
× 12,000 =
lymphocytes:
×12,000 =
monocytes:
× 12,000 =
eosinophils:
× 12,000 =
basophils:
×12,000=
Assuming this is a dog (even if your slide is a human blood smear), the normal range of neutrophils
(segs and bands combined) is 3,000 to 12,000 cells/μl, lymphocytes is 1,000 to 5,000 cells/μl, monocytes is
150 to 1,350 cells/μl, and eosinophils is 100 to 1,250 cells/μl. The normal range of basophils is not listed
because they are rare in peripheral blood. Which, if any, of these levels are out of the normal range?
Editorialrevie
84
Chapter 5
SUMMARY
This chapter has been a general study of microscopic anatomy and should form the basis
for the study of the organ systems we will encounter in later chapters. You learned the
basic structure of epithelial tissues, their functions, and where they are located. We covered
connective tissue, and you found that the fibers and matrix predominates over the cellular
-ads pue 'adoid 'jeuoaqwa uaamiag aouaiathp aut paueal noy anss siut ui stuauodwoo
cial connective tissue. We also reviewed the structure and function of nerve cells. The fina
anbiuyoat e pue Apnis siut woiy pauieh abpalmouy eut jo uoieoldde qeooeid e sem asiaiaxa
most technicians should put to great use in the future.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Name the four primary tissue types.
 2. What do all epithelial tissue have in common as a support structure?
3. Name the areas a free surface might face.
4. Name the five characteristics of epithelial tissue.
 5. What is the difference between simple and stratified epithelia?
6.
 What are the shapes of squamous, cuboidal, columnar, and transitional epithelial cells?
 7. Describe the configuration of pseudostratified epithelial cells relative to the free surface
and basement membrane.
8. What is the difference between exocrine and endocrine glands?
 9. Where might you find each of the following epithelial cells: simple squamous, simple
 cuboidal, pseudostratified columnar, simple columnar, stratified squamous, stratified
cuboidal, stratified columnar, transitional?
10. What is contained in a goblet cell?
11. A striated border is made up of what structures?
12.
 What is the difference between keratinized and non-keratinized stratified squamous
epithelium?
 13. Name the three components of all connective tissue.
14. Name the three major types of connective tissue.
 15. Name the three types of fibers found in connective tissue proper.
16. What is mesenchyme?
17. Name four cell types found in areolar connective tissue.
18.
 True or False: There is no such thing as loose regular connective tissue.
19.
Where are each of the different types of proper connective tissue found?
20. Name the three types of cartilage.
Microscopic Anatomy of Tissues
85
21. What types of cells are found in cartilage?
22. Where are the different types of cartilage found?
23. Name the different types of normal white blood cells found in blood. Which ones are
called granulocytes, and which are called agranulocytes?
24.
 Name the two types of bone.
25. What is the name of the mature type of bone cell, and in what structures are they found?
 26. Name the three types of muscle.
 27. Which muscle types are striated?
 28. Which muscle type(s) is/are voluntary, and which is/are involuntary?
29. What is the difference between a dendrite and an axon?
30. Distinguish between a relative cell count and an absolute cell count.
Copyright 2010 Cer
Editorial
CHAPTER 6
THE INTEGUMENTARY SYSTEM
OBJECTIVES
name and histologically identify the layers of the epidermis and dermis from prepared slides
 identify the cutaneous glands and hair from prepared slides
un derstand the factors determining skin color
identify the structure and parts of the equine foot; note which parts are epidermal derivatives and which
are dermal derivatives
understand the structure of a horn as compared to an antler; identify the parts and note which are
epidermal derivatives and which are dermal derivatives
understand the structure of the claws, pads, and nose of a dog
 know the anatomical structure of a cow's mammary gland, including the names of all the ducts, lobes,
lobules, and alveoli
MATERIALS
three-dimensional model of the skin (if available)
three-dimensional model of the equine foot. (if available)
 model of the cow's mammary gland
 longitudinal and cross-sectional displays of horn and antler
 prepared slides of bovine skin, hairy mammal skin, sweat gland, and human heavily pigmented skin 
 compound light microscope
1
immersion oil
 magnifying glass
colored pencils
 prepared specimen of an equine hoof
 live dog(s), some with unpigmented nails, and others with pigmented nails
live cat.
 live horse
INTRODUCTION
skin. The skin consists of the epidermis and dermis. The dermis is attached to the underlying
hypodermis, or subcutis (subcutaneous tissues), which is composed mostly of adipose
tissue and is attached to muscle and bone underneath. The accessory organs of the skin
include the sweat, sebaceous, and mammary glands, as well as the hair or feather follicles,
claws, hooves, beak, and scales.
86
Editorialre
The Integumentary System 
87
EXERCISE 6.1
- HISTOLOGY OF THE INTEGUMENTARY SYSTEM
and orient yourself on the slide (i.e., find the free surface and the deeper structures). Then change to
high power to see the cellular detail needed to understand the morphology of the tissue.
 For the following types of tissue, obtain the recommended slide (s), locate all the structures on the
slide you are instructed to find and that are labeled in the diagrams and photomicrographs shown
in the fgures throughout the chapter. Then, draw and label what you see in the spaces provided.
The things you will be instructed to find will include the cell, its nucleus and cytoplasm, the base-
identifed are listed in colored bold print. Subsequent slides may also contain the same structures or
other related structures, which may be listed in bold print or italics; they are of no less importance and
therefore should also be identified.
Epidermis
SLIDEs REcoMMENDED: Those labeled bovine skin or human skin, scalp.
 DEscRiPTioN: You may want to begin by reviewing the section of the previous chapter covering strati-
fied squamous epithelium. The epidermis viewed in the previous chapter on pages 49-50 was non-
keratinized. However, the epidermis of thick skin (as seen here) is keratinized to assist in its protective
function. Hence, the most abundant type of cells in this tissue are the keratinocytes (Figure 6.1), which
 so i e si s     ae   sos o a as  a
proof protein that imparts to the skin its strength and resiliency.
Slide: skin
 tum granulosum, stratum lucidum, and stratum corneum (Figure 6.2).
Locate the bottom layer of the epidermis, or the basal cell layer, next to the red, fibrous dermis. This
 is the stratum basale; it consists of only one layer of keratinocytes, which are constantly undergoing
mitosis and producing millions of new cells daily. This layer's alternative name is the stratum germi-
nativum. This stratum is attached to the basement membrane. Up to 25% of the cells in this layer are
melanocytes, which produce the skin pigment melanin. The darker the skin, the more melanocytes are
 present to produce a greater amount. of melanin. Other cells located at this level are the Merkel cells,
which are associated with sensory nerve endings extending from the dermis. The Merkel cell and nerve
ending combine to form a Merkel disc, or a touch receptor.
The stratum spinosum is a relatively thick layer of cells just superficial to the stratum basale. These
keratinocytes appear stippled, an appearance that is a result of processing for histological examina-
tion: The cells shrink, but their desmosomes hold tight. Contained within these cells are thick, web-like
bundles of intracellular tonoflaments of prekeratin protein. These cells are also undergoing mitosis
and it functions as a macrophage. Only these two layers of the epidermis receive adequate nourish-
ment via diffusion from the dermis. As the cells multiply, the daughter cells are pushed upward and
away from their source of nutrition, and they gradually die.
The next layer of cells, just above the stratum spinosum, is the stratum granulosum, named for
the abundant number of granules its keratinocytes contain. These cells are more flattened in appear-
ance than those of the deeper layers. The granules within them are of two types: (1) lamellated
granules, which contain a waterproofing glycolipid that is excreted into the extracellular space; and
(2) keratohyaline granules, which combine with the tonoflaments in the more superficial layers to
form keratin fibrils within the cells. At the upper border of this level, the cells begin to die.
88
Chapter 6
Pore
 Hair shaft 
Dermal papillae
(papillary layer
of dermis)
Epidermis
 Meissner's corpuscle
Free nerve ending
Reticular layer
of dermis
Sebaceous (oil)
gland
Arrector pili muscle
Dermis -
Sensory nerve fiber
 Pacinian corpuscle
Hypodermis
Artery
or subcutis
Vein
Adipose tissue
Eccrine
sweat gland
 Root hair plexus
Hair root
Hair follicle -
FlGURE 6.1: The structure of skin.
The thinnest layer is the next layer, called the stratum lucidum. It is a clear or translucent band of
dead keratinocytes with indistinct boundaries and keratin fbrils located within. It is present in areas of
thick skin, but not. thin skin.
The outermost layer of the epidermis is called the stratum corneum, which consists of 20 to 30 cell
layers and accounts for much of the epidermal thickness. These cells are dead, and their flattened,
scale-like remnants are fully keratinized. These cells are constantly shed and replaced by division of the
deeper cells (Figure 6.3).
Editorial
The Integumentary System
68
Keratinocytes
Langerhans' cell
Desmosomes
Cells are dead, represented
Stratum
only by flat membranous
corneum
sacs filled with keratin; 
glycolipids in extracellular
Stratum
space.
lucidum
 Stratum
Cells are flattened;
granulosum
 organelles deteriorating;
cytoplasm full of lamellated
granules (release lipids)
and keratohyaline granules.
Epidermis
Cells contain thick bundles
 of intermediate filaments
Stratum
made of prekeratin.
spinosum
 Cells are actively mitotic
stemcells;somenewly
formed cells become part
of the more superficial
layers.
Stratum
basale
Dermis
Dermis
cell
Sensory
Melanin
nerve
granules
ending
FlGURE 6.2: The layers of the epidermis, including the various cell types.
Stratum
corneum
 Stratum
 granulosum
Dermal
Stratum
Basement
Stratum
Stratum
papilla
spinosum
 membrane
basale
lucidum
FIGURE 6.3: Mammal skin.
Editorial
90
Chapter 6
 In the space below, using the slide of the epidermis, draw and label the layers and cells observed.
Epidermis
Dermis
 SLIDEs REcoMMENDED: Those used in the previous activity, labeled bovine skin or human skin, scalp.
DEscRiPT1oN: Below the epidermis is the dermis. It is composed of two layers: (1) the papillary layer
and (2) the reticular layer. The papillary layer is made of areolar (also known as loose irregular) con-
nective tissue, and the reticular layer of dense irregular connective tissue. The reticular layer accounts
for 80% of the total thickness of the dermis. Like the epidermis, the dermis varies in thickness depend-
ing on its location within the body. For example, a dog's foot pads are much thicker than an eyelid.
Slide: mammal skin
The papillary layer is the most superficial of the two dermal layers. Its name is derived from the word
 papilla, which means small, nipple-shaped projection. This layer contains multiple papillary projec-
tions, called dermal papillae, which rise into the epidermis and form a wave-like pattern between
the epidermis and dermis (Figure 6.3). The shape of this interface helps ensure the connection
between these two structures. Within the papilla are looping blood vessels that provide nourish-
  r  s     s   s e  
 products and assist with temperature control of the body. Also, within this layer are nerve endings
for pain and touch, called Meissner's corpuscles (Figure 6.1), and receptors sensitive to tempera-
ture changes.
 The boundary between the two layers of the dermis is indistinct because the collagen fibers from
the papillary layer blend with the bundles of collagen fibers of the reticular layer. (You may want to
review the material on deep irregular connective tissue in the previous chapter on pages 57-58). Note
that in the reticular layer these layers of heavy, wavy bundles (or cords) of collagen fi bers tend to run
parallel to each other (see Figure 6.4B) . The orientation of these fibers is in the direction of the stress
placed on them. It also consists of many small arteries and veins, sweat glands (in species containing
tion of the body. When the body's temperature is high, the arterioles dilate, and the capillary network
The Integumentary System 
91
Epidermis
Papillarylayer
Dermis
Reticular layer
 Subcutis
A
Epidermis
Papillary layer
Dermis
Reticularlayer-
Subcutis
B
FGURE 6.4: A. Epidermis and dermis of a digital pad. B. Primate plantar pad.
environment is cool and the body's heat must be conserved, the arterioles constrict so that blood
bypasses the dermal capillary networks.
 Both layers of the dermis, papillary and reticular, are heavily invested with collagenic fibers and
elastic fibers, which give the skin its exceptional elasticity in youth. As the body ages, the number of
elastic fibers decreases and the subcutaneous layer loses fat; this leads to wrinkling and inelasticity of
the skin and can be observed most easily in primates and humans.
Editorialrevie
92
Chapter 6
 In the space below, using the slide of the dermis, draw and label the layers, cells, and other structures
observed.
Dermis
Hypodermis, or Subcutis
SLIDEs REcOMMENDED: Those used previously, labeled bovine skin or human skin, scalp
DEscRiPTioN: The hypodermis, or subcutis, is the thick layer of subcutaneous areolar connective
tissue that is rich in adipose tissue and lies deep to the dermis (Figure 6.5). You may want to review
the section of the previous chapter on pages 61-63 on adipose tissue. Blood and lymphatic vessels and
nerves are also found in this region. At the dermis-subcutis border is a special type of touch receptor,
called a Pacinian corpuscle, which is sensitive to heavy pressure. The boundary between the dermis and
subcutis is blurred because the fibers of both merge with one another. This layer is important because
it permits the skin to move freely over the underlying muscle and bone without putting tension on the
skin, which might result in tearing. The hypodermis also acts to help insulate the body from environ-
mental temperature variations.
Sloughingstratum
corneum cells
Hair shaft Dermis
Epidermis
Hair follicles
Hypodermis or subcutisMuscle
Subcutaneous
(adipose tissue and areolar
fat
connective tissue)
FIGURE 6.5: Skin: epidermis, dermis, and hypodermis (subcutis), including hair follicles and hair shafts.
Editorialrevie
The Integumentary System
93
Slide: skin
Look beneath the dermis to view the subcutaneous fat and the structures within.
 In the space below, using the slide of the hypodermis, draw and label the layers, cells, and other
structures observed.
Hypodermis/Subcutis
Accessory Structures of the Integument: Hair
SLIDES REcOMMENDED: Those labeled hairy mammal skin.
DEscRiPT1oN: Most. skin covered with hair or fur consists of three epidermal layers: the stratum basale,
stratum spinosum, and stratum corneum. However, there are regions in furry mammals where all five
layers exist. These are places where the keratinization process has slowed and the skin is very thick. The
surface of the skin of a hairy mammal is covered in scale-like folds, and the hair shaft. emerges from
beneath the scales and is directed away from the opening. Dogs usually have a cluster of three hair
follicles per scale. A tylotrich hair (also known as a tactile hair) is a special type of hair that. emerges
from a knob-like elevation called a tactile elevation (or epidermal papilla). These hairs are important.
to animals because they assist with their perception of touch and space.
Slide: hairy mammal skin
Observe the shaft of the hair first; it is made of hard keratin and has a central medulla surrounded
by a cortex, which is enveloped by the cuticle layer (Figures 6.6 and 6.7). The amount. of melanin in
Connective tissue
root sheath
Follicle wall
Cuticle
Medulla
Cortex
Internal 
root sheath
External
root sheath
Glassy
membrane
FIGURE 6.6: Cross section of a hair shaft.
Editorialrevie
94
Chapter 6
Hair shaft
{cuticle, cortex,
medulla)
Cuticle
Internal
Hair
shaft
root sheath
External
root sheath
Glassy
membrane
Arrector
Medulla
pili
Connective
Sebaceous
tissue sheath
gland
of hair follicle
Hair root
Cortex
Hair bulb
in follicle
Matrix
Melanocyte
Connective tissue papilla
Subcutaneous
adipose tissue
FIGURE 6.7: Longitudinal section of a hair follicle.
the cortex determines whether the hair is brown, red, yellow, or black. As pigment is lost from the
medulla fills with air, and the hair becomes white.
Next, observe the hair follicles and try to find one cut directly through the middle longitudinally
The portion of the hair enclosed within the follicle is the root. The hair bulb is a collection of well.
nourished, germinal epithelial cells at the basal end of the follicle. As the daughter cells are pushed
farther away from this growing region, they die and become keratinized. Thus, the bulk of the hair
(i.e., the shaft) is composed of hard keratin and is no longer living material. The follicle contains both
epidermal and dermal cells.
Look closely at the hair bulb and find the hair's connective tissue papilla, which is a continuation of
the connective tissue sheath that surrounds and anchors the hair in the dermis. Proceeding from the
 exterior inward, the next layer is a thin, clear layer called the glassy mermbrane. The frst layer of cells
in the follicle proper is the external root sheath. Beneath this is the internal root sheath. Everything
inside of this becomes part of the hair shaft as it grows out, but. these cell layers are not distinct in the
follicular area. A thin area just inside the internal root sheath is the cuticle, the area directly in the
center is the medulla, and the cells in between, which are the most abundant part of the hair root. and
shaft, compose the cortex. The cells of the bulb, located around the connective tissue papilla, are called
the matrix. This is also where melanocytes are found. These add the pigment melanin to the cortex.
The part of the root. where cells begin to lose their cellular appearance is called the keratogenous
zone. Above this area, just peripheral to the internal root sheath, you should find the pale-stained,
glandular epithelial cells.
o si p o aai s (sho da sons o sn pa sas are ssa
 as a holocrine gland (an exocrine-type gland). Holocrine refers to a gland in which the whole cell is
liberated during secretion (Figure 6.8). The cell ruptures and emits a white, semi-liquid mixture called
sebum, the oil that lubricates the hair shaft. In the sheep, this product ultimately becomes lanolin.
 Other types of exocrine glands named for their secretory process are merocrine glands and apocrine
glands. In merocrine glands, the secretory product passes through the cell walls without any loss of
cytoplasm; examples are sweat. glands. Apocrine glands lose a slight amount. of cytoplasm and/or cell
membrane during secretion, although the whole cell is not lost. in the process; examples include the
prostate gland.
Editorialrevie
The Integumentary System
95
Cortex
Medulla
Cuticle
Connective tissue
Connective
Glassy
Extermal
Intemal
papilla (not perfect
tissue sheath
 membrane
root
root
cut so does not
sheath
sheath
A
extend to root
of follicle)
Part of 
Sebaceous
 Epidermis 
hair shaft 
glands
B
Dermis
 In the space below, using the hairy mammal slide, draw the follicle and hair shaft and label the
layers, cells, and other structures observed.
Hair Shaft and Follicle
Editorial
trictions
96
Chapter 6
EXERCISE 6.2
THE INTEGUMENTARY SYSTEM MODEL
Locate all the items found on the slides in the previous exercise on the plastic model of the integu-
ment. The model also should have an example of the arrector pili muscle. This is composed of small
bands of smooth muscle cells that. connect each hair follicle to the papillary layer of the dermis. When
these muscle cells contract, which is usually during cold, fright, or bluffing behavior (e.g., the animal is
making itself appear larger),the slanted hair follicle is pulled upright, which dimples the skin surface.
In areas of small, fine hairs, this dimpling appears as goose bumps, but in heavily furred areas it will
not be seen. Contraction of the arrector pili muscles also exerts pressure on the sebaceous glands sur-
 rounding the follicles, causing a small amount of sebum to be released.
Note some of the other glands present on the model. There are the sweat glands, also known as
sudoriferous glands. These are found over the entire body of most domestic species, including the
dog, pig, horse, cow, and sheep. However, only the horse produces a profuse amount of sweat. There
are two types of sweat glands, apocrine and eccrine. The eccrine sweat gland consists of a simple, coiled
tube located in the dermis or subcutis and connected to the surface via a long duct. In dogs, this type
of sweat gland is found only in the deep layers of fat and connective tissue of the foot pads. Apocrine
sweat glands have a coiled, excretory portion found deep in the dermis or subcutis, and they empty
into the hair follicles rather than onto the skin's surface.
EXERCISE 6.3
 PAW, PADS, CLAWS, AND NOSE OF THE DOG AND CAT
Pigmented Skin
There are numerous regions in the dog, including the skin, mucous membranes, and claws, that are
carotene, in the skin and accessory structures. Another factor that may affect the color of the skin is
the degree of oxygenation of the blood, which can give a reddish tint to areas of white skin. This may
be especially noticeable in areas of inflammation.
and the deeper layers of the stratum spinosum. Because these cell layers also form the germinal lay-
ers of claws (and hooves in large animals), the amount of melanin deposited determines the color of
these structures as well. The release of the melanin granules is controlled by the release of melanocyte-
stimulating hormone, which is controlled by the pituitary gland. Carotene is a yellow-orange pigment.
 present primarily in the stratum corneum and in the adlipose tissue of the hypodermis.
 Obtain a live dog and observe the tongue and other areas inside the mouth for black pigmentation.
Which breeds are likely to have this pigmentation? Then, look at. the top of the nose and the claws to
see if they are pigmented.
The Nose of a Dog
Using a magnifying glass, observe the surface of the nose and pads of the dog. The top of the nose in dogs.
cats, pigs, and sheep is called the planum nasale. In the cow and horse, this area is called the muzzle and
technically is named the planum nasolabiale. Note that it is composed of many polygonal plates packed
together, and that it may be further divided by grooves into polygonal plaques (Figure 6.9). The nose is
usually black or dark brown and is composed of three layers of epidermis: the stratuun basale, stratuum spino-
sum, and stratuun corneun. Surprisingly, considering the heavy use of the nose, stratum corneum is com-
 posed of only four to eight layers of cells. The nasal epidermis and dermis interdigitate in a manner similar
the planum nasale contains no glands. However, in the sheep, pig, and cow, tubular glands are found.
Foot Pads of a Dog or Cat
Now observe the pads on a dog's or cat's paws. The pads adjacent to the claws are called the digital.
pads; the large central pad is called the metacarpal pad (or metatarsal pad in the rear feet), and the
The Integumentary System 
97
 Polygonal plaque
Grooveseparating plaques
Stratum corneum
-Surface groove
Planum 
nasale
Nostril
Epidermis
Dermis
Dermal papilla 
Epidermal peg
FIGURE 6.9: The nose of a dog and cross section of the epidermis and dermis.
Stratum_
corneum
Epidermis
 of papilla
Carpal pad
Dermis of_
footpad
- Metacarpal pad
 Digital pad 
Sweatglands
Claw
Conical papilla
FIGURE 6.10: The pads of a dog's feet and cross section of a drawing of the epidermis and dermis.
small pad on the caudal surface of the leg (located a short distance proximal from the metacarpal or
metatarsal pad) is called the carpal pad or tarsal pad, depending on its location on front or hind feet.
(Figure 6.10). The digital, metacarpal, and metatarsal pads are the weight-bearing pads in the dog and
cat. Using a magnifying glass, observe the many minute conical papillae covering the pads. Sometimes
the central areas of the pads are worn smooth from walking on hard, rough surfaces. When this hap-
pens, the central papillae are rounded or flattened. All five layers of the epidermis are present, and the
Editorialrevie
98
Chapter 6
Middle
 phalanx
Corium
or "quick"
Distal
 phalanx
Claw
(cornified
epidermis)
Unguicular
process
FIGURE 6.11: The claw of a cat.
stratum corneum is the thickest. There are multiple dermal papillae at the epidermal-dermal interface as
well. Deep to the dermis is a thick layer of subcutaneous adipose tissue. This insulating fat, plus the thick,
tough keratinized stratum corneum, forms an effective protective barrier against abrasion and thermal
changes. This enables the animal to walk on rough, hot, or cold surfaces. The interior of the pads is com-
posed of exocrine sweat glands and lamellar corpuscles. The ducts pass through the dermis to the stratum
The Claw of a Dog and Cat
of a cat and compare it. to the dog and to the diagram in Figure 6.11. In both animals, the claw is attached to
the toe at the coronary band (or bed). This composes the germinal, epidermal cell matrix that gives rise to the
horny wall (or unguis). Beneath the wall is the sensitive corium, which is modified dermis, otherwise known
as the quick of the claw. This is the area that bleeds if you accidentally cut. the claw off too short. during a nail
trim. The corium surrounds a bony process attached to the distal phalanx called the unguicular process.
EXERCISE 6.4
ASSOCIATED STRUCTURES OF THE INTEGUMENT
IN LARGE ANIMALS
Chestnuts and Ergots
The chestnut. and ergot are dark, horny structures found on the legs of members of the equine family.
Chestnuts are brown to tan or grayish, depending on the hair color of the animal. They are found on
the medial side of the legs at the level of the carpus or knee (note that this is not the true knee, which
is the stifle joint of the hind leg) and the tarsus or hock (Figure 6.12). The ergot is the horny tissue
found buried in the long hairs below the fetlock joint.
Chestnuts are thought to be vestiges of the carpal pads (front. leg) and tarsal pads (hind leg) of the
first digit; and similarly, the ergots are vestiges of these pads of the second and fourth digits. Remnants
of the fth digit do not exist. As the horse progressed through its evolutionary development, the multi-
toed species progressively lost their digits as their need for speed increased. Now the equine species
supports all of its weight. on the third digit. Using the live horse, find the chestnuts and ergots.
Horns and Antlers
The horns of cattle, sheep, goats, and similar species are formed over the horn process, or os cornua,
which is an outgrowth of bony tissue from the frontal bone. Horns are covered by a thin layer of modi-
fied dermis called the corium of the horn. The corium at the base of the horn where it joins the skin is
thickest; this area is the germinal area. The horn itself is made of highly keratinized stratum corneum
Editorialrevie
The Integumentary System
66
Chestnut
rgo
FIGURE 6.12: Location of the chestnuts and ergots of a horse.
Stratum corneum of cornual
epidermis (cornified horn)
Corium
Stratum
corneum
Epidermis
Dermis
Frontal Cornual (horn)
sinus
process of
frontalbone
(os cornua)
FIGURE 6.13: A horn.
of the epidermis and is constructed of many tubules of horn tissue that extend from the base of the
horn to the tip. The medullary cavity of the os cornua is continuous with the frontal sinus within the
frontal bone. A soft type of horn, called the epikeras, covers the surface of the horn at the base and
extends for a variable distance toward the horn's apex.
 Seasonal variations in the animal's nutritional state are reflected as variations of the horn's growth,
which resembles the rings of a tree. The age of the animal may be estimated by counting the rings in the
horn. Horns occur in both males and females and are not. sex-linked characteristics. Observe the cross
section and longitudinal section of the display of a horn, and compare it. to the diagram in Figure 6.13.
Editorialrevie
100
Cha pter 6
Antlers are bone developed by a process called endochondral ossification (bone growth on a
velvet is modified skin and contains both epidermis and dermis. The antler's progression to full
with the breeding habits of the species. Antlers in the deer and elk are sex-linked; only the males of
the species have them. Observe the cross section and longitudinal section of the display of antler.
The Foot of the Horse
The foot of the horse is defined as the hoof and all the structures contained within it. The horse walks
 hoof are the distal phalanx (coffin bone), the distal tip of the middle phalanx (short pastern bone), and
the distal sesamoid bone (navicular bone).
Observe the plastic model and the prepared specimen of the horse's foot, and identify the parts
listed as follows. Use the diagrams to aid in this identification. After doing this, find these structures
on the foot. of a live horse.
1. hoof wall: The wall is the portion of the hoof visible when the horse is standing up. On the out-
side it is divided arbitrarily into a toe region in front, medial, and lateral quarters on the sides,
and the medial and lateral heels. Internally, it is divided into three layers: the stratum externum
(outer layer—the periople and a thin layer of horny scales that gives the outer surface of the wall
below the periople its smooth, glossy appearance),the stratum medlium (middle layer—forms the
bulk of the wall), and stratum internum (inner layer—consists of the horny lamina). The wall is
keratinized material, making it hard and durable.
Why would the hoof be constructed of thousands of small tubules of horny material? Take a piece
D n tu pe aded jo aid aes seu aei mon odns som uis oi ll il oi A pue aded jo
a coiled cylinder; it should stand on its own. The tubular structure is stronger. The stratum internum
connects to the corium deep within the hoof by interdigitating with the primary and secondary lam-
ina of the laminar corium. This forms a solid connection between these two layers (Figure 6.14).
 Note the rippled laminar surface of the stratum internum on the model and specimen of the
inside of the hoof wall. This layer is also called the insensitive lamina, or horny lamina. The coro-
nary band (coronet) produces the hoof wall in an area just inside where the hair meets the wall.
 This is actually the coronary corium, which contains multiple papillae with the germinal cells that.
produce the tubular wall. This is why the hoof wall grows downward and needs to be trimmed if it.
does not wear off. The coronary groove is the convex surface on the top edge of the wall that con-
nects to the coronary corium. See Figures 6.14 through 6.17 for examples of these structures.
 2. periople: The periople is a thin layer of tubular horn that covers the top of the wall for a short.
distance distally from where the hair meets the wall. It turns a milky white color when the hoof is
soaked in water. The periopole is produced by the perioplic band, a small area of perioplic corium,
which is just. above and concentric with the coronary band.
Note that structures 3 through 9 can be viewed from the bottom of the hoof.
3. angle of the wall: This area is where the walls turn inward at the heel, forming the bars.
4. bars: Bars are the extensions of the wall toward the apex of the frog.
5. sole: This is the horny bottom of the hoof between the wall, the bars, and the frog.
6. frog: The frog is a cornified tissue that forms a point in the middle of the bottom of the foot. It is
split into two halves at the heel by the central sulcus and is more elastic than the sole. The frog.
with its underlying digital cushion, aids in the absorption of concussion as the foot impacts the
surface of the ground. As the frog strikes the ground, both the digital cushion and the frog are
compressed between the distal phalanx and the ground. As they become thinner and wider, pres-
sure is placed on the bars, the collateral cartilages, and the wall. The blood within the corium has
a hydraulically shock-absorbing effect on the hoof wall.
The compression on the frog, digital cushion, and blood within the hoof causes the blood to be
forced out of the vascular corium. This effectively pumps it into the veins of the legs and upward
against gravity. Because the leg veins of horses do not have valves, movement of the horse's legs and
The Integumentary System 
101
Coronet
Periople
 Papillae of 
coronary
corium
covered by
coronary
epidermis
Tubular and
 intertubular horn 
 of the stratum
medium of the
hoof wall
Laminar corium
Interdigitation of
corial and
epidermal laminae
(stratum internum)
 Stratum medium
FlGURE 6.14: Longitudinal and cross section of the hoof wall, showing the primary and secondary lamina.
Toe
Groove for
coronary band 
Perioplic
sulcus
(groove)
White line
Horny laminae-
Quarters
--Apex of the frog
Upper 
Sole
surface
of bars
-Bars
 Angle of the sole
Heel
Central sulcus
Frog stay ~
 of the frog
Angle of the wall
Frog
 Collateral sulci
Bulbs of the heel 
or commissures
FIGURE 6.15: The bottom and inside of the hoof.
Editorial
102
Chapter 6
Superficial digital tendon
 Cannon
bone
 Fetlock joint
Long pastern
bone
Ergot
 Superficial
Common digital
sesamoidean
extensor tendon 
ligament
 Short pastern bone
 Pastern joint
 Perioplic corium 
Periople.
Deep digital 
flexor tendon
Coronary corium
or coronary band
Suspensory ligament 
Extensor process 
ofnavicularbone
of coffin bone
- Navicular bone
Coffin joint ~
Horny laminae-
- Navicular bursae
Sensitive laminae
Wall of hoof-
Digital cushion
Sensitive frog
Junction of
Coffin bone
 sensitive sole and
Sensitive sole
 sensitive laminae
White line Sole
FlGURE 6.16: Sagittal section of the foot of a horse.
 Perioplic corium
 Coronary corium
Laminar corium
 Solar corium
 Perioplic sulcus -
Coronary sulcus
(groove)
Stratum medium
of the hoof wall
 Corium of the frog
Horny
laminae
Frog stay
Internal surface of the sole
FIGURE 6.17: Dissected view of the hoof and lamina of a horse.
Editorialrevie
The Integumentary System
103
the fluid portion of blood flling the extracellular spaces.
 7. commissures: Two commissures, one on each side of the frog, separate the frog from the bars.
They are also known as the collateral sulci.
8. bulbs of the heel: These are paired, rounded projections—one medial, one lateral-located proxi-
mocaudally from the caudal aspect of the hoof proper.
9. white line: This is the continuation of the stratum internum to the bottom of the hoof, where the
sole and the hoof wall meet.
10. corium: The corium, like other coria previously mentioned, is modified dermis. Like the dermis
of the skin, which contains the blood vessels and nerves and provides nutrition to the epidermis,
the corium also is well vascularized and innervated and supplies nutrition to the wall. The corium
is not considered part. of the hoof proper, but it is part of the foot. The corium can be subdivided
into different regions as follows.
The laminar corium interweaves with the stratum internum and lies between the wall and the third
phalanx. It consists of primary and secondary laminae (Figure 6.18) and supplies nutrition to the
stratum internum. Although the secondary lamina appears striated, it is actually made up of adja-
The perioplic corium lies in the perioplic groove (located above the coronary groove), contains 
the germinal cells, and supplies nutrition to the periople.
The coronary corium lies in the coronary groove, contains the germinal cell for the wall, and sup-
plies nutrition to the stratum externum and medium.
The sole corium lies superior to the sole and supplies it with nutrition.
The frog corium lies superior to the frog and supplies it with nutrition.
Mammary Gland of a Cow
Compare the structures listed below to the model of a cow's mammary gland. If a model is not avail
able, use only the diagram in Figure 6.19.
auoxa puodon e jo aduexa re se asn ii ans eapi aui si mo e jo pue reu au
gland because it con tains all of the anatomical designated ducts, lobes, and lobules. Many other glands
Tubular
Secondary
Primary lamina
Alveolus
cornified wall
lamina
 of laminar corium
Lobule
Intralobular duct or
alveolar duct
Lobe
-- Interlobular duct
Intralobar duct
Interlobar duct
Udder cistern
G
or lactiferous
sinus
Teat cistern
Stratum medium
Stratum internum of hoof wall
 Streak canal or
lactiferous duct
FIGURE 6.18: Microscopic appearance of hoof
FlGURE 6.19: Anatomy of the bovine mammary
wall showing the primary and secondary lamina of
 gland.
the horse's foot.
Copyright 2010 Ceng
Editorialrevie
104
Chapter 6
are named using the same terminology but may lack one or more structures. A mammary gland is a
compound, alveolar, exocrine gland. It is multicellular, and its secretions are merocrine and serous
in nature. It is actually classified as a modified sweat gland that produces milk. See Figure 6.19 for the
 anatomy of the cow's mammary gland.
Comparative Anatomy of Mammary Glands
1. Cow: As pictured in Figure 6.19, there are technically four mammary glands in the cow. However,
it is conventional to describe the gland as having four quarters, each with one teat.
2. Mare: The female horse has a smaller lactiferous sinus at the base of each teat, which opens to the
exterior via two or three lactiferous ducts. There are two mammary glands, one on each side of the
median line in the prepubic region.
3. Ewe and doe: The mammary glands of the female sheep and goat are similar to the cow's in struc-
ture, but they have only two mammary glands.
4. Sow: A female pig's mammary glands contain a small lactiferous sinus at the base of each teat, and
each teat has two lactiferous ducts. There are usually 10 to 12 glands or 5 to 6 pairs.
 5. Bitch and queen: The mammary glands of the dog and cat contain a small lactiferous sinus at.
the base of each teat. The teats are short and contain 6 to 12 lactiferous ducts. There are usually
10 mammary glands or 5 pairs.
Milk Production
The hormones estrogen and progesterone cause the mammary glands to enlarge during pregnancy.
Shortly before birth these hormone levels decrease, and prolactin is released, stimulating lactogenesis.
Maintenance of milk production is dependent on the secretion of prolactin, growth hormone, adre-
suckling of the offspring.
 Milk Let-Down
 Suckling also causes milk let-down; it stimulates nerves that send a message to the posterior pituitary
gland to release oxytocin into the bloodstream. This in turn causes a contraction of the myoepithelial
cells surrounding the alveoli and smaller ducts to cause milk ejection (let-down).
linical Significance
Because the skin is the largest organ of the animal's body and covers the animal's exterior, it is subjected
to many types of injurious agents. Dermatology is the study of the skin and its associated diseases. The
skin must protect the animal from becoming overhydrated during immersion in water, from becoming dehy.
drated during exposure to heat or sun, and from a variety of bacterial, viral, fungal, and parasitic agents.
When an animaf becomes infested with the mite Demodex canis, this condition is known as demodec-
the follicle. This parasite is present in the hair follicles of almost all dogs and in some cats. Their presence
indicates a form of immunity called premunition, which is seen in some parasitic conditions and depends
Many of these dogs have some form of immune deficiency. Treatment is aimed at geting rid of the mites
matures, its immune system will also mature and prevent future infestations and secondary infections.
The Integumentary System 
105
eterinary
ignettes
and things we do not. Personally, I enjoy surgery. The saying "a chance to cut, a chance
to cure" really does define the psyche of the surgeon, and I think I have this affliction. If I
had the opportunity to do it all over again, I would become a board-certified veterinary surgeon-
become completely cured.
The day Mel Parker burst into my hospital carrying a profusely bleeding lrish Setter was the day I
had the opportunity to be both. And after looking at this dog, I wanted to be neither.
At first I thought it was Mel's own Setter, which struck me with fear.
"Take him to the treatment room," I directed, bypassing the exam room.
"/what happened, Mel? where did you get this dog?" I asked as I immediately started to assess
the problems presented and stem the flow of blood.
"I don't know where he came from. All of a sudden he was just there, right in front of my truck. I
was on top of him before I could hit the brakes. You know what my truck looks like, raised up. I went
right over him and stopped I don't know how far down the road- 40 feet or so, I guess. I looked 
back in my rear view mirror, thinking I would see the dog lying there, but it was gone. I jumped out to
look and heard this crying underneath my truck. Oh God! It was horrible. The dog's collar got caught
bop aut iah oi buii ami ha job 1 'aouesip aa aut h bnp peu i pue 'yonl Au jo apislapun aui uo
loose." Mel showed me the wounds on his hand.
The dog was a male, and he was not being aggressive right now. Nevertheless, we put a muzzle
on him to be safe. It is hard to treat an injured animal if the veterinarian or technician is bleeding as 
badly as the dog. It was the dog's collar getting caught that had saved his head from injury, but his
right front leg and hip suffered the rest of the damage. The bone was exposed from his elbow down
to his carpus; the pavement had ground it right down to the marrow cavity. The outer muscles were
 in shreds and bleeding profusely.
Mel was a contractor and an old friend; in fact, we had worked together for awhile. vwhen my hos-
pital was being built and I was between jobs as a relief veterinarian, I pounded nails, carried lumber.
and helped him build a house or two. It was just like being back on the farm. I knew Mel, and I knew
aaooau bop sjut dlay oi pinoo ay bujuiue op pinom au
After administering some hefty doses of pain medication, which had the beneficial effect of also 
pey shal lean sih 'spunom sly dn uealo pue buipaala aul dois oi alge aam am 'bop aul buiznbue
many abrasions and a few cuts that needed suturing, but nothing of the magnitude of the damage to
the front leg. vwe administered fluids and other anti-shock treatment to stabilize him, and within a few
hours he was doing quite well. The problem, of course, was that there was not enough skin left to
cover the open wound, and it was so large that sliding skin grafts would be of no help.
Fortunately the dog's owner was located within a couple of hours. After some discussion
between Mel and the owner, I got permission to do surgery. The owner was not exactly rich; and in
in a city with a leash law.
I decided a full-thickness skin graft was our best hope. I took a strip of skin from the dog's back,
removed all the subcutaneous fat down to the bottom layer of the dermis, and sewed it over the
open wound.
 For skin grafts to survive, they (like alltissues) must receive blood to nourish the cells and supply
skin graft, in which a section of skin is slid from one area to another, retains its vascular supply.
 Sometimes surgeons willuse a tube graft, which involves making a tubular stalk of skin containing 
the blood vessels, spreading the end out, and sewing it in place. w/hen that section of skin develops
a new blood supply in its new location, the tubular connection is severed and removed. This type of 
106
Chapter 6
graft can be used in areas of the body that are not connected but are close to each other, such as
from the animal's side to an area around the knee.
If these two grafts are not possible, either a fullthickness or a split-thickness graft can be used
For a split-thickness graft, a dermatome knife is used to cut a strip of skin down to the level of the
dermis to prepare it for transplant. Because I did not have a dermatome and so much tissue was 
missing, a full-thickness graft was my only choice in this situation. Removing the subcutis so the 
underlying vessels could attach directly to the dermis was the critical step in the surgical procedure.
I had marked the skin with a surgical marking pen so I knew which direction the hair grew. This
way I could orient the skin strip so the hair grew down the leg, not up. After suturing the skin graft in
place, my technician and I put a thick cotton bandage, called a Robert-Jones bandage, on the leg
temporarly to stabilize it and apply compression without cutting off circulation. After a few days, we 
switched to another type of splint to support both the elbow and carpal joints. Fortunately, the
damage was to the side of the leg and not to the cranial surface, which might have damaged the
radial nerve.
As it turned out, about 60% of the graft took, and there were no large areas that did not survive.
just smaller patchy areas. Those formed scab-like crusts, and new skin from the periphery flled them
in. The dog walked with a limp for about a year, and then one day the limp mysteriously went away.
All in all, we were quite lucky: Mel for not getting hurt any worse than he did, the owner because
Mel helped him pay for his dog's surgery, the dog because he could have just as easily been killed.
and finally me because it was the first and only time I have ever done this surgery. I'm one for one!
SUMMARY
sahiseied snoea aui uaym asuajap yo aul isiy s,lewiue aul si waisas aeiuawnbaiui au1
the skin. This system also includes the structures that support weight, enable traction dur-
ing limb progression, and enable functions such as digging and personal defense. Because
so many disease conditions occur to the structures of this system, an understanding of both
the structure and function of all the components is necessary. In this chapter we covered the
structure and function of skin and its accessory organs. This included the horse's foot; the
dog's and cat's pad, claws, and extermal surface of the nose; horns; and antlers.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What are the two layers of the skin?
 2. Give the three names of the layer of tissue deep to the skin, and name the type of tissue
of which it is composed.
 3. Name the accessory structures/organs of the skin.
4.
 Name the layers of the epidermis, from deepest to most superficial.
What is the purpose of a Merkel disc?
6.
Where is a Langerhans’ cell found, and what is its function?
Editorialrevie
The Integumentary System 
107
7.  How do the epidermal cells receive nourishment?
8. Name the type of granules found in the stratum granulosum cells.
 9. Name the two layers of the dermis, and indicate the type of tissue of which each
is composed.
 10. Name the touch receptor found at the dermal-subcutis border.
11. Name the three layers of the hair shaft.
12. In which layer is melanin found?
13.  What is the purpose of the arrector pili muscle?
 14. What is the anatomical name of sweat glands, and in what
species are they found?
15. Name the different types of sweat glands.
16. What are the anatomical names for the top of the nose in a dog and the muzzle in a cow?
17. Name and locate the various pads found on a dog's foot.
18. What is the anatomical name for the “quick" of a dog's or cat's claw?
19. Where are the chestnuts and ergots located? They are vestiges of what structures?
20. What is the bony process of a horn called?
21. What structure gives nutrition to the developing antler?
 22. What is the stratum internum of the horse's foot, and how does it relate to the
"white line"?
23. The hoof wall receives its nutrition from what structure?
24. Name the number of mammary glands in each species listed in the book.
 25. Which hormones stimulate lactogenesis and milk let-down?
CHAPTER 7
THE SKELETAL SYSTEM
OBJECTIVES
know the five functions of bone
name and histologically identify the parts of mature compact. bone from a model, diagram, or prepared
slide
 identify all the bones of the cat's skeleton, including the skull bones
 identify the major processes, depressions, and foramina in the cat's skeleton, as specifed in this
chapter
 compare the bones of the skulls of the dog, cat, horse, ox, and pig for location, shape, and size
compare the bones of the foreleg and the hind leg of the dog, cat, horse, ox, sheep, and pig for number,
location, shape, and size
 identify the bones of the fowl, and recognize the analogous bones and major differences in bones
in the mammal
 identify the names (anatomical and common) of the joints specified in this chapter
 locate specified ligaments, tendons, and cartilage
 understand that ionized calcium is the critical form for metabolism, and explain how it is associated with
serum protein levels
MATERIALS
three-dimensional model of mature compact. bone (if available)
 prepared slides of compact and cancellous bone
compound light microscope
+
immersion oil
colored pencils
three-dimensional model of the equine foot. (if available)
three-dimensional model of the knee joint (human or animal)
 whole and bisected skulls of a cat
whole skulls of a dog, horse, and cow (if available)
articulated and disarticulated skeletons of a cat.
 articulated skeleton of a dog
 articulated skeleton of a chicken
 articulated skeleton of an equine foreleg, from the carpus distally, and equine hindleg, from the
hock distally
 articulated foreleg and hindleg of a sheep (Sheep legs are small, easily stored, relatively inexpensive
substitutes for other large animal legs.)
 blood chemistry machine
· assay cards for calcium, albumin, and total serum protein
108
Editorialrevi
The Sk eletal System  1o9
INTRODUCTION
There are two types of bone formation: intramembranous ossification and endochondral
mesenchymal cells, whereas in endochondral ossification an embryonal bone is initially
constructed of cartilage, which eventually is replaced by true bone. The cartilaginous bone
serves as a temporary support structure and is replaced gradually so that no body part is 
S pawoy auoq jo adat isiy aui 'uoeoyisso yo sadst yioq ul 'awii Aue 1e pahoddnsun 1al
woven bone; it resembles spongy bone in its appearance. This bone then goes through a
process of erosion and remodeling to become either mature cancellous (spongy) bone or
compact bone.
Osteoblasts are cells that actively produce bone. They are destined to become osteocytes
and are so named when found in a lacuna in mature bone. Osteoclasts are cells that tear
down bone so it can be rebuilt. The combined actions of the osteoclasts and osteoblasts
have three important effects: (1) Bone is modeled, then remodeled in fetal life; (2) old bone
is removed and replaced with new bone in adult life; and (3) bones heal by laying down
a large callus of spongy bone, which is remodeled into compact bone as needed to bear
weight. In addition to helping remodel bone, osteoclasts are active in the formation of bone
marrow cavities and spaces, which are formed to provide sites of hematopoiesis (blood cell
formation).
The skeleton has three divisions: the axial skeleton, the appendicular skeleton, and a
small visceral skeleton. The axial skeleton is composed of the bones that lie around the
body's center of gravity; this includes the bones of the skull, vertebrae, hyoid apparatus, ribs,
and sternum. The appendicular skeleton is composed of the bones of the limbs. The visceral
skeleton consists of bones that form in soft organs (viscera). The os penis is a bone that
surrounds the penile portion of the urethra in the penis of the male dog, beaver, raccoon, and
walrus; the os cordis is a bone that supports the valves in the heart of cattle and sheep; and
the os rostra is a bone in the nose of swine that lends support during rooting behavior.
Bones have the following five functionis:
1. form (shape): bones help define the shape and appearance of animals
 2. protection: certain bones have a critical role in protecting internal organs, such as the skull
protecting the brain and the ribs protecting the thoracic organs (heart and lungs)
 3. mineral storage: bone is a primary storage site of calcium and phosphorus
4. blood formation (oxygen-carrying cells and immune function): the marrow cavities of
 slley pooig ehym pue pay yiog buianpoid 'uoiewoy lay pooig jo sats aie sauog
 5. leverage (mobility): the muscles and bones work together to enable movement
110
Chapter ?
Types of Bones
tuberosity: A large prominence on a bone; for
example, the ischiatic tuberosity on the ischium of
Bones are classified according to their shape and
the pelvis.
structure as follows.
tubercle: Large and small prominences on the
1. Long bones are proportionally longer than 
humerus, known as the greater and lesser tubercles.
they are wide. Each has a central marrow
trochanter: Large and small prominences on the
cavity and a proximal and distal epiphysis.
femur, known as the greater and lesser trochanters.
Examples of long bones include the femur
and metacarpals.
epicondyle: Roughened area on the sides of a bone,
just proximal to the condyles.
 2. Short bones are about as long as they are
wide, and each has only one growth center.
spine: A pointed projection off a bone, as in the
Examples of short bones are carpals and
spine of the scapula.
tarsals.
crest: A ridge on a bone, as in the crest of the
3. Flat bones have two plates of compact
ilium.
bone with spongy bone in between. This
forms the trabeculae crossing from one
side of the bone to the other. These bones
Depressions
have no marrow cavity but have small,
cavities: Generally articular spaces, where the head
irregular marrow spaces. Examples of flat.
of a bone fits; for example, the glenoid cavity of the
bones include pelvic bones, skull bones,
scapula.
and ribs.
notch: If non-articular, this is a groove or concav-
4. Irregular bones are all the irregularly
ity, as in the alar notch of the atlas. If articular, it
shaped bones, such as the vertebrae and
is inside the joint where the ligaments attach; for
some skull bones. Sesamoid bones are a
example, the trochlear notch of the ulna.
type of irregular bone and are interposed
facet: An almost flat surface, as found on the carpals.
in tendon. An example of a sesamoid bone
is the patella (kneecap).
fovea: A small depression on a bone, such as the
 5. Pneumatic bones are bones with air spaces
fovea capitis.
in them. These include certain bird bones.
fossa: A large shallow depression, as in the supras-
pinous fossa of the scapula.
Projections, Processes, Depressions,
foramen: A hole in a bone.
and Foramina
canal: A small, tubular hole through a bone; it. is
longer than a foramen.
To be able to compare bones, you should know the
terminology used to describe the skeletal system.
The following list. of defnitions is provided to aid
Parts of the Long Bone (Figure 7.1)
in the study of bones and their projections, depres-
diaphysis: The shaft of the bone. This consists of com-
sions, and foramina.
pact bone, a central medullary canal, and spongy bone
at. the proximal and distal ends of the shaft area.
Articular Projections
epiphyses (singular is epiphysis) : The proximal and
head: The proximal end of the bone; it may have a
distal ends of the bone. They have a thin outer layer
neck attached.
 of compact bone with centers composed of mostly
 condyle: A rounded projection on the distal aspect.
cancellous (spongy) bone.
of a bone.
metaphyses (singular is metaphysis) : The regions in
 trochlea: A grooved, sliding surface that acts like
mature bone where the diaphysis joins the epiphy-
the surface of a pulley to increase the mechanical
ses. This is where the bone visually starts to widen at.
advantage in the movement of a joint.
the proximal and distal ends of a long bone prior to
the epiphyseal plates, or growth plates. The meta-
physeal region includes the epiphyseal plate, the
Non-Articular Projections
area in which the cartilage laid down by chondro
blasts is replaced by bone via ossification in a grow-
process: A prominence or projection on a bone.
ing animal.
Editorialrevie
The Skeletal System  111
 Articular cartilage
Proximal
epiphysis
Epiphyseal line
Metaphysis
Spongy bone
Endosteum
Compact bone
Periosteum
Medullary cavity
 Diaphysis
 Nutrient artery in
 nutrient foramen
Metaphysis
Distal
epiphysis
Articular cartilage
FIGURE 7.1: Parts of the long bone.
EXERCISE 7.1
HISTOLOGY OF BONE
When viewing the following recommended bone tissues, frst go to low power, focus, and orient. yourself
on the slide. Then change to high power to view the cellular detail necessary to understand the mor-
phology of the tissue. The high-power, dry objective lens should be sufficient for viewing these slides.
Obtain the recommended slide(s) and locate all the items on the slide you are instructed to find,
the chapter. Draw and label what you see on each slide in the spaces provided.
Compact Bone
Obtain a slide labeled compact bone, and use the plastic model and diagram (Figure 7.2) as a reference
to locate the parts of the bone described in the following section.
SLIDEs REcOMMENDED: Those labeled compact bone.
DEscRiPTioN: Compact bone is a cylinder of bone containing a hard, calcifed matrix and many col.
lagen fibers. The cells, or osteocytes, lie in lacunae similar to those in cartilage. Bones are well vascular-
ized by vessels from the bone marrow canal and the periosteum. Approximately the outer third of the
blood supply comes from the periosteum, and the inner two-thirds comes from the bone marrow.
Editorialrevie
112
Chapter ?
Osteocyte
Canaliculi
Lacuna
Concentric
lamellae 
Interstitial
Osteon
Outer
lamellae 
circumferential
lamella
Blood vessels
Inner circumferential
lamella
Central canal
Periosteum:
Medullary
Outer fibrous layer
cavity
Inner osteogenic
Perforating canal
layer
(Volkmann's canal)
Periosteal vein
Periosteal artery
Trabeculae
Lymph...
Periosteum
Spongy
bone
Compact
bone
Medullary cavity
FIGURE 7.2: Diagram of cross section of compact bone.
 Side: compact bone
First, observe the dense irregular connective tissue surrounding the bone; this is called the periosteum.
Because it is an important source of blood to the bone and provides nutrition to the outer third (as
mentioned previously), veterinarians attempt to preserve as many periosteal attachments to the bone as
 possible during fracture-repair surgery. Just inside the periosteum are multiple circular layers of bone
that go around the entire circumference of the bone. These are called the outer circumferential lamel-
lae. Similarly, just. inside the endosteum are the inner circumferential lamellae (Figure 7.3).
As mentioned in Chapter 5, many round cylinders of bone, called osteons, are located throughout.
bony tissue, and these combine to make up the Haversian system of bone (Figure 7.3). The layers of
Editorialrevie
The Skeletal System
113
Inner
circumferential
Lacunae with
lamellae
Volkmann's canal
 osteocyte inside
Haversian canal
Osteon
X 125
X280
Osteon Interstitial lamellae
Canaliculi
Lacuna with
A
 osteocyte inside
Osteon
Haversian or
central canal
Canaliculi
Interstitial
lamellae
Lacuna with
osteocyteinside
B
Volkmann's canal
FIGURE 7.3: A & B. Cross section of compact bone.
bone between the osteons are the interstitial lamellae. At the center of each osteon is a central (or Hav-
ersian) canal that contains a blood vessel. The dark, elliptical dot-like structures are the lacunae, each
 containing an osteocyte. Note the thread-like lines that radiate toward each lacuna; these are canaliculi,
 of the osteons are connected by transverse canals, called Volkmann's canals, or perforating canals.
Editorialrevie
114
Chapter ?
These canals also contain blood vessels that interconnect to the vessels in the central canals. These
canals, together with the canaliculi, create a complex system for providing nutrition throughout the
bone.
 In the space provided, draw a section of compact bone and label the cells, canals, and other parts
 discussed previously.
Compact Bone
Cancellous (or Spongy) Bone
Whereas compact bone contains more compact bony tissue than interosseus spaces, cancellous bone
contains more interosseus spaces than bone.
SLIDEs REcOMMENDED: This type of bone is found in the epiphysis or metaphysis (just inside the epi-
physeal plate), so slides of these regions can be used. Recommended slides are labeled compact and
spongy bone, epiphyseal plate, or the epiphysis.
spicules, hence the name spongy bone.
Slide: cancellous bone and/or epiphysis
On the slide, note the areas of bony matrix surrounded by white areas containing either undif.
ferentiated cells of bone marrow or osteoblasts. Look at the area known as the Zone of ossification;
you will see light purple-stained areas which have small elliptical lacunae containing osteocytes
(Figure 7.4A). Note the epiphysis is similar in appearance to this layer. In the Zone of calcification
the lacunae are larger. Immediately above is the Zone of hypertrophied chondroblasts, in which they
appear stacked in parallel columns. In the Zone of multiplication the lacunae and chondroblasts have
a more flattened appearance. These are destined to hypertrophy and produce matrix destined to
calcify in the process of ossification, thus lengthening the bone. Above this layer is the Zone of reserve
cartilage, which supplies the chondroblast needed for growth. This area will eventually ossify con-
necting the epiphysis and metaphysis as the growth plate closes.
Editorial
The Skeletal System  115
Spongy bone -
epiphysis
Zone of
reserve
cartilage
Zone of
multiplication
Zone of
hypertrophy
(chondroblasts)
Zone of
1
calcification
Zone of
ossification
Osteocyte
Spongy bone of epiphysis
Zone of
reserve cartilage
Zone of
 multiplication
Zone of
hypertrophy
(chondroblasts)
Zone of
calcification
Zone of
ossification
B
Osteocytes in lacunae
FIGURE 7.4: A & B. Cross section of an epiphyseal plate and spongy bone.
Editorial
116
Chapter ?
 In the space provided, draw a section of cancellous (spongy) bone and label the cells, canals, and
other parts discussed previously.
Cancellous (Spongy) Bone
EXERCISE 7.2
THE SKELETON OF THE CAT
condyles) for a cat. The names of the bones and bone parts listed here are in bold print because these
are the items that. are important to identify and know.
1. Identify, name, and number each of the vertebrae in the following groups of vertebrae (Figure 7.5):
a. cervical: 7 vertebrae; includes the atlas (first vertebra) and axis (second vertebra)
b. thoracic: 13 vertebrae
c. lumbar: 7 vertebrae
d. sacral (sacrum or os sacrum): 3 vertebrae (These three vertebrae are fused into one bone, which
is why they are also called the sacrum or os sacrum.)
e. Caudal (coccygeal): variable number of vertebrae depending on breed of cat (You may see this
abbreviated Ca+ + or Cy+ + .)
2. Parts of a vertebra: Using the cat skeleton, identify the parts of the vertebra listed as follows for each
of the types of vertebrae listed in the previous activity (Figure 7.6).
a. vertebral arch
1. lamina
 2. pedicle
b. vertebral canal
C. vertebral body
d. spinous processes
 e. cranial and caudal articular processes and facets
f. lateral vertebral foramen
g. transverse process
Editorialrevie
The Skeletal System 
117
Inter-parietal 
Occipital
Temporal
Floating
Thoracic
Parietal
vertebrae (13)
Lumbar
rib
Atlas.
 Frontal
vertebrae (7)
Os coxae
Axis
Maxilla
(pelvis)
Canine tooth
Sacrum (3)-
Mandible
False rib-
Hyoid apparatus
Cervical vertebra (7)
 Scapula
Femur.
Manubrium
Xiphisternum
Clavicle
Caudal
True rib
(coccygeal)
Costal cartilage
vertebrae
-Patella
Sternum (sternebrae)
Fibula 
Humerus
Calcaneus
 Olecranon process
Tarsals-
Tibia
Carpals
Radius
 Metacarpals
UIna
Phalanges
Metatarsals-
Phalanges-
FlGURE 7.5: Side view of the skeleton of the cat.
Dorsal arch
Cranial articular fovea
Lateral vertebral
Intervertebral
 Cranial
foramen
notch
Spinous process
articular
Alar notch
 Cranial
 Caudal
process
Transverse
 articular 
articular process 
process
and surface
Ventral arch
process
and surface
Transverse
Transverse
 Caudal
foramen
Dens
process
articular
fovea
Ventral
Lateral mass
Transverse
tubercle
foramen
A
Atlas - Ventral View
B
Axis - Lateral View
Spinous
 Spinous
process
Transverse
Cranial articular 
process
process
process
Lamina
Caudal
Caudal articular 
articular 
Costal fovea
process
Vertebral canal
process
 Cranial
Transverse
and facet
 articular process
Transverse
foramen
Intervertebral 
and facet
process
Body
notch
 Cranial costal
Caudal costal
fovea
Cervical Vertebra(e) - Caudal View
fovea
Body
C
D
Thoracic Vertebra - Lateral View
FlGURE 7.6: Vertebrae of the cat. A. Atlas, ventral view. B. Axis, left lateral view. C. Cervical vertebra(e),
Caudal View. D. Thoracic vertebra, lateral view.
Continued
Editorialrevi
118
Chapter ?
Spinous
process
Spinous
Lamina
process
Vertebral
 Cranial 
Mammillary
arch
 articular 
Vertebral
process
process
arch
Accessory
Lamina
Transverse
process
process
Pedicle
Vertebral
Pedicle
 canal
Body
Vertebralcanal
Transverse
Caudal costal fovea
process
Body
Thoracic Vertebra(e) - Caudal View
Typical Lumbar Vertebra - Cranial View
Promontory
Body
Caudal
Spinous
Sacral canal
Wing of
articular
process
Auricularface
process
Mammillary
sacrum
Spinous 
Accessory
process
processes
process
Cranial articular
Intermediate
Intervertebral
sacral
process
Dorsal
notch
crest
sacral
Transverse
Body
foramen
process
Lateral
Caudal
sacral
crest
articular
Typical Lumbar Vertebra - Lateral View
process
一
Sacrum - Dorsal View
Hemal process
Caudal (coccygeal) Vertebra(e) - Dorsal View
FIGURE 7.6; cont' d: Vertebrae of the cat. E. Thoracic vertebra(e), right cranial view. F. Lumbar vertebra, right cranial
view. G. Lumbar vertebra, lateral view. H. Sacrum, dorsal view. I. Caudal (coccygeal) Vertebra(e) - Dorsal View.
h. transverse foramen (cervical vertebrae only)
i. costal fovea and cranial and caudal costal foveae (thoracic vertebrae only)
j. accessory process (lumbar vertebrae only)
k. atlas (Cl)
1. dorsal and ventral arches
2. ventral tubercle
 3. transverse processes (wings)
Editorialrevie
The Skeletal System 
119
4. alar notch
 5. lateral vertebral foramina
6. vertebral canal
7. cranial articular fovea
8. caudal articular fovea
1. axis (C2)
1. dens or odontoid process
 2. cranial articular surface
 3. spinous process
4. transverse foramen
m. sacrum
1. median sacral crest (the three spinous processes)
 2. intermediate sacral crest
3. dorsal and ventral sacral foramina
4. promontory
 5. lateral sacral crest
6. auricular face
 3. Ribs, sternum, and associated structures: Using the cat skeleton, identify the parts of the ribs,
sternum, and associated structures listed as follows (see Figures 7.5 and 7.7). Also, determine the
number of each rib and sternebrae (i.e., the fourth rib is attached to the fourth thoracic vertebra) .
a. head
b. tubercle
c. neck
d. shaft or body
e. costal cartilage
f. costochondral junction
g. true (#1-9), false (#10-12), and floating ribs (#13)
h. sternum
1. sternebrae
 2. manubrium sterni
i. xiphoid process
 j. xiphoid cartilage
k. intersternal cartilage
Neck -
 Manubrium
Tubercle
Head 
 3rd sternebrae
Angle
Sternebrae of body
Shaftbody
 Articular
Intersternal cartilage
sulrface
for costal
Costochondral
Xiphoid process
Depression for
cartilage
 junction
costal cartilage
Xiphoid cartilage
A
B
Costal cartilage
FlGURE 7.7: Sternum and ribs of the cat. A. Sternum, ventral view. B. Ribs, lateral view.
Editorial
120
Chapter ?
Incisors
Canine tooth
Incisive bone 
 Rostral palatine
foramen
Zygomatic process
Extemal nares
of maxilla
Maxilla
Infraorbital foramen 
 Nasal bone
Maxillary foramen
Lacrimal bone
Maxilla 
Ethmoid bone
 Palatine 
Zygomatic bone
Frontal suture
Orbit
 Frontal process of 
Frontal bone
Zygomatic
Temporal fossa
Zygomatic process
of frontal
Bregma
Zygomatic process
of temporal
Coronal suture
Temporal bone 
-Parietal bone
Sagittal suture
Lambdoidal suture :
 Sagittal crest 
Occipital bone :
 Interparietal bone
Nuchal crest
External occipital
A
protuberance
Incisors
Rostral palatine
Canine tooth 
foramen
Incisive bone
Premolars
 Maxilla 
Infraorbital foramen 
Caudal palatine
foramen
Palatinebone
Molar -
Internal naris
Vomer-
Zygomatic bone
Frontal bone
Zygomatic process
of frontal bone
Frontal process
 Presphenoid 
of zygomatic
Hamulus
Pterygoid bone
Round foramen
Oval foramen 
Alisphenoid
 Mandibular fossa
Entry for eustachian 
Retroarticular process
tube
Temporal bone 
 Basisphenoid 
Externalauditorymeatus
Tympanic bulla
Occipital bone
Tympano-occipital fissure
(leads to jugular foramen)
 Mastoid process 
 Paracondylar process
Foramen magnum
 Occipital condyle
Occipital bone 
B
Nuchal crest
FlGURE 7.8: Skull and mandible of the cat. A. Skull, dorsal view. B. Skull, ventral view.
Continued
Editorialrevie
The Skeletal System 
121
Alisphenoid
Presphenoid
Coronal suture
Parietal bone -
Frontal bone
Temporal bone -
 Zygomatic process
Zygomatic process
of the frontal bone 
of the temporal bone
Orbit
Interparietal bone 
Ethmoid bone
Maxillary foramen
(leads to lacrimal 
Nuchal crest.
canal)
 Occipital bone -
Lacrimal bone
External auditorymeatus
Nasal bone
Stylomastoid foramen .
Incisive bone
 Occipital condyle
Infraorbital foramen
 Jugular process 
Mastoid process.
Incisor
Tympanic bulla
Canine
Temporal bone
Maxilla
 tympanic part
Premolars
4thPremolar
Foramen ovale
Pterygoid bone
(carnassial tooth)
 Foramen rotundum .
Palatine bone
Hamulus of
 Optic foramen
pterygoid bone
C
Orbital fissure
Ramus
Coronoid process
Canine
 Mandibular notch 
Incisor
Condyloid process
Mandibular symphysis
Premolars
Molar
Angular process
Mental foramina
(on lateral side)
 Mandibular foramen
D
Body of mandible
FIGURE 7.8, cont'd: Skull and mandible of the cat. C. Skull, lateral view. D. Mandible, medial view.
4. Skull: Using the whole and bisected cat skulls, identify the bones of the skull, their processes, and
the foramina listed as follows (Figure 7.8). Remember, the bones of the skull are irregular bones.
These bones are three-dimensional, whereas the drawings provided are two-dimensional; therefore,
bones bend, curve, and occupy space on both the outside and inside of the skull.
a. bones of the skull
1. incisive
2. nasal
3. lacrimal
4. maxilla
5. palatine
6. frontal
7. parietal
8. temporal
9. occipital
Editorialrevie
122
Chapter ?
10. tympanic bulla
11. zygomatic bone
12. interparietal
13. presphenoid
14. basisphenoid
15. pterygoid and the hamulus of the pterygoid
16. nasal concha (also known as nasal turbinate bones; bones visualized through external nares)
17. mandible
18. wings of the basisphenoid
19. ethmoid
b. processes, crests, sutures, and other protuberances
1. frontal suture
 2. sagittal suture
3. coronal suture
4. muchal crest
5. sagittal crest
6. external occipital protuberance
7. occipital condyle
 8. zygomatic process of the frontal bone
 9. zygomatic arch
10. frontal process of the zygomatic bone
11. zygomatic bone
12. zygomatic processes of the temporal bone and maxilla 
13. bregma
14. paracondylar process
15. retroarticular process
16. mastoid process
 C. parts and processes of the mandible
1. body
2. ramus
 3. mandibular synphysis
4. angular process
5. condyloid process
6. coronoid process (the top of the ramus)
d. foranina and concavities of the skull
1. infraorbital foramen
2. maxillary foramen leading to the lacrimal canal
 3. frontal sinus
4. maxillary sinus
5. oval foranen (or foramen ovale)
 6. round foramen (or foramen rotundum)
Editorialrevie
The Skeletal System  123
7. orbital fissure
8. optic foramen
9. external acoustic meatus
10. jugular foramen (best seen from the inside)
11. tympano-occipital fissure leading to jugular foramen
12. foramen magnum
13. nares
14. choanae
15. orbit
16. mandibular fossa
e. foramina and depressions of the mandible
1. massenteric fossa (on lateral side)
 2. mandibular foramen (on medial side caudally)
3. mental foramina (on lateral side cranially)
Note: Teeth will be covered in the chapter on the digestive system.
 5. Scapula: Using the cat skeleton, identify the parts of the scapula (or shoulder blade) listed as follows 
(Figure 7.9).
a. coracoid process
b. glenoid cavity
c. clavicle
d. spine
Vertebral border
Vertebral border
 Supraspinous
fossa
 Infraspinous fossa
Subscapular fossa-
Spine
Axillary border
-Suprahamate
process
Acromion
 Infraglenoid tubercle
Coracoid process
Glenoid cavity
 Supraglenoid
A
B
tubercle
Clavicle
FIGURE 7.9: Scapula of the cat. A. Left medial view. B. Left lateral view.
Editorial
124
Chapter ?
Humerus - Cranial View
Humerus - Caudal View
Greater tubercle
Greater tubercle
Lesser tubercle.
Lesser tubercle
-Teres minor tuberosity
Head
Crest of the greater
tubercle
Tricipital line
Brachial groove
Deltoid tuberosity
Shaft
 Supracondyloid
foramen
 Lateral epicondylar
Supracondyloid foramen
Coronoid fossa
Radial fossa
Olecranon fossa
crest
Medial epicondyle.
Lateral epicondyle
Lateral epicondyle-
- Medial epicondyle
Capitulum
A
Trochlea
B
Trochlea
FIGURE 7.10: Humerus of the cat. A. Cranial view. B. Caudal view.
e. acromion
1. hamate process (of the acromion process)
2. suprahamate process (of the acromion process)
f. infraspinous fossa
g. supraspinous fossa
6. Humerus: Using the cat skeleton, identify the parts of the humerus listed as follows (Figure 7.10).
a. head
 b. greater and lesser tubercles
c. tricipital line
d. deltoid tuberosity
e. brachial groove
f. shaft
 g. supracondyloid foramen
h. medial and lateral epicondyles
i. coronoid fossa
j. radial fossa
k. trochlea
1. capitulum
7. Radlius: Using the cat skeleton, identify the parts of the radius listed as follows (Figure 7.11).
a. head
b. radial tuberosity
c. shaft
d. styloid process (medial)
Editorialrevie
The Skeletal System 125
Uina
Tuber olecranon
 Radius
Olecranon process
Head
Anconeal process
Trochlear notch
Neck
Radial tuberosity-
Medial coronoid
Lateral coronoid process
process
Radial notch
Body or shaft
Shaft
Medial styloid process
Articular circumference
Lateral
A
B
styloid process
FIGURE 7.11: A. Radius. B. UIna of the cat.
8. Ulna: Using the cat skeleton, identify the parts of the ulna listed as follows (see Figure 7.11).
a. trochlear notch
b. olecranon (Tuber olecranon) (plural: olecranoni)
c. anconeal process
 d. medial and lateral coronoid processes
e. lateral styloid process
f. body of the ulna
9. Carpus, metacarpal bones, and phalanges: Using the cat skeleton, identify the parts of the carpus,
 metacarpal bones, and phalanges of the digits listed as follows (Figure 7.12).
a. intermedioradial carpal bone
b. ulnar carpal bone
c. accessory carpal bone (on lateral aspect. of leg in all species)
d. carpal bones I to IV (medial to lateral)
e. metacarpal bones I to V
f. head (proximal end)
g. body (shaft)
h. base (distal end)
i. proximal sesamoid bones
 j. proximal phalanges of digits I to V
k. middle phalanges of digits I to V (the dewclaw, digit I, has no middle phalanx)
Editorialrevie
126
Chapter ?
1. clistal phalanges of digits I to V
m. unguicular process of the distal phalanges
10. Os coxae (pelvis): Using the cat skeleton, identify the parts of the os coxae (pelvis) listed as follows
(Figure 7.13). There are four bones of the pelvis: the ilium, ischium, pubis, and acetabular bones.
The acetabular bone is in the center of the acetabulum. There is no clear distinction as to where
one bone starts and another leaves off.
a. acetabulum
b. acetabular fossa (the cavity of the acetabulum)
C. acetabular notch (the center area)
d. obturator foramen
e. ilium
Intermedioradial
Carpal 
carpal bone
bone Ill 
Accessory
Carpal
carpal bone
bone Il
UInar
Carpal
bone I
carpal bone
 Proximal
 Carpal bone IV
phalange I
(Medial)
(Lateral)
Distal
Metacarpal
phalange I
bones I-V
Proximal
 Proximal
phalanges
sesamoid bones 
li-V
Middle
phalanges
II-V
Distal
phalanges
Unguicular
ii-V
process
FlGURE 7.12: Carpal bones, metacarpal bones, and phalanges of the cat.
Lateral View of Os Coxae
Medial View of Os Coxae
Tuber
lliac crest
sacrale
Tuber coxae
Gluteal
llium
suface
Greater-
ischiatic notch
Hschial spine
Acetabulum
Lesser-
 ischiatic notch
Crest of pubis
Pubis
Obturator
Articulation surface
foramen
 of pubic symphysis
Ischium 
Ischial
Pubis
tuberosity
(tuber ischiadicum)
FGURE 7.13: Pelvis (or os coxae) of the cat.
Editorialrevie
The Skeletal System 
127
f. iliac crest
g. gluteal surface
h. tuber sacrale (very prominent and important in large animals)
i. tuber coxae (very prominent and important in large animals)
 j. greater ischiatic notch
k. ischium
1. ischiatic spine
m. lesser ischiatic notch
n. ischial tuberosity (tuber ischiadicum)
0. pubis
p. symphysis pubis (or pubic symphysis)
11. Femur: Using the cat skeleton, identify the parts of the femur listed as follows (Figure 7.14).
a. head
b. neck
c. fovea capitis
d. greater trochanter
e. lesser trochanter
f. trochanteric fossa
g. intertrochanteric crest
h. shaft
i. trochlea (medial and lateral trochlear ridge and trochlear groove)
Femur - Cranial View
Femur - Caudal View
Head
Head-
Fovea capitis
Greater trochanter
Greater trochanter -
femoris
Neck-
Trochanteric
Neck
Lesser trochanter
fossa
Lesser trochanter
Intertrochanteric
crest
Linea aspera
Shaft
Sesamoid bones -
Medial epicondyle
Intercondyloid
fossa
Patellar surface
 Lateral epicondyle
(trochilea)
Lateral condyle
Medial condyle
A Medial condyle
Lateral condyle
B
FIGURE 7.14: Femur of the cat. A. Cranial view. B. Caudal view.
Editorial
128
Chapter ?
 j. medial and lateral condyles
k. medial and lateral epicondyles
1. patella (or kneecap)
m. sesamoid bones
12. Tibia: Using the cat skeleton, identify the parts of the tibia listed as follows (Figure 7.15) .
 a. medial and lateral condyles
b. tibial tuberosity
c. shaft
d. medial malleolus
13. Fibula: Using the cat skeleton, identify the parts of the fbula listed as follows (see Figure 7.15).
a. head
b. shaft
c. lateral malleolus
14. Tarsus: Using the cat skeleton, identify the parts of the tarsus (the tarsal bones), also known as the
hock, listed as follows (Figure 7.16).
a. talus (tibial tarsal bone)
b. trochlea
C. calcaneus (fibular tarsal bone)
d. tuber calcanei
e. sustentaculum tali
f. central tarsal bone
g. tarsal bones I to IV
Tibia - Ventral View
Fibula - Ventral View
Lateral 
Intercondyloid eminence
condyle
Head
Medial condyle 
Tibial tuberosity
Patella
 Shaft
Crest-
Shaft-
Lateral malleolus
A
Medial malleolus
B
FlGURE 7.15: A. Tibia, ventral view; B. Fibula, ventral view of the cat.
Editorial
The Skeletal System
129
15. Metatarsals and phalanges: Using the cat skeleton, identify the metatarsals and phalanges listed as
follows (see Figure 7.16) .
a. metatarsal bones I to V
b. body
C. proximal sesamoid bones
d. proximal phalanges of digits II to V (medial to lateral; digit I usually is missing in the cat)
e. middle phalanges of digits I to V
f. cdistal phalanges of digits ⅡI to V
Tuber calcanei
Calcaneus
Trochlea
Talus
Central tarsal
bone
Tarsal
bone Ill
Tarsal bone |
Tarsal bone Il
Metatarsal bone |
Talus
calcanei
Tarsal
bone I
Sustentaculum
Metatarsal
tali
bone l
Calcaneus
Calcaneus
Central
(fibular
tarsal
tarsal bone)
Body
bone 
Talus
(tibial
tarsal bone)
Metatarsal
bone ll-IV
Tarsal
Tarsal
bone IV
bone IV
Distal
Tarsal
sesamoid bones
phalanges
Tarsal
bone Ill
 Proximal phalanges II-V
bone ll 
1I-V
Tarsal
Tarsal
Metatarsal
Middle phalanges II-V
bone Ill
bone l
bonesI-V
Cavilal view
Cranial view
Editorial
130
Chapter ?
EXERCISE 7.3
COMPARATIVE OSTEOLOGY
1.1
 Using skulls from the dog (Figure 7.17A), horse (Figure 7.17B and C), and ox (Figure 7.17D and
E), identify the following bones, and compare them to each other and to the bones in the skull of
the cat (Figure 17.8).
a. maxilla
b. frontal and frontal sinus
c. parietal
d. occipital
e. temporal
f. nasal
g. lacrimal
h. zygomatic arch
i. mandible
 Temporal wing of
Zygomatic
sphenoid
Frontal
Parietal
 Palatine
Lacrimal
Temporal
Maxilla
Nasal
 Occipital
Incisive
Tympanohyoid cartilage
Stylohyoid
Mandible
Epihyoid
Keratohyoid 
Basihyoid
Thyrohyoid
Trachea
Thyroid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
FIGURE 7.17: A. Skull of the dog.
Continued
Editorial
The Skeletal System 
131
Supraorbital foramen
Orbit
 Frontal
Lacrimal foramen
Zygomatic arch (zygomatic process of temporal)
 Coronoid process of mandible
Zygomatic (malar)
Parietal
Lacrimal
Interparietal
Maxilla
 Nuchal crest (caudal 
Infraorbital foramen
end of skull]
-Petrous temporal
Nasal
Occipital
External acousticmeatus
 Occipital condyle
Jugular process
 Premaxilla (incisive
(paramastoid process)
bone - os incisivum)
Condyle of mandible
 Foramen
incisivum (rostral
Squamous temporal
end of skull]
Palatine
Mental foramen
Mandible
B
Lateral View
Occipital
Nuchal crest (caudal end of skull})
 Interparietal
Petrous temporal
 Parietal 
 Squamous temporal
Coronoid process of mandible 
Zygomatic arch (zygomatic process of temporal)
 Supraorbital foramen 
Frontal
Orbit
 Lacrimal
Zygomatic (malar)
Nasal
Maxilla
 Infraorbital foramen 
 Premaxilla (incisive bone - os incisivum)
 Foramen incisivum (rostral end of skull)
C
Dorsal View
FlGURE 7.17, cont'd: B and C. Skull of the horse.
Continued
Editorial
132
Chapter ?
Zygomatic process of temporal bone
 Coronoid process of mandible.
Temporal process and frontal ,
Frontal 
Cornual process
process of zygomatic bone 
bone
Zygomatic process,
Oribital part of lacrimal bone,
Lacrimal bulla
 Parietal bone
Fossa for lacrimal sac
Squamous part of
Lacrimal bone
temporal bone
 Condylar process of
mandible
Nasal bone
Occipital bone
 Occipital condyle
Zygomatic bone
 External acoustic
Maxill a
meatus
 Infraorbital foramen
 Jugular process
Incisive bone
Tympanic bulla
 Perpendicular part o1
Facial tuber
palatine bone 
Angle of mandible
Mental foramen
D
Mandible
Parietal bone
Intercorunal
Nuchal eminence
protuberance
Cornual process
Sagittal crest -
Temporal fossa
Zygomatic arch 
 Supraorbital foramen
 Frontal bone
Supraorbital groove
Orbit
Zygomatic bone
Lacrimal bone
Nasal bone
Maxilla
-Facial tuber
Nasal process of
incisive bone
Palatine process
Palatine fissure
of incisive bone
Body of incisive
bone
FIGURE 7.17, cont'd: D. Skull of the ox, lateral view. E. Skull of the ox, dorsal view.
Editorial
The Skeletal System 133
2. Identify the bones listed below using the following items: (1) the front leg and hind leg of the
sheep, (2) the model of the leg of a horse, and (3) the articulated skeletons of a horse and cow from
the carpus and tarsus distally (Figure 7.18).
a. scapula
b. humerus
c. fused radius and ulna
 d. carpal bones (The equine carpus contains the accessory, radial intermediate, and ulnar carpal
bones, as well as carpal bones I to IV; see Figure 7.18B).
. cannon bone (metacarpal [Mc] II or metatarsal [Mt] Ml; Mc III and IV are fused in the rumi-
nant.)
f. splint bones (Mc or Mt I and IV in the horse)
g. proximal sesamoid bones
 Suprascapular cartilage
Scapula (shoulder blade)
Humerus
Ulna
Radius
Accessory carpal
Carpus ("knee")
Metacarpal (ll) (cannon bone)
Metacarpal (IV) ("splint")
Proximal
Metacarpal (ll) ("splint")
phalanx (lll)
long pastern 
 Fetlock joint -
bone
 Proximal sesamoid bones
Middle
phalanx (llI)
 Pastern joint 
 short pastern
bone
 Coffin joint
Distal sesamoid (navicular bone)
 Distal phalanx (lll) (coffin bone)
A
Lateral View
 Medial View
FIGURE 7.18: A. Foreleg of the horse, lateral and medial views.
Continued
Editorial
134
Chapter ?
Radius
Radius
Lateral malleolus 
Medial malleolus
Lateral facet
Medial facet
Accessory carpal
 Intermediate carpal
Accessory carpal
 Ulnar carpal
 Radial carpal
Carpal bone Ill
CarpalboneIV
 Carpal bone IV
 Carpal bone Il
Metacarpal Ill
Carpal bone Ill
Metacarpal IV
 Carpal bone 
Metacarpal Il
Metacarpal Il
Lateral
Medial
Radius
Lateral
malleolus
-Lateral facet
- Medial facet 
Accessory
~Radial carpal
carpal
 Intermediate
carpal
(Lateral)
Ulnar carpal 
Carpal bone lIl
(Medial)
Carpal bone Ill
Carpal bone IV
Metacarpal IV-
Carpal bone |
Metacarpal II
Metacarpal Il!
Palmar
B
FIGURE 7.18, cont'd: B. Carpus of the horse, lateral, medial, and palmar views.
Continued
Editorial
The  Sk el etal  Syste m 
135
Tuber sacrale
Sacral vertebrae
Tuber
Ilium-
coxae
lschium
Pubic bone
Articular
surface
Tuber ischiadicum
of pubic 
symphysis
Femur
Patella
 Fibula
Tibia
Fibular tarsal-
Tibial tarsal -
Central tarsal-
-Distal row of tarsals -
Metatarsal Ill -
Metatarsal IV("splint")
MetatarsalIl-
Fetlock joint -
Proximalsesamoids
Proximal phalanx (lll) -
Long pastern bone 
Pastern joint-
Middle phalanx (lll) ~
 Short pastern bone
Coffin joint -
-Distal sesamoid -
 Distal phalanx (ll) -
Coffin bone
Lateral View
Medial View
FlGURE 7.18, cont'd: C. Hind leg of the horse, lateral and medial view.
Continued
Editorial
136
Chapter ?
Tuber calcanei
Calcaneus
Talus
Trochlea-
Central tarsal
Tarsal bone Il
Tarsal
Tarsal.
bone IV
bone IV
Tarsal bone | 
Tarsal bone Ill
Metatarsal IV
Metatarsal Il -
Metatarsal IV
Metatarsal Ill 
Cranial View
Caudal View
Tuber calcanei
Calcaneus
-Talus-
-Trochlea-
Tarsal
Central tarsal
bone IV 
- Tarsal bone |
Tarsal
Tarsal bone Il
bone Ill
Metatarsal IV-
Metatarsal ll
Metatarsal Ill 
Lateral View
Medial View
D
FIGURE 7.18, cont'd: D. Tarsus of the horse.
Continued
Editorial
Th e Sk e l etal S y ste m 
137
Metacarpal lIll
(Lateral)
Metacarpal IV
Metacarpal
Metacarpal
IV
Metacarpal
Metacarpal
川
Proximal
Proximalphalanx(ll)
phalanx (IV)
Middle
phalanx (IV)
1
Middle-
Distal
 phalanx (IV)
phalanx (lll)
Pig
Digital-
sesamoid
bone(s)
Distal 
Cattle
 phalanx
Sheep
(1)
Goat
Horse
E
Accessorycarpal
 Radial
Ulnar
carpal bone
carpal
Carpal bone I
 Carpal bone IV
Carpal bone Il
Carpal bone Ill
Metacarpal 1
Metacarpal
Metacarpal Il
Metacarpal
Proximal
IV
phalanx I
Metacarpal
 Distal phalanx I
Proximal
Proximal
sesamoid
sesamoid
Proximal
 phalanges II-V
Unguicular
Middle
 phalanges II-V 
process
Distal
phalanges II-V
Left Forepaw
F
DorsalAspect
FIGURE 7.18,
cont'd: E. Comparative feet of domestic animals. F. Carpal bones, metacarpal bones, and
phalanges of the dog, dorsal aspect of left forepaw.
Editorial
138
Chapter ?
h. long pastern bone (This is the proximal phalanx, digit MlI in the horse and digits MI and IV in
the ruminant.)
i. short pastern bone (This is the middle phalanx, digit MlI in the horse and digits MI and IV in the
ruminant.)
j. coffin bone (This is the distal phalanx, digit ⅢI in the horse and digits ⅢI and IV in the
ruminant.)
k. navicular bone or distal sesamoid bone(s) (There is one in the horse and two in the ruminant.)
1. collateral cartilages
m. tuber sacrale
n. tuber coxae
o. tuber ischiadicum
 p. os coxae and acetabulum
q. femur
r. patella
s. tibia
t. fbula
 U. tarsal bones (The equine tarsus includes the talus, or tibial tarsal bone; the calcaneus, or fibular
tarsal bone; the central tarsal bone; tarsal bones I and II fuse d; tarsal bones MI and IV.
 3. Using the diagram and the articulated skeleton of a chicken, locate the following bones
(Figure 7.19) .
a. axis
b. atlas
C. cervical vertebrae
d. thoracic vertebrae
e. synsacrum
f. caudal vertebrae
g. pygostyle
h. furcula (singular: furculum)
i. coracoid
j. humerus
k. radius and ulna
1. phalanges and digits of the wing
m. keel of the sternum
n. ribs
o.ilium
 p. ischium
q. pubis
r. femur
s. patella
t. tibia and fibula
u. tarsometatarsus
V. phalanges and digits of the foot.
Editorialrevie
The Skeletal System 
139
 Proximal phalanx, digit l!
Middle phalanx, digit Il -
Axis
 Carpometacarpus 
Atlas
Middle phalanx, digit III -
Skull-lateral parietal bone
 Orbital fossa (rostral) 
Proximal phalanx, digit IV 
- Nasal bone
 Radial carpal -
Ulnarcarpal
Mandible
Radius
Thoracic (dorsal) vertebrae
UIna
Ilium
Cervical vertebrae
 Synsacrum 
Body of cervical vertebra
 Pelvic girdle 
 Free caudal vertebrae
Humerus
Pygostyle
 Scapula
 Vertebral ribs
Coracoid
Furculum
 Stemal rib 
Patella
Ischium
 Hypocledial ligament 
Keel of stemum
Pubis .
 Fibula
 Femur 
Tibia
Ossified tibial cartilage (tibial sesamoid)
Hypotarsus (calcaneal ridge)
 Tarsometatarsus
Metatarsal I
Proximal phalanx, digit Ill
Middle phalanx, digit Il 
- Distal phalanx, digit IIl 
Distal phalanx, digit Il (distal)
 Middle phalanx, digitIl 
Proximal phalanx, digit Il
FlGURE 7.19: The skeleton of the chicken.
EXERCISE 7 .4
COMPARATIVE ARTHROLOGY AND DESMOLOGY
1. Arthrology is the study of joints. Using the articulated skeleton, models, and Figure 7.18, find the
following joints. Items are found in all species except. where noted.
a. costochondral junction (where bony rib meets cartilaginous rib)
b. temporomandibular joint (T-M joint)
c. shoulder joint (scapulohumeral joint)
Editorial
140
Chapter?
d. elbow joint (humeroradioulnar joint)
e. carpal joint (Found in small and large animals; composed of three joints, each with a separate
 synovial sac or membrane. Sometimes referred to as a knee in the equine.)
1. radiocarpal joint
 2. intercarpal joint
 3. carpometacarpal joint
f. fetlock joint (metacarpophalangeal joint; found in the equine)
 g. pastern joint (proximal interphalangeal joint; found in the equine)
h. coffin joint (distal interphalangeal joint; found in the equine)
i. sacroiliac joint (where the sacrum attaches to the ilium of the pelvis)
j. pubic symphysis (symphysis of the two halves of the pelvis at the pubic bones)
k. hip joint (coxofemoral joint)
 1. stifle joint (femorotibial joint, true knee joint)
 m. tarsal joint (hock joint) The tarsus of small animals is composed of three separate joints, each
with its own joint capsule. The name of each joint is based on the names of the bones from proxj-
 mal to distal, e.g., the tibiotarsal joint is an articulation between the tibia and the tarsus.
1. tibiotarsal joint
2. intertarsal joint
3. tarsometatarsal joint
The tarsus of large animals is made up of four separate joints, and, as in small animals, each has
its own joint capsule. As you can see, there is an extra row of tarsal bones in large animals that.
1. tibiotarsal joint
 2. proximal intertarsal joint
 3. dlistal intertarsal joint
4. tarsometatarsal joint
 2. Desmology is the study of ligaments. Using the prepared models and diagrams, find the following
ligaments.
nuchal ligament: Massive ligament that helps sup-
side to the dorsal aspect. of the ischiatic tuberosity
port the head of large animals. It runs from the
(tuber ischiadicum) of the pelvis.
nuchal crest. of the skull to the spinous processes of
round ligament: Helps hold the head of the femur
the thoracic vertebrae. In dogs it runs from the axis
in the acetabulum. It runs from the acetabular bone
to the thoracic vertebrae.
to the fovea capitis.
interspinous ligaments: Ligamentous bands between
 patellar ligaments in the horse: Medial, middle, and
the spinous processes of the vertebrae.
Jateral patellar ligaments. Horses have three patel-
supraspinous liganents: Run along the top of the
lar ligaments that run from the patella to the tibial
 spinous processes from the thoracic vertebrae caudally.
tuberosity: one each on both the lateral and medial
aspects, and a central ligament in the middle.
transverse humeral ligament: Holds the tendon
of origin of the biceps brachii muscle next to the
straight patellar ligament: In small animals, this
humerus as it passes the greater tubercle medially.
is an extension of the quadriceps femoris ten-
don through and around the patella to the tibial
tuberosity.
for the pelvis. Each runs from the sacrum on either
The Skeletal System 
141
Tendon of
quadriceps 
femoris muscle
Femur
Lateral fabellar
sesamoid bone
 Straight 
Tendon of
patellar-
popliteus
tendon
Collateral
Lateral
ligament
meniscus
Tendon of long
Tibial
digital extensor
tuberosity
muscle
Fibula
Tibia
Lateral View
Trochlea
Caudal cruciate ligament 
 Cranial cruciate ligament 
 Caudal cruciate ligament
Medial meniscus
Lateral meniscus
 Straight patellar tendon
Caudal View
Cranial View
B
FIGURE 7.20:
:A. Stifle joint, lateral view of a dog. B. Stifle joint, caudal and cranial views of a dog.
collateral ligaments: These stabilize the sti-
plantar metatarsal  ligament:  Mainly  observed
fle medially and laterally, coursing from the
 in the equine. This runs from the caudal aspect.
distal epicondyle of the femur to the proximal,
of the calcaneus to the fourth metatarsal bone
 medial, and lateral aspects of the tibia and fibula
(proximal aspect) .
(Figure 7.20).
suspensory ligament: Located between the mefacar-
cruciate ligaments: These stabilize the stifle cra-
 pal bone (or metatarsal in the hindleg) and the deep
nially and caudally; the cranial cruciate is lateral
digital flexor tendon. This atfaches at the proximal
to the caudal cruciate within the knee joint and
end of the metacarpal (and metatarsal) and runs
is attached cranially on the central head of the
 distally, and branches above the fetlock to atfach on
tibia. The caudal cruciate attaches caudally on
both sides to the proximal sesamoid bones. It then
the central head of the tibia, between the medial
sends two symmetrical branches that pass across the
 and lateral menisci (Figure 7.20).
fetlock to join the common extensor tendon and
Editorialrevie
142
Chapter ?
attach to the proximal phalanx. It is a strong support
fibrous sheet. of the serratus ventralis, tendon of the
mechanism of the fetlock. In large animals with more
biceps brachii, the extensor carpii radialis, proximal
than one digit, the suspensory ligament. contains a
and distal check ligaments, just to name a few. The
muscle called the interosseus muscle.
exact components of the stay apparatus in the front.
and hind legs is beyond the scope of this book.
Achilles tendon: This is the combined tendon of the
gastrocnemius, soleus, and superficial digital flexor
check apparatus: The attachments of the superficial
muscles and two additional calcanean tendons from
and deep digital flexor tendons to specific bones of
the thigh; it attaches to the tuber calcanei.
the carpus; as part. of the stay apparatus in the fore-
limbs, the attachment. only of the deep digital flexor
stay apparatus: Its components are certain mus-
tendon on the tarsus.
cles, tendons, and ligaments which allow the horse
to stand upright on the forelimbs and hindlimbs
reciprocal apparatus: A series of muscles and liga-
with little muscular activity. As an example, in the
ments that permit the stifle and hock to both flex
frontleg it includes numerous structures such as the
and extend together.
EXERCISE 7.5
 PHYSIOLOGY: CALCIUM MEASUREMENTS
Approximately 50% of total serum calcium is ionized; 40% is bound to protein, especially to albumin;
and 10% is complexed with anions such as citrate or phosphate. Only the ionized calcium is bio-
coagulation.
Alkalosis decreases ionized calcium levels in serum, and acidosis increases them. Ionized calcium
is almost. always increased in hypercalcemic conditions, and similarly, is almost always decreased in
hypocalcemia (<6.5 mg/dl). During hypoalbuminemia (low serum albumin), the amount of calcium
bound to protein (and thus the total serum calcium) drops. However, the amount of ionized cal-
cium remains normal, or nearly so. Therefore, in dogs with low serum albumin, low serum calcium
is necessary.
Procedure
 Using the provided serum samples, one from a normal dog (sample A) and another from a hypoalbu-
minemic dog (sample B), measure serum calcium, total protein, and albumin in both samples with your
clinical chemistry machine.
Use the following formula to calculate the adjusted calcium.
adjusted calcium (mg/dll) = 3.5 - albumin (mg/dl) + measured calcium (mg/dl)
A
= 3.5-
B:
= 3.5 -
+
Another formula uses total protein to get the adjusted calcium.
adjusted Ca++ (mg/dll) = measured Ca++ (mg/dll) - [0.4 X serum protein (g/dl)] + 3.3
A:
[0.4 ×
1 + 3.3
B:
[0.4 ×
1 + 3.3
Questions
1. Was a decrease in measured serum calcium (when compared to the normal dog) associated
with hypoalbuminuria?
2. Was a decrease in calculated adjusted serum calcium associated with hypoalbuminuria?
 3. How did the two methods of calculating adjusted serum calcium compare; that. is, were the
results they produced close, or not?
Discussion
There should have been a decrease in measured calcium in the hypoproteinemic (hypoalbuminemic) dog
because the test is measuring protein-bound calcium as well as free, ionized calcium. With the correction 
Copyright 2010 Cengag
The Skeletal System 143
factor, the calculated results should compare well to those of the normal dog. If the reason for the decrease
 in serum protein is a drop in the albumin level, there should be a proportional decrease when comparing
a decrease in albumin levels to a decrease in total serum protein, and the values should compare well. How-
ever, if fibrinogen or globulins are decreased and albumin stays the same, the values will vary.
The clinically significant aspects of this chapter could fill a book on orthopedic surgery. A common injury
in large dogs is a rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament. in Exercise 7.4, the anatomy of the cranial cruci-
ate ligament was discussed. The cruciate ligaments stabilize the stiffe joint cranially and caudally. Specifi-
articulated position with the femur.
When this ligament ruptures, a pathological movement called cranial drawer movement occurs. The
name presumably results from the movement's similarity to a desk drawer being opened, and it is the
diagnostic feature of this condition. The veterinarian can assess the degree of movement of the tibia from
its normal position to ascertain whether the ligament is strained or completely ruptured. Sometimes there
is aiso a tear of the cartilage of the medial meniscus. Veterinary surgeons can open the joint capsule to
observe whether this tear has occurred and trim away any remaining pieces of the torn ligament. ff the
corrective surgeries developed for repair of this injury.
A study conducted by Sandman and Harariand, published in the November 200t issue of Veterinary
Medicine, discussed various methods of repairing cranial cruciate ligament ruptures and the frequency
with which veterinarians use the various methods. The most common was the Modified DeAngelis Tech-
nique, in which a strong, non-absorbent suture material is placed on the outside of the joint from the
caudal aspect of the femur to the tibial crest and continued either through the bone or to the attachment of
the straight patellar ligament, or a combination of both. This substitutes for the missing ligament, stabilizes
the joint, and prevents drawer movement.
eterinary
ignettes
oC, Mary Thompson just called," my receptionist told me. "She's bringing Rocky in right
away. He seems to be having difficulty breathing.'
I was just about to anesthetize my first surgery patient of the morning. I put the
needle cover back on the needle and asked my technician to take the dog back to its cage. This was
going to have to wait. I knew that if Mary was in a rush to get her dog here, there was something very
wrong with him. Mary was a nurse anesthetist at the local hospital, and unlike some clients, she was
not the type to panic unless there was good reason.
144
Chapter 7
When Rocky arrived I could tellimmediately he was in great distress. He was open-mouth breath-
ing, and his gums were blue. He was cyanotic; his tissues weren't getting enough oxygen, and his
mucous membrane color reflected this state.
"He seemed fine last night," Mary told me. "Then this morning when I got up, he was like this."
"Had he been showing any signs of problems before this, like coughing or tiring easily on
exercise?"
"Yes, some coughing occasionally, but not bad. And he has been moving really slow lately, limping
a bit on his front left leg, but I thought that was just age. I mean, he's a 10-year-old Geman shepherd!
These dogs don't move fast at this age."
It was hard to understand how this dog had become this ill so quickly without having significant
congestive heart failure, and his lungs were filled with fluid. This was causing the cyanosis. Second, I
found a firm mass on the distal left humerus, just above the elbow joint. This was probably an osteo-
sarcoma, a cancerous bone tumor.
Bone, like other tissues of mesodermal origin, forms sarcomas that metastasize via the blood-
stream to the lungs. Contrast this with carcinomas, which arise from tissue of ectodermal or
endodermal origin (i.e., epithelial tissue) and metastasize via the lymphatics to the lungs. The usual 
procedure when I find a bony growth is to radiograph both the bone and the lungs. In Rocky's case.
the fluid in his lungs would mask any metastatic lesions present.
I gave Rocky an intravenous (Iv) injection of furosemide, a diuretic that would help remove the fluid
aul aaaian diay oi abeo uabixo ue oui wy snd pue 'shaupy aul ela Apog sly wo pue shuni sly woy
the prognosis for both of Rocky's conditions was grave, especially in his current state. Personally. I
gave the dog little hope. Even if he did pull through his current crisis, after spending a considerable
amount of money on treatment, we could find metastasis to the lungs. It was a difficult decision for
Mary to make, especially with the suddenness of the onset of the disease. I thought she would put
Rocky to sleep, but she told me to go ahead with my treatment plan.
 Back in 1981, when this occured, we did not have the number of good cardiac drugs that are
now available. To increase the strength of the heart muscle's contractions, we put Rocky through a
rapid, 48-hour digitalization with digoxin. We monitored him closely with an electrocardiograph s0
we would know when to back off to a maintenance dose. Rocky gradualy improved over the next
week. In that time period we took serial radiographs, and I sent an electrocardiogram by phone to a
cardiologist with whom I conferred on the case. After one week had passed, the radiographs showed 
no sign of metastasis. This did not mean that it didn't exist, only that we could not see it. A lesion in 
the lungs must be greater than 5 mm in diameter to be visible on radiographic examination.
Ten days after entering my hospital, Rocky was stable enough for surgery. The anesthetic protocol
I chose was an Iv injection of a neuroleptanalgesic, a combination of a narcotic and a tranguilizer. I
had a narcotic reversal agent drawn up and ready to use, just in case the dog crashed. I was able to
intubate Rocky and put him on a gas anesthetic with little stress or struggle. Because this was the
distal humerus, not the proximal portion, I amputated the leg at the shoulder joint rather than excising 
both the scapula and leg.
 Having a front leg removed, especially if the dog is large, makes mobility much more difficult
than does excision of a rear leg. Because about 70% of the weight is placed on the front legs, the
dog must move by hopping on the remaining leg. This places great stress on the joints of that leg.
and if arthritis were already present it would be difficult for the dog to move comfortably. Fortunately.
Rocky's good leg was not arthritic.
 Rocky went home with a strict exercise regimen, a diet low in sodium, and medications. He
died quietly in his sleep. It is said that 5 years of survival after cancer in humans is equivalent to
6 months in dogs. Mary and I figured we had given Rocky the equivalent of an extra 10 years of life.
The Skeletal System  145
SUMMARY
In this chapter we covered the comparative anatomy of the skeletal system in great detail.
This system has the greatest variation in structure from one species to the next. The shape
and size of the bones and joints of the limbs reflect the specific needs of mobility and func-
tionality of each species. Learning the differences in the development of both cancellous and
compact bone enables you to understand the process of bone-fracture healing in the young or
adult animal. Learming the names of the bones and their processes, depressions, and foramina
in the various species covered enables you to become better skilled at animal restraint, blood
woid iaut pue sauog asn sanbiuyoat asaut iy Aydeibopes Aleioadsa pue 'suooalui 'smeip
nences as landmarks for these tasks.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Name the two types of bone formation.
2.  In which of the types of bone formation do osteoblasts originate from embryonic
mesenchyme?
3.  Which of the types of bone formation is preceded by cartilage formation?
4. Name the two types of mature bone.
 5. Osteocytes are located in what structures?
6. Name the two divisions of the skeletal system.
7. Name and define the five functions of bone.
 8. Name the five types of bones according to shape and structure; then define and give
an example of each.
9. Name the parts of a long bone.
10. What is the anatomical name for the growth plate in long bones?
 11. Fill in the blank: Compact bone is made up of tubular bony structures
called
12. The central canal of the structure in Question ll contains what?
13.
 Central canals interconnect with each other by connecting canals that have what two
names?
14.
Name the “groups" of vertebrae in the vertebral column, and indicate how many vertebrae
are in each group in the cat.
 15. On which bone is the dens or odontoid process located?
 16. In which group of vertebrae are the bones fused?
 17. Name the area in which a bony rib becomes a cartilaginous rib.
 18. What is the difference between true, false, and floating ribs, and how many of each are
there in the cat?
19.
 The tympanic membrane is attached to what “hole" in the skull?
20. How is the acromion process different in the cat vs. the dog?
146
Chapter 7
21. The dew claw is what number digit?
 22.  What bone has a greater tubercle, and which one has a greater trochanter?
23. What are the anatomical names for the calcaneus and the talus?
 24. What is unique about the frontal bone of the ox vs. that of the dog, cat, or horse?
 25. Give the correct anatomical names for the following bones and joints of the horse's leg:
cannon bone, splint bones, long pastern bone, short pastern bone, coffin bone, navicular
bone, kneecaps, front leg “knee,” true knee, hip joint, hock joint, fetlock joint, pastern
joint, and coffin joint.
26. What is the anatomical name for the wishbone of the fowl?
27. What ligament connects the patella to the tibial tuberosity in the dog and cat?
28. Name the ligaments of the knee, and describe how they stabilize this joint.
29. What is the difference between a tendon and a ligament?
30. What allows the horse to sleep standing up?
Copyright2010 Cer
CHAPTER 8
THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM
OBJECTIVES
 identify and differentiate histologically the three different types of muscle tissue
dissect. the muscles of the cat and identify them by name
 gain a general knowledge of the origin, insertion, and action of the muscles dissected
MATERIALS
 prepared slides of skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscle
compound light microscope
immersion oil
colored pencils
cat cadaver, triple injected (order without skin attached)
 mayo dissecting scissors
probe
1 X 2 thumb forceps or Adson tissue forceps
#4 scalpel handle with blade
· rubber gloves
INTRODUCTION
The muscular system is closely tied to the nervous system. This is illustrated by the fact that
as voluntary muscles. Other types of muscle that move independently of conscious thought are
called involuntary muscles. Skeletal muscle, as you may remember, is striated and voluntary.
Cardiac muscle in striated and involuntary, and smooth muscle is non-striated and involuntary.
147
Editorialrevi
148
Chapter B
EXERCISE 8.1
MUSCLE HISTOLOGY
The purpose of this exercise is to demonstrate the microscopic anatomy of the three types of muscle
tissue. It also illustrates the complexity of muscle anatomy, especially of skeletal muscle. As with previ-
ous chapters, obtain the recommended slide(s) and locate all the things you are instructed to view and 
that are labeled in the diagrams and photomicrographs. Then, draw and label what you see in the space
provided.
Skeletal Muscle
DEscRiPTioN: A muscle that is attached to bone is called a skeletal muscle. It is composed of multiple
bundles of muscle tissue called fascicles (Figure 8.1). Each fascicle is surrounded by connective tissue
known as the perimysium, which separates it from other muscle bundles. Perimysium is composed of 
reticular and collagenic fibers. The fascicles together make up the entire muscle and are surrounded
by epimysium, which is composed of dense irregular connective tissue. These connective tissue layers
contain blood vessels, nerves, and fat, which enable the cells to obtain nourishment, to receive nervous
stimulation and contract, and to slide past each other with minimal friction. Fat deposits are visible in
meat, and their appearance is called marbling. The epimysia of various muscles blend together to form
the deep fascia, a coarse sheet of dense connective tissue that binds muscles into functional groups. The
superficial fascia is less-dense connective tissue that connects subcutaneous tissue to the deep fascia.
 Individual skeletal muscle cells are multinucleated and may be 3 or 4 cm long (depending on the
species). The nuclei are located just beneath the cell's plasma membrane (the sarcolemma), which
is called the hypolemmal position. A muscle cell is also called a muscle fiber. Inside the cell or fiber
 are numerous tubular bundles called myofibrils, which nearly fll the sarcoplasm (the cytoplasm of a
muscle cell). These myofibrils are composed of even smaller threadlike structures called myofilaments.
The myoflaments are composed largely of two varieties of contractile proteins, actin and myosin, that.
slide past one another during the contractile phase of muscular activity. Surrounding each muscle cell
is the endomysium, made up of areolar connective tissue.
Slide: skeletal muscle, longitudinal section and cross section
 On the longitudinal section slide, note the cross-striations; these represent the A, I, H, and M lines,
bands, and zones of the sarcomeres (the contractile units) of the myoflaments. The letters are just.
labels; they do not refer to any specific name. In Figure 8.2 you can see the various lines, bands, and
 zones that are visible with normal light microscopy.
The depiction of an electron micrograph in Figure 8.3A and the drawing in Figure 8.3B illustrate the
Perimysium
Muscle
fiber,(cell)
A band Zline
Endomysium 
(between
Endomysium
fibers)
Blood
vessel
Epimysium -
Fascicle
Tendon
(wrapped by
perimysium)
Bone
Iband
FlGURE 8.1: Three-dimensional view of muscle
FGURE 8.2:
Longitudinal section of  skeletal
and its connective tissue layers.
muscle.
Copyright 2010 Ceng
Editorialrevie
The Muscular System
149
Nucleus
I band
A band
I band
disc
H zone
M
line
Sarcolemma
Triad
Mitochondria
Myofibrils
Tubules of
sarcoplasmic
reticulum
 Terminal cisterna 
 of the sarcoplasmic
Part of a skeletal
reticulum
 muscle fiber (cell)
Ttubule
B
 Sarcolemma 
 Myofibril
FIGURE 8.3: Skeletal muscle. A. Depiction of an electron micrograph. B. Microfibril structure with
sarcoplasmic reticulum.
Continued
Editorial
150
Chapter B
Nucleus
Iband  A band
Onesarcomere
A
band
band
band
H
zone
Z
M
line
line
line
Relaxed
Actin
filament
Myosin
filament
Contracted
FIGURE 8.4: A sarcomere.
Editorial
The Muscular System
151
filament; it does not change in length. The thin actin filaments slide across the myosin during contrac-
tion. Because these filaments are anchored at the Z line, the Z-to-Z distance shortens during contraction
(see Figure 4.4). The space between the two Zlines is a sarcomere, which represents the contractile unit.
of striated muscle. The sarcomeres of each myoflament line up together within each muscle cell; thus
each band also lines up together. During contraction, the H zone and I bands shorten proportionally as
the length of the sarcomere shortens. The M line is thought to be caused by transversely oriented, slen-
der filaments that hold the myosin in place. All sarcomeres contract simultaneously, causing the entire
myofibril to shorten, in turn causing the entire muscle cell to shorten. At each junction of the A and I
bands, the sarcolemma indents into the cell, forming a transverse tubule (T tubule) that runs deep into
the muscle cell. Surrounding each myofilament is a web-like system of cross channels that make up the
smooth endoplasmic reticulum, which is called the sarcoplasmic reticulum. It is thickest where it touches
the T tubules (Figure 8.4).
 On the slide, find the muscle cell/fber; the nuclei; the endomysium; perimysium (and perhaps a
blood vessel within); the A and I bands; the H-zone; and possibly the M line.
Draw a section of skeletal muscle in the space provided, and label the parts of the cells.
Skeletal Muscle
Cardiac Muscle
 DEscRiPTioN: Cardiac muscle is involuntary and striated. It is different from skeletal muscle in that.
 its cells are generally uninucleated, may branch, and anastomose with one another using special
cell-surface modifications called intercalated discs.
Slide: cardiac muscle
The striations on cardiac muscle cells are not as noticeable as they are on skeletal muscle; instead, they
 appear as multiple, fine-lined crossstriations on each cell. Find the intercalated discs, the nuclei, and an
example of a branching cell (Figure 8.5).
Editorialrevie
152
Chapter B
Cardiac
Intercalated
muscle cell
disc
Nuclei
Nucleus Intercalated （
Cardiac
Branching
disc
muscle
cell
B
FlGURE 8.5: A. Cardiac muscle. B. Mammal cardiac muscle cells.
 Draw a section of cardiac muscle in the space provided, and label the parts of the cells.
Cardiac Muscle
Smooth Muscle
 DEscRiPTioN: Smooth muscle is involuntary; it is found in organs that need to contract to move fluids,
 or it acts as a sphincter rmuscle to control the diameter of the opening in vessels and airways or between
tubular organs. Smooth muscle cells are non-striated, have spindle-shaped cells with a central nucleus,
and are arranged closely to form sheets. These muscle cells also contain actin and myosin, but smooth
muscle does not. have the orderly arrangement that skeletal muscle has.
Slide: smooth muscle or the intestinal tract
Smooth muscle cells are long and thin, tapered at both ends, and course in the same direction but are not.
 perfectly parallel in configuration. The nuclei may appear rippled if the cellis contracting (Figure 8.6).
Editorialrevie
The Muscular System
153
L.S. smooth
Smoothmuscle nucleus
Nuclei
muscle
 starting to contract
(wavy appearance)
Smooth muscle cell
X.S.smooth
Connective
 muscle
tissue
B
FIGURE 8.6: A. Smooth muscle. B. Mammal intestinal smooth muscle, longitudinal section.
Draw a section of smooth muscle in the space provided, and label the parts of the cells.
Smooth Muscle
EXERCISE 8.2
DISSECTION OF THE CAT'S SKELETAL MUSCULATURE
The anatomical terms for the musculature of the cat differ from those used to name certain muscles in
humans. Numerous cat-dissection manuals on the market use the analogous human muscles' names,
but these are used in human anatomy and physiology classes in the allied human health professions.
 The textbook used as the definitive veterinary source for naming these muscles is the Atlas of Feline
Anatomy for Veterinarians by Hudson and Hamilton.
The important muscles to identify in this exercise are listed in colored bold print. If a muscle is men-
tioned prior to its dissection, it will be italicized. Also realize that there are many muscles in the cat that.
you will not dissect out; these are generally the smaller, deeper muscles.
Editorialrevie
154
Chapter 日
Each muscle has an origin (the site of attachment to a fixed bone) and an insertion (the attachment to
a more freely movable bone). As a muscle con tracts, it pulls the insertion toward the origin. This is known
as the action of the muscle. If you know a muscle's origin and insertion, in most instances you can deter-
mine its action. Muscles may originate directly from the bone or from fascia above the bone, and they are
 often attached to their insertion by tendons. You will remember from your study of histology that tendons,
ligaments, and aponeuroses are made of dense regular connective tissue, which are linear parallel bands of
collagenous fibers. Some muscles insert by means of an aponeurosis, a broad flattened sheet of tendon.
 In the following dissection guide, locate each muscle before making any incisions or attempting to
transect the muscle. Clean the surface of each muscle by gently pulling off or cutting away superficial
fat. With this method you should be able to see the direction of the muscle fbers. Generally, all the
fbers of a muscle will run in one direction, and the fibers of the muscle that is adjacent or deep to it.
will run in a different direction.
As mentioned previously, muscles are separated from one another by sheets of fascia that envelop
each muscle. Discovering these separations will enable the dissector to effectively isolate each muscle.
A scalpel or knife can often create false separations; therefore, it is best to use blunt separation when-
ever possible. This is best accomplished using a probe, the blunt end of a scalpel, your fingers, or
ss pads on (sae o) sossis asn soas (ado sd ar as oo a) soss
apart to minimize bleeding. When separating, leave the fascia that surrounds the muscle attached. This
 should ensure that. the entire muscle is intact and that there are no artificial separations.
To examine the deep muscles, it is frequently necessary to cut through a superficial muscle. Do not.
bisect a muscle unless directed to do so. To bisect (or transect) means to cut into two parts. When bisect-
 ing a muscle, cut through it at right angles to the direction of the muscle fibers, halfway between the
origin and the insertion, using scissors or a scalpel. To see the underlying muscles, reflect the superficial
muscle: pull the ends back, one toward the origin and the other toward the insertion. If these directions
are followed, the origin and insertion of the muscle will be retained.
Part 1: Superficial Muscles of the Chest
Complete the following steps in the dissection procedure.
1. Clean the fat off the surface of the muscles on the left side of the chest. We will not dissect. the right.
side unless errors have been made on the left.
 2. Locate the pectoralis muscles, the large group that covers the ventral chest. The group originates
from the sternum and inserts on the humerus, or close to it. Locate the muscles in this muscle
group (discussed in the following steps) by comparing the cadaver's muscles with Figure 8.7. The
action of this muscle group is to adduct the limb medially.
3. The pectoralis descendens muscle (M. pectoralis descendens) (name used in previous cat dissec-
tion guides is the pectoantebrachialis) is the most superficial muscle of this group. It is approxi-
mately 0.5 in wide and extends from the manubrium of the sternum to insert. on the fascia of the
forearm. The cranial edge of this muscle is about 0.3-0.5 in from the beginning of the entire pec-
toralis group. It is a thin muscle and must be carefully dissected from the pectoralis transversus.
Separate this muscle from the underlying fascia and muscle.
4. The pectoralis transversus muscle (M. pectoralis transversus) (previous cat dissection guides use the
 toralis descendens and cleidobrachialis. It originates on the upper part of the sternum and inserts
 along much of the humerus. It can be diffcult to dissect from the more caudal (and caudolateral)
pectoralis profundus and may appear to have two bodies or sections. The key to this dissection is to
note that the fibers of the pectoralis transversus course in the same direction or slight craniolaterally
(especially in the caudal part) as those of the pectoralis descendens. There is a slight separation in the
fascia where the pectoralis transversus and the pectoralis profundus meet. This muscle is also not very
thick, and as you start bluntly dissecting this muscle from the deeper pectoralis profundus, you will see
that the deeper muscle's fibers actually run cranially under the pectoralis transversus. Also loosen this
muscle away from the cleidobrachialis at its cranial border. Note its wide insertion on the humerus.
 5. The pectoralis profundus muscle (M. pectoralis
ofundus) (known in previous guides as the pecto-
ralis minor) lies caudal and deep to the pectoralis t
transversus. It originates on the middle portion of
the sternum and inserts near the proximal end of the humerus. In the cat, this muscle is larger than
the pectoralis transversus. The caudal part. of the pectoralis profundus muscle was once dissected as
a separate muscle and in older dissection manuals was labeled the xiphihumeralis. It need not. be
Copyri ght 2010 Cengage L
The Muscular System
155
Cleidocervicalis
Cleidobrachialis
Pectoralis descendens
Tensor fasciae antebrachii
 Pectoralis transversus
Pectoralis profundus
Latissimus dorsi
External abdominal oblique
A
Pectoralis
Pectoralis
Pectoralis
Cleidobrachialis
profundus
transversus
denscendens
FlGURE 8.7: A. Ventral view of chest musculature. B. Ventral view of chest musculature of a cat.
separated as shown in Figure 8.7. Start. caudally at. its origin and work cranially, undermining and
separating the caudalateral margin from the fascia and latissimus dorsi muscle. The muscle becomes a
tendinous-appearing band as it passes deep to the pectoralis transversus and inserts on the humerus.
6. The muscle on the shoulder cranial to the pectoralis descendens is the cleidobrachialis muscle
(M. cleidobrachialis) (the clavodeltoid in previous guides). By blunt dissection, separate the cleido-
brachialis from the connective tissue deep to it. Palpate the clavicle on the underside of the medial
end of this muscle (toward the neck). The cleidobrachialis originates on the clavicle and inserts on 
the ulna with the pectoralis descendens. It appears as a continuation of the cleidocervicalis on the
shoulder. Its action is to help draw the limb forward.
Editorialrevie
156
Chapter B
Digastric
Mandible
 Masseter
Mylohyoid
Linguofacial vein
 Sublingual salivary gland 
Mandibular lymph nodes
Parotid salivary gland
Maxillary vein
Mandibular salivary gland
Hyoid venous arch -
Sternohyoid
External jugular vein 
Sternocephalicus
Cleidomastoid
Cleidocervicalis
Cleidobrachialis
Pectoralis descendens
A
Parotid
 salivary gland
Mandibular
 Cleidomastoid
Mandibular
Sublingual
salivary gland (twisted dorsally
Maxillary vein
due to leg position}
Digastric  Mylonyoid
Linguofacial Sternohyoid Sternocephalicus External jugular
B
vein
vein
FIGURE 8.8: A. Ventral view of the neck musculature. B. Ventral view of the neck musculature of a cat.
Part 2: Superficial Muscles of the Neck
1. Remove additional skin from the left side of the neck up to the base of the ear. Be careful not to
cut or damage the external jugular veins or the hyoid venous arch. The external jugular is the large
vein that lies on the ventral surface of the neck, and the hyoid venous arch connects the right and
left external jugular veins at the level of the larynx. At this time, free these veins from the underly-
ing muscles. (Refer to Figure 8.8 during this dissection.)
 2. Remove any excessive superficial connective tissue or fat from the back of the left shoulder and
from the ventral and lateral surfaces of the neck. Do not remove the fascia in the midline of the
back because it. is part. of the origin of the trapezius muscle.
Editorialrevie
The Muscular System 
157
3. The sternocephalicus muscle (M. sternocephalicus) has two parts, mastoid and occipital, known as the
sternomastoid and sterno-occipitalis muscles. They are difficult to separate by dissection, and it is easier
to just identify the main areas of these muscles by their thickness and shape. They originate as a unit.
from the manubrium sterni and course diagonally to insert on the mastoid part. of the temporal bone
and the dorsal nuchal line of the occipital bone of the skull (see Figure 8.8). The sternomastoid muscle
is the ventral portion and separates as a thick, elliptical bundle that unites with the cleidomastoid as a
no-occipitalis is the broad, thinner, dorsal segment that lies immediately cranial to the cleidocervicalis.
The action of this muscle is to turn and bend the head. Separate both borders of this muscle.
 4. Next, locate the sternohyoid muscles (M. sternohyoideus). These are a narrow pair of muscles that are
 connected together along the midline,just superficial to the trachea in the middle of the neck. The cau-
dal ends are covered by the sternomastoid. The sternohyoids originate from the first costal cartilage of the
sternum and insert onto the hyoid bone. Its action is to pull the basihyoid bone and tongue caudally.
5. The cleidomastoid muscle (M. cleidomastoideus) is a narrow band of muscle, of which the cranial
 part passes deep to, and the caudal part. courses dorsolateral to the sternomastoid muscle (see
Figure 8.8). It originates on the clavicle deep to the cleidocervicalis and inserts on the mastoid
region of the temporal bone. Its action is to help draw the limb forward and also to fix the neck,
holding the head in one position. Locate this muscle by looking between the sternomastoid and
cleidocervicalis. Then separate the cleidomastoid along both borders.
 6. The digastric muscle (M. digastricus) is a thin, superficial muscle that. runs adjacent to the inner
inserts on the mandible. Its action is to help open the mouth.
 7. Inserting deep to the digastric and bridging the two sides of the mandible is the mylohyoid muscle
(M. mylohyoideus). To see its fibers you must. carefully remove the thin deep fascia that covers
this muscle. The mylohyoid is a thin, sheet-like muscle with transverse fibers; it. originates on the
mandible and inserts on the median raphe (the connective tissue along the midline). Its action is
to raise the floor of the mouth.
 8. Note the large parotid salivary gland located ventral to the ear. The large muscle mass cranial to
matic arch and inserts onto the mandible. Its action is to close the jaw.
 9. Other structures to find are the remaining salivary glands and the lymph nodes. Located inferior
to the parotid salivary gland is the large mandibular salivary gland. Just cranial to this gland is the
small sublingual salivary gland (monostomatic part). These glands are separated cranially and cau-
dally by the maxillary vein, and lie deep and dorsal to the external jugular vein and caudal to the
transverse jugular vein. The linguofacial vein is the cranial branch that feeds into the jugular vein;
on either side are two small mandibular lymph nodes (see Figure 8.8).
Part 3: Superficial Muscles of the Shoulder and Back
1. The cranial extension of the cleidobrachialis muscle (dorsal to the clavicle) is the cleidocervicalis
muscle (M. cleidocervicalis) (in previous guides called the cleidotrapezius) . This is the broad mus-
cle located on the back and side of the neck, dorsal to the sternocephalicus muscle. It originates
from the occipital bone and the first few cervical vertebrae and inserts on the clavicle. The action
of the cleidocervicalis is to elevate the clavicle.
 2. The trapezius muscle covers much of the dorsal surface of the scapula (Figure 8.9). It is divided into
(in previous guides called the spinotrapezius). The cervical part covers the dorsal part of the scap-
ula. It is a fan-shaped muscle that originates from fascia along the median dorsal line of the back
 and inserts on the cranial aspect of the scapular spine. The thoracic part of the trapezius group is a
triangular sheet. of muscle located caudal to the cervical part. of the trapezius. It originates from the
fascia above the spinous processes of the thoracic vertebrae and inserts on the caudal aspect of the
scapular spine. Separate these muscles from underlying muscles and free their cranial and caudal
borders. The action of this muscle group is to adduct. the scapula
 3. The latissimus dorsi muscle (M. latissimus dorsi) is the large muscle caudal to the trapezius group
(see Figure 8.9). It originates from the spinous processes of the thoracic vertebrae and the lum-
158
Chapter B
 Deltoid, spinous part
Trapezius, cervical part
Trapezius, thoracic part
Cleidocervicalis
Omotransversarius
Deltoid, acromial part 
Cleidobrachialis
Latissimus dorsi
Triceps brachii
Triceps brachii
{lateral head)
(long head)
A
Cleidocervicalis
Trapezius,
Trapezius,
 cervical part
thoracic part
B
CleidobrachialisOmotransversarius
Latissimus dorsi
HGURE 8.9: A. Superficial muscles of the shoulder and back. B. Superficial muscles of the shoulder
 and back in a cat.
 bodorsal fascia. It courses cranioventrally to insert on the proximal end of the humerus with the
pectoralis profundus. Its action is to draw the trunk forward, depress the vertebral column, draw
the limb against the trunk, and draw the limb caudally during flexion of the shoulder joint. Free
the cranial and caudal borders of the latissimus dorsi. Part of the cranial border lies beneath the
thoracic part of the trapezius.
 4. The omotransversarius muscle (M. omotransversarius) (in previous guides called the levator scapu-
lae ventralis) in the cat is a strap-like band of muscle that originates from the atlas and the occipital
area of the skull and passes caudally beneath the cleidocervicalis to insert on the acromion process
of the scapula. Its action is to pull the scapula cranially (see Figure 8.9).
 5. The deltoid muscle (M. deltoideus) consists of two parts: the acromial part (in previous guides
the acromiodeltoid) and the spinous part (in previous guides the spinodeltoid). The spinous part.
a po aunds an jo noadse renno an oe sao i 'uood rn so ai si piotp an jo
scapula ventral to the insertion of the thoracic part of the trapezius. It runs almost parallel with the
edge of the spine of the scapula and inserts on the proximal humerus. Separate and free the bor-
 ders of this muscle. The acromial part of the deltoid originates from the acromion process of the
scapula and inserts on the proximal end of the humerus. Free the edges of this muscle. The actions
of the deltoids are to flex, extend, rotate, and abduct. the humerus (Figures 8.9A and 8.10).
The Muscular System
159
Trapezius, thoracic
part (bisected)
Trapezius, cervical
Serratus
part (bisected)
dorsalis
Rhomboideus
Rhomboideus cervicis
thoracis
Rhomboideus capitis
Cleidocervicalis
Splenius
Cranial part of
 serratus ventralis
Omotransversarius
Latissimus
dorsi
Cleidobrachialis
bisected
Deltoid,
Teres
acromial part 
major
Caudal part of
Deltoid,
serratus ventralis
Lateral head of
 spinous
-E xternal intercostals
triceps
part
Supraspinatus
-Infraspinatus
Long head of
triceps
Rhomboideus
Rhomboideus
 Trapezius, cervical
Trapezius, thoracic
 Serratus ventralis
capitis
cervicis
 part (cut end)
part (cut end)
(pua ino)
Omotransversarius
Supraspinatus
Trapezius, cervical Rhomboideus
Trapezius, thoracic 
Infraspinatus
s Serratus ventralis
part (cut end)
thoracis
part (cut end)
(cut end}
'eo e jo ba luoit jaddn aut to salosnw jeioadns pue japinous aut to salosnw daea sol'g sano
and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial
160
Chapter 8
Part 4: Deep Muscles of the Shoulder and Back
1. To expose the deeper muscles of the shoulder and back, carefully bisect. the cervical and thoracic
parts of the trapezius muscles halfway between their origins and insertions (notat. the midline of the
back). Reflect the bisected muscles dorsally and ventrally.
 2. The supraspinatus muscle (M. supraspinatus) fills the supraspinous fossa of the scapula cranial to the
spine. The infraspinatus muscle (M. infraspinatus) fills the infraspinous fossa caudal to the scapula's
spine. Both muscles originate on the scapula and insert on the humerus (see Figure 8.10) . The action
3. The teres major muscle (M. teres major) originates on the dorsocaudal border of the scapula,
caudal to the infraspinatus (see Figure 8.10). It inserts on the proximal end of the humerus with
the latissimus dorsi. Separate the teres major from the infraspinatus. The action of this muscle is to
extend and rotate the humerus.
4. Observe the dorsal rim of the scapula. A large muscle group originates from the spinous processes
of the caudal cervical and cranial thoracic vertebrae. This is the rhomboideus group of muscles
(M. rhomboideus), which contains three muscles (see Figure 8.10). The most caudal is the rhom-
boideus thoracic (M. rhomboideus thoracic) (in previous guides the rhomboideus major). It inserts
on the dorsal caudal angle of the scapula.
 Just cranial to this is the rhomboideus cervicis (M. rhomboideus cervicis) (in previous guides
the rhomboideus minor) . It inserts along the dorsal rim of the scapula. The division between these
two muscles is somewhat obscure (difficult to see). As the rhomboideus thoracic inserts, it partially
covers the dorsal aspect of the scapula. Follow the cranial edge of this insertion dorsally toward the
spine, and you will find a natural separation in the fibers above the rim of the scapula, and thus the
separation between the rhomboideus thoracic and the rhomboideus cervicis. The action of these
two muscles draws the scapula dorsally and rotates it.
The rhomboideus capitis (M. rhomboideus capitis) is the most cranial muscle of this group.
It is a narrow, thin, ribbon-like muscle that originates from the occipital bone and inserts on the
cranially. Carefully dissect this muscle from the deeper muscles.
5. Deep to the rhomboideus capitis is a broad, flat muscle called the splenius muscle (M. splenius). It.
covers most of the dorsal and lateral surface of the neck. Its action is to turn the head.
6. Bisect the latissimus dorsi muscle at its center and reflect the halves dorsally and ventrally. This will
muscle called the serratus ventralis muscle (M. serratus ventralis). It originates from the ventral
aspect of the ribs, passes medial to the scapula, and inserts on the medial dorsal border of the
scapula (Figures 8.10, 8.11, and 8.12A) . This muscle is also visible on the lateral surface of the body
 at its origin on the ribs. The action of this muscle is to pull the scapula forward and down.
 7. The subscapularis muscle (M. subscapularis) fills the subscapular fossa of the scapula on its medial
side. Thus, it originates on the medial scapula and inserts on the humerus. Its action is to rotate the
scapula medially. Do not dissect. this muscle.
Part 5: Muscles of the Front Leg
1. Clear away the superficial fat and fascia from the upper leg (also called the brachium).
2. The Tensor fasciae antebrachi muscle (M. Tensor fasciae antebrachii) is a thin, flat muscle that.
originates from the surface of the insertion of the latissimus dorsi, extends along the medial surface
of the arm, and inserts on the olecranon process of the ulna. The long head of the triceps brachii
lies deep and caudal to this muscle (Figure 8.13).
 3. On the caudal aspect of the front leg is the triceps brachi group of muscles (M. triceps brachii)
(see Figures 8.10,8.11, and 8.12). The name triceps indicates the presence of three main muscles in
this group, although the dog and cat have four when the small accessory head is considered. These
encompass most of the caudal and lateral surfaces. The long head of the triceps is on the caudal
surface and is the largest of the three muscles. It originates from the scapula caudal to the glenoid
cavity and inserts on the olecranon process. The action of the triceps group of muscles is to extend
the elbow joint. Free both borders of the long head.
Copyright 2010 Ceng
The Mus Gular Sy ste m 
161
Deltoid,
Cut end of trapezius,
acromial part
Cleidocervicalis
cervical part
Cut end of trapezius,
Cleidobrachialis
 Omotransversarius
Supra spinatus 
 thoracic part
Triceps
Triceps
Teres major
Part of
Deltoid,
Infra spinatus 
rhomboideus
brachii,
brachi,
 spinous part 
Reflected
Serratus
lateral
latissimus
thoracis
long head
ventralis
head
dorsi
FlGURE 8.11: Deep muscles of the upper shoulder and back in a cat.
 4. The lateral head is located just cranial to the long head on the lateral aspect of the leg. It.
originates from the proximal end of the humerus and inserts on the olecranon process. Free the
cranial border first; then free the caudal border, making a linear incision in the fascial attachment.
at its distal insertion, and continue it for approximately 1 cm down the olecranon process. This will
enable you to reflect this muscle cranially. You may choose to bisect the muscle to view the medial
cranially to view the medial head. On the medial side of the lateral head is the accessory head. Try
to separate it along the cranial border; sometimes a distinct. separation can be found.
 5. The long, narrow medial head is located beneath the lateral head and can be viewed by reflecting
the lateral head in a cranial direction. It is located just caudal to the humerus. It also originates
from the proximal end of the humerus and inserts on the olecranon process.
6. The anconeus muscle (M. anconeus) is a thin, flat, triangular muscle that lies deep to the distal
insertion of the lateral head of the triceps. It can be seen once the fascia above the lateral aspect.
 of the olecranon process is opened and the insertion of the lateral head of the triceps is reflected
cranially (see Figure 8.12). The anconeus originates on the lateral epicondylar area and the distal
shaft of the humerus, and inserts on the olecranon process. Even though this is a small muscle, it.
is important because it must be incised to perform surgery on the anconeal process in a pathologi
cal condition known as ununited anconeal process (elbow dysplasia). Just view this muscle; do not
attempt to free its edges as it tears easily.
7. The brachialis muscle (M. brachialis) is located on the lateral surface of the humerus, cranial to
the lateral head of the triceps (see Figure 8.12). It originates from the humerus and inserts on the
proximal end of the ulna. The action of the brachialis is to aid in flexion of the elbow joint.
 8. The biceps brachi muscle (M. biceps brachii) is found on the craniomedial surface of the humerus.
Because much of this muscle lies beneath the insertion of the pectorals, it is best viewed by elevating
the insertions of the pectoralis transversus, pectoralis profundis, and pectoralis descendens mus-
cles. The biceps brachii originates on the scapula and inserts on the radius. This muscle's action is
to aid in flexing the elbow joint (see Figure 8.13B).
9. Deep beneath the pectoralis muscles is the coracobrachialis muscle (M. coracobrachialis) . To locate
this muscle, the pectoralis transversus and pectoantebrachialis must be elevated, and the lateral
border of the pectoralis profundus must be separated completely from the fascia of the insertion
Editorialrevie
162
Chapter B
Rhomboideus thoracis
 Latissimus dorsi
Supraspinatus
Spinalis et semispinalis
Rhomboideus cervicis
Longisimus thoracis
Rhomboideus
capitis
lleocostalis thoracis
Cut edge of
Omotransversarius
serratus dorsalis
 Cut edge of trapezius:
Thoracic part
Accessory head of
Cervical part
the triceps
External
intercostals
Brachialis
E xternal
abdominal
Radial nerve
oblique
Deltoid,
acromial
Serratus
ventralis
Latissimus
part
Long head of 
Teresmajor
dorsi (cut)
triceps brachii
 Infraspinatus
Anconeus
Medial head of 
Spine of scapula
triceps brachi
Deltoid,
Lateral and accessory
spinous part
heads of
A
triceps brachii
Cut end of triceps brachi,
Brachialis
lateral and accessory heads Deltoid,
spinous part
Anconeus
Triceps
 Teres major Infraspinatus
Triceps
B
brachi,
 bra chii,
medial head  long head
FIGURE 8.12: A. Lateral view of the deep muscles of the upper front leg. B. Lateral view of the deep
muscles of the upper front leg of a cat.
Editorial
The MusGular Syste m 
163
Pectoralis
Pectoralis
transversus
profundus
1
Coracobrachialis
Tensorfasciae
antebrachii
 Biceps brachi
(cut end)
Triceps brachii,
Tensor fasciae
long head 
antebrachii 
A
(cut end)
Pectoralis
Pectoralis
profunds
transversus
Coracobrachialis
Tensor fasciae
Triceps brachi, Tensor fasciae
Biceps brachii
 antebrachii
long head
antebrachii
(cut end)
(cut end)
of the front leg of a cat.
of the latissimus dorsi and epitrochlearis. It should take only a few small snips with your scissors to
make this separation. The coracobrachialis is found at the origin of the biceps brachi and is a short.
pue poq au pemon alanbo aue gt e ie sua ll 'pm u g oi  aaexodde aosnu jo puq
 away from the insertion of the biceps brachii. It originates from the coracoid process of the scapula
 and inserts on the proximal end of the humerus. Its action is to adduct. the front leg.
The remaining steps (10-12) are optional.
10. Note the thick layer of fascia covering the foreleg muscles. Remove this fascia so that the muscles
can be identified. Observe the tendons of these muscles at the carpus, and separate the super-
ficial muscles of the foreleg. Do not bisect any of these muscles. Compare your dissection with
Editorialrevie
164
Chapter B
Figures 8.14 and 8.15 and identify each of the labeled muscles. The cranial group of muscles, in
 general, extends and supinates. The caudal group of muscles are flexors and pronators.
11. On the cranial side, the most cranial muscle at the elbow joint is the brachioradialis muscle
(M. brachioradialis). Proceeding caudally, you will encounter the extensor carpi radialis (M. extensor
carpi radialis) longus and brevis, extensor digitorum communis (M. extensor digitorum commu-
 nis), extensor digitorun lateralis (M. extensor digitorum lateralis), and the ulnaris lateralis muscle
(M. ulnaris lateralis). Deep to the tendons of the previously mentioned muscles, running obliquely
Deltoid, acromial part
Omotransversarius
Cleidobrachialis
Extensor
Brachioradialis
carpi radialis
brevis
Extensor
carpi radialis
longus
Trapezius,
cervical part
Deltoid, spinous
UInaris
part
lateralis
Extensor
Lateral head
digitorum
 of triceps
lateralis
Extensor
digitorum
Long head
A
communis
 of triceps
Extensor digitorum
Extensor carpi
Extensor carpi
 radialis, brevis 
radialis, longus
communis (and tendon)
Brachioradialis
Extensor digitorum
Ulnaris lateralis
B
lateralis (and tendon)
FGURE 8.14: A. Craniolateral view of the muscles of the foreleg. B. Craniolateral view of the muscles
of the foreleg of a cat.
Editorialrevie
The Muscular System
165
(not shown in Figure 8.14). These muscles
agroup,arecalledthe
: extensors and are innervated by
the radial nerve.
12. On the caudal side is another muscle that angles across the proximal foreleg, the pronator teres
(M. pronator teres) . Just caudal to this muscle is the flexor carpi radialis muscle (M. flexor carpi
radialis), followed caudally by the flexor digitorum superficialis (M. flexor digitorum superficia-
lis) and the flexor carpi ulnaris (M. flexor carpi ulnaris). If these three superficial muscles are
removed, the flexor digitorum profundus (M. flexor digitorum profundus) with its three heads
can be viewed (not shown in Figure 8.15). The radial head appears most cranially, then the humeral
head, followed by the ulnar head.
Flexor digitorum 
profundus, radial head,
(3 heads—deep to
other muscles)
Flexor carpi
Brachioradialis
radialis
Pronator
Flexor
teres\
 digitorum
superficialis
Flexor carpi
ulnaris
凸
Pronator teres
Brachioradialis
B
Flexor carpi  Flexor digitorum 
 Flexor carpi radialis
ulnaris
superficialis
(muscle separated, an anomaly in this cat)
FlGURE 8.15: A. Medial view of the superficial muscles of the foreleg. B. Medial view of the superficial
muscles of the foreleg of a cat.
Editorialrevie
166
 Chapter 日
Part 6: Abdominal Wall Muscles
1. Remove the fat and superficial fascia from the ventral and lateral surfaces of the left side of the
trunk between the pectoralis profundus and the pelvic area. Note the lumbodorsal fascia, the wide
sheet of white-colored fascia covering the lumbar region of the back.
muscles are very thin, each no greater than 1 mm in thickness; therefore, be extremely conservative
in your dissection and cut. through only one layer at a time.
 3. The action of the lateral abdominal wall muscles is to compress the abdomen. This is important.
in forced expiration, defecation, micturition, and parturition. The muscles are also important in
dorsal, ventral, and lateral flexion of the trunk.
 4. The external abdominal oblique muscle (m. obliquus externus abdominis) forms the most super-
ficial layer of the lateral abdominal muscles (Figure 8.16). It. originates on the posterior ribs and
the lumbodorsal fascia, beneath the caudal edge of the latissimus dorsi muscle, and inserts as fascia
on the ventral midline. Make a cut in the middle of this muscle parallel to the muscles fibers and
separate the opening you have formed. Once this muscle layer is isolated, bluntly dissect between
this muscle and the internal oblique. Separate it and extend the opening ventrally to the ventral
fascia. The top layer of this fascia is a broad sheet. of connective tissue called the aponeurosis of the
external oblique. Notice that the muscle fibers terminate about 1 inch before the linea alba (also
called the white line; the mid-ventral line formed by the union of the aponeuroses of the lateral
abdominal wall muscles). The aponeurosis is superficial to the rectus abdominis muscle.
5. The internal abdominal oblique muscle (M. obliquus internus abdominis) lies deep to the exter
nal oblique, with its fibers running in the opposite direction (ventrally and cranially) . It originates
on the lumbodorsal fascia, inserts with an aponeurosis on top of the transversus abdominus, and
continues to the linea alba. Note where the muscle fibers terminate superficial to the tranversus
abdominis before reaching the rectus abdominis muscle.
6. The muscle deep to the internal oblique is the transversus abdominis muscle (M. transversus abdomi-
nis) . This may be viewed by making a second cut, in the same direction as the muscle fibers, through
the internal oblique muscle. The transversus abdominis originates from the vertebral column, the
 lumbodorsal fascia, and the sacrum, and it inserts at. the linea alba underneath the rectus abdorminis
muscle. Separate this muscle from the internal oblique and follow it as far ventrally as possible.
7. Carefully separate some of the fbers of the transversus abdominis. The shiny membrane visible
beneath the muscle fibers is the parietal layer of the peritoneum, which should not be pierced.
8. The longitudinal band of muscle lying lateral and parallel to the linea alba on both sides is rectus
abdominis muscle (M. rectus abdominis) (see Figure 8.16) . To view this muscle, reflect the exter
nal oblique. The rectus abdominis originates from the cranial aspect of the pubis and inserts on
the sternum and costal cartilages. Its action is to support. the abdominal wall and ventrally flex the
abdomen. Dissect only the lateral edge of this muscle from the underlying transversus abdominis
for a short distance to enable you to see the direction of the muscle fibers.
 9. In certain mammals, such as the pig, fat. is deposited in the connective tissue layers between the
muscles of the lateral abdominal wall such that fat and muscle alternate. This part of the pig is sold
commercially as bacon. The small pieces of cartilage often found in bacon are pieces of costal car
tilage from the lower ends of the ribs.
Part 7: Superficial Muscles of the Hind Legs
1. Remove the fat and superficial fascia from the dorsal surface of the back above the hind legs,
around the groin region, and down the legs. Be careful during your dissection not. to damage any
muscles in the gluteal region, because the fascia adheres tightly to the gluteal muscles. Also, be care-
ful not to remove any blood vessels or nerves from the inner thigh.
The Muscular System
167
2. On the superficial craniomedial surface of the thigh (Figure 8.17) is the sartorius muscle (M. sartorius).
It is a thin, band-like muscle, about 1 to 1.5 in. wide. Free both the cranial and caudal borders from the
 ilium to the tibia, and bisect this muscle at. the middle. The action of this muscle is to adduct and rotate
the thigh.
3. The gracilis muscle (M. gracilis) is the large (but thin), wide, flat muscle covering the caudomedial
surface of the thigh, caudal to the sartorius. Free both borders of this muscle and bisect it in the
middle. This muscle originates on the os coxae bone and inserts on the tibia and fascia of the knee
area. Its action is to adduct. the thigh.
Latissimus
dorsi (cut)
External abdominal
 oblique
Rectus
abdominis
Transversus
abdominis 
Aponeurosis of
(window cut in fascia
external abdominal
to view this muscle)
 oblique
Linea alba
Internal abdominal
(white line)
oblique
Inguinal
ring
Spermatic
cord
Internal abdominal 
Linea alba
Rectus
 oblique
(white line)
abdominis
 External abdominal
 External abdominal 
Transversus
B
oblique (cut and reflected)
oblique
abdominis
FIGURE 8.16: A. Muscles of the abdomen. B. Muscles of the abdomen of a cat.
Editorial
168
Chapter B
4. Now turn the cat. over so the lateral and dorsal areas of the rear leg are presented. Caudal to the
sartorius on the lateral surface of the thigh is a tough, white sheet of fascia. This is the fascia
lata (Figure 8.18). The fascia lata covers the biceps femoris, semitendinosus, and semimembra-
nosus, and sends a lamina deep to the biceps. To free the lateral surface of the fascia from the
underlying muscles, reflect. the bisected sartorius muscle and pass your fingers caudally beneath
the tough fascia. With your scissors or scalpel, separate the caudal border of fascia at the cranial
border of the biceps femoris from the quadriceps femoris muscle. Bisect the fascia in the mid-
dle. When the proximal part of it is elevated, a triangular muscle, the tensor fasciae latae muscle
External abdominal
 oblique
Aponeurosis
Femoral artery
Illiopsoas
Femoral vein
Pectineus
Adductor longus
Sartorius -
Adductor brevis-
 and magnus
(muscle continues
underneath gracilis)/
Gracilis
Medial
saphenous
vein
A
Sartorius
Gracilis
B
Femoral artery
 Adductor brevis
Medial saphenous
Adductor
and vein 
longus
 and magnus 
vein
FIGURE 8.17: A. Ventral view of the superficial muscles of the upper hind leg. B. Ventral view of the
superficial muscles of the upper hind leg of a cat.
Editorialrevie
The Muscular System
169
(M. tensor fasciae latae), can be seen. The aponeurosis of this muscle is fused with the fascia
lata. The tensor fasciae latae muscle originates from the ilium and inserts as the fascia lata. It.
acts as the tensor of the fascia lata and as an extensor of the lower leg. Free the caudal boundary
between the tensor fasciae latae and the middle gluteal muscle.
 5. The huge muscle caudal to the fascia lata, covering the entire caudolateral surface of the thigh, is the
biceps femoris muscle (M. biceps femoris) (see Figure 8.18). This muscle forms the lateral wall of
the popliteal fossa, which is located caudal to the knee joint. It originates on the ischium and inserts
on the distal femur, patella, and fascia of the lower hind leg. Its action is to extend the stifle and the
Lumbodorsal fascia
External oblique
Middle gluteal
Sartorius -
Tensor fasciae latae
Superficial gluteal 
Gluteofemoralis
Fascia lata -
Biceps femoris 
Semitendinosus
Semimembranosus
A
 Middle gluteal   superficil gluteal   Semitendinosus
Tensor
Biceps
fasciae lataelateralis
femoris
of the superficial muscles of the upper hind leg of a cat.
Editorial
170
Chapter B
hock when the leg is weight bearing, and it is also a propulsor and acts to abduct the thigh and flex
the lower leg. Dissect the fat from the popliteal fossa and locate the superficial popliteal lymph node
within (Figure 8.19C). Free both cranial and caudal borders of this muscle.
ing for a small, narrow muscle-the gluteofemoralis muscle (M. glutefemoralis) (previous name: caudo
femoralis m.)—at the cranial edge (Figures 8.18 and 8.19). This muscle originates on the coccygeal
vertebrae and inserts on the patella with a long, narrow tendon visible on the inner surface of the biceps
femoris. Its action is to help adduct the thigh. It is not present in the dog, but is in the fowl and reptiles.
 7. The superficial gluteal muscle (M. gluteus superficialis) is immediately cranial to the caudofemoralis
(Figure 8.19A and B). Its fibers originate and extend laterally from the sacrum and coccygeal vertebrae
and insert on the lateral aspect of the greater trochanter of the femur. Its action is to abduct the thigh.
8. The muscle that extends craniad and is located cranial to the superficial gluteal muscle is the middle
gluteal muscle (M. gluteus medius). It. originates on the lateral ilium and the sacral and coccygeal
vertebrae, and it inserts on the greater trochanter of the femur, just craniomedial to the insertion of the
superficial gluteal. Its action is also to abduct. the thigh. The deep gluteal muscle is located beneath the
 middle gluteal and also inserts on the greater trochanter. In the Brown Approach to surgery of the hip
joint, these tendons of insertion must be cut, and the muscles reflected, to perform surgery on this joint.
External oblique
Deep gluteal -
Sartorius 
Middle gluteal
Tensorfasciae latae
 Superficial gluteal 
Gluteofemoralis
Vastuslateralis
Bicepsfemoris
Adductor.
Semitendinosus
Semimembranosus
 Sciatic nerve
Biceps femoris
Gastrocnemius
Soleus
Achillestendon
A
FlGURE 8.19: A. Dorsolateral view of the deep muscles of the upper hind leg.
Continued
Copyright 2010 Cer
Editorialrevi
The Muscular System
171
Abductor cruris
Deep
 Middle  Superficial
caudalis
Biceps femoris
gluteal
 gluteal
 gluteal
 Gluteofemoralis
Fascialata and tensor
Fascia
Biceps
Sciatic nerveGastrocnemius
Vastus
Superficial
Semitendinosus
lata
femoris
fasciae latae (retracted)lateralis
 popliteal lymph node
(with needle inserted)
B
C
FGURE 8.19, cont'd: B. Dorsolateral view of the deep muscles of the upper hind leg of a cat.
C. Caudal view of the deep muscles of the upper hind leg of a cat. Needle is in the popliteal lymph node.
Part 8: Deeper Muscles of the Thigh
1. On the lateral side of the cat's thigh, the caudal borders of the biceps femoris should be free. Gently
lift up the biceps femoris, freeing it from the sciatic nerve and the abductor cruris caudalis muscle
lying beneath. Carefully remove the fat in the popliteal fossa so the medial aspect. of the biceps femoris
can be viewed. Be careful not to bisect the sciatic nerve or this thin muscle (see Figure 8.19A and C).
 2. The abductor cruris caudalis muscle is an extremely thin, long muscle lying beneath and attached
to the biceps femoris and running parallel to the sciatic nerve. This muscle originates from the
second caudal vertebra and inserts on the aponeurosis of the biceps femoris. Its action, similar to
that of the biceps femoris muscle, is to abduct the thigh. It is easy to cut accidentally
3. Turn the cat over so the medial aspect of the thigh is visible. Deep to the gracilis, four muscles are
now visible. The most caudal is the semitendinosus muscle (M. semitendinosus) (Figure 8.20) . It is a
thick, strap-like muscle that. originates from the ischial tuberosity and inserts on the proximal tibia.
 It forms part of the caudomedial border of the popliteal fossa. Its action is to flex the leg. Free both
borders of this muscle.
4. Just cranial and medial to the semitendinosus is the semimembranosus muscle (M. semimembra-
nosus) . This originates on the ischium and inserts on the femur. Its action is similar to that of the
 biceps femoris and semitendinosus muscles to adduct the thigh.
 5. Between the pectineus muscle cranially and the semimembranosus muscle caudally are three adduc
tor muscles: a thin in the cat muscles adductor longus (M. adductor longus) cranially, followed by the
 small adductor brevis (M. adductor brevis) and the large adductor magnus (M. adductor magnus).
All three adductor muscles originate from the pubis and ischium, and insert along most. of the length
of the femur. Their collective action is to adduct. the thigh (see Figure 8.20A and B). Be careful not. to
separate the adductor magnus in the middle of the muscle belly; there is a slight fascial separation that.
can be mistaken for the caudal border of the adductor brevis.
 6. Cranial to the adductor longus muscle is the pectineus muscle (M. pectineus). This is a tiny, thin
muscle located below the femoral artery and vein. The pectineus originates on the pubis and inserts
on the femur. Its action is to adduct the limb, flex the stifle, and extend the hip and hock joints
(see Figure 8.20). Just proximal and dorsal to the pectineus is the iliopsoas muscle (M. iliopsoas), a
Editorialrevie
172
Chapter B
Sartorius
Iliopsoas
External
abdominal
Rectus femoris
oblique 
Tensor fasciae
latae
Femoral artery -
Femoral vein
Pectineus
Vastus lateralis .
Adductor longus
Adductor brevis
Rectus femoris
 Adductor magnus
Vastus medialis
Gracilis
Semimembranosus
Sartorius
Gracilis
Medial
saphenous
vein
Semitendinosus
Gastrocnemius
凸
Femoral artery
lliopsoas
 and vein (cut)
 Sartorius
Pectineus、
(reflected)
Femoral artery
Adductor.
and vein (cut)
longus
Vastus
Adductor
medialis
brevis
Adductor
magnus
Sartorius
(reflected)
Gracilis
(reflected)
Semimembranosus .
Semitendinosus
B
FGURE 8.20: A. Medial view of the deep muscles of the upper hind leg. B. Medial view of the deep
muscles of the upper hind leg in the cat.
 and/or eChapter(s),
Editorial
The Muscular System 
173
Vastus
Sartorius
 medialis
(reflected)
Rectus
Vastus
Rectus
Sartorius
 femoris (cut) intermedius 
Vastus
(reflected)
lateralis
femoris (cut)
FlGURE 8.21: The quadriceps femoris group of muscles in a cat.
 compound muscle originating from the lumbar vertebrae and ilium and inserting on the femur. The
iliopsoas muscle consists of the iliacus and psoas major muscles. Its action is to rotate and flex the
thigh. Only a small, terminal portion of the iliopsoas is visible. It can be seen cranial to the femoral
artery and veins. Its fibers run at. nearly right. angles to the blood vessels.
a s ee es e ss a (soe e ) asn s sasr al as o 
bisected (this should already be done). Reflect the sartorius and the tensor fasciae latae muscle. The
large muscle now exposed on the craniolateral surface of the thigh is the vastus lateralis (Figure 8.21).
Craniomedial to the vastus lateralis is a narrow muscle, the rectus femoris, that originates on the ilium
and inserts as part of the quadriceps femoris on the patella. Remove approximately 1 cm from the
 center of this muscle to view the deeper muscle. The vastus medialis muscle is located on the medial
surface of the thigh, just. caudomedial to the rectus femoris.
The deep muscle beneath the rectus femoris is the vastus intermedius muscle. Using blunt.
dissection, separate the internal margins of the vastus lateralis and vastus medialis from the vastus
intermedius. The three vastus muscles originate from the upper femur and converge to encompass
and insert on the patella (a sesamoid bone) . The quadriceps muscle's action is to extend the stifle 
Part 9: Posterior Leg Muscles
1. The gastrocnemius muscle (M. gastrocnemius) is the large calf muscle (Figure 8.22) visible on the
caudal aspect of the tibia, distal to the stifle joint. There are two bellies in this muscle, one medial
 and the other lateral. The gastrocnemius originates primarily on the distal femur and inserts as the
tendon of Achilles (Achilles tendon) on the calcaneal tuber (tuber calcanei) of the fbular tarsal
 bone (calcaneus). This muscle's action is to extend the hock joint and flex the digits of the foot.
 2. Ventral to the gastrocnemius, on the lateral aspect of the calf, is the soleus muscle (M. soleus), the
third component of the triceps surae. Originating from the fibula, it joins the lateral head of the
 gastrocnemius and contracts simultaneously with this muscle. Deep to the gastrocnemius, and origi
nating from the distal femur, the superficial digital flexor muscle becomes superfcial surrounding
dividing its tendon for each digit, and then inserts on the second phalanges of all the digits. It acts
as one of the flexors of the digits. Its tendon, together with the tendons of triceps surae muscle and
the calcaneal tendons of some muscles of the thigh, are known as the tendon of Achilles (Achilles
tendon) . It will not be dissected.
Editorialrevie
174
Chapter B
Gastrocnemius
 Achilles
 Semitendinosus 
(2 bellies)
tendon
 Biceps femoris
Soleus
 Flexor digitorum
 profundus 
FlGURE 8.22: Caudal view of the superficial muscles of the lower hind leg of a cat.
Part 10: Deep Muscles of the Hind Leg
This is an optional dissection.
1. On the lateral side of the hind leg, locate the following muscles, starting with the most cranial muscle
(M. extensor digitorum longus), fibularis (peroneus) longus (M. fbularis [peroneus] longus), exten-
sor digitorum lateralis (M. extensor digitorum lateralis), and fibularis (peroneus) brevis (M. fbularis
[peroneus] brevis). Consult Figure 8.23 for help.
Fibularis
 Fibularis
Gastrocnemius
(Peroneus) longus
(Peroneus) brevis
Gastrocnemius
Soleus
Tibialis
cranialis
Extensor
digitorum -
longus
Fibularis
(Peroneus)
longus
Extensor
digitorum 
lateralis
Fibularis
(Peroneus)
brevis
Tibialis cranialis
Extensor digitorum
longus
A
B
FlGURE 8.23: A. Craniolateral view of the muscles of the lower hind leg. B. Craniolateral view of the
muscles of the lower hind leg of a cat.
Editorialrevie
The Muscular System
175
Part 11: Deep Back Muscles
1. To view the intercostal muscles (the muscles between the ribs), reflect the caudal border of the
origin of the serratus ventralis muscle and expose the ribs.
2. The fibers of the external intercostals (Figure 8.24) course in a craniodorsal to caudoventral direc-
tion between the ribs. The action of the external intercostals is to lift the ribs in inspiration, thereby
expanding the thoracic cavity.
 3. Remove approximately 1 cm of the external intercostal muscle between two ribs to expose the inter-
nal intercostals, the fibers of which run at right angles to the external intercostals. These muscles
act to depress the ribs during active expiration.
Spinalis et 
semispinalis
Serratus
ventralis
Longissimus
thoracis
lliocostalis
 thoracis
Latissimus
dorsi
External intercostals
External oblique
Serratus dorsalis
(reflected)
A
lliocostalis
Spinalis et
Longissimus
thoracis  semispinalis
 thoracis
 Serratus dorsalis
 External intercostal Internal intercostal
 Serratus dorsalis
External abdominal
muscle
muscle
(reflected)
oblique
：
FIGURE 8.24: A. Deep muscles of the back and ribs. B. Deep muscles of the back and ribs in a cat.
Copyright 2010 Ceng
Editorial
176
Cha pter 
4. Dissection of the deep back muscles requires that you reflect the latissimus dorsi toward its origin.
Bisect this muscle now if you have not already done so. The serratus dorsalis muscle (M. serratus
dorsalis) (see Figure 8.24), which is a series of muscle bundles that appear serrated, originates from
a middorsal aponeurosis and inserts ventrally on the ribs. Reflect this muscle ventrally by cutting
through the aponeurosis and exposing the iliocostalis part of the erector spinae muscle system.
5. The epaxial spinal musculature (dorsal trunk muscles) (see Figure 8.24) is a system of muscles divided
We will dissect. the most. visible representative muscle from each system. It may be necessary to remove the
dorsal fascia to visualize these muscles. The most ventral, the iliocostalis thoracis muscle (M. iliocostalis
thoracis), lies beneath the serratus dorsalis and inserts on the ribs. The middle muscle is the longissimus
thoracis muscle (M. longissimus thoracis). It occupies the space between the spinous and transverse
 processes of the caudal thoracic and lumbar vertebrae, and thus runs the length of the back. The dorsal
muscle of the transversospinalis system we will dissect is called the spinalis et semispinalis muscle (M.
spinalis et semispinalis) . It is found next to the spinous processes of the thoracic vertebrae. The action
of this group of muscles is to extend the spine and neck. Each system has more muscles cranial and/or
caudal to the three dissected muscles, such as the iliocostalis lumborum and longissimus lumborum.
ClinicalSignificance
The clinical significance of this chapter is illustrated in the following exercise.
EXERCISE 8.3
 MUSCLE PHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY
The classic experiment to illustrate muscle physiology is to sacrifice a frog, remove its gastrocnemius
muscle, attach it to a myograph, and stimulate it electrically to show summation and tetany. Please read
about these experiments in your textbook; we will not do them.
Instead, we will demonstrate the importance of an enzyme found within muscle. Creatinine kinase (CK)
catalyzes one of the most important reactions in body chemistry. The concentration of adenosine triphos-
phate (ATP) in skeletal muscle is relatively low; it supplies only the energy needed to maintain contraction
for a brief period of time. Muscles continue to contract after the initial supply of ATP has been used, leaving
adenosine diphosphate (ADP). The ADP is phosphorylated again from another source, creatinine phos-
phate (CP). About five time more CP than ATP is stored in the sarcoplasm. When ATP is used to supply
energy for muscular contraction, the ADP produced is transphosphorylated by the following equation:
 This reaction replenishes the ATP almost as fast as it is being used. Therefore, the ATP level changes
little until the concentration of CP gets low.
Horses are susceptible to a condition known as exertional rhabdomyolysis. Rhabdomyo- refers to
  n sn  a o sn  a nn sa ss pe as 
 breakdown of skeletal muscle cells. This is actually one of a group of disease conditions that share
common symptoms and causes; these are tying-up syndrome, azoturia, Monday morning disease, and
exertion-associated myositis. These conditions most often occur in heavily muscled horses that are
working or in training and/or have been rested for one or more days, but were kept on full feed during
that period. When returned to exercise, these horses may develop a myopathy.
The Muscular System 
177
The resulting pathology is myonecrosis, and the severity of the disease is directly related to the extent
of the necrosis. When a muscle cell breaks down, it liberates myoglobin and CK, among other chemi
cals, into the bloodstream. When a suffcient amount of myoglobin has been released, urine will appear
 coffee-colored because of its presence.
Procedure
1. Three samples of horse serum will be provided: Horse A, normal horse, minimal activity; Horse B, nor
 mal horse, exercised vigorously or given an intramuscular injection; Horse C, horse showing much pain,
sweating, reluctance to move.
 2. Using your blood chemistry machine, measure the CK from each horse.
Horse A =
Horse B =
Horse C =
Questions
1. Was CK elevated in Horse B; if so, why?
 2. Given that CK levels cannot determine the extent of muscle damage (despite the fact that it. is
 organ-specific), why were CK levels elevated in Horse C?
Discussion
CK levels can rise slightly from minor muscular injuries because of the release of CK from the cells. Damage
can be minor due to such events as receiving an intramuscular injection, persistent recumbency, bruising.
a laceration, or hypothermia. In a situation in which there is considerable muscle damage, CK levels will
elevate dramatically, but diagnosing exactly what. amount of muscle damage has occurred is not possible
based on CK levels alone. The presence of myoglobin in the urine is a better indicator of injury severity than
a CK level by itself.
eterinary
ignettes
 OC, I think Lucas has tetanus.,” Ann Coles told me over the phone.
"vwhy do you think that?" I asked. Dogs so rarely get tetanus that we don't
vaccinate for it.
"vell, isn't tetanus fockjaw?" she asked. "He can't open his mouth."
I assured her it probably wasn't really tetanus, but there were some other things it could be
The first thing a veterinarian must do when an animal can't move a body part is to determine
whether it is reluctance or a true inabiity. The former is usually due to pain, and the latter is 
often a neurological problem. In Lucas's case, the differential diagnosis was a broken jaw, a tooth
latter two diseases are now combined into a syndrome known as masticatory muscle 
myositis (MMM).
 Ann brought Lucas to the hospital that afternoon. She was very worried; I could tell by the look on
her face and the strain in her voice.
Editorialrevie
178
Chapter B
 Lucas's jaw was really painful; just attempting to open his mouth caused him to cry cut loudly.
This caused Ann even more distress.
"Ann, the only way I'm going to figure out what's going on is by anesthetizing and administering
an analgesic to Lucas. I'll open his mouth while he's out and not feeling any pain."
to learn until I got the mouth open. wwe did check the rest of the dog 's systems for abnormalities,
but there were none. As I studied Lucas's face, it seemed as though his facial muscles were a little
swollen, but this was mostly a subjective impression and was difficult to say with certainty.
 After Lucas was anesthetized, I was able to open his mouth. Because there was no muscle
atrophy and the jaw was not locked shut, he did not have the atrophic form of this disease. The teeth
looked fine, as did both mandibles. There did not appear to be an abscess behind either eye, and
that left only an inflammatory or autoimmune condition on my list of diseases to rule out. I made an 
incision, took a small piece of muscle tissue from the masseter muscle, and sent it to the lab. wve
also ran blood chemistries and found the CK level mildly elevated. Eosinophils were normal, but this 
wasn't an unexpected finding. The lab confirmed the diagnosis of MMM
Because this is an immune-mediated disease, immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids were
indicated, and the dog responded nicely. In talking to Ann I soon realized that her fear of giving her
dog cortisone would hamper its needed therapy. I tried to convince her that Lucas would need to
stay on the cortisone for six months, even though he would appear to be doing well and be back to
normal. Just to be safe, I decided to educate her into giving treatment. I found some good articles on
the disease, complete with photos from my veterinary journals, copied them, and gave them to her.
The photos of both the atrophic and chronic forms of the disease were very graphic. I don't think the
dog missed a pil the entire six months he was on the medication.
SUMMARY
Most of this chapter has consisted of a detailed dissection of the muscular anatomy of the
cat. We started at the chest, moved to the neck, upper back, front leg, abdomen, hind leg.
and then to the deep muscles of the back and ribs. We also studied the histology of the three
types of muscle tissue and discussed muscle physiology. The muscles of other animals are
similar to that of the cat, so it serves as a good basis for other domestic animals.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Name the three types of muscles, and indicate whether they are striated
 or non-striated, and volun tary or involun tary.
2. What are fascicles?
3.
 Describe the locations of the epimysium, perimysium, and endomysium.
Fill in the blank: The nuclei of the muscle cell are located in the
position.
5.
What is the difference between myofibrils and myofilaments?
What are the two contractile proteins of muscle?
Editorialrevie
The Muscular System
179
7. Define sarcomere.
 8. Which of the “bands" does not change in size when a muscle cell contracts, and which
"bands" shorten?
9. What is the sarcoplasmic reticulum?
10. Cells of cardiac muscle interconnect at junctions known as what?
11. True or False: Cardiac muscle cells do not branch.
 12. True or False: Actin and myosin are present only in skeletal muscle.
13. Define origin, insertion, and action of muscle.
14. What is the function of creatinine kinase?
 15. Under what circumstances might a veterinarian measure CK levels, and what do elevated
CK levels mean?
Copyright 2010 Cen
Editorial
CHAPTER 9
THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
OBJECTIVES
 state the overall purpose and function of the digestive system 
using diagrams, identify the structural anatomy of the alimentary canal wall
dissect. the structures and organs of the digestive system, and identify them by name
 describe and identify the teeth of a cat or dog, including their dental formula and eruption table
1
identify the parts of a tooth
know the methods used in dental charting and the Triadan system of numbering teeth
using a model or diagram, identify the parts of the ruminant digestive system, including rumen,
reticulum, omasum, abomasum, and the large intestine
differentiate between the ansa spiralis of the ruminant and the pig
 know the parts of the fowl digestive system
MATERIALS
 cat cadaver, triple injected (order without skin attached)
+
Mayo dissecting scissors
probe
1 × 2 thumb forceps or Adson tisue forceps
#4 scalpel handle with blade
 bone-cutting forceps
rubber gloves
 models of the equine colon and ruminant forestomachs and stomach
+
three dogs for blood analysis, and two of the three for fecal analysis
10-ml graduated cylinders
 blood chemistry machine, amylase and lipase tests
INTRODUCTION
The digestive system is made up of the structures of the alimentary tract and the accessory digestive
organs. Its purpose is to ingest, digest, and absorb food and to eliminate the undigested
remains as feces. It provides the body with the nutrients, water, and electrolytes that are 
essential for health and growth.
The alimentary tract or canal is a hollow tube extending from the mouth to the anus. The
interior of the canal is technically outside the body because the contents within make contact
only with the cells that line the canal. These cells are mostly the simple columnar epithelial
cells studied previously. They protect the inside of the body from the bacteria and by-products
of digestion found within the alimentary canal. For the ingested food to be available, it
first must be broken down into smaller, diffusible molecules. The steps in this process are
prehension, or using the mouth and lips to grasp the food; mastication, or chewing, which mixes
food with salivary enzymes to both physically and chemically break it down; swallowing.
moving the food through the esophagus to the stomach; digestion and absorption, which take
 place in the stomach and small intestines; and elimination via the large intestines and anus.
180
Editorialrevie
The Digestive System 
181
The accessory digestive organs empty their secretions into the alimentary canal to aid digestion
and absorption. These structures include the salivary glands, gallbladder, and pancreas. The liver is
also considered—among other things-an accessory digestive organ. It is the largest gland in
the body and performs many metabolic roles, such as formation of plasma proteins, vitamin
storage, removal of foreign substances via Kupffer cells (phagocytic cells, also called stellate
reticuloendothelial cells), detoxification, carbohydrate metabolism, and storage of glycogen.
The liver's role in digestion is to produce bile, which leaves the liver via the hepatic ducts and is
carried to the duodenum through the bile duct. When bile is not being used, it backs up through
the cystic duct into a small reservoir sac known as the gallbladder. Bile emulsifies fats; in other
the pancreas to break down the fat molecules into fatty acids for absorption.
The Structural Anatomy of the
that enables local movement of the mucosa). The
major functions of the mucosa are secretion (of
Alimentary Canal
enzymes, mucus, and hormones), absorption (of
The alimentary canal walls have four layers, or tunics.
 digested foodstuffs), and protection (against bac-
From the lumen outward, these are the mucosa,
terial and endotoxin invasion). Each layer of the
submucosa, muscularis (muscularis externa), and
alimentary canal wall may be involved in one or
serosa (adventitia). Each of these layers is composed
more of these three functions.
of a predominant tissue type and has a specifc func-
 The submucosa is composed of moderately dense
tion in the digestive process (Figure 9.1).
irregular connective tissue and contains blood and
The mucosa (mucous membrane) consists of
lymph vessels, scattered lymph nodules, and nerve
fibers. The layer's intrinsic nerve supply is called the
surface epithelium (which in most. cases is simple
columnar epithelium), a layer of lamina propria
submucosal plexus. The submucosa's major func-
(consisting of areolar connective tissue), and the
tions are movement. of absorbed nutrients into the
muscularis mucosae (a thin layer of smooth muscle
bloodstream, structural support for the canal, and
protection. When a veterinarian places sutures in
the wall of the intestinal tract, this is the layer that.
Muscularis
has the holding power.
LongitudinalCircularl
The muscularis externa consists of two layers: an
muscle
muscle,
Submucosa
inner circular layer and an outer longitudinal layer,
both composed of smooth muscle. Between the two
/Muscularis mucosae
layers is another in trinsic nerve plexus, the myenteric
Serosa
 Lamina propria
Mucosa
 plexus. The muscularis externa and its nerve plexus
(visceral
 are responsible for the gastrointestinal (Gl) motility
peritoneum)
 Epithelium 
of the organ.
Villus
 The serosa is composed of visceral peritoneum,
which histologically is simple squamous epithelial
Lumen
tissue, and a thin layer of areolar connective tissue.
In areas outside the abdominal cavity, the serosa
is replaced by adventitia, a layer of coarse fbrous
connective tissue that binds organs, such as the
esophagus and rectum, to the surrounding tissues.
Mesentery
The serosa, with its smooth surface and lubricating
peritoneal fluid, reduces friction during contrac-
Connective
Gland in
tions of the GI tract. The adventitia anchors and
tissue
Submucous
submucosa
 protects the surrounding organs of the GI tract.
 Myenteric
plexus
plexus 
(plexus of
Gland
(plexus of 
Meissner)
outside
Teeth
Auerbach)
tract
Lymphatic 
There are four types of teeth, classifed accord-
 nodule
ing to their shape, function, and time of eruption.
 The front teeth are called incisors (I) and are used
FIGURE 9.1: Basic structural pattern of the alimen- 
cutting; the fang teeth are the canines (C), which
tary canal wall.
are used for grasping; the next set. of teeth are the
Editorialrevie
182
Chapter 9
 premolars (P); and caudal to the premolars are the
 The mnemonic devise for remembering these
 molars (M). The premolars and molars are used for
formulas:
chewing, and since the molars have a flatter occlusal
surface, they have a grinding function. The first set of
kitten 
313 over 312
top same as puppy, bot-
teeth an animal grows are the deciduous teeth; these
tom is one number less
fall out and are replaced by the adult permanent
(one less premolar)
teeth. As you can see from the dental forrmulas, only
adult
3131 over 3121
bottom is 10 numbers
the incisors, canines, and premolars are deciduous.
less than top (one less
premolar), or just add 
Dental Formulas
one molar to kitten for-
mula on both top and
Students should know at least the dental formulas
bottom
for the dog and cat, which are listed in the following
 paragraphs. The dental formulas for the other main
Dental formulas of other
domestic animals are listed at the end of this section.
Dental formulas can be written in two ways. The
domestic species
first is with the numbers of teeth of each type on
 the upper arcade written over the numbers of teeth
horse:
 of each type on the lower arcade. For example, the
313-43
adult dental formula for dogs is as follows.
X2
3133
Ox:
0033
X2
The second method of writing this is to know
3133
that the order written is incisors, canines, premo-
pig:
lars, then molars. Then you simply list the numbers
of teeth of each type.
3143
X2
3142
3143
X2
3143
We multiply by two because you must consider
Aging a Dog or Cat
both the left and right sides of the mouth to calculate
A student should learn to age a dog or cat. using
the correct total number of teeth.
the eruption table shown in Table 9.1. Note that
Using this same method, the dog deciduous
this is a simplifed version showing the median age
formula is:
for the incisors. The figures in parentheses are the
 documented ranges.
313
X2
313
table as the dog, except it has no upper P1, no lower
A mnemonic devise for remembering these for-
P2 and P3, and no M2 or M3.
mulas: It is easier to remember one number than
many (i.e., it is easier to remember 313 than 3, 1, 3
 in the dog deciduous formula). Try remembering
TABLE 9.1: Permanent Teeth Eruption
the formulas this way:
Ages in the Dog
puppy
313 over 313
top same as
Tooth
Age
bottom
[1
3 mos. (2-5 mos.)
adult
3142 over 3143
bottom one number
12
4 mos. (2-5 mos.)
 greater than top (tran-
 slates to one more
13
5 mos. (4-5 mos.)
molar on the bottom)
C
6 mos. (5-6 mos.)
Here is the formula for a cat's deciduous teeth:
P1
4-5 mos.
P2
5-6 mos.
313
X2
P3
5-6 mos.
312
P4
5-6 mos.
Similarly, the adult cat formula is as follows:
M1
5-6 mos.
3131
M2
6-7 mos.
X2
3121
M3
6-7 mos.
The Digestive System
183
After the permanent teeth come in, aging an
the tooth occupies, and this is always based on the vet-
animal is an estimate based on tartar on the teeth,
erinarian viewing the animal from the rear.
amount of wearing of the teeth, graying of the muz-
For example:
 zle, and the overall condition of the dog or cat.
I, = lower right second incisor
Dental Charting
Currently there is no standardized method of tooth
 P4 = upper right fourth premolar
identification in veterinary medicine. Human den-
tal insurance carriers have helped to standardize
Triadan System
nomenclature for human teeth by using a numerical
system. Veterinarians have been using a form of den-
 Most veterinary dentists are now using the Triadan
 tal shorthand for years to identify a specific tooth and
 system in which each tooth has a three-digit number.
 its corresponding quadrant. The letters indicating
 The frst. number represents the quadrant, starting
the type of tooth are the same as those used in the
with 1 on the animal's upper right side and continu-
previously discussed dental formulas. Adult teeth are
 ing clockwise (as viewed from the front of the animal's
a paai snniap pue sanat rde a paeaisa
head) to 4 on the lower right side. See Figure 9.2 for
lower-case letters. A number in superscript or subscript
additional  information. Quadrants for deciduous
to the left or right of the letter indicates the quadrant.
teeth are numbered 5 through 8.
101 201
102
202
103
203
104
204
Upper
Upper
right
left 
Quadrant 1
105
205
Quadrant 2
106
206
101 201
102
202
103
daaae0
207
203
107
104
204
Upper
Upper
105
208
right
left
106
206
Quadrant 1
Quadrant 2
109
209
107
207
110
210
311Q
108
208
411
410
310
109
209
409
309
409
309
408
308
408
308
Lower
407
307
Lower
right
left
407
307
Lower
Lower
Quadrant 4
406
15
306
Quadrant 3
right
left 
405
305
Quadrant 4
Quadrant 3
404
304
404
304
402302
4034
303
402
302
401 301
401301
Triadan Dental Numbering System - Dog
Triadan Dental Numbering System - Cat
FIGURE 9.2: Triadan system of tooth identification.
Editorial
184
Chapter 9
Individual teeth are represented by the sec-
Enamel
ond and third digits. For example, all canines are
 Dentin 
numbered 04, and all frst molars are numbered
Site of 
09.Thus, the four canine teeth would be 104 to 404,
odontoblasts
starting on the upper right (104), upper left (204),
Crown
 Dentinal tubules
lower left (304), and lower right (404). The same
Gingival sulcus
numerical pattern is used for each first molar, 109
to 409. This system works for both dogs and cats
 Gingival margin
and takes into consideration that cats have fewer
Pulp cavity
Neck
(contains
teeth than dogs. Cats have three premolars on the
blood vessels
upper jaw and two premolars on the lower jaw, so
 and nerves)
in the Triadan system tooth 05 on the top and 05
Gingiva (gum)
and 06 on the bottom are not present. If you look
at the shape of the cat's teeth in comparison to the
dog's, it makes sense to identify the teeth by this
Cementum
method.
Dentin
Periodontal
Root-
The Structure of a Tooth
ligament 
Each tooth consists of a crown, neck, and root
(Figure 9.3). The crown is the portion of the tooth
Bone
that is visible above the gum, or gingiva. This por-
tion of the tooth also can be called the clinical
 crown. The entire area covered by enamel is called
Root canal
the anatomical crown, and it extends a short dis-
Apical foramen
tance into the neck area. The neck is the portion
of the tooth between the gum line and where the
 gum attaches to the tooth, and it is associated with
FIGURE 9.3: The structure of the tooth in a dog
a slight. constriction in the shape of the tooth. The
or cat.
root is the area below the neck that. extends into
the bone.
The crown is covered by enanel, which is the
 margins of the pulp cavity, produce the dentin. The
hardest substance in the body but is also fairly
 pulp cavity extends into the deep portions of the
brittle. It is 95 to 97% inorganic calcium salts (chiefly
root and becomes the root canal. An opening at.
CaPOt). The crevice (or space) between the margin
the root apex, called the apical foramen, provides
 of the gingiva and the limit of the anatomical crown
a route of entry into the tooth for the structures
(i.e., the enamel) is called the gingival sulcus, and
found in the pulp cavity.
its border is the gingival margin. The outermost.
Teeth are either for cutting (shearing)
or
surface of the root is covered by cementum, which
grinding. In all animals the incisors are used for
is similar to bone in composition and less brittle
cutting or shearing. Depending on whether an
than enamel. The cementum atfaches the tooth to
animal is a carnivore, an omnivore, or an herbi-
the periodontal ligament, which is the connective
vore, the premolars and molars have different
tissue that holds the tooth in the alveolar bone. The
amounts of grinding surface. A carnivore's pre-
 periodontal ligament also has a cushioning effect.
molar and molar teeth have a relatively small
on the tooth.
amount of grinding surface, whereas omnivores
The inner part, which is the bulk of the tooth,
and herbivores have a greater amount of grind-
is called the dentin. It also is composed of a bone-
ing surface. In the dog and other canines, only
 like material. In the center of the tooth is the pulp
the molars have a grinding occlusal surface; the
cavity, which contains the pulp, a connective tis-
same is true for the cat, but in the cat the molars
sue containing blood vessels, nerves, and lymphat-
are small and fewer (only one in each quadrant).
ics. This provides the nutrients and sensation to
Teeth that have a short crown are called bradydont
the tooth. The odontoblasts, located on the outer
teeth, while those with a long crown are known as
hypsondont teeth.
Editorialrevie
The Digestive System 
185
EXERCISE 9.1
I DISSECTION OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
Compiete the foflowing steps in the dissection procedure. The important organs and tissues to iden-
tify are fisted in cofored bofd print. ff a structure is mentioned before its dissection or its definition, it
is itaficized.
1. In the previous chapter you dissected the left side of the head and neck to expose the major salivary
glands and lymph nodes of the cat. If any of the glands were destroyed during the dissection of the
musculature, remove the skin on the right side of the neck and dissect out these structures. The
salivary glands produce saliva, which is carried to the mouth via salivary ducts that pass through
the head and neck musculature.
2. The largest. salivary gland in the cat is the parotid salivary gland, which is located ventral to the
pinna (Figure 9.4). This gland can be recognized by its lobular texture. The duct of the parotid
crosses the masseter muscle and enters the oral cavity opposite the last upper premolar tooth. This
is one of the reasons this tooth often has a lot of tartar buildup in older dogs. Two branches of the
facial nerve also cross the masseter, dorsal and ventral to the parotid duct.
 3. The mandibular salivary gland, which has the same lobular texture as the parotid gland, lies caudal
to the angle of the jaw, ventral to the parotid gland (see Figure 9.4). The maxillary vein passes over
this gland. This gland's duct opens into the floor of the mouth near the lower incisors.
4. The smaller sublingual salivary gland (monostomatic part) is located rostral to the mandibular
gland and the maxillary vein, and it is just superior to the mandibular lymph nodes. This gland also
has a lobular appearance. Do not confuse this gland with the mandibular lymph nodes (which are
into the jugular vein).
 5. The cat has two additional salivary glands, the molar salivary gland, which lies near the angle of the
mouth, and the infraorbital salivary gland on the floor of the orbit beneath the eye. They are hard
to locate, and both, especially the latter, require difficult dissection.
 6. On the side opposite the dissection of the salivary glands and lymph nodes (should be the animal's
right side), use a scalpel to incise through the masseter muscle from the corner of the mouth to
just ventral to the parotid salivary gland. Then, using bone cutters, cut through the ramus of the
 Sublingual
Parotid
 Mandibular
 External jugular
salivary gland 
 salivary gland  
 salivary gland 
vein
 Mandibular
 Linguofa cial
Hyoid venous 
 Maxillary vein
lymph nodes
vein
arch
FIGURE 9.4: Salivary glands of a cat.
Editorialrevie
186
Chapter 9
 ans en a yno ino oi sossis an aia [eno an uado ad oi leis no s aue
the same (right) side all the way to the epiglottis. When you are done, the entire mouth and throat.
of the cat will be exposed, yet the structures of one side will be completely intact. (Figure 9.5).
 Locate the following structures in the oral cavity.
 a. The vestibule is the area between the teeth and cheeks and lips.
a p sa aan u e ss a pa as a a i aed  a a
 palatine rugae, and it makes up the roof of the mouth.
c. The soft palate extends caudally as a membranous continuation of the hard palate.
d. The fauces (a “space" bordered on each side by the palatoglossal arches, ventrally by the base of
the tongue, and dorsally by where the soft palate starts) is the opening between the oral cavity
and the oropharynx.
e. The two small palatine tonsils are masses of lymphatic tissue located on the dorsolateral wall of
the oropharynx, about 1 cm caudal to the cranial edge of the glossopalatine arches.
f. The lips can be found on both the dorsal and ventral portions of the mouth.
g. The labial frenulum is the mucous membrane attached to each lip, upper and lower, at the midline.
 7. The tongue lies on the floor of the oral cavity. Underneath the tongue is the lingual frenulum, the
tissue covered by mucous membrane that anchors the tongue to the bottom of the mouth.
8. The dorsum of the tongue's surface is covered with many papillae of four different. types (Figure 9.6).
The filiform papillae are the most numerous; they are hard, pointed, spinous projections with
which the cat. grooms its fur. The fliform papillae are located on the front half of the tongue. The
fungiform papillae are small, more rounded, mushroom-shaped, and are located between and
ally toward the base. There are only two or three of these on each side. Each is large and rounded
and is surrounded by a circular groove (like a moat around a castle). The vallate papillae are
difficult to see in a preserved cat. The last type are the foliate papillae, which are leaf-like projec-
tions located both at the base of the tongue and along the lateral sides. Microscopic taste buds are
located on all the papillae except the filiform type.
 9. Examine the teeth of the cat. and number them using the Triadan system.
 Palatoglossal
 Palatine tonsil 
arch
(artificially reddened)
Tongue
Labial frenulum 
Hard palate
Soft palate
FlGURE 9.5: Dissected oral cavity of a cat.
Copyright 2010 Ceng
Editorialrevie
The Dig estive Sy ste m 
187
Area of vallate
Filiform
Epiglottis
 papillae
 papillae
Foliate
 Area of fungiform
 papillae
papillae 
FIGURE 9.6: Tongue and epiglottis of a cat.
10. To expose the nasopharynx, make a small slit in the middle of the soft palate (see Figure 11.2 in
Chapter 1l). If you remember your skull anatomy, there is a depression just behind the internal
nares bordered by the pterygoid bones. Inhaled air goes through the nasal cavity, exits through the
In the dorsolateral wall of the nasopharynx are two small holes: the nasal openings of the auditory
tubes or Eustachian tubes. These tubes go to the middle ear and help maintain the correct pressure
within.
11. The oropharynx and nasopharynx are separated by the soft palate. Next, locate the laryngophar
 ynx, or the part of the pharynx cranial to the larynx and dorsal to an open epiglottis. This part of
the pharynx opens into the larynx and esophagus.
12. Locate the epiglottis, the pointed cartilage covered with mucous membrane, just in front of and
below the larynx, caudal to the base of the tongue (see Figure 9.6). It closes the larynx and prevents
fluids or food from entering during the swallowing process.
13. To study the remaining digestive organs, you must open the abdominal and thoracic cavities. First,
locate the center of the pubic bone ventrally and make a small incision (large enough to permit entry
of the blunt end of your scissors so you do not accidentally cut any organs). Open the abdominal cavity
by cutting along the linea alba to the xiphoid process, just caudal to the sternum on the ventral midline.
At this point, continue the cut cranially just. to the left of the sternum (the animal's left side), cutting
through the costal carilages up to the manubrium. Do not sever the blood vessels supplying the ventral
body wall.
 Observe the thin, transparent membrane dividing the chest. cavity into two halves; this is the medi-
astinum. On the right. side, locate where the diaphragm (the large, flat, muscular membrane that.
separates the abdomen from the thorax) meets the ventral chest wall. Using scissors, make two cuts
about 2 cm apart: First feel with your index finger where the diaphragm attaches to the wall; then cut.
caudodorsally at an angle past your finger, making certain you are slightly caudal to the attachment.
of the diaphragm the entire distance of the cut. Make a second cut parallel to the first, only this time
cut on the cranial side of the diaphragm (Figure 9.7). When you are finished, make these cuts on
the left side in the same way. Now the abdomen and caudal thorax are visible, and both sides of the
diaphragmatic attachments have been preserved.
14. Spread the chest wall so the heart and lungs are visible. Move the caudal lobe of the leff. lung out
of the way and locate the esophagus, which runs along the dorsal wall of the thoracic cavity. It is
best seen caudal to and behind the heart, just before it penetrates the diaphragm (Figure 9.8). The
188
Chapter 9
Proper
method of 
Liver
 cutting
around 
 diaphragm 
Greater
omentum
Abdominal
wall (cut)
FIGURE 9.7: Proper method of cutting the abdominal wall and around the diaphragm of a cat.
Heart 
Liver
 Diaphragm 
Thoracic
Lung
esophagus
FIGURE 9.8: Thoracic esophagus, cranial to the esophageal hiatus, in a cat.
hole through the diaphragm where the esophagus penetrates is called the esophageal hiatus. The
esophagus is the muscular tube connecting the laryngopharynx to the stomach. Try to visualize
where the esophagus passes through the diaphragm.
15. Observe the greater omentum, the lacy structure containing adipose tissue, and covers and protects 
the ventral abdominal organs (see Figure 9.7).
16. The liver is the largest organ in the abdominal cavity. It is the reddish-brown structure located
immediately caudal to the diaphragm. Observe the ligaments of peritoneum attaching the liver to
the diaphragm and ventral body wall. The ventral ligament is called the falciform ligament (which 
may have been partially cut while opening the body wall), and the cranial one is the coronary liga
 ment (Figures 9.9 and 9.10). The coronary ligament. can be seen by moving the liver caudally. This
Editorialrevie
The Digestive System 
189
Right medial 
lobe of liver
Gallbladder
Cystic duct 
Left medial
lobe of liver
Hepatic ducts
Quadrate
lobe of liver
Bile duct
Left lateral
Duodenum
lobe of liver
Right lateral
Stomach
lobe of liver ~
Caudate process
 of caudate .
lobe of liver
Jejunum 
Pancreas
 Spleen
Kidney
Ovary
Descending
colon
Fat
Ureter
Uterus
(left uterine horn)
 Urinary bladder
FGURE 9.9: A cat's abdominal contents.
ligament is short and attaches the liver to the central tendon of the diaphragm (a sheet of connec-
tive tissue in the dorsomedial area of the diaphragm).
17. The falciform ligament divides the liver into right and left halves. Each half is subdivided into mul-
tiple lobes. These are named the right lateral and right medial lobes, the left lateral and left medial
lobes, and the quadrate lobe (see Figures 9.9, 9.10, and 9.11). There is also a caudate lobe, which
has two processes: The largest, located caudal to the right lateral lobe, is called the caudate process,
whereas the smaller papillary process is located below the lesser omentum (Figure 9.12).
18. Observe the dark green gallbladder in a depression in the large right medial lobe (see Figures 9.9
and 9.10).
19. The largest part of the stomach lies mainly on the left side of the abdominal cavity. Separate the
stomach and liver to observe the esophagus as it courses through the esophageal hiatus. There are
four regions of the stomach (see Figure 9.1l). The cardiac sphincter, or cardia, is the muscular
valve that prevents esophageal reflux. The cardiac region is caudal to the cardiac sphincter and sur-
rounds it. for a short distance. The fundic region (or fundus) is the dome-like part of the stomach 
majority of the greater curvature and lesser curvature. The pyloric region is distal to the body and
extends from the level of the angular notch of the lesser curvature to the pylorus.
As noted previously, the shape of the stomach is such that it has two significant curvatures: the greater
curvature, which is the larger outer curve located on the left lateral margin, and the lesser curvature,
the smaller curve located on the inner medial margin of the stomach (Figures 9.12 and 9.13). The
greater omentum is a double-membraned sac attached to the greater curvature, and the lesser omen-
tum is attached to the lesser curvature. Because the greater omentum is a double-layered structure,
there is a cavity, called the omental bursa, between the superficial and deep walls. To verify this,
make a small, shallow tear in the omentum and insert. your finger between the two layers.
Editorialrevie
190
Chapter 9
Location
Quadrate
of coronary
lobeof liver
ligament 
Left medial
Gallbladder
lobe of liver
Left lateral
Right medial
lobe of liver
lobe of liver
 Stomach
 Spleen
Greater
omentum
Urinary
bladder
FlGURE 9.10: Ventral view of the lobes of the liver in a cat.
Left medial
lobe of liver
Papillaryprocess of
audate lobe
Hepatic duct
 of liver
Right medial
lobe of liver
Gallbladder
Left lateral
lobe of liver
Bile duct
Cardiac region
Cystic duct 
Fundic region
Portal vein
Body of the
 Right lateral
stomach
lobe of liver
Caudate process
ofcaudate lobeof liver
Spleen
Duodenum
Gastrosplenic
ligament
Pancreas
Pylorus
Lesseromentum
Pyloric region
Greater omentum
FIGURE 9.11: A cat's upper abdominal contents and underside of the liver.
Editorial
The Digestive System 
191
 Caudate process
of caudate
Right lateral  
 Right medial
Left medial  Left lateral 
lobe of liver 
lobe of liver
lobe of liver
lobe of liver  lobe of liver
Duodenum  Lesser  Jejunum  Greater
Papillary process  Stomach
omentum
omentum
of caudate
lobe of liver
FlGURE 9.12: Underside of the liver in a cat.
Left lateral
Roundworms
Gastric folds
lobe of liver
 in stomach 
Greater 
 Spleen 
Gastrosplenic
 Stomach
omentum
ligament 
FlGURE 9.13: Stomach and spleen of a cat.
20. Make a longitudinal incision through the stomach wall, beginning in the esophageal region and
continuing to the duodenum. Wash out the stomach's contents. From the interior, observe the car-
diac sphincter at the opening between the esophagus and stomach. Also look at the pyloric sphinc-
ter, which is between the stomach and duodenum. Notice the longitudinal gastric folds of the wall
of the stomach called rugae.
21. Locate the spleen, the large reddish-brown organ to the left of the stomach and attached to it via
the gastrosplenic ligament (see Figure 9.13).
22. Lift up the greater omentum and fold it back over the stomach so that the small intestines are visible.
There are three parts that make up the small inte stines. The first part. is the duodenum. It courses from
Editorialrevie
192
Chapter 9
Hepatic ducts 
Gallbladder
 Papillary process
of caudate
lobe of liver
Right medial
lobe of liver
Left lateral 
lobe of liver
Cystic duct
Esophagus
Hepatic artery
Celiac artery
Bile duct 
 Stomach
Gastroduodenal
artery
Left gastric artery
Right lateral 
lobe of liver
Spleen
Caudate process of 
caudate lobe of liver
Splenic artery
Pancreas
Duodenum
Portal vein
Transverse
Ascending
colon
colon
Middle colic
lleocecal .
artery
fold
Cecum
Cranial
mesenteric
lleum
artery
Descending
lleocolic
colon
artery
Jejunum
Jejunal lymphnode.
Caudal vena cava
FIGURE 9.14: Ducts and vessels in the small and large intestines of the cat (most of the jejunum and
part of the ileum have been removed).
sharply around the root of the mesentery, which is the mesenteric extension of the parietal perito-
neum from which the intestines hang when the cat is in its normal standing position (Figure 9.15).
23. Just medial to the duodenum and lying within its mesentery is the pancreas (see Figures 9.14 and
9.15). There are three parts of the pancreas: The body of the pancreas lies within the mesoduode-
num and is attached to the duodenum; the left lobe is thicker and traverses across the abdomen
between the layers of the deep wall of the greater omentum; and the right lobe is the free tip of the
lar to that. of the parotid salivary gland, although darker in color).
Locate the sharp cranial flexure of the duodenum, found a short. distance from the pylorus, where
it. curves caudally. Lift it up, view the dorsal side, and carefully dissect. away the most. cranial part of
       ae     s ae  o s
the liver to the duodenum; you will dissect this out in Step 30). By teasing apart the tissues, locate
pancreatic juice to the duodenum. It. attaches to the duodenum adjacent. to the bile duct to form
the hepatopancreatic ampulla at the exterior wall (Figure 9.16). The bile duct and the pancreatic
duct continue within the wall of the duodenum and open to the mucosa at the major duodenal
papilla. The sphincter of Oddi is a structure composed of smooth muscle that encircles the bile
duct and main pancreatic duct as they traverse the wall of the duodenum. An accessory pancreatic
duct may be found a short distance (approximately 1 cm) distal to the main pancreatic duct, and
Editorial
The Digestive System
193
Ascending
colon
Cecum
Jejunum 
lleum
Body of the  Duodenum 
 Right lobe of 
Root of the 
 Decending
pancreas
the pancreas
mesentery
colon
FIGURE 9.15: The small intestine of a cat.
 Stomach
Pancreas
Duodenum
Kidney
Hepatopancreatic Bile duct Pancreatic
Right lateral  Caudate process
ampulla
duct
lobe of liver
of caudate
lobe of liver
FIGURE 9.16: Main pancreatic duct of a cat.
creatic duct. (reported to be approximately 20% of cats); in the vast majority of cats you will not be
able to locate it. These ducts carry the enzymes produced by the exocrine glands of the pancreas.
(See Exercise 9.5 for more information on these enzymes.)
 24. The second and largest part of the small intestine, the jejunum (Figure 9.17), is the next portion
encountered; it makes up the majority of the length of this organ. The ileum is the last part of the
small intestine; it opens into the large intestine. There is no gross demarcation between the jeju-
num and ileum except for a thin mesenteric ileocecal fold. Open the jejunum or ileum. The velvety
 like projections that aid in the absorption of food.
Editorialrevie
194
Chapter 9
Jejunum
Mesojejunum
Ascending
lleocolic
Cecum
lleum
colon
junction 
FIGURE 9.17: The ileum and the ileocolic junction of a cat.
25. Trace the ileum to where it. enters the large intestine. This is approximately 0.5 to 1.0 cm from
the tip of the cecum. This connection is called the ileocolic junction, a sphincter at the junction
between the small and large intestines. Make a longitudinal incision through the wall of the colon
in the region of the juncture of the two intestines (see Figure 9.17).
26. The large intestine starts as a blind pouch known as the cecum (see Figure 9.17). The large intestine
continues cranially on the right side as the ascending colon, arches transversely as the transverse
colon, and continues caudally as the descending colon (Figure 9.18). There is no distinctive division
between the ascending, transverse, and descending colons. The next part of the large intestine, the
rectum, is located within the pelvic canal and opens to the exterior. This external opening of the
rectum is known as the anus.
27. Examine the interior surface of the abdominal wall. The shiny membrane over the muscles is called the
parietal peritoneum. The visceral peritoneum is the shiny covering on all the abdominal organs inside
the abdominal cavity. These two layers are connected by the mesentery. The visceral peritoneum is also
called the serosa or serosal surface of the intestinal organs. The serosa is made up of visceral perito-
neum and areolar connective tissue, which atfaches it to the underlying intestinal smooth muscles.
28. Identify the urinary bladder (see Figure 9.18), the small ventral organ located just. cranial to the
pelvic cavity, and the uterus, if your specimen is a female.
29. The portion of the peritoneal cavity between the urinary bladder and the uterus is called the vesico-
genital pouch in the female. The rectogenital pouch is the space between the uterus and rectum. In
males, the above pouches still exist due to a genital fold, containing the ductus deferens, which lies
between the urinary bladder and rectum. These pouches are lined by visceral peritoneum.
30. The lesser omentum (or gastrohepatoduodenal ligament) can be seen extending from the left lat-
eral lobe of the liver to the stomach and duodenum. Three important structures are located in the
lesser omentum: the bile duct, the hepatic artery, and the portal vein. The bile duct is formed by a
convergence of the hepatic ducts from each liver lobe with the cystic duct coming from the gallblad-
der. If the ducts contain bile, they will be green in color; otherwise, they are colorless and difficult.
to see. The bile duct. enters the duodenum about. 3 or 4 cm from the pylorus.
Carefully dissect away the lesser omentum and locate the hepatic artery dorsal and to the left of the bile
duct. This vessel should be injected with red latex. The portal vein is located under the duodenum
and beneath the bile duct as the cat is viewed on the table. Lift the duodenum and observe the dorsal
surface of the lesser omentum and the duodenum to find this vein (Figure 9.19). It is a large vessel
entering the liver. If it is not injected with yellow latex, it will be dark brown from the presence of 
coagulated blood. The portal vein is thin-walled and may be damaged during dissection.
Editorialrevie
The Digestive System 
195
Ascending
colon
Transverse
colon
lleum
 Descending
colon
Cecum
Urinary
bladder
(pushed to
left side)
FIGURE 9.18:
Large intestine, cecum, and parts of the colon of a cat.
Hepatic artery   Stomach
Duodenum
Gallbladder
Bile duct
Portal vein (not 
Pancreas
 injected with latex)
FIGURE 9.19: Bile duct, portal vein, and hepatic artery of a cat.
 31. Lift a loop of the jejunum and find the large jejunal lymph node, located within the mesojejunum
(see Step 32). Also note the arteries, veins, lymphatic vessels, adipose tissue, and other lymph nodes
in the mesentery of the colon.
 32. Each mesentery is named for the organ it supports; for example, the mesocolon is the mesentery
attached to the colon, and the mesoduodenum is the mesentery attached to the duodenum. Locate
and name these structures for each abdominal organ.
 33. The kidneys and ureters are located dorsal to, or behind, the peritoneum. For this reason they are
considered retroperitoneal.
Editorial
196
Chapter 9
EXERCISE 9.2
ANATOMY OF THE RUMINANT STOMACH
The process of digestion in the ruminants is classifed as anterior fermentation; in other words, fermen-
tation takes place anterior to the small intestine. The rumen is a fermentation vat in which bacteria and
protozoa process cellulose and hemicellulose from ingested roughage and convert them to volatile fatty
more than 70% of the mature ruminant's daily energy supply.
The rumen, reticulum, and omasum are considered the forestomachs, which are non-glandular
and lined with stratified squamous epithelium. The abomasum is the true, or glandular, stomach. The
reticulum and rumen are located on the left side of the animal, whereas the omasum and abomasum
are located on the right. This is important when considering where the incision line will be so that the
technician can clip the animal's hair appropriately for an abdominal surgical procedure
Procedure
 Using Figure 9.20, fnd the following structures. Note that on the exterior, indentations are called
 grooves, whereas on the interior these grooves are called pillars.
1. rumen
 a. esophageal sphincter
b. rumino-reticular orifice
c. rumino-reticular groove
d. ventral sac
e. dorsal sac
f. caudal dorsal and ventral blind sacs
g. caudal groove
h. right and left longitudinal pillar and/or groove
i. ruminal papillae
Reticulo-
Dorsal
Dorsal sac
 omasal
blind sac
of rumen
Omasum Esophagus
orifice
Ventral
Ventral sac  Abomasum  Pylorus
Omaso-
A
 blind sac
of rumen
abomasal
orifice
Editorial revie
The Digestive System 
197
Dorsal sac
Left longitudinal 
Dorsal
 Spleen 
 of rumen 
groove
 blind sac 
Reticulum
Rumino-
Abomasum
Ventral sac
Ventral
B
reticular fold
of rumen
blind sac
Ruminal
papillae of
Rumino-
the ruminal
Caudal
reticular orifice
wall
groove
Reticular
 Esophageal Dorsal sac
Dorsal
groove
 sphincter  of the rumen 
 blind sac
Reticulo-
 Reticulum
Rumino-
Ventral sac
Right 
Ventral
omasal
reticular fold   of the rumen  longitudinal   blind sac  
C
orifice
pillar
tesy of SoMSo Modelle, www.somso.de.)
2. reticulum
a. reticular groove or esophageal groove
b. reticulo-omasal orifice
c. honeycombed interior mucosal surface
3. omasum
a. studded laminae (aids to move food to the abomasum)
b. omaso-abomasal orifice
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Res
Editorial
198
Chapter 9
4. abomasum
a. cardiac region
b. fundic region
c. pyloric region
5. pylorus or pyloric sphincter
EXERCISE 9.3
COMPARATIVE ANATOMY OF THE LARGE INTESTINE
Locate the foffowing structures fin boid or italic type) in the figures that foffow
Equines
 Unlike the ruminan ts, the equine species is a posterior fermenter (i.e., fermen tation takes place posterior
to the small intestine). Because of this, the horse (and other equidae) has the largest and most complex 
intestinal anatomy is crucial for the performance of a competent rectal palpation, and thus for an accu-
rate diagnosis in a case of equine colic.
The cecum is large and comma-shaped and extends from the pelvic inlet to the floor of the abdominal
cavity behind the diaphragm near the xiphoid cartilage. The ileuum empties into the cecum, and from
there the intestinal contents move to the great colon. This has four parts, and food moves through them
Pelvic
 flexure
Left ventral
/colon
 Cranial
Left dorsal
 mesenteric
colon
Caudal
artery.
mesentericDescending
Transverse
colon
artery
 Diaphragmatic
colon
/Rightdorsak
flexure
colon
 Sternal
/ flexures
Rectum
Cecum-
-Stomach
Right ventral colon -
lleum
-Duodenum
Jejunum
FIGURE 9.21: The gastrointestinal tract of the horse.
Editorialrevie
The Digestive System 
199
 in the following order: (1) right ventral colon (bends at the sternal flexure); (2) left ventral colon (bends
at the pelvic flexure); (3) left dorsal colon (bends at the diaphragmatic flexure); (4) and right dorsal
 colon (Figure 9.21). This then continues with the transverse colon, leading to the descending colon, then
to the rectum. At the flexures and the en try to the relatively narrow transverse colon, foreign bodies may
longitudinal bands. The former are separated by grooves, and the latter differ in number from segment.
to segment.
Ruminants
 In the ruminants, as in the horse and the pig, the ileum empties its content into the cecum. From there
the material moves into the ascending colon, which consists of the proximal loop (ansa proximalis),
the spiral loop (ansa spiralis), and the distal loop (ansa distalis). The spiral loop is coiled and makes
up the bulk of the ascending colon (Figure 9.22). From the distal loop the ingesta enter the transverse
colon, then the descending colon, and finally the rectum. In all ruminants, large and small alike, the
large intestine is smooth; neither sacculations nor bands are present.
Pigs
 In the pig the ascending colon is similar to that of the ruminants, with three exceptions: There is no
proximal loop, the spiral loop is very different, and most. of the segments of the large intestine have
sacculations and bands similar to those in the horse. The biggest. difference is that the spiral loop is not.
nearly as symmetrically coiled as in the ruminants (Figure 9.23).
Cranial
 mesenteric
Caudal
 artery
mesenteric
 artery
Descending 
Transverse
colon
colon
Rectum
Duodenum
Distal loop-
Proximal loop.
Cecum
Stomach
Jejunum
Ileum.
Ansa
spiralis
(coiled 
(colon)
FIGURE 9.22: The gastrointestinal tract of an ox.
Editorial
200
Chapter 9
Cranial
Caudal
mesenteric
 mesenteric
artery
artery
Descending
colon
Transverse
Rectum
colon
Cecum
Duodenum
lleum
Coiled
colon
(ansa
 spiralis)
Stomach
 Jejunum 
FlGURE 9.23: The gastrointestinal tract of a pig.
EXERCISE 9.4
DIGESTIVE ANATOMY OF THE FOWL
Locate the structures in boid type in Figure 9.24.
1. esophagus
 2. The crop is a temporary food storage area where food waits until the proventriculus and gizzard
empty. Enzymes that digest carbohydrates are secreted by the crop's wall. Peristalsis moves food out.
of the crop and into the proventriculus.
 3. The proventriculus has no storage function but mixes foodstuffs with pepsin, a proteolytic enzyme
released from the cells within. Little acid is produced by this organ.
4. The gizzard macerates the food.
Editorial
The Digestive System 
201
Beak
Pharynx
Tongue
 Small
Cloaca
Esophagus
Gizzard intestine
Rectum
Proventriculus
Yolk sac
Crop
lleocecal
valve
Gallbladder
Liver
Duodenum
Pancreas
Cecum
Kidney
Colon
(large intestine)
FlGURE 9.24: Digestive system of a chicken.
5. The small intestine has the same function as in other animals.
6. The large intestine also has the same function as in other animals.
7. The cloaca is the common opening for the gastrointestinal, urinary, and genital systems. In birds,
the transit. time for foodstuffs through the digestive system is very rapid. Feces begin to be formed
2 to 2.5 hours after food is ingested, and half the waste has been excreted within 5 hours.
EXERCISE 9.5
EXOCRINE PANCREATIC ENZYME ANALYSIS
The pancreas is a mixed gland producing both enzymes and hormones. Enzymes are produced by the
 no sy 'su auoua au a panond are saoou pue 'seaud a jo spue auoxa
endocrine glands secrete directly into the bloodstream.
Two pancreatic enzymes are routinely assayed in dogs because their levels rise in cases of acute
qualitatively in suspected cases of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. The following list indicates the
 process by which these enzymes are produced by the pancreas, and the nutrients they digest.
 Precursor
Enzyme
Substrate
H+, trypsin
trypsinogen
→
trypsin
proteins
 none
amylase
carbohydrates
none
lipase
fats
Assays for Lipase and Amylase
The object. is to quantitatively determine whether an animal's pancreas is responding to the presence of
fat and carbohydrates in the diet.
Editorialrevie
202
Chapter 9
1. After three dogs (A, B, and C) have fasted overnight, draw blood from all three and perform the
following:
a. Administer 3 ml/kg of corn oil to dog A
b. Administer 3 ml/kg of 50% dextrose to dog B.
c. Keep dog C NPO (non per os, or no food taken in orally) ; this will be the control.
2. Draw blood from A and B again one hour after administration of the corn oil and dextrose,
respectively, and again at. 3 hours post-administration from all three dogs.
                
the results, using time on the x axis and mg% (milligrams percent) of amylase and lipase on the
y axis.
Questions
1. Should there be a rise in serum levels of these enzymes if these enzymes are being secreted
from the pancreas into the intestinal tract?
 2. Was there a change in the appearance of the serum of either dog A or dog B at one hour or
three hours post-administration?
 3. If any of the dogs were exhibiting signs of pancreatitis (painful abdomen, vomiting), what.
changes would you expect to see in the enzyme levels of the pancreas?
Discussion
There should be no significant absorption of lipase or amylase back into the bloodstream from the
intestinal tract after these enzymes are released by the pancreas in a normal animal. However, in an
animal with an inflamed pancreas, the administration of a large amount of fat or dextrose could fur
ther stress the pancreas and cause release of these enzymes into the blood, and thus both lipase and
amylase levels would be expected to rise. The serum of dog A should have become lipemic (white,
cloudy appearance) at either 1 hour or 3 hours post-administration. (This occurs both in normal
and in clinically ill dogs.) There should have been no change in the appearance of the serum from
dog B.
Qualitative Assay for the Presence of Trypsin Using the Fecal Film Test
by more modern assay methods, such as the trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI) test. However, it is a
simple test to run and will demonstrate the presence or absence of trypsin.
 1. Your instructor will provide samples of feces from two dogs. Label them dog A and dog B.
 2. For each dog's sample, using a graduated cylinder, bring 9 ml of 5% sodium bicarbonate to 10 ml
total volume by adding feces. Mix well with a stirring rod.
3. Place a 3/4inch wide strip of undeveloped x-ray film into the test tube (cut the strip so that it sticks
out the top of the test tube about 1 inch).
4. Incubate the test tubes at 37 degrees centigrade for 30 minutes.
 5. Remove the flm strip, rinse under running water, and examine whether the gelatin on the
end of the strip has been removed (by enzymatic action). If it has, the end of the strip will be
transparent.
6. If the gelatin has been removed, this indicates the presence of trypsin.
Questions
1. In dogs with acute pancreatitis, feces have an increased fat content. Why might this occur?
The Digestive System
203
Discussion
 In acute pancreatitis, lipase is not breaking down the pieces of fat in the duodenum. Therefore fat.
cannot be absorbed, and it is excreted in the feces. Animals that cannot produce sufficient enzymes
for digestion will have weight loss and will appear malnourished after a long period of time, in spite of
having a good appetite. They may also have chronic diarrhea.
linical Significance
Topics that could be discussed in this section include crop burns after eating food that is too hot in
in hungry dogs that are losing weight, and periodontal disease in dogs and cats. However, placement of
Cesarian section incisions will be our focus.
When considering where to make an incision for a Cesarian section on a cow, ewe, or doe, knowledge
Of the abdominai anatomy and the arrangement of abdominal organs is crucial. The gravid uterus lies
just above, or dorsaf to, the mid-to-caudal ventral bely wall. To access this structure, there are generally
two approaches: a paramedian incision between the midline and lef mammary vein, or a finear incision
starting in the left paralumbar fossa and extending ventrally. The former is done with the animal in dorsal
recumbency, and the latter with the animal standing or lying on its right side.
wouid make access to the uterus impossible; for this reason it is not done. On the left side, there is an
veterinarian likes to do this surgery and knowing the animal's internal anatomy will help you correctly ciip
and prep the animal for surgery.
eterinary
gnettes
severe colic. He lived about halfway between my hospital and wvillamette Ski Bowl- about
70 miles up a winding, two-lane highway. It was the dead of winter, with the temperature
dropping about as fast as my enthusiasm for my chosen profession. I might not have minded it so much
sem l ina 'sadois aul uo sunu mal e yhm xelau pinooI asloy sluh paino I lehe ulis jyhju pey Aaul H!
 already getting dark, the roads were icy and my car's right defroster wasn't doing the job it should have
I'm not sure maybe I was just nervous, scared, or both ... about the drive and about whether I
could cure this animal. The horse was reported to be roling, sweating. kicking at its side, and getting 
and not to let it roll. we didn't want a twisted intestine to complicate matters.
204
Chapter 9
veterinarians classify colic into two categories: of gastrointestinal origin and of non-gastrointestinal
origin. Causes of non-gastrointestinal colic are conditions such as peritonitis, hepatitis, uterine torsion,
urinary tract disease, or parturition (giving birth). The clinical signs of a colicky horse are classified as 
mild or severe.
A horse with mild colic is restless, anorexic, has an anxious expression in its eyes, and may be
the upper lip, grinding the teeth, and abnormal feces. Behavioral signs include groaning. pawing the 
and intermittent.
may be depressed, may want to vomit, and may have profuse diarrhea. Other more severe behavioral
signs include rolling, kicking at the belly, disregard for self and handlers, walking in short circles, and 
falling or suddenly dropping to the ground in pain. we also see labored breathing and profuse sweat-
ing. Pain is classified as continuous.
uied :oioo jo sd lyba aul uo paseg apeu sl yioo aul jo asneo pue aanieu aul jo sisoubeip aul
(how severe?), pulse (how high?), peristalsis (increased or decreased?), perfusion of the mucous
membranes, passage of a stomach tube (to note ability to pass the tube and the stomach's con-
tents), palpation (by rectum), peritoneal fluid assessment (normal or not?), and packed cell volume
(the percentage of red blood cells).
 In this case the diagnosis was not tremendously difficult. The horse's colic was severe. After
taking the horse's pulse (78 beats per minute, which is high), temperature (102?F, also elevated), and
'los 'ahny e sem aaul 'uoedied jeioan e paoad i 'spunos ina pue 'shuni 'yeay sh oi busuais
lah oi Kabins jo pous Kem ou sem ahaul pue 'aunxal piad aul oi Ajua aul pe jyhneo ssew pieu
to it. I recommended transferring the horse to an equine surgeon, but Geoff did not want to do this
and requested that I put the horse down. I am sure that the pain this horse was exhibiting weighed
the dark-and that was provided he could have borrowed his neighbor's horse trailer. Under the
drcumstances, he did what he thought was best, and I euthanized his horse.
"Dr. Cochran, how much will it cost to find out what caused this problem? Geoff asked.
If I don't know the cause of a problem, my natural curiosity compels me to find the source of the 
physical symptoms of my patient by performing a necropsy. I told him I was about to suggest that.
If we didn't find out what the foreign body was that caused this horse's problems, one of his other
horses might ingest something similar.
Iopened the horse's left side, starting my cut at the dorsal aspect of the paralumbar fossa. I
 mmediately found the pelvic flexure, where the left ventral colon becomes the left dorsal colon. The
cbject was stuck solidly in this flexure. I cut open the wall of the colon, pulled out the object, and 
washed it off. At first I didn't recognize what it was, but as the fecal material washed away, its shape 
became uncommonly clear to me. It looked like a white, ankle-length gym sock- wrinkled at the
ankle as if it had been sitting in an old locker for years. This sock had become completely mineral-
 ized. It must have lain in the bottom of the cecum for years
This horse had been a range horse for a period of time in its life, eating off the ground and picking
yhnoul ll apeu ll mou pue yoos sut uatea peu asloy aul Au poot shl yhm yip pazieauu auos dn
the smal intestine to the cecum is a mystery, but it happened, and then something caused it to be
expelled from the cecum. It was even surprising that the sock had made it past the sternal flexure,
 considering its size and shape.
Now we knew what had caused this problem, and chances are, this is one I will never see again.
The Digestive System 
205
SUMMARY
The dissection of the gastrointestinal system of the cat should provide you with a good knowl-
edge of the anatomy of monogastnic animals (those having one stomach). We examined the struc-
tures of the mouth, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, and accessory digestive
organs. If time permitted and the specimens were available, a detailed study of the equine,
bovine, porcine, and avian digestive systems would be included rather than just diagrams of their
structures. By matching specimens to the diagrams provided, a study of the digestive system
structures of the aforementioned animals and the bird would be greatly enhanced.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is the difference between the digestive tract and the alimentary tract?
2. Name the accessory digestive organs.
3. What is the function of the Kupffer cells of the liver?
4.
 Name the four layers or tuinics of the alimentary canal.
5. Name the layers of the mucosa.
6. What replaces the serosal layer outside of the peritoneal cavity, such as the area of
the rectum?
7. Name the four types of teeth.
8. Write the dental formulas for the adult dog and the adult cat.
9.
 Using a shorthand method for dental charting and the Triadan system, identify the
 fourth upper premolar on the right side, and the left lower canine tooth.
10.
 Name the three main parts of a tooth.
11. What must be broken down in order to extract a tooth?
12. Where is a tooth's nerve located?
13. Which is the largest salivary gland?
14. Name the two frenula (singular: frenulum) that are found in the mouth
15. Name the four types of lingual papillae, and indicate which have taste buds.
16. Fill in the blank: The esophagus penetrates through the diaphragm at the
17. Name the two ligaments attached to the liver ventrally and cranially.
18. Name the regions of the stomach.
 20. Where is the sphincter of Oddi?
 21. What is the difference anatomically in the locations of the cystic duct, the hepatic
ducts, and the bile duct?
22.
Why is the abomasum not considered a forestomach in the ruminants?
23.
 What is the difference between an anterior fermenter and a posterior fermenter?
24. What is the function of the crop in the fowl?
25. The cloaca is the common opening for which three systems?
Editorial
CHAPTER 10
THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
OBJECTIVES
 name and describe the layers of the heart and the layers of an artery
understand how the heart is positioned in the chest. and how that relates to the sites used to auscultate
the heart sounds
 understand and describe the flow of blood through the heart
 name and locate the major anatomical structures of the heart using models, diagrams, and a sheep's
heart.
 explain the operation of the atrioventricular valves and semilunar valves, and their relationship to the
heart sounds
 dissect and name the arteries and veins of the cat; identify the pulmonary, systemic, and portal systems of
blood flow
 understand the pathway of electrical conductivity through the heart, and how this produces the
electrocardiogram
 know the various intervals, segments, and deflection waves produced during the electrocardiogram, and
understand their relationship to the electrical conductivity of the heart.
 understand arterial blood pressure and how to measure it.
MATERIALS
 cat. cadaver (triple injected) without skin attached
sheep heart.
 Mayo dissecting scissors
Probe
1 X 2 thumb forceps or Adson tissue forceps
 #4 scalpel handle with blade
 bone cutting forceps
 rubber gloves
model of the heart.
electrocardiograph
 doppler and sphygmomanometer
 electric clipper and #40 blade
 rubbing alcohol
 electrocardiogram gel
INTRODUCTION
The study of the cardiovascular system can be divided into two parts: the heart and the
blood as the transport vehicle. The blood carries oxygen, nutrients, cellular wastes, electrolytes,
and many other substances and chemicals that are essential to life and to maintaining
homeostasis in the body. The heart is a muscular pump that propels the blood through the
vascular system. The vascular system is composed of a number of circulatory paths. The
systemic circulation is the blood flow to and from most of the parts of the body (Figure 10.1).
206
Editorial revie
The Cardiova scular Sy ste m 
207
The pulmonary circulation is the blood flow to and from the lungs, during which the blood
picks up oxygen and returns to the heart. The coronary circulation is the blood flow to the
heart muscle itself, which provides it with the oxygen and nutrition it needs to do its job as
a pump. The hepatic portal system is a venous system in which blood leaves the intestines 
and proceeds to the liver before returming to the heart. A portal system, by definition, is a
series of vessels between two capillary beds. Also by definition, the venous system returms
blood to the heart, and the arterial system carries blood away from the heart.
Brain
Carotidarteries
Jugular vein
To left front leg
Right front leg
Left subclavian
Lungs
 artery
(inflated)
Bronchus
 Pulmonary
capillaries
Pulmonary
artery
 Brachiocephalic
Cranial
 artery
vena cava
 Pulmonary vein
Right atrium
Left atrium
Dorsal aorta
Right
-Left ventricle
ventricle
Liver
 Stomach
Portal vein
 Small intestines
Vessels not
 Adrenal gland 
patent after birth
Umbilicus
Kidney
Ureter
Caudal
(to bladder)
vena cava
Colon and
rectum
 Arteries
 to lower
extremities
A
Left hind leg
Right hind leg 
FIGURE 10.1: A. Plan of circulation in an adult animal. Red shading shows oxygenated blood and blue
shading shows unoxygenated blood (opposite in the pulmonary system)
Continued
r eChapter(s).
Editorialrevie
208
Chapter 10
Lungs
(uninflated)
Bronchus
Pulmonary
Pulmonary
 capillaries
artery
Ductus
 Arteries to
arteriosus
upperhalf
of body
Cranial
Pulmonary vein
vena cava
Right atrium 
Left atrium
 Foramen
 Dorsal aorta
ovale
Right
Left ventricle
ventricle
Liver.
Ductus
Gastrointestinal
venosus
tract
Caudal
vena cava
Vein
Umbilical
Arteries
Ring
 Adrenal gland
Kidney
Ureter
Rectum
Placenta
Arteries and
veins to hind
Umbilical
legs
B
cord
FlGURE 1o.1, cont'd: B. Plan of circulation in a fetal animal. Red shading shows oxygenated blood 
and blue shading shows unoxygenated blood. The blood returning to the fetus via the umbilical vein has
the highest oxygen content of all fetal blood
Part One: The Heart
Both atria contract at virtually the same time, as
 do both ventricles. The cardiac cycle is illustrated in
The heart has two phases: contraction and relaxation.
Figure 10.3. The blood enters the atria while they
Contraction, or systole, is the active phase when
are relaxed. The atrioventricular valves (between
 energy is expended; relaxation, or diastole, is the
the atria and ventricles), also known as the AV
resting phase. There are four chambers of the heart:
valves, are open, and so blood flows rapidly into
 the upper chambers are the right and left atria, and
the ventricles. Approximately 70% of the filling of
the lower chambers are the right and left ventricles
the ventricles occurs during this phase. The atria
(Figure 10.2).
then contract, which is called atrial systole, and
Editorialrevie
The Cardiovascular System 
209
 Cranial part
of animal
Lungs
Aorta
Pulmonary
arteries
Pulmonary
veins
Cranial,
vena cava
Right
atrium 
Aortic
valve
Left atrium
Caudal
Left atrio-
venacava
ventricular
valve
Right atrio-
ventricular -
Left
valve
ventricle
Pulmonary
valve
Right
ventricle
Caudal part
 of animal
FlGURE 10.2: Diagram of the heart and the blood flow through it.
the ventricles fill completely. Next, both ventricles
of relaxation of the heart called diastole. Figure 10.3
begin to contract, and the atrioventricular valves are
shows only the right side of the heart—the same
forced closed, producing an audible sound; this is
cycle occurs simultaneously on the left side. The
called the first heart sound (the lub of the lub-dub
third heart sound is rapid ventricular flling, and
of the heartbeat). This phase is a period of isometric
atrial systole causes the fourth heart sound. The third
contraction. As contraction continues, the pressure
and fourth heart sounds can normally be heard with
within the ventricles overcomes the closed semilu-
 an esophageal stethoscope (a tubular device placed
nar valvules (the valves to the large arteries that exit.
within the esophagus, usually during anesthesia and
off the base of the heart); the valves open, and the
surgery, that amplifes theheart beat and respiratory
 blood is ejected into the pulmonary artery and the
sounds). If these sounds can be heard with a normal
aorta (the large artery that begins the systemic circu-
stethoscope, there may be some cardiac problems,
lation) . This contraction is called ventricular systole.
 and the veterinarian should be alerted.
As blood moves into the two arteries, they stretch,
 In the exercises in this chapter, the impor-
and because of their elasticity, the pressure within
tant structures are listed in colored bold print. If
these vessels becomes sufficient to cause the semi-
 a structure is mentioned before its dissection, it is
lunar valves to snap closed. This is the second heart
italicized.Structures discussed before their dissection
sound. The cycle is repeated, starting with the period
may also be in bold print for special emphasis.
Editorialrevie
210
Chapter 10
 3rd heart
4th heart 1st heart 
2nd heart
sound
sound
sound
sound
W
Heart sounds
Repeatcycle
Ventricle:
Diastole
 Systole
Atria
Diastole
Systole
Diastole
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
P
Isometric
Rapid
Ventricles
Diastasis
Atrial systole
sometric
Ejection
relaxation
filling
contr.
A.V.valves
A.V. valves
Atrioventricular valves open
A.V. valves closed
closed
Semilunar
Semilunar valves closed
S.L. valves open
valves
Repeat cycle
Cardiac cycle
FIGURE 10.3: Events of the cardiac cycle.
EXERCISE 10.1
ANATOMY OF THE HEART
The heart is positioned in the chest such that the base (the top part) is located just inferior to the tracheal
carina (tracheal bifurcation), and in most species it angles caudoventrally until the apex (the pointed
Because the base of the heart is oriented more cranially than the apex, the valves of the pulmonary
artery and aorta are more cranial than the valves that separate the atria from the ventricles.
 The heart is enclosed within the pericardium or pericardial sac. The pericardium consists of the
fibrous pericardium at the periphery, and a double-walled serous sac, the serous pericardium, between 
the fbrous pericardium and the heart. The parietal lamina of the serous pericardium intimately lines the
fibrous pericardium, whereas the visceral lamina of the serous pericardium intimately covers the heart.
and becomes the epicardium. Between the two serous laminae is the pericardial cavity, which contains
fluid that acts as a lubricant, allowing the heart to beat freely (Figure 10.4). The fbrous pericardium is
covered by the pericardial pleura, the continuation of the mediastinal pleura. The mediastinal pleura
was first noted when the chest. was cut. open in the dissection of the digestive system.
 Complete the following steps in the dissection procedure using a cat's heart. and a sheep's heart as
indicated.
1. Using the cat, observe the pericardial sac surrounding the heart. Make a tiny incision in the sac
at the apex of the heart. Using your scissors, cut up through the pericardial sac to the heart's base
 and fold the sac above the heart and out of the way. Find on the cranial surface of the heart. a red
paraconal artery, which is a branch of the left coronary artery traversing the heart in the paraconal
interventricular groove. We look for these arteries in the cat's heart because they are not injected
with latex in the sheep's heart. (Figure 10.5).
Editorialrevie
The Cardiovascular System 
211
Visceral
Parietal
pleura
Visceral
pleura
pleura 
 Cranial
mediastinum
Lungs
Lungs
Endothelium
of blood vessel
Fibrous
pericardium
Parietal
lamina 
Pericardial
Serous
space
pericardium 
Visceral
Pericardial
Myocardium
lamina 
pleura
Endocardium
Parietal
 pleura.
、Caudal
mediastinum
Diaphragm
 FIGURE 10.4: The pericardial sac and thoracic pleura.
 2. Now obtain a sheep's heart and rinse it in water to remove as much preservative as possible. If
present, observe the pericardium around the sheep's heart. Figure 10.6 illustrates all the layers of
the heart and pericardium. The sheep's heart will be used for the remaining steps in this exercise.
3. If the pericardium has not been removed, remove it from the heart, being especially careful to
dissect it. from the vessels at the base of the heart. If it has been removed, look for the remnants of
this membrane attached to the large blood vessels above the heart.
4. There are three layers to the heart: the epicardium, myocardium, and endocardium (Figure 10.6).
Separate a small portion of the epicardium (the visceral layer of the serous pericardium) from the
myocardium (the muscle layer) by careful dissection with a scalpel. The third layer of the heart, the
endocardium, will be visible when the heart is opened.
Editorial
212
Chapter 10
Right ventricle
 Right auricle
Coronary artery
Base of heart 
FGURE 10.5: Heart position in the thorax of a cat.
Serous pericardium,
parietal layer 
Fibrous pericardium
 Pericardial sac (space)
Parietal pleura
Epicardium:
 serous pericardium,
visceral layer
 Myocardium
Endocardium
Coronary
 artery and 
vein
Fibrous
pericardium
Pericardial
space
FIGURE 10.6: The layers of the heart.
Editorial
The Cardiovascular System 
213
5. Start the dissection by locating the pulmonary artery on the cranioventral left surface of the heart.
(Figure 10.7A) . This artery emerges from the cranial surface of the heart at the base, medial to the
left auricle. The simplest method of identifying the ventral left surface of the heart is to look for the
paraconal interventricular groove, which separates the right ventricle from the left ven tricle. In this
 groove lies the paraconal artery, a branch of the left coronary artery.
Turn the heart over and look at the caudal surface. Another coronary artery runs down the
middle and angles to the right just above the apex. This is the subsinuosal artery. This is where
the coronary vascular system in domestic animals differs from species to species. In carnivores and
ruminants, the subsinuosal artery is a branch of the left coronary artery (see Figure 10.7B). In the
 horse and pig, the subsinuosal artery arises from the right coronary artery (see Figure 10.7C). The
right coronary artery can be located beneath the right auricle as that artery circles the heart.
The coronary venous system of the heart on the left cranial side includes the paraconal vein, which
joins the great cardliac vein to enter the coronary sinus as it courses within the coronary groove beneath
the left auricle. On the right lateral side is the subsinuosal vein. It lies in the subsinuosal interventricular
groove and joins the coronary sinus as it courses toward the base of the heart. It does this in all species.
Adjacent. to the right coronary artery beneath the right auricle is the small cardiac vein.
 6. Insert the handle end of a probe through the pulmonary artery and down into the right ventricle.
There are several ways to know you are in the right ventricle: the chamber of the right ventricle does
not go all the way to the apex; the myocardial wall is thinner when compared to the left. ventricle;
and within the chamber there is a cord that attaches the inner wall to the outer, called the trabecula
septomarginalis (old name: moderator band) (see Step 15).
 7. Using scissors, make a cut through the ventral wall of the pulmonary artery into the right ventricle.
Continue the cut parallel to and 1 cm to the right of the paraconal interventricular groove
(Figure 10.8). If you are too far from this groove, you will cut. structures within the heart.
 8. Continue the cut around the bottom of the right ventricle and up the opposite wall (stillstaying
1 cm from the edge of the wall) through the opening of the caudal vena cava (Figure 10.9).
Intercostal
 arteries
Aorta
Left subclavian
 artery
Pulmonary
Brachiocephalic
arteries
trunk
Pulmonary
veins
Right 
Left coronary
auricle
artery
of right 
Intermediate 
atrium
branch
Small
cardiac vein 
(in coronary
 Circumflex branch of 
groove)
the left coronary artery
Right coronary
Great cardiac
vein
 artery (in right 
 atrioventricular
groove)
-Left ventricle
Right ventricle 
Paraconal interventricular artery
and great cardiac vein in paraconal
A
interventriculargroove
FlGURE 10.7: A. Left lateral view of the coronary circulation of the heart, all species.
Continued
Editorial
214
Chapter 10
Pulmonary
Left subclavian
veins
Pulmonary
artery
trunk
Azygos
vein
Caudal
vena cava
Brachiocephalic
trunk
Coronary sinus in
coronary groove
Cranial
vena cava
Circumflex branch of
theleftcoronaryartery
Right auricle
of right atrium
Left
ventricle
 Right coronary
Subsinosal
 artery and small
artery and 
middle cardiac vein
cardiac vein
 in subsinosal
interventricular
groove
Right
ventricle
B
Apex
Coronary.
sinus
Right coronary
 artery
Subsinaosal interventricular
artery
Middle cardiac vein (still
C
drains into coronary sinus)
FlGURE 10.7, cont'd: B. Right lateral view of the coronary circulation of the heart in carnivores and
ruminants. The subsinuosal artery is a continuation of the circumflex artery (a branch of the left coronary
artery). C. Right lateral view of the coronary circulation of the heart in horses and pigs. The subsinosal
 artery is a continuation of the right coronary artery rather than the left coronary artery.
 9. Pry open the pulmonary artery and observe the pulmonary valve. It should have two intact crescent-
shaped semilunar valvules, with the third incised by the cut you just. made (see Figure 10.8).
dorsally and caudally and find the opening of the cranial vena cava. These two large vessels are
Editorial
The Cardiovascular System 
215
Pulmonary
artery
Semilunar
valvule of
pulmonary artery
Trabecula
Right
septomarginalis
ventricle
Paraconal
Right atrio-
artery in
ventricular
paraconal
(tricuspid)
interventricular
valve
groove
Left
Trabeculae
ventricle
carneae
 FIGURE 10.8: Proper cut through the pulmonary artery and right ventricular wall in a sheep heart
Pectinate
muscle
 inside of 
right auricle
Papillary
muscle
Right
atrium
Trabeculae
carneae
Caudal
vena cava
Trabecula
septomarginalis
Cusp of 
 Chordae
tricuspid
tendineae
(right AV)
valve
Interventricular
 Papillary
septal wall
muscle
Right 
ventricle
FlGURE 10.9: Right atrium and ventricle. The previous cut is continued around the ventricle and dorsally
to join the entrance of the caudal vena cava.
the routes for blood returning to the heart. from the cranial and caudal halves of the body(see
Figure 10.9).
11. Open the right ventricle as shown in Figure 10.9, and look into the area of the right atrium and auricle.
First observe the internal structure of the right auricle, the flap-like or ear-like (auricle means ear)
structure seen from the exterior of the heart. The web-like arrangement of muscles on the interior of
the auricle is made of multiple pectinate muscles, so called because they resemble a comb (pecten).
Editorialrevie
216
Chapter 10
12. Locate the orifice of the coronary sinus, just below the caudal vena cava. It is a small canal-like tube that.
courses around the heart between the atria and the ventricles in the groove just under the auricles.
13. Examine the tricuspid valve, or right atrioventricular (AV) valve, between the right atrium and right.
ventricle. Count the number of cusps, or flaps, that make up this valve. From the name, you should
determine that. it has three cusps.
14. Locate the papillary muscles and the attached chordae tendineae in the wall of the right ventri-
cle. The papillary muscles exert tension on the cusps of the valve during the contraction of the
ventricles, thereby preventing the valves' eversion into the atria.
15. Find the trabecula septomarginalis crossing the lumen of the right ventricle. This is thought to pre-
vent overdistension of the ventricle. Also note the trabeculae carneae, myocardial ridges projecting
mainly from the outer wall and running toward the apex (in both ventricles).
16. Find the aorta. This is the large, thick-walled vessel coming from the left ventricle. It can be found
by inserting the handle of the probe into the remaining large vessel at the base of the heart and on
 into the left ventricle. Insert one side of the scissors deep into the aorta and down into the ventricle.
slipped into one of the cusps of the aortic valve). With your opposite hand, rotate the pulmonary
artery out of the way, position the visible side of the scissors under this artery, and make a longitu-
dinal cut through the aorta and ventricle to the apex (Figure 10.10).
17. Try to find the pulmonary veins entering the left atrium. This may be possible in hearts that have
the pericardium still attached, but if it has been removed, often there is just. a large hole in the
dorsum, or top, of the atrium where these vessels once entered the heart.
18. Locate the most ventral and lateral of the pulmonary veins, or the most ventrolateral point. on
the opening into the left ventricle. Make a longitudinal incision through this pulmonary vein or
Pulmonary
artery
Aorta
 Paraconal
Semilunar
groove
valvule of
aortic valve
Interventricular
septum
Myocardium
of left ventricle
Apex
FGURE 10.10: Proper cut through the aorta and left ventricular wall.
Editorialrevie
The Cardiovascular System 
217
opening, staying at least 2 cm from the previous cut (which was actually through the left lateral
wall of the heart) . Continue this incision through the wall of the left atrium and the left ventricle to
the apex, where it should join the previous cut (Figure 10.11).
19. Spread open the left side of the heart. (see Figure 10.11). Compare the wall thickness of the leff ventri-
cle with that of the right. Observe the bicuspid valve, or left atrioventricular (AV) valve. This valve has
two major cusps; hence the name bicuspid valve. Veterinarians often call it the mitral valve. Note that.
this ventricle also has chordae tendineae and papillary muscles, but no trabecula septomarginalis.
20. Look into the left atrium and note that it also has pectinate muscles within the left auricle. Locate
the interatrial septurm, the wall that. separates the two atria. This is best accomplished by grasping
the heart with your thumb in the right atrium and your index fnger in the left atrium (or vice 
versa); if you pinch your thumb and finger together, that will be where the interatrial septum is
located. Now examine this septum from the interior of the right atrium. Locate the fossa ovalis, the
oval-shaped depression ventral to the entrance of the cranial vena cava. At one time this was a por-
 tal through which the fetal blood (containing oxygen from the placenta) by-passed the pulmonary
circulation and flowed into the left side of the heart. to be pumped to the body (see Figure 10.1B).
21. Spread apart the cut made through the aorta into the left ventricle (see Figure 10.10). Note the
valve between these two structures; like the pulmonary valve it also has three moon-like, crescent-
shaped valvules and is called the aortic valve.
Pectinate
muscle of
left auricle
Sites of
 pulmonary
veins
Left atrium
Cusp of 
bicuspid,
mitral, left
AV valve
Trabeculae
carneae
Chordae
tendineae
Left
ventricle
Papillary
muscle
Myocardium
of left ventricle
Apex
FlGURE 10.11: Left atrium and ventricle. The cut is made toward the apex through one pulmonary vein
hole on the lateral side and connects with the previous cut at the apex of the heart.
Editorialrevie
218
Chapter 10
Part Two: The Vascular System
The walls of blood vessels, except for the capil-
laries, have three layers, or tunics (Figure 10.12).
The blood-vascular systerm is a closed transport.
The tunica interna (or tunica intima) lines the
system; blood leaves the heart in arteries and
lumen of the vessel and is composed of a thin layer
returns via veins. Veins contain venous blood, which
 of simple squamous epithelial cells, also called the
is generally deoxygenated, and arteries con tain arte-
endothelium (squamous cells underlain by a scant.
rial blood, which is generally oxygenated. There
basal lamina). It is continuous with the endocar
 are two exceptions to this general rule for both the
dium of the heart. The cells of this layer fit closely
venous and arterial systems. In the venous system,
together, forming an extremely smooth inner lin-
the pulmonary vein(s) returning from the lungs
ing that helps to decrease resistance to blood flow.
contain oxygenated blood, as does the umbilical
The tunica media is the thicker middle layer
vein of the fetus, which returns oxygenated blood
of blood vessel walls and is composed primarily of 
to the fetal heart. This oxygen is picked up from
smooth muscle and elastin. The smooth muscle is
the mother as blood courses through the placenta
under the control of the sympathetic nervous system,
(see Figure 10.1B). Conversely, in the arterial
a component of the autonomic nervous system.
 system, the pulmonary arteries taking blood to the
 It plays an active role in regulating the diameter
lungs, and the umbilical artery taking blood to the
of the blood vessels, which controls the peripheral
 placenta, contain deoxygenated blood.
resistance and thus blood pressure.
The flow of blood through the vascular system
The tunica externa (or adventitia) is the outer
starts with the arteries. As the arteries branch and
most tunic and is composed of areolar, or fbrous,
enter tissues, they get smaller and become arteri-
 connective tissue. Its function is basically support.
oles, which are the smallest arteries. From there
and protection.
they become capillaries, and a network of capillar-
In general, the walls of the arteries are thicker
ies within tissue is called a capillary bed. This is the
than those of the veins because their tunica media
site of internal respiration, where the nutrients and
have more smooth muscle and elastin. Arteries and
 oxygen enter the cells of tissues, and carbon diox-
arterioles in tissue sections appear round, whereas
ide (CO2) is removed to the blood according to the
the venules and veins are larger and can take on
following formula:
a variety of elliptical shapes during the sectioning
of tissues. The larger veins have valves, usually two
paired cusps placed at irregular distances along
CO2 + HO HCOH+ + CO
the vessels. They direct blood to flow only toward
the heart. and prevent backflow. Horses' legs do
Most. of the CO, combines with water to produce
not have valves in their veins—instead they depend
carbonic acid, which rapidly dissociates into hydro-
on the pumping action of the horse's weight.
 gen ions and bicarbonate ions. The hydrogen ions
and movement on the hooves to move the blood
combine with the blood's hemoglobin, which has
up the legs.
released its oxygen to tissues, thus forming reduced
Arteries, because they are closer to the pump-
hemoglobin that acts as a buffer. Most of the bicar-
ing action of the heart, must expand as blood
bonate ions are carried inside the red blood cells,
is propelled into them and then recoil passively
but some diffuses out into plasma, and chloride dif-
as the blood continues on its path into circula-
fuses in. Approximately 21% of the carbon dioxide
tion during diastole. The systolic blood pressure
combines with the amino groups on hemoglobin
is the pressure within the arterial system at the
to form carbaminohemoglobin. Another 7% is dis-
peak of systole and is controlled by two factors:
solved in plasma. Once the blood reaches the lungs,
(1) peripheral resistance (based on the diameter
the reaction reverses itself, and CO, passes from the
and elasticity of the vessel) and (2) stroke volume
capillary blood into the alveoli and then is exhaled.
 of the heart (how much blood is pumped out per-
Simultaneously, oxygen enters the blood and is
heartbeat). Diastolic blood pressure (when the
picked up by the red blood cells and hemoglobin
heart is relaxed) is controlled only by peripheral
within. This shows the close relationship between the
resistance. If arteries did not have elasticity (no
 blood-vascular system and the respiratory system.
elastin), were built similar to veins, and could not.
Capillaries are microscopic tubes composed
passively recoil, blood pressure would drop pre-
almost entirely of simple squamous epithelium.
cipitously during diastole. Conversely, if arteries
These were examined in the histology section of
lose their elasticity (via sclerosis or hardening)
Chapter 5, Figure 5.3. Blood exits the capillaries and
and cannot. stretch, blood pressure rises during
enters the smallest veins, called venules, which then
both systole and diastole. This condition is known
unite to form larger veins and return the blood to
as hypertension. Excessively low blood pressure is
the heart.
known as hypotension.
The Cardiovascular System
219
Tunica interna
Valve
· Endothelium
· Subendothelial layer.
Internal elastic
lamina
Tunica media
External elastic
lamina
Tunica externa
Lumen
Lumen
Artery
Capillary
Vein
network
Capillary
 Endothelial
cells
FlGURE 10.12: Structure of arteries, veins, and capillaries.
EXERCISE 10.2
DISSECTION OF THE ARTERIES AND VEINS
During this dissection, be careful to not damage the kidneys, ureters, uterus, ovaries, ductus deferens,
or the vessels to these structures. Also take care not to damage any nerves. Use both the diagrams and
the photos shown in the figures to determine the locations of the veins and arteries during your dissec-
tion. With the exception of the pulmonary veins, the veins will be injected with blue latex for ease of
dissection and identification.
Part A: Dissection of the Veins
1. Using the cat, look at the pericardium surrounding the heart. After determining the location of
[ a u sou q ae pe ' s a  ad ar sn 'ae s
thorax. Remember that the visceral layer of the pericardium forms the epicardium of the heart.
Figure 10.13 illustrates the important veins that will be identified during dissection.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learr
Editorialre
220
Chapter 10
Hyoid venous arch
 Left linguofacial 
Left maxillary
 Left external jugular
Left vertebral
 Left superficial
cervical
Right internal jugular
Left subclavian
Right superficial
cervical
Right vertebral 
Right subscapular 
Right axillary
 Left brachial
Left brachiocephalic
Right lateral 
 Cranial vena cava
thoracic
Azygos
Internal thoracic
Intercostal
Right phrenico-
Hepatic
abdominal
Left phrenico-
Right renal
abdominal
Left renal 
Right ovarian
Caudal vena cava
Left testicular (right 
Lumbar
testicular joins caudal 
vena cava)
Right common iliac
Left deep
circumflex iliac
Right internal iliac 
Left common iliac
Caudal
Left external iliac 
Left femoral
Left deep femoral
 Popliteal
Medial saphenous
FGURE 10.13: Venous system of the cat.
vein returns blood from the head, neck, and front legs.
3. Lift up the heart and cranial vena cava and carefully dissect away any tissue found beneath the
cranial vena cava. The azygos vein can be seen entering the dorsal surface of the cranial vena cava
 immediately cranial to the heart (Figure 10.14). Lift up the right lung; the azygos vein is now visible
 on the right side against the vertebral column. The tributaries of the azygos vein are the intercostal
veins from the body wall, the esophageal veins, and the bronchial veins. It is difficult to find the
esophageal and bronchial veins if they are not injected with latex, which they may not. be.
Editorialrevi
The Cardiovascular System 
221
 External 
Subclavian
 Brachial
Cephalic 
 jugular
 Superficial
Vertebral
Axillary
Subscapular
cervical
Maxillary
Azygos  Cranial  Internal
Left and right  Internal  Hyoid venous  Linguofacial
vena cava thoracic   brachiocephalic  jugular 
arch
FlGURE 10.14: Cranial venous system of the cat.
4. Trace the cranial vena cava forward; note that it is formed by the union of the two brachiocephalic veins
(see Figures 10.13 and 10.14),
 5. The cranial vena cava also receives the internal thoracic vein from the ventral chest wall. The right.
and left internal thoracic veins unite shortly before they empty into the cranial vena cava. In some
cats the right vertebral vein from the brain might enter the dorsal surface of the cranial vena cava,
but in most cats it enters the right brachiocephalic vein (see Figures 10.13 and 10.14).
 6. Trace both brachiocephalic veins forward. The left brachiocephalic vein receives the left vertebral
vein. The vertebral veins come from the vertebrae and thus can be traced only a short distance
dorsally in your dissection. Both brachiocephalic veins are formed by the union of the external
jugular veins, which drain the head, and the short subclavian veins, which drain the front legs
(see Figures 10.13 and 10.14).
7. Start tracing the external jugular vein toward the head. The frst branch is the smaller internal jugu-
lar vein, and it joins immediately above the point of union of the external jugular with the subcla-
vian. The internal jugular vein, which drains the brain, lies next to the leff. common carotid artery
 near the trachea. Another vessel, which is often difficult to locate, is the thoracic duct. It is a large
lymphatic vessel that originates in the cranial portion of the sublumbar region and courses ventral
to the vertebral column into and through the thorax between the aorta and azygos vein, specifically
a o sada i a soaze al jo iao rea pe i al jo iao rep  an u
external jugular at the point of union of the external jugular with the subclavian. Sometimes this
empty. Continue tracing the external jugular vein toward the head. The large superficial cervical
vein (formerly known as the transverse scapular vein) empties into the external jugular (see Figures
10.13 and 10.14).
 8. The external jugular vein is formed by the union of the maxillary vein (the dorsal branch) and
the linguofacial vein (the ventral branch) just caudal to the point of the mandible. The hyoid
venous arch can be seen connecting the two external jugular veins at this point (see Figures 10.13
and 10.14).
9. We will use the left side of the cat to dissect the vascular system, and the right side for the nerves.
If both the arteries and veins on the right side have superior latex injection (as was the situation in
the photo of the cat in Figure 10.14), use that side. However, if on one side the arteries are better
injected and on the other the veins are better injected, use both sides for the dissection. Just be sure
not to damage any nerves as you do this.
Editorialrevie
222
Chapter 10
Trace the left subclavian vein through the chest wall. It receives the subscapular vein from the
shoulder a short. distance from the site where it joins with the external jugular. Distal to where the
subscapular vein joins, the continuation of the subclavian is called the axillary vein. When the axil-
lary vein attaches to the muscles of the front leg, it becomes the brachial vein. The cephalic vein lies
ai aas so moqa aul ie ua pue a aui dn usos an al go aes ee aui uo
10.14). It continues up the cranial surface of the upper leg as the cephalic vein, whereas the other
branch, the superior brachial vein, passes medial to the humerus to course adjacent to the superf-
cial brachial artery and join the brachial vein (see Figures 10.13 and 10.14) . The cephalic vein may
join the superior cervical vein or enter the external jugular on its own.
10. Raise the apex of the heart and spread the lung lobes apart so you can find the caudal vena cava.
Trace this vessel from the diaphragm cranially to where it drains into the right atrium. This large
vein drains the lower part of the body.
11. Continue to trace the caudal vena cava caudally through the diaphragm and into the abdominal
cavity, where it lies to the right of the aorta. To see this vein and its tributaries, dissect away the
peritoneum because the caudal vena cava and the aorta are retroperitoneal. The tributaries usually
accompany the arteries of the same name.
12. The hepatic veins drain blood from the liver into the caudal vena cava. To locate these veins, use a
 probe or a scalpel blade to gently scrape away tissue on the right cranial surface of the liver. Several
hepatic veins may be located in this manner.
13. The phrenicoabdominal veins (formerly known as adrenolumbar veins) drain the adrenal glands
and the body wall. The right vein drains into the caudal vena cava, and the left may either drain into
the caudal vena cava or into the renal veins. These veins may be located by examining the dorsal
muscle wall cranial to the kidney (see Figures 10.13 and 10.15).
14. Locate the renal veins, which carry blood from the kidneys into the caudal vena cava. Note that. the
right kidney, and thus the right renal vein, is more cranial than the left one. Do all the dissection on
the left kidney, leaving the right kidney intact under the peritoneum for later dissection. Also note the
white ureters exiting from the kidney and traversing retroperitoneally toward the bladder. Find these ,
but do not cut them (see Figures 10.13 and 10.15)
15. Caudal to the renal veins are the long, thin, paired ovarian veins or testicular veins. They are most.
easily located by tracing the vessels from the gonads back toward the caudal vena cava. If the cat is a
female, locate the ovaries, small oval bodies near the cranial ends of the uterus, below the kidneys.
The ovarian artery and vein should be visible. If the cat. is a male, the testicular vein, artery, and
ductus deferens can be seen passing through the inguinal canal (the opening in the caudal abdomi-
nal body wall).Trace these blood vessels cranially toward the aorta and caudal vena cava. In the cat,
the left testicular and ovarian veins enter the left renal vein; on the right they enter the caudal vena
cava (see Figures 10.13 and 10.15).
Caudal vena cava
Deep circumflex iliacOvarian
Renal
 Phrenicoabdominal
FlGURE 10.15: Veins of the mid-abdominal dorsal wall of the cat.
Copyright 2010 Cer
The Cardiovascular Srstem 
223
External iliac
Common iliac
Caudalvena cava
Internal iliac 
Caudal
 Deep circumflex iliac
FlGURE 10.16: Veins of the caudal abdomen of the cat.
16. Several pairs of lumbar veins enter the dorsal surface of the caudal vena cava at intervals in the
abdominal cavity. Spread the dorsal median musculature apart and lift the caudal vena cava gently
to reveal these veins.
17. The right and left deep circumflex iliac veins (formerly known as iliolumbar veins) enter the caudal
vena cava near its termination. These vessels drain the abdominal wall muscles (see Figures 10.13
and 10.15).
18. The cormmon iliac veins join to form the caudal vena cava (see Figures 10.13 and 10.16).Trace the route
of the common iliac veins toward the hind legs. On the left side, the first vessel joining this vein is the
internal iliac vein, which drains the rectum, bladder, and internal reproductive organs. The common
iliac vein con tinues distally from this point as the external iliac vein. When it. passes out of the body wall,
it is the femoral vein. There is a slight variation on the right side; the first vein to join the common iliac
is the caudal vein, a short distance from the caudal vena cava (see Figures 10.13 and 10.16). Trace the
femoral vein to its formation by the rmedial saphenous vein superficially and the popliteal vein from
deep between the muscles (see Figures 10.13 and 10.17). If this vein were to be traced to the lateral side
of the leg, you would note that it is formed by the cranial tibial vein and the lateral saphenous vein.
19. The hepatic portal system may or may not be injected; if it is, it will be injected with yellow latex
(Figure 10.18). A portion of the portal vein was dissected in a previous chapter with the digestive
system (see Figure 9.19 in Chapter 9). As mentioned previously, a portal system is a vessel between
two capillary beds-in this case, between the capillaries of the digestive organs and those of the
liver. Thus, the portal veins carry blood from the digestive organs to the liver. As you follow the
portal vein caudally, note that it is formed by the union of the splenic vein (formerly known as
the gastrosplenic vein) from the stomach and spleen, and the larger cranial mesenteric vein com-
ing in caudally from the small intestine. Two veins join the cranial mesenteric just dorsal to the
mid-pancreas area: the pancreaticoduodenal from the pancreas and duodenum, and the caudal
mesenteric from the colon.
Part B: Dissection of the Arteries
With the exception of the pulmonary arteries, the arteries will be injected with red latex for ease of dis-
section and identification.
1. Locate the pulmonary artery emerging from the cranioventral surface of the heart. Because it is
attached to the right ventricle, it will be filled with blue latex. Trace its path to the lungs, noting that.
it branches into the right and left pulmonary arteries. Figure 10.19 illustrates the important arteries
identifed during dissection.
Editorialrevie
224
Chapter 10
Medial
Deep femoral
saphenous vein
Femoral vein 
 artery and vein
 Popliteal
Femoral artery
External iliac
 artery and vein 
 artery
FIGURE 10.17: Medial view of the vessels of the hind leg of a cat.
Gastroduodenal
vein
Portal vein
Liver
Liver
Pancreas
Duodenum
Stomach
Splenic
vein
Caudal
pancreatico-
Spleen
duodenal
vein
Caudal
Ascending
 mesenteric vein
colon
Cranial
 mesenteric vein
Colon
Jejunum
FIGURE 10.18: Hepatic-portal venous System in dogs and cats.
ventricle and passing beneath the pulmonary artery; its path forms an arch that moves dorsally and
to the left above the heart. The arch is known as the aortic arch. When the aorta becomes attached
to the dorsal thorax, it is called the thoracic aorta. This is injected with red latex, but due to the
thickness of the wall of the aorta, the color often cannot be seen (do not. remove the wall of the aorta
in your dissection).
Editorialrevie
The Cardiovascular Syste m 
225
 3. The first major branch off the aortic arch is the brachiocephalic trunk, or brachiocephalic artery.
 Trace this vessel forward. The first branch off the brachiocephalic is the left common carotid artery;
it then branches into the right subclavian artery and the right common carotid artery (Figures 10.19
and 10.20).
 4. Follow the path of the left common carotid artery. It ascends cranially in the neck, coursing between
the small internal jugular vein and the trachea. As you follow it cranially, you will note some small 
branches arising from this artery, such as the caudal thyroid artery, which is often hard to find and
usually is not injected (see Figures 10.19 and 10.20). The first major branch to locate is the cranial
 Left lingual
Left cranial laryngeal
Left maxillary
 Left superficial temporal
Rightcranial laryngeal
 Left external carotid
Right common carotid 
Left occipital
 Thyroid gland
Left common carotid 
Right vertebral
Left cranial thyroid
Right superior cervical
Left caudal thyroid
 Right subclavian 
 Left superficial cervical
Right axillary
Left vertebral
Brachiocephalic trunk
Left costocervical
Left subscapular
Right brachial 
 Left subclavian
Right internal thoracic
Left internal 
thoracic
Right lateral thoracic
 Paraconal
Aortic arch
 Ascending aorta
Hepatic
Bronchial
Celiac
Intercostal
 Left gastric
Cranial mesenteric
Splenic
Right renal 
Left phrenico-
Right ovarian
abdominal
Left renal 
 Caudal mesenteric
Left testicular
Lumbar
Left deep
Aorta
 circumflex iliac
Right deep femoral 
Left external iliac
 Left internal iliac
Caudal
Femoral
 Deep femoral
FlGURE 10.19: Arterial system of the cat.
Editorial
226
Chapter 10
Caudal
Thyroid
Cranial
thyroid
 gland
laryngeal 
Lingual
Maxillary
Common
Cranial
Occipital
ExternalSuperficial
carotid
thyroid
carotid
temporal
FlGURE 10.20: Cranial arterial system of the cat.
thyroid artery, which originates at the level of the junction between the trachea and the cricoid
cartilage. It supplies blood to the thyroid gland and muscles of the larynx. The next two branches
off the common carotid are the occipital artery, which courses dorsally and supplies the back of
a   axa a xe a  aa e      a 
lingual artery, which courses ventral and cranially. After this branch, the artery continues dorsocra-
nially as the external carotid artery.
In the cat, the internal carotid artery is extremely small and need not be located. (It emerges 
from the common carotid just. cranial to the occipital artery and courses dorsally.) The external
carotid divides into the superficial temporal artery, coursing dorsally and supplying the parotid
salivary gland and local musculature, and the maxillary artery, coursing ventrocranially and branch-
ing into numerous other arteries that deliver blood to the maxilla and mandible (see Figures 10.19
and 10.20).
5. Return to the aortic arch and locate the left subclavian artery, the next branch off the aortic arch
just to the left of the brachiocephalic artery. This artery supplies the left side of the chest and leff.
front leg. Locate each of the following arteries. The left subclavian artery emits two branches, a
ventrally oriented internal thoracic artery and a dorsocranial oriented vertebral artery. The next.
branch emitted also oriented dorsocranially is the costocervical trunk. The subclavian becomes the
axillary artery as it proceeds ventrolaterally cranial to the frst rib. The axillary artery then emits
the ventrocranial oriented superficial cervical artery (see Figures 10.19 and 10.21). Its next major
branch is the craniolateral oriented Left subcscapular artery.
6. The internal thoracic artery goes to the sternum and supplies blood to the ventral intercostal mus-
cles. Note that it joins its corresponding vein. The left vertebral artery courses dorsally to the ver-
tebrae and cranially to supply the brain, The costocervical trunk and the deep cervical artery (on
occasion you may find this artery next to the costocervical trunk) supply most of the neck and some
of the back muscles.
 7. Next the superficial cervical artery, which ascends for a short distance and then branches, supplies
some of the neck and shoulder muscles. The subscapular artery initially courses cranially but turns
laterally to supply the muscles of the subscapular and caudal aspect of the scapula.
 8. When the axillary artery becomes attached to the musculature of the front leg, it is known as the
brachial artery. Follow the brachial artery until it branches to form the superficial brachial artery
The Cardiovascular Srstem
227
Brachiocephalic
Right internal Right common
trunk
thoracic
carotid
Right
 Right
Leftcommon
Left subclavian
 subclavian
vertebral
 carotid
 Left internal
Left
Left brachial
Left
 Left superficial 
thoracic (protruding
costocervical
vertebral
cervical
vertically in photo)
Left axillary
Let
 subscapular
FlGURE 10.21: Cranial thoracic and appendicular arterial systems of the cat.
and the median artery. The superficial brachial gives off the collateral ulnar artery which courses
ulna. Just proximal to the carpus, the median artery gives off the radial artery, which courses medi-
ally across the carpal bones and continues caudally and medially to the accessory carpal bone. All
from the right subclavian just distal to the point at which the right. common carotid artery emerges
(see Figures 10.19 and 10.21). Also note the superficial cervical artery is the frst branch off the
axillary as it. enters the axilla.
 9. Returning to the aortic arch, trace the aorta caudally. Pull the viscera in the thorax to the right.
to expose the aorta in the thoracic cavity. As this vessel passes through the thorax it is called the
thoracic aorta. Remove the pleura to expose this ve ssel in the thorax.
10. Note the intercostal arteries emerging from the thoracic aorta to supply the intercostal muscles.
In addition, there are several bronchial arteries, which supply the lungs, and esophageal arteries,
which supply the esophagus.
11. As the aorta emerges above the diaphragm, its first major branch from the abdominal aorta is the short.
celiac artery. Dissect away the fat and peritoneum that cover the cranial aspect of the abdominal aorta
to locate this artery. The celiac artery divides into three branches: first is the hepatic artery, coursing
 dorsal to the stomach and to the liver; immediately distal to this is the left gastric artery, supplying
the lesser curvature and cranial stomach; then the artery continues as the splenic artery, the largest.
of the branches, and goes to the spleen (see Figures 10.19 and 10.22). The hepatic artery branches
into the right gastric, gastroduodenal, and cranial pancreatoduodenal arteries on its path to the liver.
 The hepatic artery was located previously in the lesser omentum, to the left of the portal vein, during
the dissection of the digestive system (see Chapter 9, Figure 9.19).
and 10.22). It supplies the small intestine and a portion of the large intestine.
228
Chapter 10
Deep 
Left gastric
cirumflex iliac
Cranial mesenteric 
 Splenic 
Hepatic
Caudal
Ovarian Renal
Phrenicoabdominal AortaCeliac
mesenteric
FlGURE 10.22: Mid-abdominal arteries in a cat.
13. The paired left and right phrenicoabdominal arteries (formerly known as the adrenolumbar
 arteries) course from the aorta to the dorsal body wall (see Figures 10.19 and 10.22). They supply
the adrenal glands, diaphragm, and muscles of the body wall.
14. The next pair of arteries are the renal arteries, which supply the kidneys (see Figures 10.19
and 10.22).
15. Just caudal to the kidneys, off the abdominal aorta, the right and left. testicular or ovarian arteries
emerge (see Figures 10.19 and 10.22). These are small, thread-like arteries emerging from the ventral
surface of the aorta. If your cat is a male, follow the testicular arteries from the inguinal canal to
the aorta. The testicular artery supplies each testis. If your cat is a female, trace the ovarian arteries to
the ovaries.
16. Push the descending colon to one side to see the single caudal mesenteric artery (see Figures 10.19
 and 10.22). This arises from the ventral surface of the aorta a short distance from the previous
testicular or ovarian arteries. It supplies the descending colon.
lumbar arteries emerging at intervals along the abdominal aorta in the cat. These supply the
abdominal wall.
18. Another pair of arteries called the deep circumflex iliac arteries (formerly known as the iliolum-
and 10.23).
19. The aorta terminates in a series of branches, first the paired external iliac arteries, then the inter-
nal iliac arteries (see Figures 10.19 and 10.23). The external iliac becomes the femoral artery as it.
 passes out through the body wall (see Figure 10.17). It courses next. to its corresponding vein and
branches with it; the nomenclature for these branches is the same as for the veins. The internal iliac
 artery supplies the gluteal muscles, rectum, and uterus.
20. The aorta terminates by branching into the small caudal artery, which courses down the median
ventral surface of the sacrum and enters the tail (see Figures 10.19 and 10.23)
Editorialrevie
The Cardiovascular Srstem 
229
 Deep circumflex
Caudal
Cranial
Caudal
iliac
 mesenteric
Aorta
 mesenteric
Internal
 External Uterus Ovary Ovarian Renal Leftkidney
iliac
iliac
FlGURE 10.23: Caudal abdominal arteries in a cat.
The Electrocardiogram
ions rapidly diffuse out of the neuron. This causes
An electrocardiogram is a recording of the electro-
the membrane to return to its resting potential (see
chemical activity (depolarization waves) traveling
 Chapter 15 for a more detailed explanation).
through the heart immediately prior to each beat.
The sinoatrial node (the SA node), also called
The heart's ability to beat is intrinsic, and thus it.
the pacemaker, has the highest rate of discharge
does not depend on impulses from the nervous
 and provides the stimulus to initiate the heartbeat.
system to initiate its contraction. The heart will
It also sets the rate of depolarization for the heart. as
continue to contract rhythmically even if all nerve
a whole. The impulse then spreads across the both
connections are severed. However, because it is con-
atria and is immediately followed by atrial contrac-
nected to the autonomic nervous system, this system
 tion (atrial systole). The impulse then is picked up
has a controlling effect on the heart and can either
by the atrioventricular node (or AV node) . At the AV
increase or decrease the heart rate.
node the impulse is momentarily delayed; in an ani-
Within the heart is the intrinsic conduction
- iad siea z o ai leq ae u  de
system, or nodal system. This system consists of
ute, the delay is approximately 0.1 sec. It is shorter
specialized noncontractile myocardial tissue, called
in animals with faster heart rates and longer in
purkinje fibers of the purkinje system, that con-
animals with slower heart rates. This allows the atria
ducts the wave of depolarization through the heart.
time to completely contract. From there the impulse
in an orderly, consistent, and sequential manner
 passes through the AV bundle (or bundlle of His)
that enables the heart to beat as a coordinated unit.
and splits into the right and left bundle branches as
The definition of depolarization is the state of a
it travels down the interventricular septum. Branch-
neuron that occurs immediately after a sufficiently
ing off the bundle branches are numerous purkinje
strong stimulus is applied and results in an influx of
fbers attached to the myocardium, called termi-
sodium ions. This changes the membrane potential
 nal purkinje conducting fibers. The impulse passes
through these fbers to initiate ventricular contrac
ization follows depolarization; during it, potassium
tion (ventricular systole; Figure 10.24).
Editorialrevie
230
Chapter 10
Brachiocephalic trunk
 Left subclavian artery
Cranial vena cava
Aortic arch
Left pulmonary
 Right pulmonary
artery
artery
Aortic valve
Sinoatrial
node
Pulmonary
Atrioventricular.
veins
node
Left atrium
 Right atrium 
Atrioventricular
bundle
Chordae
Right and left
tendineae
branches
Terminal
conducting
fibers
Caudal
vena cava
Apex
Papillary muscle
FlGURE 10.24: The intrinsic conduction system of the heart, all species.
The electrocardiograph records the electrical
and four or more chest leads. The three standard
currents generated by the heart as they eventu-
limb leads—Leads I, II, and III—record two of the
ally spread through the body and are picked up
electrodes during a reading. Lead I is positive on
by the machine's electrodes. The electrocardio-
the left front leg and negative on the right front
gram (ECG or EKG) records three main recog-
leg; Lead II is positive on the left hind leg and nega-
nizable waves, called deflection waves. The first.
tive on the right front leg; and Lead II is positive
 is the P wave, representing depolarization of the
on the left hind leg and negative on the left front.
atria, which occurs immediately prior to atrial sys-
leg. The augmented or unipolar leads, known as
tole. The next is the QRS complex, representing
aVR, aVL, and aVF, compare the positive electrode
ventricular depolarization, and it is immediately
to each of the standard limb leads. The chest. leads
followed by ventricular systole. The third wave is
are placed at various locations on the external
the T wave, representing ventricular repolariza-
che st. wall.
tion. A small atrial repolarization wave occurs at.
 In a normal animal, the lead that usually gives
the same time as ventricular depolarization, and
the P wave and R wave in a positive deflection
thus this wave is buried within the QRS complex
is Lead II because of the heart's position in the
(Figure 10.25).
 chest. As the wave of depolarization moves toward
The direction of the ECG deflection waves
the positive electrode, it will record it. as a posi-
(up or down) depends on where the positive and
tive deflection. If the wave moves directly toward
negative electrodes are atfached on the limbs of
the lead, it will be a strong positive deflection;
the patient. Traditionally, a dog lies in right. lateral 
if it is moving 45° obliquely toward the positive 
recumbency and has electrodes attached at the
electrode, it will be a small positive deflection;
 elbows and knees. The right knee is the ground
if it is moving 90° to the positive electrode, the
electrode. Cats may be positioned like dogs or ster-
deflection will usually be minimal and be as much
nally. The electrocardiograph machine is able to
positive as negative. If the wave moves 45? away
change the polarity of the electrodes without hav-
from the positive electrode and toward a negative
ing to move them. A typical ECG records three
electrode, it will be a small negative deflection;
standard limb leads, three augmented limb leads,
and finally, if the wave moves directly away from
Editorialreviewha
The Cardiovascular Srstem 
231
Normal Lead ll Electrocardiographic Complex
P wave: Measure from the baseline to the top of the
P wave.
R
R wave: Measure from the baseline to the top of the
R wave. (Note: it is measured not. from the bottom
of the Q or S waves to the top of the R wave, but.
from the baseline.)
Along the horizontal axis of the ECG, certain
measurements are taken. Remember, intervals
include the wave deflections; segments do not.
P-Q
S-T
The units of the following are in seconds (sec).
Segment
PR interval: Measure from the start of the P wave
to the start. of the Q wave. This interval is misnamed
and should be called the P-Q interval, but it is so
named because the Q wave is often absent. This rep-
resents the time for atrial depolarization.
P-Q segment: Measure from the end of the P wave
P-R
-QRS
to the start of the Q wave. This represents the time
Interval Complex
Q-T
the wave is within the AV node.
Interval-
0.02
QRS complex: Measure from the start. of the Q wave
Seconds
to the end of the R wave. This represents the time
0.1
for ventricular depolarization.
FlGURE 10.25: The normal Lead Il electrocardio-
S-T segment: Measure from the end of the S wave
to the start. of the T wave. This represents the time
gram pattern. The machine appears standardized
period between the end of depolarization of the
at 1 cm = 1 mV, and the tract would normally be
ventricles and the initiation of repolarization.
recorded at 50 mm/sec paper speed
QT interval: Measure from the start of the Q
the positive electrode and directly toward the nega-
wave to the end of the T wave. This represents
tive electrode, it will be strongly negative. If the QRS
the length of time for ventricular contraction and
complex's wave deflections are equally positive and
repolarization.
negative, this lead is called the isoelectric lead. The
size of the atria or ventricles also affects the size of
Note that the measure along the horizontal axis
the wave deflection, giving veterinarians an indica-
is time in seconds, and that the vertical is measured
tion of whether there is heart enlargement. There-
in millivolts (mV). The standard measurements are
fore, measurements of the P wave and R wave are
taken at 50 mm/sec, and 1 mV = 1 cm on the verti-
performed as follows (see also Figure 10.25). The
cal axis. This makes each small box equal to 0.02 sec
units of the following are all in millivolts (mV).
horizontally and 0.1 mV vertically.
EXERCISE 10.3
RECORDING THE ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
Procedure
 1. Place a dog in right lateral recumbency on a table with a non-metallic surface (otherwise you may
get. 60 cycle-per-second interference), and place the electrodes on the skin as indicated on the
electrode leads. Standard to the industry is that. the white electrode is right front (RF) leg, the black
ei aou) a (h) pusy n si aana pe  (ht) py [ si ai a () sog a si apoaa
green is the ground wire). The brown electrode is the chest. lead, but we will not use this electrode.
Place a small amount of electrode gel or alcohol at the connection sites.
 2. Turn on the ECG machine and push the standardize button to be sure it. deflects 1 cm at. 1 mV. (If
needed, adjust it so 1 cm = 1 mV.) Also make sure it is running at 50 mm/sec.
Editorialrevie
232
Chapter 10
 3. Record Leads I, II, and III for a short distance on the paper. If you would like to, you may also
record AVF, AVL, and AVR at this time.
4. Reduce the paper speed to 25 cm/sec. Note the printed marks at the top of the ECG paper.
Each little box is 1 mm square, and there are 75 little boxes between each mark, which we will
call one section. If you do the math you will see that at 25 mm /sec it will take 3 seconds to tra-
verse 75 boxes (one section), and 6 seconds for two sections. Counting the number of R waves
animal. (There are ten 6-second intervals in each minute; therefore, you multiply the beats
counted by 10.)
 5. Using the ECG, record the information in the following spaces and compare it to your instructor's
 computations. Remember to label your units.
P-R wave
 Q-T interval:
 P-Q segment:
P wave:
QRS complex:
R wave:
 S-T segment:
heart rate:
Questions
1.
What would be the multiplier that is needed to determine the heart rate for two sections of
ECG paper if the machine were run at 50 cm/sec?
 2. If there were a delay or block in the impulse as it passed through the AV node, which two
measurements would be increased?
Discussion
Regarding question 1, if the paper were running twice as fast as previously, half the number of R waves
would be recorded. Therefore, the multiplier would have to be doubled to 20.
To answer question 2, because the impulse is in the AV node during the P-Q segment, this measure-
ment would be increased in length. Also, because the P-R interval includes the P-Q segment, this too
would be increased in length.
EXERCISE 10.4
BLOOD PRESSURE MEASUREMENT USING A DOPPLER
In humans, blood pressure is measured in a peripheral artery in the arm using a stethoscope and a
sphygmomanometer, which consists of an inflatable cuff that circles the arm and a pressure manometer.
Normally the blood flow through an artery is inaudible, but the inflated cuff causes blood flow in the
artery to be turbulent, which is audible.
The cuff is inflated until the artery is completely compressed, with no flow of blood through
it and thus no sound. As pressure is slowly released from the cuff, the manometer needle drops.
At the point at which arterial blood pressure exceeds the pressure of the cuff, blood will flow
through the artery and will be audible. This point is called the systolic blood pressure and repre-
sents peak systolic pressure at maximum ventricular contraction. As more pressure is released, pres-
sure drops from the cuff and the artery; the point at which the blood flow again becomes inaudible
is the diastolic blood pressure. This is the pressure within the vascular system when the heart is
in diastole.
 Animals do not have peripheral vessels of sufficient size distal to where a cuff could be placed to
hear an audible pulse with a stethoscope. Therefore, devices such as dopplers must be used to hear the
blood flow through the artery. Because the doppler records blood flow without turbulence, it is limited
to systolic blood pressure measure ment.
The Cardiovascular System 
233
Procedure
1. Using an electric clipper and a #40 blade, clip away the hair on a dog between the carpal pad and
 metacarpal pad (or if necessary, clip on the dorsum of the hock).
 2. Place a blood pressure cuff sized for a human infant or for a newborn (depending of the size of the
dog's leg) around the dog's foreleg, just. below the elbow (or hind leg just. below the knee). Cuff 
width should be 40% of the circumference of the leg. Do not inflate it. yet.
3. Put some ECG gel on the clipped area; in the area just medial to the midline of the ventral aspect of
the leg, place the doppler head and listen for the audible heartbeat. When it is consistently audible,
inflate the cuf until the heartbeat. becomes inaudible, then slowly release the pressure until it.
becomes audible once again. This point is the systolic blood pressure. Perform this three times and
record your results below.
first measurement:
second measurement:
third measurement:
Question
1. Were all three measurements different, or were they the same each time?
Discussion
 If the measurements were done correctly and the animal's blood pressure was not affected by pump-
ing the cuff, they should be the same each time. However, like humans, animals may get nervous and
release epinephrine into their system, causing vasoconstriction, which increases peripheral resistance
and increases blood pressure. Even though the act of measuring may hinder the accuracy of the
 measurement, the change is not so significant as to cause a misdiagnosis.
linical Significance
Auscultation of the heart valves is an important skill for both the veterinarian and the veterinary technician
to learn. During dissection, when you made your cuts through the puimonary artery and aorta, they were
made through the cranial surface of the heart on the left side. ft was mentioned that these two valves,
because of the way the heart is positioned in the thorax, are cranial to the mitral valve, or left AV valve. ft is
thus logical that we would auscultate for these valves on the left side of the chest.
If the diaphragm of the stethoscope is placed just above the sternum on the left side of the chest and
slid fonward until the heart sound is clearly audible, it will be over the mitral vaive. This should be the fourth
Or fifth intercostal space at the costochondral junction. Next, slide the stethoscope head a little dorsally and
cranially and listen for the heart sounds in this location; this will be the aortic valve and should be the fourth
intercostal space. Then, slide the stethoscope head cranially and ventrally one intercostal space and listen
to the puimonary valve, which should be at the third intercostal space at the costochondral junction.
On the right side, the right AV vaive is found at the fourth intercostal space at the costochondral
junction, or wherever it is best heard. Here is how to remember the order in which these valves are found:
P-A-M (pu lmonary valve-aortic valve-mitral valve).
234
Chapter 10
eterinary
ignettes
forms of life.
Wwhen I was a junior, the two senior students with whom I was assigned for my week of cardiology
 heah aul pui, sem aw ylm paeld Aaul auih shy aul 'asuadxa Au pe uny yo poi e pey uoeio
Monday morning they took me out to the calf pens and told me there was something wrong with the
calf's heart and, if I had any brains at all, I should be able to diagnose the condition within a few min-
utes. I got out my stethoscope and proceeded to listen for the heart sounds. I started on the left side.
meticulously searching for the mitral valve. I searched and searched, listening intently, but I could not
hear anything.
"well, what do you hear?" Mutt (the tall one) asked me.
"Uh, nothing. I can't hear anything." I replied, beginning to show a little red on my face.
"Come here," said Jeff (the short one)
I walked over to him and, not being the brightest human on the planet at that moment, did not
remove the earpieces of my stethoscope from my ears.
Grabbing the head of my stethoscope and tapping on it, he yelled, "Does this thing work?"
I jumped back in pain and pulled them from my ears.
"VWell, that's not the problem. Listen to the other side of the chest; maybe the heart is over there.,"
he told me.
Dumbly, I did as he suggested. All the while, these two were trying to keep straight faces and
glaring at me like I was stupid. I wasn't stupid, just ignorant. As I listened, I was thinking, because the
heart is in the middle of the chest, how could I hear it on the right side if I couldn't hear it on the left?
This time I moved the stethoscope up and listened to the lung sounds. Now I could hear the muffled
 sounds of a heart.
I stood up and looked at them. "The heart's not in the chest, is it?" I asked.
"Vwhat do you mean it's not in the chest?" Jeff replied.
"If it isn't in the chest, where would it be?" Mutt inquired.
I started listening to the cranial chest and palpated the neck. Deep in the neck, just in front of the 
thoracic inlet, I felt something beating and found a small heart.
"Vwhat's it called?" they asked.
"I don't know," I replied.
"An ectopic cordis," Mutt answered.
I had gotten the answer too quickly for them. Next I was guided to the small animal ward to play
"Name the Murmur."
"Listen to this heart and tell us the type of murmur you hear and its cause," Jeff told me.
As I grasped the chest, I could feel the vibration of the heartbeat in my hand. Placing the stetho-
 scope head against the chest, I immediately heard a whoosh-whoosh sound rather than the normal
lub-dub. I had been taught that murmurs were abnormal heart sounds, often heard between the
first and second heart sounds, but being only a rookie at this, my experience was lacking. It sounded 
more like a washing machine than a heartbeat.
"I have no idea what this is," I said.
"Well, is it systolic or diastolic?" Mutt asked me.
"I don't know. Both maybe?" I replied.
"That's an intelligent answer: you can do better than that, can't you?" Jeff remarked sarcastically.
"Describe it to us," Mutt demanded.
"vvell, there's no first or second heart sound, just a loud whoosh, followed immediately by a
hands and shrugging my shoulders.
Editorialrevie
The Cardiovascular System
235
They had given me up as hopeless, I thought
a pot har .'snsnape snonp uad e jo anuanu Aauuoeu g s,l,
"Better go read up on it before Dr. Frye asks you about it and you get it wrong.," Mutt said, shak-
ing his head.
They sent me off to the vet school library to read about it. This is what I found out: The ductus
 arteriosus is a vessel present in fetal life that shunts blood from the pulmonary artery to the aorta,
thus bypassing the lungs (see Figure 10.1B). In dogs and cats, it normally closes by muscular con-
traction sometime in the first eight days of life. wwhen it does not close, the condition is known as a
patent ductus arteriosus. Sometimes the vessel doesn't close completely and leaves a very small
bop away aul 'sabueuo sweuapowau ueodui ou sasneo Ainsn l saso asoun ul pue bujuado
is most often affected, and there is a breed predilection in miniature poodles, German shepherds,
 develop severe clinical signs in first six to eight weeks of life. Cats with this condition rarely survive
past a few weeks of age.
The pathophysiology is complicated and depends on the size of the patent ductus and the direc-
tion of the blood flow through it. The result is left and/or right heart failure. Animals with the condition
generaly have a history of coughing and exercise intolerance. On physical exam, a veterinarian may
find a persistent machinery murmur, a pounding femoral pulse, and a precordial thrill(which is the
vibration I felt when I placed my hand on the dog's chest). Diagnosis is made based on the clinical
signs, radiography, ECG, ultrasonography of the heart, and angiography. If the blood flow is left to
 the problem. Because the condition may be hereditary, which has been confirmed in the miniature
poodle, animals that survive should not be bred.
After reading up on the condition, I realized I had not done such a bad job in describing it. Later
I found out I had secretly passed their test on both accounts, but they would never admit that to me.
SUMMARY
In this chapter we covered the anatomy and physiology of the heart and the blood-vascular
system. You leamed that there are three main circulatory systems of the blood-vascular
system: the coronary, pulmonary, and systemic circulations. You will learn in Chapter 13 that
there is a small portal system between the hypothalamus of the brain and the pituitary gland.
In addition to learming the parts of the heart and its intrinsic vessels, you learmed the names of
the main vessels in the body of the cat. These names are similar in most species.
The vascular supply of the equine leg is beyond the scope of this book, but many excellent
texts cover this if you are interested. Some of the more important vessels in horses are the
external maxillary artery as it crosses the mandible (for obtaining a pulse rate), the jugular veins
in the jugular furrow (for intravenous injections and drawing blood), the carotid arteries (for
avoiding them when working on the jugular veins), the common digital artery on the medial
aspect of the leg (for obtaining a pulse rate), and the medial and lateral posterior digital arteries
just below the fetlock joint (which may develop a prominent pulse in cases of laminitis).
Finally, knowing how to take blood pressure readings and what they mean, and knowing
the significance of the wave forms on an EcG, are important skills every veterinary technician
should learn.
236
Chapter 10
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Into what two portions is the cardiovascular system divided?
 2. Differentiate among the systemic, pulmonary, and coronary circulatory systems.
 3. Define a portal system, and describe the hepatic portal system.
4. Differentiate between systole and diastole.
5. Name the four chambers of the heart and their associated valves.
6. What causes all four heart sounds, and which are audible with a stethoscope?
7. The pericardial sac is made up of what layers?
 8. What structure consisting of a groove and an associated artery on the ventrocranial
surface of the heart delineates the right and left sides of the heart?
 9. What is the function of the trabecula septomarginalis?
10. Which veins contain oxygenated blood in the fetus? In the adult?
11. Which arteries contain non-oxygenated blood in the fetus? In the adult?
12. What is the function of the papillary muscles and chordae tendineae?
13. In fetal life, what is the function of the fossa ovalis?
14. What is the name of the smallest arteries and smallest veins?
15. What compound acts as a buffer in blood by combining with free hydrogen ions produced
by the dissociation of carbonic acid?
16. Where is endothelium located?
17. Since a horse's legs have no valves, how is stocking up (swelling) prevented?
18. What are the factors that control systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure?
 19. Define hypertension and hypotension.
20. Where is the thoracic duct found, and what does it carry?
 21. Name the specialized non-contractile myocardial tissue in the heart.
 22. What is the pacemaker of the heart?
23. What events are occurring during the P, QRS, and T waves of the electrocardiogram?
 24. If the wave of depolarization is moving directly toward the positive electrode, will the
deflection on the electrocardiogram be positive or negative, and will it be a strong
deflection, a moderate deflection, or no deflection at all?
25. True or False: The P-R interval is from the start of the P wave to the start of the Q wave
CHAPTER 11
THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
OBJECTIVES
 state the function of each component of the respiratory system
 describe the air flow from the nose to the alveoli of the lungs
dissect. the structures and organs of the respiratory system, and identify them by name
 identify the parts of the larynx and its cartilages
describe the anatomy of the lungs of different. species
understand the flow of air between the air sacs and lungs of the bird and their connection to the
pneumatic bones
understand the various methods of measuring lung volumes and capacities
 understand the concept of dead space
MATERIALS
cat cadaver, triple injected (order without skin attached)
Mayo dissecting scissors
probe
1 × 2 thumb forceps or Adson tissue forceps
 #4 scalpel handle with blade
bone cutting forceps
rubber gloves
 model of the larynx
· spirometer
INTRODUCTION
The respiratory system can be divided into two parts: the upper respiratory system and lower
respiratory system. The structures of the upper respiratory system include the extermal nares,
nasal cavity, sinuses, and larynx. The lower respiratory system includes the trachea, bronchi,
is the process of breathing (also called pulmonary ventilation), which is the movement of gases
in and out of the lungs. Respiration is a broader term that includes not only the act of ventilation
but also the distribution of gases in the alveoli and the diffusion of oxygen into and of carbon 
dioxide out of the bloodstream. This exchange of gases in and out of the blood is called external
In the exercises in this chapter the important structures are listed in colored bold print. If a
structure is mentioned prior to its dissection it will be italicized. Structures discussed prior to
dissection may also be in bold print for special emphasis.
237
or eChapter(s)
Editorialrevi
238
Chapter l1
EXERCISE 11.1
 THE UPPER RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
The functions of the upper respiratory system are as follows:
1. conducting air (in and out)
 2. cleansing air before it is used by the body
3. humidifying air before it is used by the body
4. transferring heat.
5. making sounds (phonation)
6. maintaining acid-base balance
 7. smelling (olfaction). The olfactory sensory receptors are neuroepithelial cells, which are chemical
to depolarize. This message is carried by the frst cranial nerve (the olfactory nerve) to the olfactory
bulbs, up the olfactory tracts, into the rhinencephalon (the olfactory brain, part of the telencepha-
lon of the cerebrum), and is interpreted there as an odor. The sensory receptors are located in the
posteromedial and posterodorsal parts of the nasal cavity.
Procedure
 1. Examine the nose of the cat. The air enters the nasal cavity through the nares or nostrils. These open-
 ings vary in size and shape with each species. The horse's nostrils are large and easily dilated, whereas
the pig's are small and rigid. The non-haired area of the nose is called the planun nasale (or planum
nasolabiale in species with a large muzzle). The most rostral part of the nasal cavity is the nasal vestibule,
The two nasal cavities, left and right, are separated rostrally by a cartilaginous septum. Each cavity is
divided further by the nasal bone in the center and by the nasal turbinate bones projecting from the
lateral wall of the nasal passage. The bony turbinates are scroll-like in appearance and are covered
by nasal mucosa to form the nasal conchae. These effectively divide the flowing air into channels:
the ventral meatus, middle meatus, dorsal meatus, and common meatus. The mucosa is made up
of pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelial cells, goblet cells, and nasal glands. These channels
increase air turbulence and thereby warm, moisten, and filter air as it passes through.
The main sinuses are the maxillary and frontal sinuses, which are located within the bones for
which they are named. Large animals also have a sphenoid sinus and a palatine sinus, except the
horse, in which these two sinuses are fused into a sphenopalatine sinus. The cow and sheep have
an additional sinus, the lacrimal sinus. These sinuses act as resonance chambers in phonation, and
their mucosa, like that of the nasal cavity, warms and moistens the incoming air.
the nasopharynx. On the dorsolateral wall of the nasopharynx are openings to the audlitory or eusta-
chian tubes. These act in pressure regulation with the middle ear, to which the tubes connect. (In the
horse, each eustachian tube opens into a large ventral diverticulum within the nasopharynx known as
the guttural pouch, which is located just. lateral to the pharynx.) The nasopharynx is separated from the
of the soft palate or just beneath it, causes inhaled air to pass through the nasopharynx into the laryn-
gopharynx (the area above the open epiglottis) and directly into the larynx (Figures 11.1 and 11.2).
 2. Carefully remove the muscles from the ventral surface of the larynx in the neck to expose the
cartilage (Figure 11.3).
The larynx is a hard tube made of cartilages. The thyroid cartilage is the large, ventral cartilage vis-
ible after removal of the ventral neck muscles. The cricoid cartilage is located caudal to the thyroid
cartilage. This cartilage is shaped like a signet ring, with the small band located ventrally and an
expanded portion located dorsally on both sides.
3. The cricothyroid ligament is the semi-transparent membrane in the space between the cricoid and thy
roid cartilages. Make a median longitudinal incision through these two carilages on the ventral ridge
The Respiratory System
239
Eustachian
Nasopharynx
(auditory) tube
Cerebrum
 Frontal sinus
Cerebellum
Sphenoid
sinus
Laryngopharynx
Nasal
conchae
Epiglottis -
Nasal
vestibule
Arytenoid-
cartilage
Nasal
Vocal cord -
cavity
Hard
palate
Trachea-
Tongue
Oropharynx
Tracheal
rings
Cricoid
Thyroid
cartilage
cartilage
Palatine
tonsil
Soft
palate
Lingual
frenulum
FlGURE 11.1: Sagittal view of the cat's head.
Cut edge of
Eustachlan(auditory)
soft palate
 Nasopharynx
tube entrance
Hard
palate
with
 palatine 
rugae
FlGURE 11.2: Nasopharynx and eustachian tube opening in a cat.
and through the basihyoid bone (the most ventral bone of the hyoid apparatus). Now find the two
 pyramid-shaped arytenoid cartilages on the dorsal surface of the larynx, cranial to the cricoid cartilage.
 4. The epiglottis is the most cranial cartilage of the larynx and can be seen at the base of the tongue
during the dissection of the mouth. This pointed, leaflike cartilage is attached ventrally to the
thyroid cartilage.
Editorialrevie
240
Chapter 11
Hyoid bones of
hyoid apparatus
Arytenoid cartilage-
Cricoid 
Epiglottis
Cricoid
cartilage
cartilage
Location of
Trachea
laryngeal ventricle-
Trachea
(saccule)
Tracheal
rings
Vestibular fold
Epiglottis
Thyroid cartilage -
Thyroid cartilage -
Arytenoid
Lateral ventricle
Vocal fold
cartilage
(saccule)
Vocal process of
 arytenoid cartilage
Epiglottis
Cricoid
Laryngeal
cartilage
saccule
Arytenoid
Trachea
 cartilage
Vestibular
ligament
Thyroid cartilage-
Laryngeal ventricle
(saccule)
Vocal ligament-
Cricothyroid ligament
M. vocalis -
 M. cricoarytenoideus lateralis
FIGURE 11.3: Laryngeal cartilages and the structure of the larynx (dog). A. Cartilaginous structures of 
fo sainionis ' 'pauoee esoon yh xusiel aut jo sainionis 'a 'snienedde pioay aui pue xusel aur 
the larynx with mucosa removed.
Arytenoid
Entrance
cartilage
to trachea
Vocal fold
Vestibular
fold
Epiglottis
FGURE 11.4: Isolated view of the tongue and laryngeal opening in a cat.
5. The most cranial and lateral folds of mucous membranes extending across the larynx are the
vestibular folds; the caudal, large pair of folds are the vocal folds or vocal cords. Note in Figure 11.4
that these structures form a V in the center ventrally. This is how you would view the entrance to
the larynx prior to inserting an endotracheal tube. The median longitudinal cut you made through
the ventrum of the larynx splits the apex of the V. Your view is upside down from the photo in
The Respiratory System 
241
Figure 11.4, but this does not alter the appearance of the structures studied. In fact, you can observe
them more closely with the larynx opened.
The depression created between the vocal and vestibular folds is called the laryngeal ventricle (pres
membrane covering the internal vocal ligament. This ligament extends from the arytenoid cartilages
to the thyroid cartilage. Just caudal to this ligament is the vocalis muscle (m. vocalis), the muscle
that controls the tension on the ligament and thus the pitch of the sound that is produced. Sound
production, of course, is the purpose of this structure. The glottis is the space outlined by the paired
arytenoid cartilages and paired vocal folds that form the opening (the vestibulum) into the larynx.
EXERCISE 11,2
THE LOWER RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
The functions of the lower respiratory system are the conduction of air into the alveoli and the exchange
of gases with the pulmonary blood.
Procedure
1. The trachea starts at the caudal end of the larynx and continues until it bifurcates just dorsal to the
heart. Observe the large right and left common carotid arteries and smal internal jugular veins on
each side of the trachea. The vagus nerve is the white, flattened thread that courses adjacent. to the
common carotid artery. This nerve supplies many of the thoracic and abdominal organs.
2. Free the trachea laterally from the preceding blood vessels and nerves if this has not already been
done. Find the esophagus, the muscular tube that runs dorsal and parallel to the trachea.
3. Locate the two thyroid glands. Each is a small, dark-tan, oval-shaped lobe attached to the trachea,
 on the right lateral and left lateral side just caudal to the cricoid cartilage.
4. Examine the interior of the thoracic cavity. It is divided by the mediastinum into two right and left
pleural cavities. To reiterate from the previous chapter, the pericardial sac, which contains the
 heart, is made up of the fibrous pericardiurm and the serous pericardium. The latter consists of two
laminae: the parietal larmina and the visceral lamina, also called the epicardium. Thus, the walls of
endocardium, the most internal layer. Between the two pericardial serous laminae is the pericardial
sac, in which a small amount of lubricating pericardial fluid allows the smooth gliding of one over
pleura (Figure 11.5). This is an extension of the mediastinal pleura.
5. The parietal pleura (like the parietal peritoneum) lines the thoracic cavity, while the visceral pleura
covers the lungs. Both the parietal and visceral pleurae meet with the mediastinal pleura. The
mediastinum is a connective tissue partition, which includes the symmetrical mediastinal pleurae
 and se parates the right and left pleural cavities. Conventionally, the mediastinal area of the thoracic
the heart is located, called the middle mediastinum; and the space between the heart and the
diaphragm, called the caudal mediastinum. However, dorsal and ventral to the heart are two more
 spaces, called the dorsal mediastinum and the ventral mediastinum.
 6. Remove the heart. to expose the bifurcation of the trachea; this is called the carina. Note the cuts
you are making through the pulmonary arteries and veins. The pulmonary artery and its branches,
plus the right side of the heart, contain blue latex (illustrating they carry deoxygenated blood),
and the pulmonary veins and the left side of the heart contain red latex (illustrating they carry
oxygenated blood); note that this color pattern is the opposite of what is found in arteries and veins
throughout. the rest of the body. Visualize the bifurcation of the trachea and the extrapulmonary
 main bronchi (Figure 11.6). Note how they divide and enter each lobe of the lungs.
242
Chapter 11
Visceral
Parietal
pleura
Visceral
pleura
pleura
Cranial
mediastinum
Lungs
Lungs
Endothelium
 of blood vessel
Fibrous
 pericardium
Parietal
lamina
Pericardial
Serous
space
 pericardium 
 Visceral
Pericardial
Myocardium
 lamina
pleura
Endocardium
Parietal
pleura,
Caudal
mediastinum
Diaphragm
FlGURE 11.5: The pericardial sac and thoracic pleura.
 7. Examine the lungs on either side of the thorax. Each lung is divided into lobes. There are four lobes
on the right side: the cranial, middle, caudal, and accessory lobes; and there are two lobes on the
left: the cranial and caudal lobes (Figures 11.7 and 11.8). Note in Figure 11.7B that the horse has a
single right and left lung lobe, and a smaller accessory lobe of the right lung.
These lobes were formerly known as the apical (cranial), cardiac (middle), dliaphragmatic (caudal),
and intermediate (accessory) lobes. Many veterinarians learned them by these names, which are still
used in older textbooks. See Table 1ll.1 for a comparison of the lungs in different species.
Tease away the medial surface of the cranial or middle lobes to observe the branching of the
bronchi and blood vessels. Observe the lobar bronchus that runs the length of each lobe and the
branches off of it.
Editorial
The Respiratory System 
243
Pulmonaryartery
Tracheal
 bifurcation 
Trachea
Caudal
vena cava
Lobar.
Thyroid
bronchus
gland 
Caudal part of
the left cranial
lung lobe
Segmental
Left main
bronchus
bronchus
FIGURE 11.6: Arrangement of the lungs and bronchial tree within the thoracic cavity—in situ.
Right
Left
Cranial
lobes
Trachea
Main
Middle
bronchus
lobe
Caudal part
of the left cranial lobe
Caudal
/lobes
Accessory
lobe (right side)
Dorsal border
Trachea
1111
Apex
Cardiac
notch
FGURE 11.7: A. Lobes of the lung in a cat. B. Lobes of the lung in a horse.
Editorial
244
Chapter 11
Right 
 cranial
lobe
Heart 
(inside
 pericardial
sac)
Right
middle
lobe
Right caudal  Diaphragm
Right accessory
lobe
lobe
FlGURE 11.8: Lobes of the right lung of a cat.
TABLE 11.1: Lungs of Various Species of Domestic Animals
Middle
Caudal
Intermediate
Cranial (apical)
(cardiac)
(diaphragmatic)
(accessory)
Horse
1 lobe (right and left)
1 right only
Ox
1 left 2 right
1 left and 1 right
1 left and 1 right 
1 right only
Sheep
1 left and 1 right
1 right only
1 left and 1 right 
1 right only
Pig
1 left and 1 right
1 right only
1 left and 1 right
1 right only
Dog
1 left and 1 right
1 right only
1 left and 1 right
1 right only
Cat
1 left and 1 right
 1 right only
1 left and 1 right
 1 right only
8. Note that the lungs are attached to other structures in the thorax only by the root. The root of the
lung is formed by the branching of the bronchi, the pulmonary artery and veins, the nerves, and the
lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes, all of which are encircled by pleura.
9. As the main bronchus enters the lungs, it becomes a lobar bronchus, which is the tube that courses
the entire distance down the lung lobe (Figure 1l.9). The branches from this are the segmental
bronchi. Segmental bronchi have less cartilage than the main and lobar bronchi. The branches off
the segmental bronchi are the terminal bronchioles, which are too small to be dissected and look
like the tissue of the lungs. The trachea and the bronchial tree down to the first 2/3 of the termi-
nal bronchioles is lined with pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium. The last. 1/3 is simple
ciliated columnar epithelium. Branching off the terminal bronchioles are the respiratory units,
each of which consists of a respiratory bronchiole, an alveolar duct, an alveolar sac, and alveoli
(Figure 11.10). This is called a respiratory unit because all the structures contain alveoli, which are
where external respiration occurs.
10. In the mid-cranial area of the thoracic cavity, where the cranial mediastinum is located, is a large,
fluctuant-appearing gland called the thymus gland (Figure 11.11). This gland, divided into lobules,
 is large in young cats but smaller in older ones. Just dorsal to this gland, within the cranial mediasti-
num, are the mediastinal lymph nodes.
11. Examine the interior of the wall of the thoracic cavity and locate the intercostal vein, intercostal
artery, and intercostal nerve on the caudal border of each rib.
Editorialrevie
The Respiratory System 
245
Segmental bronchi 
 Right cranial lobe
Right 
middle -
lobe
Lobar bronchus
Heart 
FGURE 11.9: Lobes of the right lung of a cat.
Main bronchus
Trachea
Lungs
Pulmonary vein
Pulmonary
 artery
Lobar bronchus
Visceral
Segmental
 pleura
bronchi
Terminal
bronchioles
Pulmonary
Pulmonary
Terminal
vein
bronchioles
artery
with smooth
muscle in wall
Respiratory
bronchiole
with thin-walled
alveoli in wall
Respiratory
Alveolar ducts
unit
Alveolar sac
-Alveoli
Capillaries of
pulmonary circulation
(Elastic tissue permits distension
 of lung tissue in inspiration;
passive recoil in expiration.)
FIGURE 11.10: Bronchiolar system of the lungs (all species).
Editorial
246
Chapter 11
12. The crura of the diaphragn (where it attaches to the dorsal wall) forms the caudodorsal area of
the thoracic cavity. Find the phrenic nerves: white, thread-like structures directed caudally on each
side of the pericardium to the cranial surface of the diaphragm (Figure 11.12). The phrenic nerves 
 originate from the fifth and sixth cervical nerves.
Thyroid
 gland 
Common
carotid artery
with vagus
Trachea
nerve attached
Thymus
gland
Lymph
nodes
FlGURE 11.11: Thymus gland in the cranial thorax of a cat.
Diaphragm
 Phrenic nerve
Internal
thoracic
vein
Mediastinum (with hole in it)
FlGURE 11.12: Mediastinum and phrenic nerve of a cat.
Editorial
The Respiratory System
247
EXERCISE 11.3
THE LUNGS OF BIRDS
Procedure
 Using Figure 11.13, find the structures of the respiratory system of the bird. Air enters the external nares
through the nasal cavity, exits via the choanal slit, and continues through the glottis and larynx into the
trachea. At the bifurcation of the trachea is the syrinx, or voice box. The trachea branches into bronchi
which pass through the ventral aspect of each lung. As these bronchi enter the lungs, they lose their
Glottis-
Interclavicular
Larynx-
air sac
Trachea
Syrinx
Cervical air sac
Bronchus
Humeral air sac
Anterior
thoracic air sac
Posterior
thoracic air sac
 Mesobronchus
Lung
Abdominal
 air sac
FIGURE 11.13: Avian lungs and air sacs.
reinforcing cartilage and are called mesobronchi. These give rise to between four and six ventrobronchi
then branch into smaller parabronchi, which are connected to the air capillaries. The air capillaries are
surrounded by blood capillaries, and gas exchange occurs between these two groups. The mesobronchi
also continue down through the lungs and connect to the abdominal air sac. There are nine air sacs:
the paired cranial thoracic, caudal thoracic, cervical, and abdominal air sacs, and the unpaired inter-
clavicular air sac. In birds, the mesobronchi are considered primary bronchi, and the ventrobronchi
connect to the cervical, cranial thoracic, caudal thoracic, and interclavicular air sacs.
Two breaths, or respiratory cycles, are required to move one inhaled unit. of air through the avian
respiratory system (Figure 11.14). The frst inhalation is made by expansion of the thoracoabdominal
space (birds do not have a diaphragm), and most of the air moves directly into the abdominal air
The second inspiration moves the air into the cranial thoracic pairs of air sacs (anterior thoracic and
posterior thoracic), and the second expiration moves the air out through the trachea. More than any
other animal, birds truly receive fresh air during breathing because air flow is pushed into the lungs,
not pulled.
air flow drastically. Air sacs also communicate with pneumatic bones. The interclavicular air sac extends
to the humerus, sternum, syrinx, and pectoral girdle. The abdominal sac often extends to the legs and
pelvic girdle.
Editorialrevie
248
Chapter 11
Inspiration 1
Inspiration 2
Lung
Lung
Anterior
Anterior
air sacs
air sacs
Main
Main
 bronchus
bronchus
Posterior
Posterior
air sacs
air sacs
Expiration 1
Expiration 2
-Lung
Lung
Anterior
Anterior
air sacs
air sacs
Main
Main
 bronchus
 bronchus
Posterior
Posterior
air sacs
air sacs
FIGURE 11.14:
:Air flow through the respiratory system of birds (white areas represent air flow).
Lung Volumes and Capacities
Functional residual capacity equals the volume of gas
left in the lungs at the end of a normal expiration,
tidal volume (VT): Volume of air moving in (or out)
and this remaining gas will mix with the next tidal vol-
 during normal breathing.
ume. Functional residual capacity also shows that the
inspiratory reserve volume: Volume of air it is
 alveoli do not fill with fresh air on each inspiration.
 possible to inhale after a normal inspiration.
dead space: The space occupied by air at the end
expiratory reserve volume: Volume of air it is
 of an expiration. Dead space is also the volume of
 possible to exhale after a normal expiration.
the respiratory system that takes no active role in
residual volume: Volume of air in the lungs, even
external respiration; in other words, it is the volume
 after maximum expiration.
of air that occupies the space between the nose and
the respiratory unit. Only the respiratory unit has
vital capacity: The total volume of air that can be
alveoli in which external respiration can occur. If an
exhaled after a maximum inspiration.
endotracheal tube is inserted and extends through
functional residual capacity: The sum of the expi-
the mouth, as in gas anesthesia, this added volume
ratory reserve volume and the residual volume.
is added dead space.
Editorialrevie
The Respiratory System 
249
EXERCISE 11.4
MEASURING LUNG VOLUMES AND CAPACITIES
Procedure
 Because dogs and cats are reluctant to breathe into a hose on command, this exercise will use a spirom-
eter with you as the subject. In the spaces provided, record the volume of air for each measure ment.
1. Without using the spirometer, count and record the your normal respiratory rate (RR).
RR =
 respirations/min ute
2. Insert the disposable cardboard mouthpiece into the open end of the valve assembly of the
spirometer. Practice exhaling though the spirometer instead of through your nose so an accurate
measurement can be obtained.
3. Conduct the test three times for each required measurement. Write down each measurement and
the average of the three.
 4. Measure tidal volume (V). Inhale a normal breath, and then exhale normally into the spirometer
mouthpiece. Record the volume and repeat the test twice more. (Normal human value = 500 ml)
trial 1:
ml
trial 2:
ml
trial 3:
 ml
average:
ml
5. Compute the minute volume (Ve).
minute volume (V,) = V, × RR
minute volume (V) 
ml x
resp/min
minute volume (Ve) =
ml
6. Measure expiratory reserve volume (ERV). Inhale and exhale normally two or three times; then,
after exhaling, insert the spirometer mouthpiece and exhale forcibly as much of the additional air
in your lungs as you can. Record the result, and repeat the test twice again. (Normal human value
= 1,000 to 1,200 ml)
trial 1:
ml
trial 2:
ml
trial 3:
ml
average:
ml
7. Determine vital capacity (VC). Breathe in and out two or three times; then bend over and exhale
 all the air possible. Next, as you raise yourself upright, inhale as fully as possible (you must strain to
inhale the maximum amount). Quickly insert the mouthpiece and forcibly exhale as much as you
 can. Record your result and repeat the test twice again. (Normal human value = 4,500 ml or a range
of 3,600 to 4,800 ml)
trial 1:
ml
trial 2:
ml
trial 3:
ml
average:
m]
250
Chapter 11
8. Calculate inspiratory reserve volume (IRV) with the following formula. (Normal human value =
2,100 to 3,100 ml)
IRV = VC - (V, + ERV)
Record your average IRV: IRV =
ml
Question
1. How does your computed value compare with normal for each of the previous calculations?
linical Significance
Knowiedge of the anatomy of the lung lobes is critica when considering the areas to auscultate. Most
veterinarians start listening to the area of the chest walljust above the elbow joint, caudal to the scapula.
This is where the trachea and carina are located. The sounds auscultated here are called bronchial sounds
and are loudest because of the air turbulence created at this bifurcation. Listen to the lower end of the
trachea in the neck area to learn what this sounds like.
animais, this sound is heard only in a limited area of the chest because bronchial sounds are not con-
ducted any distance in normal lung tissue. In the dog (in particular, in small breeds of dogs) and in the
cat, bronchial sounds may be heard over a considerable part of the area of auscultation. Next, slide the
stethoscope head ventrally to listen to the cranial lobe; then auscultate the middle and the caudal lobes
in order. The normal sounds of the lung lobes are quieter and called vesicular sounds. They are best
described as the sound produced if the letter F is whispered softly.
These sounds may change in various pathological situations. ff the lung lobe (or part of a lung lobe)
becomes consolidated with fibrin and fluid due to pneumonia, the sounds are called referred bronchial
ventral aspects of the lung lobes. Abnormal lung sounds produced by pathological processes within the
 tracheobronchial tree are termed adventitious sounds. The point of maximum intensity is usually near the
diseased area.
 Adventitious sounds may be either discontinuous (crackles) or continuous (wheezes). Crackles are
characterized as either coarse or fine. Coarse crackles are bubbling or gurgling sounds, whereas fine
crackies are often characterized as Velcro or cellophane-type sounds. One mechanism for causing
bronchopneumonia. Fine crackles may occur when a closed airway opens suddenly during inspiration, as
may occur in fibrosis, inffammation, or interstitial pulmonary edema. Wheezes are continuous musical or
the presence of foreign bodies, bronchospasms, mucous plugging, or tumors.
The Respiratory System
251
eterinary
gnettes
ike was a 12-Ib. "terror," according to Mrs. Robertson. Corralling him long enough
to administer his puppy shots was an impossible task for one person. I summoned
my best technician, who, by the way, can hold anything stillfor 10 seconds. Fortu-
nately, I can administer a DHLPP in less time than that and can even manage to get the needle into 
 the animal rather than my thumb ... usually. Nike was a perpetual-motion poodle, with every body
part moving simultaneously: squirming, wiggling, running. jumping, and going every direction at the
same time. But running was his specialty! He would have been about 9 months old the day he ran full
speed through an 8-cm wide opening in a wooden fence. Unfortunately, Nike's chest was just slightly
under 10 cm in diameter. It was not the best day of his life.
m buuado aul yanoiul l apeu eo s,loguaiau aul uaaa aloum aul uaas pey uostagoy 's
ahny e ape pey au mou laumo sly lal ay 'uid jo moy e yh 'jnsand joy ui yin yhm 'walgod ou
error in judgment. Mrs. Robertson was frantic upon entering my office.
"He's having trouble breathing." she exclaimed.
I listened to his chest and noted that the lung sounds on the right side were normal, but on the
left side the vesicular sounds were diminished in the areas of the lower cranial and caudal lung lobes 
where they should have been audible. A quick x-ray revealed that his left lung was not inflating as
much as it should, and fluid was accumulating in the pleural cavity. The thoracocentesis showed the
fluid was fresh blood. This condition is known as a hemothorax.
Fortunately I could not find any fractured ribs. The ribs had some give to them because of their
ligamentous attachment at the vertebrae and the cartilaginous portion that attaches to the sternum.
Nike's blood work-up revealed normal clotting times. After sedation, we drained the blood from his chest
through a small catheter so as not to damage the lung tissues. Simultaneously, we treated him for shock.
were still able to get blood from the chest, but the amount was diminishing. For that reason, a tho-
a small-gauge chest tube in the thoracic cavity on his left side because we were concerned about
the possibility of a large blood clot forming within the thoracic cavity. If this happened, a thoracotomy
would be a necessity. vwe kept track of the total amount of blood drained from the chest and did
repeated blood counts. we wanted to determine whether a blood transfusion would be necessary.
By the next afternoon, we could no longer draw any blood through the chest tube
The look of relief on Mrs. Robertson's face when she went home with Nike just made my day- for
about 2 hours, that is, when she came rushing back in with Nike breathing hard again!
"1 just let him out to go to the bathroom. I didn't think he'd try to run through the fence again!"
she cried.
I looked at the poor little beast and just shook my head; we were going to have to do it all over again.
SUMMARY
For a veterinarian or veterinary technician to perform a good physical exam on a patient's
respiratory system, a detailed knowledge of the patient's anatomy is required. This includes
the upper respiratory system as well as the lower respiratory system. Technicians, as part of
their duties as veterinary anesthetists, routinely intubate patients using an endotracheal tube.
To do this properly, knowledge of the internal anatomy of the larynx is needed.
of the physiological parameters that can be measured or estimated. Because much of the
anesthesia performed on animal patients is gas anesthesia, an understanding of respiratory
physiology is needed to understand the principles of anesthesiology. Key concepts in
252
Chapter 11
respiratory physiology include the movement of gases through the respiratory tree to the
alveoli, the subsequent exchange of gases with the blood, and the concept of dead space.
This chapter also introduced you to auscultation of the lungs and the normal and abnormal
sounds that can be heard.
REVIEW OUESTIONS
 1. Name the two parts of the respiratory system and the structures of which each is
composed.
 2. Differentiate between respiration and ventilation.
 3. Differentiate between external respiration and internal respiration.
4.
Name the six functions of the respiratory system.
 5. What is the function of the sinuses?
6. What structure covers and thus closes the glotis during swallowing?
7. What structure alters the tension on the vocal ligament to change tones produced?
8.
What structures combine to form the mediastinum?
 9. Name the lung lobes on each side of the thorax in the cat.
10. How many cranial lobes does the ox have?
11.
 Name the branches of the bronchi from the trachea deep into the lung lobe.
 12. Name the component structures of the respiratory unit.
 13. In the bird, how many respiratory cycles are required to move one pocket of air through
the lungs, and why?
14. Define tidal volume.
15. Define dead space.
CHAPTER 12
THE URINARY SYSTEM
OBJECTIVES
name and describe the vascular supply to the kidneys
 name and identify the parts of the nephron using diagrams and models
describe the function of the urinary system
 name and locate the major anatomical structures of the kidney using pig and cat kidneys
understand blood pre ssure regulation by the kidneys
understand the physiological principles and factors involved in an animal's ability to concentrate urine
 measure the specific gravity of urine and understand what it means when it is elevated, fixed, and abnor-
mally low
 understand the complexities of the physiology of micturition and the tests needed to diagnose urinary
incontinence
MATERIALS
cat. cadaver, triple injected (order without skin attached)
 pig kidney, injected with red and blue latex
necropsy knife
Mayo dissecting scissors
probe
1 × 2 thumb forceps or Adson tissue forceps
#4 scalpel handle with blade
bone cutting forceps
rubber gloves
models of the nephron
 refractometers
intravenous (IV) fluids and administration kit.
two live dogs
INTRODUCTION
The urinary system is one of the most important excretory pathways in the body. The other
excretory pathways are (1) the alimentary tract; (2) the biliary system, which eliminates
waste into the digestive tract via the common bile duct; (3) the lungs, from which gases
and chemicals are exhaled; and (4) the exocrine glands of the skin. Metabolism of nutrients
produces waste products, such as carbon dioxide, nitrogenous wastes, ammonia, and
 Apoq ayt woy paieujwja ag isnw yoiym 'spunodwoy yjuebio-uou pue yjuebio paiyxoiap
normal function is to continue. The urinary system is primarily concerned with the removal
of nitrogenous wastes from the body. In addition to their function as excretory organs, the
kidneys help maintain the body's electrolyte, acid-base, and fluid balances; thus, the kidneys
also act as major homeostatic organs.
253
or eChapter(s)
Editorialrevie
254
Chapter 12
To perform these functions, the kidneys filter the blood, taking fluid and chemicals into their
functional tubular system, the nephron, where the fluid and chemicals are then processed.
The nephron selectively keeps certain chemicals in the fluid, such as toxins and nitrogenous
by-products; it allows needed chemicals such as glucose, sodium, and chloride to be
se yons) suo! uieteo jo siunowe aaissaoxa smolle t! pue :pooiq eyl oiui yoeg paqiosqe
hydrogen ions) to leave the blood via the fluid. After this process, the liquid to be excreted
is urine.
The nephron also controls the amount of fluid absorbed back into the bloodstream and the
amount eliminated from the body, thus helping maintain the correct amount of hydration in
the system. Failure to perform these functions adequately (due to malfunctioning kidneys) will
result in the animal's death.
ui se 'paqoiouow eq ue aaui hixaidwoo pue sanioniis ui lefhp slewiue snojea yo saaupiy
the pig, dog, cat, sheep, and horse, or multilobed, as in the ox and fowl. Some animals have
complex duct systems, called the calyxes, leading from the renal papilla to the renal pelvis;
others have no duct system and the urine flows directly into the renal pelvis. Figure 12.1
shows the kidneys of various domestic animals.
Chicken
Pig
Cattle
Horse, cat, and dogs
FlGURE 12.1: Structure of kidneys of various domestic animals.
The Vascular Supply to the Kidneys
 monolobed kidneys of the cat, dog, and horse, the
division between the medullary areas is not distinct;
The renal artery enters the kidney and branches into
the interlobar arteries course within the medulla
interlobar arteries that course between the lobes of
rather than between the lobes. At the division
the kidneys. These lobes comprise separate areas of
between the medulla and the cortex, the interlobar
the medulla (Figure 12.2). This is easily seen in the
complex kidneys of the pig and ruminants, but in the
arcuate arteries. The arcuate arteries send multiple
The Urinary System
255
 Interlobular vein
Interlobular artery
Arcuate vein
Arcuate artery
 Interlobar vein
Renal column 
Interlobar artery
Major calyx.
Papilla of 
pyramid 
Cortex
-Renal artery
Renal vein
Minor calyx
 Renal pelvis
Medullary
(renal)
Major calyx
pyramid
 Ureter
Renal capsule
FGURE 12.2: Frontal section of a pig kidney.
Macula densa
Afferent arteriole
 Ascending limb of 
Juxtaglomerular cells
bop of Henle
Parietal layer of glomerular
(Bowman's) capsule (simple
squamous epithelial cells) 
Efferent arteriole
- Visceral layer of glomerular
capsule (simple squamous
epithelial cells with podocytes)
 Capsular space
 Endothelium of glomerulus
Proximal convoluted
tubule
Glomerulus
FIGURE 12.3: Renal corpuscle and the juxtaglomerular apparatus.
Editorial
256
Chapter 12
smaller interlobular arteries linearly through the
capillary network. The part of this network that sends
 cortex toward the periphery of the kidney
vessels adjace nt to and parallel to the Loop of Henle is
At multiple sites along the interlobular arteries,
 called the vasa rectae (straight vessels) and is divided
 microscopic afferent arterioles branch. Each termi-
into arteriae rectae, which take the blood down next.
nates in a tufted ball of capillaries called a glomeru-
to the loop, and venae rectae, which return blood to
lus (Figure 12.4). From each glomerulus, an efferent
the interlobular veins. The venous system has veins
arteriole emerges that quickly branches to surround
that. course with the corresponding arteries. From
the tubules of the nephron and forms the peritubular
the interlobular veins, the blood travels through the
Distal convoluted
tubule
Proximal
Efferent
convoluted
 arteriole
tubule
Afferent
arteriole
Interlobular
 artery
Interlobular
vein
Arcuate
 artery
Arcuate
vein
Glomerulus
Interlobar
vein
 Interlobar 
artery
Arteria recta-
Loop of
Ascending limb
Venae
Arteriae
Henle
 Descending limb
rectae
rectae
Collecting
duct
Renal
vein
 Renal
 artery
Interlobar .
Renal
artery
pelvis
Papillary
Interlobar
Ureter
duct
vein
Medulla
Arcuate
 Renal
 artery and
 papilla 
Cortex
vein
Orifice of common
collecting tubule
FIGURE 12.4: The nephron and its blood supply (all animals).
Editorialrevie
The Urinary System
257
arcuate veins into the interlobar veins, which con-
the lumen of Bowman's capsule is called glomerular
verge to form the renal vein and leave the kidney.
filtrate. This fluid then proceeds into a convoluted
tube proximal to the loop of Henle, called the proxi-
 mal convoluted tubule. From there it goes down the
The Nephron: Anatomy and Physiology
descending loop of the loop of Henle and up the
As mentioned previously, the nephron (tubular sys
ascending loop to the distal convoluted tubule. Mul-
tem of the kidney) selectively absorbs its contents
tiple distal convoluted tubules, each from a separate
into the blood or excretes them via the urine. The
 nephron, join in a common duct known as a col-
nephron starts as a blind sac; its visceral layer vir-
lecting duct. The many collecting ducts within the
tually shrink-wraps around the capillaries of the
glomerus, and the parietal layer forms the outer wall
which terminate in a part of the kidney called the
of the sac, which is continuous with the wall of the
 renal papilla. The fluid, which has become urine,
 proximal convoluted tubule. This blind sac is called
flows out of the renal papilla either into a minor
Bowman's capsule. Note in Figure 12.3 how the
calyx, or directly into the renal pelvis in simple kid.
simple squamous epithelium of the parietal layer
neys like those of the cat.
of Bowman's capsule continues as the proximal
As previously mentioned, the cells of Bow-
convoluted tubule where the cells become simple
man's capsule
e are simple squamous epithelium.
cuboidal in shape. Refer to Figure 12.3 to identify
Figure 5.6 contains an example of simple cuboi-
the glomerulus, simple squamous parietal layer,
dal epithelium of the kidney. The simple cuboidal
Bowman's capsule, and the lumen of the capsule.
 cells of the proximal convoluted tubule are unique
Together, Bowman's capsule and the glomerulus
in that they have microvilli, known as a brush
 are called the renal corpuscle. The fluid entering
border (Figure 12.5). The thin descending loop
Histological Features of the Renal Tubule and Collecting Duct
Region
Histology
Description
Proximal convoluted
Mictovilli
Mitochondria
Simple cubodial epithelial
tubule (PCT)
cells with prominent brush
borders of microvilli.
Loop of Henle: descending 
Simple squamous
limb and thin ascending
epithelial cells.
limb
Loop of Henle: thick
Simple cuboidal to low
ascending limb
columnar epithelial cells.
Most of distal convoluted
Simple cuboidal epithelial
tubule (DCT)
cells.
Final portion of DCT;
h/
M
Simple cuboidal epithelium
collecting duct (CD)
 consisting of principal cells
and intercalated cells in 
last part of DCT and 
collecting duct.
Intercalated Principal 
cell
cell
FlGURE 12.5: Histological features of the nephron's tubular cells, all species.
Editorial
258
Chapter 12
is simple squamous tissue again, but the thicker
juxtaglomerular cells, combined with the macula
ascending loop is simple cuboidal or low colum-
densa, constitute the juxtaglomerular apparatus.
nar. The distal convoluted tubule is also simple
Relatively high blood pressure must be main-
 cuboidal tissue, as are cells of the collecting ducts,
tained to facilitate the filtering process within the
 most of which are called principal cells, except for
glomerulus. Both the afferent and efferent arterioles
a few intercalated cells. The intercalated cells also
are equipped with smooth muscle, so the amount
are cuboidal, but they have microvilli at the apical
of blood entering the glomerulus and the pressure
surface and a large number of mitochondria. The
within can be controlled by constricting either the
 principal cells have receptors for both antidiuretic
afferent. arteriole, the efferent arteriole, or both.
hormone (ADH) and aldosterone, the two hor
The juxtaglomerular cells produce a chemical
mones that regulate water and sodium resorption.
called renin (do not. confuse with rennin, α digestive
 Intercalated cells play a role in the homeostasis of
product), which is secreted into the blood under the
blood pH.
following conditions: (1) when the blood pressure
The bottom of the loop of Henle is rotated such
in the afferent arteriole falls; (2) when the sodium
that the top of the ascending loop is adjacent to the
concentration of the blood plasma decreases;
afferent arteriole (see Figure 12.4). As the affer-
(3) when the distal tubular osmolality decreases; or
ent arteriole approaches the glomerulus, the cells
(4) when sympathetic nerve fibers innervating the
become a special type of cell, called myoepithelial
afferent arteriole are stimulated. In the blood, renin
cells (see Figure 12.3). These cells have some char
stimulates the production of angiotensin, which
 acteristics of smooth muscle and some of epithelial
acts as a vasoconstrictor to increase blood pressure.
cells. Because they are juxtapositioned around the
Renin also stimulates the adrenal gland to secrete
arteriole and glomerulus, they are called juxta-
aldosterone, a hormone that causes the kidney to
glomerular cells. A cluster of special cells that.
conserve sodium ions.
make up the wall of the ascending loop of Henle
 In the exercises in this chapter the important
where it. touches the afferent arteriole is called
structures are listed in colored bold print. If a struc-
the macula densa (meaning “dense spot"). These
ture is mentioned prior to its dissection, it will be
are special osmoreceptors that communicate the tubu-
italicized. Structures discussed prior to dissection
lar osmolality to the juxtaglomerular cells. The
may also be in bold print for special emphasis.
EXERCISE 12.1 DISSECTION OF THE KIDNEY
 In this exercise you will use both your cat cadaver and a pig kidney. Complete the following steps in the
 dissection procedure.
Procedure
1. Get out your cat cadaver. In your previous dissection of the arteries and veins you found the renal
arteries coursing to the kidneys. The kidneys and ureters were found to be retroperitoneal and
located along the dorsal wall. The right kidney should be relatively intact if your dissection has been
careful to this point. Each kidney is surrounded by adipose tissue, called perirenal fat. The right.
kidney is positioned more cranial than the left (Figure12.6).
 2. Remove the adipose tissue and the peritoneum that covers the ventral surface of the left and right.
kidneys.
3. Identify the renal artery and renal vein, which carry blood to and from the kidney, respectively
(see Figures 12.6 and 12.7).
4. Find the ureters (the narrow, white tubes that drain the urine from each kidney) and trace them
from the hilus (the indentation on the medial border of each kidney) to the urinary bladder
(see Figures 12.6 and 12.7). The right and left ureters attach to the right and left dorsolateral
 5. The oval urinary bladder is connected to the mid-ventral wall by a median suspensory ligament,
 and to the lateral walls by lateral ligaments, which contain a large amount of adipose tissue. Make
a longitudinal incision in the ventral bladder wall and locate where the ureters enter on the dorsal
wall. The triangular area formed by the opening of the two ureters and the opening of the ure-
thra is called the trigonal area of the bladder. The part of the bladder that narrows, leading to the
urethra, is the neck. The fundus of the bladder is the expanded part. What type of epithelial cells
The Urinary System 
259
Caudal
Abdominal
vena cava
aorta
 Left adrenal
Renal
gland
artery
Left kidney
and vein
Hilus of 
kidney
Ureter
Urinary
bladder 
Ductus
deferens
Orifice of 
the ureter
 Trigonal
area
-Neck
Prostate
 gland
Urethra
Bulbourethral
glands
 Penis
FIGURE 12.6: Urogenital system of the male cat.
Renal artery
Urinary bladder
 and vein 
Left ureter
Left Kidney
FlGURE 12.7: Kidney, ureter, and bladder of a cat.
lines the bladder and urethra? If you remember your histology, you will know they are transitional
epithelial cells. The bladder's smooth muscle layers are unique. Whereas most hollow or tubular
structures contain an inner circular layer and an outer longitudinal layer of smooth muscle, the
bladder has a third outer circular layer. This layer aids in contraction of the organ to expel the
urine (see Figures 12.7 and 12.8).
Editorial
260
Chapter 12
Urinary
bladder
Ureter
Trigonal
area (on 
Neck -
inside)
Urethra
FlGURE 12.8: Urinary bladder, ureter, and urethra of a cat.
6. Locate the urethra, the duct. that. conducts urine from the caudal part. of the bladder to the exterior.
The urethra will be dissected with the reproductive system.
7. Remove the left kidney and make a longitudinal cut through it with a necropsy knife or scalpel
blade, dividing it into two halves. Remove the renal capsule, a thin layer of connective tissue, from
around the outside. The renal cortex is the outer, lighter-brown layer of the kidney immediately
beneath the capsule. This layer contains renal corpuscles. The central layer of the kidney, the renal
d  as a e (  pd   'e a so i
called the renal crest in the cat. It is the rounded projection at the bottom of the renal pyramid of
the medulla. It. drains urine into the renal pelvis, which opens to the ureters.
 8. Find the branches of the renal artery that lead into the kidney, the interlobar arteries within the 
medulla, the arcuate arteries at the division between the medulla and cortex, and the interlobular
arteries within the cortex. The corresponding veins should also be identified; they can be found
coursing adjacent to the arteries.
9. Obtain a pig kidney, and as you did with the cat's kidney, make a longitudinal cut with a necropsy
knife. Divide the kidney into two halves so that it resembles the one shown in Figure 12.10.
10. Locate the hilus of the pig's kidney. All vessels enter and exit through this area. Find the renal
artery, the renal vein, and the ureter exiting the renal pelvis, which is the funnel-shaped expansion
of the ureter inside the renal sinus. The renal sinus is the hollow interior of the kidney; in other
words, if the membrane that makes up the renal pelvis were removed, the space remaining within
the kidney would be the renal sinus (see Figure 12.10)
11. The renal pelvis is joined by two (or more) large tubules, each called a major calyx. These calyxes
are formed by the joining of smaller minor calyxes (see Figure 12.10) . Minor calyxes do not. exist in
the cat.
12. Notice the darker brown areas of the renal medulla; each of these is called a renal pyramid (three-
dimensionally it looks like an upside-down pyramid within the kidney) . The rounded apex, or point,
Editorialrevie
The Urinary System
261
Arcuate
artery
and vein
Cortex
Renal
artery
Medulla
and vein
Interlobular
Interlobar
artery
artery
and vein
 and vein 
 Renal
Ureter.
pelvis
Interlobar
Renal
artery
 and vein 
capsule
FIGURE 12.9: The cat kidney.
Major  Renal
Interlobular
Renal pyramid 
calyx column
 artery and vein
 Renal
papilla
Interlobar
artery and
vein
Cortex
Medulla
Arcuate artery  Minor  Renal artery 
Hilus Ureter
Renal
and vein
calyx
 and vein
pelvis
FGURE 12.10: Frontal section of pig kidney.
urine from the papillary ducts. The striated appearance of the pyramids is caused by the numer-
ous collecting ducts and papillary ducts, as well as the bottoms of some of the loops of Henle that.
 extend down into the medulla. The areas between the pyramids are called the renal columns. These
contain the interlobar arteries and interlobar veins (see Figure 12.10) .
13. Follow the interlobar arteries and veins toward the periphery of the kidney, where they branch.
 Note that they arc, branching along the division between the medulla and the cortex. These
are the arcuate arteries and arcuate veins, which send branches into the cortex as the interlobular
arteries and interlobular veins (see Figure 12.10). The small, latex-injected vessels within the
cortex are interlobular vessels.
Editorial
262
Chapter 12
EXERCISE 12.2
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE URINARY SYSTEM
One of the most important functions of the urinary system is maintaining the correct fluid balance
in the body. The kidney's ability to concentrate or dilute urine is dependent on its ability to resorb
sodium into the interstitium and respond to the presence or absence of antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
in the system. In the nephron, sodium is actively resorbed from the glomerular filtrate into the kid-
ney's interstitium from the proximal convoluted tubules, the ascending loop of Henle, and the distal
ducts (which are in the medulla). The resorption of water from the collecting ducts is dependent on
the permeability of the cells lining these ducts. The permeability of these cells is influenced by the
secretion of ADH from the posterior pituitary gland at the base of the brain. ADH is a hormone that.
decreases diuresis (the production of urine), and therefore its name is based on its action to reduce
the volume of urine produced: however, it might be easier for you to think of what it. promotes, which
 is the resorption of water, making it a water resorption hormone. Under the influence of ADH, the
cells become more permeable and water is resorbed from the collecting ducts (and distal convoluted
tubules) into the hyperosmotic interstitium. It is then picked up by the vasa rectae and returned to the
blood-vascular system.
Secretion of ADH is based on the blood's plasma volume. Ifincreased, the animal will have a decreased
secretion of ADH; if plasma volume is decreased, there will be an increased secretion of ADH.
Procedure
1. Locate two live healthy dogs and designate them dogs A and B for this exercise. Weigh both dogs
and record your results here:
:v 8op
dog B:
2. Deprive the dogs of water for six hours (or overnight) and permit them to have only food with a low
moisture content. First thing in the morning, collect urine samples from both dogs by free catch or
cystocentesis, and record the time and specifc gravity using a refractometer.
time:
am/pm
:v 8op
dog B:
3. Continue to deprive dog A of water until completion of the test, but let dog B drink as much as it.
wants and administer 200 ml of subcutaneous fluids.
4. Weigh both dogs and record your findings.
:v 8op
dog B:
For the next. three hours, collect urine each hour and measure the specific gravity.
:aun
am/pm
raum
am/pm
time:.
am/pm
dog A:
dog A:
dog A:
dog B:
dog B:
dog B:
 5. Graph the change in urine specific gravity over time on the x axis, and graph urine specifc gravity
on the y axis.
Questions
1. At the end of the test, which of the two dogs was producing the most. ADH?
2. Which dog's collecting ducts were very impermeable to water toward the end of the test?
The Urinary Sy stem 
1263
Discussion
Withholding water and testing urine specific gravity is called the water deprivation test and is usually
done by withholding water from an animal for 12 hours. Once the urine specific gravity rises above
1.030, the test is considered complete because this indicates the kidney's ability to concentrate urine.
Dog A should have had urine with a gradually increasing specifc gravity, providing that its kidneys have
the ability to concentrate urine. Dog B's urine specific gravity should have risen while being deprived
of water, then dropped again.
When a patient is deprived of fluids, the body's response is to conserve water by releasing ADH; thus
water is resorbed from the collecting ducts and distal convoluted tubules, which causes the urine specific
gravity to rise. Administering fluids and letting the animal drink reverses this need and stops ADH secre-
 tion. When an animal's kidneys fail and no longer respond to ADH, or when not enough nephrons survive
to do the job, the urine specific gravity falls into the fixed range of 1.008 to 1.017. In this state, urine osmo-
linical Significance
One of the issues that continually confront veterinarians in practice is how to deal with the problem of the
thing is to eliminate any medical and infectious causes of the problem. This traditionally involves getting a
 good history; knowing the amount of water the animal is consuming and whether or not it has increased;
finding out if the owner has noticed blood in the urine, whether or not the accidents happen in the same
urinary bladder for size and tone prior to a voiding urination, check for stones, and fee the bladder wall
thickness. in addition, a complete neurological exam may be necessary. The basic lab tests would need to
as air or air combined with a positive contrast agent. Use of ultrasound studies may be of value in lieu of
using contrast radiography to find radiolucent stones or tumors. These are not the only tests that can be
a behavioral problem may exist, or if it is an older dog, there may be a weakening of the bladder sphincter
muscle. Noting the dog dribbling urine while sleeping may be an indication that this is the problem.
A detailed explanation of the neurophysiology of micturition is beyond the scope of this book, as it is
quite invofved. Micturition refers to the process of storing and periodically voiding urine. In the process of
storage, the process of urination, the urinary bladder as both a reservoir and a pump, or the urethra as the
conduit. Micturition is a complex integration of the central nervous system and the sympathetic, parasym-
pathetic, and somatic systems, with muscular activity as the result. There are many diverse causes of the
problems associated with micturition because so many systems are invoived. An example of this is bladder
overactivity, which is due to "hyperexcitability" of the storage phase. This could be due to infection, uro-
lithiasis, or certain drugs. The treatment is to relax the bladder. f the proper tests are not performed and the
wrong treatment is implemented, the problem could worsen and cause the animal considerable distress.
264
Chapter 12
eterinary
ignettes
 they dislike. I have scars from the ones I stil dislike. Pointing to my hands, I can say. 
"This scar is from Killer and this one is from Frodo," and so on. But some of our
patients are very dear to us
 One day I heard a scratching and whining at the front door of my home. Wwhen I opened the
 door, one of my Golden Retriever patients was sitting on my front porch. He was lost and stopped 
by because he couldn't find his way home. I called his owner, and he came over and picked him up.
 Sometimes the patients I treat are my own animals, and then of course there is no escaping
emotional involvement. I used to own a beautiful yellow Lab named Sandy. On a warm, sunny sum-
mer day while I was out playing Frisbee with my wife and son, Sandy decided to lie down in the tall
 grass under an apple tree and consume 2 pounds of apples. In the time it took us to walk home.
could. I could have taken him to the facilities at the college where I was employed, but I knew I didn't 
have time
The veterinarian on duty and I tried tubing the dog to relieve the pressure, but the stomach had
already twisted. I was shocked by the speed with which this had occurred; it had been no more than
1 5 minutes from the time I first noticed he was in distress. To relieve the pressure, we had to trocar
let off some gas.
Personally, I don't like operating on my own animals; I've done it, but I don't like it. In this situation
there was no alternative; the emergency clinic did not allow outside veterinarians to operate in their
facility- not even on their own pets. It was very distressing to me because I had lost control of the
Post-operatively, he started having numerous ventricular premature contractions (vPC), and I
found a pneumothorax (air in the pleural cavity) to complicate his condition. How and why the spon-
taneous pneumothorax occurred was a mystery, both to me and to the clinician who did the surgery. I
treated both; the VPCs diminished with medical treatment, and I had to insert a chest tube to corect 
the pneumothorax. It was almost 10 days before I could be certain the lung lobe had sealed.
Over the next month Sandy continued to improve, but he still was just not doing as well as he
 should have been. He started consuming large amounts of water. As soon as I noted this, I began 
oi aaal paxy aul molaa s yoym 'too' l punoe ol paddop pey ll Aaeie yoads auun sly bunisat
some reason he had developed a case of diabetes insipidus, a disease caused either by a lack of
diabetes insipidus and renal failure, I decided to put him down. He had been through enough, and 
 after two months of daily battle, we both gave up.
Ihave euthanized my own animals before, but for some reason I couldn't do it this time. Fortu-
nately for me, I have friends in the business that could come to my home and do it for me. A few 
times I had gone to clients' homes to put their animals down for them, and after this experience I
understood just why they had been so grateful. vwe learn about the practice of veterinary medicine in
school, but we learn about the art of veterinary medicine in practice. I stillhave a painting of Sandy in 
my home office. He lived 12 grand years, and I still miss him 15 years later!
The Urinary System 
265
SUMMARY
In this chapter, you learned that the kidneys of domestic animals vary in both shape and 
ayp 'saupiy aut yo 1ed euoiouny ayt 'aoueieadde ssoib ui suoieiea asayt ahdsap iay 'asis
nephron, is similar in all species. The anatomy and physiology of the nephron was studied in
detail. Thus, you learned the mechanism by which the kidney is able to concentrate urine and
maintain a stable hydration level within the body. By dissecting both the cat kidney and pig
kidney, the comparative anatomy of the two kidneys was demonstrated. You also dissected
the other parts of the urinary system and learned the parts of the bladder. Finally, you learned
the mechanisms that affect the physiology of micturition.
REVIEW OUESTLONS
1. Name all of the excretory pathways of the body.
 2. What is the functional unit of the kidney?
3. In which species is the kidney unilobular, and in which is it multilobular?
4. Name the arteries and arterioles of the kidney, moving from the renal artery to the
glomerulus.
5.
 Name the parts of the nephron, moving from the glomerulus to where it empties into the
renal pelvis.
              s
7. What is the function of the juxtaglomerular apparatus?
8. Under what conditions is renin secreted into the bloodstream?
 9. What are the functions of angiotensin and aldosterone?
10. Name the ligaments that support the bladder.
11. Fill in the blank: The sites of entry of both ureters into the urinary bladder and the
opening to the urethra is a triangular area called the
12.
 Differentiate between the renal sinus and the renal pelvis.
13. What is the function of antidiuretic hormone?
14. Define micturition.
 15. Micturition is the complex integration of what systems?
CHAPTER 13
THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
OBJECTIVES
 identify and name the major endocrine organs in the dissected cat and the brain of a sheep
a go suo aei a pe u arid au pe sneeody au a panod sauo an i
 understand the feedback mechanism that controls the release of these hormones
understand the basic functions of the hormones produced by endocrine glands
MATERIALS
cat. cadaver, triple injected (order without skin attached)
sheep brain, with pituitary gland attached
Mayo dissecting scissors
probe
1 × 2 thumb forceps or Adson tissue forceps
 #4 scalpel handle with blade
rubber gloves
blood chemistry machine and serum glucose tests
 one live dog
INTRODUCTION
The endocrine system is system of glands that produce hormones, which are chemical
messengers in the body. These hormones are released directly into the blood and transported
throughout the body. Whereas the nervous system is able to effect rapid changes in the
body (via electrochemical impulses generated by neurons), hormones tend to produce
slower changes. Although they are released into the bloodstream, specific hormones affect
the biochemical activity of only one or a few specific organs. An organ that responds to a
particular hormone is referred to as the hormone's target organ.
The target tissue's response seems to depend on the hormone molecule's ability to
bind with specific receptors (proteins) on the cells' plasma membranes or within the cells.
Hormones are most often either steroid- or amino-acid-based molecules. When the hormone
binds with the target organ's cells, it stimulates changes in the organ's metabolic activity. For
cells, which increases production of thyroid hormones. An increase in thyroid hormones
affects many cells of the body by stimulating their metabolic activity.
Some endocrine glands produce only hormones; others produce both hormones and
certain cell types, such as reproductive cells. Examples of the former are the anterior pituitary.
thyroid, parathyroid, and adrenal glands. Examples of the latter are the testes and ovaries.
Both types of glands are derived from epithelial tissue during development, but the endocrine
(or ductless) glands secrete their products into the blood or lymph. The difference between
exocrine and endocrine glands was discussed in Chapter 5. You may remember that exocrine
glands secrete their products onto an epithelial surface, whereas endocrine glands secrete
directly into the bloodstream. The pancreas has both endocrine and exocrine glandular tissue.
266
Editorialrevie
The Endocrine System 
267
 Pancreatic islet cells contain endocrine tissue, which produces insulin and glucagon; the
in Chapter 9).
Anatomy and Physiology of the
chiasm, infundibulum, tuber cinereun, Mammillary
body, and hypophysis (Figures 13.2 and 13.3).
Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
The hypothalamus is also a crucial regulator
The pituitary gland, or hypophysis, is attached
of the endocrine system and pituitary gland. The
to the hypothalarmus at the base of the brain by a
hormones produced by the neurons in the ventral
slender stalk called the infundibulum. The pitu-
hypothalamus are of two types: releasing hormones,
itary gland consists of two major functional areas:
which stimulate specific cells of the anterior pitui-
the anterior pituitary, or adenohypophysis, and the
tary to produce certain hormones, and inhibitory
posterior pituitary, or neurohypophysis. The ade-
 hormones, which have an inhibitory effect. and sup-
nohypophysis consists of three portions: the pars
press production. Table 13.1 lists the hormones
dlistalis, pars intermedia, and pars tuberalis.
. The
produced by the hypothalamus on the left, and
neurohypophysis contains the pars nervosa
1 and
hormones of the anterior pituitary that are affected
is directly connected to the hypothalamus by the
are listed on the right.
infundibulum. The shape of the pituitary gland and
Two other hormones also are produced by the
the degree of development of its relative parts vary
hypothalamus: antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and
 in domestic animals (Figure 13.1).
Oxytocin. ADH is produced primarily in the supraoptic
The hypothalamus is an important regulatory
 nuclei, and oxytocin primarily in the paraventricular
center for the nervous system; it regulates body tem-
nuclei. These are special neurosecretory neurons that.
 perature, thirst, hunger, sexual behavior, and such
allow their product to slide down an axon into the
reactions as fear and rage. Despite its many functions,
 posterior pituitary gland, or neurohypophysis, for
the hypothalamus is quite small. It consists of the optic
release into the blood (Figure 13.4).
Equine
Bovine
Lumen of 
Infundibulum
 Infundibulum  pituitary gland 
Porcine
Canine
Feline
Infundibulum
Infundibulum
Infundibulum
Lumen of 
Lumen of 
Lumen of 
pituitary gland 
 pituitary gland 
 pituitary gland
Pars distalis
Pars intermedia
Pars nervosa
FIGURE 13.1: Comparative pituitary glands of various species.
Editorialrevie
268
Chapter 13
Mammillary
Pineal gland
body
Optic
chiasm
Third ventricle
 and medial wall of
tuber cinereum of 
Mammillary
the hypothalamus 
body
Infundibulum -
 Neurohypophysis
(posterior pituitary)
Adenohypophysis
(anterior pituitary)
Pituitary
Infundibulum
Optic
 gland 
FGURE 13.2: The hypothalamus and pituitary
chiasm
gland.
FlGURE 13.3: Sagittal section of the sheep brain
showing the endocrine structures.
TABLE 13.1: Hormones of the Hypothalamus and Adenohypophysis
Releasing and inhibiting hormones
Anterior pituitary hormones affected
Somatotropin-releasing hormone (STH-RH)
 Somatotropic hormone
Somatotropin releasing-inhibiting hormone (STH-RIH)
Somatotropic hormone
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH)
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
Prolactin-releasing hormone (PRH)
Prolactin
 Prolactin-inhibiting hormone (PIH)
Prolactin
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
 Follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone
The releasing and inhibitory hormones produced
tissues, and thus is an important hormone in repair
in the hypothalamus are delivered to the anterior
and regeneration.
pituitary via the hypophyseal portal system. The
thyroid-stimulating hormone  (TSH): Influences
capillaries in the ventral hypothalamus pick up these
growth and activity of the thyroid gland. Increasing
hormones and transfer them via the hypophyseal
 portal veins to the secretory cells of the adenohypo-
TSH increases production of the thyroid hormones.
physis (see Figure 13.4).
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH): Regulates
 The adlenohypophysis is the glandular part of the
the endocrine activity of the adrenal cortex, the
pituitary gland (adeno means “gland"), and it pro-
 outer part of the adrenal gland. Increasing ACTH
duces the tropic hormones. The tropic hormones
increases production of glucocoricoid hormones
(see Table 13.1) stimulate target organs (which are
by the adrenal gland.
also endocrine glands) to secrete their hormones.
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH): Stimulates fol-
The hormones of the target organ then exert.
licular development. in the female and spermato-
their influence on other body organs and tissues.
genesis in the male.
There are seven known hormones produced by the
anterior pituitary:
luteinizing hormone (LH): Stimulates follicular
rupture and formation of the corpus luteum in the
somatotropic hormone (STH): Also known as growth
female, and testosterone production in the male.
hormone (GH), STH is a general metabolic hor-
In the male, it. is called interstitial cell stinulating
mone that plays a role in determining body growth 
hormone (ICSH).
and size. However, it also affects many tissues of the
 body as it regulates metabolism of proteins, carbo-
prolactin: Stimulates milk production at parturi-
hydrates, and lipids. It acts as an anabolic hormone
tion and replenishment. of milk during lactation.
in its effect on the metabolism of body proteins; in
It may also stimulate testosterone production in
other words, it stimulates formation and buildup of
males.
Editorialrevie
The Endocrine System
269
Hormone produced as neurosecretion
 by cells in supraoptic nucleus and
 conducted by nerve fibers to posterior
lobe for storage or absorption
Hypothalamic
Cell of 
neurons in the
supraoptic
 paraventricular nuclei
nucleus
Neurons in
the ventral
Neuro-
Posterior
hypothalamus
 secretion
lobe
Hypothalamic
neurons in the 
supraoptic nuclei
Capillary
 Superior
Infundibulum
hypophyseal
(connecting stalk)
artery
Hypothalamic
hypophyseal tract
Hypophyseal
Neurohypophysis
portal system
(storage area for
●Primary capillary
hypothalamic
plexus
hormones)
●Hypophyseal
portal veins
● Secondary capillary
 Posterior
plexus
lobe
Anterior lobe
Secretory cells of
Venule
adenohypophysis
TSH, FSH, LH,
Oxytocin
ACTH, GH, PRL *-
Tnferior
ADH
Venule
hypophyseal
artery
FIGURE 13.4: The hypothalamus, pituitary gland, blood flow, and neurosecretory pathways.
melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH): Increases
detected by the hypothalamus, and secretion of
skin pigmentation by stimulating dispersion of mel-
the releasing factors is diminished. As levels drop,
 anin granules by melanocytes. This effect is readily
secretion of releasing factors increases. In this way,
demonstrated in lower vertebrates, such as amphib-
a constant level is maintained in the blood. To
ians and fish. Other actions of this hormone are not.
 review, target. organs regulated by the hormones of
completely understood as yet.
the adenohypophysis are the adrenal glands, thy-
roid glands, parathyroid glands, and reproductive
Two hormones are secreted into the bloodstream
 from the neurohypophyis:
organs.
antidliuretic hormone (ADH): Studied in the last.
Adrenal Glands
chapter, this hormone can be considered by its
 The adrenal glands,like many organs, have an outer
action as a water resorption hormone.
area called the cortex and a central area called the
 Oxytocin: Stimulates uterine contractions during
medulla. The adrenal cortex is divided into three
birth and milk let-down in the lactating mother.
zones:
Physiology of the Glands
 1. The zona glomerulosa is the outer layer
(under the capsule) that produces
of the Endocrine System
mineralocorticoids. Aldosterone consti-
The hormones produced by target organs have a
tutes 95% of the hormones produced by
feedback effect. on the hypothalamus and pituitary
the zona glomerulosa and is responsible
for sodium reabsorption by the kidneys.
gland; as they are produced, their serum levels are
Editorialrevie
270
Chapter 13
 2. The zona fasciculata is the middle layer and
 6. stimulate glucagon to initiate glycogenolysis
is the widest; it produces glucocorticoids.
in the liver
 3. The zona reticularis is the inner layer
 7. stimulate the breakdown of fats for energy
and produces a small amount of weak
androgens, which are steroid hormones
The Thyroid Gland
that have a masculinizing effect. The
major androgen secreted by the adre-
The thyroid gland produces the hormones
nal gland is dehydroepiandrosterone
triiodothyronine (Ts),  tetraiodothyronine (T4),
(DHEA). This hormone has a minimal
and thyrocalcitonin (TCT). Of T, and T4, T4 is the
effect. in males, but in females it.
most prevalent in farm animals, dogs, and cats. In
contributes to libido.
 general, Ts and T are the hormones that regulate
(1) basal metabolic rate and oxygen use, (2) cellu-
The glucocorticoids produced are steroid-based
lar metabolism, and (3) normal growth and tissue
molecules. They are cortisol (hydrocortisone),
differentiation. In addition, as production of T, and
corticosterone, and cortisone. Of these three,
T4 rises, so do the following metabolic activities:
cortisol is the most abundant and is responsible
for approximately 95% of glucocorticoid activity.
1. glucose absorption and utilization
The metabolism of glucocorticoids is catabolic;
 2. cholesterol synthesis (but under deficiency
that. is, tissues are broken down to produce prod-
conditions, cholesterol levels rise because
ucts needed for metabolism. The glucocorticoids'
of decreased elimination via the bile)
metabolic activities include:
 3. potentiated effects of norepinephrine
1. increasing gluconeogenesis in liver
The metabolism of thyrocalcitonin  will be
 2. decreasing peripheral glucose use
discussed with the parathyroid glands because its
 3. increasing proteolysis in skeletal muscle
metabolic activity is associated with calcium and
 4. increasing circulating levels of amino
phosphorus balance in the body.
acids
 5. increasing mobilization of free fatty acids
Parathyroid Glands
6. producing an anti-inflammatory effect.
 The parathyroid glands are small nodules within or
near the thyroid glands, usually two on each side.
7. producing an anti-allergic effect.
One is located external to and the other internal
8. decreasing the immune system's
to the thyroid gland. They produce parathyroid
functionality
hormone (PTH), which controls calcium levels in
the blood, and thus phosphorus levels. PTH acts to
The adrenal medulla is not. considered glandular
increase calcium mobilization from bone, calcium
 tissue; instead it is modifed sympathetic nervous
absorption from the intestines, and calcium resorp-
tissue. Its products are norepinephrine, which is
tion from the kidneys.
also released at post-ganglionic, sympathetic nerve
A decreased PTH level causes decreased blood
endings, and epinephrine (adrenalin), which consti-
calcium levels, blood phosphorus levels, and urine
tutes approximately 80% of the total secretion by
phosphorus levels. A pathologic decrease in blood
this gland.
calcium levels causes tremors, muscle twitches,
 Both these hormones are sympathomimetic;
tetany, and convulsions. This condition could be
that is, their effects mimic the effects of the
caused by loss of calcium from the blood due to
sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous
increased demand from the mammary glands in a
system. When released into the blood, these two
period of increased milk production. If sufficient.
chemicals:
PTH is not available for release, calcium absorption
1. stimulate an increase in heart rate and
from the intestinal tract cannot keep up with the
force of contraction
demand. In dogs this condition is called eclampsia,
 or hypocalcemic tetany.
 2. serve as vasoconstrictors that produce
As previously mentioned, the hormone thyrocalci-
increased peripheral resistance
tonin (TCT) is produced by the thyroid gland. It keeps
 3. increase blood pressure
calcium in the bones by blocking reabsorption, and it.
moves calcium from blood back into the bone. TCT
4. counteract the depressing action of insulin
needs vitamin D as a coenzyme to work, and there is a
on blood sugar, thereby raising blood
relationship between PTH and TCT: If blood calcium
sugar levels
levels are high, TCT is released; if blood calcium
5. stimulate ACTH release
levels are low, PTH is released.
Editorialrevie
The Endocrine System
271
The Pancreas
The primary effect of insulin is to facilitate transfer
of glucose into cells. However, during exercise cells
The pancreas's endocrine activity is not. controlled
do not need insulin for glucose to enter. This fact has
by pituitary hormones, and this organ has both
endocrine andexocrine activity. The exocrine
diabetes mellitus. A consistent amount of daily exer-
portion of the pancreas secretes digestive enzymes
cise should reduce the quantity of insulin required
into the duodenum. Histologicall, the endocrine 
daily.
portion of the pancreas is composed of numerous
Glucagon has the following effects:
islands of cells, called pancreatic islet cells (or islets of
Langerhans), scattered throughout its tissue. The islets
 1. increases glyconeogenesis from glucose in
are composed of three types of cells: alpha cells, beta
the liver
cells, and delta cells. Beta cells produce insulin; alpha
 2. increases gluconeogenesis from amino
cells produce glucagon; and delta cells secrete soma-
 acids and lactic acid (via pyruvic acid) in
tostatin, gastrin, and a vasoactive intestinal peptide.
the liver
 Insulin has the following anabolic effects:
 3. increases insulin secretion
1. facilitates transfer of glucose into cells
4. when given intravenously, relaxes smooth
(hypoglycemic effect)
 2. once inside a cell, causes glucose to be
muscle
use d more rapidly
 The hormones of the reproductive glands will
be discussed in the next chapter. In the exercises in
 3. enhances glycogen formation
this chapter, the important structures are listed in
4.i
increases glucokinase (which stimulates
colored bold print. If a structure is mentioned prior
glucose to become glucose-6-phosphate)
to its dissection, it is italicized. Structures discussed
 5. increases amino acid uptake in skeletal
lon ud pioq ui aq ose keu uonss oi oud
muscle
special emphasis.
EXERCISE 13.1 DISSECTION OF THE ENDOCRINE GLANDS
Most of these glands have been focated at feast once during previous dissections.
Procedure
1. Locate the paired thyroid glands on either side of the cranial end of the trachea, just below the
cricoid cartilage (Figure 13.5).
Thyroid
 gland 
Thymus
 gland 
FIGURE 13.5: Thyroid gland and thymus gland of a cat.
Editorialrevie
272
Chapter 13
2. Examine the surface of the thyroid glands for two tiny parathyroid glands on each side. The
external parathyroid gland is located at the cranial pole of the thyroid gland and is external
to the thyroid capsule. The internal parathyroid gland is located within the thyroid capsule (is
intracapsular) and lies within the parenchyma of the thyroid gland. Often these glands are not.
visible with the unaided eye because they are so small, or because previous dissection and the
preservative have destroyed them (see Figure 13.5).
3. The thynus gland is cranial to the heart, in the ventral medial area of the thorax (see Figure 13.5).
This gland was probably destroyed during your dissection of the vascular system. The hormones
produced by the thymus gland are thymosin, thymic humoral factor (THF), thymic factor (TF),
and thymopoietin. They promote the proliferation and maturation of T cells (a type of white blood
 cell), which destroy microbes and foreign substances and may retard the aging process.
4. The adrenal glands are located cranial and slightly medial to each kidney (Figure 13.6). Each gland
resembles a small lymph node and has the blue phrenicoabdominal vein traversing across it.
5. The pituitary gland (hypophysis) is attached to the hypothalamus by a stalk called the infundibu-
lum. If you remove the brain of the cat, the pituitary can be seen on the floor of the cranial cavity
in the hypophyseal fossa of the skull. In the sheep brain with the meninges left intact, the rounded
bulb of the pituitary gland should be easily located (see Figures 13.3 and 13.7).
6. The pineal gland may be found in either the cat brain or sheep brain above the corpora
quadrigemina of the midbrain (see Figures 13.3 and 13.8).
 Adrenal
 gland 
Renal artery
and vein
Left kidney
FGURE 13.6: Left adrenal gland of a cat
Olfactory
bulbs
Dura
Optic
 mater
chiasm
Pituitary
gland
FIGURE 13.7: Ventral view of the sheep brain with dura mater and pituitary gland still attached.
Copyri ght 2010 Cengag
Editorialrevie
The Endocrine Syste m 
273
Cerebral
hemispheres
 Pineal
 gland 
Corpora
quadrigemina
Cerebellum
FGURE 13.8: Caudal view of the pineal gland of a sheep.
Liver 
Pancreas
Right 
kidney
Duodenum-
FIGURE 13.9: Pancreas of a cat.
7. The pancreas is located in the abdominal cavity, coursing adjacent to the duodenum and then
curving within the mesentery medially underneath the greater omentum (Figure 13.9).
 8. Locate the ovaries or testes. They will be described in more detail in the next chapter.
Editorial
274
Chapter 13
EXERCISE 13.2 ORAL GLUCOSE TOLERANCE TEST
This test is used to confirm the diagnosis of a deviation from normal glucose metabolism. If glucose
is administered orally to a normal monogastric animal, an alteration in glucose concentration is
30 min to 1 hour, the peak blood glucose level is reached and then begins to fall. Phase 2 is the
decreasing phase of the blood glucose level, and the rate of removal exceeds that of entry. During
phase 3, glucose, after having returned to its original level, continues to fall to a minimal level before
re turning to the pre-test level.
Procedure
 1. Select a live dog for the experiment and have the dog fast overnight. In the morning, take a fasting
blood glucose serum level.
2. Administer glucose orally in the amount of 4 g per kilogram of body weight.
 3. Take blood samples at 30- to 60-minute intervals for 3 to 4 hours.
Blood:
30 minutes:
1 hour:
1 1/2 hours:
2 hours:
 2 1/2 hours:
3 hours:
 3 1/2 hours:
4 hours:
4. Make a graph of your findings by plotting time on the x axis and glucose levels on the y axis
Questions
1. At what point in the test do you know the pancreas has begun to secrete insulin?
 2. Why do doctors use the term hypoglycemic effect when describing the action of insulin?
Discussion
As blood glucose rises, insulin is released. This causes cells to start absorbing glucose. When this
happens, blood glucose begins to drop as glucose is removed from the serum and moved into the cells.
 Because glucose is removed from the blood, this process is described as having a hypoglycemic effect.
A normal animal's fasting blood glucose is less than 120 mg/dl; this value should not. exceed 160 mg/dl at.
the end of the frst hour and should return to normal by the end of the second hour. In a diabetic animal
(in whom insulin is not produced or the beta cells are not responsive), blood sugar levels during the test.
may rise to more than 180 mg/dl and will not return to normal during the testing period. In other words,
much of the glucose stays in the blood and does not enter the cells.
The Endocrine System
275
Hormonal problems can manifest themseives in many ways; some occur as pathological changes to the
on both sides of the body: hypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism. When testing for these diseases,
you must either assay for the hormones produced by the giand, or administer a stimulating hormone and
then assay for the levels of the hormones that should be produced.
For hypothyroidism, we assay for Ts, usually free T, so that results are not affected by changes in serum
protein binding. Other tests that can be run are thyrotropin (TSH) stimulating test, thyrotropin-releasing
hormone (TRH) stimulation test, and a TSH assay. For hyperadrenocorticism we can do an ACTH response
test, a dexamethasone suppression test, or a plasma ACTH concentration. In these tests, failure to produce
hormones after a signal from the stimulating hormones indicates a suppressed gland, and overproduction
indicates an overactive gland.
eterinary
ignettes
he day Mr. Opecia and his dog Al entered my hospital was a dark day in the history of
veterinary medicine, at least as far as I was concerned. On that day I realized that we had
entered a new era, one in which pharmaceuticals could be ordered from a catalog, by
 patient relationship had been abandoned and replaced by mail-order gerontology.
"Dr. Cochran, I found the greatest nutritional supplement to extend both human and animal
life spans that has ever been developed," Mr. Opecia exclaimed, puffing out his chest and smiling 
broadly while reaching down to pet his dog on the head. "Al and I are both on it. It is a synthetic 
hormone that I order from overseas through a catalog."
Al was a 10-year-old wweimaraner with a pleasant disposition. He was not overly hyper and had
a broad head and intelligent eyes. I wish I could have given the same compliment to Mr. Opecia. I
stared in utter disbelief at this once-proud dog, for Al was now almost completely hairless. He had 
only about 12 hairs remaining in the middle of his back above the scapula. I counted them . .. exactly
12. well, 14, but two came out as I counted them.
Not only was there no hair, but there had to be 10,0o0 comedos— tiny litle blackheads— all over
his body. This was the most pathetic-looking dog I had ever seen. I didn't even want to touch him.
somehow I think he knew what I was thinking because his entire body turned red. I had embarrassed
him! Now I really felt bad. Honestly, I have never intentionally or unintentionally embarrassed a dog
before; it is not in my nature.
Editorialrevie
276
Chapter 13
"Mr. Opecia, he has no hair!" I exclaimed.
"Yeah, but I bought him a doggy coat so he won't get cold."
"How do you know the supplement is working?" I asked him.
"vwell, I'm on it, and I feel great," he explained.
I glanced quickly at the top of his head. Mr. Opecia was also bald as a brick.
"So why have you brought Al in today? what's wrong with him?" I asked.
"He's got some growths around his anus I thought you should look at," he replied.
There were three small, hard lumps in the tissue surrounding A's anus. I did a fine-needle aspirate
"He's got a few benign tumors around his anus that wil have to be removed," I told Mr. Opecia.
"No way, Doc. There's no way I'm going to do that to Al. I want to use him as a stud dog: I want
to breed him!"
 A looked up at his owner and stared in apparent disbelief. "who would have me?" he seemed to
be wondering.
 My concerns about the pills were correct. They must have had some potent hormones in them,
because when Al stopped taking them, he regrew most of his hair. He also regrew a few more
tumors, but after those were excised, they stopped returning. Eventually, Al went on to become a
doggie daddy. All's well that ends well, I suppose. Oh yes, and he lived for another 8 years.
 Mr. Opecia also stopped taking the pils. He is still alive and well, and he currently works as a
 pharmaceutical salesman. He sells injectable growth hormone, if I remember correctly.
SUMMARY
 Much of this chapter was devoted to explaining the anatomy and physiology of the hypothalamus
and pituitary gland, and the target organs of pituitary hormone production. You learned that
the pituitary gland varies in size and shape in the various species of domestic animals. The
hormones produced by the hypothalamus were described, and the mechanisms by which they
are transported to the pituitary gland were covered. You found out that the releasing hormones of
the hypothalamus are transported to the anterior pituitary gland by a small portal blood system,
and that oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone flow down the neurosecretory axons to the posterior
leut pauieal noy 'uebio iabiet si uo ioaje qeoiboloisayd 5yoads e sesneo auowioy yoe3
the production of hormones by the target organ is controlled by a feedback mechanism
to the hypothalamus, which controls output of releasing factors. Also discussed was that
hormone output from the neurohypophysis is affected by certain physiological conditions,
such as the effect of hydration levels on ADH release. You also learned that two hormones
can have opposite physiological effects, and that homeostasis is maintained by a balance
between the two hormones. For example, insulin acts to lower blood glucose, and glucagon
action and its effect on serum glucose levels
The Endocrine System
277
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What class or type of organic compounds does the endocrine system produce?
2. Define target organ.
3. Name the two parts of the pituitary gland (give both common names and
anatomical names).
4. Name the strictures that make up the hypothalamus
5. What are releasing hormones, and what two types are produced?
6.  Where are the products released by the neurohypophysis produced?
7. Where are the products released by the adenohypophysis produced?
8. What is a tropic hormone?
 9. Describe the hypophyseal portal system.
10. Give another name for growth hormone.
11. What is the target organ for adrenocorticotropic hormone?
12. What effect does follicle-stimulating hormone cause?
 13. Luteinizing hormone stimulates the production of what hormone in both males and
females, and what is this hormone called in males?
14. What are the effects of the release of prolactin and oxytocin?
15. Name the zones of the adrenal cortex, and indicate what each zone produces.
16. Name the three types of glucocorticoids produced.
17. Name the eight metabolic activities of glucocorticoids.
 18. What are the products of the adrenal medulla, and what metabolic activities do these
compounds produce?
19.
Name the products of the thyroid gland, and describe what metabolic activities these
compounds produce.
20. What hormone is produced by the parathyroid gland, and what is its metabolic action?
21. Where is thyrocalcitonin produced?
22. Where are alpha, beta, and delta cells found, and what does each produce?
23. Name the metabolic activities caused by the release of insulin and glucagon.
24. Which thyroid hormone is assayed in clinical medicine?
 25. Name the tests run for hyperadrenocorticism.
CHAPTER 14
THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
OBJECTIVES
recognize the types of uteri in domestic animals
understand the relationship between the endocrine system and the reproductive system, and how the
endocrine hormones affect. the production of reproductive hormones and cells
understand the estrous cycle and the factors that influence its stages
name and locate the anatomical structures of the reproductive system using diagrams and the dissected cat.
understand the production of semen, its composition, and the organs that contribute to its formation
name and describe the layers of the uterus
understand the types of placentation in domestic animals
know the signs of impending parturition
identify the various stages of the estrous cycle from vaginal cytology in the dog
MATERIALS
cat. cadaver, triple injected (order without skin attached)
Mayo dissecting scissors
1
probe
1 × 2 thumb forceps or Adson tissue forceps
#4 scalpel handle with blade
 bone cutting forceps
1
rubber gloves
1
compound microscope
stained slides of the various stages of the estrous cycle of the dog
 progesterone and luteinizing hormone assay test kits
INTRODUCTION
The function of the reproductive system is to perpetuate the species. Although it is considered
a separate system, the endocrine system's hormones play a vital role in the function of the
reproductive system.The target organs of endocrine hormones include the essential organs
of reproduction: the gonads, which are the testes and ovaries. These produce the germ cells:
spermatozoa in the male and ova in the female. During the period of female receptivity, which is
hormone controlled, copulation, or mating, occurs; a haploid sperm fertilizes the haploid ovum
(egg), and a diploid zygote is produced. This union occurs in the uterine tubes or oviducts.
 Cell division in the zygote commences quickly to prepare it for implantation in the uterine 
lining. The zyzgote implants and becomes an embryo. The embryo continues to develop, and
when all of the body parts are recognizable, it is called a fetus. The length of gestation, or the
gestation period (the time from fertilization to birth), varies with the species. Generally, the
larger the animal, the longer gestation takes. The act of giving birth is called parturition.
278
Editorial revie
The Reproductive System 
279
Anatomy of the Female
corpus albicans if pregnancy does not occur. A corpus
albicans resembles a white, scar-like area.
Re productive Tract
The uterine tube, also called the tuba uterina,
The ovaries are both endocrine (hormone-producing)
 oviduct, Fallopian tube, or salpinx, has an open end
 and cytogenic (cell-producing) organs. The medulla
that receives the ejected ova; this funnel-like struc-
is the vascular center of the ovary. The cortex of the
ture adjacent to each ovary is the infundibulum.
ovary is protected by a layer of dense irregular con-
The funnel has a fringed margin called the fimbria.
nective tissue called the tunica albuginea. This layer
The two oviducts, one for each ovary, are convo-
 is surrounded by a layer of germinal epithelium. In
luted and extend between the ovary and the uterus.
the regions of the ovarian cortex in animals that are
Their lining is highly folded and covered by ciliated
seasonally polyestrus (having repetitious heat cycles),
simple columnar epithelial cells. They also contain
various stages of the folicle may be found, such as
 smooth muscle. Both the cilia and the smooth mus-
developing and atrophying follicles, including the
 cle help move the ova and possibly the spermatozoa.
corpus luteum. In the development of the primary fol-
As mentioned previously, the oviduct is the site of
licle, the germinal epithelium invades the stroma as a
fertilization.
mass of cells; one cell of the mass becomes an oocyte,
The uterus of domestic animals consists of three
and the others become the follicular cells, which sur-
parts: the neck (where the cervix is located), the
round the oocyte. As the follicle matures, the oocyte
body, and the horns. The uterus is a hollow struc.
enlarges and the follicular cells multiply. During fol-
ture, is lined by a mucous membrane called the
licular enlargement, a fluid-filled vesicle forms in the
endometrium, and is glandular. The endometrium's
center. At this stage it is called a vesicular follicle,
thickness and vascularity vary with the stages of the
 or Graafian follicle (Figure 14.1). At a certain stage
estrous cycle. In the horse and dog, the uterus is
of development the follicle ruptures, releasing the
lined by simple columnar epithelium, whereas
ovum. The follicular cells multiply to fill in the vesicle,
in the pig and ruminants it is lined by stratified
and the structure becomes a corpus luteum (CL). It
columnar epithelium. The uterus has intermedi-
appears as a large, round, yellow-looking structure,
ate smooth muscle layers called the myometrium,
hence the common name “yellow body." The CL will
which consists of thick, inner, circular and thin,
persist if pregnancy occurs but will degenerate into a
outer, longitudinal muscle layers. The outer serous
Theca
Tunica
folliculi
 albugineaGraafian
Growingfollicle
[Maturing
follicle
Corpus
follicle
albicans
Primary
follicle
Atretic
Hilus
follicle
Retrogressive
corpus luteum 
Interstitial
tissue
Corpus
Medulla
luteum
Ruptured
 follicle
Germinal
epithelium 
FlGURE 14.1: Ovary showing all stages of ova development and regression (all species).
Editorial
280
Chapter 14
layer, called the perimetrium, is visceral peritoneum
minor labia, which may be absent. The two labia
and has a thin layer of connective tissue to attach it.
meet dorsally at the dorsal commissure and ventrally
to the myometrium. The cervix is a heavy, smooth-
at the ventral commissure. The vulva leads into the
muscle sphincter, and it is tightly closed except dur-
vestibulum, which extends cranially up to the exter-
ing estrus and parturition. There are four types of
nal urethral orifice. At the ventral commissure, just.
uteri in domestic animals (Figure 14.2):
deep to the external opening, is the clitoris, which
is the homologue to the male penis and consists of
1. bicornuate uterus: in the pig (sow), dog
similar parts (minus the urethra and muscles) . The
(bitch), and cat (queen)
shaft is called a corpora clitoridis, and its size varies
 2. bipartite uterus: in the ox (cow), sheep
with the species. It ranges from 5 cm long in the
(ewe),and horse (mare)
mare to about 3 cm in the bitch, and it is consider-
 ably smaller in the queen. The glans clitoridis is the
3. simplex uterus: in the primate
rounded and enlarged free end of the organ that.
4. duplex uterus: in the rabbit (doe)
Occupies the fossa clitoridis at the ventral commis-
sure of the vulva in female animals, and it has the
The vagina is located within the pelvic canal and
same embryonic origin as the penis in the male.
extends from the cervix cranially to the vulva caul-
The mesentery supporting the uterus is called
dally. Its mucosa is glandless, and most of the mucous 
the broad ligament. The broad ligament has three
secretions present there come from the mucous
indistinct divisions:
cells of the cervix. The vagina is lined with stratified
squamous epithelium. The muscle layer is mainly cir-
1. mesovarium: supports the ovaries
cular smooth muscle. The serosa is present only in
 2. mesosalpinx: supports the salpinges
the small cranial part that enters the abdominal cav-
(singular: salpinx) or uterine tubes. ( In
ity; the caudal part in the pelvic canal is covered by
the bitch this forms a bursa around the
 connective tissue. The fornix is an area of depression
 ovary, called the ovarian bursa.)
 around the cervix. (The fornix is absent in the pig.)
3. mesormetrium: supports to the uterus (see
 The vulva,the opening (entrance) into the genital
 organs, is one of the two external parts of the female
Exercise 14.1, #3)
genitalia; the other external part is the clitoris. The
Twoligaments are found within the broadligament.
vulva consists of symmetrical, well-developed major
The most cranial is the suspensory ligament, which is
labia, and poorly developed (also symmetrical)
 incorporated into the mesovarium and mesosalpinx
Mare - Bipartite
Cow - Bipartite
Sow -Bicornuate
Bitch, Queen - Bicornuate
 Rabbit - Duplex
 Primate - Simplex
FGURE 14.2: Shapes and types of uteri of domestic animals.
Copyright 2010 Cengag
Editorialrevie
The Reproductive System
281
and is attached to the body wall just caudal to the
into the epididymis (via the ductuli efferentes,
kidneys. The second is the round ligament of the
or efferent ducts). The interstitial cells (cells of
uterus. This is the lateral edge of a sheet of mesentery
Leydig) are located in the connective tissue between
that projects lateral and perpendicular to the main
the seminiferous tubules (Figure 14.3).
part of the mesometriun (see Exercise 14.1, #3).
The epididymis contains three parts (see
Figure 14.3): The head is found on the dorsal
Anatomy of the Male
surface of the testicle; the body is the middle part;
Reproductive Tract
and the tail is located on the ventral surface of
the testicle (see Figure 14.3). The tubule inside
Like the ovaries, each testis (plural: testes), or
is the duct of the epididymis, which is connected
testicle, is both an endocrine (hormone-producing)
to the ductus deferens (vas deferens), a muscular
and a cytogenic (cell-producing) organ. The testes
tube that transports the spermatozoa and aids in
contain a mass of seminiferous tubules surrounded
their propulsion. The ductus deferens exits the
by a heavy connective tissue capsule called the tunica
tail of the epididymis, travels within the spermatic
albuginea. The tubules are separated by fbrous
cord, passes through the inguinal canal, and enters
 septa called trabeculae, which form the support, or
the urethra just caudal to the neck of the bladder
stroma, for the tubules. The seminiferous tubules
 and immediately cranial to the prostate gland (if
combine to form the larger rete testis, which flow
the species has this organ).
Ductus
deferens
Visceral layer
Tunica
vaginalis
Parietal layer
Head of
testis
epididymis
Cavity of the 
 tunica vaginalis
Body of
 Tunica
epididymis
 albuginea
Rete testis
-Blood vessels
Mediastinum
testis
Tail of 
epididymis
Tubuli recti
Trabeculae
(septa)
Lobule of testis
(contains seminiferous tubules)
Head of epididymis
Duct of
epididymis
Body of
Efferent ductule
epididymis ~
Rete testis
Mediastinum
testis
Ductus
Tubuli recti
deferens
(straight tubules)
Seminiferous
tubules (convoluted
tubules)
Lobule of testis
Tail of epididymis
FGURE 14.3: The testis and epididymis (all species).
Editorial
282
Chapter 14
The spermatic cord consists of the following:
glands. Bulbourethral glands are found in all
domestic animals except. the dog, and are very large
1. ductus deferens
in the boar (Figure 14.5)
 2. testicular artery, vein, nerve, and
The penis, which is the male organ of copula-
lymphatics
tion, consists of three major components: the root,
the body, and the free end surrounded by the pre-
 3. mesoductus deferens and mesorchium
puce. The root of the penis consists of the two crura
 4. tumica vaginalis visceralis (visceral vaginal
and the bulbus penis. The paired crus penis is the
tunic)
proximal end of the corpus cavernosum penis.
The tunica vaginalis parietalis (parietal vaginal
The corpus cavernosum penis makes up the bulk
of the penis's erectile tissue and is located dorsal to
tunic) and cremaster muscle cover the spermatic
the urethra. The bulbus penis is the caudal extent.
cord (Figure 14.4).
The scrotum is the sac containing the testes. It is
of the corpus spongiosum penis. The corpus spon-
attached to the bottom of the testicle by the scrotal
giosum penis is the erectile tissue surrounding the
ligament, which is a remnant of the gubernaculum
penile urethra. The urethra opens at the external
urethral orifice. In the horse, sheep, and goat, a ure-
(a ligament that pulled the testis from the abdo-
men, through the inguinal canal, and into the scro-
thral process extends the urethra out from the free
tum during development).
end of the penis. The free part of the penis starts
 The following accessory sex glands are present
from the attachment of the prepuce on the penis
 in male animals, but not in all species:
and ends as the glans penis. The glans penis is the
 prostate: Surrounds the pelvic urethra, just cau-
head of the penis, which contains the corpus spon-
dal to the bladder. The prostate is round in the
giosum glandis. The glans is a cushion that overlaps
the distal end of the corpus cavernosum penis. The
dog, cat, and horse (these species have two-lobed
prostates—a right and left) and more diffuse in
 prepuce is the skin surrounding the free part of the
 penis like a muff.
vesicular glands (serminal vesicles): These paired
The bulbus glandis is the caudal part of the penis
glands lie just caudal to the neck of the bladder on 
in dogs. It swells to lock the male into the female
both sides. Vesicular glands are hollow, pear-shaped
 during copulation by becoming entrapped (or tied
sacs in the stallion, and large, lobulated glands in
up) within the pelvic canal. The bull, ram, and boar
the bull, ram, and boar. These glands are absent in
have a sigmoid (S-shaped) flexure of the penis (see
Figure 14.5); the penis straightens during the erec-
the dog and cat.
ampullae: These glandular enlargements at the
tion process. The os penis is a grooved bone in
terminal end of the ductus deferens are well devel-
the dog's penis. A retractor penis muscle (made of
oped in the stallion, bull, and ram; are small in the
smooth muscle) returns the penis to its normal posi
 tion following an erection.
dog; and are absent in the boar and cat. Ampullae
contribute to the seminal fluid.
bulbourethral glands (Cowper's glands): Small,
Physiology of the Female
paired glands on either side of the urethra just cra-
nial to the bony ischial arch but caudal to other
Re productive System
 Follicle-stimulating hormone initiates development.
 of the follicle. The adenohypophysis starts to liber-
Testicular artery, vein, Ductus
nerve and lymphatics deferens
ate luteinizing hormone toward the end of follicu-
lar development, which causes the follicle to finish
Fibrous
developing and rupture, expelling the ovum.
Cremaster
covering
muscle
This process is called ovulation and is associated
(spermatic
with estrus (heat) in most mammals. There are two
fascia)
types of ovulation, depending on the species. Ani-
Smooth
mals that are spontaneous ovulators do not require
muscle
fibers
copulation for ovulation to occur. Most species fall
into this category, including the horse, ox, sheep,
Mesoductus
pig, goat, dog, primates, mouse, rat, and guinea pig.
Tunica
Tunica
deferens
Induced ovulators, which require copulation for
vaginalis
 vaginalis
ovulation to occur, include the cat, rabbit, ferret,
(parietalis) (visceralis) Mesorchium
 and mink.
After ovulation, the opened follicle becomes a
FGURE 14.4: The spermatic cord (all species).
corpus hemorrhagicum when the ruptured follicle
Editorialrevie
The Reproductive System 
283
Bull
Pelvic part of the 
Ram
urogenital
Vesicular
Vesicular
canal
gland
 gland
 Prostate
Ampulla
Ampulla 
disseminate
Bodyof
of deferent
of deferent
 (body is missing
jonp
prostate Cowper's
duct
in the ram)
gland
Bulbospongiosus
Cowper's
Bladder-
Bladder-
 gland
muscle
Pubic
Retractor
Ductus deferens.
Ductus deferens-
penis muscle
'symphysis
Free part
Left crus of penis
\Retractor
 of the penis
penis muscle
Pubic symphysis
Penis
Penis
Free part
The urethral
 of the penis
process (in ram)
Boar
Stallion
Vesicular
Body of
 prostate
Ampulla
gland
Cowper's
of deferent
gland
duct
Vesicular
gland
Retractor
Body of
Ductus deferens
penis muscle
Ductus deferens-
prostate
Pubic
Cowper's
Bladder-
Bladder
gland
 symphysis
Retractor
 Preputial
Fold of
~penis
pouch (in boar)
the internal 
muscle
prepuce (in
Pubic
stallion)
symphysis
Urethra (in lower
part of penis)
\Urethra (in
Free part.
Penis
lower part
 of the penis 
Free part
Penis
 of the penis
of penis)
forms a blood clot in the antrum area. It next devel-
queen, whereas it terminates in late pregnancy in the
 ops into the corpus luteum (CL) and is influenced
 mare and ewe. Retention of the CL in a non-pregnant.
by luteinizing hormone to develop. The follicular
 animal is considered a pathological condition. The
cells lining the vesicle multiply to fill this open cavity.
terminal stage of development is the corpus albicans.
The CL persists if pregnancy occurs. Maintenance of
The CL degenerates to form this structure, which is
the corpus luteum is caused by hormones produced
 a small amount. of scar tissue remaining in the ovary.
 by the placental membranes, specifically chorionic
There are five stages in the estrous cycle.
gonadotropin and prolactin, which is produced by
Figure 14.6 shows the relationship between the
the adenohypophysis. The CL persists throughout.
stages of estrus and the development. of the follicle
pregnancy in the cow, doe (goat), sow, bitch, and
and corpus luteum.
Editorialrevie
284
Chapter 14
Estrus
Estrus Pregnancy
Unfertilized ovum
In 
In 
In
In
Becoming
Allantois
tube   uterus 
tubeuterus
attached
expanded
Corpus luteum of pregnancy
10
Corpus luteum
Ovulation
Ovulation
8
#
Involution of corpus luteum 
Follicle
Follicle
(non-pregnant sow)
4
02 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
Days
FlGURE 14.6: The estrous cycle of the sow, showing the relationship between stages of estrus and
the period of follicular and corpus luteum (CL) development.
 proestrus: The anterior pituitary gland
help move spermatozoa. Prolactin from the ante-
(adenohypophysis) produces follicle
 rior pituitary gland helps maintain the CL during
stimulating hormone (FSH) and some
 pregnancy, stimulates the mammary glands to fll
luteinizing hormone (LH), which cause
up with milk at parturition, and stimulates replen-
development of the follicle. The follicle
ishment of milk (production of prolactin is stimu-
starts producing estrogen, which stimu-
lated via suckling).
lates the buildup of the walls of the vagina
The placenta is the membranous structure that
and uterus to prepare for copulation and
obtains nutrients and oxygen from the mother and
pregnancy.
delivers them to the fetus. The chorion is the out-
 2. estrus: This is the period of female recep-
ermost membrane and is in contact with the mater-
nal uterus. The amnion is the innermost membrane
tivity. Ovulation usually occurs during the
end of this period in spontaneous ovula-
closest to the fetus. The amnionic sac is the sac in
which the fetus is located, and it is also called the
tors. FSH levels are decreasing and LH
levels are increasing.
second water bag. The allantoic sac is the space
between the amnion and the chorion; it is lined by
 3. metestrus: In this post-ovulatory phase,
the allantois (or allantoic membranes) and is called
the CL starts secreting progesterone,
the first water bag (Figure 14.7).
which prevents further development of
The attachment. of the placenta to the lining of
other follicles. The CL also is responsible
the uterus varies according to species (Figure 14.8).
 for maintaining the uterine lining to sup-
The following are the types of placentation:
 port the fetus during pregnancy.
 1. diffuse: epithelial; found in the pig and
4. diestrus: This is the short period of qui-
horse
escence in seasonally polyestrus animals.
First the CL degenerates; then one or
 2. cotyledonary: epitheliochorial; found in
 more follicles develop (depending on
the sheep, goat, and cow
whether it is a litter-bearing animal) and
 3. zonary: endotheliochorial; found in the
estrus repeats.
dog and cat.
 5. anestrus: The CL degenerates during this
4. discoid: hemochorial; found in primates
 period of quiescence between breeding
Figure 14.8 illustrates the types of placentation of
seasons.
various species; the structure of the lining of the
Oxytocin, as mentioned in the previous chapter,
areas of placentation also differs among species.
is secreted into the bloodstream by the posterior
Figure 14.9 illustrates the types of maternal and fetal
pituitary gland (neurohypophysis). Oxytocin stimu-
tissues present in the placenta. The information in
lates milk let-down in the mother, and in the pres-
the previous list correlates to Figure 14.9.
ence of estrogen it stimulates uterine contractions
Signs that parturition is approaching include
 during parturition. It also stimulates the oviducts to
an enlarged abdomen, enlarged mammary glands,
The Reproductive System 
285
Chorion
Allantois
Allantoic cavity
Amnion
Amniotic cavity
Ureter
Bladder
Digestive
tract
Urachus
Yolk stalk
FlGURE 14.7: The fetal membranes in the dog.
Diffuse placenta
Zonary placenta
Mare
Sow
Dog, cat
Cotyledonary placenta
Discoid placenta
Man, monkey
Cow, goat, sheep
FIGURE 14.8: Types of placentation in various species.
mammary glands that fill up with colostrum, and
continuous as delivery approaches. The fetal mem-
clear mucus from the vulva. Signs in large animals
branes appear as a sac filled with fluid, and the bitch
include a relaxed abdominal wall, sinking in of the
will usually rupture the sac with her teeth (some-
flanks, dropping of the belly, and sinking of the rump
times the sac is not seen). The first puppies generally
 on both sides of the tail head. In dogs, the frst stage
arrive within 30 minutes after the fetal sac appears.
noted is the nesting stage; the dog is restless, tears
The interval between pups may vary greatly; how-
up bedding, scratches, and has no appetite. The
ever, puppies usually arrive in pairs, with the mother
dog's temperature will decrease at least 2°F within
 resting 30 minutes to 2 hours between deliveries. The
24 hours of the onset of labor. In dogs, this is called 
 bitch normally licks each puppy as soon as it is born,
 the first definitive sign of impending parturition.
and an experienced mother will sever the umbilical
Labor in dogs is characterized by intermittent.
cord with her teeth. The placental membranes are
straining that becomes more pronounced and
 delivered shorly after each puppy is born.
Editorialrevie
286
Chapter 14
Placental Microscopic Structure
Type
Maternal tissue Fetal tissue
Gross form
Species
Epithelial
Diffuse
Pig, horse
Cotyledonary
Sheep, goat,
Epitheliochorial
or multiplex
cow
Endotheliochorial
Zonary
Dog,cat
Hemochorial
Discoid
Primates
FIGURE 14.9:
 Layers of the placentation in various species.
Physiology of the Male
Reproductive System
Acrosome
The main hormone produced by the testes, specifi
cally, by the interstital cells (cells of Leydig), is
Nucleus
Head-
testosterone, which is responsible for secondary
sex characteristics and sex drive. Testosterone is an
Proximal
 centriole
androgen, or anabolic steroid. Its production is stim-
Neck-
Axial
ulated by luteinizing hormone (from the anterior
 filament 
 pituitary gland); however, in the male, the hormone
is called interstitial cell stimulating hormone (ICSH) .
Midpiece-
Mitochondrial
In males, follicle-stimulating hormone is the anterior
helix
pituitary hormone that. stimulates spermatogenesis,
 or the creation of spermatozoa.
The sperm has the following parts:
1. head: This oval structure includes the
Fibrous
 nucleus containing the haploid number
 sheath 
of chromosomes (half the chromosomes
needed for an animal of the species). The
Tail-
head also has a cap called the acrosome,
which contains enzymes to permit.
 penetration into the ovum.
 2. midpiece: This is the power plant of
the sperm. Within the midpiece are
numerous mitochondria that carry out.
the metabolism that provides adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) for the sperm's
locomotion.
 3. tail: This section consists of a flagellum
for propulsion (Figure 14.10).
FlGURE 14.10: Parts of a spermatozoa.
Editorialrevie
The Reproductive Srstem 
287
The seminal fluid is produced by the accessory sex organs, and it is the medium for survival and
activation of the sperm. The prostatic secretion has a specific action (in addition to those mentioned
previously) : It also alkalinizes the vaginal environment, preventing spermatozoa death.
EXERCISE 14.1 DISSECTION OF THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Although you may dissect the reproductive system of only one sex, you will need to know the parts of both
sexes. After dissection, trade specimens with others in the lab to study the reproductive structures in a
cadaver of the opposite sex. Follow the steps in the appropriate section below, depending on the sex of
your cat. cadaver.
is mentioned prior to its dissection, it will be italicized. Structures discussed prior to dissection may also be
in bold print. for special emphasis.
Procedure
The Female Reproductive System
1. Locate the ovaries (Figure 14.11). These are small, oval structures just caudal to the caudal pole of
the kidneys. They are enveloped within the mesosalpinx, which forms a bursa around each ovary
called the ovarian bursa.
 2. The uterine tubes (or oviducts, or Fallopian tubes) are small, highly convoluted tubes within the
mesosalpinx. The dilated end is called the infundibulum of the oviduct, but it is difficult to see. The
oviduct's opening is called the ostium of the tube and is surrounded by the fimbria.
 3. Trace the oviducts to their termination at the uterine horns, or cornua. The descriptive name for
this type of uterus is bicornuate, or two-horned. Fertilized ova undergo multiple cell divisions as
they pass through the oviducts to the uterine horns, where they implant and continue to develop
into embryos and on to become fetuses. The fetuses tend to be equally spaced throughout the two
horns. The broad ligament supports the uterine horns and body of the uterus. The broad liga-
ment consists of three partsthe mesovarium, mesosalpinx, and mesometrium—but these parts
are indistinguishable. The broad ligament is T-shaped; its lateral portion is a sheet of mesentery that.
is perpendicular to the main part of the mesometrium and anchors it to the dorsolateral wall (see
Figure 14.11). The thickened, lateral edge of this lateral portion is called the round ligament of the
uterus. The suspensory ligament is the thickened part of the mesovarium and mesosalpinx that con-
nects each ovary to the dorsal body wall, just caudal to each kidney. During an ovariohysterectomy,
the suspensory ligament must be broken by the veterinarian so that the ovary and ovarian artery can
be elevated to the exterior and ligated.
4. The two horns come together in the middle to form the body of the uterus, which lies dorsal to the
bladder and urethra (Figure 14.12).
288
Chapter 14
Left
Suspensory
Uterine body
uterine horn
Ovary
ligament
Urinary
Ureter
Round 
Mesometrium
Mesometrium   Oviduct or
bladder
 ligament  (lateral projection)
(main part)
uterine tube
FGURE 14.11: The broad ligament in the uterus of a cat.
Vagina
Cervix
Body of
the uterus
 Uterine
artery
Horn of 
the uterus
Ovary
Uterine tube
Or oviduct
FIGURE 14.12: Parts of the female reproductive tract. The uterus has been everted and laid out on a
surgical towel.
Editorialrevie
The Reproductive System
289
5. To dissect. the remainder of the female reproductive system, it is necessary to cut through the pubic
pubic bones at the pubic symphysis in the ventral midline. Be careful not to cut the urethra, which
lies immediately beneath the pubic bone. Open the area further by abducting the thighs to clear
the pelvic canal.
6. Locate the urethra, the tube carrying urine from the urinary bladder. Dorsal to the urethra, fnd
the vagina, the tube leading from the body of the uterus. Note that about. 2/3 of the length of the
vagina, toward the uterus, is slightly thicker than the rest. This is the cervix (see Figure 14.12).
 7. The vagina and urethra open into a common passage, called the vestibule of the vagina, which is 
the space from the external urethral orifice to the vulva.
 8. Examine the external part of the vulva, which is the predominant structure of the external genita-
lia. The large labia majora are the lips surrounding the external genitalia. On the ventral wall of the
vestibule, just deep to the opening, is the fossa clitoridis, which is difficult to identify.
 9. Locate the rectum, the continuation of the descending colon, which is dorsal to the vagina.
The Male Reproductive System
1. Locate the scrotum, the sac ventral to the anus in cats. Early in fetal development, the testes are
located caudal to the kidneys; they migrate before birth through the inguinal canal on either
side, and into the scrotum either just before or soon after birth. They are guided by a fibrous
cord, which is called the gubernaculum. The remnant of this cord is the connective tissue
attaching the testis to the inside of the scrotum and is called the scrotal ligament. The scrotum
is covered with skin on the outside and is lined with peritoneum on the inside. It is divided into
two compartments by a median septum.
 2. Open the scrotum to view and examine the testes. They are covered with tunica vaginalis pari
etalis (parietal vaginal tunic), an extension of the parietal peritoneum. Cut open this cover-
ing to view the testis within. The shiny surface covering the testis, epididymis, and the vessels is
the tunica vaginalis visceralis (visceral vaginal tunic), an extension of the visceral peritoneum
(Figures 14.13 and 14.14) .
Spermatic
cord
Testicular
Ductus
artery
deferens
 and vein 
Head of
Tunica
 epididymis
vaginalis
parietalis
Body of
(parietal
epididymis
vaginal
tunic)
Tail of 
epididymis
FlGURE 14.13: Testis and component parts of a cat. The lower needle is under the head of the
epididymis; the upper needle (dark hubbed) is under the tail.
Copyright 2010 Ceng
Editorialrevie
290
Chapter 14
a p p a ssa na po nase  a oi pae ar  st sa a '
epididymis is found at the cranial or dorsal aspect. of the testis, the body of the epididymis on the
side, and the tail of the epididymis at the caudal or ventral end of the testis. The natural position
of the testicle varies with species; the testicle is oriented horizontally in the dog, cat, boar, and stal-
lion, and vertically in the bull and ram (see Figure 14.5). The epididymis is a long, coiled tube that.
receives sperm from the testis, stores it, and delivers it to the ductus deferens during ejaculation.
 4. The ductus deferens carries the sperm from the epididymis through the inguinal canal and emp-
ties it into the urethra. As the ductus deferens leaves the testis, it travels within the spermatic cord
under the skin adjacent to the prepuce containing the shaft of the penis, caudally to the scrotum 
(one on each side), through the inguinal canal, and into the abdominal cavity. It is accom panied
by the testicular artery, vein, and nerve as it courses to and through the inguinal canal. Collec-
tively, these structures-covered with the tunica vaginalis visceralis and their serous membranous
attachments, the mesoductus deferens and mesorchium—are called the spermatic cord. Trace
the path of the ductus deferens from the testis through the inguinal canal; then follow it as it.
curves (leaving the artery and vein) and passes into the pelvic canal, where it joins to the urethra
(seeFigure 14.14).
 5. Locate the penis, ventral to the scrotum. The glans penis is the enlargement at the distal end of
the organ. In adult, intact male cats, it possesses numerous rows of proximally directed cornifed
 papillae known as penile spines. After copulation, these spines scrape the walls of the queen's
vagina upon withdrawal of the penis, an act that is in part responsible for inducing ovulation.
The penile spines regress almost completely after castration. The penis's opening to the outside
is called the external urethral orifice. The prepuce is the skin that covers the glans penis.
 6. To dissect the rest. of the male reproductive system, the pelvic cavity must. be exposed. Cut through
the pelvic muscles and the pubic symphysis at the ventral midline. Do not cut the urethra, which lies
canal.
Urinary
 bladder
Testicular
artery
Trigonal
Urethra
area
Ureter
Ductus
deferens
Prostate
 Bulbourethral
gland
Penis
Crus of
penis
Glans
 Spermatic
penis
cord
Testis (out
ofscrotum)
FlGURE 14.14: Ventral view of the male reproductive system of the cat.
Editorialrevie
The Reproductive System 
291
Urinary
bladder
Ureter
 Spermatic
Prostate
cord
 gland 
Urethra
Ductus
Bulbourethral
deferens
 glands
Crus of
Testis
 penis 
Epididymis
Penis
Glans penis
FlGURE 14.15: Dorsal view of the male reproductive tract of the cat.
7. It is now possible to view the entire urethral pathway from the urinary bladder caudally. Trace this
pathway to the penis. From the distal penis working cranially, free the penis from the connective tissue
and cut the crura (singular: crus) of the penis where each attaches to the ischium on both sides. Using
your finger, work cranially and free the rest of the urethra from the underlying colon. Any remaining
connective tissue can be cut away, but make sure it is only connective tissue. The penis and urethra
should now be free and can be rotated so that their dorsal aspects can be viewed.
Immediately cranial and dorsal to the crura of the penis are the paired bulbourethral glands
(Figure 14.15). Carefully dissect the ductus deferens until it reaches its point of attachment to
the dorsolateral surface of the urethra. Locate the prostate gland just caudal to the attachment
of the ductus deferens. The urethra can be divided into three parts: the prostatic urethra, sur-
rounded by the prostate; the membranous urethra, between the prostate and the penis; and the
penile urethra, passing through the penis.
EXERCISE 14.2 DIAGNOSIS OF BREEDING TIME IN THE FEMALE DOG
The estrous cycle of the bitch typically lasts for several weeks; however, the fertile period is short: only
 48 to 72 hours. A female dog may exhibit receptive behavior, which is controlled primarily by changes
in levels of the hormone estrogen, but this does not always coincide exactly with ovulation. Therefore,
a combination of tests can be used to more accurately predict the best time to breed or inseminate a
female dog.
 The vaginal epithelium of the anestrus bitch is made up of noncornified stratified squamous epithe-
lial cells. Under the influence of estrogen, the lining cells begin to cornify (take on keratin) in prepara-
 tion for copulation. Proestrus is the time when the uterine lining, the endormetrium, is developing for
implantation of the embryo. The bitch will typically bleed during this stage because of red blood cell
(RBC) diapedesis, or migration, into the uterine lumen. Vaginal cytology will show many uncornifed
squamous epithelial cells and many RBCs. Proestrus can last anywhere from four to 20 days. During
Editorialrevie
292
Chapter14
Noncornified
epithelial cell
A
 Anestrus
Cornified
Noncornified
epithelial cell
 epithelial cell 
Erythrocytes
Clumps of
erythrocytes
B
Proestrus
and epithelial cells beginning cornification.
Continued
The Reproductive System
293
Cornified 
Pyknotic
épithelial 
nucleus
cell
C
Estrus
 Cornified epithelial cell 
White blood
Noncornified
 cell nuclei
epithelial 
cell
D
Metestrus
FIGURE 14.16; cont'd: The stages of canine estrus as demonstrated by vaginal cytology. C. Estrus:
All cells are cornified, and nuclei are becoming increasingly pyknotic. RBCs are no longer present.
still present. White blood cells are usually numerous; however, on this slide there were few and it was
necessary to go to high power to see them well (this photo was taken with the low power objective).
Editorialrevie
294
Chapter 14
proestrus, the epithelial cells begin to cornify and gradually change from a rounded shape to a more
polygonal shape with rough, angular borders, and they sometimes appear folded (Figure 14.16). The
shrink, becoming pyknotic.
When no more RBCs are visible (occasionally RBCs will persist into estrus) and all the cells are corni
fed, estrus has commenced. Estrus can last anywhere from four to 13 days. The ideal time to breed
 is when the cells' nuclei are completely pyknotic, but this is a subjective determination. Metestrus is
characterized by the presence of white blood cells (WBCs) and new noncornified squamous epithelial
36 hours before the appearance of WBCs in the vaginal smear. Metestrus represents the luteal phase and
begins when the bitch no longer accepts the male. If pregnancy does not occur, metestrus may last up to
two weeks before anestrus or diestrus occurs. Diestrus is a relatively short. phase of quiescence between
estrus cycles in seasonally polyestrus animals.
 Because of the wide variation in the length of the stages of the estrous cycle and the diffculty in
predicting the exact. time for ovulation, we can use serological testing to enhance the accuracy of our
predictions. The following is one method of determining optimal breeding time.
1. On the first day of either noticeable blood spotting or vulvar swelling, perform vaginal cytology.
other day until the vaginal epithelium is 50% cornified.
2. At this stage, start drawing blood daily to test the progesterone level. Prior to LH release, the level
will remain low, generally between 0 and 1.0 ng/ml.
 3. When progesterone rises to a range of 1.5 to 2.0 ng/ml, initiate daily testing of serum LH
(ICG Status-LHTM, Synbiotic Corporation, San Diego, CA). The progesterone will continue to
rise, but it is the initial rise in progesterone that signals the ending of the LH surge. However, there
as Ht au ue aisad u ss isg au uaami a a u op o op  uoa st
Therefore, continue to draw blood and test for LH rise on a daily basis.
4. Ovulation will occur 2 days after the LH surge. The ova then require an additional 2 to 3 days to
mature enough for implantation in the endometrium. Thus, the fertile period falls between 4 and
7 days after the LH surge, with the most-fertile days being days 5 and 6 (the day of the LH surge is
counted as day 0).
 5. The traditional method of counting the gestation period is 63 days from breeding. Using the
LH surge offers a second method. Research has demonstrated that gestation is 65 days in length
(+/- 1 day) from the LH surge. This is true regardless of the day the bitch is bred.
Procedure
1. Using prepared slides, identify all four stages of the estrous cycle: anestrus, proestrus, estrus, and
metestrus.
2. Draw blood from an anestrus dog; perform a progesterone assay.
 3. Draw blood from a dog in heat (if available); perform an LH assay.
4. Record the test results.
Progesterone:
LH:
Questions
1. Will doing these tests one time enable you to predict the optimum time for breeding?
 2. If a dog becomes pregnant and progesterone is continually assayed, what will happen to
progesterone levels over time?
Discussion
Because we are looking for a rise in progesterone and LH, it usually takes two or more samples to
observe this. However, it is possible to draw a sample on the day of LH rise and see an increased LH
The Reproductive System 
295
compared to the predicted normal value in dogs. We could tentatively predict. ovulation time by this
rise in the LH level.
d pe d o p aa lm a sno a ed sq  e  
and level off until near the time of parturition.
linical Significance
Cryptorchidism is a condition in which one or both testes do not descend into the scrotal pouch during
development. ft is an inherited trait and is thought to be due to a single autosomal recessive gene,
although recent research indicates more than one gene may be invoived. Usually, testicie descent
into the scrotum is expected to be complete by two months of age. Absence of palpable testes at two
months is presumptive evidence of cryptorchidism. However, individual dogs have been known to have
Pomeranian, Yorkshire terrier, and other toy and miniature breeds have higher incidences. Unilatera!
cryptorchidism is more common than bilateral (75% of cases are unilateral and 25% bilateral). The right
testis is twice as often retained as the left. The prevalence in the general population of males is 1.2% in
dogs and 1.7% in cats.
Cryptorchid testes are usually retained just caudal to the inguinal ring, within the inguinal ring, or
Ultrasound is the other method of determining the position of a retained testis.
The treatment is castration of both testes. Orchiopexy, the surgical placement of a retained testis
into the scrotum, is considered unethical because it masks an inherited condition. Castration is strongly
recommended to owners, because of the increased incidence of tumor formation in retained testes.
Owners are encouraged to castrate before the animal is four years old. Fifty-three percent of sertoli
cefl tumors and 36% of seminomas are found in cryptorchid testes. The risk of testicular neoplasia is
approximately f0 times greater in a cryptorchid testis than in normal testes.
eterinary
ignettes
nen the owner of a practice considers himself a horse doctor and you are the newest
vet on the block (or in this case, in the hospital, you get all the cow, sheep. pig. and 
 goat work. I pulled so many calves and did so many Cesarian sections on cows that I
 C on my scrub shirt. A significant proportion of my work was done on just one farm, whose owner 
had decided that maximum weight at weaning was better for the bottom line. Of course, any extra
 profit he made was being eaten up in veterinary bills. But being a pseudo-scientist and following a
Copyright 2010 Ceng
296
Chapter 14
strict protocol for breeding. he was determined to make this work. He was doing a breeding program 
 called a three-breed reciprocal cross: He was trying to maximize weight at birth, milk production,
and weaning weight.
Istudied this during my master's degree work in genetics using Hereford, Angus, and milking
Shorthorn cattle. He was using Simmental, Hereford, and Angus stock. It was the Simmental genes
he was counting on to give the increase in size, but the small Angus cows and young Hereford 
heifers did not have the pelvic size to expel a 110-lb calf. The results were disastrous.
Iwas putting in the last suture on a spayed animal when the receptionist said, "Dr. C., Mr. Barkley
is on the phone; another of his cows is having trouble giving birth, he says."
"Ask him to wait a few minutes and I'll talk to him," I told her.
Within 10 minutes, I was in my truck heading for Barkley Breeding Farm with all possible haste.
I have always thought there should be a special flashing green light veterinarians can put on their
limit, but it would alert people to a doctor on his way to an emergency. I guess we could let people 
doctors use it too.
Wvhen I arrived, they had the cow in a large stallin the barn (at least at this place I didn't have to
play cowboy and rope it firsty. Sure enough, it was a small Hereford cow, bred to a Simmental bull.
I expected to see the calf's front legs protruding from the vulva; then I could reach inside, find the
head, and pullit out. In this case, there was nothing presenting at all.
a poi aeg a .'l uani oi pat pue u yoea ll pausnd am os 'ishly shal puy buuoo sem i,
while looking toward the ceiing of the barn.
well, and pushed my arm through the vagina and up into the uterus. Being tall, thin, and lanky, I had 
the perfect build for this type of work. First, I located the calfs hind legs and tail, then worked my way
forward along the back until I found the neck and head. Then I felt it! vwvhat the heck? I thought (or
words to that effect). wwhy is the cow's spleen next to the calf's head? I quickly realized that they had
pushed the calf so hard trying to turn it that it had ripped through the uterus and was now partly in 
the abdominal cavity. I wasn't sure if it was dead or alive.
 pue peau sgeo aul pue 'uado uoi s! lem auuain aul 'uonas ueesag e op oi aaey oi buloh w,l,
me he knew he had screwed up.
wvhenever a calf was dead in this situation, I would use a fetatome to cut it up and take it out in
pieces. But in this case, it wouldn't matter I was still going to have to open up the cow to repair the 
its cranial tip into the pelvic canal. Most of the calf was in the abdomen, and it was dead, and had
been for some time. I had to struggle to remove it because of its size and the stiffness of its muscles.
I set it on the ground behind me.
"Push on its chest and see if you can get it breathing." Mr. Barkley shouted.
subag slou lobu uaum jeut aouaadxa Au uaag s,ll ina, pies I .'uouido Auo sl sut 'noA puin,
to set in, we rarely are able to bring them back. Sorry, Mr. Barkley this one's dead."
I double-sutured the uterus, using an inverting suture pattern on the second row to turn the
serosa inward to ensure a good seal and prevent adhesions.
"lf I were you, Mr. Barkley, because of the long tear in the uterus, I would cull this cow.," I told him.
"Even though I did my best in suturing the uterus closed, I don't know if it would support another
pregnancy."
I left, thinking he would abide by my advice. A year later, I got a phone call from none other than
Mr. Barkley. "Hey Doc, you know that cow you told me to cull? wwell, you were wrong. It just had the
nicest looking calf you'll ever see! Thanks, Doc!"
 Sometimes it's nice to be wrong.
The Reproductive System 
297
SUMMARY
This chapter covered the anatomy of the female and male reproductive systems through
examination of diagrams and by dissection of a cat. You learned the functional anatomy
of both the testes and the ovaries. The processes of ovum and sperm development were
included. Emphasis was placed on the comparative anatomy of the genital systems of various
the dog was discussed in detail. In the discussion and exercise you learmed how to identify
the various stages of the estrous cycle through the use of vaginal cytology and a serum
chemistry method to obtain more accurate predictions of the time of breeding. The anatomy
and different accessory sex organs of the male were also described.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. The target organs, the testes and ovaries, are both endocrine and reproductive; therefore
they have two types of products; what are they?
Define copulation.
3.
 Where does the union of sperm and ovum occur?
 Define gestation period and parturition.
5. What is the mature follicle called?
6.
 Name the two structural stages of the life of the follicle after it has released the ovum,
providing pregnancy does not occur
 Name the three parts of the uterus.
8.
 Describe the layers of the uterine wall, moving from the lumen to the exterior.
9.
 Name the types of uteri in domestic animals, and indicate which type occurs in which
species of animal.
10.
 Describe the areas of the vulva.
11.
 What is the broad ligament, and what are the parts of its mesentery?
12.
Name the three parts of the epididymis.
13.
 Name the parts of the spermatic cord.
14.
 Name the accessory sex glands in the male.
15.
What are the names of the erectile tissue of the penis?
16. What is the function of the bulbus glandis?
 17. Differentiate between induced ovulators and spontaneous ovulators, and indicate which
types of animal fall within these two categories.
18.
 Name the stages of the estrous cycle.
19.
 Name the layers of the placenta.
20.
 Describe the four types of placentation, and indicate which animals fall within each of
these types.
21.
 In the dog, what is considered the first definitive sign of impending parturition?
22.
 Name the parts of the sperm.
23.
What is cryptorchidism?
24.
 Why is castration rather than an orchiopexy performed in veterinary medicine as a treat-
ment for cryptorchidism? What may be the sequelae if a cryptorchid testis is not excised?
CHAPTER 15
THE NErVOUS SYSTEM
OBJECTIVES
 describe the anatomy of a neuron and a nerve using diagrams or a prepared slide
understand the reflex arc from the sensory afferent nerve fibers, through the spinal cord, to the efferent.
nerve fbers
 understand the mechanism of a nerve impulse
 locate and name the major anatomical structures of the sheep's brain and meninges
explain the function of each part. of the brain
 locate and name the major nerves of the peripheral nervous system
 understand the transmission of an impulse across a synapse
understand and describe the flow of cerebrospinal fluid from its origin
 name the cranial nerves and describe their functions
MATERIALS
 compound microscope
 prepared slide of a giant multipolar neuron and cross section of mammal spinal cord
cat cadaver, triple injected (order without skin attached)
sheep brains
Mayo dissecting scissors
probe
1 × 2 thumb forceps or Adson tissue forceps
 #4 scalpel handle with blade
 bone cutting forceps
rubber gloves
percussion hammer
jive dog or cat.
INTRODUCTION
The nervous system is the master integrating and coordinating unit of the body. It is
continuously monitoring sensory input from internal systems and from the extermal
environment, then processing this information. All thoughts, actions, and perceived
sensations are a reflection of the nervous system's activity.
The nervous system can be divided into two parts: the central nervous system (cNS) and
the PNS consists of the spinal nerves from the spinal cord and the cranial nerves from the
brain. The PNs can also be divided functionally into the autonomic nervous system, which acts
automatically, and the somatic nervous system, which involves controlled muscular actiorn.
Nervous tissue has just two different classes of cells: neurons and their supporting cells.
include astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglia, and ependymal cells (Figure 15.1). They hold
the neurons and their processes in place and have been described as nerve glue, which is the
meaning of the word neuroglia. Supporting cells of the PNS are Schwann cells and satellite
298
Editorial revie
The Nerus System  299
Neuron Capillary Astrocyte
Microglial cell
Neuron
Process of
Fluid-filled cavity
oligodendrocyte
Myelin
sheath
Nerve
Ependymal
 Brain or spinal
7fibers
cells
cord tissue
FlGURE 15.1: Supporting cells of the nervous system (all species).
cells. They serve neurons by acting as phagocytes and by bracing, protecting, and myelinating
the neurons' tiny, delicate fibers.
In addition, these support cells play a role in the exchange between local capillaries
and neurons to control the surrounding chemical environment. Although the neuroglia
resemble the neurons (because of their fibrous cellular extensions), they cannot generate or
occasions, they may be the source of tumor development.
In the exercises in this chapter the important structures are listed in colored bold print. If
a structure is mentioned prior to its dissection, it is italicized. Structures discussed before
dissection may also be in bold print for special emphasis
EXERCISE 15.1 THE NEURON
 The neuron is the basic structural unit of nervous tissue (Figure 15.2). Neurons transmit messages as
nerve impulses from one part of the body to another. Although neurons in different parts of the body
differ structurally, they have a number of commonly identifiable features, which are discussed in the
following text.
The cell body is where the nucleus is located, and the slender processes, or fibers, extend from it.
The cell bodies can be found within the CNS or outside of it. Ganglia (singular: ganglion) are small
masses of nervous tissue, containing primarily the cell bodies of neurons, that are located outside the
brain and spinal cord. Collections of nerve cell bodies within the CNS constitute the gray matter.
Within the cell body of a neuron, neurofibrils can be found in the cytoplasm. These are the cytoskel-
etal elements of the neuron that help with support and intracellular transport. Also visible are Nissl
(chromatophilic) bodies, which are elaborate types of endoplasmic reticulum involved in the metabolic 
activities of the cell.
Extending from the cell body are the neuron's processes, or fibers, which can take a variety of forms.
 Dendrites are the receptive region of the neuron, as they bear receptors for neurotransmitter substances
released from adjoining axons and conduct the nerve impulse toward the cell body. Neurons have
many dendrites.
Axons are another type of process. Generally axons carry impulses in one direction only: away from
the cell body. However, we now know that some axons transmit impulses both to and from the cell body
 Therefore, axons are now defi ned as nerve impulse generators and transmitters.
Editorialrevie
300
Chapter 15
Dendrite
Nucleus of
cell body
Nissl bodies
Myelin
Neurofibrils
sheath 
Axonhillock
Neurilemma
(sheath of
Schwann
Schwann)
cell--
Axon
covered
with myelin
Collateral
 sheath and 
 branch 
neurilemma
Node of
Ranvier
Axon
terminals
U.
FIGURE 15.2: The structure of a neuron (all species).
Neurons are classified as unipolar, bipolar, and multipolar (Figure 15.3). Unipolar neurons are
sensory neurons that originate in the embryo as bipolar neurons. During development, the axon and
dendrite fuse to form a single process that divides into two branches a short distance from the cell body.
 Both branches function together as an axon. The branch that extends to the periphery at its distal tip
has unmyelinated dendrites attached. The other branch extends into the CNS and synapses with other
neurons.
 Bipolar neurons have one main dendrite and one axon. They are found in the retina of the eye, in
the inner ear, and in the olfactory area of the brain. Multipolar neurons usually have several dendrites
and one axon. Most neurons of the brain and spinal cord are of this type. Even though multipolar
neurons have only one axon, the axon may branch into collaterals. Note that the term nerve fiber is a
synonym for axon and is thus quite specific.
Neurons communicate with one another or with cells of other tissues (such as muscle) by transmitting
 impulses from the terminal end of the axon (axon terminal) to another neuron's dendrite (Figure 15.4)
 or to another type of cell. The terminal end of an axon meets a dendrite at a synapse. These axon
terminals have synaptic vesicles containing the neurotransmitter substance, and numerous mitochon-
dria for energy. The membrane of the axon terminal is called the presynaptic membrane. When the
 nerve impulse reaches the axon terminals, some of the vesicles release the neurotransmitter substance
to diffuse across the synaptic cleft (the tiny gap between the presynaptic membrane of an axon and
the postsynaptic membrane of the dendrite). This substance then stimulates the dendrite, and thus
the impulse is picked up and carried to the receiving nerve's cell body. It was long thought that each
type of axon produced only one neurotransmitter, but we now know that axons may produce two or
three different. types of neurotransmitter substances, each with its own specific synaptic vesicle.
Editorial review
The Nervous System 301
Cell body
Dendrites
Trigger
Dendrites
Dendrite
zoné
 Cell body
 Cell body
Trigger
zoné
Axon
Axon
Trigger
zone
Axon
Axon
Axon
Axon
terminal
terminal
terminal
Multipolar neuron
Bipolar neuron 
Unipolar neuron
FlGURE 15.3: Structural classification of neurons.
Cell process-
Nucleus
Nucleolus
Dendrite
Nerve cell body
Axon
Axon hillock
Neurofibrils
FIGURE 15.4: Neuron cell bodies and their processes.
Procedure
1. First, examine the giant multipolar neuron smear slide using the 10X objective lens. Locate a large, dark-
blue motor neuron. Center the neuron in your feld of vision and change to the 40X objective lens.
2. Note the distinct separation between the blue and the pink background at the cell boundary. This
is the plasma mermbrane. The details of this membrane are not visible using the light microscope.
These cells have numerous cytoplasmic extensions called cell processes. Some of these processes
were cut off during the sectioning of the tissue. Each cell, if sliced perfectly down the middle, would
have a long process called an axon, and numerous shorter ones called dendrites.
Editorialre
302
Chapter 15
Axon
Axonal
Direction 
terminal
Mitochondrion
of nerve
impulse
Vesicles containing
neurotransmitter chemicals
Membrane of
Presynaptic membrane
postsynaptic
Synaptic cleft
neuron
FIGURE 15.5: A synapse.
 If you are using a slide stained specifically for RNA, the nucleus (with mostly DNA) has a halo appear-
ance around the RNA-rich nucleolus (the dark dot in the center). The nuclear mermbrane will not be
visible on an RNA slide (Figure 15.5) unless it is stained with hematoxylin and eosin stain. Observe the
granular structures within the cytoplasm; these are the Nissl bodies. Now look for neurofibrils, which
are linear, darkly stained structures often found at the widened area where the axon leaves the cell body
(the axon hillock).
The Nerve Impulse
Neurons have two major physiological properties:
3L
hillivolts
+20
 Depolarization 
They are excitable (can convert stimuli into a nerve
+10-
phase
impulse), and they are conductive (can transmit. the
wu!
 Repolarization
impulse). The following characteristics differentiate
-10
phase
tential
a nerve impulse from an electric impulse that runs
-20
through a wire:
pot
-30
After-
1. Nerve impulses are based on ion move-
40
/hyperpolarizing
-50
phase
ment rather than electron movement.
m
Threshold
-60
 2. Nerve impulses are slower than electric
Resting
-70
impulses.
Stimulus
 membrane
potential
 3. Nerve impulses are active and self-
6
C
d
Time in miliseconds (msec)
propagating.
 4. Nerve impulses require energy in the
FIGURE 15.6: The action potential, or nerve impulse,
form of ATP.
and its phases. A. During resting membrane potential
 5. Nerve impulses move at a constant.
the voltage-gated Nat channels are resting and volt-
amplitude and velocity.
age-gated K+ channels are closed. B. Rise to threshold 
potential: Sufficient stimulus causes depolarization to
A nerve impulse is described as an action
the threshold potential. C. Depolarization: The voltage-
potential (Figure 15.6). The difference in charge
gated Nat channels' activation gates are open. Part C
on two sides of a cell membrane results in a volt-
 age known as the resting mermbrane potential, and a
neuron in this state is polarized. This resting poten-
ization: The Voltage-gated K+ channels are open; Na+
channels are inactivating. E. After hyper-polarization:
tial, measured across the axonal cell membrane,
is approximately -70 millivolts (mV). The value is
voltage-gated K+ channels are still open; Na+ channels 
negative because the inside of the nerve cell mem-
are in a resting state. Parts D and E represent the rela-
brane is negatively charged relative to the exterior
tive refractory period.
Editorialreviewha
The Nervous System 303
because of an excess of cations in the extracellular
voltage-gated K+ channels close, the membrane
fluid (ECF), especially sodium (Na+).
'umau [id e un A o- on suan euod
At rest, the plasma membrane is virtually
the entire action potential lasts about 1l msec, or
 impermeable to sodium. A balance is maintained
0.001 seconds.
(by an active sodium-potassium pump) in which
When the Nat is rushing in, the neuron is totally
there are more potassium ions (K+) inside the
insensitive to additional stimuli and is said to be in
cell and more sodium ions (Na+) outside the cell.
an absolute refractory period. During the period
When an axon receives a stimulus, the plasma
of repolarization, it is nearly insensitive to further
membrane briefly becomes more permeable, and
 stimuli; however, a very strong stimulus may reacti-
sodium rushes into the cell, resulting in more pos-
vate it. This period is called the relative refractory
itive ions inside the cell (the chloride ions [Cl-] in
period. The sodium-potassium pump reestablishes
the extracellular fluid stay outside the cell). Thus,
the ionic balance soon after the action potential is
the interior of the cell starts to become less nega-
completed, and because only minute amounts of
tive, and the outside less positive. This process is
sodium and potassium ions change places, once
called depolarization.
repolarization is completed, the neuron can quickly
 If the stimulus is strong enough to depolarize
respond again to a stimulus.
the membrane to a critical level, called a threshold
Once generated, the action potential is self-
(approximately -55 mV), voltage-gated Na+ chan-
 propagating: It spreads along the entire length of
nels (special gates that open and close to allow ions
the nerve fiber. It is never partially transmitted but is
to pass) rapidly start to open. Both the electrical and
an all-or-none response (see previous discussion of
chemical gradients favor inward diffusion of Na+;
 this concept). The nerve impulse is the propagation
this initiates the depolarizing phase of the action
of the action potential in which the disruption of
potential. The inflow of Na+ becomes so large that.
the membrane permeability in one area of the axon
the membrane potential passes 0 mV and rises to
causes disruption of the membrane permeability
+ 30 mV. Action potentials arise according to the
of the distal adjacent axonal area. This initiates
all-or-none principle: Once depolarization reaches
another action potential in that axonal area, which 
the threshold an action potential occurs that is
stimulates the next axonal area, and so on down the
always the same size in terms of amplitude. Differ-
axon. Because these axonal areas are small, propa-
ent neurons may have different thresholds for the
gation (and thus nerve impulse conduction) is slow
generation of action potentials, but the threshold in 
under these circumstances.
any one neuron is usually constant.
As an animal develops and grows, either in utero
or early in life, the nerves become myelinated. This
voltage-gated K+ channels are opening. This pro-
results in faster nerve transmission and increased
 duces the repolarizing phase of the action potential
coordination. Animals that need to run immediately
 and a process called repolarization. With the slow-
after birth to survive are born with fully myelinated
ing of Na+ influx and the acceleration of K+ outflow,
nerves; others, such as kittens, do not complete
the membrane changes from +30 mV to -70 mV.
myelination of motor neurons until 4 to 6 weeks
However, the voltage-gated K+ channels continue to
of age. Figure 15.7 shows a rmyelin sheath around
allow K+ to flow out; this overshoot is called after-
an axon. Myelin is a fatty substance within Schwann
hyperpolarization of the action potential. As the
cells that segmentally envelopes the axon for its
Plasma
Neurilemma
membrane
Myelin sheath
Schwann cell
cytoplasm
-Nucleus
Schwann cells that make 
Axon at node
up the myelin sheath 
of Ranvier
FIGURE 15.7: Axon with Schwann cells.
Editorialrevie
304
Chapter 15
entire length. The areas between the Schwann cells
 In other words, the impulse jumps from node to
are called nodes of Ranvier (or neurofbril nodes).
node, progressing down the axon at a very fast.
In myelinated nerves, these nodes act as the adja
rate, especially when compared to an unmyelinated
cent axonal area in which propagation occurs.
nerve fber.
EXERCISE 15.2 DISSECTION OF THE PERIPHERAL NERVES
 e  nia       s  n s s ae ae 
racic, seven lumbar, three sacral, and seven coccygeal nerves. The first pair of cervical spinal nerves
exits the atlas through the lateral vertebral foramina; the second pair exits between the atlas (Cl) and
the axis (C2). Each spinal cord segment produces a pair of spinal nerves; for example, cord segment C6
eight pairs of spinal nerves. From T1 to L2 in the dog, and to L3 in the cat, the cord segment is located
entirely within its associated vertebrae; in other words, inside the seventh thoracic vertebra is cord seg-
 rd aau ls sd ee  a
From Cl caudally, each spinal nerve emerges from the intervertebral foramen between its associated
vertebra and the next one or, in other words, just caudal to its associated vertebra. Continuing with the
previous example, T7 exits the vertebral column just. caudal to the seventh thoracic vertebra (between
the seventh and eighth thoracic vertebra). Caudal to L2, more than one cord segment can be found
within the vertebral bodies (Table 15.1)
Even though the cord segments lie within a more cranial vertebra, their spinal nerves still exit caudal
to the associated vertebral body. This means the nerves travel down the vertebral canal to reach the
proper intervertebral foramen. Collectively, these spinal nerves come off the end of the spinal cord to
form the cauda equina, so named for its resemblance to a horse's tail (Figure 15.8).
Procedure
 1. As the spinal nerves emerge from the intervertebral foramina, they divide to form a dorsal ramus
and a ventral rarmus. The ventral rami form the major plexuses, the brachial and lumbosacral
plexuses, which supply nerves to the front legs and hind legs as well as to the skin and muscula-
ture of the ventral trunk. The dorsal rami are smaller and supply only the skin and musculature of
the back.
 2. The frst four cervical nerves supply the lateral neck musculature. It is not necessary to locate
these nerves.
TABLE 15.1: Relationship between Vertebral Bodies and Cord Segments
Vertebral Body
Cord Segment
Dog
L1
L1
L2
L2
L3
L3, L4*
L4
L5*,L6*十, L7十
L5
S1++, S2+, S3#
L6
Ca++ (Cy++), all caudal (all coccygeal)
Cat
Cord segments S1, S2, and S3 are located either within L6 or at the L5, L6
junction.
*Patellar reflexes {includes L4, L5, L6 cord segments)
+Pedal reflexes {includes L6, L7, S1 cord segments)
+Perineal reflexes (includes S1, S2, S3 cord segments)
Editorialrevie
The Nervous System 305
Dorsal root n. T11
T11
T12
Dura mater
T13
L1
N. L1
Ventral br.
Dorsal br.
L2
L3
L4
$1
L5
Segment Ca1
Segment Ca5
L6
L7
N. L7
N.S1
Cauda equina
S1,2,3
N. Ca1
Ca1
Ca2
Ca3
Ca4
N. Ca5
Ca5
Caudal ligament
Ca6
FlGURE 15.8: Spinal cord segment's placement within the spinal vertebrae and the cauda equina
of the dog.
 3. The phrenic nerve was identified during the dissection of the respiratory system. The two phrenic
 i  a a n e s  ru     a a   s 
to the diaphragm.
 4. The sixth through eighth cervical nerves and frst thoracic nerve form the brachial plexus, which
supplies nerves to the muscles of the front leg. This plexus was exposed during the dissection of the
chest and arm muscles. In your previous dissection, we tried to preserve the nerves on the right front.
leg by only dissecting the vessels on the left. Therefore, carefully cut through the pectoralis muscle
 group on the right side of the cat's chest. until these nerves are exposed.
 5. The most. cranial of the nerves of the brachial plexus that we will dissect is the musculocutaneous
nerve (Figures 15.9 and 15.10). This small nerve may be identifed as it passes along the medial
edge of the biceps brachii muscle. This nerve supplies the biceps, coracobrachialis, and brachialis
muscles.
Editorialrevie
306
Chapter 15
Suprascapular n.
Subscapularn.
Axillary n.
Musculocutaneousn.
Radial n.
Median n.
Ulnar n.
FlGURE 15.9: Diagram of the nerves of the brachial plexus of a cat.
 6. The deepest of the nerves is dorsal and cranial to the brachial artery and passes between the triceps and
the humerus: the radial nerve. It is the largest nerve of the plexus. Follow this nerve as it passes to the
lateral surface of the upper leg and trace it distally. Near the elbow it divides into a superficial branch
 7. Coursing adjacent and cranial to the brachial artery is the medlian nerve. Follow it to the elbow region,
through the supracondyloid foramen in the humerus, and to the forearm. It supplies the pronators
and flexors of the lower forelimb, except for the flexor carpi ulnaris.
8. The ulnar nerve is the most caudal nerve of the brachial plexus that we will dissect. It emerges from its
course adjacent. to the median nerve and runs caudally from the brachial artery to the carpus. It passes
between the medial epicondyle of the humerus and the olecranon process of the ulna at. the elbow.
sd n rx  p paq e a pe s ie xa al sans au s
 9. The next. 12 thoracic nerves pass between the ribs, each with an artery and vein. They are known as
the intercostal nerves, and they supply the intercostal muscles.
10. The sciatic nerve is the major nerve emerging from the lumbosacral plexus (Figures 15.11 and 15.12).
This plexus is made up of the last four lumbar nerves and the three sacral nerves. Locate the sciatic
nerve beneath the biceps femoris muscle. Trace it. to the popliteal fossa, where it divides into two
Editorialr
The Nery0us System   307
Subscapular
Axillary
nerve
nerve
Musculocutaneous
Biceps brachii Radial Median Ulnar
nerve
muscle
nerve  nerve nerve
FlGURE 15.10: The nerves of the brachial plexus of a cat.
Sciatic nerve
 Adductor femoris m.
Muscular branch
Biceps femoris muscle
Common peroneal n:
FlGURE 15.11: Diagram of the sciatic nerve of the lumbosacral plexus of a cat.
branches, which supply the leg. This nerve supplies the flexor muscles of the stifle, extensors of the
hock, and the digital flexors.
11. The femoral nerve also emerges from the lumbosacral plexus. This nerve can be located on the
cles (Figures 15.13 and 15.14). It supplies the sartorius muscles and the quadriceps femoris group
Editorial
308
Chapter 15
Greater trochanter
Biceps femoris
Sciatic
muscle (reflected)
nerve
FlGURE 15.12: The sciatic nerve of a cat.
Sympathetic chain
Lateral cutaneous n.
Femoral nerve
Lumbosacral cord
Obturator nerve
Muscularbranches
 Femoral artery
and vein
FIGURE 15.13: Diagram of the femoral and obturator nerves of a cat.
Editorial
The Nervous System 309
Lumbosacral cord
Lateral cutaneous  Femoral  Obturator  Femoral
nerve
nerve
nerve
artery
(cut)
FlGURE 15.14: The femoral and obturator nerves of a cat.
(the extensors of the stifle). It continues as the saphenous nerve to supply the skin on the medial
aspect of the leg. Trace the femoral nerve cranially to where it enters the ventral back muscles.
Separate these muscles and continue the dissection to the femoral nerve's origin with other lum-
bar nerves. Follow these nerves caudally, finding the separation between the lumbosacral cord and
the obturator nerve (see Figures 15.13 and 15.14). The obturator nerve supplies the adductors,
 pectineus, and gracilis.
12. The autonomic nervous system of the cat will not be dissected. Without dissection, you can observe
(in the thoracic cavity) the two sympathetic trunks, or chains, located on each side of the vertebral
column. Push the left lung to the right and locate the sympathetic trunks on the dorsal wall of the
thoracic cavity. The sympathetic trunks are beneath the parietal pleura, parallel to the vertebral
column. They resemble white threads.
13. The cranial nerves also will not be dissected. The vagus nerve, or cranial nerve X (CN10), has
been noted previously, as it. courses adjacent to and is attached to the common carotid arteries 
on both sides.
The Cranial Nerves
The Autonomic Nervous System
 The cranial nerves are the nerves of the peripheral
The autonomic nervous system is divided into the
nervous system that. come from the brain and the
sympathetic and parasysmpathetic nervous systems.
 brain stem. Each of these nerves is either sensory,
Figure 15.15A illustrates the neuronal arrangement.
motor, or both (if they have multiple functions).
of the somatic, sympathetic, and parasympathetic
They may have autonomic function or may be
nerves. The parasysmpathetic nerves arise from the
voluntary. Table 15.2 lists the numbers and cor-
cranial nerves and sacral nerves. The sympathetic
responding names of each of these nerves, its
nerves arise from the thoracic and lumbar spinal
type, and its key function (s). Table 15.3 has two
nerves (Figure 15.15B).
mnemonic devices for remembering the name and
 The sympathetic nerves' presynaptic fbers syn-
type of each nerve.
apse at the sympathetic chain or other ganglia,
Editorialrevie
310
Chapter 15
TABLE 15.2: Names and Functions of the 12 Cranial Nerves
Number
Name
Type
Key Function
Olfactory
Sensory
Smell
Optic
Sensory
Vision
Oculomotor
Motor
Eye movement, pupil size, focusing lens
IV
Trochlear
Motor
Eye movement
V
Trigeminal
Both
 Sensations from the head and teeth, chewing
VI
Abducens
Motor
Eye movement
Vll
 Facial
Both
 Face and scalp movement, salivation, tears, taste
VIII
Vestibulocochlear
Sensory
Balance and equilibrium, hearing
IX
Glossopharyngeal
Both
Tongue movement, swallowing, salivation, taste
X
Vagus
Both
 Sensory from Gl tract and respiratory tree; motor
to larynx, pharynx; parasympathetic motor to the
abdominal and thoracic organs
IX
Accessory
Motor
Head movement
Xll
Hypoglossal
Motor
Tongue movement
TABLE 15.3: Mnemonics for Remembering Cranial Nerve Names and Types
Number
Name
 Name-Mnemonic
Type-Mnemonic
Word
Word
Olfactory
on
six
Optic
old
sailors
Oculomotor
 Oregon's (Oklahoma's, Olympus's, etc.)
made
IV
Trochlear
towering
merry
V
Trigeminal
tops
but
VI
Abducens
a
my
VlI
 Facial
fine
brother
VIII
Vestibulocochlear
 veterinary
said
IX
 Glossopharyngeal
 gastroenterologist
bad
X
Vagus
viewed
business
XI
Accessory
my
XII
Hypoglossal
horse
man
and use acetylcholine as the neurotransmitter at.
fully turned on, and the parasympathetic turned
this junction (see Figure 15.15A). The postsynaptic
off. The cow's heart rate increases; the force of
fibers innervate organs of the chest and abdomen
its heart contractions increases; the bronchioles
and use norepinephrine as the neurotransmitter.
dilate; the pupils dilate; its gastrointestinal motil-
The parasympathetic nerves' presynaptic fbers are
ity shuts down; the diameter of blood vessels in the
long and synapse at or just below the surface of the
skin decreases; the diameter of vessels in muscles
 organ they innervate. A short postsynaptic fiber
increases; and the diameter of vessels in the kidneys
innervates the organ. Both use acetylcholine as the
decreases.
neurotransmitter.
Conversely, a cow lying down in the field, relaxed
The easiest way to remember the effects of the
and chewing its cud, isin the exact opposite situation:
 sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems
The cow's parasympathetic nervous system is active.
is to think about which system is active in a given
The cow's heart rate is decreased; the bronchioles
set of circumstances. Consider a cow being chased
constrict slightly; the pupils constrict slightly; and
by wolves: The cow's sympathetic nervous system is
gastrointestinal blood flow, motility, and secretions
Editorialrevie
The Nervous System 311
Peripheralnervoussystem
Autonomic nervous system
Somatic
Sympathetic
 Parasympathetic
motor neuron
neuron
neuron
Preganglionic
neuron
Acetylcholine
Synapse in
ganglion or
sympathetic
chain
Postganglionic
neuron
Acetylcholine
Norepinephrine
Acetylcholine
Synapse at
 target tissue
Skeletal muscle 
 Smooth muscle,
Acetylcholine
 cardiac muscle,
 organs, and glands
Smooth muscle, cardiac 
A
muscle, organs, and glands
PARASYMPATHETIC
SYMPATHETIC
Ciliary ganglion CN II
Y
Midbrain
 Pterygopalatine 
ganglion
Zygomatic gland
CN YIl!?
Pons
Mandibular
qanglion
CN VIl-
Medulla
Sublingual
C1.
salivary gland
CN X Neck r
Heart
Parotid
salivary gland
Mandibular
Forelimb
 salivary gland 
Lungs
Liver
Lungs
Stomach
Heart-
Body wall
Spleen
Diaphragm
Stomach
Pancreas
Liver
-Spleen
Large
intestine
Pancreas
Small
intestine
Intestines
Kidney
Kidney
Hindlimk
Bladder
Bladder
 Celiac ganglion
 Cranial mesenteric ganglion
 Caudal mesenteric ganglion
 Sympathetic
 chain
 Preganglionic neurons 
B
- Postganglionic neurons
and postganglionic innervation.
Editorial
312
Chapter 15
(including saliva) increase. There is no significant.
 2. The parietal lobe also contains part of the
effect on the force of heart contractions or on the
motor cortex, as well as the somesthetic
diameter of blood vessels in the skin, muscle, or
interpretation center, which con trols
kidneys. If a drug such as atropine (called a para-
conscious perception and localization of
sympatholytic), which turns off the parasympathetic
 pain, touch, and temperature.
nervous system, is given to an animal, the sympa-
3. The occipital lobe is associated with visual
thetic nervous system will take over. Heart rate will
interpretation.
increase and mucous membranes will become dry,
 4. The temporal lobe is associated with
among other effects.
auditory function, behavior, and
memory.
Anatomy and Physiology of the Brain
5. The piriform lobe is found on the ventral
The regions of the brain originate in the embryo.
surface of the cerebrum and is associated
They are discussed in the following text.
with olfaction (Figure 15.16).
 The telencephalon is composed of the cerebrum,
 The major connection between the right and left.
or cerebral hemispheres. These are divided into
functional lobes, which roughly correspond to the
cerebral hemispheres is the corpus callosum. Ven-
 tral to the corpus callosum and septum pellucidum
area of the cerebrum underlying the bone of the
is the body of the fornix. The fornix is the white
same name.
 matter connection between the hippocampal gyrus
1. The frontal lobe contains the part of the
and nearby areas, such as the mammillary body and
motor cortex associated with volun tary
the brain stem.
movement, as well as areas associated with
Other areas of the brain include the diencepha-
 psychomotor skills.
lon, which consists mainly of the thalamus but also
Occipital lobe Parietal lobe
Frontal lobe
Prefrontal
area
Cerebellum
Olfactory Olfactory
tract
bub
Temporal lobe Piriform lobe
Medulla oblongata
Occipital lobe
 Temporal lobe Parietal lobe Frontal lobe
FGURE 15.16: The lobes of the cerebrum of a sheep.
Editorialrevie
The Nervous System 313
includes smaller areas of the epithalarmus, subthala-
The embryonic rhombencephalon (hindbrain)
mus, metathalamus, and hypothalamus. The thala-
develops into the metencephalon and myelencepha-
mus functions as a sensory relay center; it receives
lon. The metencephalon consists of the cerebellum
general sensory impulses and transmits them to the
dorsally and the pons ventrally. The cerebellum has
telencephalon. The other parts of the diencephalon
a cortex and a medulla made up of white matter,
also act as relay centers. The hypothalamus consists
 which, on a cut surface, has a branching appearance
of the optic chiasm, tuber cinereum, mammillary
and is called the arbor vitae. The cerebellum is con-
body, infundibulum, and hypophysa. The functions
nected by the rostral, middle, and caudal cerebellar
of the hypothalamus were discussed in Chapter 13
peduncles to the cerebral peduncle, pons, and brain
on the endocrine system. The diencephalon and
stem, respectively. The cerebellum coordinates
telencephalon together may be referred to as the
motor activity. The pons is visible on the ventral sur-
forebrain.
face, rostral to the brain stem. It is a mixture of white
The mesencephalon, or midbrain, is located
matter and gray matter and contains the ascending
immediately caudal to the diencephalon and con-
reticular activating system (ARAS). The ARAS main-
sists of the corpora quadrigemina (made up of the
tains alertness or awareness by way of the cerebrum,
rostral and caudal colliculi) and the paired cerebral
and it controls the apneustic center and pneumot.
peduncles. The rostral colliculi are associated with
axic center (for respiration), the nuclei of the ves-
vision, and the caudal colliculi with hearing. The
tibular apparatus, and the motor nucleus of cranial
cerebral peduncles are essentially the continuation
nerve 5 (CN V) . The myelencephalon is the medulla
of the right and left. halves of the spinal cord and
oblongata, or brain stem. It contains the center for
brain stem into the respective cerebral hemispheres.
heart functions, as well as centers for respiration,
They contain nerve fber tracts and nuclei.
swallowing, and vomiting.
EXERCISE 15.3 ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN
Procedure
1. Obtain a preserved sheep's brain and rinse it with tap water.
dura mater is intimately attached to the inside of the skull, but there is a slight space between it and
the vertebral canal where it. covers the spinal cord. Carefully remove this covering. The dura mater
contains a longitudinal fold, called the falx cerebri, which penetrates into the longitudinal fissure
 between the two cerebral hemispheres. The transverse fold separating the cerebrum from the cer-
ebellum is the tentorium cerebelli. The pituitary gland will break off from the infundibulum during
the removal of the dura mater.
The inner two layers of the meninges can now be seen covering the brain. The arachnoid, or middle
layer, lies between the dura mater and the pia mater, the innermost, vascular layer of the meninges
(these layers also cover the spinal cord). The arachnoid is easily distinguished from the pia mater in
the region overlying the grooves on the brain surface because the pia mater dips into the grooves
and the arachnoid traverses them (see Figure 15.18). The subarachnoid space is filled with cere
brospinal flhuid, which has been removed from this specimen; in the preserved brain, the arachnoid
appears to be attached to the pia mater.
3. Place the brain in the dissecting tray so that the dorsal surface is visible. Observe the paired cerebral
hemispheres and the caudal cerebellum. The cerebral hemispheres are separated by the cerebral
longitudinal fissure, and the cerebellum is separated from the cerebral hemispheres by the trans-
verse fissure (Figures 15.19 and 15.20).
4. The surface of each hemisphere is composed of numerous ridges and grooves. The raised ridges
are called gyri (singular: gyrus), and the depressions are sulci (singular: sulcus).
5. Spread the cerebral hemispheres and cerebellum to see the roof of the midbrain, or mesencephalon
(Figure 15.21) . Four prominent, round swellings, the corpora quadrigemina, form the roof of the
 midbrain. The larger, rostrodorsal pair are called the rostral colliculi, and the smaller, caudoventral
 pair the caudal colliculi. The pineal gland can be seen between and above the superior colliculi
314
Chapter 15
Integument 
Cranium
Superior sagittal sinus
 Dura mater
Arachnoidmembrane
Subarachnoidspace
Pia mater
Artery
Vein
Cortex
-Medulla
FIGURE 15.17: Diagram of the meninges of the brain (all species).
Tentorium
 Superior 
cerebelli
Falx cerebri sagittal sinus
Blood
Arachnoid    Dura
vessel
 membrance mater
FIGURE 15.18: The meninges of the sheep's brain.
The trochlear nerve (cranial nerve [CN] IV) appears as a thin, white strand, directed ventrally and
slightly caudal to the caudal colliculi.
6. Caudal to the cerebral hemispheres is the cerebellum. The cerebellum is connected to the brain
stem by three prominent fber tracts, or peduncles. Lif the cranial edge of the cerebellum and
locate the rostral cerebellar peduncle, which connects the cerebellum to the cerebral peduncle
of the midbrain. The middle cerebellar peduncle connects the cerebellum with the pons. Slightly
caudal to this is the caudal cerebellar peduncle, connecting the cerebellum to the medulla.
7. Turn the brain over so that the ventral surface is visible. A pair of olfactory bulbs can be seen
beneath the cerebral hemispheres. These bulbs lie over the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone
and receive the olfactory neurons from the nose (Figures 15.22 and 15.23).
Editorialrevie
The Nervus System  315
Gyrus
(gyri (pl.)
Sulcus
(sulci (pl.))
Longitudinal 
fissure
Cerebral
hemisphere
 Pineal gland 
Rostral
colliculus
 Caudal 
colliculus
Transverse
fissure
Cerebellum
Vermis of the
cerebellum 
Medulla
oblongata
FIGURE 15.19: Diagram of the dorsal view of the sheep's brain.
Cerebral
hemispheres 
Elevated layer of
Gyrus
arachnoid (in forcep)
Sulcus
Longitudinal
fissure
Cerebellum 
Vermis
Medulla
FlGURE 15.20: Dorsal view of the sheep's brain.
Left
rostral
colliculus
 Pineal
Left
 gland 
caudal
colliculus
Cerebral
quadrigemina 
(includes all four
colliculi: right, left,
rostral, and caudal)
 FIGURE 15.21: Corpora quadrigemina of the sheep's brain.
Editorial
316
Chapter 15
Olfactory bulb
Ofactory tract
(CN I)
Optic nerve
(CN II)
Optic chiasm
Tuber cinereum
 Infundibulum
Cerebral
Mammillary
peduncle 
body
 Oculomotor
Pons 
nerve (CN II)
Trochlear
Trigeminal nerve 
nerve (CN IV)
(CN V)
Facial nerve
 Abducens
(CN VII)
nerve (CN VI)
Vestibulocochlear
Glossopharyngeal
nerve (CN VII)
nerve (CN IX)
Pyramids -
Vagus nerve
(CN X)
Medulla
Accessory
oblongata
nerve (CN XI)
Basilar artery 
Hypoglossal
nerve (CN XIl)
Trochlear
Tuber
Optic
Olfactory
Oculomotor
nerve
 cinereum 
 chiasm
tract
 nerve
Mammillary
Olfactory
Optic
body
Infudibulum/
bulb
nerve
Pons
Medulla
Pyramid  Abducens Facial Trigeminal Cerebral
 oblongata
nerve
nerve
nerve
peduncle
FlGURE 15.23: Ventral view of the sheep's brain.
8. A white band, the olfactory tract, extends from each olfactory bulb along the ventral surface of the
cerebral hemispheres.
9. On the ventral surface of the diencephalon is the hypothalamus, located posterior to the olfactory
tracts. The optic nerves (CN I) undergo a partial crossing over (decussation) to form the rostral
border of the hypothalamus, known as the optic chiasm. This results in the left eye connecting to
the right side of the brain, and the right eye to the left side of the brain.
Editorialrevie
The Nery0us System  317
10. The rest of the hypothalamus is the oval area lying caudal to the optic chiasm. The infundibulum can
be seen connecting the pituitary to the hypothalamus. Caudal to the infundibulum are the paired,
rounded mammillary bodies. Around the infundibulum is the tuber cinereum (see Figures 15.22
and 15.23).
11. Observe the cerebral peduncles on the ventral surface of the midbrain. The large oculomotor
nerves (CN Mml) arise from the cerebral peduncle caudal to the mammillary body.
12. Caudal to the midbrain is the pons. This is composed primarily of white fibers, many of which run
transversely across the pons and out to the cerebellum. Just caudolateral to the pons on both sides 
is the large trigeminal nerve (CN V), and caudolateral to this nerve are two nerves, the facial nerve
(CN VII) and the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VII). The abducens nerve (CN VI) is located at the
border between the pons and the medulla just off the midline on both sides. The rest of the nerves 
will be difficult to locate because they are often broken off as the dura mater is removed.
13. The medulla oblongata is caudal to the pons. The longitudinal bands of tissue on either side
of the ventral median fissure on the ventral surface of the medulla are known as the pyrarmids
(see Figures 15.22 and 15.23).
14. Cut the brain in half along the longitudinal sulcus to create a sagittal section of the sheep's brain
(Figures 15.24 and 15.25). Locate the corpus callosum, the white fbers connecting the two cerebral
hemispheres.
15. The thin covering of tissue separating the left and right lateral ventricles is the septum pellucidum,
which is ventral to the corpus callosum. The septum should be intact on one side of the brain, and
an opening to the lateral ventricle should be visible on the opposite side (as it is virtually impossible
to split the septum pellucidum down the middle). Inside the lateral ventricles is the choroid plexus,
(derived from the lining membrane of the ventricles). This produces cerebrospinal fhuid (CSF),
which flows out of each lateral ventricle through the foramen of Monro, to the third ventricle
through the mesencephalic aqueduct, and into the fourth ventricle. Then the CSF either flows
 down the central canal of the spinal cord or passes out into the subarachnoid space via the foramen
of Luschka. The CSF forms a cushion to protect the brain and spinal cord.
16. The fornix, a band of white fibers, lies ventral to the septum.
Cerebrum
Pineal gland
 Corpus callosum
Rostral colliculi
Septum pellucidum
Caudal colliculi
(divides left and right 
lateral ventricles)
Cerebellum
Fornix
Olfactory bulb
Arbor vitae of
Massa intermedia
cerebellum
 of the thalamus
 Optic chiasm
- Third ventricle
- Infundibulum
Central
~Mammillary body
 canal
Pituitary gland
Spinal 
 Cerebral peduncle
cord
Fourth
Pons
Mesencephalic
ventricle
aqueduct
Medulla
(aqueduct of Sylvius)
oblongata
FlGURE 15.24: Diagram of the sagittal view of the sheep's brain.
Editorialrevie
318
Chapter 15
Mesencephalic
Massa
aqueduct
Rostral
Pineal
 intermedia 
(aqueduct of Sylvius)
colliculi
 gland
of thalamus Dura
3rd
Caudal colliculi
White matter
mater
ventricle
of corpora
Tentorium
Cortex(gray
Corpus
Septum
quadrigemina
 cerebelli 
matter)
Fornix
callosum
pellucidum
Lateral
Optic
Mammillary
Pons
Medulla
Central
ventricle
 chiasm
body
 oblongala
canal
Through
 Infun dibulum
Pituitary 4th ventricle
Spinal
Arbor
foramen
 gland 
(under 
cord
vitae of 
of Monro
cerebellum)
cerebellum
FlGURE 15.25: Sagittal view of the sheep's brain.
17. The third ventricle and thalamus lie ventral to the fornix. The narrow third ventricle, the walls of
which are covered by a shiny layer of epithelium, is on the midline. The thalamus forms the lateral
walls of the third ventricle.
18. The massa intermedia connects the two sides of the thalamus. The third ventricle forms a partial
epithelium.
19. The foramen of Monro, the opening through which each lateral ventricle communicates with the
third ventricle, lies in the depression rostral to the massa intermedia. Find this connection by pass-
ing a dull probe through it.
 20. Relocate the hypothalamus ventral to the third ventricle. Also note the pineal body dorsal to the
midbrain, near the rostral colliculi. Observe the narrow mesencephalic aqueduct (aqueduct of Syl-
vius) leading through the midbrain and connecting the third and fourth ventricles.
21. The fourth ventricle lies above the pons and medulla and below the cerebellum.
 22. The beginning of the spinal cord may be seen connected to the medulla. A canal known as the
central canal, which is connected to the fourth ventricle, is present in the center of the cord.
 23. Note the tree-like arrangement of gray and white matter in the cerebellum. This arrangement. is
known as the arbor vitae ("tree of life"). The gray matter of the cerebellum is the cortex, and the
white is the medulla.
 24. Make a cut into the cerebral hemisphere. The outer layer of each cerebral hemisphere is its cortex,
composed of gray matter. The white area beneath the cortex is the white matter.
The Nerus System  319
EXERCISE 15.4 THE CROSS SECTION OF THE SPINAL CORD
The spinal cord is part of the central nervous system and starts at the foramen magnum of the skuf!
and fies within the vertebral canal of the vertebrae.
1. Obtain a slide of a cross-sectional view of mammal spinal cord (Figure 15.26)
 2. The spinal cord is divided into two mirror halves, right and left. The two halves are divided dorsally
by a sulcus, the dorsal median sulcus, and ventrally by a fissue, the ventral median fissure. The gray
 matter is located centrally on both sides, surrounded by white matter peripherally. The gray matter
contains nerve cell bodies, both in the brain and in the spinal cord.
 3. The white matter contains the white tracts, or columns, that communicate with the brain stem,
cerebellum, and cerebrum. It is white because these nerve fibers are myelinated. The dorsal white
column is called the dorsal funiculus; the lateral column, the lateral funiculus; and ventral column,
the ventral funiculus.
4. In the center is the central canal, which communicates with the fourth ventricle.
 Dorsal median sulcus
Dorsal
funiculus
Dorsal root
White matter
White  Lateral
Central canal
columns
funiculus
- Gray matter
~Ventral root
Ventral
funiculus
Ventral
spinal artery
Ventral median fissure
FlGURE 15.26: The cross section of the spinal cord (any species).
EXERCISE 15.5 SPINAL REFLEXES
A spinal reflex arc is a pathway of a nerve impulse. A sensory afferent neuron extends to the spinal cord,
synapses there with an interneuron (also called an internuncial neuron or Renshaw cell), and synapses
 again with a motor efferent neuron (Figure 15.27).
 The neurotransmitter at. the efferent motor neuron is excitatory. It establishes an excitatory post-
synaptic potential in the efferent motor neuron that goes to the agonist muscle. This neurotransmitter
 is acetylcholine. Simultaneously, another interneuron establishes an inhibitory postsynaptic potential
to the efferent motor neuron of the antagonist muscle by releasing an inhibitory neurotransmitter,
glycine, at the spinal cord level. Gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA) is the inhibitory neurotransmitter
in the brain. As a result, the agonist. muscle is contracting while its opposing muscle, the antagonist, is
relaxing, thus allowing easy movement of a limb or other body part. The excitatory neurotransmitter is 
Procedure
 Using a live dog or cat, observe the following reflexes. They are used to gauge the depth of anesthesia.
1. palpebral (blink) reflex: Touch the hairs on the lateral side of the eyelid or the medial canthus of
the eye; the response should be a blink.
320
Chapter 15
1. Stretching stimulates
 3. Within the integrating center (spinal
sensory receptor
 Antagonist 
cord) thesensoryneuron activates the
(muscle spindle)
/ musclerelaxes
 motor neuron to the agonist muscle via
2. Sensory
an excitatory interneuron, while an
inhibitory interneuron prevents an
neuron
impulse to the antagonist muscle 
excited
5. Effector
Agonist
Dorsal root To brain
(same
muscle,the
muscle
Dorsal root
agonist
contracts
ganglion
muscle)
contracts and
relieves the
stretching
Spinal
4. Motor neuron
excited
nerve
Inhibitory interneuron
Ventralroot
Motorneuronto
Excitatory interneuron
antagonist
muscle is
inhibited
FIGURE 15.27: The spinal reflex arc in a dog.
 2. corneal reflex: Touch the cornea with a wisp of cotton from a cotton ball; the response should be a
blink.
3. oral-pharyngeal reflex: Try to open the animal's mouth or place an object in the mouth while touch-
ing the pharyngeal region. The normal response should be for the animal to close its mouth. This
reflex is often stimulated when pilling an animal.
The normal response should be for the animal to cough or swallow; the epiglottis should close and
so should the vocal folds.
 5. ear pinna reflex: Lightly touch the lateral aspect. of the upper part of the ear; the normal response
is for the ear to twitch.
6. pedal reflex (toe pinch): Extend the rear limb while simultaneously pinching the middle toe; the
normal response is a reflexive withdrawing of the limb.
 7. patellar reflex: Strike the straight patellar tendon lightly with a percussion hammer; the normal
 response is reflexive jerking of the lower leg.
 8. flexors of the tarsus and extensors of the digit: Place your index finger on the cranial tibial muscles
and strike your finger semi-softly with the percussion hammer. The response should be flexion of
the tarsus and extension of the digits.
9. extension of the tarsus: Grasp behind the stifle with your thumb, and strike it with the percussion
hammer. The response should be for the animal to extend the tarsus.
10. extension of the elbow: Place your finger on the tendon of the long head of the triceps and strike
your finger with the percussion hammer. The animal should extend the elbow joint.
Editorialrevie
The Nervous System  321
Questions
1. Why is it necessary to strike your finger or thumb placed over the muscle instead of the
muscle directly?
2. Why is the patellar reflex not abolished during general anesthesia?
Discussion
With the patellar reflex, the percussion hammer strikes a relatively tough tendon, whereas at the other
sites it would strike the muscle directly and could damage it. Plus, by striking your finger or thumb you
spread the stimulus across the entire muscle belly.
The patellar reflex, being an entirely spinal reflex, is not abolished during general anesthesia because
the anesthetic is de pressing the brain but not the spinal cord.
Clinical Significance
The nervous system is so intricate and delicately balanced that even minor problems can have
catastrophic effects. Take, for instance, the disease hydrocephalus. The condition may be congenital
or acquired. The congenital form occurs in small and brachycephalic breeds, such as the bulldog,
Chihuahua, Maltese, Pomeranian, toy poodle, Yorkshire terrier, Llasa apso, Cairn terrier, Boston terrier,
pug, Pekingese, and the Siamese cat. ft usually appears a few weeks after birth but may present at up to
 One year of age. Acquired hydrocephalus can occur in any breed at any age.
There are two types of hydrocephalus. The noncommunicating type is caused by an obstruction of
CSF fow within the ventricular system of the brain. The communicating type is due to a lack of resorption
of CSF into the subarachnoid space. Congenital hydrocephalus is usually obstructive, caused by a
which hydraulically compresses the cortex of the brain. This pressure may result in seizures, altered
mental status, visual deficits, and an uncoordinated gait.
A set of diseases classified as peripheral neuropathies results in demyelination of the spinal cord
and peripheral nerves. This condition may occur in many species and may be a primary condition or
secondary to axonal degeneration. ft most often affects the cervical spine and spinal nerves, causing
 progressive ataxia and spastic incoordination in the rear legs (paraparesis), which may progress to
inciude the front legs (tetraparesis). The cause is unknown.
A host of viral and bacterial infections can cause inflammation of the brain and spinal cord. Canine
distemper and rabies are two examples. The way the nervous system is structured tends to keep
unwanted molecures out. The pia mater follows the vesseis into the brain, enveloping them and allowing
only certain-sized molecules to pass through. This is known as the pial barrier, or blood-brain barrier. ft is
aiso the reason why certain antibiotics will not enter nervous tissue. in inffammatory conditions, however
the pores in the pia mater may become bigger, allowing unwanted molecules in, but also allowing us to
Use certain antibiotics we could not use under normal circumstances.
322
Chapter 15
eterinary
ignettes
 remember being told in veterinary school that boxers as a breed are considered walking
tumor factories. In my practice, however, this was not the case. My boxers were not 
getting tumors! It was magic, and I was the magician.
It was a nice delusion while it lasted. Then Tobey arrived at my practice's door. I wish I could have
 saxog lauio slouni aul le joy dn apeu ah yoeg bujuoo jday jsng bop sjut ina ialow laran, pies
didn't get. Fortunately, his tumors were not malignant. Most were skin tumors, but he seemed to 
had his own shelf in my cabinet. If he lived to be 15, I figured he would have his own wing in Ripley's 
 Believe It or Not!
It was on a fine, sunny day in June that Anthony Tuscalini carried Tobey in and set him on my
 sam slul 'asuodsan ued daap e inoulm sem au pue 'pazaeed aam shal puy s,Aaaol 'algei wexa
not a good sign. Testing for deep pain involves pinching the toe so hard that it is painfuly stimulated.
If the dog withdraws its leg without evidence of feeling pain, the peripheral nerves and spinal centers
peau shl buuant Aa ued buaat jo aouapiaa smous bop aut h 'lou sl poo jeuids aut ina 'eou ae
and crying, the cord and thalamus are normal as well.
on page 23), I took a quick look outside. The sky had suddenly grayed, and I heard distant thunder.
It was an ominous sign. I took Tobey to radiology and took a lumbar spine series of radiographs. The
spinous process of the L3 vertebra had a moth-eaten appearance, which corresponded to the exact
location where Tobey's panniculus reflex had stopped. This reflex comes from the dorsal rami of the 
spinal nerves to move the muscles of the skin. This was definitely not a good sign. After viewing the
radiographs, I reexamined Tobey and was able to palpate two hard lumps under the skin on either
side of the L3 vertebra.
"Tony, I think Tobey has a tumor around his backbone and spinal cord," I told him.
"Can you do surgery to repair it?" he asked.
"You say he was moving his legs last night?" I asked skeptically.
"He wasn't walking very well but he was moving." he replied.
This may have been the best news yet, because that meant the spinal cord had been functional a
asked if I could do the surgery on Tobey. "OK, I can try to do surgery, but it's a long shot, and I can't 
 make any promises."
"Do it!" Tony said. "vwe've got to give him a chance."
About an hour later, after clipping the hair off of Tobey's back, I could see the tops of two golf
ball-sized lumps buried deep under the skin on either side of the vertebral column. I made one 
long incision above the spinous processes of vertebral bodies T13 through L5. There were two
through the spinous process of the L3 vertebra. I excised the two masses, which left massive holes in 
the subcutaneous fat and muscle tissue. The ventral part of each mass was necrotic and gelatinous 
rather than fibrous, and getting it out was dificult.
At the time, I felt my effort to remove every neoplastic cell had not been successful. wvith my
3-mm bone rongeurs, I removed bits and pieces of the dorsal lamina and spinous process. This 
I would do a hemilaminectory, opening only one side of the lamina to view the spinal cord. In this 
case, I had no choice but to remove the entire lamina and much of the dorsal spinous process. I
tried to leave as much of the pedicle of the vertebra on either side of the spinal cord as possible. It
was necessary to remove both articular processes of the L3-L4 junction and the left cranial articular
process of the L2-L3 junction. This exposed the spinal cord, which had a significant dent in it where 
the tumor's stalk had passed. I knew I couldn't leave the vertebra without support; otherwise, it would
tear apart at the L3-L4 intervertebral disc.
The Nervous System 323
I had read about this technique in a veterinary journal and decided to use a thin, intramedullary
pin and bend it on both ends around the spinous processes of L1 and L5.Then, I wired it to each
vertebra, L1 to L5; there was just enough of the L3 spinous process left to attach the pin to it Had
I had a spinal plate I might have used it, but attaching it to what remained of L3 would have been 
difficult. As it was, this worked fine.
I put Tobey on post-operative steroids and antibiotics, and five days later he walked out of the
hospital. The pathology report said the tumor was a very hot fibrosarcoma (a malignant tumor of
fibrous origin). I suggested that Tony consult a veterinary oncologist, but he decided against it.
I thought for sure the tumor would return, but it never did. And the amazing thing was, Tobey never
developed any more tumors. My only explanation was that we turned his immune system on. I know
magician!
SUMMARY
Much of this chapter was devoted to explaining the differences between the central nervous
system and the peripheral nervous system. You learmed about the neurons and the supporting
cells of nervous tissue. The structure of neurons was discussed, and you learned to classify
neurons based on number of axons. You once again looked at a giant multipolar neuron, but
this time with greater knowledge. You performed detailed dissections of the cat's periphral
nervous system and the sheep's brain. You learned the names, types, and functions of the
cranial nerves. Finally, using a live dog you learned how to test the various reflexes used to
assess neurological function.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Name the two parts of the nervous system and the structures of each part.
2.  The peripheral nervous system can also be divided into what two parts?
3. Name the two classes of cells that exist in the nervous system.
4.
What is a ganglion?
5.
What are the cytoskeletal elements of the neuron cell body?
 6. What is the name for the special endoplasmic reticulum found in the neuron
cell body?
7.
 Differentiate between an axon and a dendrite.
8.
 Name the three classifications of neurons.
 9. What is a synapse, and where may synapses occur?
10.
What causes a postsynaptic potential to occur during impulse transmission?
11.
What is the energy source at the axon terminal?
12. In what ways is a nerve impulse different from an electrical impulse?
13. What ion moves into a neuron's axon to create depolarization?
Copyright 2010 Ceng
Editorialrevie
324
Chapter 15
14. What ion moves out of a neuron's axon during repolarization?
15. How do the ions in Questions 14 and 15 reestablish the ionic balance that existed prior to
the action potential?
16. Differentiate between the absolute refractory and relative refractory periods.
17. What does “self-propagating” mean?
18. What is the fatty substance of a Schwann cell?
 19. What is the area between adjacent Schwann cells called?
21. What does the phrenic nerve innervate?
22. Name the two parts of the autonomic nervous system.
23. Name the 12 cranial nerves, and indicate the key function(s) of each.
 24. What is the postganglionic excitatory neurotransmitter in the sympathetic nervous system?
 25.  What is the excitatory neurotransmitter for all other synapses and at the target organs?
26. Name the lobes of the brain.
 27. What structure connects the right cerebral hemisphere to the left cerebral hemisphere?
28. In what part of the brain is the hypothalamus located?
29. What is the anatomical name of the brain stem?
30. Name the layers of the meninges.
31. Which of the meningeal layers is responsible for the blood-brain barrier?
32. Define sulci and gyri.
33. Which eye connects to the left side of the brain?
 34. Describe the flow of cerebrospinal fluid from the lateral ventricles to the central canal of
the spinal cord.
35. Describe the difference between white matter and gray matter.
 36. At what location within the gray matter of the spinal cord does the impulse from a sen-
sory afferent neuron establish either an excitatory or an inhibitory postsynaptic potential?
37. Name the two inhibitory neurotransmitters, and indicate where each would be found.
38. How is the excitatory neurotransmitter removed from the synaptic cleft?
39. Which spinal cord segments affect the patellar reflex? (Hint: See Table 15.1.)
40. What is the name for the collection of spinal nerves that extend from the end of the
spinal cord as they travel to their associated intervertebral foramina?
CHAPTER 16
ORGANS OF SPECIAL SENSE
OBJECTIVES
 differentiate between the three parts of the ear
understand the mechanisms of hearing and balance
 name and locate parts of the ear using models and diagrams
dissect the sheep's eye and identify its structures
generally understand the mechanism of sight.
identify the layers of the cornea
 know the innervation of the eye and ear
MATERIALS
 preserved sheep's eye
Mayo dissecting scissors
probe
1 × 2 thumb forceps or Adson tissue forceps
 #4 scalpel handle with blade
rubber gloves
 models of the ear
 plastic red, green, fluorescent orange, and white balls
 sheets of colored paper to match the balls
● live dog that knows how to retrieve balls
INTRODUCTION
You have already briefly studied the mechanisms of taste in the chapter on the digestive
system (Chapter 9), and those of smell in the chapter on the respiratory system (Chapter 11),
This chapter will cover the other special senses: hearing, balance and equilibrium, and sight.
325
or eChapter(s)
Editorialrevi
326
Chapter 16
The Ear and the Mechanisms
caudal colliculi, and to the cortex of the temporal
 part of the brain.
of Hearing and Equilibrium
 In the exercises in this chapter the important.
Hearing occurs when sound waves enter the ear
structures are listed in colored bold print. If a struc-
and vibrate its tiny bones, which in turn stimulate
ture is mentioned prior to its dissection, it will be
hair cells in the cochlea. This sends information up
italicized. Structures discussed prior to dissection
the vestibulocochlear nerve ( CN VIll), through the
may also be in bold print for special emphasis.
The ear can be divided into three anatomical and functional parts: the external ear, middle ear, and
internal (inner) ear.
Procedure
1. Using both the provided diagram of the canine ear (Figure 16.1) and a model of the ear (can be
a human ear model), locate the pinna, the vertical and horizontal ear canals of the external audi-
tory canal, and the tympanic membrane (eardrum) . Human ear canals are not divided into vertical
and horizontal canals. The support for the pinna of the animal ear is mostly elastic cartilage, and
the attached muscles enable it to be aimed in the direction of sound. The pinna acts as a funnel to
direct. sound waves into the external auditory canal. Note the vertical and horizontal components
of the external ear canal in Figure 16.1. When placing the speculum of an otoscope into a dog's or
cat's ear, it initially must be directed down the vertical canal and then turned horizontally, so that.
 you can see into the horizontal canal.
The tympanic membrane is the termination of the external ear. It is oriented such that the dorsal
tive tisue, and it is tightly stretched across the opening of the middle ear cavity. As sound waves strike
it, the membrane vibrates at the same frequency through a process called sympathetic vibration.
2. The middle ear is located within a hollow area bounded by the temporal bone and the tympanic
bullae, and it is lined with soft. tissue. The middle ear is filled with air through communication with
the middle ear via the auditory tube or Eustachian tube from the nasopharynx (which you studied
as part. of the respiratory system). This tube enables the pressure on the eardrum to be equal on its
inside surface (via the middle ear) and its outside surface (via the external auditory canal).
The eardrum is attached to the first of the three ossicles of the middle ear: the malleus, also known
by its common name, the harmmer. Next is the incus (or anvil), then the stapes (or stirrup), which is
Incus
Vertical
ear canal of
Semicircular canals
external ear
 Utricle
Stapes
Vestibulocochlear
nerve (CN VIll)
Cochlea
Horizontal
Auditory
ear canal
(Eustachian)
Malleus
Middle
tube
ear cavity
Nasopharynx
Tympanic membrane
(eardrum)
Editorialrevie
Organs of Special Sense 
327
Stapes vibrating
Malleus
in oval window
Helicotrema
Cochlea
Incus
Perilymph
Sound
waves
 Scala
tympani
Scala
vestibuli
Basilar
membrane
Spiral organ
(organ of Corti)
Tectorial membrane
Vestibular membrane
Auditory
Cochlear duct
sound waves
Eardrum
contains
Middle ear
endolymyph
Secondary tympanic
Auditory
membrane vibrating
tube
in round window
FlGURE 16.2: The ear of a dog, showing ossicles and a longitudinal cross section of the cochlea.
connected to and covers the oval window of the cochlea. An acronym to help remember these names
malleus, incus, stapes-is MIS (so you will not."miss" it on a test). The ossicles act as a system of levers
that transmits sound vibrations to the cochlea. In the process, the ossicles decrease the amplitude (size )
of the vibrations but increase their force. As a result, the cochlea is not damaged. A tiny muscle attached
to the malleus, the tensor tympani, acts to dampen vibrations. The stapedius, another muscle, acts to
3. The inner ear has components that contribute to both hearing and balance. The hearing component.
is housed in the cochlea, a snail-shell-shaped spiral cavity within the temporal bone (Figure 16.2).
 Inside of this is the soft, multilayered, fluid-flled organ of Corti, which contains the receptor cells
for hearing (Figure 16.3). This organ runs the length of the cochlea in a tube called the cochlear
duct, which is flled with a liquid called endolynph. On either side of this duct is a tube containing
perilymph; these ducts communicate at. the tip of the cochlea.
The cochlear duct starts at the oval window, which is attached to the stapes, goes to the tip of the
cochlea, and returns to the round window. Nothing is attached to the round window. The organ
of Corti runs the length of the cochlear duct, resting on a membrane called the basilar membrane
(Figure 16.4).The organ's functional parts are the hair cells, supporting cells, and tectorial mem-
 brane. The hair cells are receptor cells, with tiny hair-like projections on their surfaces. The tecto-
d ad s s a sr a  a s e  i a 
support to the hair cells.
Sound waves transmitted to the cochlea's oval window via the stapes cause the membrane of the
window to move back and forth. This causes the perilymph around the cochlear duct. to vibrate as
well. The round window acts as a pressure-relief mechanism by alternately bulging out and in with
 the vibrations of the perilymph. The perilymph's vibrations cause the tectorial membrane to rub
against the hair cell, which bends the sensory hairs and generates nerve impulses that travel to the
brain and are interpreted as sound.
The inner ear also contains the semicircular canals and vestibule. These structures are important
in maintaining balance and equilibrium. The vestibule is a part of the inner ear located between
the cochlea and semicircular canals. It contains two sac-like spaces called the utricle and saccule
(see Figure 16.4), which are continuous with the cochlear duct and are filled with endolymph.
These two sacs are surrounded by perilymph. Each sac contains an area of sensory epithelium called
the macula. Each also contains hair cells and supporting cells covered by a gel-like matrix contain-
ing tiny crystals of calcium carbonate called otoliths (Figure 16.5). Gravity causes the otoliths and
Editorial
328
Chapter 16
Scala vestibuli
(contains perilymph)
Vestibular
membrane 
Cochlear duct
(contains ennolymph) 
Tectorial
membrane
Spiral organ
Spiral ganglion
(organ of Corti)
 Basilar
membrane
Scala tympani
Cochlear branch
A
(contains perilymph)
vestibulocochlear
(Vlll) nerve
 Section through one
turn of the cochlea
Tectorial
membrane 
Hair bundle
(stereocilia)
Outer hair
cell
-Inner hair
cell
 Supporting
cells
Basilar
Sensory and
membrane 
in cochlear branch
 Cells lining
vestibulocochlear
 scala tympani
(Vlll) nerve
Enlargement of spiral organ
B
(organ of Corti)
FIGURE 16.3: Cross section of the spiral organ (organ of Corti) of the cochlea of a dog. A. Section 
through one turn of the cochlea. B. Spiral organ, or organ of Corti.
Lateral
Utricle
Medial
Vestibulocochlear
Stapes in oval window
nerve (CN VIl):
Vestibular branch 
Saccule
Cochlear branch 
Scala vestibuli
Cochlea
 Scala tympani
Cochlear duct
Scala vestibuli
Vestibular membrane
Transmission of
sound waves from
Cochlear duct
scala vestibuli to 
 Basilar membrane 
 scala tympani by
 Secondary tympanic
way of helicotrema
membrane in round window
Scala tympani
FIGURE 16.4: The inner ear of a dog with cochlea, semicircular canals, and nerve branches.
Editorial
Organs of Special Sense
329
Utricle
Overall Structure of
a Section of the Macula
accule
Otoliths
Otolithic
membrane
- Hair bundle
Location of utricle
Hair cell
 and saccule (contain
maculae)
 Supporting cell
Vestibular
branches of
vestibulocochlear
(Vlll) nerve
 Otoliths
 Otolithic
Force of
Hair bundle:
Otoliths  membrane 
gravity
 Otolithic
Kinocilium
V
membrane
Stereocilia
Hair
cell
Hair cells
Supporting
cell
Head upright
Head tilted
Vestibular branches of
forward
vestibulocochlear (Vlll) nerve
Position of Macula with Head Upright
B
Details of Two Hair Cells
C
(Left) and Tilted Forward (Right)
FIGURE 16.5: Receptors of the utricle and saccule of a dog and their mechanism of action. A. Section 
of the macula. B. Two hair cells. C. Position of macula with head upright and tilted forward.
  ss  a   o sr ae o assd    x s s
ment. of the head bends these sensory hairs, which generates nerve impulses that give the brain
information about the position of the head.
Three semicircular canals, each oriented in a different. plane at right angles to one another, are
also filled with endolymph and surrounded by perilymph. Near the utricle end of each semicircular
canal is an enlargement known as the ampulla. It contains the receptors, known as the crista ampul.
laris (crista). The ampulla functions in the same way as the macula of the vestibule. It consists of a
called the cupula (Figure 16.6). But the ampulla has no otoliths. The cupula functions as a float.
that moves with the endolymph as the head changes position. As the head moves in one of the
Editorialre
330
Chapter 16
planes of the semicircular canals, the inertia created causes the endolymph to lag behind the move-
ment of the canal. The relative movement of the endolymph pulls on the cupula, bending the hairs,
 and generating a nerve impulse that is sent up the vestibular portion of the vestibulocochlear nerve
to the brain.
 Semicircular duct
Ampulla
Cupula
Location of ampullae
 of semicircular ducts 
(contain cristae)
 Hair bundle
Hair cell
Supporting cell 
Ampullary nerve
Details of a Crista
 Section of ampulla of
membranous labyrinth
Ampulla
 in semicircular duct
Crista
Cupula sensing
 Ampullary nerve
movement and direction
 of flow of endolymph
Head in still posistion
Head rotating
B
 Position of a Crista with the Head in the Still Position (Left)
and When the Head Rotates (Right)
B. Position of a crista when head is still and when it rotates.
Editorialrevie
Organs of Special Sense
331
The Eye and the Mechanisms of Vision
EXERCISE 16.2 ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE EYE
Vision is a process in which light waves of differing wavelengths enter the eye and are focused on the
back of the eyeball, which is lined by the retina. The retina's nerve cells pick up the visual image, which
is transmitted via the optic nerve, which crosses to the opposite side of the brain at the optic chiasm,
and is then relayed through the rostral colliculi to the cortex of the occipital part. of the cerebrum. This
Dissection of the Sheep Eye
 1. Obtain a sheep's eye and note the fat surrounding the surface of the eye. This cushions the eye from
shock in its bony orbit.
 2. Identify the sclera: the tough, fibrous, external, white coat.
 3. The conjunctiva is a thin, transparent membrane that covers the front portion of the sclera and
lines the inside of the eyelids. It is composed of two parts: the bulbar conjunctiva, attached to the
sclera, and the palpebral conjunctiva on the inner eyelids. The space between these two parts is the
conjunctival sac, and they meet at the fornix.
4. The palpebrae are the eyelids. The dorsal and ventral palpebrae join at the medial canthus, or inner
corner of the eye, and at the lateral canthus, or outer corner of the eye. Along the margins of the
eyelids are small pores that are the openings to the tarsal glands (Meibomian glands) . These glands
produce a waxy substance that helps prevent tears from overflowing onto the face. The eyelashes
(cilia) are more prominent on the upper lid. Domestic animals also have a third eyelid, or nictitat-
ing membrane, which is located medially between the globe of the eye and the eyelids (Figure 16.7).
third eyelid, on its ocular surface, are lymph tissue and the gland of the third eyelid, an accessory
lacrimal gland (tear-producing gland).
 5. The lacrimal apparatus is the tear drainage route for the eye (Figure 16.8). At the medial canthus
of both eyes, there are two small holes or puncta (singular: punctum), each is located a few milli-
meters dorsally and ventrally just medial to the margin of the eyelid. The dorsal punctum connects
to the superior canaliculus, and the ventral punctum connects to the inferior canaliculus; these
canaliculi join to form the lacrimal sac, which drains into the nasolacrimal duct. This duct exits to
the nasal cavity just inside external nares on the medial surface of the wall. Patency of these ducts
can be tested by placing fluorescein dye in the eyes and checking for its appearance around the
nose. It is sometimes necessary to use a Wood's light (an ultraviolet light) to observe this.
Upper
papebra
Third eyelid
Cornea
(nictitating
membrane)
Sclera
Bulbar
conjunctiva
FlGURE 16.7: External view of a sheep's eye.
Editorialrevi
332
Chapter 16
Lacrimal gland
Dorsal lacrimal
punctum
Medial canthus-
Superior canaliculus-
 Inferior canaliculus
Lateral canthus
Lacrimal sac
Excretory ducts
Nasolacrimal
 Nictitating membrane
duct
(third eyelid)
Cartilage of third eyelid
Nasal cavity
Ventral lacrimal punctum
FIGURE 16.8: The eye and an internal view of the nasolacrimal system of a dog.
Dorsal
Dorsal
oblique
oblique
Dorsal
Dorsal
rectus
rectus
Retractor
oculi
Medial
rectus-
Lateral
rectus
Lateral rectus
Ventral
Ventral-
rectus 
Ventral
oblique
rectus
Front View
Lateral View
FlGURE 16.9: The extrinsic eye muscles of a dog.
 6. On your specimen, the eye muscles may be attached to the globe (eyeball), but. they will probably
be too damaged to distinguish which muscle is which.The extraocular eye muscles (Figure 16.9)
consist of four rectus muscles (the ventral, dorsal, lateral, and medial rectus muscles) and two
oblique muscles (the ventral and dorsal oblique muscles). Many animals also have a retractor bulbi
 7. The cornea is the anterior, transparent. tissue (though it may appear opaque in your specimen 
because of the preservative) that attaches to the sclera at the limbus. The cornea has multiple lay
ers. The outer epithelium is composed of stratifed squamous cells that are continuous peripherally
with the conjunctiva. The outer epithelium is thicker in the middle than at the periphery and shows
great powers of regeneration. Beneath the epithelium is the basement membrane. The substantia
propria, or stroma, is the thickest layer of the cornea and is made of transparent collagen fbrils
without blood vessels. Its transparency is dependent. on the exact. amount of water it contains.
Editorialrevie
Organs of Special Sense
333
If there is too much (corneal edema), it becomes cloudy. It contains many pain receptors, making
it. extremely sensitive. Below this, just. deep to the stroma, is Descemet's membrane. Deep to this is
the endothelium, composed of a thin layerof squamous epithelial cells (Figure 16.10).
8. The optic nerve is located on the caudal surface of the eye. This nerve has a solid, white core and
is approximately 3 mm thick.
 9. Make a stab incision through the sclera about. 1/2 cm from the edge of the cornea. Using scissors,
cut completely around the eye, parallel to the cornea.
10. You should now see the vitreous humor (vitreous body) in the caudal part of the eye, and the lens
sitting in the vitreous chamber (Figure 16.11) .
Endothelium
Descemet's membrane
Stroma
Epithelium 
Anterior chamber of the eye
Exterior
Basement membrane
FIGURE 16.10: Layers of the cornea of a dog.
Vitreous
 chamber
Limbus
Pupillary aperture
Lens
Cornea
Iris-
Posterior chamber
 Sphincter muscles
Zonular ligaments (fibers)
 of iris
(fibers of suspensory ligament)
Dilator muscles 
 Ciliary process
of iris
Ciliary body
Anterior chamber
 Palpebral conjunctiva
Ciliary muscle 
Ocular (bulbar)
Retina-
Hyaloid
conjunctiva
-Choroid
canal
Pectinate ligament
Fornix.
Sclera-
Scleral venous-
plexus
FlGURE 16.11: Sagittal section of a sheep's eye, showing vitreous humor, lens, and ciliary body.
Editorial
334
Chapter 16
11. Examine the interior of the rostral part of the eye. Look at the black structure around and behind
the lens. This structure is the ciliary body consisting of the ciliary muscle and the ciliary processes;
the latter appear as radial folds (Figures 16.11 to 16.13). Locate the suspensory ligaments, the deli-
cate fibers connecting the ciliary body to the lens. They hold the lens in position.
 12. Detach the lens from the ciliary body and remove the lens. The remnants of the suspensory liga-
ments can be seen attached to the lens (see Figure 16.13).
13. The iris is now visible anterior to the former position of the lens (see Figure 16.13). It also appears
black (as did the ciliary body) on the caudal surface, but it may be brownish-tan on the cranial sur-
face. Try to distinguish between the circular and radial fbers that make up the iris. These are the
muscles that control the aperture opening of the iris, known as the pupil.
14. Find the space between the ciliary body and the iris; then find the space between the iris and the
 cornea. These are the posterior and anterior chambers, respectively. The ciliary processes pro-
duce the aqueous humor, which flows between the ciliary body and the iris, in front of the lens,
and through the pupil into the anterior chamber. The aqueous humor flows out of the anterior
chamber at the angle formed between the iris and cornea (the iridocorneal angle) through tiny
holes in the pectinate ligament (called the spaces of Fontana), into vessels leading to the scleral
venous plexus (called the canals of Schlemm), and is then absorbed back into the bloodstream.
The pectinate ligament is a network of fne trabeculae connecting the iris to the inner wall of
the sclera.
Vitreous
Lens
humor
Ciliary
body
FGURE 16.12: A transverse section of the eye of a dog.
 Choroid
(tapetum
(ucidum)
Iris
Retina
 Ciliary
body
Non-tapetal
choroid
FIGURE 16.13: Sheep's eye, showing retina, choroid, and iris.
Copyright 2010 Cengag
Editorialrevie
Organs of Special Sense 
335
15. This first thing to note in the caudal part of the eye is the vitreous humor. During life this substance
is perfectly clear (see Figure 16.13). Remove it from the eyeball.
16. The retina is the white inner coat that was covered by the vitreous humor (it is white because of the
preservative). Determine the point at which the retina is attached caudally; this is the location of
the optic disc, or the inner attachment of the optic nerve (see Figure 16.13).
 17. The middlle vascular layer of the eye is called the uvea. It consists, from anterior to posterior, of the
iris, the ciliary body, and the choroid. It is located between the retina and sclera. The retina is eas-
ily separated from the choroid, the pigmented vascular layer. The choroid is continuous with the
ciliary body and completely envelops the posterior hemisphere of the eyeball (the area posterior to
the lens and ciliary body). It consists of six layers, which from outmost inward are the suprachoroid,
the perichoroidal lymphatic space, the vascular layer, the reflective layer (tapetum lucidum), the
choriocapillary layer, and the basal lamina.
 The tapetum lucidum (see Figure 16.13) is a highly reflective, iridescent area. It is not present in
swines or humans. The function of the tapetum lucidum is to reflect light back onto the retina. As
the light passes the photoreceptors (the rods and cones) of the retina, it reflects off the tapetum
 and passes through the photoreceptors once again, thereby amplifying the entering light. The
tapetum lucidum is also what. causes an animal's eyes to shine in the dark.
The retina is a multilayered structure that is the functional nervous tunic of the eye. It consists of
five layers (Figure 16.14) . Moving from the inside of the retina toward the choroid the layers are
the optic nerve fibers, the ganglion cells, the bipolar cell layer, the photoreceptor layer, and the
pigrnented epithelial layer. The inner layer consists of axonal nerve fibers that combine to form
the optic nerve at the optic disc (where all the nerve fibers converge). The disc contains only a few
nerve fibers and no photoreceptors, so it is essentially a blind spot at the back of the eye.
Light must pass all the way through to the photoreceptor layer. These cells, when excited, stimulate
the bipolar cells, which in turn stimulate the ganglion cells (the next. layer). The axons of the gan-
glion cells leave the retina as a tight bundle of fibers to form the optic nerve. The photoreceptors are
Light
Optic
nerve
fibers
Ganglion
cells
Nervous
tissue
Bipolar
layers
cells
Photo-
Rods
receptors
Cone
Pigmented
epithelium
FlGURE 16.14: The layers of the retina of a cat (or other animal that has color vision). llustration
shows cones. Dogs have few cones making them functionally color-blind. Cats have enough cones
to recognize colors.
Editorialrevie
336
Chapter 16
neurons with dendrites modified to be sensory receptors for light. There are two types of photore.
ceptors, named for their shape: rods and cones. The rods are more sensitive to light and produce a
somewhat coarse image in shades of gray. The cones are more sensitive to color and detail and do
not function well in dim light.
Most domestic animals are described as color-blind because they have many rods and few cones.
However, this description is not entirely accurate; animals can see colors to some extent, but.
they appear washed out or faded. They also do not perceive detail as sharply as humans. This
is because humans have an area highly concentrated with cones, called the fovea centralis, in
the center of the retina. Most animals need good vision to survive. The eyes of prey animals
are located at the sides of their head, giving them a greater field of vision and a better chance
to escape. Predators need good binocular vision to catch prey; therefore, their eyes are located
more toward the front of their heads.
EXERCISE 16.3 COLOR VISION IN DOGS
This is an entertaining experiment that illustrates color vision (or the lack of it) and visual acuity
in dogs.
Procedure
1. Obtain a dog that will retrieve. Place on the ground four colored ballsone each of red, green,
fluorescent orange, or white—and get the dog to retrieve each of them. Then, wash each of the balls
to remove any contaminating odors.
2. Blindfold the dog. In a feld of green grass, place the colored balls at the 12, 3, 6, and 9 o'clock
positions at the perimeter of a circle 60 ft in diameter, one ball at each position. (Note that one ball
must be the same color as the grass.) Place the blindfolded dog in the center of the circle
3. Remove the blindfold and release the dog. Observe which ball it retrieves first.
4. Remove that ball from the game and continue with the other three. Continue until all the balls are
re trieved.
 5. Place the white ball on a sheet of white paper, and each colored ball on sheets of colored paper of
the same color. Repeat. the experiment. This should be a test. of visual acuity.
Questions
1. Which ball did the dog retrieve first?
2. Why would placing the balls on sheets of paper of the same color be a test of visual acuity?
Discussion
 The ball the dog should see easiest is the white ball. Even the fluorescent orange ball will have a gray
scale appearance similar to that of the green and red balls, and to that of the grass. It is easy for a human
to see, but not a dog. Fluorescent-orange boat bumpers are great to teach a retriever hand signals
because you can see the bumper from a distance in high grass, but the dog cannot and needs your help
to find it. Placing the balls on similarly colored sheets of paper removes the contrasting background,
and the dog must. then rely on its sense of visual acuitythat is, how well it. sees the shadow cast around
the ball—to find it.
Organs of Special Sense 
337
Tinical Significance
The amount of aqueous humor in the anterior chamber of the eye determines the eye's intraocular
pressure. ff the animal does not have the ability to absorb this liquid, the volume within the eye will
shnsan l eoneih peeo uouos aseesip e sasnio ainssaid siui 'sinssaid aur m os pue 'aseaiou!
in degenerative changes in the retina and optic nerve and eventually leads to blindness.
When a veterinary ophthaimologist examines an animal's eye, one of the tests performed is to visual-
ize the angle between the cornea and iris (the iridocormeal angle). This is done using a slit lamp.
the drainage through the spaces of Fontana and into the canais of Schlemm. We can measure the pres.
Most forms of glaucoma are best treated surgically. Surgery can enhance the outfow or reduce
the production of aqueous humor. Unfortunately, veterinarians often are presented with cases that are
already quite advanced, and treatment is unsuccessfu!
eterinary
ignettes
 Oc, Tom Foley is on his way in with his Rottweiler, Granite. He's just been hit by a train.,"
pies aus .,'sainuiw oe inoge ui ahay aa llah, 'a liai oi ui pausn, jsjuodaoa, Au 
"You mean a real train? Uh. .. like a real choo-choo?" I asked. I have always liked
"Yep."
"How bad is it?" I asked.
"Don't know; he didn't say. He just hung up in a hurry," she told me
 Oh no! I thought. The last time I had one of those, the dog had chest trauma, was throwing all 
sorts of abnormal electrocardiogram wave patterns, and was hemorrhaging internally. I rushed into
the treatment room to tell my technician what was going on and to get the trauma cart ready. "This
could be a bad one.," I told her. I turned up the radio when we heard the news flash come in.
"We advise you to route around Highway 99 wvest at Glen Market Road. We have reports that the
northbound Union Pacific express is stalled at this intersection. It seems an animal was injured and is
on its way to an emergency veterinary hospital. we will keep you posted on these developments as
they come in. This is Sharon Schilling, live on the scene for KPTX."
I had thought I was going to get to go home early this evening. It had been a relatively slow day:
a few vaccinations, 14 cases in a row of flea allergic dermatitis, and a man wanting codeine for his
non-coughing dog with kennel cough.
"He's here, Doctor," the receptionist told me.
WWe rushed cut to help. Granite was standing in the waiting room, tongue hanging out the side of
his mouth, panting and drooling on the floor and wagging his taill He jumped up, as he usually does,
putting his front feet on the counter top to look over at the receptionist. His left eye had popped out
Editorialrevie
338
Chapter 16
his front feet loosely together, and he had covered the eye with a moist cloth to protect it. He had
completed a first aid course at work and was using his training on his dog. Smart man!
"I heard the report on the radio about a train on 99, is that the same one?" I asked him.
"Yeah, he ran cut in front of it, got hit on the back of the head and knocked about 20 feet."
That explained the dog. wwhat about the train? I thought.
"I don't know why it stopped," Tom added. "Maybe he derailed it." He laughed.
Wve checked Granite over and found nothing else wrong. Wwe replaced his eye and sewed the
pue aa aul puyag auoslloo snoanbe auos paioalull 'aoeid u l piou pue ll poaloid oi lauaboi sil
 puyaa ped el aul ui buiams pue bubeuoway aul lol allum e ayel pinom ll jeui wol oi pauieidxa
'uis sly asol pou Agegoid pinom ay Ayginb aa aul paulieda, am asneoag umop oh oi ara satlueo 
which he didn't. The funny thing about Granite was, he didn't even act like he had a headache.
 Wve found out later that the engineer of the train saw the dog running toward the track, then tried
to look back to see if he had hit it. In the process, he banged his head and cut a huge hole in his 
scalp. He probably had a worse headache than Granite. But then, maybe his head wasn't as hard!
SUMMARY
The focus of this chapter was the senses of sight, balance and equilibrium, and hearing. The
special senses of smell and taste were covered briefly in previous chapters. You learmed the
anatomy of the external, middle, and internal ears using the provided drawings and a plastic
the brain also were discussed. Using the illustrations provided, the mechanisms by which
spatial orientation were covered. You were able to dissect a sheep's eye and learn its anatomi-
cal structures. lllustrations were used to describe how the retina works to facilitate vision.
Discussion also included the mechanism of aqueous humor production and resorption, the
microscopic anatomy of the cormea, and the mechanism of sight. Finally, a fun exercise using
a live animal was utilized to illustrate the lack of color vision and the extent of visual acuity in
dogs. In this you learned that dogs have trouble seeing items of similar gray-scale values, like
green grass and orange balls, but that objects having substantial black-and-white contrast are
much easier for them to see.
REVIEWOUESTIONS
1. Sound waves hitting the eardrum are translated into sensory impulses that are transmitted
through what structure to the temporal part of the brain?
 2. Name the three anatomical and functional parts of the ear.
3. What is the name of the ear flap?
4.
 Give both names of the structure that divides the horizontal ear canal from the middle ear
 5. What structure connects the middle ear to the nasopharynx, and why is its function necessary?
6.
 Name the three bones of the middle ear in order, from exterior to interior.
 7. Name the two organs of the inner ear that are responsible for balance and equilibrium.
 8. What are the little stones in the inner ear that stimulate the hair cells called?
Editorialrevie
Organs of Special Sense  339
 9. How are the semicircular canals arranged, and how is that arrangement of significance in
their function?
10. What is the name of the bony location of the eye?
11. What is the fibrous outer coat of the eye called?
 12. Differentiate between the bulbar conjunctiva and the palpebral conjunctiva. What is the
site where these two structures meet called?
13. What are the lateral and medial corners of the eyes called?
14. Give both names of the glands that have small pores on the margins of the eyelid.
15. What is the other name for the third eyelid?
 16. Name the apparatus (and its component structures) that drains tears from the eyelids to
the nose.
17. Name the layers of the cornea.
18. What is the name of the space between the cornea and the pupil?
19. What is the name of the space between the inner iris and the ciliary body?
20. Where is the vitreous humor located?
21. Name the innermost nerve cell layer at the back of the globe of the eye. The white dot at
the center of this layer is called what? This white dot connects to what structure?
22. What is the choroid layer?
 23. What is the name of the shiny, reflective layer of the choroid, and what is its function?
24. Name the two types of photoreceptors, and indicate which type is responsible for black
and white vision, and which type is responsible for seeing color.
25. What anatomical defect is responsible for the disease called glaucoma?
CHAPTER 17
NECROPSY: THE POSTMORTEM
EXAMINATION
OBJECTIVES
know the difference between an autopsy, necropsy, antemortem, and postmortem examination
understand the reason a veterinary technician should be able to perform a necropsy
 know the safety precautions necessary for the protection of all personnel involved in a postmortem
examination in all circumstances, whether it is a routine necropsy or one that may contain an infectious
agent and has the potential to spread to animal and/or human populations
understand the record keeping requirements and methods utilized in antemortem and postmortem exams
know what to look for, tests to be performed, and recordings necessary when doing an antemortem
examination or when examining the carcass prior to starting the necropsy portion of the postmortem
examination
know how to perform a necropsy
 be able to section a tumor and know the fixation process prior to submission for histopathological analysis
 understand the basic tenets of forensics and how it applies to the postmortem examination in animals
MATERIALS
 deceased animal, not preserved
Mayo dissecting scissors
 serrated postmortem scissors or other serrated scissors
probe
1 × 2 thumb forceps or Adson tissue forceps
#3 or #4 scalpel handle and blades
bone-cutting forceps
 rubber gloves
glass jars
10% formalin solution
glass slides
INTRODUCTION
The purpose of a necropsy is to determine the cause of death of a patient. In some cases
the antemortem information gained through the physical exam, laboratory results, and other
diagnostic procedures will provide sufficient knowledge to know what exactly caused the
patient's death. In these situations, observations of pathological changes in the body obtained
during a postmortem exam will help you ascertain what else may have contributed to the
death, and the extent of the lesions involved. In other situations you may have virtually no
Aaisaw aul aalos 0t paioadxa s! Asdoioau aut pue '4ieap s1! 0t 1ojd 1ualied aui jo abpamouy
of the patient's demise.
The necropsy procedure outlined by the AVMA-CVTEA guidelines for accreditation is part
of what every veterinary technology student must learn. The purpose of this knowledge is to
340
Editorialrevie
Necropsy: The Postmortem Examination 
341
enable a technician to perform a necropsy by opening the body cavities; then the veterinarian
or pathologist can view the organs in situ and lay them out on a tray after removal from
the body so further examination is possible. At this time a diagnosis can be made and/or
lesions noted that must be sectioned and placed in formalin to be sent to a laboratory for
histopathological analysis.
Technicians may also be part of a forensics team that goes beyond just determining the
cause of death of the animal, but also tries to recreate the events that occurred close to
death, and to reveal any part that trauma, poison, disease, or neglect may have played. This
reconstruction of events must fall within legal and possibly medical-criminal guidelines.
Necropsy Considerations
Ideally the body should be weighed and its temper-
ature recorded. If you are taking feld notes, record
Safety should always be the primary concern. The
the surface the animal was lying on and the condi-
potential always exists for three types of hazards:
tion of the ground around the animal. In addition,
biological, chemical, and physical. Depending on
note the air temperature. Organ weight data can be
the situation—whether the necropsy occurs in a vet-
recorded when collected during the necropsy.
erinary hospital, involves a farmer's animal in the
Radiographs of the body are optional and should
feld, or the investigation of a death of unknown
be done if this is a forensic investigation. Items to note
cause of a wild bird or on a poultry facility, appropri-
are newly broken or dislocated bones, and healing
ate clothing is required and can vary from a protec-
 and healed fractures. Look for the presence of foreign
tive smock or apron and wearing rubber gloves, to
objects. Note any patterns of possible abuse. Making
the highest-level, fully encapsulated suit. with a self-
notes on dental development, bone calcification, ossi-
 contained breathing apparatus.
fication centers, and epiphyseal closure can provide
The nature of the circumstances surrounding
 accurate age information, especially in pre-adults.
the animal's death, what diagnostic procedures have
The surface of the body should be observed for
been done antemortem, and knowledge about the
scars, abnormalities, discharges, discolorations, nod-
 patient. will dictate the extent of the workup prior to
ules, masses, and abnormalities. Comb the animal
the necropsy procedure. The best time to perform
and hold a piece of paper under the area you are
a necropsy is as soon after death as possible. Even
combing to collect and observe the debris obtained.
with refrigeration, lesions become more and more
Shave, count, and measure all wounds and lesions.
Bruising and bleeding in the tissues near wounds
ens. The animal's body should never be frozen, and
indicate that they occurred before the animal died.
neither should the specimens obtained during a
Look for, collect, and preserve any external para-
necropsy.
sites. Note the conditions of and any changes in the
Good record keeping is essential, whether you
eyes, ears, nose, mouth, anus, urinary and genital
are using standard medical records
s or specific
 tracts, and other openings.
necropsy forms. If not. previously recorded on medi-
 In a forensic investigation, photographing the
cal records, the signalment information should be
body and the surrounding area is necessary. Include
documented; this includes the owner's name and
 any significant findings and all lesions, both on
address, the animal's name or number, species, gen-
the surface of the animal and those observed during
der, age, breed, color, markings, and other perti-
 the necropsy procedure. Placing a ruler adjacent.
nent information that would specifically identify the
 to a lesion when photographing it. will document
animal. The initial part of the physical postmortem
its size.
exam（
documents the animal's measurements,
Collect representative samples as indicated,
including length: tip of the nose to base of the tail;
including such things as blood, insects, mites, bone
height: to top of the shoulder; and girth depending
 marrow, gastrointestinal contents, feces, and urine.
 on the species. Record information from tags,
You can take bone marrow from the femur, rib, ster-
 bands, and tattoos. Scan the carcass for microchips.
num, or vertebrae. Blood may be collected directly
Describe all abnormalities observed on the animal's
from the heart or major vessels, and urine from
body and collect samples where possible. Note that.
the urinary bladder. These samples can be help-
any interpretation of lesions should not appear in
ful because certain laboratory values remain stable
the description. Make an assessment of the animal's
after death. You should save gastrointestinal con-
body condition; was the animal of normal weight,
tents for identification and to screen for toxic sub-
underweight, cachexic, overweight, or obese? Also
 stances. During the necropsy, normal saline should
note the state of muscle rigor present.
be used to rinse organ surfaces, as water will cause
342
Chapter 1?
artifacts. Take microbiological samples as soon as
areas. Even though autolysis can cause artifacts to
possible during the necropsy by using sterile instru-
occur in tissues, it is better to obtain a tissue sample
ments to cut away contaminated surfaces; then col-
 and let the pathologist decide if the lesions noted
lect specimens with additional sterile instruments
were a result of a disease process or due to post-
or culture swabs. Take samples from any abnormal
mortem changes.
EXERCISE 17.1 THE NECROPSY
The procedure demonstrated as depicted in the photos was performed on a cat euthanized at the
owner's request. The presumptive diagnosis, which was confirmed on necropsy, was hepatic lipidosis.
This cat was used to show the organs in a more natural state as compared to the preserved cats used
for dissection. The necropsy procedure described here is a standard method that can be used on any
species or size of animal. A review of the literature on this procedure revealed only slight variations in
technique and order from the procedure listed here. It is written as though a graduate veterinary tech-
and diagnostician.
Procedure
 1. Begin the procedure using sharp, clean necropsy instruments such as those pictured in Figure 17.1.
If microbiological samples need to be taken, have a set of sterile instruments and culturettes avail-
able. Be sure to have all other necessary supplies and specimen containers on hand and readily
available, including jars of formalin. As previously mentioned, if applicable, have someone take
notes for you, or speak into a recording device for later transcription. Observe and note any lesions
on the surface of the body and on any orifice. In Figure 17.2 note the jaundice (yellow color) of the
skin together with petechial hemorrhages.
2. Placing the animal in dorsal recumbency, make a midline incision from the tip of the jaw to just.
below the anus. If an abdominal infection is suspected, use sterile instruments to prep the outside
of the skin, make a small incision, and then introduce a sterile culturette into the abdomen to
obtain an uncontaminated microbiological sample
FlGURE 17.1: Instruments needed for the necropsy procedure.
Copyright 2010 
Editorial
Necropsy: The Postmortem Examination 
343
 3. Using scissors or a scalpel, dissect and spread the skin from the abdomen, thorax, and neck area, expos-
ing the underlying tissues and lymph nodes. Note the amount and color of the subcutaneous adipose
tissue; in this cat the fat is icteric (jaundiced) as a result of bile pigment infiltration (Figure 17.3).
4. Carefully cut the muscles between the scapula and the thorax, and the muscles and soff. tissue sur-
rounding the hip joints, to allow the pelvic and thoracic limbs to lie flat against the table, thereby
stabilizing the cat in dorsal recumbency. Ideally, do not cut any vessels or nerves within the front or
hind limbs (Figure 17.4).
5. In the neck area, remove the muscles ventral to the trachea, and examine the thyroid and parathyroid glands
on both sides (Figure 17.5). Then locate and examine the salivary glands and regional lymph nodes.
Linea alba
Abdominal
body wall
Icteric
subcutaneous
fat
External abdominal
oblique muscle
 Petechial
Jaundiced skin
hemorrhages
FIGURE 17.2: Jaundice and pettechiation of skin.
FIGURE 17.3: Incision down ventral midline
with skin dissected off muscle layer and folded
laterally. Note icteric subcutaneous fat.
Incised 
area of
axilla
Incised
area of
groin
Thyroid
Esophagus
Trachea
 giand
FIGURE 17.4:
Cuts have been made through
FIGURE 17.5:
Ventral neck muscles have been
both axillary and groin areas so that legs lie flat on
dissected away to reveal thyroid and parathyroid
the table.
glands.
Editorialrevie
344
Chapter 17
Liver
Iver
Spleen
Greater
omentum
Jejunum
Kidney
Urinary
bladder
Descending,
Urinary
colon
bladder
FIGURE 17.6: Abdomen has been opened to
FIGURE 17.7: Greater omentum has been
reveal the abdominal organs in situ. Note the cen-
removed  and  organs  are being explored  within
timeter marks on the scalpel handle.
abdominal cavity.
 6. To completely expose the abdominal contents, use your scissors to make a cut through the abdomi-
nal wall from the ventral midline incision, caudolaterally on both sides adjacent. to the last ribs,
to about midway on the lateral sides. At the cranial border of the pubis, make a similar cut from
the midline incision laterally on both sides, and then fold the body wall out. of the way to view the
abdominal organs in situ (Figure 17.6). Note that the use of a scalpel handle marked in centimeters
can be used to identify the relative sizes of the various organs.
7. Excise or reflect the greater omentum so that the abdominal organs can be observed. At this point,
the veterinarian or pathologist will want to observe the organs (Figure 17.7). Methodically examine
 all of the viscera in situ, and observe their anatomical positions and sizes. Record any abnormali-
ties noted. Observe the fluid in the abdomen. (The lateral cuts previously described are only made
to the mid-lateral abdomen so that the fluid does not. flow out.) Record any abnormalities in fluid
quantity, color, consistency, or odor. Samples of this fluid can be taken for cellular content and
other laboratory tests. Locate and examine both adrenal glands (Figure 17.8). If wound paths are
present, use rods to demonstrate them, and then take photographs. In this cat, note the color of
the liver. It should be dark reddish-brown; instead, it is a speckled yellow and red color, indicating
that fatty infiltration has occurred in the parenchyma between the hepatocytes.
8. Verify the existence of negative pressure within the thoracic cavity by making a small stab incision
dure should be done through the non-muscular portion of the diaphragm; any fluid present in the
pleural cavity would drain out. In this cat, the puncture was done more ventrally because fluid was
known to be present (Figure 17.9). At this time the puncture hole can be prepped and microbio-
logical samples obtained from the thoracic cavity.
 9. Using bone cutters (or, on smaller animals, serrated scissors), remove the ventral one-third of the
rib cage (Figure 17.10). Observe the thoracic viscera in situ for correct anatomical position and
size. If any abnormal fluid is present, record its quantity, color, consistency, and odor. Samples of
that fluid can be taken and sent. to the lab for cellular examination and other laboratory tests as
required. In this cat, note the presence of a large quantity of icteric pleural effusion (fluid that has
leaked out of blood vessels and lymphatics into tissues or a body cavity). Again, demonstrate wound
 paths, as described for the abdomen.
If the owner wants to take the animal home for burial, perform a cosmetic necropsy. Instead of
removing the ventral one-third of the rib cage, make an incision either through the sternum or
Editorialrevie
Necropsy: The Postmortem Examination 
345
Adrenal
gland
Renal
vein
Left
kidney
StomachLiver
Diaphragm
Spleen
FlGURE 17.8: Left adrenal gland is examined.
FiGURE 17.9:
: Incision is being made through
the diaphragm.
Heart
Lung
lobe
Icteric
pleural fluid
Liver
Heart 
Trachea
Tongue
Digastric
muscle
FIGURE 17.10: Ventral one-third of the chest
FlGURE 17.11:
: The tongue has been removed
wall has been removed. Note the icteric pleural
 from the oral cavity and the dissection for removal
effusion in the thoracic cavity.
of the viscera of the neck and thoracic cavity is
being initiated.
adjacent to the sternum; then hold the chest cavity open with self-retaining retractors. After your
examination of the thoracic and abdominal viscera is complete, sew the body walls and skin back
together again, and then send the animal home for burial.
10. Dissect. through the soft tisue adjacent to the digastric muscles along the mandible, through to the
mouth and around the tongue and larynx. Pull the tongue down through the incision area; then
remove the tongue, larynx, trachea, esophagus, lungs, and heart as a unit, tying off the distal esopha-
gus to prevent gastric spillage (Figure 17.11). Examine the oral cavity, teeth, pharynx, and tonsils.
11. Lay the removed organs on a surface for examination. Incise the pericardial sac and observe for
abnormal fluid within; then reflect it over the base of the heart (Figure 17.12). Next, examine the fol-
lowing: the base and apex of the heart, coronary vessels, great vessels, atria, and ventricles. Dissect the
heart along the path of blood flow, similar to the way it was done during the disection of the sheep's
heart. Remove any blood and examine the endocardium, the thickness of the heart walls, and the
Editorialrevi
346
Chapter 1?
valves, and look for abnormalities that would indicate problems with blood flow, such as a ventricular
septal defect (Figure 17.13). The heart of this cat. does not appear enlarged, although samples of it
should be sent in for histopathological examination to rule out hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
12. Locate and section the thymus and the lymph nodes of the cranial thoracic viscera (Figure 17.14).
Examine the external surface of the trachea, and open it from the larynx to the main bronchi
(Figure 17.15). Palpate all lung lobes, and dissect through the lobar bronchi. Next, examine and
open the esophagus (Figure 17.16). In this cat, there are red areas in the lungs indicating inflam-
mation and consolidation, and the dorsal aspect of the intermediate lobe has an unusual lesion.
Tongue
Right cranial
lung lobe \
 Right
- Trachea
ventricle
 Right auricle
Right middle 
Left cranial
lung lobe
 lung lobe
Right caudal
Left caudal
lung lobe
lung lobe 
Right
intermediate
- Paraconal artery
 lung lobe
Left ventricle
FIGURE 17.12:
The viscera, including the tongue, esophagus, larynx, trachea, lungs, heart, and 
pericardium, have been removed from the mouth, neck, and thorax. The pericardium in this photo
has already been removed.
Left
Left
 Myocardium
 atrium
ventricle
Chordae
 Intermediate
Papillary
Heart
Lymph node
Trachea
tendineae
lung lobe with
muscle
(with pericardial
(with unusual
lesion present 
sac still attached)
appearance)
FIGURE 17.13:
: Photo of an open left atrium
FIGURE 17.14:
: Photo showing an enlarged and
and ventricle (the right atrium and ventricle has
already been opened).
Head of the cat is toward the right.
Editorialrevie
Necropsy: The Postmortem Examination 
347
Trachea
Bifurcation
Main
Lobar
bronchi
bronchus
Esophagus (opened to view mucosa)
FGURE 17.15: Incised trachea and bronchi
FIGURE 17.16: Using scissors to open the
extending into the lung lobes.
esophagus attached to the dorsal aspect of the
trachea.
Right kidney
Left kidney
(renal ca psule
removed)
-Ureter
Urinary
bladder
-Urethra
Uterine
body
Vagina
Cervix
Vulva
FIGURE 17.17:
:Dissected urogenital system from the vulva to the kidneys. This cat was spayed
so the vagina, cervix, and part of the uterine body were present.
13. Using bone cutters, locate by palpation each obturator foramen and cut the pubis cranially and
caudally on both sides, opening the pelvic canal. Using a scalpel, incise the skin and subcutane-
ous tissue around the external genitalia. Free both the kidneys and ureters from their attachment.
sites. Bluntly dissect the external genital tract, urethra, and, in the female, dissect the vagina, cer-
vix, and body of the uterus (include the horns and ovaries if still present) off of their attachment.
to the rectum. In the male, remove both the testes and spermatic cord from their attachments
at the proximal prostate area. Remove the kidneys, ureters, bladder, urethra, and genitalia, and
place them on a clean surface for examination. Reflect the renal capsule from each kidney, and
examine the ureters and renal vasculature. Cut one kidney longitudinally, and the other trans-
versely; this was not done in Figure 17.17, so that it could show the entire genito-urinary tract. Then
extend each incision into the renal pelvis and ureter. Then serially section each kidney and ureter.
Open the bladder, urethra, and prostate gland (if a male). Then examine the genitalia.
14. Examine the anus and anal glands; then, using a scalpel, incise the surrounding skin and subcuta-
neous tissues. Remove the entire abdominal viscera as a unit. Then examine the remaining lymph
nodes and the abdominal aorta.
Editorialrevie
348
Chapter 1?
15. Lay the organs on a clean surface. Next, examine the entire pancreas. Then open the distal esoph-
agus and stomach, and examine the contents and lining (Figure 17.18). Collect samples of the
contents, as necessary. Incise through the pylorus to the area of the hepatopancreatic ampulla.
Apply pressure to the gallbladder while observing for bile expulsion through the major duo-
denal papilla (Figure 17.19). Open and examine the gallbladder. Then open and examine the
 Stomach
Liver
(with gastric folds
and mucosa visible)
FGURE 17.18: The gastrointestinal tract has been removed. The dissection starts with the open-
ing of the stomach. Normal contents and gastric folds were noted.
Gallbladder
Cystic duct
Hepatic duct
-Bile duct
Major duodenal papilla with
bilebeingexpressed
 through opening
Duodenum(mucosavisible)
FIGURE 17.19:
allq uaajh yhm ellded jeuaponp jolew aui pue pauado uaaq sey wnuaponp aul 
coming through the opening is demonstrated after compressing the gallbladder.
Editorialrevie
Necropsy: The Postmortem Examination 
349
hepatic artery and veins, and the portal vein (visceral surfaces). Serially section the liver and
spleen (Figure 17.20). Samples can be taken in areas containing lesions. Examine the omentum,
mesentery, root of the mesentery, and mesenteric lymph nodes. Open the duodenum and con-
tinue through both the small intestine and large intestine. In Figure 17.21, only a small part of the
jejunum has been opened. Note that the mucosa is normal and lacks petechiation. Collect fecal
samples as indicated.
16. Examine the hip, stifle, shoulder, and elbow joints for ruptured tendons and ligaments; then open
them to look for arthritic changes and abnormal fluid (Figure 17.22). Document any evidence of 
trauma observed. For any bony swellings, the muscles should be stripped off and a section of dis-
eased bone sent to the lab.
17. If there is any suggestion of neurological disease, the brain and spinal cord should be opened. In 
this exercise, the rest of the examination is optional. First, carefully remove the eyes intact. Then
Liver
(being sectioned)
Jejunum
(mucosa visible)
Stomach
FIGURE 17.20: The liver is being sectioned. Note
FlGURE 17.21: The jejunum is being opened
the abnormal light yellow speckled appearance of
along its length. Normal mucosa is visible.
the liver tissue characteristic of fatty infiltration.
Acetabulum
Femoral head
FIGURE 17.22:
 The coxofemoral joint has been opened and disarticulated with the femoral head
and acetabulum visible. The pelvis is toward the left and the leg is toward the right.
Editorialrevi
350
Chapter 1?
remove the head. Make a dorsal incision from the nose to the foramen magnum on the midline,
and reflect the skin ventrally. Next, transect and examine the ear canals. After excision of the
temporal muscles, make lateral cuts from the foramen magnum cranially on each side, until they
meet. Pry off the top of the skull and examine the internal dorsal surface. Turn the head over and
let the brain fall gently into your hand or onto a surface, while carefully cutting the cranial nerves
to free the brain from the skull. Then serially section the brain.
18. Saw transversely through the frontal and maxillary bones in front of the orbits to examine the nasal
cavities and sinuses.
19. Return to the body cavities; examine the ventral aspects of the vertebrae. Remove the rest of the
skin and observe the dorsal body musculature for any abnormalities.
20. In cases of spinal disease or trauma, cutting through the laminae and removing the dorsal spinal
in one piece.
Hepatic lipidosis is a secondary disease caused when a cat stops eating (becomes anorexic). It is
mately, liver failure. Normalhemoglobin degradation cannot occur, and bile pigments back up into
tissues, causing icterus in organs (and fl uids) and the jaundiced appearance of the skin. The necropsy
was to determine the reason for the anorexia. The reason for the inciting cause was not readily appar
ent, and histopathological examination was needed. It is possible that some initial liver problems might
have caused additional liver problems. Specimens taken for histopathological examination would have
included the liver, the kidney, the entire intermediate lung lobe, the abnormal cranial thoracic lymph
node, and a distal section of the right humerus, which was either very arthritic or contained an osteo-
sarcoma.Unfort.unately,the owner did not. elect. to have histopathology done.
EXERCISE 17.2 SECTIONING METHOD FOR TUMORS
Tissue samples obtained for lab analysis during the necropsy procedure must be prepared in such a
 manner to ensure that the fixative solution (10% formalin) penetrates sufficiently deep to prevent.
autolysis in the center of the specimen. Formalin can be expected to penetrate only about 1 cm in most.
tissues. For a tumor found during a necropsy or removed during surgery, it is often necessary to pre-
serve the entire structure to identify its borders and verify that complete excision occurred. The follow-
ing exercise will demonstrate the proper method of tissue preparation to ensure adequate preservation
throughout the specimen.
1. Using a crabapple, make serial slices that yield sections no greater than 1 cm thick. Do not cut all
the way through the crabapple. Instead, leave a 1-cm thick area at the bottom of the cuts so that the
fruit remains in one piece (Figure 17-23). If this were a tumor, a pathologist would be able to view
formalin would be able to penetrate the entire tumor.
2. When fixing a piece of tissue, the amount of fixative needed is 10 times the volume of the tissue.
Accordingly, a 1 cubic centimeter (cc) piece of tissue must be placed in 10 milliliters (ml) of fixa-
tive. To fnd a tumor's volume in cubic centimeters, a technician could measure it and calculate
it, or weigh it and utilize the following estimate: assume 1 gram (g) of tissue displaces 1 cc of fluid,
therefore a tumor weighing 10 grams could be estimated to have a volume of 10 cc. Weigh your
crabapple in grams and fll in the blanks below to estimate the amount of fixative you would need.
a. weight. of crabapple:
CC
D
ccX10=
 ml of fixative required.
Copyright 2010 Ceng
Necropsy: The Postmortem Examination 
351
c. What is the minimum number of slices necessary for a tumor that is 8 cm long?
Answer:
 d. How many milliliters of fixative are necessary for a perfectly round tumor that. is 4 cm in diam-
eter? The equation for the volume of a sphere is V=4/3rr', where V= volume, r=radius.
Answer:_
 3. The tissue is fixed for 24 hours, and then it can be transferred to a small container filled with fixa-
tive for shipping. The answer to question c is seven slices, and the answer to question d is 335 ml.
Note that in “d" above, for simplicity's sake, we used a perfectly round sphere. If the tumor were an
ellipsoid, or egg-shaped, the formula would have been V=4/ 3mr,rers (see figure 17.24). It is obvious now
that just weighing a tumor or mass and using the approximation of converting the weight directly to c's
is much easier than doing these calculations.
There may be a time when the organ or tumor is too large and/or you do not have enough forma-
lin to ensure adequate preservation. In this case, placing the specimen in a bag filled with physiologic
saline solution (and then double bagging it) will suffice if you can get it to a lab as soon as possible.
cm
Icm
FIGURE 17.23: Method of sectioning of a tumor for fixation.
FIGURE 17.24: The three radi used to calculate the volume of a elliptoid-shaped object.
Editorialrevi
352
Ch a p t e r 1 7
Forensics is an area of veterinary medicine in which all veterinarian must be knowledgeable especially
Considering the possibiity of bioterrorism or zoonotic disease outbreaks. According to Dr. Lonnie King,
Acting Director of the National Center for Zoonotic, Vector-Borne, and Enteric Diseases, infectious
organisms cause some 1,620 human diseases, 60 percent of which are zoonotic. in adoition, of the
Most states have procedures in place or are developing procedures to address disasters, terrorism,
diseases that might enter their state or area. Training in proper procedures, in the use of protective
equipment, and in the team's activation and response are of critical importance.
Safety is again the prime concern. ff something killed an animal, the aim is to prevent it from killing
again. The common procedure is to institute a three-layered border to isolate and secure a scene, whether
it is a crime scene or the scene at which an animal or bird is found dead of unknown causes. The outer
border is the safe area for bystanders, media, and nonessential personnel; the middle zone is a buffer and
Work area; and the inner zone is the core area or the site where the event occurred. Barricades consisting
of tape or ropes must be depioyed to prevent unauthorized people from entering the area and potentially
materiais must be set up. Levels of protection required vary with the nature of the event, and generally
too much protection is better than not enough. Disposable coveralls, gowns, boot and shoe covers, and
acceptable. Even using a disposable pen to write with may prevent accidentally taking dangerous disease
agents home or back to the office.
Experience will tell us when "something isn't right. " This may be especially true with odors, as many
conditions have a characteristic odor. Always treat unrecognized odors as though you are dealing with a
toxic substance. Assume the animal has an infectious disease until proven otherwise.
If a disease is suspected that has great risk of environmental contamination, either a diagnosis must
be obtained prior to the necropsy or it must be performed under strict quarantine conditions. Anthrax is an
example of a bioterrorism weapon. Opening a carcass with anthrax will induce the bacteria to form spores
that are then dispersed throughout the environment. ff anthrax is suspected, get blood smears first from
during a necropsy. f the diagnosis is confirmed, the carcass must be quarantined and destroyed properly
such as incineration.
Determination of time of death is dependent on body temperature, which in turn depends on ambient
Initially, body temperature drops; however, after the onset of putrefaction due to metabolic activity of
develop. Higher environmental temperatures ailso shorten this time. In temperate regions, the following is a
general rule of thumb that may help in estimating the time of death (but use it with caution): Warm means
dead for not more than eight hours; stiff means dead for not more than three days.
Necropsy: The Postmortem Examination 
353
eterinary
gnettes
his final story is almost embarrassing to tell. wwhen I was between my third and fourth years
Colorado, where we encountered the case of a dog with severe dyspnea. The owner told
us that he had brought the dog in as soon as he noticed its condition. A thoracic radiographic series
 showed multiple radio-opaque masses scattered throughout the lung field. It appeared to be either
primary or metastatic neoplasia, and the owner decided not to biopsy any of the thoracic masses 
the dog to the diagnostic lab at Colorado State University. I made the arrangements and took the
body to the pathology lab
Upon opening the chest, we found granulomatous lesions characteristic of a deep fungal
infection, which the lab confirmed to be cryptococcosis, caused by the organism Cryptococcus 
neoformans. It was not surprising this dog was dyspneic; very little normal lung tissue remained.
Furthermore, the owner must not have been paying much attention to this dog because this disease
does not get to this level overnight.
About a week or so later I noticed a red, pustular lesion on the front of my right forearm. Of
 course, I immediately got out my pathology book and read that cryptococcosis has multiple forms:
respiratory, cutaneous, ophthalmic, and nervous. The fungus responsible is transmitted by inhalation
of the yeast-like form of the organism, and in cats it usually colonizes the nose and sinuses before
spreading to other organs. In dogs it has a predilection for the CNS and the eye but disseminates
to more organs than it does in the cat. I discovered that no documentation exists that the spheri-
 cal organisms found in tissues are directly transmissible from animals to humans. In other words,
humans can get cryptococcosis, but only from the yeast-like soil-borne state. I was safe. At least,
I thought so- until I went to a dermatologist.
"lt's theoretically possible you got infected if you splashed cells from the dog's chest onto an
already-open sore," he told me.
“lI didn't splash any tissue onto my arm," I told him. He was not convinced. So much for applying 
 scientific evidence and logic.
"Oh boy this could be my first case of cryptococcosis," he declared excitedly. "vwe'll have to do
 a punch biopsy." He actually said this! I don't know where he went to medical school and learmed 
Insensitive.
Still, no matter how much I was sure he was full of dog-poo, in the back of my mind the "vwhat ifs"
kept creeping in. As it turned out, the biopsy came back negative; it was nothing more than a little
bacterial infection. A course of antibiotics and I was fine.
remember, it took months and the use of an autogenous vaccine to get rid of it.
g 'all aul pue sassaosge eo ylm shueap a ui aiao ao aa di pasn i aaio au ui Ai
 now I wear protective gloves when dealing with all infections, and a mask and glasses for dentals. I
am conscientious about wearing my protective gear during radiographic exposures, and about mak-
jshuuh le ui 'isly Aag saaoih bueam uaum uaaa 'ueaa pap aun ui sl aw jo ped ou jeul ains bus
354
Chapter 1?
SUMMARY
-aa ioy Aessaoau s! h! aym aanpasoid Asdoioau aut inoqe paueal aaey noa laideuo siut ul
erinary technicians to know how to perform one, and how you might assist your veterinarian
and add another skill to your repertoire. Safety has been stressed a number of times, both in
terms of your personal safety but also that of the environment. You learmed about antemortem
examinations of the body and all they entail, plus the procedures involved in postmortem
examinations. When it is necessary to send an organ or pathological specimen such as a
tumor to a lab, you learned how to section it.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is the purpose of a necropsy?
 2. Differentiate between antemortem and postmortem.
 3. Why would a veterinary technician need to know how to perform a necropsy?
4. What is the primary concern in all postmortem exams?
 5. Name the three types of hazards that might be encountered during a necropsy.
6. When is the best time to perform a necropsy?
7. Define signalment.
 8. What parts of an animal should be examined prior to starting to cut?
 9. What liquid should be used to clean the surfaces of the body or of organs, and why?
10.  Name all the equipment and supplies needed to perform the necropsy procedure.
11.  Why is the abdomen opened as described in the necropsy procedure?
12. Why is a puncture through the diaphragm made prior to opening the thorax?
13. Why is only the ventral one-third of the chest wall removed?
 14. What thickness of tissue can formalin be expected to penetrate?
15.  To ensure that a tumor that is 10 cm long and 5 cm thick is properly fixed, how many
cuts of what depth would be required?
Editorialr
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bacha, W. J., Jr., and L. M. Bacha, Color Atlas of Veterinary Histology. 2nd ed. Baltimore:
Lippincott, 2000.
Boyd, J. S., Color Atlas of Clinical Anatomy of the Dog and Cat. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Mosby,
1999.
Cochran, P. E., Guide to Veterinary Medical Terminology. St. Louis: Mosby, 1991.
Coles, E. H., Veterinary Clinical Pathology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders, 1986.
Colville, T., and J. Bassert, Clinical Anatomy & Physiology for Veterinary Technicians. St.
Louis: Mosby, 2002.
Cooper, E. L. and L. D. Burton, Agriscience Fundamentals & Applications. 3rd ed. New York:
Delmar Thomson Learning, 2002.
Edwards, N. J., ECG Manual for the Veterinary Technician. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders,
1993.
Evans, E. E., Miller's Anatomy of the Dog. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders, 1993.
Evans, H. E., and A. deLattunta, Miller's Guide to the Dissection of the Dog. 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders, 1993.
Ettinger, S. J., Textbook of Veterinary Intermal Medicine, Diseases of the Dog and Cat. Philadelphia:
W. B. Saunders, 1975.
Frandson, R. D., and T. L. Spurgeon, Anatomy and Physiology of Farm Animals. 5th ed.
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1992.
Gilbert, S. G., Pictorial Anatomy of the Cat. 7th ed. Seattle: University of Washington, 1987.
Holmstrom, Steven E., Veterinary Dentistry for the Technician & Office Staff Ist ed.
Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders, 2000.
Hudson, L. C., and W. P. Hamilton, Atlas of Feline Anatomy for Veterinarians. Philadelphia:
W. B. Saunders, 1993.
Jenkins, T. W., Functional Mammalian Neuroanatomy. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1972.
Kealy, J. K., Diagnostic Radiology of the Dog and Cat. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders,
1987.
Marieb, E. N., Human Anatomy & Physiology Laboratory Manual. 7th ed. San Francisco:
Benjamin Cummings, 2002.
Miller L. and Zawistowski S., Shelter Medicine for Veterinarians and Staff: Veterinary Forensics,
Ames, Iowa: Blackwell, 2004.
355
Copyright 2010 Ce
oreChapter(s)
ditorial
356
Bibliography
McDonald, L. E., and M. H. Pineda, Veterinary Endocrinology and Reproduction. 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1989.
Neal, K. G., and B. H. Kalbus, Dissection Guide for the Cat (and Selected Sheep Organs).
Minneapolis: Burgess, 1971.
Patten, B. M., Foundations of Embryology. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964.
Pratt, P.W., Principles and Practice of Veterinary Technology. St. Louis: Mosby, 1998.
Reagan, W. J., T. G. Sanders, and D. B. DeNicola, Veterinary Hematology Atlas of Common Domestic
Species. Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University, 1998.
Rebar, A. H., Handbook of Veterinary Cytology. St. Louis: Ralston Purina, 1978.
Reece, W.O., Functional Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals. 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
Sandman, K. M., and J. Hatari. “Cranial Cruciate Ligament Repair Techniques: Is One Best?*
Veterinary Medicine 96(11): 850-856, 2001.
Sisson, S., and J. D. Grossman, The Anatomy of the Domestic Animals. 5th ed. Philadelphia:
W. B. Saunders, 1975.
Stashak, T. S., Adam's Lameness in Horses. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1985.
Synbiotics Corporation. ICG Status-Pro C? ICG Status-LH. San Diego: Synbiotics Corporation,
1998.
Tilley, L. P., and F. W. K. Smith, The 5-Minute Veterinary Consult, Canine and Feline. Baltimore:
Williams & Wilkins, 1997.
Tortora, G. J., and S. R. Grabowski, Principles of Anatomy and Physiology. 9th ed. New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 2000.
A
Adrenal cortex, 269
Abdominal, defined, 3
Adrenal glands, 270-271, 273
Abdominal aorta, 228
Adrenal medulla, 271
Abdominal oblique muscle, 167
Adrenalin, 271
Abdominal wall muscles, 167
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 269
Abducens nerve, 318
Adventitia, 182
Abduction, defined, 4, 5
Aging a dog or cat, 183-184
Abductor cruris caudalis muscle, 172
Agonist muscle, 320
Abomasum, 197, 199
Agranulocytes, 70
Absolute cell count, 83
Air capillaries, 248
Absolute refractory period, 304
Aldosterone, 259, 270
Accessory digestive organs, 181
Alimentary tract, 18l, 182
Accessory head, 162
Allantoic membranes, 285
Accessory lobes, 243
Allantoic sac, 285
Accessory pancreatic duct, 193-194
Allantois, 285
Accessory sex glands, 283
All-or-none principle, 304
Acetylcholine, 311
Alpha cells, 272
Acetylcholinesterase, 320
Alveolar duct, 245
Achilles tendon, 174
Alveolar sac, 245
Acidophilic cell parts, 27
Alveoli, 41, 43, 245
Acromial part, 159
Amnion, 285
Actin, 149, 152
Amnionic sac, 285
Action of the muscle, 154-155
Amorphous ground substance, 66
Action potential, 303
Ampullae, 283
Active transport, 20-21
Amylase, 202-203
Adduction, defined, 4, 5
Anatomical terms, 3-4
Adductor brevis, 172
Anconeus muscle, 162
Adductor longus, 172
Androgens, 271
Adductor magnus, 172
Anestrus, 285, 292
Adductor muscles, 172
Angiotensin, 259
Adductor pollicis longus muscle, 165-166
Antagonist muscle, 320
Adenohypophysis, 268
Antebrachium, defined, 3
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP), 177
Ante-mortem, 341
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 21, 25, 177
Anterior, defined, 1
Adipocytes, 62
Anterior chambers of the eye, 335
Adipose tissue
Anterior pituitary, 268
 connective tissue, 54
Anterior-posterior view, 6
 described, 62
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
function, 63
endocrine system, 268, 270
hypodermis or subcutis, 92
rinary system, 259, 263-264
location, 62-63
Antigenicity, 20
pigmented skin, 96
Antlers, 100
skin, 86
Anucleated red blood cells, 70
slide, 63-64
Aorta, 210, 217
subcutaneous, 98
Aortic arch, 225
Adjacent, defined, 2
Aortic valve, 218
Editorialrevie
358
Index
Apex of the heart, 211
Band neutrophils, 7l, 74
Apical foramen, 185
Bars, 100
Apical lobes, 243
Basal cells, 49, 53
Apical surface, 41
 Basal lamina, 41
Apocrine glands, 94, 96
Basal surface, 41
 Appendicular, defined, 3
Base of the heart, 211
 Appendicular skeleton, 109
Basement membrane
Apple, cross-sectioning, 35-36
epidermis, 87
Aqueduct of Sylvius, 319
epithelial tissue, 41
Aqueous humor, 335
 simple columnar epithelium, 46
Arachnoid, 314
 simple squamous epithelium, 42
Arbor vitae, 314, 319
stratified columnar epithelium, 52
Arcuate artery, 255, 262
stratified squamous epithelium, 49
Arcuate vein, 262
urinary bladder or transitional
Areolar or loose connective tissue, 54, 56-57
epithelium, 53
Arrector pili muscle, 96
Basihyoid bone, 240
Arterial system, 208
 Basophilic cell parts, 27
Arteries, 219, 223, 224-229
Basophils, 56, 70, 71, 75
Arthrology, 139-140
Beta cells, 272
 Articular projections, 110
Biceps brachi muscle, 162
Arytenoid cartilages, 240
 Biceps femoris muscle, 170
Ascending colon, 195
Bicornuate, 288
Ascending loop, 258
Bicuspid valve, 218
ATP. See Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
Bile, 182
Atrial systole, 209
Bile duct, 182, 195
Atrioventricular bundle, 230
 Bipolar neurons, 301
Atrioventricular node, 230
Birds. See Fowl
Atrioventricular valves, 209
 Bitch, mammary gland, 104
Auditory tubes, 188, 239, 327
Blood, 54, 70-76
Auscultate, 251
Blood pressure, 219, 233-234
Autolysis, 24, 32
Blood-brain barrier, 322
Autonomic nervous system, 299, 310-313
Blood-vascular system, 207, 219
Autophagy, 24
 Body of the stomach, 190
Axial, defined, 3
Body of the uterus, 280, 288
Axial skeleton, 109
Boideus thoracic muscles, 16l
Axillary, defined, 3
 Bone marrow cavities and spaces, 109
Axillary artery, 227
Bones. See also Skeletal system
Axillary vein, 223
basihyoid bone, 240
Axon, 28, 81, 300, 302
cancellous (spongy) bone, 109, 1l4-116
Axon hillock, 82, 303
coffin bone, 100
Axonal terminal, 301
compact bone, 109, 111-114
 Azurophilic granules, 74
comparative osteology, 130-139
Azygos vein, 221
carpus, 134
chicken skeleton, 138-139
B
feet, 137
Back
foreleg, 133
deep back muscles, 176-177
hind leg, 135
deep muscles, 161
skulls, 130-132
superficial muscles, 158-159
tarsus, 136
Index
359
connective tissue, 54, 76-77
C
distal sesamoid bone, 100
Calcium measurements, 142-143
erosion of, 109
Canal, 110
flat bones, 110
Canaliculi, 77, 113
functions, 109
Cancellous (spongy) bone, 109, 114-116
Haversian system of, 112
Capillaries, 45, 71
histology, 11l-116
Capillary bed, 219
 cancellous (spongy) bone,
Carcinomas, 144
114-116
Cardia, 190
 compact bone, 1ll-114
Cardiac lobes, 243
irregular, 110
Cardiac muscle, 79-80, 147, 152-153
lacuna bone, 77
Cardiac region, 190
long bone parts, 1l0, 111
Cardiac sphincter, 190
metacarpal bones, 125-126
Cardiovascular system
nasal turbinate, 239
arteries, 224-229
navicular bone, 100
blood pressure, 219, 233-234
pneumatic, 110
 blood-vascular system, 207
process, 110
clinical significance, 234
projections, 110
electrocardiogram, 230-233
remodeling, 109
heart
short bones, 100, 110
anatomy, 211-218
types of, 110
cardiac cycle, 209-210
woven bone, 109
chambers, 209
Bony orbit, 332
function, 40, 207
Bowman's capsule, 37, 43, 44, 258
overview, 207, 209-210
Brachial, defined, 3
phases, 209
Brachial artery, 227
overview, 207-208
Brachial plexus, 305, 306
vascular system, 219
Brachial vein, 223
veins, 220-224
Brachialis muscle, 162
veterinary vignettes, 235-236
Brachiocephalic artery, 226
Carina, 242
Brachiocephalic trunk, 226
Carotene, 96
Brachiocephalic veins, 222
Carpal pad, 97
Brachioradialis muscle, 165
Carpus, cat skeleton, 125-126
Brain
Cartilage connective tissue
anatomy, 314-319
blood, 70-76
brainstem, 313, 314
bone, 76-77
nerve cells, 82
elastic cartilage, 67-68
nervous system, 299
fibrous cartilage, 68-70
physiology, 313-314
histology, 54
Branched cardiac muscle, 79, 80
hyaline cartilage, 66-67
Broad ligament, 281, 288
overview, 66
Bronchial sounds, 251
Cat
Brown fat, 62
aging, 183-184
 Buccal, defined, 4
artery dissection, 224-229
 Bulbar conjunctiva, 332
blood, 7l, 73
Bulbourethral glands, 283, 292
claw, 98
Bulbs of the heel, 103
description using anatomical terms, 7-8
Bulbus glandis, 283
electrocardiogram, 231
Editorialrevie
360
Index
Cat (continued)
Caudal lobes, 243
endocrine gland dissection, 272-274
Caudal mediastinum, 242
foot pads, 96-98
Caudal mesenteric artery, 229
kidney dissection, 259-262
Caudal thyroid artery, 226
lower respiratory system, 242-247
Caudal vein, 224
 mammary gland, 104
Caudal vena cava, 216
necropsy, 343-351
Caudally, defined, 2
peripheral nerve dissection, 305-310
Caudate lobe, 190
 reproductive system dissection
Cavities, 110
female, 288-290
Cecum, 195
male, 290-292
Celiac artery, 228
skeletal musculature, 154-177
Cell
abdominal wall muscles, 167
absolute cell count, 83
chest, superficial muscles, 155-156
alpha, 272
deep back muscles, 176-177
anatomy, 20
front leg muscles, 16l-166
anucleated red blood cells, 70
hind leg, deep muscles, 175
basal, 49, 53
hind leg, superficial muscles, 167-171
beta, 272
neck, superficial muscles, 157-158
cell body, 28, 300
posterior leg muscles, 174
cell junctions, 21
shoulder and back, deep muscles, 161
cell processes, 28
shoulder and back, superficial muscles,
clinical significance, 29
158-159
columnar, 41
thigh, deeper muscles, 172-174
 connective tissue, 54
skeleton, 116-129
 cross-sectional appearance of a sheet 
carpus, 125-126
of cells, 38
femur, 127-128
cuboidal, 4l, 45
fbula, 128
 cut at angles, 35
humerus, 124
cytoplasm, 20, 22
 metacarpal bones, 125-126
defined, 19
metatarsals, 129
delta, 272
os coxae (pelvis), 126-127
differential cell count, 70
phalanges, 125-126, 129
embryonal mesenchymal, 109
radius, 124-125
endothelial, 42
ribs and sternum, 119
erythrocytes (red blood cells), 70, 74
scapula, 123-124
germ, 279
skull and mandible, 120-123
glial cells, 299
tarsus, 128
goblet cells, 48, 49
tibia, 128
ICSH, 269
ulna, 125
intercalated, 259
vertebrae, 116-119
interstitial (cells of Leydig), 282
topographical anatomy, 9
juxtaglomerular, 259
upper respiratory system, 239-242
Kupffer cells, 182
vein dissection, 220-224
Langerhans' cell, 87
Cauda equina, 305
leukocytes (white blood cells), 70, 83
Caudad, defined, 2
mast cells, 56, 57
Caudal, defined, 2, 3
Merkel cells, 87
Caudal artery, 229
 mesenchymal cells, 55
Caudal colliculi, 314
mesothelial, 42
Editorialrevie
lndex  361
mucosal cells, 48-49
Cerebrospinal fluid, 314, 318
multinucleated, 2l, 149
Cerebrum, 313
muscle cells, 79, 149
Cervical, defined, 3
 myoepithelial, 259
Cervical artery, 227
nerve cells, 81, 82
Cervical nerves, 305
pancreatic islet, 272
Cervical part, 158
parts of, 20-26
Cervix, 281, 290
cilia, 26
Chestnuts, 98, 99
cytoplasm, 20, 22
Chicken skeleton, 138-139
flagella, 26
Choanae, 239
identification using microscope, 27-29
Choanal slit, 248
inclusion bodies, 20, 26
Chondroblasts, 66
nucleus, 20, 21-22
Chondrocytes, 66, 67, 69
organelles, 20, 22-26
Chondrogenic hyaline cartilage, 66
 plasma membrane, 20-21
Chondroitin sulfate, 66
plasma cells, 56, 57
Chondronectin, 66
principal cells, 259
Chordae tendineae, 217
processed, 302
Chorion, 285
purpose of, 19
Choroid, 336
relative cell count, 83
Choroid plexus, 318
Renshaw cell, 320
Chromatin, 22
reticular, 65
Chromosomes, 22
Schwann cells, 304
Cilia
sliced, 34
centrioles, 25
spindle-shaped, 81, 153
described, 26
squamous, 38, 41
epithelial tissue, 41
stellate mesenchymal, 55
eyelashes, 332
striated cardiac muscle, 79
 pseudostratified columnar
structural components, 20
epithelium, 48
surface, 41
Ciliary body, 335
tissue, 40
Cisterns, 22, 24
unstriated smooth muscle, 81
Claws, 98
Cementum, 185
Cleidobrachialis muscle, 156
Central (Haversian) canal, 113
Cleidocervicalis muscle, 158
Central canal
Cleidomastoid muscle, 158
bone, 76-77
Cloaca, 202
nervous system, 318, 319, 320
Coccygeal, defined, 3
Central nervous system (CNS), 299
Coccygeal nerves, 305
Central pallor, 70
Cochlea, 327, 328
Central suleus, 100
Coffin bone, 100
Centrioles, 25
 Collagenous fibers
Centrosome, 25
areolar connective tissue, 57
Cephalic, defined, 2
areolar or loose connective tissue, 56
Cephalic vein, 223
connective tissue, 54
Cerebellar peduncle, 314, 315
dense irregular connective tissue, 58
Cerebellum, 314, 315, 319
dense regular connective tissue, 60
Cerebral hemispheres, 313, 314
fibrous cartilage, 68, 69
Cerebral longitudinal fissure, 314
reticular connective tissue, 64
Cerebral peduncle, 314, 318
skin, 90, 91
Editorialrevie
362
Index
Collateral cartilages, 100
Corpus spongiosum penis, 283
Collateral sulci, 103
Corpuscle
 Collateral ulnar artery, 228
Meissner's corpuscles, 90
Collecting duct, 258
 Pacinian corpuscle, 92
Columnar cells, 4l
renal corpuscle, 37
Commissures, 103
Cortex
Common iliac veins, 224
cerebellum, 319
Common meatus, 239
hairy mammal skin, 93, 94
Compact bone, 109, 111-114
kidney vascular supply, 255
Compound microscope. See Microscope
ovary, 280
Condyle, 110
Corticosterone, 271
Cones of the eye, 337
Cortisol, 271
Conjunctiva, 332
Cortisone, 271
Conjunctival sac, 332
Costocervical trunk, 227
Connective tissue
Cow
 adipose tissue, 62-64
 comparative osteology, feet, 137
 areolar or loose connective tissue, 56-57
mammary gland, 103-104
 connective tissue proper, 54
Cowper's glands, 283
dense irregular connective tissue, 58-59
Crackles, 251
dense regular connective tissue, 59-60
Craniad, defined, 2
elastic connective tissue, 6l-62
Cranial, defined, 1, 2, 3
embryonal connective tissue, or
Cranial drawer movement, 143
mesenchyme, 55-56
 Cranial laryngeal artery, 227
histology, 54-55
Cranial lobes, 243
overview, 40, 41
Cranial mediastinum, 242, 245
 papilla, 94
Cranial mesenteric artery, 228
reticular connective tissue, 64-65
Cranial mesenteric vein, 224
sheath, 94
Cranial nerve, 299, 310, 315
special. See Special connective tissues
Cranial pancreatoduodenal artery, 228
subcutaneous areolar connective tissue, 92
Cranial thyroid artery, 226-227
Contact, defined, 4
Cranial vena cava, 216, 221
Copulation, 279
Cranial-caudal view, 6
Coracobrachialis muscle, 162, 164
Cranially, defined, 2
Corium, 98, 103
Cranium, defined, 2, 3
Cornified tissue, 49
Creatinine kinase (CK), 177
Cornua, 288
Cremaster muscle, 283
Coronary band, 98, 100
Crest, 110
Coronary circulation, 208
Cricoid cartilage, 239
Coronary corium, 100, 103
Cricothyroid ligament, 239
Coronary groove, 100
Cristae, 25
Coronary ligament, 189-190
Crop of fowl, 201
Coronary sinus, 214, 217
Cross-striations, 79, 80
 Coronary vascular system, 214
Crown, tooth, 185
 Corpora quadrigemina, 314
Crura, 246
Corpus albicans, 280, 283
Crural, defined, 3
Corpus callosum, 313, 318
Cryptococcosis, 354
 Corpus cavernosum penis, 283
Cryptorchidism, 296
Corpus hemorrhagicum, 283
Cuboidal cells, 41
Corpus luteum (CL), 280, 283
Cuticle, 93, 94
Index
363
Cystic duct, 182, 195
Digestive system
Cystic fibrosis, 29
alimentary canal, 182
Cytoplasm
clinical significance, 204
cell anatomy, 20, 22
dissection, 186-196
elastic cartilage, 68
exocrine pancreatic enzyme analysis,
simple squamous epithelium, 42
202-204
Cytoskeletal elements, 25-26, 82
fowl digestive anatomy, 201-202
Cytosol, 22
large intestine, 199-200
overview, 181-182
D
ruminant stomach, 197-199
 Deep, defined, 3
teeth,182-185
 Deep circumflex iliac arteries, 229
aging a dog or cat, 183-184
Deep fascia, 149
dental charting, 184-185
 Deep gluteal muscle, 171
dental formulas, 183
Deflection waves, 231
structure, 185
Delta cells, 272
Triadan system, 184-185
Deltoid muscle, 159
veterinary vignettes, 204-205
Demodectic mange, 104
Digital, defned, 3
 Dendrites
Digital cushion, 100
cellular, 28
Digital pads, 96
nervous tissue, 8l, 82
 Digitorum superfcialis, 166
neuron, 300, 302
 Diploid zygote, 279
Dense connective tissue, 54
Directional terms, 2-3
Dense irregular connective tissue, 58-59
Disease
 Dense regular connective tissue, 59-60
demodectic mange, 104
Dental charting, 184-185
distemper, 322
Dental formulas, 183
mites, 104
Dentin, 185
MMM autoimmune condition, 178-179
 Depolarization, 304
 necropsy procedure safety, 353
 Depolarizing phase, 304
 premunition, 104
Depressions, 110
rabies, 322
 Dermal papillae, 90
Distal (teeth position), 4
Dermatology, 104
Distal, defined, 3
Dermis, 86, 90-92
Distal convoluted tubule, 258
Descement's membrane, 334
Distal loop, 200
Descending colon, 195
Distal phalanx, 98, 100, 104
Descending loop, 258
Distal sesamoid bone, 100
Desmology, 140-142
Distemper, 322
Desmosomes, 87
 Doe, mammary gland, 104
 Diaphragm, 246
Dog
 Diaphragmatic flexure, 200
aging, 183-184
Diaphragmatic lobes, 243
blood, 70-72
Diaphysis, 110
boxers and tumors, 323-324
Diastole, 209
claw, 98
Diastolic blood pressure, 219, 233
color vision, 337
Diencephalon, 313
cranial cruciate ligament rupture, 143
Diestrus, 285, 295
demodectic mange, 104
Differential cell count, 70
distemper, 322
 Digastric muscle, 158
electrocardiogram, 231, 232
Editorialrevie
364
Index
Dog (continued)
 dense irregular connective tissue, 58
female breeding time, 292-296
elastic cartilage, 67, 68
foot pads, 96-98
skin, 91
larynx and trachea, 66
Elastin, connective tissue, 54
 mammary gland, 104
Electrocardiogram
nose, 96,97
defined, 230
pigmented skin, 96
deflection waves, 231-232
rabies, 322
function, 231
 reticular connective tissue, 64
intrinsic conduction system, 230
skull, 130
measurements, 232
spinal reflexes, 320-322
recording, 232-233
stifle joint, 141
sinoatrial node, 230
 topographical anatomy, 9
Embryo, 279
Doppler blood pressure measurement,
Embryonal connective tissue, 54
233-234
Embryonal connective tissue
Dorsal, defined, 1, 2, 3
 or mesenchyme, 55-56
 Dorsal funiculus, 320
Embryonal mesenchymal cells, 109
 Dorsal meatus, 239
Enamel, tooth, 185
Dorsal median sulcus, 320
Endocardium, 212
Dorsal mediastinum, 242
Endochondral ossification, 100, 109
Dorsal palpebrae, 332
Endocrine system
 Dorsal plane, defined, 5
adrenal glands, 270-271
Dorsal recumbency, defined, 3
clinical significance, 276
Dorsal-palmar (dorsopalmar) view, 6
function, 267
 Dorsal-plantar (dorsoplantar) view, 6
 gland dissection, 272-274
Dorsal-ventral view, 6
glands, 42, 270-272
Dorsolateral palmaromedial oblique
hypothalamus, 268-270
(DLPM oblique) view, 6
oral glucose tolerance test, 275
Dorsomedial palmarolateral oblique view, 6
overview, 267-268
 Dorsopalmar (D-P) view, 6
pancreas, 272
Dorsum, defned, 2
 parathyroid glands, 271
 Ductus deferens
pituitary gland, 268-270
cardiovascular system, 223
thyroid gland, 271
 male reproductive tract, 282, 283, 291
veterinary vignettes, 276-277
Duodenum, 182, 192-193
Endocytosis, 24
Dura mater, 314
Endometrium, 280
D-V view, 6
Endomysium, 149
 Dyspnea, 354
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), 2l, 22-23
Endosteum, 112
E
Endothelial cells, 42
Ear canals, 327
Endothelium, 42, 219
Eardrum, 327
Eosinophils, 56, 70, 71, 75
Ears, 327-331
Epicardium, 211, 212, 242
Eccrine glands, 96
Epicondyle, 110
Elastic connective tissue, 54, 61-62, 67-68
Epidermis, 86, 87-90
Elastic fibers
Epididymis, 282, 291
areolar connective tissue, 57
Epiglottis, 188, 240
 areolar or loose connective tissue, 56
Epikeras, 99
connective tissue, 54
Epimysium, 149
lndex  365
Epinephrine, 271
Falx cerebri, 314
Epiphyseal plates, 110
Fascia lata, 168
Epiphysis, 110, 114-116
Fascicles, 149
Epithalamus, 314
Fauces, 187
Epithelia, 4l
Femoral artery, 229
Epithelial tissue, histology, 41-54
Femoral nerve, 308
Epithelium, 40, 182, 333
Femoral vein, 224
Equilibrium, 327-331
Femur, cat skeleton, 127-128
Equines, large intestine, 199-200
Fetus, 279
Ergots, 98, 99
Fibers, 54
Erosion of bone, 109
Fibroblasts
Erythrocytes (red blood cells), 70, 74
areolar connective tissue, 57
Esophageal arteries, 228
areolar or loose connective tissue, 56
Esophageal hiatus, 189
connective tissue, 55
Esophagus
dense irregular connective tissue, 58
digestive system, 182, 188-189, 201
dense regular connective tissue, 59, 60, 61
slide, 49-50, 51
mammal elastic connective tissue, 6l
Estrogen, 104, 285
Fibrous cartilage (fbrocartilage), 68-70
Estrus, 283, 285
Fibrous pericardium, 21l, 242
Eustachian tibes, 188, 239, 327
Fibula, cat skeleton, 128
Eversion, defined, 4
Fibularis (peroneus) brevis, 175
Ewe, mammary gland, 104 
 Fibularis (peroneus) longus, 175
Excitatory postsynaptic potential, 320
Filiform papillae, 187
Exocrine glands, 42
Fine needle aspirate, 38
 Exocrine pancreatic enzyme analysis, 202-204
First heart sound, 210
Exocytosis, 24
Fixation, 32
Extension, defined, 4, 5
Flagella, 25, 26
Extensor carpi radialis, 165
Flat bones, 110
Extensor digitorum communis, 165
Flexion, defined, 4, 5
Extensor digitorum lateralis, 165, 175
Flexor carpi radialis muscle, 166
Extensor digitorum longus, 175
 Flexor carpi ulnaris, 166
External abdominal oblique muscle, 167
Flexor digitorum profundus, 166, 175
External auditory canal, 327
 Fluid mosaic model of plasma membrane, 20
External carotid artery, 227
 Foliate papillae, 187
External iliac arteries, 229
Follicle, 280
External iliac vein, 224
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH),
External intercostals, 176
269, 283
External jugular vein, 222
Foot of the horse, 100-103
External respiration, 238
Foot pads, 96-98
External root sheath, 94
Foramen, 110
External urethral orifice, 281
Foramen of Luschka, 318
Extraocular eye muscles, 333
Foramen of Monro, 318, 319
Eyelashes, 332
Forebrain, 314
Eyes, 332-337, 338-339
Forensics, 353
Forestomachs, 197
F
Fornix
Facet, 110
eye,332
Facial nerve, 318
female reproductive tract, 281
Falciform ligament, 189
nervous system, 313, 318
Editorialrevie
366
Index
Fossa, 110
Goblet cells, 48, 49
Fossa ovalis, 218
Golgi complex, 24, 29
Fourth ventricle, 318, 319
Gonads, 279
Fovea, 110
Goose bumps, 96
Fowl
Graafian follicle, 280
digestive anatomy, 201-202
Gracilis muscle, 168
lungs, 248-249
Granulocytes, 70
Free ribosomes, 22
Gray matter, 319
Free surface, 4l
Great cardiac vein, 214
Frog, 100, 103
Greater curvature, 190
 Frog corium, 103
Greater omentim, 189, 190
Frontal, defined, 3
Gross anatomy, defined, 1
Frontal lobe, 313
Ground substance
Frontal sinuses, 239
connective tissue, 54
Fundic region, 190
 dense regular connective tissue, 60
Fundus, 190, 259
fbrous cartilage, 68-69
 Fungiform papillae, 187
 reticular connective tissue, 64
Growth hormone (GH), 269
G
Growth plates, 110
Gallbladder, 182, 190
Gum, tooth, 185
Gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA), 320
Guttural pouch, 239
Ganglia, 300
Gyri, 314
Gastrocnemius muscle, 174
Gastroduodenal artery, 228
H
 Gastrohepatoduodenal ligament, 195
Hair, 93-95
Gastrosplenic ligament, 192
Hair bulb, 94
Genes, 22
Hair follicle, 94, 95
Germ cells, 279
Haploid ova, 279
Germinal epithelium, 280
Haploid sperm, 279
Gestation period, 279
Hard palate, 187
Giemsa stain, 70
Haversian canal, 113
Gingiva, 185
Haversian system, 76
Gingival margin, 185
Haversian system of bone, 112
Gingival sulcus, 185
Head, 110
Gizzard, 201
Hearing, 327-331
Gland of the third eyelid, 332
Heart
Glans penis, 283, 291
anatomy, 211-218
Glassy membrane, 94
cardiac cycle, 209-210
Glial cells, 299
chambers, 209
Glomerular filtrate, 43, 258
function, 40, 207
Glomerulus, 43
overview, 207, 209-210
Glottis, 242
phases, 209
Glucocorticoids, 271
Heels, 100
Glucose tolerance test, 275
Hematopoiesis, 109
Gluteofemoralis muscle, 171
Hematoxylin and eosin
Glycine, 320
combination stain, 27
Glycogen storage disease, 29
Hemostasis, 74
Glycoproteins, 23
Hepatic artery, 195, 228
Goat, comparative osteology, feet, 137
Hepatic ducts, 182, 195
Index  367
Hepatic portal system, 208
Hydrocortisone, 271
Hepatic vein, 223
Hyoid apparatus, 240
 Hepatopancreatic ampulla, 193
Hyoid venous arch, 222
Heterophil, 70
Hyperpolarization, 304
Hilus, 259, 261
Hypertension, 219
Histiocytes, 56
Hypertrophied chondroblasts, 114
Histology
Hypodermis, 86, 92-93, 96
bone, 1ll-116
Hypolemmal position, 149
cancellous (spongy) bone, 1l4-116
Hypophysa, 314
compact bone, 11l-114
Hypophyseal portal system, 269
Bowman's capsule, 37
Hypophyseal portal veins, 269
clinical significance, 38
Hypophysis, 268
connective tissue, 54-55
Hypotension, 219
defined, 31
Hypothalamus
epithelial tissue, 41-54
endocrine system, 268-270, 273
integumentary system, 87-95
nervous system, 314, 317
interpretation of sections, 32, 34
muscle, 78, 149-154
I
 preparation of sections, 32
Ileocolic junction, 195
renal corpuscle, 37
lleum, 194
sectioning methods, 35-36
lliocostalis thoracis muscle, 177
sheet of cells, 38
Iliopsoas muscle, 172, 174
steps in slide production, 32, 33
Impression smear, 38
Histopathology, 32
Inclusion bodies (inclusions), 20, 26
Holocrine gland, 94
Incus, 327
Hoof, 100-103
Induced ovulators, 283
Horns, 98-99
Inferior, defined, 3
Horns of the uterus, 280
Infiltration, 32
Horny lamina, 100
 Infraorbital gland, 186
Horny wall, 98
 Infraspinatus muscle, 161
Horse
 Infundibulum
 chestnuts and ergots, 99
endocrine system, 268, 273
colic, 204-205
nervous system, 314, 318
 comparative osteology
reproductive system, 280, 288
carpus, 134
 Inguinal, defined, 3
feet, 137
Inguinal canal, 223, 291
foreleg, 133
 Inhibitory hormones, 268
hind leg, 135
 Inhibitory postsynaptic potential, 320
tarsus, 136
Inner circumferential lamellae, 112
description using anatomical terms, 8
Insensitive lamina, 100
elastic connective tissue, 6l
Insertion of muscle, 154
large intestine, 199-200
 Integumentary system
 patellar ligaments, 140
claws, 98
skull, 131
clinical signifcance, 104
Humeral head, 166
dermis, 90-92
Humerus, cat skeleton, 124
epidermis, 87-90
Hyaline cartilage, 66-67
hair, 93-95
Hyaluronic acid, 66
histology, 87-95
Hydrocephalus, 322
hypodermis or subcutis, 92-93
Editorialrevie
368
Index
 Integumentary system (continued)
Intramembranous ossification, 109
large animals
Intrinsic conduction system, 230
chestnuts and ergots, 98
 Involuntary cardiac muscle, 79
foot of the horse, 100-103
Involuntary smooth muscle, 80
horns and antlers, 98-100
Iris of the eye, 335
mammary gland of a cow, 103-104
Irregular bones, 110
model, 96
Irregular connective tissue, 54
 nose of a dog, 96-97
Ishiatic tuberosity, 110
overview, 86
Islets of Langerhans, 272
pigmented skin, 96
Isoelectric lead, 232
veterinary vignettes, 105-106
 Isogenous group, 66
Interatrial septum, 218
Intercalated cells, 259
T
Intercalated discs, 79, 80, 152
 Jejunal lymph node, 196
Intercellular cement, 41
Jejunum, 47, 194, 202
 Intercostal artery, 228, 245
Jugular veins, 242
 Intercostal muscles, 176
 Juxtaglomerular apparatus, 259
Intercostal nerve, 245, 307
Juxtaglomerular cells, 259
Intercostal vein, 22l, 245
Interdigitate, 96
K
Interlobar artery, 255, 262
Keratin, 87
 Interlobar vein, 262
Keratinized, 49
Interlobular artery, 257, 262
Keratinocytes, 87
 Interlobular vein, 262
 Keratogenous zone, 94
Intermediate filaments, 26
Keratohyaline granules, 87
Intermediate lobes, 243
Kidney
Internal iliac arteries, 229
cuboidal epithelial cells, 45
 Internal iliac vein, 224
dissection, 259-262
 Internal intercostals, 176
functions, 254, 255
 Internal jugular vein, 222
simple cuboidal epithelium, 45-46
Internal respiration, 219, 238
simple squamous epithelium, 43
Internal root sheath, 94
vascular supply, 255-258
 Internal thoracic artery, 227
Kupffer cells, 182
Internal thoracic vein, 222
 Interneuron, 320
Internuncial neuron, 320
Labia majora, 290
 Interstitial cell stimulating hormone
Labial, defined, 4
(ICSH), 269
Labial frenulum, 187
Interstitial cells, 282
Lacrimal apparatus, 332
Interstitial lamellae, 1l2-113
Lacrimal sac, 332
Interstitium, 263
Lacrimal sinus, 239
Interterritorial matrix, 66
Lactiferous ducts, 104
 Interventricular septum, 230
Lactiferous sinus, 104
Intervertebral foramen, 305
Lactogenesis, 104
 Intestinal tract
Lacuna
function, 40
bone, 77
large intestine, 199-200
compact bone, 111
small intestine, 47, 194, 202
elastic cartilage, 67, 68
smooth muscle, 81
fibrous cartilage, 69
Editorialrevie
lndex  369
hyaline cartilage, 66
Ligament
osteocytes, 109
desmology, 140-142
Lamellated granules, 87
slide, 60
Lamina propria, 182
Limbus, 333
Laminar corium, 100, 103
Linea alba, 167
Langerhans' cell, 87
Lingual, defined, 4
Lanolin, 94
Lingual artery, 227
Large intestine, 199-200, 202
Lingual frenulum, 187
Large lymphocyte, 74
Linguofacial vein, 222
Laryngeal ventricle, 242
Lipase, 182, 202-203
Laryngopharynx, 188, 239
Lips, 187
Larynx, 239
Liver, 40, 182, 189
Lateral, defined, 2
Lobar bronchus, 243, 245
Lateral canthus, 332
Long bones, 110
Lateral funiculus, 320
Long head of triceps, 161
Lateral head, 162
Longissimus thoracis muscle, 177
Lateral ligament, 259
Loop of Henle, 258
 Lateral recumbency, defined, 3
Loose connective tissue, 54, 56-57
Lateral ventricles, 318
Lower respiratory system, 238, 242-247
Latissimus dorsi muscle, 158-159
Lumbar, defined, 3
Left atria, 209
Lumbar arteries, 229
Left atrioventricular (AV) valve, 218
Lumbar nerves, 305
Left atrium, 217
Lumbar veins, 224
Left auricle, 218
Lumbodorsal fascia, 167
 Left bundle branch, 230
Lumbosacral plexus, 305, 307
Left common carotid artery, 226, 242
Lungs, 43-44, 243
Left coronary artery, 211
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 269, 283
Left deep circumflex iliac veins, 224
Lymphocytes, 56, 70, 76
 Left dorsal colon, 200
Lysosomes, 24
Left gastric artery, 228
Left lateral lobe, 190
M
Left medial lobe, 190
Macrophages
Left subclavian artery, 227
areolar connective tissue, 57
Left subcscapular artery, 227
areolar or loose connective tissue, 56
Left ventral colon, 200
Macula densa, 259
Left ventricles, 209, 217
Main bronchi, 242
Left vertebral artery, 227
Main bronchus, 245
Left vertebral vein, 222
Main pancreatic duct, 193
Leg
Major calyx, 261
front leg muscles, 16l-166
Major duodenal papilla, 193
hind leg, deep muscles, 175
Major labia, 281
hind leg, superficial muscles, 167-171
Malleus, 327
posterior leg muscles, 174
Mamillary body, 268, 314
Lemon, sectioning methods, 35, 36
Mamillary mammillary body, 313
Lens of the eye, 335
Mammals, elastic connective tissue, 6l-62
Lesser curvature, 190
Mammary, defined, 3
Lesser omentum, 190
Mammary gland, 103-104
Leukocytes (white blood cells), 70, 83
Mammillary bodies, 318
Levator palpebrae superioris muscle, 333
Mandible, cat skeleton, 120-123
Editorialrevie
370
Index
Mandibular lymph nodes, 158, 186
Mesencephalon, 314
Mandibular salivary gland, 158, 186
Mesenchymal cells, 55
 Marbling of muscle tissue, 62
 Mesenchyme connective tissue, 54
Mare, mammary gland, 104
Mesial, defined, 4
 Massa intermedia, 319
Mesobronchi, 248
Mast cells, 56, 57
Mesocolon, 196
Matrix
Mesoductus deferens, 283
 areolar or loose connective tissue, 56
Mesoduodenum, 196
blood, 70
Mesometrium, 288
 cellular anatomy, 25
Mesorchium, 283
 compact bone, 11l
Mesosalpinx, 288
connective tissue, 54
Mesothelial cells, 42
elastic cartilage, 67
Mesovarium, 288
fibrous cartilage, 69
Metacarpal bones, cat skeleton, 125-126
hyaline cartilage, 66
 Metacarpal pad, 96
 integumentary system, 94
Metaphyses, 110
interterritorial matrix, 66
Metatarsal pad, 96
 territorial matrix, 66
Metatarsals, cat skeleton, 129
Maxillary artery, 227
Metathalamus, 314
Maxillary sinuses, 239
Metencephalon, 314
 Maxillary vein, 222
Metestrus, 285, 295
Medial, defined, 2
Microfilaments, 26
Medial canthus, 332
Microscope
Medial head, 162
care of, 12
Medial saphenous vein, 224
cell part identification, 27-29
Median artery, 228
field size, 15-16
Median nerve, 307
oil immersion lens, 14-15
Median plane, defined, 5
parts of, 12-13
 Median suspensory ligament, 259
purpose of, 11
Mediastinal lymph nodes, 245
steps for use, 14-15
Mediastinal pleura, 21l, 242
vernier scales on the mechanical stage, 16-17
Mediastinum, 188, 242
Microtome, 32
Medulla
Microtubules, 25
 integumentary system, 93, 94
Microvilli, 4l, 47
medulla oblongata, 318
Midbrain, 314
nervous system, 314, 319
Middle ear, 327
 reproductive system, 280
Middle gluteal muscle, 171
urinary system, 255
Middle lobes, 243
Meibomian glands, 332
Middle meatus, 239
 Meissner's corpuscles, 90
Middle mediastinum, 242
Melanin, 87, 93, 94, 96
Middle phalanx, 100
Melanocytes, 87, 94, 96
Midsagittal plane, defined, 5
 Melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), 270
Milk
 Membrane-bound ribosomes, 22
let-down, 104
Meninges, 314
mammary gland, 103-104
Merkel cells, 87
production, 104
Merkel disc, 87
Mineralocorticoids, 270
Merocrine glands, 94
Minor calyxes, 261
 Mesencephalic aqueduct, 318, 319
Minor labia, 281
Index  371
Mites, 104
Myoepithelial cells, 259
Mitochondria, 22, 25, 301
Myofilaments, 149
Mitral valve, 218
Myometrium, 280
Molar salivary gland, 186
Myosin, 149
Monocytes, 56, 70, 74, 76
Monolocular, 62
N
Motor efferent neuron, 320
Nares, 239
Mouth
Nasal, defined, 3
anatomical terms, 4
Nasal cavity, 239
teeth. See Teeth
Nasal conchae, 239
Movement terms, 4-5
Nasal turbinate bones, 239
Mucosa, 182
Nasal vestibule, 239
Mucosal cells, 48-49
Nasolacrimal duct, 332
Mucous connective tissue, 54
Nasopharynx, 188, 239
Multinucleated cells, 2l, 149
Navicular bone, 100
Multipolar neuron, 28, 301
Neck, skeletal system, 110
Muscle
Neck, tooth, 185
 arrector pili muscle, 96
Neck of the bladder, 259
cardiac muscle, 79-80, 147, 152-153
Neck of the uterus, 280
cat skeletal musculature, 154-177
 Necropsy procedure
abdominal wall muscles, 167
clinical significance, 353
chest, superficial muscles, 155-156
defined, 341
deep back muscles, 176-177
overview, 341-342
front leg muscles, 161-166
photographs, 342
hind leg, deep muscles, 175
procedure, 343-351
hind leg, superficial muscles, 167-171
record keeping, 342
neck, superficial muscles, 157-158
safety, 342, 353
 posterior leg muscles, 174
samples, 342-343
shoulder and back, deep muscles, 161
sectioning method for tumors, 351-352
shoulder and back, superficial muscles,
tissue sections, 32
158-159
veterinary vignettes, 354
thigh, deeper muscles, 172-174
Nephron, 43, 255, 258-259
clinical significance, 177-178
Nerve cell body, 81, 82
histology, 78, 149-154
Nerve cells, 81
muscle cells, 79, 149
Nerve impulse, 303-305
muscle fber, 149
 Nervous system
skeletal muscle, 78-79, 147, 149-152
autonomic nervous system, 310-313
smooth muscle, 80-81, 147, 153-154
brain, 313-314
tissue anatomy, 40
brain anatomy, 314-319
veterinary vignettes, 178-179
clinical significance, 322
voluntary, 147
cranial nerves, 310
Muscularis externa, 182
function, 299
Muscularis mucosae, 182
nerve impulse, 303-305
Musculocutaneous nerve, 306
neuron, 81, 299, 300-305
Muzzle, 96
overview, 299-300
Myelencephalon, 314
peripheral nerve dissection, 305-310
Myelin, 304
spinal cord, 320
Mylohyoid muscle, 158
spinal reflexes, 320-322
Myocardium, 79, 212
veterinary vignettes, 323-324
Editorialrevie
372
Index
Nervous tissue, 40, 8l-82
Obturator nerve, 310
Neurofibril nodes, 305
Occipital artery, 227
Neurofbrils, 303
Occipital lobe, 313
Neuroglia, 299
Occlusal, defined, 4
Neurohypophysis, 268
Oculomotor nerves, 318
Neurons, 81, 299, 300-305
Olfactory bulbs, 315
Neurotransmitter substance, 301
Olfactory tract, 317
Neutrophils, 56, 70, 71
Omasum, 197, 198
 Nictitating membrane, 332
Omental bursa, 190
9 + 0 array, 25
Omotransversarius muscle, 159
9 + 2 array, 26
Oocyte, 280
 Nissl (chromatophilic) bodies, 300, 303
Optic chiasm, 268, 314, 317
Nissl bodies, 82
Optic disc, 336
Nodal system, 230
Optic nerves, 317, 332, 334
 Nodes of Ranvier, 305
Oral, defined, 3
 Non-articular projections, 110
Oral glucose tolerance test, 275
Non-keratinized, 49
Orbital, defined, 3
 Norepinephrine, 271, 311
Orchiopexy, 296
Nose, 96, 97, 239
Organ tissue, 31, 40
Nostrils, 239
Organelles
Notch, 110
centrioles, 25
Nuclear envelope, 2l-22
cilia, 26
Nuclear membrane, 28, 303
cytoskeletal elements, 25-26
 Nuclear pores, 22
defined, 20,22
Nuclei
endoplasmic reticulum, 22-23
cardiac muscle, 80
flagella, 26
dense regular connective tissue, 60
Golgi complex, 24
elastic cartilage, 68
inclusion bodies, 26
hyaline cartilage, 66
lysosomes, 24
mammal elastic connective tissue, 61
mitochondria, 25
nervous tissue, 8l, 82
peroxisomes, 24-25
reticular connective tissue, 65
ribosomes, 22
simple columnar epithelium, 46, 47
Origin of muscle, 154
simple squamous epithelium, 42, 43
Oropharynx, 187, 239
skeletal muscle, 78, 79
Os coxae (pelvis), cat skeleton, 126-127
smooth muscle, 81
Os penis, 283
stellate mesenchymal cells, 55
Osteoblasts, 76, 109, 114
stratified columnar epithelium, 52
Osteoclasts, 76, 109
urinary bladder or transitional
Osteocyte
epithelium, 53
bone, 76, 77
Nucleoli, 82
 cancellous (spongy) bone, 114
Nucleolus, 22, 28, 303
compact bone, 1ll, 113
Nucleus, 20, 21-22, 28
overview, 109
Ostium, 288
0
Outer circumferential lamellae, 112
Oblique, defined, 2
Oval window, 328
Oblique muscles, 333
 Ovarian arteries, 229
Oblique view, 6
Ovarian bursa, 288
 Oblongata, 314
Ovarian veins, 223
Index
373
Ovaries
Patellar, defined, 3
cardiovascular system, 223
Pectinate muscles, 216
endocrine system, 274
Pectineus muscle, 172
reproductive system, 279, 288
 Pectoralis descendens muscle, 155
Oviducts, 288
 Pectoralis muscle, 155
Ovulation, 283
Pectoralis profundus muscle, 155-156
Ox skulls, 132
Pectoralis transversus muscle, 155
Oxytocin, 104, 270, 285
Pelvic, defined, 3
Pelvis (os coxae), cat skeleton, 126-127
P
Penis, 283, 291
Pacemaker, 230
Perforating canals, 1l3-114
 Pacinian corpuscle, 92
Pericardial fluid, 242
Palatal, defined, 4
Pericardial pleura, 2ll, 242
Palatine rugae, 187
Pericardial sac, 21l, 242
Palatine sinus, 239
Pericardium, 211
Palatine tonsils, 187
Perichondrium, 66
Palatoglossal arches, 187
 Perimetrium, 281
Palmar (volar), defined, 3
Perimysium, 149
Palpebrae, 332
Perineal, defined, 3
 Palpebral conjunctiva, 332
Periodontal ligament, 185
Pancreas
Periople, 100
digestive system, 182, 193
Perioplic band, 100
endocrine system, 272, 274
Perioplic corium, 100, 103
Pancreatic islet cells, 272
Periosteum, 1ll, 112
Papilla, 90
Peripheral, defined, 3
Papillary ducts, 258
 Peripheral nervous system (PNS), 299
 Papillary layer, 90
Peripheral neuropathy, 322
Papillary muscles, 217
Perirenal fat, 259
Parabronchi, 248
Peritoneal, defined, 4
Paraconal artery, 2l1, 214
Peritoneum, 167
Paraconal interventricular
Peritubular capillary network, 43
groove, 211, 214
Peroxisomes, 24-25
Paraconal vein, 214
 Phalanges, cat skeleton, 125-126, 129
Paramedian plane, defined, 5
Phrenic nerves, 246, 306
Parasympathetic nervous system, 310
Phrenicoabdominal arteries, 229
Parathyroid glands, 271, 273
Phrenicoabdominal veins, 223
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 271
Pia mater, 314
Paraventricular nuclei, 268
Pial barrier, 322
Parietal lamina, 2ll, 242
Pig. See Sow
Parietal layer, 258
Pineal gland, 273, 314
Parietal lobe, 313
Pinna, 327
 Parietal peritoneum, 195
Piriform lobe, 313
Parietal pleura, 242
 Pituitary gland, 268-270, 273
Parotid salivary gland, 158, 186
Placenta, 285
Pars distalis, 268
Placentation, 285
Pars intermedia, 268
 Planes of the body, defined, 5
Pars nervosa, 268
Plantar, defined, 3
Pars tuberalis, 268
Planum nasale, 96, 239
 Passive transport, 21
Planum nasolabiale, 96, 239
Editorialrevie
374
Index
Plasma, 70
Proximal loop, 200
Plasma cells, 56, 57
Pseudostratified ciliated columnar
Plasma membrane, 20-2l, 28, 302
epithelium, 48-49
Platelets, 70, 74, 75
Pseudostratified columnar
Pleural, defined, 4
epithelium, 48-49
Pleural cavities, 242
 Pseudostratified epithelium, 42
Plurilocular, 62
Pubic, defined, 4
Pneumatic bones, 1l0
Pulmonary artery
 Pneumothorax, 265
cardiovascular system, 210, 214, 224
Polarized neuron, 303
 respiratory system, 242
 Polygonal plaques, 96
 Pulmonary circulation, 208
 Polygonal plates, 96
 Pulmonary valve, 215
 Polymorphonucleated leukocytes, 74
Pulmonary veins, 217
 Polymorphs (PMNs), 74
Pulp, tooth, 185
 Polyribosomes, 22
Punctum, 332
Pons, 314, 318
Pupil of the eye, 335
 Popliteal, defined, 4
Purkinje fibers, 230
Popliteal fossa, 170
Purkinje system, 230
 Popliteal vein, 224
Pyloric region, 190
Portal vein, 195, 224
 Pyloric sphincter, 199
Positional terms, 3
Pylorus, 190, 199
Posterior, defined, 1
Pyramids, 318
Posterior chambers of the eye, 335
Posterior fermenter, 199
Q
Posterior pituitary, 268
QRS complex, 231, 232
Post-mortem examination, 34l. See also
Q-T interval, 232
 Necropsy procedure
Quadrants, defined, 4
 Postsynaptic membrane, 301
Quadrate lobe, 190
P-Q segment, 232
Quadriceps femoris muscle, 174
 P-R interval, 232
Quarters, 100, 104
Premunition, 104
Queen, mammary gland, 104
Prepuce, 283, 291
Quick of the claw, 98
Presynaptic membrane, 301
Primary lamina, 100, 101
R
Principal cells, 259
Rabies, 322
Process, bone, 110
Radial artery, 228
Proestrus, 285, 292
Radial head, 166
Progesterone, 104
Radial nerve, 307
 Projections, bone, 110
Radius, cat skeleton, 124-125
Prolactin, 104, 269, 285
Rectogenital pouch, 195
Pronation, defined, 5
Rectum, 182, 195
Pronator teres, 166
 Rectus abdominis muscle, 167
Prone, defined, 3
Rectus femoris, 174
Proper connective tissue, 54
Rectus muscles, 333
Prostate gland, 282, 283, 292
Recumbent, defined, 3
 Proteoglycans, 66
Red blood cells (erythrocytes), 70, 74
 Proventriculus, 201
Referred bronchial sounds, 251
Proximal, defined, 3
Regular connective tissue, 54
Proximal convoluted tubule, 258
Relative cell count, 83
Index
375
 Relative refractory period, 304
Reticular connective tissue, 54, 64-65
Releasing hormones, 268
Reticular fibers
Remodeling of bone, 109
areolar connective tissue, 57
Renal artery
areolar or loose connective tissue, 56
cardiovascular system, 229
connective tissue, 54, 64-65
urinary system, 255, 259, 261
Reticular lamina, 41
Renal capsule, 261
Reticular layer, 90
Renal columns, 262
Reticulum, 197, 198
Renal corpuscle, 37, 258
Retina, 332, 336
Renal cortex, 261
Retractor bulbi muscle, 333
Renal medulla, 261
Retractor penis muscle, 283
Renal papilla, 258, 261
Retroperitoneal, 196
Renal pelvis, 261
Rhombencephalon (hindbrain), 314
 Renal pyramid, 261
Rhomboideus capitis muscles, 161
Renal sinus, 261
Rhomboideus cervicis muscles, 161
Renal tubules, 43
Rhomboideus muscles, 16l
Renal vein, 259, 261
Ribosomal RNA (rRNA), 22
Renin, 259
Ribosomes, 22
Renshaw cell, 320
Ribs, cat skeleton, 119
Repolarization, 304
Right atria, 209
Repolarizing phase, 304
Right atrioventricular (AV) valve, 217
 Reproductive system
Right atrium, 216
breeding time of female dog, 292-296
Right auricle, 216
clinical significance, 296
Right bundle branch, 230
female reproductive system, 283-286
Right common carotid artery,
female reproductive system dissection,
226, 242
288-290
Right coronary artery, 214
female reproductive tract, 280-282
Right deep circumflex iliac veins, 224
function, 279
 Right dorsal colon, 200
male reproductive system, 287
Right gastric artery, 228
male reproductive system dissection,
Right lateral lobe, 190
290-292
Right medial lobe, 190
male reproductive tract, 282-283
Right subclavian artery, 226
overview, 279
 Right ventral colon, 200
veterinary vignettes, 296-297
Right ventricles, 209, 214
Respiration, 238
Right vertebral artery, 228
Respiratory bronchiole, 245
Right vertebral vein, 222
 Respiratory system
Rods of the eye, 337
clinical significance, 251
Root, 94
lower respiratory system, 238, 242-247
Root canal, 185
lung volumes and capacities, 249-251
Root of the lung, 245
lungs of birds, 248-249
Root of the mesentery, 193
overview, 238
Rostral, defined, 2
upper respiratory system, 238, 239-242
Rostral colliculi, 314
veterinary vignettes, 252
Rotation, defined, 5
Respiratory units, 245
Rough ER, 22-23
Resting membrane potential, 303
 Round ligament, 282
Resting potential, 21
Rumen, 197
Reticular cells, 65
Ruminants, 197-199, 200
Editorialrevie
376
Index
S
Shoulder
Saccule, 328
deep muscles, 16l
 Sacral, defined, 4
shoulder blade (scapula), 123-124
 Sacral nerves, 305
superficial muscles, 158-159
 Sagittal plane, defined, 5
Simple columnar epithelium, 4l, 46-47
 Salivary ducts, 186
Simple cuboidal epithelium, 4l, 45-46
Salivary glands, 51, 158, 182, 186
Simple epithelium, 41
Saphenous nerve, 310
Simple squamous epithelium, 41, 42-44
Sarcolemma, 149
Sinoatrial node, 230
Sarcomas, 144
Skeletal muscle, 78-79, 147, 149-152
Sarcomere, 152
Skeletal system. See also Bones
Sarcoplasm, 149
arthrology, 139-140
 Sarcoplasmic reticulum, 23, 152
bones, types of, 110
Sartorius muscle, 168
calcium measurements, 142-143
 Scalpel blade tissue scrape, 38
cat skeleton, 1l6-129
Scapula, cat skeleton, 123-124
clinical significance, 143
 Scapular, defined, 4
 comparative osteology, 130-139
Schwann cells, 304
carpus, 134
Sciatic nerve, 172, 307
chicken skeleton, 138-139
Sclera, 332
feet, 137
Scrotal ligament, 283, 290
foreleg, 133
Scrotum, 283, 290
hind leg, 135
Sebaceous glands, 90, 94
skulls, 130-132
Sebum, 94
tarsus, 136
Second heart sound, 210
depressions, 110
Secondary lamina, 100, 101
desmology, 140-142
 Secretory vesicles, 24
histology of bone, 1ll-116
 Segmental bronchi, 245
cancellous (spongy) bone, 1l4-116
 Segmented neutrophils (segs), 71, 74
compact bone, 11l-114
 Self-propagating action, 304
long bone parts, 1l0, 111
Semicircular canals, 328, 330
overview, 109
Semilunar valvules, 210
projections, 110
 Semimembranosus muscle, 172
veterinary vignettes, 143-144
Seminal fluid, 287
Skin
Seminal vesicles, 283
antlers, 100
Seminiferous tubules, 282
chestnuts and ergots, 98
Semitendinosus muscle, 172
claw, 98
Sensory afferent neuron, 320
 clinical significance, 104
Septum pellucidum, 313, 318
dermis, 86, 90-92
Serosa, 182
epidermis, 86, 87-90
Serosal surface, 36
foot of the horse, 100-103
 Serous pericardium, 2ll, 242
foot pads, 96-98
Serratus dorsalis muscle, 177
grafts, 105-106
Serratus ventralis muscle, 161
horns, 98-99
Sheep
hypodermis or subcutis, 86, 92-93
brain anatomy, 314-319
mammals, 89
comparative osteology, feet, 137
mammary gland of a cow, 103-104
Short bones, 110
nose, 96,97
 Short pastern bone, 100
pigmented skin, 96
Index  377
slide, 58-59, 87-90
Squamous cells, 38, 41
structure, 88, 92
ST segment, 232
Skull, cat skeleton, 120-123
Stains, 27, 32, 70
Small cardiac vein, 214
 Stapedius, 328
Small intestine (jejunum), 47, 194, 202
Stapes, 327
Small lymphocyte, 74
Stellate mesenchymal cells, 55
Smooth ER, 22-23
Stereocilia, 4l
Smooth muscle, 80-81, 147, 153-154
Sternal, defined, 4
Soft palate, 187, 239
Sternocephalicus muscle, 158
Sole, 100
Sternohyoid muscle, 158
Sole corium, 103
Sternomastoid muscle, 158
Soleus muscle, 174
 Sterno-occipitalis muscle, 158
Somatic nervous system, 299
Sternum, cat skeleton, 119
Somatotropic hormone (STH), 269
Stifle, defined, 4
Sow
Stomach, 190
comparative osteology, feet, 137
Stratified columnar epithelium, 4l, 51-52
kidney dissection, 259-262
 Stratified cuboidal epithelium, 4l, 50-51
large intestine, 200-201
Stratified epithelium, 41
mammary gland, 104
Stratified squamous epithelium, 4l, 49-50
Special connective tissues
Stratum basale, 87, 93, 96
blood, 70-76
Stratum corneum, 87, 88, 93, 96
bone, 76-77
Stratum externum, 100
cartilage, 66
Stratum granulosum, 87
elastic cartilage, 67-68
Stratum internum, 100
fibrous cartilage, 68-70
Stratum lucidum, 87, 88
histology, 54
Stratum medium, 100
hyaline cartilage, 66-67
Stratum spinosum, 87, 93, 96
Spermatic cord, 283
Striated border, 47
 Spermatogenesis, 287
 Striated cardiac muscle cells, 79
Spermatozoa, 279
Striated muscle, 78
Sphenoid sinus, 239
Stroma, 333
Sphenopalatine sinus, 239
Subarachnoid space, 318
Sphincter muscle, 80, 153
Subcutaneous adipose tissue, 98
Sphincter of Oddi, 193
Subcutaneous areolar connective tissue, 92
Spinal cord, 299, 320
Subcutis (subcutaneous tissues), 86, 92-93
 Spinal nerves, 299, 305
Sublingual salivary gland, 158, 186
 Spinal reflexes, 320-322
Submucosa, 182
 Spinalis et semispinalis muscle, 177
Submucosal plexus, 182
Spindle-shaped cells, 153
Subscapular vein, 223
Spindle-shaped smooth muschel cells, 81
Subscapularis muscle, 16l
Spine, 110
Subsinuosal artery, 214
 Spinous part, 159
Subsinuosal interventricular groove, 214
Spiral loop, 200
Subsinuosal vein, 214
Spleen, 192
 Subthalamus, 314
Splenic artery, 228
 Sudoriferous glands, 96
 Splenic vein, 224
Sulcus, 314
 Splenius muscle, 161
 Sulfated glycosaminoglycans, 66
Spongy bone, 114-116
Superficial, defined, 2
Spontaneous ovulators, 283
 Superficial brachial artery, 227
Editorialrevie
378
Index
Superficial cervical artery, 227, 228
Tendon slide, 60
 Superficial cervical vein, 222
Tensor fascia antebrachii muscle, 16l
 Superficial digital flexor, 174
Tensor fasciae latae, 169-170
 Superficial fascia, 149
Tentorium cerebelli, 314
 Superficial gluteal muscle, 171
Teres major muscle, 161
 Superficial popliteal lymph node, 171
Terminal bronchioles, 245
Superficial temporal artery, 227
Terminal purkinje conducting fibers, 230
Superior, defined, 3
Terminology
Supination, defined, 5
anatomical terms, 3-4
Supine, defined, 3
clinical significance, 6
 Supraoptic nuclei, 268
describing body structures or areas, 7-8
 Supraspinatus muscle, 161
directional terms, 2-3
Surface cells, 41
mouth and teeth anatomical terms, 4
Suspensory ligament, 281, 288, 335
 planes of the body, 5
Sweat glands, 90, 96
 positional terms, 3
 Sympathetic trunks or chains, 310
 terms of movement, 4-5
 Synapse, 301
topographical anatomy, 9
 Synaptic cleft, 301
Territorial matrix, 66
 Synaptic vesicles, 301
Testes, 274, 279, 282
Syrinx, 248
Testicular artery, 229, 283, 291
Systemic circulation, 207
Testicular lumphatics, 283
 Systole phase, 209
Testicular nerve, 283, 291
 Systolic blood pressure, 219, 233
Testicular veins, 223, 283, 291
Testosterone, 287
T
Tetraiodothyronine, 271
T wave, 231
Thalamus, 314, 319
Tactile elevation, 93
Thigh, deeper muscles, 172-174
Tactile hair, 93
Third eyelid, 332
Tapetum lucidum, 336
Third ventricle, 318, 319
Target organ, 267
Thoracic, defined, 4
Tarsal glands, 332
Thoracic aorta, 225
Tarsal pad, 97
Thoracic duct, 222
Tarsus, cat skeleton, 128
Thoracic nerves, 305
Teeth
Thoracic part, 158
aging a dog or cat, 183-184
Thorax, 243
 anatomical terms, 4
Threshold level, 304
 canines, 182
Thrombocytes, 70
deciduous, 183
Thymus gland, 245, 273
dental charting, 184-185
Thyrocalcitonin, 271
dental formulas, 183
Thyroid cartilage, 239
incisors, 182
Thyroid glands, 242, 271-272
molars, 183
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 269
mouth, 4
Tibia, cat skeleton, 128
 premolars, 182-183
Tibialis cranislis muscle, 175
structure, 185
Tissue
Triadan system of charting, 184-185
clinical significance, 83
Telecephalon, 313
connective tissue, 40
Temporal lobe, 313
 cut at angles, 35
Tendon of Achilles, 174
defined, 31
Index  379
 epithelium, 40
Ulnar nerve, 307
muscle, 40
Ulnaris lateralis muscle, 165
nervous tissue, 40
Umbilical, defined, 4
sliced, 34
 Unguicular process, 98
tissue side, 41
Unguis, 98
Toes, 98, 100
Uninucleated cardiac muscle, 79
Tongue, 49-50, 187
Unipolar neurons, 301
 Trabecula septomarginalis, 214, 217
Unstriated smooth muscle cells, 81
Trabeculae, 282
Upper respiratory system, 238, 239-242
Trachea
Ureters, 223, 259, 261
described, 242
Urethra, 52, 290
hyaline cartilage, 66-67
Urethral process, 283
slide, 48-49, 66-67
Urinary system
Transitional epithelium, 42, 53-54
clinical significance, 264
Transverse colon, 195, 200
kidney dissection, 259-262
Transverse fissure, 314
kidney vascular supply, 255-258
Transverse plane, defined, 5
nephron, 255, 258-259
Transversus abdominis muscle, 167
overview, 254-255
Trapezius muscle, 158
physiology, 263-264
Triadan system of charting, 184-185
urinary bladder, 53-54, 195, 259
Triceps brachi muscles, 161
urine, 255
Tricuspid valve, 217
veterinary vignettes, 265
Trigeminal nerve, 318
Uterine horns, 288
Trigonal area of the bladder, 259
Uterine tubes, 288
Triiodothyronine, 271
Uterus, 195, 223, 280
Trochanter, 110
Utricle, 328
Trochlea, 110
Trochlear nerve, 315
V
Tropic hormones, 269
Vacuoles, 62, 74
Trypsin, 202, 203-204
Vagina, 281, 290
Tuber cinereum, 268, 314
Vagus nerve, 242, 310
Tubercle, 110
Vallate papillae, 187
Tuberosity, 110
Vascular system, 207, 219, 255-258
Tubulins, 25-26
Vastus intermedius muscle, 174
Tumors, 351-352
Vastus lateralis, 174
Tunica albuginea, 280, 282
Vastus medialis, 174
Tunica externa, 219
V-D view, 6
Tunica interna, 219
Veins, 220-224, 242
Tunica media, 219
Velvet, 100
Tunica vaginalis parietalis, 283, 290
Venous system, 208
Tunica vaginalis visceralis, 283, 290
Ventilation, 238
Tunics, 182, 219
Ventral, defined, 2
Tylotrich hair, 93
Ventral fascia, 167
Tympanic membrane, 327
Ventral funiculus, 320
Ventral meatus, 239
U
Ventral median fissure, 320
Ulna, cat skeleton, 125
Ventral mediastinum, 242
Ulnar artery, 228
Ventral palpebrae, 332
Ulnar head, 166
Ventral recumbency, defined, 3
Editorialrevie
380
Index
Ventral-dorsal view, 6
Visceral layer, 258
Ventricular systole, 210
Visceral layer of the serous pericardium, 212
Ventrobronchi, 248
Visceral peritoneum, 195
Ventrum, defined, 2
Visceral pleura, 242
Vertebrae
Visceral skeleton, 109
cat skeleton, 1l6-119
Vision,332-337
fibrous cartilage, 69
Vitreous humor (vitreous body), 334
Vertebral, defined, 4
Vocal folds (vocal cords), 241
Vesicogenital pouch, 195
Vocal ligament, 242
Vesicular follicle, 280
Vocalis muscle, 242
Vesicular glands, 283
Volar, defined, 3
Vestibule, 187
Volkmann's canals, 1l3-114
Vestibule of the vagina, 290, 328
Volvulus, 265
Vestibulocochlear nerve, 318, 327
Vulva, 281
Vestibulum, 281
Veterinary vignettes
M
 amputation, 143-144
Water deprivation test, 264
cardiovascular system, 235-236
Wheezes, 251
digestive system, 204-205
White blood cells (leukocytes), 70, 83
endocrine system, 276-277
White line, 103
eyes, 338-339
White matter, 319
MMM autoimmune condition, 178-179
Woven bone, 109
necropsy, 354
Wright's stain, 70
nervous system, 323-324
reproductive system, 296-297
Z
 respiratory system, 252
Z line, 152
skin grafts, 105-106
Zona fasciculata, 271
urinary system, 265
Zona glomerulosa, 270
Visceral lamina, 2ll, 242
Zona reticularis, 271
Editorial
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel
Notes
Copyright 2010 Cel