Handbookof
Ueterinary
Ocular
Emergencies
DauidLwalliams6KathyBarrle
B工
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Butterworth-Heinemann
An imprint of Elsevier Science
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP
225 Wildwood Avenue, Woburn, MA 01801-2041
First published 2002
@ 2002, Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any material form (including
o laaum pue suau ooana Aq unpa Aue u Suois no Sdood
 nd s j a  a     no
the written permission of the copyright holder except in accordance with the
 provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms
of a licence issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, 90 Tottenham
Court Road, London, England W1T 4LP. Applications for the copyright
holder's written permission to reproduce any part of this publication should
be addressed to the publishers
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Williams, David L.
Veterinary ocular emergencies
1. Veterinary ophthalmology 2. Veterinary emergencies
I Title If. Barrie, Kathy Il1. Evans, Thomas Ffrangcon
636'.08977026
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record of this book is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN 0 7506 3560 6
available, changes in treatment, procedures, equipment and the use of drugs
become necessary. The authors and the publishers have taken care to ensure
that the information given in this text is accurate and up to date. However,
readers are strongly advised to confirm that the information, especially with
regard to drug usage, complies with the latest legislation and standards of 
practice.
Composition by Scribe Design, Gillingham, Kent, UK
Printed and bound in Great Britain by MPG Books Ltd, Bodmin, Cornwall
Preface
All too many veterinarians leave veterinary
client. Many pets are insured and it is to the
college with little exposure to ophthalmic
benefit of the animal, the owner and yourself
cases and certainly next to no experience of
to have a second opinion on the case.
even the most common ocular emergencies.
 The eye is without doubt a special structure
Veterinary colleges generally admit referral
and vision is, some would say, a veritable
cases, and so even when ophthalmology is
miracle and a delicate one at that. Surgery of
well taught as a major core curriculum subject
the eye, in particular, should always involve
there is litle opportunity to see ocular
sensitive tissue handling with plenty of irrigat-
emergencies which are dealt with in first-
ing fluid. Cadaver practice prior to one's first
opinion settings. This book is designed as a
surgical enterprise is essential. But the eye is
 not holy, not an organ which can only be dealt
presented with an ocular emergency having
with by specialists. The aim of this volume is
had little introduction, either theoretical or
to allow veterinarians in general practice to
practical, to veterinary ophthalmology
Or
deal better with emergencies which would
especially to ocular emergencies.
otherwise result in pain and/or blindness.
The book is not designed, however, to do
Thus our ultimate hope is that the book will
away with the need for referral consultation
improve the treatment of animals presented, as
in a specialist centre. If it is considered that
well as helping the vets who treat these
the ocular disorder for which the animal is
animals to feel better-equipped to diagnose
presented may be serious, with ocular pain or
and treat these often difficult cases.
potential blindness, a referral or 
second
opinion should always be offered to the
Thomas Ezans 2002
 1. tntense conjunctival redness associated
with corneal ulceration in a cross-bred dog
 after a road traffic accident
It is vital to assess the entire eye given that blunt
trauma may cause severe intraocular injury. The ulcer
shouid heal within seven to ten days huit antibiosis
and anti-infammatory medication (using a topical
non-steroidal such as ketorolac rather than topical
steroid) should be used during this time.One concern
should be that thc conjunctival swelling or chemosis 
may preclude full eyelid closure. This would
 compromise rapid ulcer healing and thus use of a
surface protective agent such as viscotears carbomer
 gel or hylashield a hyaluronic acid preparation would
be advisable. Should complete healing not occur
rapidly debridemant of devitalized epithelium may be
necessary to promote ulcer healing.
2. Chlamydiel conjunctivitis in a domestic
shorthaired cat
 Conjunctivitis in the cat is often caused by Chlamydia
(now renamed Chlamydophila felis by some
authorities) or feline herpesvirus. Given the difficulty of
diagnosing these by isolation and culture of the agent.
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests may be valuable.
A cheaper alternative is to treat the cat with topical
 chlortetracycline (Aureomycin). A positive response to
therapy strongly suggests Chlamydia to be the agent
topical antiviral such as trifluorothymidine or acyclovir
is a worthwhile agent to use.
3. Uveitis with hypopyon in a Jack Russell
terrler
An cye with a profound hypopyon suich as this
needs aggressive topical steroid medication with
prcdnisolonc acctate (Pred Forte) used four times
daily. Before that, however, a full systemic
cxaminatior should be undertaken and a
haermatological profile: all too often these
intraocular inflarnrmatory conditions can be a
presenting sign of lymphosarcoma or leukaemia.
4. Acute glaucoma with pain, blindness,
episcleral congestion and corneal oedema in a
Welsh springer 9paniel
Here measurement af intraocular pressure is
important but even without the facility to perform
this it should be assumed that the intraocular
pressure is high. Use of mannitol in the acute
phasecanbevaluableas topicalanti-glaucoma
agents such as dorzolamide (Trusopt), the beta-
antagonist timoptol or pilocarpine are unlikely to
reduce the intraocular pressure sufficiently or
5. Scleritis with intense ocular redness and
scleral nodulee in a Rotweiler
This intense scleral inflarmrnation requires boh
topical steroid medication and systemic prenisolone
at up to 1 mg/ky. Other agents such as azalhioprine
can be valuable in particularly severe cases.
6. Globe prolapse in a Pekingese dog
(courtesy of Dr S.M. Crispin)
A pulse dose of steroid should be given first to
reduce periocuiar swclling and aeuiar surface
lubrication should be maintained with a damp swab
or with copious surface protectant such as a
carbomer gel such as viscotears. Early surgery to
perform a lateral canthotomy should be perforred
to allow easy replacement of the globe, fallowed by
a tarsorraphy. held in place for 2 weeks minimum.
 7. Globe penetration with corneal, iris and
also possible lenticular damage
Here the concern lies in multiple directions, The
loss of aqueous when the foreign body is removed
 Due snoanbe Ajepuosas piouseid e u! lnsal lu
severe inflammation. Intraocular infection is to be 
expected. Worse still is possible damage to the
lens;lens capsule rupture with loss of cortical
material into the anterior chamber will result in a
 severe uveitis with supervening glaucoma in the
majority of cases. Removal of the lens is the only
8. Acute keratoconjunctivitis sicca after
systemic sulphasalazine administration
The key step here is realizing that the intense red
eye is a result of acute total ocular surface drying.
Use of a Schirmer tear test will demonstrate this in
a minute but there has to be the index of suspicion
to move pne to perform this test in such a
situation. Treatment with tear replacement is
required and topical cyciosporine can be evaluated
although in many such drug-induced cases of dry
eye there is little response to this usually excellent
drug.
9. Chronic keratoconjunctivitis sicca with
pigmentary keratitis
In a more chronic case of keratoconjunctvitis sicca
such as this there can still be situatians that present
as emergencies. Pigmentary keratitis can give a
disturbance of vision which resembles a sudden
blindness which corneal ulceration may supervene
where there is no ocular surface lubrication.
10. Deep corneal ulceration showing lack of
stromal oedema in centre of deep ulcer bed
This presentation of a corneal ulcer is an acute
emergency. Note the stromal oedema giving a
white appearance to the corneal, except in the
centre of the uicer. Here the excavation of cornea
has been so extensive that there is little stroma left
to be oedematous and waterlogged. The ulcer is
close to rupturing with catastrophic consequences.
A conjunctival peticle flap is required rapidly.
11. Descetocoele in a West Highland white
terrier
Again the finding of a bulging clear dome in the
centre of the ulcer shiows that the ulcer has 
progressed to the very farthermost depth of the
cornea. Here a pedicle flap may not be sufficient
and a corneoscleral transposition may be required
to preserve structural integrity of the cornea.
12. Stromolytic (melting) Pseudomonas
corneal ulcer in a Shetland pony
This acute emergencyresults from
metalloproteinase (collagenase and gelatinase)
activity originating both from the Pseudomonas
organisms infecting the corneal surface and the
neutrophils recruited to destroy them. Thus the
 animal needs frequent administration of an 
appropriate antibiotic (topical polymycin/bacitracin
or a topical fluoroquinolonel and anti-collengases
 such as EDTA, acetyl cystein and the alpha-2-
rnacroglobulin anti-proteases in serurn.
13. Koratic preclpltates In fellne uveltls
demonstrated in the fine bean of a slit lamp
The finding of anterior uveitis. in one eye should be
followed up with evaluation of the anterior and
posterior segments of the other eye for similar
pathology. Serology for organisms such as FiP.FIV,
FeLV and Toxoplasma can be worthwhile but the
lreatrmcnt is lopical stcroid apart froin the fatter
organism where clindamycin is curative.
14. Anterior lens luxation with the edge of
the lens clearly demonstrated by the circular
light reflection
Surgery ta remove the lens is the only option here
although topical anti-glaucoma medications may be
given to relieve high intraocular pressure should
surgery be delayed. Another important feature to
note before surgery is the state of the second eye:
a subluxated lens in this eye maybe
anaesthetic.
15. Feline hypertensive retinopathy with
serous retinal detachment
The signs of hypertensive retinopathy, such as
serous detachment, intraretinal or choroidal
haemorrhage and abnormalities of the retinal
vessels, call for measurement of the animal's blood
pressure. Even without this facility the above signs 
may be considered sufficiently indicative to warrant
instigation of treatment with amlodipine at 0.625 mg
daily.
16. Haemorrhagic optic neuritis and retinal
vasculitis in a Dachshund
Blinding optic neuritis requires emergericy
treatment with parenteral steroid at 1 mg/kg
although prognosis for recovery of vision is poor.
Infections such as distemper and mycoses or
rickettsiae should be considered and a detailed
history including foreign travel should be taken as
well as a full haematological and biochemical
profile.
Introduction
Some may consider that there are quite
Thirdly, both of these first two areas are
enough veterinary ophthalmic texts on the
heavily illustrated not by pictures: these can
market at present - why do we need another?
be found in the growing number of excellent
We suggest that there are two specific
atlases being produced by Barnett (1990),
 problems with the current texts, excellent and
Barnett et al. “(1995), Crispin and Barnett
comprehensive as they are. The first is that to
(1997) and Walde (1990); but by diagrams
demonstrating the plan of attack in both the
an emergency is almost impossible. Most
diagnostic work up of a case and the treat-
texts require at least an evening's read to
ment regimen to be used. Fourthly, the
distil out the necessary diagnostic features
     
and treatment requirements for a specific
better placed to deal with an emergency
emergency condition be it a surgical condi-
when knowing a reasonable amount of the
tion at the ocular surface, such as a staphy-
basic science background behind the patho-
loma (see
AppendixB for the(
Ocular
 a p   g sis
dictionary), or  a predominantly
 medical
anisms
underlying
 successful  treatment.
condition in the posterior segment such as a
Therefore, while the text gives diagnostic and
sudden total retinal detachment.
Secondly, most texts are presented with an
step flow diagrams, it also discusses the
anatomical breakdown of ocular conditions.
background to the disease proceses and the
The animal does not, however, present as if
ameliorating effects of treatment.
saying. 'I have a problem with my irido-
Reading
g through the whole text sequen-
corneal angle, but rather 'I have a red eye' or
tially, one may be struck by a number of
I am suddenly blind'. Thus to be useful an
repetitions: these are unavoidable to ensure
emergency text needs to be thoroughly
that each section has the opportunity to stand
problem-oriented, not an easy task given a
on its own when read in an emergency situa-
structure such as the eye which is so neatly
tion. It is hoped, however, that having the
packaged anatomically.
same  information  presented  in  different
This text aims to fill that gap in the market
contexts throughout the text will be helpful in
in four ways. A problem-based first part will
aiding understanding and remembering facts
give the basics on diagnostic signs such as the
a 'ad p  a  
red eye, the painful eye or the blind eye. That
aim of this book is to provide a useful start-
is where to start in assessing an ocular
ing point in an emergency situation where the
emergency. Secondly, each ocular emergency
step-by-step diagram and table format allow
is discussed with regard to diagnostic tests
rapid appreciation of important information.
applicable and therapeutic regimes advised.
Also, once the emergency is over, it will be
X
Introduction
possible to read the discussion sections at
glaucoma cases. Such animals, they will say,
leisure to elucidate some of the basic science
need referring to a specialist frained in
background. In this way, should the same
dealing with the sort of ophthalmic night-
type of emergency arise again, it will be
mares considered in this book. This may well
be the case, and some specialists may even
of understanding both regarding pathogenic
feel done out of a job if the diagnostic proto-
mechanisms and therapeutic rationale.
cols and therapeutic regimens used are set
We have attempted to write the portions
out in detail. We feel, however, that such an
for background reading in a style which is
approach would be short sighted and in the
easy and enjoyable to read. Some may find
best interests of nobody, let alone the animal
this annoying and prefer a more scientific and
itself. Even when the specialist practice is
less familiar manner. Given the number of
only a car ride away, and the owners are
texts in densely written scientific prose we
happy to pay, the referring veterinarian must
have sought not to use that approach, and
be able to define that referral is needed and
hope that readers will find this text easy to
give immediate treatment in every situation.
use both in the emergency situation and also
In many cases distance, financial considera-
for reading once the emergency has been
tions or the time delay between presentation
resolved.
and an emergency referral means that it is up
Chapter 1 touches on the diagnostic princi-
to
the veterinarian to give care for the
ples and techniques in dealing
with
an
emergency case through the short term and
emergency; Chapter 2 looks as the various
often for longer. And who knows - perhaps
commonly presented conditions associated
dealing in this way with a few such cases,
with problems with the eye; while Chapters 3
with the help of this book, will attract you
to 10 cover the initial diagnosis and treat-
 n   n  
ment. Three appendices are also provided.
nary ophthalmology, leading you to train to
Appendix A deals with the common applied
be one of those specialists. Nevertheless the
diagnostic methods.  This section  is not
authors understand that many of these cases
inclided in the main text as some veterinary
are, in the normal run of events, better
surgeons may find it common knowledge
referred immediately to a specialist. Situa-
while others will find a thorough description
tions where this is the case are marked thus
of instruments such as a Schiotz tonometer
@ in the text: referral is recommended in
useful. Appendix B is a veterinary ophthalmic
these cases.
dictionary. As ophthalmir nomenclature
is
Itmay
be
argued that most of the
very specialized all specific words mentioned
paragraphs
 e q aad a a
in the text are explained in this section of the
Obviously, as veterinarians earning our living
handbook. Appendix C is a drug index,
from ophthalmir referrals we are hardly
where we have tried to include most of the
going
g to dissuade you from asking for a
drugs (human as well as veterinary) that are
second
l opinion, are we! Most cases will
used for treatment of eye diseases in animals.
benefit from a referral, yet the whole point of
 One final criticism is likely, perhaps not 
this book is to equip veterinary surgeons with
  ss a r 
the knowledge to give immediate treatment
our colleagues in specialist practice. They will
that is appropriate, to recognize cases requir-
say, with perhaps some justification, that in
 ing referral and, in cases where referral is not
general practice one does not need to know
appropriate, to make the best diagnostic and
the ins and outs of treatment of uveitis or
therapeutic interventions possible.
Chapter 1
Diagnostic principles and techniques
1.1 Performing an ocular
response, including the swinging light test to
examination in an emergency
detect functional optic nerve defects. The
situation
examination of the eye itself starts with
distant direct ophthalmoscopy. This calms the
The temptation, in an emergency, is to
animal rather than beginning the examination
abandon the standard ophthalmic examina-
with one's head close to the animal's muzzle.
tion which would be undertaken under
 It allows evaluation of pupil size and any
normal circumstances and merely concentrate
opacity of the ocular media. Next the eyelids
on the immediately obvious ocular signs.
 and adnexa, including the conjunctiva, are
Thus, in a dog with an eyelid laceration the
examined with the direct ophthalmoscope at
globe is only cursorily examined. Given a cat
asetting
g of +20 D. Remember that the
with a corneal ulcer, the lids and intra-ocular
conjunctiva is found covering the globe
structures are ignored. This failure to perform
(buibar conjunctiva) and the inner aspect of
a standard examination will, in many if not
the eyelid (palpebral conjunctiva). Thus while
the majority of cases, result in failure either
uveitis or glaucoma affect the vasculature of
fully to reach the correct diagnosis or to
the globe alone, conjunctivitis involves the
identify important, but less obvious, concur-
vessels of the bulbar and palpebral conjunc-
rent ocular disease or damage. In the dog
tiva. In
 assessing the  conjunctiva
both
mentioned above there may be a globe
surfaces of the nictitating membrane should
 rupture as well as the eyelid laceration. In the
be examined as should the conjunctiva right
cat the corneal pathology may be related to a
to the depths of the fornices. This may be
post-traumatic eyelid defecf with trichiasis
done later, after topical anaesthesia and fixing
while the corneal lesion may cause reflex
the margin of the third eyelid with a pair of
miosis or more pronounced uveitis. In the
haemostats or Babcock forceps, everting and
first case failure to appreciate concurrent
looking behind the third eyelid. Next, in
disease could result in loss of the eye, while
 order, the cornea, anterior chamber, iris, lens,
in the second the rushed examination misses
vitreous, retina and optic nerve head are
both the cause of the presenting sign and the
examined with the dioptre settings of the
potentially important intra-ocular sequelae.
direct ophthalmoscope at from +20 D (cornea
Thus, a systematic approach is vital to
and sclera) and +l0 D (iris and lens) to 0 D
every emergency ocular examination, as
(retina).
shown in Box 1.l. The evaluation should
After
full
examination,
ancillary
aids
begin with an assessment of vision using the
should be brought into play. We consider
menace and startle responses, and then deter-
that, given the simplicity of the test, every
mination of pupil size and pupillary light
2
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
Assessment of vision:
Menace response
Dazzle response
Pupillary light reflex
Swinging light test
2 Distant direct ophthalmoscopy:
Assess pupil size and symmetry
Assess clarity of ocular media
3Adnexa:
Lids
Conjunctiva
Nictitating membrane
 Nasolacrimal system
4
Cornea:
Transparency
+20 D
1
Structural integrity
5
Uvea:
Colour
+10 D
Contour
6
Lens:
Transparency
+10 D ± 5 D
Position
Stability
T
Vitreous and retina:
Position
Tapetal reflectivity 0 ± 3 D
Vascular system
Box 1.1 Routine ophthalmological examination
should have a Schirmer I tear test performed
1.2 Recording observations made
(Appendix A). Measurement of intra-ocular
in an ocular emergency
difficult given the expense of tonometers such
The ophthalmic emergency might seem the
as the Tonopen, but on the other hand the
least appropriate time to make detailed notes
purchase of a Schiotz tonometer is well
and drawings of the ocular signs presented.
within the budget of a practice keen 
to
However, if one is already in the habit of
provide an adequate ophthalmic work up.
carefully
 recording what one sees at an
The importance of early diagnosis of raised
 ophthalmic examination, this is tremendously
intra-ocular pressure, and of following treat-
useful for two reasons. First, it is important to
ment response in animals with
1 glaucoma,
have written and diagrammatic records of
renders if almost essential that every practice
   '    
has access to at least a Schiotz tonometer
tobe able
tomonitor
 the progress and
(details of using the Schiotz to optimal effect
hopefully
the
recovery
ofocular
health.
are given in Appendix A).
Secondly,
recording
observations
and
Diagnostic principles and techniques
3
particularly  drawing
 annotated  diagrams
for instance, between corneal oedema, infil-
tend to improve one's assessment of lesions
 tration and scarring or a retinal haemorrhage.
in the eye and ensure that small lesions have
cellular infiltrate or a small area of retinal
not 1
been
missed.
the ophthalmic
detachment. Two useful papers have been
emergency it is, however, important to be
 produced in the human ophthalmic literature
able to record ocular signs quickly and to
suggesting methods of recording ocular signs.
have a ready method of diagrammatically
A diagnosis sheet for any ophthalmic exami-
 noting signs in such a way as to differentiate,
nation is given in Figure 1.l and may be
Name
i.d.
soads
age/sex
history
exaupe
cormea
lens/anterior chamber
retina
Figure 1.1 An example of a diagnostic sheet for ophthalmic examination. Note that a full-page version of
this figure (available for photocopying and use by readers) is provided on page 95
4
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
copied to give an acceptable method of
general practice setting. As well as enabling
recording
ophthalmic
lesions
in
an
examination of the retina at the 0 D setting
emergency
(see page
95). Alternatively,
and the iris and lens at a setting of +10 D, the
readers can devise their own scheme to
direct ophthalmoscope is  a  very useful
record ophthalmic signs in an emergency
magnifying lens for the cornea and adnexa
situation and in everyday practice.
when used at +20 D. With a powerful halogen
light source such an instrument, although not
looking as impressive as a slit lamp, is much
1.3 Equipment and aids required
less expensive and yet invaluable if used to
to deal with the ocular emergency
maximum effect.
It has already been indicated that a simple
moscopy is a plastic 20 D lens held close to
tonometer is required as a basic tool in every
the cornea of the animal and a simple pen
practice. What other items should be close to
torch held to the ear of the examiner (Figure
hand to deal with the ocular emergency?
1.2a). This will enable the examiner to view
 Clearly a good ophthalmoscope is essential.
most of the fundus at one time. For examina-
Although many veterinary ophthalmologists
tion of the iridocorneal angle a goniolens
arm themselves with an indirect ophthalmo-
might be considered worth obtaining. the
scope and slit lamp as basir tools for an
 Koeppe or Franklin lenses being particularly
ophthalmic examination, in reality a good
 easy to use (Figure 1.2b). Their application is
direct ophthalmoscope will suffice
in
a
considered further in Appendix A.
(a}
Figure 1.2 Indirect ophthalmoscopy
using a plastic 20 D lens held close
to the cornea of the animal and a
simple pen torch held to the ear of
the examiner. (a) Uni-ocular indirect
ophthalmoscopy: (b) binocular
indirect ophthalmoscopy
(b)
Diagnosticprinciples and techniques
5
Schirmer tear test strips are valuable and
should be used to determine tear production
or lack of it before any manipulation of the
eye is attempted. The dyes fluorescein and
rose bengal should be a key part of the
diagnostic armamentarium: ‘their use
is
described further in the corneal section.
Bacteriology swabs should be at hand
as
should a Kimura spatula for the collection of
 cytology samples. Kimura spatulas are expen-
sive and the blunt end of a Bard-Parker
scalpel handle may be used in its place. A
more recent innovation is that of cytology
brushes (Figure 1.3) which increase
cell
recovery
and
reduce
 sampling-induced
damage to recovered cells (Willis et al. 1997).
Figure 1.3 Use of a cytology brush will increase
Local
 anaesthetic  is  necessary  in  many
cell recovery and lessen sampling-induced damage
instances.
Profound
 anaesthesia
can
be
to recovered cells
and pressing it firmly onto an area of conjunc-
Figures 1.4 to 1.7 show both the basic, as
fiva before, for instance, the collection of a
well
as
the
  
of
 conjunctival biopsy in the conscious patient.
ophthalmic equipment.
Figure 1.4 Direct ophthalmoscope
Figure 1.5 Slit biomicroscope
Figure 1.6 Gonio lens
Figure 1.7 Schiotz tonometer
6
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
1.4 Some preliminary notes on
thus resistance to other drugs would not
treatment of ocular infections
affect these drugs. As with every antibiotic,
however, the important factors in discourag-
Ocular infections are generally considered as
ing resistance are regular dosing and persist-
adnexal diseases resulting in conjunctivitis,
ence with treatment until well after the signs
be it purulent, chemotic or hyperaemic. But
have gone. Inadequate dose frequency and
infection of the eye may involve the orbit.
cessation of treatment while there are still
giving a purulenf cellulitis; or the corneal
some organisms present are likely to lead to
stroma, giving either a well-defined stromal
resistance development.
abscess or a more diffuse stromal infiltration;
Apart from such considerations, we recom-
ormay
y be intra-ocular, with a purulent
mend two drugs for general topical use in
anterior
uveitis
oramore
generalized
external eye disease in dogs and cats respec-
panophthalmitis.
There are several differ-
tively before bacteriology results are avail-
ences between the bacteriological investiga-
able. These are fusidic acid for dogs and
tion of an ocular infection and an infection
chlortetracycline for cats. These choices are
involving skin or soft tissue. The most im-
made given the common organisms seen in
portant difference is the frequent paucity of
these species. Normal bacterial conjunctival
organisms isolated from the eye. This means
flora in dogs include Staphylococci and Strep-
that when a swab from the conjunctiva is
tococci (Gerding and Kakoma 1990). Normal
taken into transport medium and later plated
flora in cats
include these Gram-positive
onto agar, there is often only a scanty growth
species; common agents causing disease are
of organisms. Plating directly from the swab
more likely to be Gram-negative organisms,
 d a d a n  
Chlamydia andMycoplasma
(Gerding and
fungal disease of the ocular surface, especially
Kakoma 1990), more sensitive to the tetracy-
in warm climates, means that a Saboraud's
clines. Better than either of these for trans-
agar plate should be used as well as a blood
corneal penetration, and thus indicated in
agar plate. This, in practice, mostly applies to
intra-ocular infections, is chloramphenicol.
equine ocular infection and to cases in other
This has a wide range of activity, important
species where the trauma has been caused by
when
1the
full identity of the organism
vegetable matter such as a thorn or a branch.
involved is not known.
Antibiotic sensitivities for cultured organ-
The use of general broad-spectrum antibi-
isms should be viewed with caution: sensi-
otics is based on the assumption that the
      n
of
result of bacteriological culture and sensitiv-
orally or parenterally delivered antibiotics,
ity will not be available for at least two or
 and the much higher concentrations are given
three days from the time of sampling, even
locally
by
topically
applied
antibiotics.
given a courier dispatch service and the most
Whenever possible MIC-determinations will
rapid laboratory turn-around. Clearly a more
be of greater value than sensitivity testing
rapid system is needed to give an indication
based on disc diffusion.
 of which class of infectious agent is present
There are many instances of drug resistance
and whether corneal integrity is threatened.
in bacteria affecting t
the ocular
surface,
 In an emergency situation it is important to
especially with regard to gentamicin in the
be
 proficient
in preparing
bacteriological
treatment of Psevdomonas. The use of fortified
stains of smeared swab samples or scrapes
preparations, as detailed in Appendix C, has
from cornea or conjunctiva. Three such
been widespread to overcome this problem of
smears, stained with Gram's stain, Diff Quik
resistance but itself is likely to induce resist-
(Giemsa) and lactophenol cotton blue will
ance at higher levels. The more appropriate
allow a very rapid assessment of whether a
alternative
would
be
any
of
the
less
Gram-positive organism is present, probably
commonly
used aminoglycosides, such
as
sensitive to fusidirc acid, a Gram-negative
tobramycin, to which resistance has been less
organism requiring chloramphenicol or tetra-
frequently
noted.
 More_potent
 antibiotics
cycline, or a fungal agent best treated with
include
the
quinolones:
ofloxacin,
ketaconazole. It may be argued that in not
ciprofloxacin or norfloxacin.
. Their mode of
every case is the offending organism seen on
action, inhibiting DNA gyrase, is novel and
a scrape or smear - exfoliative cytology in
Diagnostic principles and techniques
7
Box 1.2 0cular
Ocular pain: origins and analgesics
pain
Palpebral nerve -
 conjunctiva, lid skin 
(lid injury)
Trigeminal nerve
intraepithelial plexus
(ocular surface irritation)
1
Topical NSAlD (ocular surface
Systemic NSAID
pain and photophobia)
(after surgery
Ophthalmic local anaesthetic
or trauma)
(not ta be long-term)
Opiates rarely required
Ciliary body spasm
(uveitic pain)
中
Topical cycloplegic
(atropine or in the
short term tropicamide)
such cases will render a neutrophilir infil-
an intra-epithelial plexus highly sensitive to
trate, which even if no organisms are seen
pain and to changes in temperature. These
should be taken as evidence of bacterial infec-
bare nerve endings are therefore less than
tion (Lavach et al. 1977, Severin and Thrall
50 pm from the ocular surface. This detail of
1981, Ugomori et al. 1991).
anatomy is highlighted to impress upon the
reader the importance of analgesia in ocular
surface disease (see Figure 1.8, Spreull 1966).
1.5 Analgesia in ocular
emergencies
All too oten in veterinary medicine, these
authors feel, we pay too littie attention to pain
relief
either   post-operatively
orafter
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic rmedia.
a
traumatic incident. The fact that many animals
 Please refer to the printed publicatiorn
 appear to cope stoically with what we would
should not let us negate our duty to provide
adequate, or perhaps it should be said better
than adequate, pain relief. The eye is an
exquisitely delicate organ with an ample
 nociceptive nervous supply. This is especially
so on the ocular surface, with a nerve network
at a very superficial level in the cornea. The
ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve
 innervates the cornea through the long ciliary
nerves, radiating into the stroma from the
limbus, there losing their myelin sheaths and
forming a subepithelial plexus (Prince et al.
Figure 1.8 Diagrammatic representation of the
1960). From there fine axons, devoid even of
Schwann cells, pierce the epithelium forming
sensory nerve pattern of the cornea (after Prince
et al. 1960)
8
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
In the emergency setting such analgesia
     '   s x
may involve topical local anaesthetic such as
ble, a large sheet of fabric (preferably dark
amethocaine or proxymethocaine, but this can 
blue or black) can be put over the head of the
only be used in the short term because of toxic
examiner as well as of the horse, as a tent to
effects on corneal epithelium (Grant and
simulate a darkened room.
Acosta 1994). Such local analgesia may be
The examination of a painful eye is always
required fully to examine the eye. The use of
somewhat tricky, but this is accentuated with
profound sedatives such as‘the alpha
2
horses and food animals where the tempera-
agonists alone perhaps should be questioned,
ment of the animal and the muscular power
since while they render the animal more easily
of the blepharospastic eyelids combine to
handled, the degree of analgesia may be insuf-
ficient. Parenterally administered analgesics
such as a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
agent (e.g. carprofen or flunixine meglumine)
Auriculo-palpebral
or in more severe circumstances an opiate
nerve block
such as methadone or butorphenol should be
considered in such cases and for more
medium-term pain relief. In the cat ketopro-
fen should be used in the place of carprofen.
In the case of pain associated with
profound miosis, as seen in uveitis, the main
cause of pain is spasm of the cilary body. For
this reason a mydriastic cycloplegic (ciliary-
body paralysing agent) such as atropine may
be a better analgesirc than a standard non-
steroidal or even opiate analgesirc. While
tropicamide is more rapidly acting it has less
cycloplegir action than atropine, so it is the
latter drug which should be used as a ciliary-
body spasmolytic agent in uveitis.
1.6 Dealing with ocular emergencies
Figure 1.9 Use of an auriculo palpebral nerve
in horses and ruminants
block in the horse
Ophthalmology is a wonderfully trans-species
discipline. While at first it was intended that
this book would aim solely at small animal
veterinarians, the authors then decided that
including horses and food animals would be
10in
appropriate. We still focus on the small
animal but include large animals, and partic-
ularly
companion
equine
ophthalmic
emergencies fhroughout fhe text. There are
some significant differences in these species,
to clinical examination and to medication, and
it is these which are covered by this section.
1.6.1 Techniques facilitating large animal
ocular examination
Examination in a light environment renders
Figure 1.10 Needle placement for a Petersen block
ophthalmoscopy difficult and thus a darkened
in cattle (after Lavach, 1990)
Diagnostic principles and techniques
9
render safe visualization of the ocular surface
inflammation. In either case, subconjunctival
difficult. Mild sedation remedies the first
medication
 supplements topical
1'therapy
problem, but may not ameliorate the covering
of the globe by lids in muscular spasm. The
cation of mydriatics in emergency situations
use of an auriculopalpebral nerve block in the
by the subconjunctival route might be consid-
horse (Figure 1.9) and the Petersen block,
ered in equine or in small animal anterior
commonly used in cattle (Figure 1.10), allow
uveitis.
There
are,
however,
potential
full examination without the interference of
problems of systemic absorption of potent
eyelid spasm (Lavach 1990). I
 Retrobulbar
autonomic agents with the injection of drugs
muscle spasm may give considerable enoph-
such as atropine and adrenaline.
thalmos in cattle which, again, complicates
 The need to provide frequent topical ocular
examination. Here the Petersen block amelio-
medication  to painful 
eyesis
especially
rates the problem (Lavach 1990).
important in equine uveitis and ulcerative
keratitis. In these conditions horses will often
vigorously
resent
regulari
instillation
of
1.6.2 Technigues facilitating large animal
medication and thus placement of a drug
ocular therapeutics
delivery system allowing interference with
Here we consider three techniques - first the
the eye to be minimized is advantageous.
simple method of subconjunctival drug deliv-
Two systems
have
been reported.
The
ery. This is particularly useful in ruminant
nasolacrimal lavage system involves a length
diseases such as New Forest Eye - infectious
 of tubing placed from the nasal nasolacrimal
bovine keratoconjunctivitis (IBK)
associated
punctum to reach the upper end of the duct
with Moraxella bovis and Mycoplasma bovicula.
(Figure 1.1l).
0. Drug solutions can then be
In the treatment of IBK, systemic tetracycline
instilled topically up the nasolacrimal duct.
therapy may be necessary (Lavach 1990); but
While having the considerable advantage of
often a subconjunctival depot injection of an
appropriate antibiotic such as cloxacillin is
efficacious for around three days before
requiring a second application.
There are some theoretical considerations
to take note of before accepting that this is the
optimum route for all large animal ocular
medication. Drugs injected subconjunctivally
-s Aq aa an raiua oi pasoddns aa i
scleral penetration. A significant volume of
injected solutions, however, has been shown
in other species to exit from the injection site
and be absorbed by topical transcorneal
Nasolacrimal,
penetration. Entry by the trans-scleral route
punctum
can be optimized by a deeper injection at a
sub-Tenon's level. ‘This can be' important
when the aim is to give high intra-ocular
levels of antibiotic rather than corneal or
ocular surface medication. Such injections
Silastic
 may require considerable sedation: in any
buqn
case subconjunctival injections should
1 be
False nostril
anaesthesia.
The main indication for subconjunctival
Distal
delivery in the horse or small animal is the
nasolacrimal
injection of antibiotics for the emergency
orifice
management of anterior segment infection.
Figure 1.11 Length of tubing is placed from the
nasal nasolacrimal punctum to reach the upper end
given in this manner for treatment of corneal
of the duct
10
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
B
C
Holes made
in tubing
Tubing pulled to avoid
abrading cornea
D
Figure 1.12 Transpalpebral drug delivery via insertion of a cannula. (A) The cannula is placed through the
lid from the conjunctival to the dermal surface; (B) the tubing is drawn through the cannula from the dermal
to the conjunctival surface and the cannula withdrawn; (C) the cannula is placed through the lid from the
umeip s! buiqnl aul (a) ipaaowaj uaag sey buiqnl aul teyi buunsua 'aoeyns lewiap aul ol leaiiounluos
through the cannula and then the cannula is withdrawn over the tubing; (E) the tubing is placed well above
the globe surface; (F) the tubing is secured by knotting
ease of placement this system has the disad-
the placement is attempted. Local anaesthesia
vantage that drug delivery may 2
also flush
with
 intradermal
lignocaine  and
topical
potentially
 infectious
material
O
the
 administration of proparacaine or proxymeta-
nasolacrimal duct back to the ocular surface.
caine should also be given.
 In many cases the preferable technique is
 Two key features of tube placement should
one of transpalpebral drug delivery, as illus-
be noted.'First, the guide used to penetrate
trated :
diagrammatically
(Figure
1.12A-F).
the lid, either a 14 gauge needle or preferably
The optimal technique is a through-and-
a
10 gauge flexible angiocatheter, always
through placement with the tube anchored by
passes from the conjunctival (internal) to the
a knot on the dermal (external) surface of the
dermal (external) side of the lid. In this way
lid. This is preferable to the technique using
the cornea is always protected from abrasion
a single lid passage flare-ended tube: the
 Or penetration. This does necessitate removal
flared end causes at best ocular irritation and
of the hub of the needle or catheter for the
 at worst corneal damage. Securing the tubing
second pass through the lid, ensuring that the
q a p a n assd ps e r
 guide can be passed through the lid over the
more time consuming to perform but avoids
tubing after placement through the lid.
The second feature to note is that
the
ene tubing (PE 190) or a premature infant
tubing should be placed as deep in the
nasogastric feeding tube is used, with holes
 conjunctival fornix as possible, to ensure that
cut at the appropriate site to allow the drug
corneal abrasion does not occur while the
solution to bathe the ocular surface. Horses,
delivery system is in place. Then a small
and especially those in considerable ocular
quantity of drug is injected into the tubing.
discomfort, need profound sedation before
followed by a considerable bolus of air fo
Diagnostic principles and techniques
11
force the solution through the delivery
corneal scraping and investigate for fungus
system to the ocular surface. The alternative
by microscopy as well as culture. For an
is to use a constant infusion device to deliver
example
o
broad-spectrum
antibiotic
a constant small flow to the ocular surface:
solutions for equine keratitis see Appendix C.
such equipment can readily be fastened to the
head-collar, as can injection ports if frequent
bolus deliveries are given.
1.7 Ocular emergencies in exotic
A spray medication can be a valuable means
species
of delivering drugs to the anterior surface of
the equine eye. The usual eye medication is
The majority of ocular emergencies in small
transferred to a spray unit and the drizzle on
mammals, birds, reptiles and amphibia can be
the cornea is likely to cause less reflex tearing:
dealt with by simple extrapolation from what
also the horse is less affected by the spray than
is known from dealing with the dog and cat: a
by topical delivery from traditional drop-
  pa aq  pd e   
bottles and eye-medication applied at the
the same way as in a dog. On the other hand
 lateral canthus with a 1 ml syringe.
there are some significant differences which
When using topical antibiotics in the horse,
should be taken into consideration when
one must always consider the possibility of
dealing with an emergency in these species.
fungal overgrowth. Thus if the infection is not
These are discussed throughout the text but are
responding to topical medication, perform a
 gathered in Table 1.1 for ease of reference.
Table 1.1 where ocular emergencies in exotic animals differ from the dog and cat
Adnexal masses in
Often not neoplastic but inflammatory
lower vertebrates
Uveitis in lower
Oftenassociated withGram-negative septicaemia
vertebrates
Uveitis in lower
Miosis requires non-depolarizing muscle relaxant, not atropine
vertebrates and birds
Traumatic keratitis in
Reported particularly in Amazons and mynnah birds and requiring
parrots
Pox virus in parrots
Early serious discharge becomes mucopurulent but the main lesions are lid
bathing with mild baby shampoo
Dacryocystitis in rabbits
Causing significant white purulent ocular discharge - requires nasolacrimal
cannulation and systemic antibiosis with enrofloxacin often the best
therapeutic agent
Myxomatosis in rabbits
Swollen lids and white mucopurulent discharge or, in vaccinated animals,
adnexal masses and lid distortion
Uveitis in rabbits
May be associated with Pasteurella infection or encephalitozoan cuniculi-
related phacoclastic uveitis
Chapter 2
Commonly presented conditions - a
problem-oriented approach
2.1 The red eye
plexus involvement, however, calls for the
application of the topical vasoconstrictor
This ophthalmic term refers to an eye in
phenylephrine (see Appendix C). This will
which the white of the eye is abnormally
constrict and thus visually obliterate an
reddened. There are other conditions result-
episcleral plexus engorged through inflam-
ing in redness of the eye, such as hyphaema
matory involvement but does not have the
same effect on the deeper scleral plexus.
imparts a red coloration to the eye. In
A second key point in the differentiation
addition trauma may lead to subconjunctival
of the red eye is that redness can include a
haemorrhage
 givingared
eye.
Here,
number of different clinical presentations.
The redness may be a diffuse feature or one
reddened in a more diffuse manner. The four
associated either with numerous small
classic differential diagnoses of the red eye
blood vessels or a few engorged vessels.
thus defined are
Each of these different rednesses can be
associated with a different diagnosis. A mild
 Conjunctivitis
overall redness normally indicates conjunc-
Uveitis
tivitis, while a deeper more 'angry' red close
Glaucoma
to the limbus is typical of ciliary flush, often
·
 Scleritis/episcleritis complex (less common).
associated with uveitis. Deeply engorged
episcleral vessels against a generally white
One key point to note when considering the
scleral background more often indicates
differential diagnosis of this clinical sign is
glaucoma.
The most important feature to note in
ically of three structures: the conjunctiva, the
coming to a diagnosis does not, however,
episclera and the sclera, each with its own
concern the redness itself but rather other signs
 perilimbal vascular plexus. Inflammation of
in the eye. The eye with conjunctivitis is often
each layer of the covering of the eye results
in other respects unremarkable. A causative
in vascular engorgement in the correspond-
feature may be an eyelid abnormality such as
ing plexus. These can be differentiated to a
entropion, ectopic cilium or distichiasis. An
degree by  careful  examination 
but
talso
associated ocular sign in lymphocytic/plasma-
pharmacologically.
On
examination,
the
cytic conjunctivitis may be corneal involvement
conjunctival vascular plexus moves as the
with chronic
C  superficial  keratitis
(pannus).
conjunctiva is gently moved while the deeper
Similarly, the bulbar surface of the nictitating
plexuses cannot be moved to this degree.
membrane may
be involved in follicular
Differentiating between episcleral and scleral
conjunctivitis
(plasmoma) and indeed the
13
Table 2.1 Differential diagnosis of the red eye
Feature
Acute conjunctivitis
Acute uveitis
Acute glaucoma
Pain
Painfree to mild irritation
Mild to severe pain
Can be extremely severe
Vision
Unaffected except in
Slight impairment with 
Often severe impairment to
systemic disease such as
miosis through to blindness
profound blindness 
distemper where the
caused by retinal
blindness is central rather
detachment
than ocular
Discharge
Moderate to copious and 
Generally confined to
Generally confined to
may be serous, mucoid or
lacrimation because of
lacrimation because of pain
purulent
painful and increased 
and increased blinking
blinking
Blood vessels
Conjunctival hyperaemia
Limbal flush and diffuse
Episcleral vessel
with mobile vessels often
redness in episcleral vessels
engorgement and congestion
associated with
deeper than those of the
with stasis hyperaemia
cedematous inflamed
conjunctiva. Note that the
conjunctiva. Note that lid
bulbar vessels are involved
and globe conjunctivae are
while those of the lid are
both affected
normal
Cornea
Clear unless keratitis is
Varying from clear through
A classically steamy or
also occurring
being affected with keratic
ground-glass diffuse corneal
precipitates to being frankly
Dedema
oedematous
Aqueous
Clear
Affected with cells and fibrin
Clear
 giving flare, hypopyon or
hyphaema
Iris
Unaffected
Muddy, thickened or dark
Usually of normal
with indistinct surface
appearance but possibly a
features and often
shallow anterior chamber
iridolenticular adhesions
(synechiae)
Pupil
Unaffected
Small (miotic) irregular or
Dilated and fixed
fixed with a sluggish
response to light
Intraocular
Unaffected
Decreased because of ciliary
Increased
pressure
body involvement
Lens
Unaffected
May be involved with
May be in situ, subluxated
pigment deposition or
or luxated secondary to
synechiae
globe enlargement in
buphthalmos
Posterior
Unaffected except in
Hyalitis, pars planitis,
Often not visible but retinal
segment
systemic diseases such as
chorioretinitis or optic
vascular attenuation or optic
distemper
neuritis may occur in 
nerve cupping may occur
panuveitis
Differential diagnosis of the red eye
 Conjunctivitis
 Note involvement of palpebral and bulbar conjunctiva
Uveitis
Note generalized globe redness often increasing at limbus (ciliary flush): note
other ocular signs - keratic precipitates, hypopyon, miosis, posterior synechiae,
also pain and photophobia in acute cases
Glaucoma
Congestion/injection of episcleral vessels; other ocular signs - blindness, pain
Episcleritis
Deeper vascular involvement with swelling at appropriate level
or scleritis
14
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
Conjunctivitis
Figure 2.1 Form and appearance of
redness
Redness of lid and globe
conjunctiva
Diffuse redness
Conjunctival swelling
(chemosis)
(a)
Uveitis
Intense redness. increasing
near limbus (ciliary flush)
Little or no lid redness
Note other signs of miosis,
intravascular inflammatory deposits
(hypopyon or keratic precipates)
(q)
Classic acute glaucoma
Individual engorged vessels
Little redness in between
here with lens luxation
Note other signs of visual
disturbance, pain, optic disc
cupping, lens luxation (as here)
(c)
roughened inner surface of the nictitating
 One unusual and generally benign cause of
membrane in these circumstances may itself be
the red eye is Horner's syndrome (Figure
a focus of irritation.
2.2). The redness of the conjunctiva of the
The most important differentials for a red
third eyelid protruded in this syndrome is
eye
involve other marked
ocular
signs
often mistaken for a unilateral red eye. Close
concurrent with the redness. The eye with
examination of the eye shows the other signs
uveitis exhibits miosis, flare, keratic precipi-
of Horner's syndrome - a miotic pupil and
tates or hypopyon with posterior synechiae as
 ptosis (drooping) of the upper eyelid. Use of
a critical sequel to pupillary margin inflam-
topical 1% phenylephrine ameliorates these
mation. The uveitic eye is often painful and
signs. It also shows that the correct diagno-
photophobic, while the glaucomatous eye is
 sis has been reached and defines the position
o ssn ina gd a jou  Aenba
of the damage to the ocular sympathetic
photophobic. The glaucomatous eye may
nerve supply by the time taken for the
have Haab's striae (fractures of Descemet's
administration to have its effect. A rapid
 membrane appearing as white lines across the
amelioration
indicates
that
denervation
 cornea) or frank corneal oedema manifesting
hypersensitivity
of
sympathetically
inner-
as a ground-glass appearance of the grey to
vated structures has occurred with a third
white cornea. The eye with sudden onset
order neuropathy. Further(
details of the
glaucoma is often blind, while the uveitic eye
diagnosis
and
prognosis
of
Horner's
is rarely blind unless sight is obscured
by
syndrome can be found in Neer's (1984)
 gross flare, hypopyon or intense miosis.
excellent review of the subject.
Commonly presented conditions - a problem-oriented approach
15
Episcleritis and scleritis
Figure 2.2 Other causes of ocular
redness
Nodular or diffuse with or
without corneal involvement
Deeper vascular engorgement
pales less with topical
phenylephrine
(a)
Vessel engorgement through
vascular compromise
No other ocular signs
Diagnosis on colour flow
Doppler ultrasound
(b)
Raised apparently reddened
third eyelid
PossibleHorner's syndrome
 Possible ocular pain with
globe retraction
(c)
2.2 The painful eye
relies on evaluation of ocular signs on
ophthalmoscopy. Their differential diagnosis
The spectrum of what we might call ocular
presented above.
irritation ranges from the mild but chronic
discomfort caused by an ectopir cilium to the
rapid onset severe pain of acute glaucoma.
Here we will consider first the acutely painful
eye, since these are the emergency situations,
Mild irritation
Severe pain
before discussing briefly conditions with
Some blepharospasm
Lid closure
chronic ocular discomfort. To some extent
Increased lacrimation
Substantial lacrimation
there is an overlap in presentation in the
middle of the nociceptive spectrum.
 The acutely painful eye may be the result
of a traumatic episode with tissue disruption
by external injury, or of two conditions
in
Distichia
Retained foreign body
Ectopic cilia
which ocular damage is the result of internal
Orbital cellititis
injurious mechanisms: uveitis and glaucoma.
Trichiasis
Glaucoma
Diagnosis of these latter two conditions
Box 2.1 0cular pain
16
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
Differential diagnosis of the painful eye
suffer
r pain although they are irreversibly
blind. This may relate to differences in intra-
· The difference between ocular irritation
ocular innervation or in central perception of
(distichia, ectopic cilia, trichiasis) and
deeper pain (uveitis, glaucoma, globe
eration of pain fibres  once intra-ocular
penetration, foreign body)
pressure has been high for some time.
The differential diagnosis of less severe
ocular discomfort centres mostly around
Understanding the origin of the pain is
causes of physical irritation (see Box 2.l).
important for its relief. If it stems from ciliary
 Ocular foreign bodies are an obvious potential
muscle spasm, as in uveitis, then paralysis of
      
this muscle will reduce pain. If it stems from
severe. These may be readily visible but often
a defective tear film exposing corneal nerve
are hidden f
from immediate view in the
endings to drying effects then tear replace-
conjunctival fornix or behind the nictitating
ment is required. However, the origin of pain
membrane. Local anaesthesia with
1  topical
in ocular disease is not in all cases completely
amethocaine drops (or other local anaesthetics:
understood. Where does the photophobia in
see Appendix C) is necessary for adequate
uveitis originate, especially as if
can be
investigation while in some cases general
ameliorated by the use
of topicalnon-
anaesthesia may be essential. Irritative foci
steroidal anti-inflammatories in many cases?
may be integral to ocular structures rather
And where does the acute pain in glaucoma
g e  ns  ixa   t
originate and why do rabbits not seem to be
body. Ectopic cilia, distichial lashes or hair
       
  (is)  s 
questions left to answer in ophthalmology as
responsible for considerable ocular irritation.
there are satisfactorily solved!
Investigation of these lashes again often
Ocular trauma can result in external and/or
requires  local anaesthesia. Magnification is
internal tissue disruption and widely differing
often necessary to diagnose distichiasis and
degrees of pain. The
pain accompanying
almost always required to localize ectopic cilia.
corneal injury can too easily be underestimated
Distichial lashes arise from the meibomian
(although
 anyone wearing
contact lenses
gland orifices.
Ectopic cilia often arise from
Ae re ro ud aas ab a s
meibomian glands but through the conjunc-
minor ocular surface abrasion). There seems to
tiva, or have distinct hair follicles which may
be quite a range of response to corneal ulcera-
occur at any point in the palpebral tissue. This
tion between individual animals: some with a
difference
1S
reflected
in the
treatment
techniques for these cilia. Distichia may simply
while others with only a mild surface abrasion
be plucked with forceps. In some cases owners
will
1exhibit marked blepharospasm
and
 are happy to perform this from time to time.
lacrimation suggesting a considerable nocicep-
While this may seem optimal to some clients,
tive response. The anatomy and physiology of
distichia plucked may recur rapidly. Because
corneal nociception is discussed below The
new distichia can be shorter and more irritant
reason for t
this difference in response may
sometimes such plucking can increase, rather
possibly be individual variation in degree of
than eliminate, irritation. Distichia can be
corneal innervation between animals; or more
removed
by electrolysis, by cryosurgical
likely  differences  in  individual  tolerance
of
ablation or by sharp knife surgery (Lawson
 painful stimuli; or conceivably because super-
1973，
Chambers and Slatter 1984, Wolfley
ficial ocular surface damage massively stimu-
1987). Electrolysis aims to deal lash by lash
lates trigeminal pain receptors while deeper
with the distichia while cryosurgery on the
stromal injury actually exposes fewer pain-
lids seeks to destroy the meibomian glands
fibre endings.
from which the lashes originate. Both of these
The same variation can be seen in glaucoma.
techniques can cause considerable palpebral
Some animals with early rises in ocular
inflammation and presurgical medication with
non-steroidal  anti-inflammatory 2
agents
iS
others
with(
catastrophir rises
in
1 pressure
advised.
Some veterinary
7ophthalmologists
accompanied by buphthalmos seem not to
apply a cold/ice pack to the eyelids after
17
 cryosurgery has been performed and leave the
use the term to denote a pathological white
pack until 'the animaf wakes up. Sharp-knife
appearance. The key here is determination of
surgery aims to remove the meibomian gland
where the white opacity is within the eye. A
seats of the lashes and thus avoids incisions in
white cornea or an opaque aqueous humour
the lid. In the past lid margin resection was
prevent visualization of intra-ocular struc-
advocated to remove distichia, but the risk of
tures beneath it, while iris detail can still be
lid scarring is too great to warrant use of that
seen around a white lens opacity. The differ-
technique today.
entiation of an opaque cornea or aqueous is
Treatment of ectopic cilia requires sharp-
more difficult. A slit beam allows the
knife resection of the area from which the
anterior and posterior faces of the cornea to
cilia arise.
Ectopic
cilia
 originate
be identified in the latter case while showing
together and during surgery a number of
the opacity to be intracorneal in the former.
 hairs may be found together in the thickening
In any case corneal opacification is far more
on the palpebral conjunctiva.
common than is a white aqueous.
A white opacity in front of the lens can only
be one of four things
2.3 The white eye
Cellular invasion
+
Normally the term white eye is used to
Oedema
differentiate a quiet or disease-free eye from
Scar tissue
a red eye, as discussed above, but here we
+
Lipid
Corneal oedema :
Glaucoma - note vessel engorgement
and visual disturbance
Endothelial dystrophy - diffuse corneal
 opacity often the only sign
Lipid deposition :
Lipid dystrophy - central crystalline
deposition
Arcus lipoides cornae - at the limbus :
associated with hypothyroid or
lipid metabolic abnormality
Lipid keratopathy:
associated with corneal
vascularization or limbal mass
Figure 2.3 The white eye
18
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
All four can occur in the cornea while in the
eye as a very startling diagnostic feature. This
aqueous humour only cellular infiltration and
could be considered an emergency, given that
lipid involvement are seen (Figure
2.3)
it disturbs vision and because it can follow
Corneal oedema is a sign of what one might
uveitis where an abnormally high circulating
monsider
 true
emergency
situation,
lipid also occurs. Fibrin in the anterior
glaucoma. Other white corneal changes occur
chamber gives a grey or yellow colour to the
mostly in chronic lesions which cannot be
aqueous rather than white but signals an
considered to be emergencies. Cellular infil-
emergency in some cases, as it is associated
tration of the cornea is normally accompanied
with uveitis. In the vitreous a total retinal
by vascular invasion, giving a pink hue as
detachment could be confused with a white
seen in chronic superficial keratitis. Corneal
eye, and a posterior chamber tumour may
oedema, however, gives a classical ground
produce a white pupil or leucocoria.
glass appearance through which, when mild,
With regard to the lens, cataract is clearly a
some intra-ocular detail can be seen using a
significant cause of white opacity, but the only
bright light source such as a Finhoff transillu-
cataractous change which could be classed as
minator. The differential diagnosis of condi-
an emergency is the diabetic cataract. This is
tions associated with corneal oedema includes
an emergency both because it can occur
rapidly and be a cause for sudden change in
Glaucoma
the appearance of the ocular media and visual
Endothelial dystrophy
deterioration, and also because it is a manifes-
Endothelitis associated with uveitis often
tation of a serious systemic endocrine disease.
after canine adenovirus infection
 Endothelial trauma
2.4 The suddenly blind eye
 The appearance of corneal lipid deposition
depends on the type of lipid or lipoprotein
 The suddenly blind eye is clearly an emergency
involved. Cholesterol, for instance, forms
first because visual compromise is a cause for
characteristic crystals
while
low
density
concern even if only
ytemporary.Secondly,
lipoprotein gives a finer lipid infiltrate. Scar
sudden b
blindness  is often the  prelude
to
tissue is readily recognizable as such, having
 permanent blindness.
a
heterogeneous
white-grey
appearance
Sudden blindness is caused through one of
Blood vessels are often seen in association
four mechanisms.
with corneal scar tissue.
Cellular
infiltration
of
the
aqueous
1.
 The first mechanism is opacification of the
produces a flare which can properly
q
ocular media. The only two conditions in
appreciated only by making use of the
which media opacification occurs with
Tyndall effect, and thus is not a truly white
rapid onset are lipid-laden aqueous and
eye (Figure 2.4). Oedema and scar tissue do
diabetic cataract (as covered above under
not occur in the aqueous, leaving lipid and
 the white eye) or vitreal or retinal haemor-
fibrin deposition as the only reasons for a
rhage.
dense white aqueous humour.
Lipid-laden
2.
The second mechanism is disruption of
aqueous does indeed give a completely white
retinal function. Rapid deterioration in
Differential diagnosis of the blue/white eye
Where is the opacity? - cornea, aqueous, lens?
What is the appearance of the opacity? - dense crystalline, ground glass, etc.?
How widespread is the opacity? - across whole cornea, focal, only in pupil?
.Cornea
Corneal lipidosis (dense white, diffuse or micro crystalline)
Corneal scar (diffuse, often off-white striate appearance)
+ Aqueous
Lipid-laden aqueous (diffuse throughout aqueous)
Hypopyon (ventrally often with a horizontal margin dorsally)
· Lens
Cataract (only seen within pupil, behind lens)
19
Figure 2.4 As happens (or rather,
Light
used to happen) in a smoke-filled
cinema, the light lens highlights the
Liquid phase
particles in the gas phase, or in the
aqueous the liquid phase. This is the
key diagnostic test to evaluate flare
in anterior uveitis
Particles
refracting
light showing
ashaze
retinal activity occurs either as a conse-
the optic nerve itself accounts for visual
quence of complete retinal detachment or
loss.
failure of retinal é
electrical function in
Optic neuritis may be visible at the
sudden
acquired1
retinal degeneration.
papilla by fundoscopy, with a swollen
Retinal detachment may occur as the
optic nerve head with or without peripap-
result of posterior uveitis, hypertension or
illary haemorrhages. On rare occasions the
trauma. It may be related to inherited
inflammatory process occurs not at the
disease such as retinal dysplasia or Collie
optic nerve head but in the nerve at the
eye anomaly. The syndrome of sudden
retrobulbar level. Diagnosis of retrobulbar
acquired retinal degeneration (SARD)
 optic neuritis is generally by exclusion but
 gives no observable retinal changes at the
ultrasonographir or magnetic resonance
time of first visual loss, but electroretino-
imaging (MRl) or computerized tomogra-
graphy
shows no measurable
retinal
phy (CT) can show a swollen retrobulbar
electrical 
activity.
 Later indicators
of
nerve,
and
electroretinography
retinal degeneration such as  increased
reveals normal retinal activity.
tapetal reflectivity occur, but as these are
Tumours of the optic nerve itself, such
not present early in the disease they are
as optic nerve meningiomas, can cause
helpful(
 diagnostic
signs
the
visual disturbance as can adjacent masses
 emergency situation.
pressing on the optic nerve. Of these
3.
The third mechanism for sudden loss of
pituitary  t
tumours are classical causes of
Vision
is
optic
nerve
dysfunction.
bilateral
visual
disturbance
through
Glaucoma and optic neuritis are the two
pressure on the optic chiasm. Such cases
conditions most commonly giving rise to
highlight the necessity for a full clinical
dysfunction although tumours of the optic
work up. They manifest also in endocrine
nerve or surrounding structures can on
abnormalities such as diabetes insipidus,
occasion cause loss of function.
and diagnosis can be aided by tests such
Although we associate glaucoma with
as the ACTH stimulation test.
ocular disease at the iridocorneal angle
4.
The fourth mechanism causing sudden
the mechanism of visual loss relates to
visual loss is central blindness. Here all
 damage at the optic nerve head. Cupping
parameters of ocular function are normal
of the optic nerve head is a visible
and the diagnosis rests on electrodiagnosis
 change, but before this happens pressure
with
1 abnormalities
shown in visually
necrosis of the nerve fibres coursing over
evoked potentials by electroencephalogra-
the edge of the cribriform plate to enter
phy. Magnetic resonance or CT imaging
20
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
-tive result
SARD
Electroretinogram
+Normal eye
Retrobulbar optic neuritis
(confirm by ultrasound)
+ tive result-
Central blindness
 (perform full neurological
work-up)
Ophthalmic
exam
Opaque media
Glaucoma
Abnormal eye
+Retinal detachment
+ Papilloedema
Optic nerve pathology
Opticneuritis
Box 2.2 The suddenly blind eye
Differential diagnosis of the suddenly blind eye
· Opacification of media
Lipid laden aqueous
Diabetic cataract
Intraocular haemorrhage (aqueous or vitreous)
+ Disruption of retinal function
Retinal detachment
 Sudden Acquired Retinal Degeneration (SARD)
+ Optic nerve dysfunction
Optic neuritis
 Glaucomatous optic neuropathy
Optic nerve compression
Meningioma
 Pituitary tumour at the optic chiasm
+ Central blindness
 Other intracranial space occupying lesion
? raising intracranial pressure
? causing compression of optic radiation
may reveal an intracranial mass
ora
diagnosis of generalized disease such as
manifestations of a systemic condition (Table
granulomatous meningio-encephalitis may
 2.2). The prevalence of ocular abnormality as
be made. Such a condition may also
a sign of systemic disease shows the impor-
account for some cases of optic neuritis.
tance of a thorough general work up for all
animals presenting with ocular disease. The
fact that the ocular signs are the reason for
2.5 Ocular lesions in systemic
emergency presentation should not detract
disease
from a thorough clinical examination of the
whole animal as soon as possible. The
Several of the 
diseases
 mentioned above,
systemir diseases producing orular signs are
from diabetic cataract to granulomatous
shown in Table 2.3.
21
Table 2.2 Ocular lesions in systemic disease(provided by T.F.Evans)
Disease
Species
Ocuiar change
Aetiology
Vitamin A deficiency
Eq, bo, 0v
Night blindness, poor PLRs
Less production of
rhodopsin
Hype rad renocorticism 
Ca
Corneal ulcers, KcS, hypertensive
Hypercortisolaemia
retinopathy,SARD
Infectious bovine
Bo
Conjunctivitis, blepharaospasm,
rhinotracheitis {IBR}
cornea generally clear
Diabetes mellitus
Ca, fe
Cataract
Osmotic (sorbitol,
glucose and aldose
reductase)
Hype rthyroidism
Fe
 Retinal detachment, perivascular
Hypertension
cuffing, tortuous retinal vessels
Chr/acute renal failure
Ca, fe
Retinal detachment, perivascular
Hypertension
cuffing, tortuous retinal vessels
Toxoplasmosis
Fe,ca
Anterior uveitis, chorioretinitis
Toxopiasma gondi
tachyzoites
Canine distemper
Ca, ferret
Conjunctivitis,KCS,chorioretinitis,
Canine distemper virus
brown retinal scars
Feline herpes virus
Fe
Conjunctivitis, chemosis, dentritic
Feline herpes virus 1
keratitis
Chlamydiosis
Fe, avian
Conjunctivitis, chemosis
Chlamydia psittaci
Equine viral arteritis
Eq
Corneal opacity, uveitis,
EVA-virus
conjunctivitis
Equine herpes virus
Eq
Conjunctivitis, dendritic keratitis
EHV-1
Feline infectious
Fe
Uveitis
Feline coronavirus
peritonitis
Leptospirosis
Eq
Anterior uveitis, equine recurrent
Leptospira interrogans
uveitis, secondary cataracts
Thiamine deficiency
Fe, eq, bo, ov
Blindness, ataxia
Listeriosis
Bo, ov, su
Chorioretinitis, blindness {unilateral
Listeria monocytogenes
or bilateral), KCS
bacteraemia
Bovine virus diarrhoea
Bo
Cataract, vitreal opacities, optic
(BVD)
nerve atrophy, retinal dysplasia
Liver disease
Ca,fe,eq
Scleral icterus
Hyperbilirubinaemia
Lymphosarcoma
Ca, fe
Uveitis, retinal haemorrhages,
Neoplasia, metastasis,
secondary glaucoma
phagocytosis
GME
Ca
Erlichiosis
Ca
Uveitis,retinal haemorrhages, optic
Ehrlichia canis
neuritis
Taurine deficiency
Fe
Central retinal atrophy
(hyperreflectivity in area centralis)
References are available in Gelatt (1999) and Lavach (1990).
22
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
Table 2.3 Systemic diseases with ocular associations having emergency implications
Canine distemper
Conjunctivitis
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Chorioretinitis
Canine adenoviral hepatitis
Corneal oedema - 'blue eye'
Anterior uveitis - endothelitis
Feline dysautonomia
Dilated unresponsive pupils
Feline herpes virus
Conjunctivitis, keratoconjunctivitis
Corneal ulceration
Feline chlamydial infection
Conjunctivitis, chemosis
Feline FIV infection
Uveitis
Feline FIP infection
Anterior uveitis
Feline Felv infection
Anterior uveitis,uveal lymphosarcoma
Feline chlamydial infection
Conjunctivitis,chemosis
Rickettsial infections
Anterior uveitis
Bacterial toxaemia
Anterior uveitis
Chorioretinitis
Rickettsial and fungal disease
Anterior uveitis
Retinal haemorrhages
Toxoplasmosis
Uveitis, scleritis
Leishmaniasis
Anterior uveitis, keratitis, scleritis
Dirofilariasis
Anterior chamber worms, corneal oedema
Toxocariasis
Chorioretinitis
Diabetes mellitus
Rapidly developing cataract
Diabetic retinopathy
y-retinal haemorrhages
Hypocalcaemia
Punctate and linear cataracts
Hyperad renocorticism
Corneal ulceration, corneal lipidosis
Hypothyroidism
Corneal lipidosis, keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Lysozomal storage diseases
Faint corneal lipidosis
Retinal deposits
Hype rtension
Retinal haemorrhages
Retinal detachment
 Hyperlipidaemia
Corneal lipidosis, lipid keratopathy
Lipaemia retinalis
Anaemia
Retinal haemorrhages
Thrombocytopaenia
Retinal haemorrhages
Hyperviscocity syndrome
Dilated tortous vessels
Retinal haemorrhages
Papilloedema
Vogt-koyanagi-harada syndrome
Anterior uveitis
RPE and choroidal depigmentation
Lymphosarcoma
Anterior or posterior uveitis
Retinal haemorrhages
Intracranial neoplasia
 Papilloedema
Blindness
Chapter 3
Adnexa and orbit
3.1 Lid laceration
globe injury also occurs and, given the
haemorrhage and swelling accompanying
Four key points should be taken into consid-
lid trauma, such lacerations may be diffi-
    
cult to evaluate. However critical we
case of a lid laceration.
consider lid injuries, a concurrent globe
penetration is considerably more import-
1.
Are there other ocular injuries? In many,
ant from the viewpoint of potential fong-
if not the majority, of cases penetrating
term visual handicap. Missing such an
injury is to be avoided at all costs.
2.
 When should surgery be undertaken? As
Emergency management of lid lacerations
we have said, there is often considerable lid
1. Perform full ophthalmic examination
 swelling and haemorrhage associated with
under sedation so as not to miss more
lid injury. As veterinarians we are often
severe globe trauma
 2. If a very recent injury (less than 6 hours)
repair immediately ensuring good lid
Eyelid injury in blunt trauma
margin apposition
 3. If longer than 6 hours since injury
1. Haemorrhage
bandage and give systemic NSAID.
2. Oedema
 delaying repair until lid swelling has
 3. Important factor to look beyond the
subsided
eyelid lesions to assess globe integrity.
4. Always ensure that further self-trauma
intra-ocular normality
 cannot occur by using Elizabethan collar.
4. The importance of shock-wave damage
to tissue boundaries in the eye
together with adequate analgesia
Prognostic indicators in lid lacerations
Eyelid injury in sharp trauma
1. The profuse vascularization of the lid
1. Laceration
ensures that even substantial lacerations
2. Haemorrhage
heal well
3. Oedema
2. The key factor in ensuring adequate
4. Critical: how much the tissue swelling
healing is adequate apposition of the lid
compromises accurate re-apposition of
margin to avoid long-term ocular surface
lid edges?
irritation
5. If lids are well vascularized, tissues can
3. Extensive damage and loss of tissue
be left protected, lubricated and clean for
requiring reconstructive surgery
several days until swelling has reduced
24
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
tempted in such a situation to rush in with
strong temptation in lid repair is to
an immediate repair. This may often
preserve as much tissue as possible even
compromise our ability to perform an
where considerable damage has occurred.
optimal repair. Assessing whether tissue is
This may be counterproductive, as non-
viable can be difficulf in such circum-
viable lid tissue will have to be removed
stances, and ensuring that the lid margin is
in a secondary repair and subsequent
perfectly aligned may be impossible, given
problems of trichiasis or corneal exposure
the degree of tissue swelling encountered.
may occur. A preferable option is to
It may, in many cases, be preferable to
remove substantially damaged tissue at
 protect the ocular surface with ointment, to
primary repair and provide replacement
provide a compress with
a moistened
tissue through skin rotation or bucket-
bandage over the peri-orbital area and to
handle flaps.
treat  with systemic non-steroidal
anti-
4.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly,
inflammatory
agentsfor
rseveral
days
the repair of the lid margin in as near
perfecf apposition as possible is vital. An
should be done only after thorough cleans-
area of defective lid edge with associated
 ing of the area. Systemic and local antibi-
trichiasis or the formation of a 'step' in the
otic therapy should be ensured. If the
margin
can
give
continual
corneal
nasolacrimal system is damaged immedi-
 problems and ocular surface irritation.
able or a nasolacrimal cannula can be
The correct placement of the first suture at
sutured in place until repair is attempted.
the eyelid margin in a lid repair is thus critical
Once swelling has subsided
l and
tissue
in ensuring a successful result. A simple inter-
viability can better be assessed a primary
rupted suture at the lid margin might be
repair can be undertaken.
considered sufficient but in fact causes an
3.
What tissue should be retained after a
unstable
tissue
adequate
substantial injury and what removed? A
support. What is required is a cruciate (or
Are there more serious globe injuries?
Full examination required
Yes
Proceed
Is immediate repair possible?
Give immediate
NO
treatment-
suture
How much lid can be preserved?
nasolacrimal
cannula in place
Remove non-
Remove vascularity
viable tissue
of lids - facilitates
reconstruction
Perform
reconstruction
Box 3.1 Lid trauma
Adnexa and orbit
25
Figure 3.2 Reconstruction of lower lid from upper-
lid with a skin flap
Figure 3.1 Suturing the lid margin
figure of 8) suture as shown in Figure 3.1.
Starting at the external surface of the lid about
(a)
3 mm from the margin the suture is passed
through the lid tissue and exits the lid at the
Lines showing
margin. Re-entering the lid on the other side
incision
of the incision the suture again passes through
the lid tissue to exit opposite the first suture
entry-point. The suture thus firmly opposes
the two parts of the lid both at the margin and
at a point away from the lid edge. Single inter-
rupted sutures of the lid skin oppose the edges
of the lid incision, but beforehand sutures in
the conjunctiva should be placed with their
knots buried in the tissue of the conjunctiva.
(b)
A number of surgical options are available
for long-term repair of substantial lid injury
Sutures to lip
where tissue defects remain. These techniques
 are not really the subject for an emergency
textbook buf line diagrams illustrating
the
possible methods to remedy lid injuries with
defects of upper and lower lids are given here
(Figures 3.2-3.5).
3.2 Conjunctivitis
(c)
It might be objected that conjunctivitis cannot
Figure 3.3 Pavletic lip-to-lid technique to
reconstruct lower lid
be considered an emergency: it is normally a
chronic disease with an insidious onset, not
causing overt pain or visual loss. Yet as a
include it here. Conjunctivitis can be caused by
differential diagnosis for the red eye, and as a
physical factors such as distichia or ectopic
 condition occasionally resulting in alarming
cilia (Helper and Magrane 1970); or entropion
chemosis and ocular discharge, it is right to
 and trichiasis (Miller and Albert 1988); through
26
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
Figure 3.4 Reconstruction of upper
lid defect from lower lid {Mustardé
technique)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.5 Bucket-handle
techniques for lid defect
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
immunological pathways that occur in follicu-
membrane in response to chronic irritation are
lar conjunctivitis in dogs; or from infectious
themselves a focus for ocular irritation. They
agents such as herpes virus, Chlamydia
or
should be removed by physical abrasion with
Mycoplasma in cats (Nasisse et al. 1993). As
such, conjunctivitis warrants a close ocular
 Differential diagnosis in conjunctival
  p  a d  
haemorrhage
the third eyelid should be examined. Often
conjunctivitis persists even when the inciting
Ocular trauma
cause of ocular irritation has been removed,
Coagulopathy
because the lymphoid follicles which have
 Systemic infections such as Rickettsia
formed on the bulbar surface of the nictitating
rickettsiae
Adnexa and orbit
27
Conjunctivitis
IFA
What is the cause?
(immunofluorescence
antibody technique)
Cheap
Expensive
method
method
PCR
Treat with aureomycin/tetracycline
Identify possible virus
(polymerase
chain reaction)
Culture and
Success
Failure
identification of
cytopathic effects
Chlamydia/Mycoplasma
Look for
was the cause
another cause
←
Local irritation
Box 3.2 Conjunctivitis
a cotton-tipped swab after topical anaesthesia,
of Chlamydia and/or herpes virus, or for
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing. In
tion of phenol, again with a cotton-tipped
past years diagnosis of herpes viral infection
applicator (Dolowy 1987).
was difficult and amelioration of signs on
Conjunctivitis
should
never
be
treated
treatment was presumed to confirm diagno-
initially with topical antibiotic with steroid
sis. Today with the availability of polymerase
 medications. For one thing such polyphar-
chain reaction-based diagnostic tests we can
sd un  u sen 
be more sure of a diagnosis of herpetic aetiol-
causative agent even if the treatment has the
 ogy in feline keratoconjunctivitis. In the UK
desired effect. More importantly, in the cat, if
viral culture is most often used for diagnosis,
the conjunctivitis is caused by ocular feline
but while the specificity here is high the sensi-
herpes virus infection, the steroid often has
tivity is poor with many 
false negative
the effect of converting a mild
harmless
results. PCR testing is only available in the
epithelial viral infection into a chronic sight-
USA, while immunofluorescence is under-
threatening corneal  stromal
infection
with
taken in Europe and is used by the two
inflammation, neovascularization and refrac-
authors of this text residing on the eastern
tory corneal oedema.
side of the Atlantic.
Feline keratoconjunctivitis may be caused
Treatment of FHV-1-related corneal disease
by chlamydial or mycoplasmal as well as
can involve topical antiviral drops: idoxyri-
herpetic infection. Thus the use of topical
dine (Herplex or Stroxil in USA) or trifluo-
tetracycline medication will have the effect of
rothymidine (Viropticin USA or Moorfields
controlling the former two agents or, in the
Eye Hospital formulation in UK) drops four
event of treatment failure, strongly suggest-
times
daily.
Topical
interferon
alpha
ing viral infection to be the cause. In that case
(300o IU/ml) has been used as has oral inter-
antiviral treatment may be considered to be
feron (again 3000 IU/ml), 1 ml daily for seven
the preferable course of action with diagnosis
s r   n 
being achieved if such treatment is effective.
ive but not curative treatment protocols
A conjunctival scraping may be submitted for
include sytemic L-lysine (200-250 mg daily
Viral
culture:
for
an
 immunofluorescent
for the
cat)，
and tear substitutes
if tear
antibody (IFA) test to investigate the presence
production is reduced (Quinn 2000).
28
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
As the above-mentioned antiviral drugs are
of the conjunctival sac under general anaes-
not widely available outside the USA, one of
thesia. Particular attention should be paid to
the authors (DLW) has successfully used a
the space behind the third eyelid and the full
preparation
of
acyclovir
(Zovirax
extent of the fornix around 360° of the globe.
ophthalmic), which is a licensed human
-o  n qo m o sono
ophthalmic ointment, for treatment of feline
purulent discharge which would otherwise
herpes virus keratitis even though the only
obscure the view and also flush out small
paper on this subject showed poor antiviral
     
effects in vitro (Nasisse et al. 1989). The results
missed.
have so far been promising, but it is advisable
to notify the owner that the drug is not
licensed for veterinary use.
3.5 Acute keratoconjunctivitis
sicca
3.3 Dacryocystitis
While keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) might
well be thought of as a chronic condition
An eye with severe frank purulent discharge
which would
 never be presented as an
may have a conjunctivitis but often the infec-
emergency, a
 small number of dogs with
tion is related to a persistent infectious focus,
sudden-onset  t
total
failure of lacrimation
either in the form of a foreign body or as
present
 as  acutely  painful 
eyes
Swith
or
dacryocystitis, where the infection centres in
without corneal ulceration. A considerable
the nasolacrimal duct. In either of these cases
number of these cases, in the authors' experi-
examination under anaesthesia is often neces-
ence, are the result of drug-induced KCS,
sary: a full investigation of the depths of the
mostly
with salazopyrin use. Here the
conjunctival fornices should be undertaken to
Schirmer tear test is zero and the whole
locate a foreign body such as a grass seed and
ocular surface has a gritty appearance. It
the nasolacrimal duct should be flushed to
assess the presence of dacryocystitis. In either
hyperacute failures of tear production are so
case topical antibiosis should be provided but
severe because the conjunctiva has not had
with dacryocystitis systemic medication is
the(
opportunity to adjust its goblet-cell
often needed and bacteriological culture and
numbers and production of mucus. The
sensitivity are worthwhile to ensure that the
classic mucopurulent ocular discharge so
correct drug is being used.
 s       
these cases, at least not in the first two to
three weeks after emergency presentation.
3.4 Conjunctival foreign body
 They do not seem responsive to management
with topical cyclosporine although one might
The
presentation
of
a
 non-penetrating
think that they should as lacrimal gland
conjunctival  foreign  body  can 
1be highly
tissue has not been destroyed through a long-
varied. Since foreign material can range from
standing immune-mediated destruction (as
a grass awn to a piece of grit, signs occupy
occurs in the more chronic cases seen in the
the whole spectrum from mild discomfort
West Highland White terrier and Cocker
and
d  purulent ocular discharge with
the
spaniel).
former to acute pain and chemosis with the
Other cases of acute KCS include traumatic
latter. The key problem is finding such a
damage to the facial nerve or trigeminal
foreign body in an eye where chemosis and
 damage resulting in reduced/absent corneal
adnexal swelling may easily hide the object.
sensation and therefore reduced tear-produc-
This is compounded by the tendency of many
tion. In the former case there is often a dry
 A   n s g 
nose,
suggestive
of denervation
damage
the fornix or to the very base of the third
affecting the nasal glands which
1 produce
eyelid. This is especially true of grass awns.
moisture at the external nares. In such neuro-
 In many cases the only way to investigate
logical cases topical cyclosporine is less useful.
an eye where the possibility of a conjunctival
Even in cases of chronic dry eye the animal
foreign body is high is to examine the entirety
may be brought in as an emergency if a
Adnexa and orbit
29
corneal
ulcer supervenes.
As will
be
mass, as discussed in section 3.6.3 below.
discussed below one key feature in the inves-
Conjunctival hyperaemia is seen concurrent
tigation of a corneal ulcer is the determination
with the exophthalmos as may a serous or a
of its cause: here a Schirmer tear test is just
 mucopurulent discharge.
about obligatory to exclude KCS as a cause of
Retrobulbar infection often presents as
the ulcer.
exophthalmos  associated
 with  peri-apical
dental disease - a tooth-root abscess may
erupt as a open lesion on the skin or as a
3.6 Exophthalmos
closed infected mass in the orbit producing
globe protrusion.
3.6.1 Globe protrusion or exophthalmos
The key feature in the diagnosis of such
infective orbital disease is acute severe pain.
This may be a gradually worsening disease or
Retropulsion of the 8
globe is painful as is
may be a sudden-onset emergency. It may
opening the mouth.
.This is important in
      
 assessment of the case as a fluctuant swelling
relatively easily diagnosed and cured, or a
retrobulbar neoplasm difficult to diagnose
may be detected behind the last molar tooth.
without recourse to expensive imaging
Animals may be febrile and show signs of
systemic malaise but this is not invariable. A
techniques and often impossible to cure.
haemogram is likely to reveal a neutrophilia.
Because of this dichotomy; the long-term
Investigation of the area behind the last
damage to the eye from prolonged exposure;
and, for the owner, the unpleasant appear-
molar tooth should include an incision in the
ance of the protruding globe it is important to
oral mucosa and gentle introduction of a
manage these cases correctly from fhe start.
closed haemostat into the orbit through the
pterygoid muscle, followed by opening and
withdrawal
of
the
haemaostat,
this
3.6.2 Orbital cellulitis and retrobulbar
obviously performed under general anaes-
infection
thesia
(Figure 3.6). While the
literature
would
Ahave
Id an  s psd  r a
one
believe that
'purulent
eye with  a profuse mucopurulent 
material usually drains from the affected
ocular
area' (Speiss and Wallin-Hakanson 1999), in
discharge or, if the infection has organized into
an abscess, there may be the exophthalmos
 that occurs with a retrobulbar space-occupying
Differential diagnosis in exophthalmos
Investigation should include
Full ocular examination {including
examination from above)
Investigation of ocular movements
(including forced retropulsion)
Full cranial examination including
opening mouth
Ocular and orbital ultrasound
 Skull radiography and other imaging
technigues (CT/MRI)
Causes
1. Retrobulbar mass
Abscess (painful on opening mouth)
Figure 3.6 Incision of the oral mucosa, gentle
Tumour (not generally painful on
introduction of a closed haemostat into the orbit
opening mouth)
through the pterygoid muscle followed by opening
2. Retrobulbar fluid
the haemaostat and withdrawal while animal is
+
 Oedema
anaesthetized. Note that here the endotracheal tube
+Haemorrhage
and throat pack have been removed for sake of
clarity, but should normally be used in such cases
30
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
our experience this is often not the case. We
3.6.3 Other orbital space occupying
propose that the anatomy of the retrobulbar
lesions?
area often traps purulent material in lacunae
but that drainage supported by aggressive
The
gradually
increasing
exophthalmos
 occurring with a retrobulbar space-occupying
systemicantibiotictreatment
is  almost
lesion
      
always successful. Advancement of a bac-
terioiogical swab into the retrobulbar space
presented as an emergency, but three features
can give useful culture data and the preva-
here are important.
lence of anaerobes in a small series (DLW)
supports the use of metronidazole together
1.
 It will not be painful, as would the
with a prolonged course of cephalosporin in
infected orbital cellulitis or retrobulbar
these cases.
abscess detailed above.
In rabbits and larger rodents such as the
2.
 The exophthalmic globe should be differ-
chinchilla the close apposition of the globe to
entiated from a hydrophthalmic, enlarged
the posterior dental molar roots leads to a
globe.
 The
position
of the
nictitating
range
of
problems,
from the
persistent
membrane is important here: an exoph-
epiphora often seen in chinchillas with dental
thalmic globe will be characterized by a
disease to the frank
 severe exophthalmos
raised protuberant third eyelid while an
seen in rabbits infected with Pasteurella
or
enlarged globe, after severe glaucoma for
Staphylococcus.
Dealing
with
this
can
be
instance, will not (Figure 3.7a-d).
problematic since the extraction of infected
3.
 The position of the retrobulbar space-
teeth is difficult and yet without elimination
occupying
lesion, whether 
within
the
of the focus of infection the condition cannot
extra-ocular muscle cone (intraconal) or
be remedied.
outside it (extraconal) substantially alters
Limited vessel
engorgement
Marked vessel
Protruding
engorgement 
nictitating
membrane
Enlarged globe
without. protruding
nictitating
membrane
(a) Exophthalmos
(b) Buphthalmos with glaucoma
Eye visual
Protruding
and without
nictitating
pain.
membrane
Lateral
displacement
of gaze often
seen (exotropia)
Sclera
Note no
obvious
nictitating 
punoe
membrane
eye
protrusion
(c) Intraconal disease
(d) Extraconal disease
Figure 3.7 Differentiating exophthalmos. (a) Exophthalmos; (b) enlarged globe; (c) Intraconial disease; (d)
extraconial disease
Adnexa and orbit
31
the appearance of the eye. Intraconal
Immunosuppressive doses of oral corticos-
disease leads to a staring appearance with
teroids are usually ameliorative although
sclera visible around the circumference of
 azothioprine may also be valuable for two
the cornea and, perhaps surprisingly, a
to three weeks at 1-2 mg/kg.
lack of nictitating membrane protrusion
(Figure 3.7). Intraconal disease may occur
Other
 non-infectious
space-occupying
with an optic nerve tumour such as an
lesions do not of course have to be neoplas-
intra-orbital menigioma but is more likely
tic. Masticatory myositis causes severe exoph-
to occur acutely as an extra-ocular myosi-
thalmos but also obvious signs of limited jaw
tis (Ramsey et al. 1995, Ramsey and Fox
movement, pyrexia, malaise and anorexia.
1997). In cases of eosinophilic extra-ocular
Salivary retention cysts and mucocoeles can
myositis, leukocytosis and eosinophilia in
 cause of slowly progressing extraconal exoph-
a peripheral blood sample are seen and
thalmos which on draining yields a tenacious
serum creatinine kinase levels are elevated.
yellow fluid.
Chapter 4
Globe
4.1 Blunt trauma to the globe
to the globe might be considered less sight-
threatening than penetrating injury but the
Emergencies involving the entire globe are
shock waves that issue from severe blunt
almost without exception traumatic. Penetrat-
trauma can actually have more devastating
ing injuries may involve the cornea or the
effects than the localized injury resulting
sclera and are dealt with below. Blunt trauma
from penetrating trauma. A fracture of the
bone surrounding the eye may similarly
injure the globe and/or extra-ocular tissues.
Emergency management of ocular
'In the same manner as an earthquake
contusion
causes  widespread
disruption, the shock
1. Perform full ophthalmic examination,
waves following blunt trauma have particu-
noting that damage may be as severe as
larly
catastrophic 
effects  at boundaries
with a penetratng injury
between
tissues
with
different
physical
2. Perform fluorescein test to evaluate for
characteristics (Figure 4.1). This is particularly
surface ulceration
      
 3. Measure intra-ocular pressure and treat
connective tissues of the cornea and sclera
accordingly
meet the delicate soft tissue and vascular
4. Give systemic corticosteroids and
structures of the iris and ciliary body. The
antibiotics
shearing forces following the shock waves
 5. Give topical steroid if no corneal
resulting
 from a blunt
t   traumatic episode
ulceration is present, otherwise give
topical NSAID ketorolac (Acular,
cause irreversible tissue damage, separating
Allergan) or flurbiprofen (Ocufen,
the uveal structures from the connective
Allergan)
tissue of the globe. Similarly the rebound
6. Give topical atropine twice daily
forces occurring at the posterior face of the
 7. Hospitalize patient and evaluate eye
globe tear retina from choroid (or more
every 3-4 hours
correctly neurosensory retina  from retinal
pigment epithelium, given the potential space
Prognostic indicators in ocular contusion
which exists between the two layers of the
1. Intra-ocular haemorrhage is a poor
embryological optic  cup). Such  shearing
prognostic sign
forces may also tear vascular structures
2. Intra-ocular inflammation is to be
giving retinal or choroidal haemorrhages or
expected and can be ameliorated if
vitreal haemorrhage arising from damage to
treated aggressively
the richly vascular ciliary body. Thus it can
3.(
Glaucoma similarly may occur and is
be seen that while penetrating trauma may
much less easily controllable than uveitis
itself cause significant local damage, blunt
Globe
33
Endothelial disruption and
Figure 4.1 Shock waves following
corneal oedema
blunt trauma have particularly
catastrophic effects at boundaries
between tissues with different
physical characteristics
Retinal detachment
and haemorrhage
Zonular disruption
and lens luxation
Iridodialysis
and haemorrhage
trauma often gives rise to irreversible damage
few minutes after injury may be sight-
throughout the globe, even quite distant from
preserving, is globe prolapse. This occurs
the sight of blunt impact.
predominantly  in brachycephalic dogs  in
which globe exposure and a considerable
degree  of 
lagophthalmos is a natural
4.2. Globe prolapse
phenomenon. The eyes are congenitally very
exophthalmic and a frightening action such as
Perhaps the most acute ocular emergency.
a over-exuberant restraint of the neck region
 one for which treatment given within the first
may cause prolapse of the globe.
Lateral trauma to the globe (the sort result-
 ing from the animal's head being trapped in
 Emergency management of the prolapsed
a closing door for instance) can result in globe
eye
prolapse in any breed. The entire globe is
1. Advise owner to attempt globe
prolapsed beyond the lid margins. Here
 replacement in first minutes after injury
several pathological events occur (Figure 4.2).
with damp cotton wool pad
The optic nerve is obviously stretched, this
2. Advise owner to cover ocular surface
potentially causing permanent visual loss.
with damp cotton wool pad while
Vascular supply to the globe is compromised,
bringing to surgery
with massive peribulbar tissue swelling and
3. Administer shock dose of steroid i.v.
potentially disastrous effects on ocular health.
(2 mg/kg)
Extra-ocular muscles may be damaged and
4.
Perform lateral canthotomy
avulsed from their globe origins, resulting in
5.
 Replace globe using only limited force -
if more required enlarge canthotomy
long-term strabismus.
Apply topical atropine and appropriate
In the time that it takes for an animal to be
6.
antibiotic (i.e. fusidic acid) ointment
transported to the surgery the immediate
7. Suture lids closed and leave for 10 days
trauma resulting from fhe prolapse will be
on systemic antibiotic and NSAID
compounded1
 massively
by
the swelling
occurring in the next few minutes. It is vital
 Prognostic indicators in the prolapsed eye
therefore to urge the owner to attempt to
1. Extra-ocular muscle avulsion and
replare the globe behind the lids using
a
 strabismus gives a poor prognosis
damp towel or piece of cotton wool placed on
2.
 Hyphaema with haemorrhage in the
the globe surface, with a quite considerable
globe gives a poor prognosis as it
degree of force exerted to replace the globe.
suggests severe intra-ocular damage
As the inflammation is extensive, application
3. The presence of a consensual light reflex
of cold towels to the eye will reduce the
is a good prognostic sign
34
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
Early changes
Exposure
keratitis
Exposure
keratitis
Vascular
compromise
Periorbital
swelling
Extraocular muscle
damage
(a)
(especially medial
rectus)
Optic nerve damage
(b)
Dilated pupil
(blindness from
 optic nerve damage)
Lateral strabismus
(from medial
rectus avulsion)
(C)
Figure 4.2 Pathological events in globe prolapse
Effects of prolapse
Stretching of
Entrapment of veins
Peri-ocular oedema and
retrobulbar tissue
 draining globe
swelling
Y
Optic nerve damage
 Damage to extra-ocular muscles,
 Further prolapse
especially short medial rectus
Ocular surface dryness
Blindness
Strabismus (globe deviation)
and subsequent damage
(exposure keratopathy)
Dealing with a globe prolapse (see Figure 4.2(d))
Immediate action
Retropulse globe into orbit if possible (before transport to hospital)
Cover with wet swab or cotton wool (to prevent corneal dessication)
Definitive action
Give i.v. shock dose of dexamethasone
 Perform lateral canthotomy
Replace globe
Perform tarsorrhaphy and leave for 2-3 weeks
Long-term action
Give tear replacement if KcS occurs
Resuture medial rectus muscle if lateral strabismus occurs
Globe
35
the first few minutes globe replacement is
4.3 Penetrating globe injury?
possible without surgery, but after this an
extensive lateral canthotomy will be required
Suture patterns in the repair of globe lacera-
to reposition the globe in the orbit because of
tions are discussed in more detail under
the peribulbar conjunctival swelling occur-
corneal lacerations: it is in the cornea that
ring during this time. If the owner is not able
repairs require careful attention to ensure that
to reposition the globe the animal should be
 transparency is maintained as much as possi-
transported  to a  veterinary
centre with
ble. While iris prolapse occurs with discon-
utmost urgency. The ocular surface must be
certing
regularity " through
a
corneal
protected and moistened to prevent surface
laceration, penetrating injury of the sclera
drying and long-term damage before the
clearly results more often in uveal trauma,
globe can be surgically replaced in the orbit.
given the anatomical proximity of the choroid
A shock dose (2mg/kg) of intravenous
to the sclera. Often in cats, having earlier had
dexamethasone
together
with
mannitol
a laceration to the eye, t
the prolapse of
a
(1.0-1.5 g/kg) should
be given slowly
(an
section of the iris would resulf in healing of
infusion pump delivering the total volume
the cornea, which may be observed at the
over 15-20 minutes is ideal) and will ameli-
annual booster. The eye is still visual but
orate the immediate after-effects of such a
pupillary miosis and mydriasis are slightly
trauma.
impaired.
 The main problem with 
iridal
After repositioning the globe a tarsorrha
 prolapse through a corneal laceration - that is
phy should be performed. The eyelids should
to say what tissue to resect as necrosed and
non-viable - does not generally occur with a
that point can the eye be assessed to give an
choroidal prolapse through a scleral wound.
adequate prognosis regarding both return of
This is because the choroid usually bulges
vision and long-term cosmetic appearance;
only to a limited extent through a scleral
even if the eye will be non-visual a good
laceration. On the other hand the free pupil-
emergency treatment will leave a cosmetically
lary edge of the iris can extend through a
acceptable eye, and most owners will be satis-
corneal laceration with vascular compromise,
fied and happy not to go through an enucle-
resulting in ischaemic necrosis of the iris on
ation. The prognosis will not in any case be
the external surface of the staphyloma. Thus
particularly good unless the eye has been
while the difficult decision regarding the
managed
optimallyi
in the critical period
resection of such compromised and necrotic
immediately after the prolapse.
tissue has to be made for iris passing through
a
 corneal laceration, the choroid exposed
through
1 a scleral laceration is generally
healthier and easier to manage.
 The problem posed by scleral laceration is
one of infectious panophthalmitis. While one
might be tempted,
considering
gvascular
Differential diagnosis in strabismus
compromise, to replace all exposed choroidal
tissue back though a scleral laceration, the
Full ophthalmic examination
threat of intra-ocular infection and subse-
Investigation of passive ocular
movement {including forced duction
quent panophthalmitis is ever present. The
tests)
danger is heightened by the fact that
 Investigation of active ocular movement
whatever caused the laceration must have
 Full neurological examination
passed into the eye, however briefly. As will
be discussed below, lacerations at the limbus
Strabismus may be caused by
may be the result of blunt trauma, but scleral
lacerations are normally direct injuries. This
 Retrobulbar mass
Cranial nerve palsy {i.e. abducens or
have deposited some bacterial contamination
ocular motor involvement)
in the posterior cavity. Unchecked, multipli-
Extra-ocular muscle trauma/fibrosis (post
cation of such organisms can give rise to a
pro ptosis medial rectus damage)
fulminant panophthalmitis.
36
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
The question is then how to deal with such
will be effective. Intra-ocular antibiotics may
a laceration. Unless obviously necrotic it is
be used as detailed in Appendix C.
advised that the choroid bulging through the
 If compromised or necrotic choroid is to be
laceration be replaced but only after a bac-
removed, topical 1:1000 adrenaline should be
teriology swab of the exposed tissue has been
applied to. produce  vasoconstriction and
taken and broad spectrum intravitreal and
minimize bleeding from resected tissue. It is
systemic antibiosis has been started. This is
always better, as will be repeated with regard
followed by medication specific to the organ-
to iris presenting through a corneal lacera-
isms cultured from the bacteriological inves-
tion, to be more radical in removing healthy
 tigation. Swabbing for bacteriology may seem
tissue at the edge of diseased uvea, than to be
academically correct, but in the clinical
cautious and risk replacing tissue which will
setting intra-ocular deposition of antibiotics
only act as a focus for necrosis and infection.
Chapter 5
Cornea
5.1 Corneal ulceration
Emergency management of deep corneal
ulceration
Disruption of the integrity of the cornea may
be divided into the following three categories
1.
 Perform full ophthalmic examination
(Schmidt 1977):
2.
Define cause and depth of ulcer
3. If ulcer is small and mid depth consider
performing radial keratotomy to promote
 Corneal erosion: disruption to the epithe-
stromal regeneration
lial surface of the cornea without stromal
4. If ulcer is small and deep perform
damage
conjunctival pedicle flap
 Corneal ulceration: disruption of epithe-
5. If ulcer is larger and deep perform
lium and a variable depth of corneal
corneoscleral transposition
6.
 Provide protection through contact lens,
stroma
nictitans flap or use porcine intenstinal
Descemetocoele:
disruption
of
 corneal
submucosal graft
stroma
to
the
level
JO
Descemet's
 membrane with subsequent protrusion of
Prognostic indicators in corneal ulceration
elastic
Descemet's
 membrane
through
1. Size and depth are critical factors in
stromal ulcer
defining treatment success
 2. Any evidence of stromal melting a poor
Not all corneal ulcers present as emergen-
prognostic sign
3.
Any evidence of intra-ocular
cies. A logical approach to their diagnosis
inflammation a poor prognostic sign
and treatment will aid in determining which
are emergency cases. In any case the logical
diagnostic protocol described  below   will
allow evaluation
of
which
 therapeutic
regimen is required for which particular
5.1.1 Is an ulcer present? - the use of
ulcer type. Any reader who has had a
ophthalmic stains
corneal ulcer will be able to testify to the
acute pain that may accompany such ocular
Corneal ulcers frequently present as a painful
surfare erosion. For this reason, as well as
eye and as such the ocular surface of any
the potential threat to globe integrity posed
painful eye should be closely examined to
by a deep ulcer, corneal ulceration should
assess whether the epithelial surface is contin-
always be viewed as a possible emergency
uous or whether a discontinuity in the epithe-
situation.
lial covering is present (Figure 5.1). In severe
38
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
Approach to the corneal ulcer
Questions to ask
Initial full ophthalmic examination
1. What has caused the ulcer?
 Exogenous trauma:
physical injury
 Perform Schirmer tear test
chemical injury:
acid
 alkali
Take bacteriology or virology swab if
detergent
necessary
Internal factors
basement membrane dystrophy
{i.e. if associated with purulent
KCS
discharge
profound corneal cedema
or history of infected trauma
2. How deep is the ulcer?
 or apparent FHV-1 infection)
 Superficial - involving epithelium only
 Mid stromal
Use fluorescein fully to delineate extent of
+
 Deep stromal
ulcer
·Descemetocoele
3. Is the ulcer healing?
How long has it been present?
(i.e.over seven days)
Is there a devitalized epithelial lip at
the edge of a superficial ulcer?
+ Is there stromal vascularization?
Purkinje image
at border of ulcer
The ocular
Clear
surface
8
Clear Purkinje
Disrupted with
image in normal
abnormality of
Broken up
ocular surface
(a)
corneal epithelium 
an d/or tearfilm
Well defined ulcer bed
Fluorescein showing
Clear centre of
in a simple ulcer
non-adherent edge in
ulcer in deep lesion
recurrent erosion
(b)
Figure 5.1 Assessing for corneal ulceration. (a) Careful ophthalmic examination; (b) the fluorescein test
Cormea
39
Epithelium
Stroma
False positive 'ulcer' staining from
True positive ulcer staining from dye
dye retention in epithelialized facet
absorption into stroma in ulcerated
cornea
· Be sure to flush off
excess dye to avoid
false positive staining
Produce drops
of facets not true ulcers
of fluorescein
+ Avoid use of dry
by gentle irrigation
fluorescein strip
of strip with water/
saline/local
anaesthetic
Flush with
sterile
water/saline
Figure 5.2 Fluorescein for ocular diagnostic use
ulceration even a cursory examination will
assessment of the ocular surface: other tests
show a defect in the ocular surface but in
may well
1 disturb the tear film and give
superficial epithelial defects the lesion may
erroneous
Schirmer
readings.
Similarly
easily be missed. Fluorescein is an invaluable
 corneal sampling for bacteriology, viral isola-
diagnostic aid in such circumstances. Fluores-
tion or cytology should be carried out before
e   asn  ro n 
the application of fluorescein. Topical anaes-
using a fluorescein
  impregnated
strip
or
a e pe aa a ps s
fluorescein drops (see Appendix C).
.When
ogy as some anaesthetics have been shown to
using the strip some merely place the strip
be bacteriotoxic (Kleinfeld and Ellis 1966).
under the upper eyelid and use the tear film
 A key step in the fluorescein dye test is to
to dissolve and distribute the dye (Figure 5.2).
flush away excess dye before examining the
A better method is to apply a drop or so of
ocular surface. The irrigation of the eye with
tear substitute or local anaesthetic to the strip
sterile water or saline using a syringe is ideal,
 before placing it gently on the ocular surface.
This not only optimizes dye distribution but
soaked with water may be used to flush
also will not cause any further ocular surface
excess dye away. A minor but important
 damage in an already compromised eye.
precaution is a paper towel under the eye to
Whether this technique or a drop
Of
keep dye away from clothing. For the same
fluorescein liquid is used, the diagnostic test
reason the
 animal's head should be well
should be atfempted only after a Schirmer
controlled.
tear test has been performed. Tear evaluation
Examination of the eye after staining is best
should be the first diagnostic test in any
 performed with a blue light or by illumination
40
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
with ultraviolet light from a Wood's fluores-
cent lamp. This may reveal subtle epithelial
erosions which are much more difficult to
 people. In our experience, cats in which the
examine with white light. A second advantage
stain has been used do not generally show
is that ulceration is so obvious with blue light
any
signs
of
discomfort
such
as
that the owner can readily be shown the
 blepharospasm. Other drugs such as tropi-
extent of the lesion, often not so easily appre-
camide can be a quite severe irritant for a few
ciated with white light.
seconds in humans but do not seem to illicit
Fluorescein i
is an
exceptionally polar
similar signs in companion animals. It is not
molecule, and as such is excluded from the
therefore considered inappropriate to use
cornea by a healthy continuous epithelium
such a drug routinely in dogs and cats.
with intact tight junctions between cells. The
cornea is composed of hydrophobic epithe-
5.1.2 Three key questions regarding any
lium
and
stroma
Fluorescein,
being
hydrophilic, does not penetrate the epithe-
corneal ulcer (see Figure 5.3)
lium but will penetrate the stroma when a
 How deep is the ulcer?
superficial ulcer is present. The extent of the
 Is the ulcer healing adequately?
coloration must be assessed shortly after
Why is there are ulcer there is the first
application, as the dye can diffuse
both
place?
vertically and horizontally, giving a false
impression of the area involved
(Gelatt
The first two questions are in many ways
1978). In the Boxer indolent ulcers
dye
   a  a   m
diffuses quickly under the epithelial flap.
will be taken separately.
but this is normally obvious given the clear
edge of the ulcer. Any defect in the epithe-
5.1.2.1
UHlcer depth Regarding the depth of
lium, allowing water to pass from the tear
the lesion, ulcers can be classified as being
film to the stroma, will be revealed by
superficial, partial thickness or descemeto-
fluorescein which moves with the water into
coeles. In this classification superficial ulcers
the stroma, instead of being flushed away
really involve only epithelial erosion without
by ocular surface irrigation. This is why
stromal destruction. Partial thickness ulcers
good flushing of the eye is important:
a
have stromal extension of epithelial defects
slight surface irregularity in which epithe-
and f
this
can 1
run
 from margin stromal
lium is still intact and not ulcerated may
involvement to deep ulceration. Descemeto-
otherwise appear to
pick up stain
 just
coeles form
when all stromal
tissue has
because the dye is pooling in these surface
been destroyed,
leaving
onlyDescemet's
epithelial irregularifies. Such an irregularity
membrane.
This.
being
 elastic in nature
is called a pit or a facet, where an ulcer has
because of its collagen type IV content, bulges
previously caused a defect in the stromal
through the stromal defect under intra-ocular
thickness, later
r being covered by i
intact
pressure.
epithelium.
How are these different depths of ulcer to
Rose bengal was previously 
thought
to
be differentiated? Close examination, ideally
stain devitalized corneal tissue. It is now used
with a slit lamp but more usually in an
for staining the ocular surface when the
emergency situation with a magnifying loupe
mucin layer of the precorneal tear film is
JO
direct
 ophthalmoscope
at+20Das
deficient (Feenstra and Tseng 1992): this
described above, shows the depth of ulcer
occurs in situations where the epithelial
 clearly merely by the appearance of the ulcer
surface is compromised, but not perhaps
edge; but some further clues aid evaluation.
The first is the degree of stromal oedema
is not destroyed fluorescein will not stain.
associated with the ulcer. A superficial
Thus rose bengal is useful to stain partial
epithelial erosion will have little or no
thickness epithelial defects. Such ulcers occur
stromal oedema, simply because the stroma
in ulcerative feline herpes keratitis before
has had little opportunity to imbibe water
complete thickness epithelial ulcers are seen
and has not undergone tissue damage. A
stained with fluorescein. The theoretical
 e    ss 
Cormea
41
How deep is the ulcer?
Purkinje
Purkinje image-
A clear centre
Bulging
linage-
Small amount
a substantial
of the fluorescein
cornea
a small
of corneal
stepmore
staining
step
oedema
corneal
Corneal oedema around
reder
ulcer but not in centre of
deep ulcer
Non healing erosion
Assessment of
ulcer depth by
assessing ulcer
appearance
Thoft's XYZhypothesis
X = Migration of epithelial wing cells
Y = Proliferation of basal cells and limbal stem cells
Z = Desquamation of epithelial squamous cells
Stromal regeneration
Keratocyte renewal
Collagen deposition
Desquamation 
of epthelial
squames
Regenerationof thecornealepithelium
Migration
of wing
Thoft's hypothesis shows that the
cells
continual regeneration of corneal
upwards
epithelium gives ulcer healing in
around 7 days when X + Y = Z.
Basal cell
multiplication
Any bigger and a cause for 
X
to create
delayed healing should be sought.
Basal cells migrating from
wing cells
limbal stem cell population
Figure 5.3 Key questions to ask of an ulcer
42
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
degree of stromal oedema around it depend-
progression in ulcer depth and what can be
ing on how much excess water has been taken
changed to remedy the situation.
up by stromal tissue. This involves the centre
of the ulcer and also a halo of cornea around
5.1.2.3
aetiologyoft
the ulcer The
the lesion. Most important is the deep ulcer,
primary reason for ulcer formation may arise
which may have considerable peri-ulcerative
from within the cornea itself or from within
oedema but in which the centre of the ulcer
the rest of the ocular apparatus, or there may
is clear of oedema, often manifesting quite a
be an external infectious or external physical
bright appearance because of tapetal reflec-
cause. The prime case of a corneal defect itself
tivity through the remaining corneal tissue. In
being responsible for ulcer formation is the
fact the clarity of tapetal reflection, in contrast
epithelial  basement  membrane
dystrophy
to the surrounding stromal oedema, shows
discussed below. Here in fact the dystrophy
      n 
may not be responsible for the initial ulcer
rated the corneal stroma. These ulcers are real
formation but is the underlying defect which
emergencies, as a little more stromal destruc-
prevents rapid healing of a minor erosion
tion will lead to a descemetocoele.
The
which might, in a normal cornea, not even
descemetocoele is generally easy to recognize
cause enough of a problem to necessitate the
since
the
clear
Descemet's
membrane
animal being presented to a veterinarian.
protrudes through the surrounding stroma to
Abnormalities in the rest of the eye fall into
some extent, producing a dome-like structure
several groups. Lid defects may give rise to
in the midst of considerable oedematous
corneal abrasions in several conditions. Entro-
stromal opacity.
pion and post-traumatirc lid defects in any
breed, or congenital abnormalities such as the
5.1.2.2 Ulcer healing The degree of healing
lid colobomas in cats, can all lead to trichia-
response of the cornea around the ulcer
sis where normal hair abrades the corneal
should be determined to give a full evalua-
surface. The same can be seen when a skin
tion of the corneal ulcer. Each of the above
fold in a brachycephalic breed causes normal
classes of ulcer depth can be assessed for
hair to contact the cornea. Medial canthal
signs of healing.
lashes can cause a similar problem and, being
The superficial
corneal ulcer or erosion
short and stubby, these can result in consid-
which is going to heal will have done so, or
erable corneal pathological changes, either as
at the very least shown a significant reduction
aberrant
pigmentation and
keratitis, or a
in ulcer size, within three to five days, given
corneal
ulcer.
Similarly
distichiasis, with
adequate corneal protection. The superficial
aberrant cilia from the meibomian gland
ulcer which is not going to heal this rapidly
openings,
or
 an ectopic
ciliumf
from
a
       
conjunctival hair follicle, can cause corneal
devitalized  non-adherent  epithelial  f
tissue.
abrasion resulting in a corneal ulcer. A neuro-
The deeper stromal ulcer which is in the
logical deficit such as a facial paralysis can
process of healing will show a gradual epithe-
cause an exposure keratopathy which may
lialization of the ulcer crater within the first
well include corneal ulceration.
few days, eventually leaving a fully epithe-
Other intrinsic defects that can lead to
lialized corneal facet. Such a healing ulcer
corneal ulceration include conditions causing
will also be characterized by vascular in-
corneal oedema. These range from endothe-
growth from the limbus. The problem is not,
lial dystrophies to glaucoma. Corneal oedema
perhaps, so much one of not healing, but of
leads to ulceration through bullous keratopa-
healing
Aiiden  Sussaioid jou st el
thy. When oedema is severe water from the
enough
or
filling in the stromal deficit
stroma can extrude in blebs under the corneal
completely enough. Given the propensity of
epithelium,
,with formation
epithelial
such ulcers to deepen further if is important
bullae. These are
prone
to burst，e
either
 to treat them as if they were liable to perfo-
spontaneously or wifh the slightest of exter-
rate at any moment. it is with these ulcers
nal forces, giving rise to a corneal ulcer. The
that the third question must be answered
difficulty
is that the underlying corneal
quickly: what is the reason for the ulcer? The
oedema renders healing problematic: sponta-
answer is likely to show also what is causing
neous healing is unlikely to occur and
Cormea
43
techniques used to promote epithelial healing
Corneal Gram-negative or fungal infection
with a normal stroma often fail to work in the
may be an important complicating factor in
face of stromal oedema. More promising
  r  n 
methods are discussed in section 5.2.2.
agents are not particularly common as predis-
An important intrinsic cause of ulceration
posing factors in corneal ulceration. Viral
is
keratoconjunctivitis   sicca
(KCS).
A
disease is a prime cause but such virally
    
mediated ulcerations are recognized with
tear covering of the ocular surface is
a
certainty only in the cat. Here feline herpes
common factor in the genesis of corneal ulcer-
virus is the primary cause of dendritic, and
ation. KCS may be the root of chronic ulcera-
possibly also geographic, ulceration. Equine
tive problems but can also result in acute and
herpes virus is thought to have a similar role
very painful surface ulceration. KCS as an
in the horse but definitive evidence for this is
underlying problem shows the importance of
 lacking. A number of cases of punctate ulcer-
fully investigating the eye before attempting
ation occur in the dog, and given the preva-
to ‘treat the ulceration. Any therapeutic
lence of similar ulceration in man with an
regimen attempted in the presence of a dry
adenoviral aetiology, a viral cause may occur
eye will fail. Amelioration of tear deficiency,
here although none has been determined to
either with tear replacement or better
with
date.
topical cyclosporine, may allow ulcer healing
Finally,trauma is at the root of many
with litfe in the way of intensive ocular
corneal ulcers, with or without other compli-
surface management.
cating factors as discussed above. Traumatic
 It might seem surprising that discussion of
incidents, from superficial abrasions to deep
infection as a predisposing cause of corneal
wounds, would be relatively easy to treat
ulceration has not been considered earlier in
but for the addition of complicating factors
this list of causes of corneal ulceration.
from inherited corneal defects to external
Treating the corneal ulcer
The assumption is made that any predisposing cause has been addressed
+ The healing superficial ulcer: antibiotic cover using chloramphenicol drops or other antibiotics
 The non-healing superficial ulcer:
protection:
therapeutic contact lens
third eyelid flap
tarsorraphy
debridement:
removal of devitalized epithelium with dry swab or scalpel blade
 alteration of ulcer bed: punctate or grid keratomy
or by partial thickness keratectomy
analgesia:
use of systemic NsAID such as oral carprofen
The stromal ulcer less than 1/2 corneal depth
protection:
therapeutic contact lens
third eyelid flap
not recommended as deepening of ulcer
tarsorraphy
 will be more difficult to recognize
The deeper stromal ulcer or descemetocoele
conjunctival pedicle flap
corneoscleral transposition
44
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
Recurrent non-healing
Debridement of devitalized
ulcer
epithelium
Dry swab
 Phenol
or lodine
Technique:
Note large size
Mechanism: remove
debride
of debrided ulcer
devitalized epithelium
Corneal bandaging
Technique:
 Mechanism: protection
Corneal
Third eyelid
protect
of healing ulcer by contact
contact lens
flap
lens or third eyelid flap
Stimulationof healing
Technique:
Mechanism: producing an
Grid keratotomy
promote
inflammatory bed for
healing
epithelial healing
exposing stromal collagen
Box 5.1 Treating the non-healing ulcer
infections. In section 5.2 we consider the
topical chlortetracycline in the cat would be
management of the different forms of ulcer
appropriate. Within this time a non-compli-
described above. Only when the ulcer has
cated ulcer will have healed. Any persistence
been fully assessed for depth, healing and
 of ulceration would call for re-appraisal of the
 aetiology can one be happy to proceed with
ulcer and possible recategorization of the
the correct course of ulcer management.
lesion as a persistent ulcer, as discussed
above.
5.2 Dealing with different ulcers
5.2.2 The recurrent or persistent non-
healing superficial ulcer
5.2.1 The simple healing superficial ulcer
Healing response is particularly important in
A superficial erosion with solely epithelial or
gauging the superficial ulcer. While some of
epithelial
and
onlly
 superficial
stromal
these ulcers will occur as a result of trauma
involvement can be effectively managed with
to a healthy
 cornea many of them will be
topical antibiosis and re-examined in five
 refractory, recurrent ulcers in which healing
days, as long as no intrinsic or infectious
is not occurring as it should. This generally
cause is determined. In such a case topical
occurs for one of three reasons. The first and
antibiosis with fucidic acid in the dog
or
best recognized is true epithelial basement
Cormea
45
membrane dystrophy. The second is severe
corneal oedema where cystir blebs arise from
stromal excretion of water giving a bullous
keratopathy. The third is less than optimal
healing in an older animal. These three condi-
tions will be discussed further below.
The most common condition resulting in a
non-healing ulcer is that occurring in dogs
with epithelial basement membrane dys-
trophic change: here there is a diminution in
the number of hemidesmosomes, the anchor-
ing points by which the basal epithelial cell
complex attaches to the underlying stroma.
These ulcers are seen in Boxer dogs and
Box 5.2 Devitalized epithelium becomes white after
phenol cautery
Pembroke
corgis
 particularly
although
recently a number of West Highland White
terriers have been seen by one of us with
membrane
dystrophy.
 The technique of
similar disease.
epithelial debridement  
is for that
reason
The classic recurrent ulcer has a lip of
important diagnostically as well as therapeu-
devitalized epithelium around the edge of the
tically.
ulcer. This
Sprevents the healthy
corneal
 Determining healing is equally, if not more,
epithelium migrating to the ulcer edge and
important for deeper ulcers involving the
commencing the healing response. Thus the
stroma. Here a key feature indicating a vigor-
ous healing response is the invasion of blood
ulcers must be to remove this dying non-
vessels from the limbus to the ulcer edge. A
adherent epithelium, as described further
firm grasp of the pathophysiology of corneal
below.
Disturbance of the ocular surface with a
standing of the mechanisms at work in both
dry swab or with a piece of cotton wool
epithelial and stromal healing, as presented
wrapped around a fine haemostat will peel
below.
off this poorly adherent epithelium, confirm-
Removal of all devitalized, poorly adherent
ing the diagnosis of epithelial basement
epithelium is vital to allow full healing of
(a) Lid-based
(b) Conjunctiva-based
Note in each case:
· anchoring around the third eyelid cartilage
· different entry of suture into third eyelid
● two sutures may be needed in many cases
Figure 5.4 Third eyelid flap anchoring to (a) upper eyelid; (b) episclera
46
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
dystrophic epithelial erosions. Often quite
If a third eyelid flap is to be placed one of
extensive amounts can readily be stripped
two techniques can be used, each favoured
from a dystrophic cornea. One should not be
by
different  groups of ophthalmologists
concerned that normal epithelium will be
(Figure 5.4). Some say that the third eyelid
removed by such a technique. Even quite a
should be secured not to the lid but to the
vigorous rubbing will not disturb a healthy
bulbar conjunctiva. This ensures that when
epithelium while it takes little effort to
the eye moves so does the flap. When
dislodge devitalized tissue.
secured to the lid there is always the possi-
Today this dry debridement is generally all
bility of some friction between the flap and
that is documented in the standard texts. In
the cornea as the globe moves. This is proba-
times past, however, agents such as phenol on
a cotton tipped applicator were used to good
surface problems it is wise to take every step
effect and might be considered appropriate, if
possible to minimize even mild
surface
not actually
y preferable, to dry debridement.
trauma. Nevertheless other ophthalmologists
As with the fatter technique phenol does not
 prefer anchoring the third eyelid to the upper
eyelid, since if long ends are left to the
selective of dystrophic epithelial tissue.
sutures the flap can be released and then
In some cases debridement and corneal
repositioned without the need to anaes-
 bandaging are all that is necessary to promote
thetize the animal again.
      
a
Removing diseased tissue and protecting
number of treatment regimens have been
the corneal surface are the bare essentials of
reported on. It is generally the case that
treatment for such persistent erosions. As has
where several treatment options exist one can
been suggested a considerable proportion of
assume that none is universally successful.
 e     s
This is the case with persistent recurrent
alone. The rationale for subsequent treat-
erosions: the best treatment for these ulcers is
ments is either to disrupt the epitheliostromal
difficult to determine. The very terms recur-
boundary with its basement membrane or to
rent, persistent
and
  recidivistic  strongly
provoke a considerable superficial stromal
suggest that achieving full permanent healing
scarring effect. The first retains good vision at
is not easy. Given the failure of any one
the end of the treatment period while the
technique to give acceptable results in every
latter tends to give scar formation reducing
case it will be worthwhile to consider the
visual acuity considerably. Such treatments
different options for treatment.
should be used either when the eye is already
The basic science behind the different treat-
blind or when nothing else will work. The
ment regimens should be understood to facil-
former 1
rationale is the basis for the
itate treatment planning. We have already
techniques of grid or punctate keratotomy.
discussed measures to remove devitalized
The latter is the reason behind the thermal
epithelial tissue from the path of new epithe-
keratoplasty described below.
lial cell migration. The second important
 Grid keratotomy uses a 21-23 gauge needle
feature in a therapeutic plan should be to
to produce, as its name suggests, a grid of
minimize trauma ^to the epithelial surface
lines over the ulcerated area while punctate
during healing. In her comparative survey of
keratotomy
merely
produces
 pinpoint
treatment methods, Susan McLaughlin deter-
punctures in the most superficial stroma
mined that of all the options the most success-
(Figure 5.5). The aim of both these techniques
ful, either alone or in combination with other
is that the epithelium which grows down into
methods, was the third eyelid flap. Today we
the gridline or puncture points should serve
might prefer to provide a corneal bandage
to anchor the whole epithelial sheet in place.
using a therapeutic contact lens. This has the
For this reason the gridlines or punctures do
advantage that the eye can both see and be
not need to be as close together as when the
seen but the disadvantage that, while the
aim is to disturb the whole basement
nictitating membrane flap will be secure until
membrane surface. The technique can be
released, a contact lens may not stay in place
undertaken in the conscious dog with topical
for ten or so days until full corneal healing
anaesthesia and perhaps mild sedation in a
has taken place.
nervous or boisterous individual. In a matter
Cormea
47
Debridement
Figure 5.5 Debridement and grid
keratomy for an indolent ulcer
of a few days epithelial healing occurs after
epithelium while others thoroughly debride
such a keratotomy, although in many cases
the ocular surface first.
accompanied by considerable vascularization.
This can be removed once full ulcer healing
5.2.4 Partial thickness stromal ulceration
has occurred by the use of topical steroids.
Ulcers with stromal involvement may be
steroids in an eye predisposed to ulceration is
managed conservatively if they are less than
unwise. Steroids markedly impair epithelial
 one third of the corneal thickness in depth.
healing and, were a subsequent ulcer to
The decision whether to leave the ulcer to
occur, the use of these agents would be most
heal or to perform a grid keratotomy or a
definitely contra-indicated. The advent of
superficial lamellar keratectomy is often
readily available topical non-steroidal anti-
difficult. If the ulcer is extensive and re-
inflammatory drugs such as flurbiprofen or
epithelialization  of   the 
cornea
has not
diclofenar has on the whole rendered unnec-
occurred,a
debridement  including  grid
essary the use of steroids to reduce post-
keratotomy or lamellar keratectomy can be
healing vascularization of the ulcer bed.
used. Grid keratotomy can be performed
under local anaesthesia. It is important to
5.2.3 Ulceration secondary to bullous
rest the hand with the needle on the face
inferior to the eye, so if the animal suddenly
keratopathy@
moves (which 'is most often drawing the
 In recurrent ulceration secondary to bullous
head back) a penetration of the globe will
keratopathy in corneal oedema, techniques
not happen. The use of bandage contact
such as the keratotomies often fail to work.
 d o p   s
Here a technique to produce epitheliostromal
third eyelid flap, for it is in these partial
scarring can be used, where the eye has little
thickness ulcers that regular monitoring is
vision in any case. In thermal keratoplasty a
essential to ensure that the ulcer is healing
thermocautery tip produces spot-welds in the
rather than becoming deeper. If epithelial-
cornea with abouf the same distribution as
izationofa
partial thickness ulcer is
the stromal punctures in punctate kerato-
 progressing, this shows that healing is occur-
tomy, that is leaving a distance of about 1 mm
ring and in most cases, where there is still
between applications (Wilkie and Whittaker
some
considerable
thickness of corneal
1997) (Figure 5.5). Some ophthalmologists
stroma intact, careful observation can be
 perform this without stripping the overlying
appropriate.
48
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
Is the cornea perforated?
The Seidel test showing a perforation:
dry the cornea
apply drop of fluorescein (uniform
yellow colour)
watch for'snaking' stream of aqueous
from the laceration
Is there prolapse of iridal tissue?
Evaluate the health of protruding iris
for 24 hours the surface covering of
exuded serum protects iris, thus a
substantial number of staphylomas can
be replaced. 'lf it bleeds it is not too
compromised' is a useful maxim
Aim to replace as much non-infected recently
traumatized tissue as possible
Use visco-elastic gel to break down
iridocorneal adhesions
Box 5.3 Treating the perforated cornea
A progressing ulcer one over a third of the
A second option, regularly used in human
corneal thickness in depth or a descemeto
ophthalmology but employed less frequently
coele where the ulcer has breached the entire
in the veterinary field, is the use of cyano-
thickness of the stroma should all be consid-
acrylate glue in the stromal wound (Figure
m paean pue sauagraa pagrn se pan
5.6).
conjunctival pedicle flaps or possibly with
Gaiddon's technique of radial keratotomy
Use of butyl cyanoacrylate glue requires
(Gaiddon 1996), as discussed further in this
section.
 an anaesthetized patient with an immobi-
 In the case of a partial thickness ulcer
lized eye
which is not showing any signs of healing.
a completely dry corneal surface. The best
there are perhaps three therapeutic options
way of ensuring this is to use a photogra-
available. The first is to perform a conjuncti-
pher's drying gas aerosol over the surface
val pedicle flap as described in section 5.2.5.
of the cornea
This has the great advantage that it ensures a
a well controlled application of a small
result which is watertight and also allows
amount of glue painted onto the ulcer bed
serum from the cut surface of the pedicle flap
with a fine (25 G) needle (Figure 5.7).
to seep continually into the underlying ulcer-
ated stroma providing both growth factors
 collagenase
inhibitory
5.2.5 Near-penetrating ulcers,
and
 alpha
macroglobulins. It does, however, give
descemetocoeles and penetrating ulcers?
a
significant obstruction to vision, often in the
As noted above an ulcer which is at the point
      g
of penetrating or has developed a descemeto-
may not always be the perfect choice of treat-
coele should be taken to surgery urgently.
ment for a midstromal ulcer but it is a safe
Even if
fperforation
during
method, where the veterinary clinician is at
 surgery, it is clearly much to be preferred that
little risk of perforating the globe. Thus the
such an entry into the anterior chamber
authors recommend the conjunctival flap as a
should occur in the controlled sterile environ-
safe surgical treatment which may cause
ment of the operating theatre rather than in a
some scarring of the cornea postoperatively.
home or field setting.
Cormea
49
Stromal oedema
Bulla
Ulcer
Thermal keratoplasty
Thermal
lance
Producing 'spot welds' to strengthen adhesion
Resultant appearance
between epithelium and stroma
Figure 5.6 Bullous keratopathy - pathogenesis and treatment
The optimal technique for performing a
tiva and then bluntly
dissect under the
conjunctival pedicle flap is shown in Figure
    h  
5.8. A pinch of conjunctiva is taken around
a single plane of dissection if the whole flap
5mm from the limbus and
apair
of
is prepared by blunt dissection through one
tenotomy scissors used to incise the conjunc-
small keyhole incision. Making a larger
'Painting' tissue adhesive glue
onto bed at base of ulcer
Usingbutyl cyanoacrylate glue
Ensure tissue to be glued is
(a)
entirely dry
Paint surfaces with
Compressd air to
minimal glue
Replace
dry corneal surface
flap
(b)
Figure 5.7 Painting glue onto the ulcer bed
50
Veterinary Ocuiar Emergencies
(a)
(b)
(c)
(p)
entry point; (b) cut flap with base opposite ulcer; (c) position flap; (d) suture flap and close
 Performing the conjunctival pedicle flap
Reasons:
 Deep corneal ulcer
Melting ulcer
Descemetocoele
Mechanism:
Immediate physical repair of defect
 Source of serum with immunoglobulins and macroglobulins
For the technique, see Figure 5.8.
incision early in the procedure results in a
fine absorbable suture such as 6/0 or better
number of planes of dissection and generally
still 8/0 vicryl. The neck of the pedicle
gives a thicker and less ideal flap. The flap
should be leff unsutured so that when the
should be thin enough to be moved easily
ulcer has healed the pedicle can be divided,
around and stretched over the ulcer bed.
leaving a small island of conjunctiva which,
 Always make the flap square and larger than
 deprived of blood supply, will eventually be
the uilcer so it can be trimmed to fit the
incorporated into a small corneal scar, allow-
defect. It should be sutured in place with a
ing vision even when in the visual axis.
Cormea
51
An alternative technique is that of Jacques
A bacteriology swab should be taken as
Gaiddon
using
the radial
1keratotomy
discussed above and cultured with urgency.
technique perfected for the treatment of
A smear of such a swab on a couple of micro-
human myopia (Gaiddon 1996).(
Gaiddon
scope slides allows one to be stained with
reasoned thaf since the basis of radial kerato-
Gram's method and the other with lactophe-
tomy for myopia was the induction of stromal
nol cotton blue and immediate evaluation of
whether a Gram-positive or, more likely, a
needed in deep stromal ulceration, deep
Gram-negative or fungal agent is responsible.
     
A corneal scraping under local anaesthetic
deep ulceration in the dog. This certainly
and/or sedation should also be undertaken
works, with substantial reduction in depth of
poq e oi ap pde sdns an pu
the ulcer and eventual complete healing. but
agar plate for immediate inoculation. Even
o Aa Aq dn un  on ia s
before the full result of these bacteriological
mologists in any great number.
investigations is known treatment must be
instituted with haste as discussed in section
5.2.6.2.
5.2.6 The melting ulcer?@
The anamnesis of the case as well as the
characteristics of previous disease in the
5.2.6.1 The melting ulcer: diagnosis
The
geographical area are important in a full
signs of a melting, or collagenolytic, corneal
evaluation of the disease. In some areas
ulcer are obvious at clinical presentation.
particular organisms are more common that
Where a normal stromal ulcer may
have
others and this, together with information
considerable corneal oedema or vascular and
regarding the involvement of, say, an injury
cellular infiltrate, its edge is relatively well
with possibility of a plant material corneal
defined and the surrounding stroma appears
foreign body, is important in the full investi-
predominantly healthy. The melting ulcer
 gation of such an ulcer.
has, as its name suggests, an appearance of
progressing from the tectonically structured
5.2.6.2
melting
uicer:
treatment
solid stroma to an almost fluid consistency.
Frequent - initially hourly - application of a
While oedema gives a ground-glass appear-
broad
spectrum
antibiotic
with
action
ance to the cornea such stromal lysis often
against
the
bacteria most likely to be
produces a much more dense white opacifi-
causing this collagenolysis - predominantly
cation of the stroma. The collagen fibrils
Pseudomonas and Proteus - is very importanf.
which
are the support structures in the
Previously, as discussed above, this meant
stroma are broken down by a variety of
the use of topical gentamicin but drug resis-
enzymes resulting in degraded stroma which
tance in many cases has led to changes.
in many cases is so fluid as gradually to run
Fortified
preparations, with 
powder
for
from the ocular surface down the eyelid.
intravenous gentamicin use, dissolved in
These collagenolytic enzymes may be derived
artificial tears or in a topical base have been
from bacteria such as Pseudomonas or from
recommended. Recently in the UK a formu-
polymorphonucleocytes infiltrating  infected
lation of
gentamicin
with EDTA and
cornea. It is the presence of bacteria produc-
trometamol has been licensed. The EDTA is
ing
the enzymes
and the action of
the
     
enzymes which must be considered in formu-
efficacy in collagenase inhibition (see below
lating the diagnostic and therapeutic plan.
in this section) but it does increase the
In the horse a recent report (Brooks et al.
efficacy of the gentamicin by facilitating
2000) described melting ulcers being caused
drug uptake by bacteria. Trometamol also
by
Streptococci,
demonstrating that it is
increases drug absorption by bacteria and
important not to assume that a melting ulcer
thus similarly raises drug efficacy. More
is caused by Pseudomonas and thus only
recently
available
drugs
include
the
applying aminoglycosides. These antibiotics
quinolones, but although these are effective
 may have little if any action on staphylococci
against Gram-negative organisms their use
and
 streptococci,
thus
aggravating
the
in veterinary ophthalmology has yet to be
problem.
assessed fully (Figure 5.9).
52
Veterinary Ocuiar Emergencies
A diagnostic and therapeutic approach
History
often history of trauma
 possible involvement of plant or other organic material
rapid deterioration in corneal condition
Appearance -v
white/cream ill-defined corneal opacity
irregular corneal surface
- frank corneal liquefaction
ocular pain
Treatment
[i}
Sedation (and/or peri-ocular nerve blocks in the horse)
(ii}
Take swabs and scrapings from affected cornea, including lesion edge cytology - Gram and Diff
Quick stains for immediate presumptive identification of infectious organisms' culture and sensitivity
- both bacterial and fungal
(ii) Insert subpalpebral or nasolacrimal medication device
(iv)  Apply antibiotic and anticollagenolytic medication hourly to start
Antibiotics
fluoroquinolones (Exocin (Allergan))
fortified preservative-free antibiotic solution
Drug
Commercially
Suggested
Shelf-life
available strength
fortified strength
Amikacin
10 mg/ml
30 days
Carbenicillin
 4-8 mg/ml
3days
Gentamicin
3 mg/ml
30 days
Tobramycin
3 mg/ml
14 mg/ml
30 days
Vancomycin
50 mg/ml
4 days
Anticollagenolytics
serum(α2-macroglobulin antiprotease)
EDTA (chelates Ca?t as enzyme cofactor)
acetyl cysteine (binds Zn²+ cofactor)
{Most easily produced by taking autologous blood into EDTA, spinning down and transferring resulting
plasma through several EDTA blood tubes) (Figure 5.9)
Box 5.4Diagnosis and treatment of collagenolytic'melting'ulcers
Mechanisms in collagenolytic ulceration
Enzyme origin:
Bacterial
Fungi
Neutrophils
Gelatinase
Collagenase
Protease
A
Mechanism:
Collagenolysis
 and stromal
Inhibited by:
10% acetyl cysteine
EDTA
Autologous serum
”
Through action of:
Zn chelation
Ca chelation
Alpha 2 macroglobulins
Cormea
53
Thus, the best therapeutic regimen in the
face of a melting ulcer is an aggressive one
combining, for the first few hours at least,
fortified
 gentamicin,
tobramycin
with
polymyxin B,(
or a quinolone
such
as
ciprofloxacin or ofloxacin - with
serum
containing 0.2M EDTA and an acetylcysteine
formulation.
 The surgical option of a reasonably deep
keratectomy and the placement of a conjunc-
tival pedicle flap should not be overlooked.
This will have the advantage of removing a
substantial microbial and stromolytic enzyme
burden on the one hand, and allowing contin-
ual natural application of serum to the ulcer-
ated
area
through
the pedicle
flap
of
conjunctiva.
Lytic corneal
5.2.7 Chemical injury
stroma
Severe corneal ulceration and long-lasting
damage to the ocular surface may be caused
Figure 5.9 Close examination of a wound
by chemical injury to the eye. With different
chemicals the pathogenesis of damage is very
different as is the remedy, although in all
cases generous ocular lavage is called for
immediately. The centrality of knowing the
 Controlling the infective agent is important
importance of taking as thorough a history as
will do little in the short term to prevent
possible.
stromal
 degradation
by
 collagenolytic
 The most serious chemical causing ocular
 enzymes. We need to inhibit action of these
surface damage is alkali - lye or ammonium-
enzymes: difficult, because more than one
based fertilizers are t
the most 
commonly
enzyme is active in most of these ulcers. In
encountered alkaline chemicals
sbut burns
fact there is a large family of matrix metallo-
from such agents are fortunately rare in
proteinases (MMP1-9 at the time of writing)
veterinary ophthalmology. The severity of an
which, together with collagenases and gelati-
 alkaline burn stems from the fact that a high
nases, produce the stromolysis. Some of these
pH destroys both epithelium and stroma
MMPs are agents of normal corneal remodel-
without causing a coagulative change. In the
ling in the healthy eye, while others are
case of an acid burn, this coagulation
derived from infiltrating
leucocytes.
Still
prevents further penetration of the chemical
 others come from infecting micro-organisms.
and thus limits the depth of the burn.
Each enzyme has a slightly different substrate
Alkaline burns can be deep and, in addition,
and a different milieu is required for the
they very rapidly destroy all cells in their
inhibition of each one. EDTA binds divalent
path, including the stem cells of the corneal
cations such as Ca?t and since many of these
epithelium, leading to chronic non-healing
enzymes need calcium as a cofactor, EDTA
ulceration.
 s i  an p  s
 Because an alkaline burn acts in many ways
board.
Serum
alpha
2
 macroglobulins
like the collagenolysis of a melting ulcer, the
similarly are natural inhibitors of a number of
same inhibitors of metalloproteinase enzymes
these enzymes. Acetylcysteine has an import-
are used in addition to copious irrigation of
ant inhibitory action by chelating zinc.
the ocular surface.
54
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
5.3 Corneoscleral laceration@
Evaluating the lacerated cornea
5.3.1 Defining the extent of a corneal
How deep is the laceration?
laceration
 Is the laceration perforated? - the Seidel
test (see below)
 Are the edges clean or is there foreign
 Emergency management of a corneal
mate rial invo lved?
laceration
Is there other ocular damage?
Is there one laceration, or several, or a
1. After careful examination, stain eye with
fluorescein
starburst appearance?
 Is the laceration perpendicular to the
2. If non-perforating cover with third eyelid
corneal surface, or with a flap of tissue?
flap or contact lens and treat with
atropine and topical antibiotic
3. Definitive repair may involve
cyanoacrylate tissue glue or merely
contact lens bandaging if superficial and
Close examination of the wound, ideally
non-perforating
with a slit-beam, is essential to evaluate
4. If perforating cover with contact lens
several features (see Figure 5.9). First, how
before definitive repair once oedema has
deep is the wound? In some injuries it is clear
subsided (on atropine and antibiotic
thaf the cornea is fully perforated. Others
treatment topically, with NSAID topically
may only involve the epithelium and anterior
and syste mically)
stroma. The intermediate lacerations are the
 5. Definitive repair in such a case will
most difficult to evaluate. There may, for
involve microsurgical repair of corneal
instance, be considerable stromal damage
lace ration
with oedema which may seal a fully perfo-
Prognostic indicators in the corneal
rating wound. The management of a perfo-
Taceration
rating wound is quite different from that of
a non-perforating wound, and it is important
1. Substantial corneal oedema and
to define into which category the trauma
vascularization can resolve after treatment
2. Prolapse of intra-ocular contents (such
falls.
as iris in a staphyloma) is a poor
The key test here is the Seidel manoeuvre
(Figure
5.10).1
Fluorescein solution 2%
prognostic sign
3. Length of time between laceration and
applied to the ocular surface. Even a small
specialist attention is critical for
amount of aqueous leaving the 
 anterior
 successful management.
 chamber through a corneal puncture wound
will be observed as a clear wandering streak
through the fluorescein lake on the ocular
surface, leaving no doubt that the cornea is
Proper management of a corneoscleral lacer-
fully perforated. It may be necessary, in the
ation depends on full pre-operative assess-
case of a self-closing wound, to perform a
ment of the degree of injury. It has been
forced
Seidel test  where slight digital
found useful in both human and veterinary
pressure is applied to the globe through the
ophthalmic trauma management to consider
upper lid. This presents certain risks and
this assessment as a hierarchy of injuries and
should be done with caution, especially if the
repair techniques. Such a hierarchy begins
corneal stroma appears compromised.
with the non-perforating corneal laceration.
Another important feature is whether the
This may be gaping or a self-sealing stromal
wound gapes at all (Figure 5.11). Some lacer-
wound. Next comes the bevelled laceration
ations 'yawn', as it were, at the ocular surface
which, although perforating, has self-closed
and need a different suturing
patternto
without involvement of other ocular struc-
ensure correct apposition at the end
of
tures. The more complicated lacerations are
surgery. Gaping wounds may be associated
those with significant damage to and oedema
with
significant
 anterior
and
epithelial
of surrounding stroma and those in which
stromal
damage，
again requiring
different
involvement of iris plugging the leaking
surgical
 management.  Another  important
wound has created a staphyloma.
feature to note is the amount of corneal
Cormea
55
Is there a penetration?
Perform the Seidel Test?
The Seidel Test
'Snake'of aqueous
leaving site of
penetration
Fluorescein
dye
Injury site
Stick
Is there iris prolapse?
swap
Look for dyscoria (abnormal pupil shape)
· Use a stick swab under sterile conditions in
theatre to remove fibrin/coagulated aqueous
· Assess prolapsed tissue for viability
+ time since prolapse (> or < 24 hours)
+ tissue bleeding during manipulation 
>24hrs
rexcise
Figure 5.10 Evaluating a potentially penetrating globe injury
 Is the laceration truly non-perforating?
Is there a gaping wound or tissue loss?
Non-perforatinglaceration
+ Use a bandage lens
with gaping edges
+ Staple the lids at the
canthus to ensure
lens stays in place
Glueing the
Flap of
corneal flap
cornea
Either use a bandage lens or use tissue glue
Figure 5.11 Treating the non-perforating corneal injury
56
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
damage surrounding the laceration. This will
layer of tissue glue can be painted onto the
define where suture entry points can be
ulcer bed and the flap replaced (Figure 5.7).
made, and whether excision of non-viable
cornea is needed before the wound edges can
5.3.4 Repairing a simple perforating
be apposed.
corneal laceration
Most if not all deep corneal lacerations, and
5.3.2 Defining involvement of other
certainly all in which there is still aqueous
ocular structures
leakage at the time of examination, require
The most obvious ocular structure which
secure wound closure with suture placement.
may be affected in a corneal laceration is the
It is important to avoid pressure on the eye
iris. The eye is designed, it might be said, to
during anaesthetic induction or placement of
minimize the after-effects of trauma. One of
the eyelid speculum. If the globe is already
the features of that design is the marner in
reformed there is no necessity to enter the
which the (
outrush of aqueous
after
a
anterior chamber, but if the chamber needs to
corneal laceration carries with it the iris,
be reformed with either balanced salt solution
plugging
the laceration and
forming
or a visco-elastic this is better irrigated into
staphyloma. The highly vascular iris itself
the anterior chamber through a limbal needle-
produces a coat of fibrin protecting it from
stab incision rather than through the wound
the
desiccating effects
of
its
external
itself, which may be infected or already
position. All this renders repair
more
compromised. When inserting a needle at the
successful than often appears on first exami-
limbus it is important to have the needle
nation of a staphyloma.
parallel to the iris, thus not lacerating the iris
Other ocular structures may be involved in
and causing a haemorrhage from this richly
a corneal laceration, with or without staphy-
vascularized tissue.
loma formation. The penetrating agent may
Simple interrupted sutures should be used.
have reached the lens surface, where a capsu-
The important point is that the sutures should
lar perforation may result in cataract in the
be deep - at least three quarters of the depth of
long term or even a so-called phacoanaphy-
the stroma to ensure that the wound is stable
 lactic reaction upon sudden leakage of lens
post-surgically (see Figure 5.12). For corneal
material.
 Jo sd oq i s uu no  ns
suture are removed when healing is complete.
For corneal surgery 6/0 to 10/0 sutures may be
5.3.3 Repairing a simple non-penetrating
used, the thickness being related to availability
corneal laceration
of microsurgical instruments, means of magni-
A non-perforating clean laceration, as deter-
fication and surgeon's preference. The sutures
mined by the Seidel test and in which the
should not penetrate the full thickness of the
edges lie either flat together or gaping open,
cornea since this gives an excellent wick for
 m e p a 
entry of infectious organisms from the ocular
otic cover and a mild pressure bandage such
surface, but a suture that is too shallow results
as that provided by a bandage contact lens.
This has the dual effect of supporting the
number of sutures should be the minimum
wound by a splinting action and shielding the
required to achieve a watertight closure. Too
cornea from the mild abrasion which may
many sutures result in further stromal compro-
occur by natural lid movement. Antibiotic
mise. The distance of suture entry from the
drops
　such
as
 chloramphenicol
or
wound edge is difficult to decide. On the one
quinolone should be given two to four times
hand the ideal suture placement is symmetri-
daily. A cycloplegic such as atropine can
1be
cal, the distance from the wound edge being
useful in preventing ocular pain. After the
equal to the depth of the suture. On the other
first day or so it will probably be needed only
hand the wound edge is often so compromised
once daily because of its long duration of
and oedematous as to render impossible suture
action in the otherwise uncompromised eye.
entry at the optimal position. In such cases
If a flap of tissue has been created but not
longer sutures can be used but still the inten-
detached from the underlying cornea a thin
tion should be to produce a deep symmetrical
Cormea
57
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.12 Deep ulcer suturing. (a) Frontal/cross-section diagrams; (b) horizontal mattress sutures (small
ulcers can be closed with just one horizontal suture; (c) horizontal sutures are slowly drawn tight; (d) initially
the corneaisflattenedbutwillreturn tonormalwithin days
suture. For best suture placement consider the
carefully in deciding whether it should be
vector forces (Figure 5.1l) which render an
removed or retained. Incarcerated iris should
optimal distance between two interrupted
be freed from the edges of the corneal wound.
sutures equal to half the distance of the suture-
If the wound is less than 24 hours old it can
length across the wound (Eisner 1990).
be replaced in the anterior chamber unless
obviously macerated or otherwise damaged.
Even after this period healthy-looking tissue
5.3.5 Repairing a corneal laceration
complicated by iris inclusion
can, with care, be replaced. The tissue should
also be examined for signs of epithelializa-
In a major laceration, or one in which
tion: a grey covering of cells may occur after
'shallowing' of the anterior chamber has
a day or so. If tissue covered by these cells is
occurred, iris may be incarcerated in the
replaced, further epithelial cell proliferation
wound or prolapsed through it (Figure 5.13).
may occur giving aberrant epithelialization of
 In either case iris tissue should be inspected
anterior segment structures. This can cause
58
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
Staphyloma
Or
Anterior
(prolapsed iris
synechiae
tissue)
Free iris from edge of corneal
Re-create anterior chamber
Widen pupil with atropine.
wound with irrigating spatula
with viscoelastic gel or with
Suture corneal wound
an air bubble
Figure 5.13 Treatment of staphyloma or anterior synechiae
glaucoma if the sheet of growing cells covers
wound is presented early, the iridal damage
the
pectinate ligament
in the iridocorneal
is minimal and iris adhesions to the exposed
angle.
stroma have yet to occur, repositioning can be
in the case of prolapsed iridal tissue 24
by
 pharmacological means. The pupillary
hours is again an important cut-off point.
constriction caused by intra-ocular deposition
Before that time dehydration of prolapsed
of carbachol or the dilation following intra-
tissue is reduced by the fibrin overlying the
cameral 1:10 0o0 adrenaline may be sufficient
prolapsed iris, as discussed above (Figure
to resolve the mild incarceration. More often
5.14).After this time both dehydration from
than not such a regimen is not effective and
outside, and vascular compromise caused by
mechanical repositioning must be attempted.
the iris being entrapped in the
corneal
Visco-elastic irrigated into the wound
or
wound, tend to cause tissue death in the
prolapsed iris.
     
There are two aims always to be kept in
adhesions but a more aggressive approach is
mind: that is, correct reposition of viable iris
often needed (see Figure 5.12). The main
tissue, as well as adequate closure of the
technique used in such circumstances is one
corneal wound. A shallow anterior chamber
of sweeping the iris off the corneal wound
through a paralimbal incision with a cyclo-
balanced salt solution, or better still visco-
dialysis
 spatula or an irrigating cannula.
elastic, through a paralimbal needle place-
Finally
visco-elastic
can be deposited
lto
ment. Injection through the traumatic wound
     n  
is more likely to compromise the structures to
position apposed to the lens and not the
be  manipulated during repositioning and
cornea, or an air bubble can be placed in the
closure. In some cases where the traumatic
anterior chamber as shown opposite.
Cormea
59
 Simple iris
prolapse
al
Iris resected
(b)
Damaged
cornealmargins
(c)
Debridedand
sutured with near
andfarplaced
sutures
(d)
Figure 5.14 Prolapsed iris. (a) Perforating corneal laceration - frontal and cross-section; (b) amputated
saa bunns (o) ipunom aui jo bunns pue einieds st ue yim paonpas suoisaupe st leauoo 's! pasdeioid
interrupted sutures placed between the horizontal mattress sutures ensure easy closure of the epithelial edge
60
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
The difficult question in these instances is
be present with corneal pathology such as
how much iris to excise and how much to
oedema,
infiltration and
vascularization.
reposition. Any iris which has been outside
After a traumatic incident giving rise to a
the eye for over 24 hours should be excised
corneal foreign body many animals are liable
and any iridal tissue which does not bleed on
 to hide away and not present to the owner for
handling and starting an excision should be
a period, giving time for these sequelae to
removed.I
During many such procedures
arise. The problem is that, as well as compli-
iridal bleeding is encountered. The use of
cating diagnosis, such signs make it signifi-
visco-elastic tends to restrict the hyphaema
cantly more difficult to remove the foreign
and keep blood localized so as to minimize
body.
interference with the surgeon's operating
 If the foreign body is perforating the cornea
field of view. Again 1:10 000 adrenaline
one may see a uveitis or even a shallow
irrigated into the anterior chamber will
 anterior chamber with anterior synechiae or a
reduce haemorrhage substantially.
fibrin clot where there has been leakage. In
Where lenticular damage has also occurred
    s  s 
a decision must be made regarding the advis-
attempting to remove the foreign body until
ability of performing lentectomy at the time
in an aseptic theatre situation with the animal
of primary anterior segment repair. The many
under anaesthetic, so that aqueous leakage
problems associated with lentectomy in the
through the resulting wound can be dealt
face of other post-traumatic ocular complica-
with.
tions, such as corneal oedema or iritis, make
In assessing a corneal foreign body it is
it unlikely that removal of lens material
important to note several features.
would be advisable at the time of primary
repair. The one situation in which removal of
1.
What is the foreign body? Plant material
lens material is required early in such ocular
can be difficult to remove in one piece and
trauma
 management
iswhen
capsular
may carry potentially dangerous bacteria.
rupture leads to the release of lens material
It is preferable in such a case not only to
info the anterior chamber, when a phacoana-
culture a bacteriological swab from the
phylactic reaction may occur.
trauma site but also to place the material
 itself on an agar plate and grow organisms
directly from it.
5.4 Corneal foreign body@
2.
 How deeply is the foreign body penetrat-
d  u    
5.4.1 Recognizing a corneal foreign body
 Ao Aq iq A a ai 
It might seem easy to identify a corneal
small amount may show few signs of this
foreign body: a piece of plant material, a
until it is removed, when aqueous leakage
thorn or a shaft of cat claw should readily be
occurs. This is where careful observation
visible in the transparent background of the
from the side as well as in front will allow
cornea. Sometimes this is the case. But often
a better evaluation of depth. Other ocular
significant  ocular  pathology  accompanies
signs such as mild uveitis, with a slight
the foreign body.  Considerable chemosis
anisocoria caused
by miosis on the
may obscure the ocular surface or corneal
affected side, will show that a penetration
change, such as oedema, infiltration or
is likely to have occurred. This is not
vascularization,  and
haemorrhage
1
may
always the case, since a corneal irritative
mmplicate the view of a possible foreign
focus can give rise to a reflex miosis,
body. Often the pain which is associated
through
a retrograde neural 
pathway
with a corneal foreign body precludes
from the trigeminal nerve.
detailed observation. For all these reasons
topical anaesthesia is almost always essential
and sedation or brief general anaesthesia
5.4.2 Dealing with a non-perforating
corneal foreign body (Figure 5.15)
may also be necessary.
Several features suggest that a corneal
Removing a foreign body which does not
foreign body may be present. Pain is often,
perforate the cornea is clearly a much less
but not invariably, a feature. A discharge may
hazardous task than dealing with one which
Cormea
61
Treating a corneal
foreign body
！
Is the foreign body perforating the cornea?
Perform a Seidal test
Use needle to remove
Non-perforated
Undermine stroma and
foreign body before
attempting to remove
Perforated
Remove through a
Either remove through
limbalincision
route of penetration if
still above surface
Qr
Figure 5.15 Treating a corneal foreign body
does penetrate the full thickness of the
a hypopyon should alert one to the possibil-
cornea. Yet the same care should be taken to
ity of perforation.
ensure complete immobility of the patient
First it may be that a very superficial
and good illumination and visibility: without
  n aa   
these it is all too easy to worsen the situation
irrigation. In any case the ocular surface
or even cause perforation.
aa pis  p nm aa 
The matter is urgent as a foreign body in
an attempt to remove a more deeply lodged
the cornea for over 24 hours will provoke an
foreign body is made. If an initial flushing of
inflammatory corneal infiltrate and gradual
the cornea is unsuccessful, as will often be the
degradation of surrounding stroma, making
 case, a more interventionist approach should
removal
1more difficult.
The1
presence
of
be taken.
aqueous flare is common, but more severe
 The key instrument to be used in removing
anterior segment inflammation and especially
the majority of foreign bodies is nothing more
62
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
complicated than a 25 G needle. The most
neither these aims in order of importance nor
important detail in using the needle is to
in
the order in which they should be
employ it at 90° to the entry track of the
remedied.
foreign body, as shown in Figure 5.12. In this
way one can be sure not to push the item
 First, the foreign body should be removed,
further into the corneal stroma. A moving
maintaining or regaining corneal clarity
globe complicates matters considerably,
SO
+
Second, the globe integrity should be
before removing the foreign body ocular
maintained, this being particularly impor-
stability must be ensured with haemostats or
tant to remember if the corneal deficit
stay sutures anchoring the conjunctiva
at
after foreign body removal is substantial
three points. Haemostats can be particularly
Third, the inflammatory sequelae of loss
useful because the one in line with the direc-
of aqueous must be remedied or hopefully
tion of the entry track can be the fixation
prevented
against
 which the foreign body（
can
be
Fourth, i
intra-ocular or corneal stromal
Withdrawn, as shown in Figure 5.i5.
infection should similarly be remedied or
There are times when the foreign body is
prevented.
toodeeply embedded to allow a simple
removal: where no part of it protrudes
The last two of these should be considered
beyond the ocular surface. In such cases the
first when dealing with a lacerated cornea.
easiest method of removal is, using the fine
Antibiotic and anti-inflammatory treatment
needle and always in the direction by which
    n a 
the foreign body will eventually be removed,
cally to correct the damage present as a
to chisel away at the stroma immediately
consequence of a penetrating foreign body.
surrounding the surfare end of the foreign
Intensive topical and systemic antibiosis 
is
body, as shown in Figure 5.15. While this will
critical given the likelihood that microbial
create a small crater leaving a superficial
contamination will occur either in the corneal
ulcer, it will allow a standard removal of the
stroma or the anterior segment. Choosing the
paisans anbnan aun q pog ua
antibiotic to use has been covered above but
above.
it is important to repeat that the involvement
of plant material as the foreign body must
always alert one to the possibility of fungal
5.4.3 Dealing with a fully penetrating
infection.
corneal foreign body@
 With any corneal perforation inflammatory
 Ensuring globe stasis is even more important
sequelae can cause significant morbidity in the
where a full perforation of the cornea has
eye. In the case of a penetrating foreign body
occurred. Here we will consider management
there may be considerable loss of aqueous as
where the foreign body is still within the
the foreign body is removed. In this situation
body of the stroma and thus is plugging the
both the loss and its prostaglandin-mediated
 gap. Larger corneal injuries with involvement
inflammatory consequences can be controlled.
of a foreign body are considered under the
Where relatively little loss has occurred with
section on corneal laceration. How is it possi-
a1
 penetrating foreign body, there is ample
ble to know, other than by careful clinical
opportunity to give a topical non-steroidal
examination, that corneal perforation has
anti-inflammatory agent such as flurbiprofen
occurred? If aqueous is leaking from the site
(Ocufen), diclofenac (Voltarol) or ketorolac
of foreign body entry the answer is clear but
(Acular) before attempting surgical removal.
often the small degree of swelling which
Where aqueous loss has already happened, as
accompanies corneal oedema tightly seals the
in a corneal laceration, any ameliorative anti-
wound, locking the foreign body in place.
inflammatory action is rather late. However,
Then the Seidel test is useful.
surgical intervention will cause further fluid
With a corneal foreign body t
that has
and
inhibiting
the
 prostaglandin-
penetrated the cornea, with some transient
mediated inflammatory response as above is
loss of aqueous there are four aims to be
still important.
achieved in dealing with the problem (Figure
After
these
partially
reparative
and
5.15). Note that the following list ranks
partially prophylactic steps have been taken,
Cormea
63
the foreign body can be removed. The impor-
microforceps
through a limbal incision
tant feature of such a removal, as with that of
(Figure 5.15).
a non-penetrating foreign body, is not to
 make matters worse. It is so tempting to use
a small pair of forceps and try to pluck the
5.5 Antibiosis and mydriatic
foreign body from the corneal surface. Too
cycloplegia in corneal emergencies
often, however, this merely results in embed-
ding the item further in the stroma or, worse
 The reader is referred to the opening chapter
still, pushing it through into the anterior
of this volume for a fuller discussion of the
chamber. Here it floats and is significantly
diagnosis and treatment of infectious ocular
more difficult to apprehend and remove from
disease. Again we emphasize the benefits of
the eye.
taking samples and using in the first place a
A foreign body embedded in and perfo-
 broad-spectrum antibiotic. The samples can
rating the depth
1 of the stroma can be
 be examined directly after appropriate stain-
carefully removed with a needle as for the
ing with Gram's method, Giemsa or Diff Quik
non-perforating foreign body. It may
be
techniques and with lactophenol cotton blue
necessary to enlarge the entry wound with
for fungal hyphal elements as well as for
a needle or blade, having already stabilized
bacteriological and fungal culture.
the foreign body to ensure it is not lost into
With regard to analgesia, paralysis of the
the anterior chamber. The most difficult
ciliary body is a useful analgesic adjunct in
cases are those in which the majority of the
 iritis, as above. This also applies in corneal
foreign body has passed into the anterior
disease where miosis is noted, the iridal
chamber leaving a small stub in the poste-
spasm being caused by retrograde trigeminal
rior stroma. In such a case removal should
nerve condurtion. In every corneal condition
not be retrograde, reversing the entry path
presenting with apparent pain or a degree of
of the foreign body through the cornea, but
anisocoria, a mydriatic cycloplegir agent
further through the anterior chamber using
should be used.
Chapter 6
Iris
6.1 Iritis?
for immediate and sustained action. Inflam-
mation of the iris is a relatively common condi-
 Iritis is one of the key conditions causing the
tion in small animal ophthalmology. It forms
red eye. It can be painful and sight-threaten-
the most obvious part of uveitis, inflammation
ing and thus is an important condition calling
of the uveal tract which also comprises the
ciliary body and the choroid. While interme-
Emergency management of anterior uveitis
tion of the ciliary body or choroid are not
noticed by the owner they can provide useful
1. Perform full ophthalmic examination
signs to the veterinary surgeon investigating a
 2. Measure intra-ocular pressure
uveitic eye.
3. Evaluate possibility of systemic infection
(Gram-negative bacteria, Toxoplasma,
viral disease)
6.1.1 Diagnosis: clinical signs
4. Treat with mydriatic until mydriasis is
achieved
The classic signs of an anterior uveitis are
 5. Treat with topical steroid if no corneal
related to anterior uveal inflammation, iridal
ulceration present, otherwise use topical
muscle spasm and, in many cases, ciliary
non-steroidal agent
body dysfunction (Figure ‘6.1). The key
6. Treat with systemic steroid if severe or
features of inflammation have always been
non-responsive to topical steroid alone
defined as rubor, calor, tumor et dolor together
7. Refer for treatment with tissue
plasminogen activating factor if
with reduction of function.
substantial fibrin deposition occurs
Rubor, redness, is seen in iritis in the increased
vasculature of rubeosis iridis. Iridal vasculature
Prognostic indicators in anterior uveitis
is in some
places dilated and in other
1. Substantial intra-ocular haemorrhage a
constricted. Where vascular dilation occurs the
 iris appears criss-crossed with engorged vessels
poor prognostic sign
 2. Substantial posterior synechiae non-
giving a rubeotic appearance, hence the term
responsive to mydriasis a poor
rubeosis iridis. In areas of vascular constriction
prognostic sign
ischaemia occurs. Ischaemic tissue releases
 3. Concurrent posterior segment signs such
angiogenic factors which promote new blood
as retinal detachment a poor prognostic
vessel formation seen as small vascular sprouts
sign
in rubeosis iridis. Redness is also manifest in the
4. Viral systemic cause a poor prognostic
episclera as the red eye and is due to vascular
sign for the uveitis and the systemic
dilation secondary to inflammatory cytokine
health of the animal
production.
Iris 65
is very important and is discussed in section
6.1.3.
The glory of the eye and of ophthalmology
is that tissue changes can be directly assessed
by ophthalmoscopy. This is particularly true
in uveitis. Early influx of leucocytes into the
iris and the formation of lymphoid follicles
are often visible even at the very earliest
stages. Thickening of the iris and loss of iris
surface detail are other results of cellular infil-
tration into the body of the iris. Leucocyte
diapedesis from the iris surface, and fibrin
formation and release from iridal and ciliary
body vasculature result in flare. In flare, parti-
cles such as cells and fibrin form a haze in the
anterior chamber through the Tyndall effect
when a beam of light is shone through the
anterior chamber. With experience flare can
be graded, allowing a  semi-quantitative
estimate of the degree of inflammation. While
this is not particularly useful in comparing
disease in ^different animals, it plays an
important part in(
 determining whether
uveitis is improving under treatment.
A higher number of cells in the aqueous
results in deposit of cells on the posterior face
of the cornea as keratir precipitates. These
may have different appearances depending
on the type of cells and the inflammatory
processes
involved.
Non-granulomatous
inflammation may show small keratic precip-
Figure 6.1 The classic signs of an anterior uveitis
itates with a wide distribution across the
are related to anterior uveal inflammation, iridal
muscle spasm and, in many cases, ciliary body
cornea. Granulomatous:
inflammation pro-
duces larger keratic precipitates, often known
as mutton fat KPs. These may form a crescent
in the inferior cornea Cells fall in the
downward current, as cooler aqueous falls in
Calor, heat, is difficult to determine in the
the centre of the anterior chamber and then
eye. Tumor, swelling, is seen in the swollen
rises at the limbus. The bicircular aqueous
dull-coloured iris. In some cases, especially
currents thus formed are slowest at the lowest
with a lightly pigmented iris, the formation of
point where they change direction (Figure
raised lymphoid follicles within the iris tissue
6.1) and the cells are thus deposited in this
can be visualized, especially with a slit lamp
position. If a larger number of cells enter the
or slit setting in a direct ophthalmoscope
aqueous they fall under gravity to give a
which readily demonstrates a raised profile.
hypopyon in the ventral anterior chamber.
 Dolor, pain, is a frequently presenting sign
Thus, the degree of anterior segment inflam-
in uveitis.]
 It is predominantly related to
iridal and ciliary body muscular spasm.
visualizing cell infiltration directly.
Photophobia is also a classical sign, although
Posterior segment inflammation is impor-
exactly where the mechanism of photopho-
tant in i
investigations also. The uvea, as
bia lies is still unclear: it may be related to
detailed above, comprises the iris, the ciliary
muscular spasm as the pupillary light reflex
body and the choroid. Fundoscopy of the
occurs. Knowing the mechanism of pain
uveitic
eye may show anterior vitreal cell-
generation is at the heart of ocular analgesia,
related flare in pars planitis (intermediate
66
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
uveitis), or chorioretinal inflammatory exu-
date or retinal detachment in posterior
Emergency management of hyphaema
uveitis. Where there is an anterior uveitis in
1. Perform full ophthalmic examination,
 one eye but on casual examination an appar-
noting concurrent signs of uveitis or
ently normal fellow eye, it is always worth
glaucoma
performing fundoscopy on both eyes even if
2. Measure intra-ocular pressure and treat
 accordingly if raised
this means waiting some time for mydriasis
 3. Perform ocular ultrasonography if 
to take effect. Finding signs of a posterior
available, looking for tissue trauma or
uveitis in the other eye will make the differ-
intra-ocular tumour
ence between topical therapy in the unilateral
4. If recurring hyphaema without signs of
anterior inflammation and systemic anti-
ocular trauma, evaluate dog for
inflammatory medication  in  the bilateral
haemorrhage elsewhere and perform
panuveitis.
coagulation profile
Iridal muscle spasm manifests as pupil
5. Give topical steroids if ulceration is not
constriction, miosis. This, combined with the
present and signs of uveitis are present
readiness of the pupil to adhere to the under-
6. Give topical NSAlDs if ulceration is
lying lens, produces posterior synechiae
present
7. Give topical atropine if uveitis is
which can, in an untreated eye, result in a
present but not if glaucoma supervenes
permanently miotic pupil or iris bombe. In
 8. Tissue plasminogen activating factor
the latter case iridal adhesion to the lens
may be useful in resolving a clot, but
prevents movement  of aqueous  forward
 care is needed as this can cause
-iad e saa anuau pue pnd aul qno
further haemorrhage
tous increase in intra-ocular pressure. All
these possibilities render amelioration of
miosis an exceptionally important factor in
Prognostic indicators in hyphaema
treatment of the uveitic eye, as discussed in
1. Signs of intra-ocular neoplasia are
section 6.1.5.
clearly a poor prognostic sign
 It may seem that the ciliary body, being
 2. Supervening glaucoma and the
invisible by routine fundoscopy, has few
darkening of the blood as it clots are
secrets to give away in the investigation of
poor prognostic signs
 3. Recurring hyphaema may signal a
the uveitic eye. Yet when we consider reduc-
tion in function as a key feature of inflamma-
systemic coagulopathy or intra-ocular
ciliary
structural defect involving vasculature,
tion, t
the
body
gives
the
onllv
both of which are poor prognostic
quantifiable feature in uveitis: the level of
signs
intra-ocular
pressure.
While
it
may be
thought that the diagnosis of glaucoma is the
only reason for the measurement of intra-
Differential diagnosis in hyphaema
ocular pressure, determination of pressure in
Ocular trauma
the uveitic eye should perhaps be considered
Uveitis
equally important. A uveitic eye with a low
 Intra-ocular tumour
intra-ocular pressure has an active uveal
Coagulopathy
inflammation, while a treated eye with a
Retinal detachment fin more chronic
higher (but still abnormally low) pressure
detachments)
than at the previous examination, is an eye
Retinal vascular haemorrhage (such as
with a resolving uveitis. Tonometry is thus a
occurs in Collie Eye Anomaly)
key diagnostic step in uveitis.
Thus work up for hyphaema should
include:
6.1.2 Diagnosis: diagnostic tests
Further ocular examination (signs of
uveitis, lesions in fellow eye)
 It might be thought that the clinical appear-
Ocular ultrasound (retinal detachment,
ance of a uveitic eye is sufficient foundation
intra-ocular tumour)
on which to base a diagnosis of uveitis. Clini-
Coagulopathy work up (platelet count,
cal signs together with a measurement of a
clotting time, PPT, APT}
low intra-ocular pressure are indeed sufficient
iris
67
as a basis but confirmation can be gained by
be at the centre of anti-uveitic therapy. Such
performing a paracentesis. A cytocentrifuga-
treatment needs to be titrated relative to the
tion of 0.2ml of aqueous will show the cell
severity of the uveitis and its position. A mild
types and indicate whether any infection is
anterior uveitis will require topical
1%
present
by
documenting
locala
antibody
prednisolone acetate. A severe uveitis with
production. This might be seen as somewhat
posterior segment involvement will require
academic, but the important diagnostic tests,
systemic (per os) predisolone at the anti-
especially in cats, are those which determine
inflammatory dose of 1.5 mg/kg or even
whether a viral aetiology underlies the uveitis.
azathioprine.
Serology for FIP, FeLV, FIP and Toxoplasma is
Subconjunctivali
injection in an already
considered the standard systemic work
up
painful eye can be eased dramatically by the
routine in Britain. Note that with travel of
    
animals abroad increasing recently Leishma-
placing a drop of proxymetacaine or ametho-
nia and Ehrlichia shouid be included
as
caine in the eye will, however, have a limited
differentials for uveitis. In the USA serology
effect. A much more effective protocol is to
qns sjuase jeauny roy ino panen aq poqs
soak a cotton-tipped swab in the anaesthetic
as Blastomyces and Coccidioides, which cause
and press it onto the globe in the position
systemic fungal disease not
 infrequently
wheref
the injection will be given.
This
manifesting as ocular disease.
Bartonella
produces profound local anaesthesia in a
henslae is another organism recently found
focused
1 area not just superficially on the
associated with feline uveitis. In all these cases
conjunctiva but deep in the episclera and
determining the ratio of aqueous to serum
sclera.
antibody titre is vastly superior to serology
alone (Chauvkin et al. 1994).
6.1.5 Treatment: reducing miosis and
A different set of pathogens may be impor-
preventing synechia formation
tant in equine recurrent uveitis: Leptospira
species and particularly L. interrogans have
One of the key concepts to bear in mind when
been found in a significant proportion of
faced with an emergency is that the first time
cases while Brucella, Toxoplasma and possibly
the patient is seen is the best (and sometimes
 a  i s s 
the only) opportunity to reduce disease activ-
 Documenting which organism is involved is
ity and signs. This is certainly the case with
probably not particularly important, although
the profound miosis seen in acute uveitis and
treatment of toxoplasmosis with a drug such
the formation of synechiae so common in
as clindamycin may be valuable in addition
intra-ocular inflammation.
to the classical topical anti-inflammatories.
A uveitic eye with a miotic pupil needs
attention until the pupil is dilated, not a quick
application of atropine and re-examination in
6.1.3 Treatment: pain relief
a few days time. Often atropine is sufficient
As has been noted above, pain relief in uveitis
to produce mydriasis in a mild uveitis, but
should be an admixture of spasmolytic anale-
even in such a case the response to a long-
gesia through cycloplegia, analgesia through
acting mydriatic such as atropine is difficult
the anti-inflammatory action  of the 
non-
to gauge
at the first consultation. A first
steroidal agents and in addition classical
application of mydriatir should include tropi-
analgesia with opiates if necessary.
Early
camide as well as atropine to ensure rapid
reduction of ciliary body spasm and early
mydriasis. Should both of these fail, phenyle-
anti-inflammatory  medication reduce pain
 phrine can be added and the three drugs used
 quite substantially without resort to the more
together every 15 minutes until mydriasis is
powerful systemic analgesics.
achieved. Should all topical mydriatics fail to
act adequately, a subconjunctival injection of
0.05 ml 1% atropine, 0.05 ml 1% tropicamide
6.1.4 Treatment: anti-inflammatory
 p   l co p
medication
given. There is some risk of a systemic
 Since inflammatory disease is at the heart of
reaction
and
cardiovascular
parameters
uveitis, anti-inflammatory medication must
should be monitored immediately before and
68
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
Pathogenic mechanisms in uveitis
 Inflammatory cell infiltration  lymphoid nodules in iris stroma
inflammatory cells in keratic
 precipitates iarger number of cells form hypo pyon
+ Iris ischaemia
from vessel constriction giving rise to new vessel sprouts
{rubeosis iridis)
 Pupillary constriction
through muscular spasm producng miosis
Iridal adhesion
posterior synechiae (iris-lens adhesion) and also peripheral
anterior synechiae which can lead to glaucoma
· Pain
 particularly through ciliary body spasm also because of
photophobia (mechanism unclear)
Thus treatment must
reduce inflammation (steroid and NSAIDs)
 reduce pain (analgesics but also cycloplegics to reduce
ciliary spasm)
dilate pupil (mydriatic high dose frequency)
after such a subconjunctival injection. There is
6.2 Change in iris appearance
evidence that reduction of inflammation will
promote the action of topical mydriatics.
Clearly a case of iritis, as discussed above,
Thus, should mydriasis not occur it is worth
will cause changes in iris appearance: new
hospitalizing the animal and trying again
vascularization, iris swelling, miosis and
 after a few hours of intensive anti-inflamma-
iridal (
 darkening all cause such changes.
tory medication.
There are other lesions which alter iris
At this point it is important to note that use
 appearance: neoplasia is one. Iris masses may
of powerful agents such as atropine in horses
be primary tumours, part of a more general-
 must be approached with caution. The possi-
ized disease such as feline lymphosarcoma
bility of development of ileus
even
1with
complex or a sign of metastolic disease from
topical use of atropine must always be
a tumour elsewhere.
remembered and use of an atropine ointment,
The development of benign iris pigmenta-
with concomitant reduction of 
 systemic
tion is another which may be rapidly devel-
absorption, is to be recommended.
oping and therefore a potential neoplasm
Another peculiarity of the equine eye is the
requiring immediate intervention. The differ-
recent use of vitrectomy to treat recurrent
ential diagnosis of a benign iris pigmentary
cases of uveitis (Frihauf et al. 1998). The
naevus and a diffuse iris melanoma can be
removal of pathogens such as Leptospira may
difficult, particularly in the cat (Williams
be important, or it may be the removal of the
1994). In some cases the raised profile of an
'soup'
 of  inflammatory  mediators  which
iris melanoma above the iris is pathogno-
remain in the vitreous which is important.
monic but in other animals diffuse iris
Nevertheless vitrectomy
can certainly
be
useful in reducing the frequency and severity
 p  a    
of attacks in horses. It may be that in the
 congenital and not change in appearance
future this approach will show benefit in the
from birth. Yet in the authors’ experience
dog and cat also, where recurrent or persis-
feline iris pigmentation can develop rapidly
tent intra-ocular inflammation is a significant
and in a multifocal manner which is indistin-
problem.
guishable from melanoma. Given the poor
Iris69
prognosis of feline iris melanoma once it
early and therefore the prognosis is good; or
reaches the iridal periphery and associated
the lesion was benign so no neoplasm was
limbal and ciliary body vasculature, enucle-
present, the cat will live a normal, if unocu-
ation is the preferred option.
lar, life and the client can be reassured that
The key factor here, as in any veterinary
tumour was not present.
medicine, is without a doubt client commu-
 It may seem strange to include this section
nication. In such a case the outcome can
 in a book on emergency ophthalmology. Yet
always seem negative. If the lesion is neoplas-
 in the emergency consultation optimal client
tic the cat has a chance of systemic metasta-
communication is supremely important. The
sis. If the lesion is benign the eye will have
very fact that the animal has been presented
been removed to no purpose. If the client is
as an emergency shows that owner is worried
informed that the condition may be benign,
d Xia sn ne si hn uad a ue Aq
but that the eye should be removed in case a
that the veterinarian's calm well-informed
neoplasm is present, then the outcome can
manner reassures the owner and ensures that
always be presented as positive: either the
 the animal benefits through the strengthening
lesion was neoplastic but we have removed it
 of the client-veterinarian relationship.
Chapter 7
Glaucoma
7.1 Introductory remarks
 and need rapid treatment to reduce the intra-
ocular pressure.
Glaucoma is a condition of increased intra-
The key
diagnostic aid in glaucomai
iS
ocular pressure that may be seen in patients
measurement of intra-ocular pressure. As we
secondary
to  intra-ocular  inflammation,
have noted earlier, having a tonometer to
intra-ocular neoplasia or more often in the
dog as a progressive disease resulting from
inherited abnormality of the irido-corneal
angle (Figure 7.1).
A large number of dog breeds have been
shown to have an inherited dysplasia of
structures in the iridocorneal angle (ACVO
1996, Whitley et al. 1995) shown in Table 7.1.
Several features of glaucoma are particularly
n  s a   n
 main problem with glaucoma is the long-term
control of intra-ocular 
r pressure either by
 ocular medication or by surgery.
 Glaucoma is a blinding, painful condition
and in many cases the changes which cause
pain and result in blindness occur in the first
Figure 7.1 Is this uveitis in the right eye or
few hours of an arute episode of glaucoma
glaucoma in the left?
Table 7.1 Dog breeds predisposed to glaucoma
Akita
Chihuahua
Lakeland terrier
Sealyham terrier
Alaskan malaute
Dalmatian
Maltese
Shih tzu
American cocker spaniel
Dandie dinmont terrier
Miniature pinscher
Siberian husky
Basset hound
Daschund
Miniature schnauzer
Skye terrier
Beagle
English cocker spaniel
Norfolk terrier
Smooth fox terrier
Border collie
German shepherd
Norwegian elkhound
Tibetan terrier
Boston terrier
Giant schnauzer
Norwich terrier
Welsh springer spaniel
Bouvier de Flandres
Greyhound
Poodle
Welsh terrier
Brittany spaniel
Irish setter
Samoyed
West Highland White terrier
Cairn terrier
Italian greyhound
Scottish terrier
Wire fox terrier
Cardigan Welsh corgi
Glaucoma
71
(a)
(b)
albue leawosopy! (a) lewouqe pue (e) lewon z'z anby
hand is important and acquiring and regularly
used to be defined as ocular disease associ-
using a Schiotz tonometer, as described in
ated with increased
IOP, the tendency
Appendix A, is highly recommended.
recently has been to move away from IOP as
The  long-term  control  of  intra-ocular
the defining criterion of glaucoma. Some eyes
pressure should be undertaken by referral to
with a raised IOP have no signs of ocuilar
a veterinary ophthalmologist.
 disease nor visual defect (Figure 7.2). In these
An important aspect of glaucoma presenting
cases people are said to have ocular hyper-
unilaterally is the possible future involvement
tension but not glaucoma. Conversely there
of the remaining visual eye. Several studies
are a growing number of people with loss of
have shown that topical anti-glaucoma treat-
visual fields as determined by perimetry and
ment of the non-glaucomatous eye can prevent
a cupped optic disc, the classic signs of
or at least postpone the disease in this eye.
glaucoma, but with a normal or even low
intra-ocular pressure (Figure 7.3). These cases
are termed fow tension glaucoma', a descrip-
tion which used to be considered
7.2. Diagnosis
lan
7.2.1 Clinical signs
The eye with acute glaucoma is, together with
globe prolapse, one of the few extreme ocular
emergencies. In the vast majority of cases the
eye is red and painful and immediate reduc-
tion in ocular pressure is required to amelio
rate these signs. More important in the long
term is the effect of high intra-ocular pressure
on vision. The arutely glaucomatous eye is
blind and, without a rapid reduction in intra-
ocular pressure, this loss of vision will be
permanent.
7.2.2 Diagnostic tests
The key diagnostic test in glaucoma as we
recognize it in veterinary ophthalmology is
measurement of intra-ocular pressure (iOP).
In human ophthalmology, while glaucoma
Figure 7.3 Closed iridocorneal angle
72
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
oxymoron.
Itmay be wondered
what
Emergency management of glaucoma
relevance this has to the veterinary field. The
importance is that glaucoma is now recog-
1. Perform full ophthalmic examination
nized as a disease with its origin not primar
2. Determine cause of glaucoma (inherited
ily in the iridocorneal angle, where all the
with gonioscopic changes, post-uveitis,
attention used to be focused, but in the optic
lens luxation etc.)
disc. The optic neuropathy in  classical
3. Measure intra-ocular pressure
4. If I0P over 30 mmHg give 20% mannitol
glaucoma is related to and indeed directly
 solution intravenously at 1-2 g/kg over
caused by increased IOP. But optic nerve
30 minutes
changes may be caused by degenerative or
 5. Start topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
vascular changes in the nerve head as well as
treatment at least q.i.d.
byt
the physical damage
 associated with
6. Monitor intra-ocular pressure hourly in
increased IOP. It is not being suggested that
acute phase
we should forget high IOP as the predomi-
Prognostic indicators in glaucoma
nant cause of glaucoma in animals, but rather
that we should broaden our view regarding
1. Degree and duration of intra-ocular
the mechanisms underlying sight loss in the
pressure increase are critical in
disease. Currently this may have little impact
prognosis
on how we treat glaucoma in our patients.
2. Degree of visual loss in eye important
a a  o a  
3. Presence of optic disc cupping a poor
in ocular
deterioration than are human
prognostic sign
4. History of previous ocular signs or
patients who present with early glaucoma.
disease in other eye generally a poor
But in the future new agents may be intro-
prognostic sign
duced adding to the small armamentarium of
anti-glaucoma drugs we possess at present.
7.3 Treatment
when performed by an ophthalmologist with
expertise in
emergency
7.3.1 Immediate systemic hypotensive
management
of
glaucoma. Systemic osmotic agents also have
therapy@
their
disadvantages,
particularly
contra-
Treatment in the emergency situation where
indication in cases of renal failure. Since they
a dog presents with a high IOP in primary
are to be used in the emergency situation,
glaucoma is, and has been for many years, the
 little time is available for a full renal work up.
use of systemic hyperosmotic agents. Intra-
Nevertheless a careful history will ascertain
venous mannitol 'at up to 2g/kg or oral
whether the animal is polydipsic and there-
glycerol at 2 ml/kg acts to draw fluid from
fore likely to have renal compromise. A rapid
both the anterior segment of the eye and the
 pad aq un ann pna go un
vitreous humour. They act rapidly and for
order more fully to ensure that one is not
several hours reduce intra-ocular pressure by
going to save the eye while ignoring the more
10+ mmHg, reducing a pathologically high
general problems of the animal.
-s aa re u au o ans
tion where no such agents are available or
7.3.2 Long-term reduction of IOP?
where a systemic condition such as renal
disease precludes use of a hyperosmotic
The problem with a stabilized acute glaucoma
agent, a 25 G needle can gently be driven at
is what to do to maintain low pressure in a
an angle through the sclera at the limbus,
glaucomatous eye in the face of abnormally
allowing aqueous just to fill the needle hub
Iow aqueous drainage. This question presents
before the needle is withdrawn. Such a pro-
      
cedure is not without complications: the rapid
intravenous
osmotic
 ocular hypotensive
reduction of pressure by such a physical
drugs as discussed above, as it is not advis-
method may result in intra-ocular bleeding
able to give more than two administrations of
and is probably only to be recommended
mannitol or glycerol to any one animal.
Glaucoma
73
Emergency therapy in glaucoma
has been achieved with dichlorphenamide
(Daranide) for many years, but now that this
Osmotic agents
drug has been withdrawn in favour of the
Mannitol 1-2 g/kg by intravenous infusion
topical dorzolamide (Trusopt) other agents
Glycerin 1-2 g/kg per os
will have to be employed by those not favour-
Paracentesis
ing
a surgical treatment. Acetazolamide
Limbal placement of 25 G needle
(Diamox) is  another carbonir anhydrase
Removal of needle when hub is filled
inhibitor but works less well than dichlor-
with aqueous
phenamide and tends to have worse emetic
Pre-treatment with calcium channel
and
nauseous side effects. Methazolamide
blockers (e.g. verapamil) advised
(Naptazane) has not, to our knowledge, been
assessed in dogs.
Other drugs
S regularly used in human
glaucoma relax the musculature of the ciliary
Detailed discussion of methods of long-
body. In the primate eye at least these have a
term management of glaucoma might seem
major effect on the outflow capacity of the
inappropriate here, as they are not aimed at
drainage pathways. Whether this is the case
the emergency situation. Briefly, the optimal
in the dog is rather unclear because dogs do
 long-term  management  is surgical.
While
 not accommodate to a great extent. Their
long-term  medical  inhibition 
of
aqueous
ciliary musculature is therefore not particu-
production is possible, since the withdrawal
larly’ well-developed and relaxing
ciliary
of dichlorphenamide from the market no one
muscle in non-primate mammals has less
drug is particularly efficacious. Nevertheless
effect on the drainage pathways. This means
Trusopt, a topicai CAl, can be useful for
that many of the drugs used in people have
control of mild glaucoma.
questionable efficary in dogs.
More invasive methods to reduce aqueous
 Nevertheless cholinergic miotics are useful
production  involve  ciliary 
body
ablation,
in the dog. They probably act in a more
either by trans-scleral photo-ablation using a
complex way in the dog than in man, widen-
ing
 the sclerociliary cleft by a compound
these carry a risk of severe damage to other
action involving the iris sphincter muscle as
ocular structures and associated intra-ocular
Well
as
the
ciliary
body
musculature.
inflammatory sequelae, they have been used
Certainly demecarium bromide (Humorsol), a
with success
in  sighted
eyes. Intravitreal
long-acting
 anticholinesterase,
works
genticin has been used successfully pharma-
extremely well but is only available in the
cologically to ablate the ciliary body
1but
United
States. Pilocarpine,
, a direct-acting
should be reserved for blind painful eyes (but
parasympathomimetic, is perhaps the most
probably not in cats, for fear of causing po-
commonly used miotic. A single dose reduces
sterior segment post-traumatic sarcoma). This
intra-ocular pressure for six to eight hours;
treatment is not advised in the emergency
4% drops produce no greater pressure reduc-
situation
and
the1
reader is 
referred
to
tion than do 2% drops, but a gel formulation
 published reports for further information.
gives longer-lasting pressure reduction, at
Pharmacological
 reduction
of
aqueous
least in people.
formation by carbonic anhydrase inhibition
Other
ocular
hypotensive
preparations
which could potentially be used in the dog
include adrenergic agonists acting on both
alpha and
beta receptors.  Topical a
alpha
Mechanisms of drug action in glaucoma
agonists,
such
as
apraclonidine,
cause
vasoconstriction of vessels in t
the ciliary
 Reduction of aqueous production
processes t
thus decreasing aqueous humour
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Beta blockers
production. But they also dilate the pupil, with
Adrenergic agonists
pressure-increasing effects in man but less so
in the dog. Beta receptor effects of adrenergic
Outflow facility modulation
agonists increase aqueous production but also
Direct and indirect cholinergic agonists
act directly on the trabecular meshwork to
74
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
increase outflow. Thus an agent such as
We have known for many years that disc
epinephrine, or the less irritant pro-drug
cupping leads to visual impairment. An
dipivalyl epinephrine, variously increases and
extension of that concept leads to the
decreases pressure through actions on alpha
hypothesis that blindness in glaucoma is
and beta receptors. In man, and in the dog, the
predominantly related to optic nerve pathol-
Overall effect is to lower pressure. The compli-
ogy. Does this change of emphasis change
cating factor is that beta antagonists as well as
our treatment regimens for glaucoma
agonists have pressure-lowering effects. Beta
patients? In one sense it changes nothing.
blocking agents bind to receptors in the ciliary
For the vast majority of canine and feline
epithelium and reduce aqueous secretion. In
glaucoma patients the problem is high intra-
human ophthalmology, timolol maleate has a
ocular pressure and the necessary treatment
major role as a topical antiglaucoma drug.
lowers that pressure. But in another sense it
Timolol has no effects on the pupil, accommo-
changes a lot. If optic nerve damage is the
dation or outflow facility
 but can reduce
focus of glaucoma pathology then at least
aqueous production in man by nearly 50% at
part of our glaucoma therapy S
should be
aimed at neuroprotection.
 The sort of tissue changes and mechanisms
 required to give significant reductions in intra-
at the heart of optic nerve damage relate to
 ocular pressure (Gelatt 4% paper).
events such as calcium influx to nerve cells
To return to the
question
regarding
after damage. Any neural damage, be it
whether glaucoma pathology is at the irido-
related to a head injury, a cerebrovascular
corneal angle, where so many of these drugs
accident or 1
 pressure-induced  damage
of
act, or at the optic nerve head, it is now being
ganglion cell axons in the optic nerve head,
suggested that perhaps the beta blockers have
produces a chain reaction of neurotransmit-
more effect on the vasculature around the
ter-related events resulting in the opening of
optic nerve head than they do on the irido-
neural ion channels which allow the lethal
corneal angle or the ciliary body. Indeed there
influx of calcium ions into neurons. If this can
be prevented, perhaps by the use of calcium
ing aqueous production with
1 medication
      
these drugs are starving
the iridocorneal
the long-term damage associated with the
angle cells of the nutritious aqueous f
they
sudden rise in IOP in acute glaucoma (seen
need to survive - possibly iridocorneal angle
s0 often in dogs with compromised irido-
pathology is being made worse!
aq oste Ae (alp snoanbe ne pao
prevented.
This, however, is all in the future - the key
7.3.3 Neuroprotection
factors in diagnosing and treating glaucoma
As noted above a recent change of emphasis
in the emergency situation are being able to
has occurred in glaucoma pathophysiology.
recognize the signs, confirm the diagnosis by
The focus on ocular damage from merely
 assd a m  p 
high
intra-ocular
pressure
caused
by
systemic osmotir ocular hypotensive agents
impaired i
iridocorneal angle 
drainage
has
before deciding what to do for the long-term
moved to effects of pressure and other factors
improvement of aqueous drainage in such
on the optic nerve head and its vasculature.
cases.
Chapter 8
Lens
Conditions  of the  lens
presenting
can be seen between lens and pupillary
as
 emergencies are luxation and damage. Much
margin (Figure 8.1). If there are also lens
regarding this latter situation is covered
changes such as cataract the edge of the lens
above as a complication of globe perforation
can be seen even more clearly and the
but here the consequences of lens rupture
diagnosis be made.
will be noted. The only other acute condition
 In other cases the lens luxates completely
of the lens which could present as an
into the anterior chamber. Here it may be
possible to see reflected light beautifully
such as is seen in diabetes. This also
is
outlining the lens (Figure 8.2). In such a case
discussed here, although the diagnosis
is
an area of corneal oedema often occurs
normally easy and management is cataract
where the lens presses on the corneal
extraction. Sudden onset cataract might not
endothelium.
be covered as an emergency in some texts. It
 Unfortunately, diagnosis is not so easy in
is sufficiently concerning for owners to be
many cases. Lens luxation may occur anteri-
orly^followed by a falling back of the lens
covered here.
behind the iris and diagnosis can be difficult
if an aphakic crescent is not obvious. Since
the iris is not supported by the lens posteri-
8.1 Lens luxation@
orly in such cases it wobbles on slight manip-
ulation of the head. As ‘iris wobble' sounds
The clearest emergency presenting as a
less than 100% scientific, the term iridodone-
disease of the lens is lens luxation. Once seen
sis is used.
never forgotten: lens luxation is obvious in its
 Signs of lens luxation are
presentation once one knows what to look
for. The characteristics of the animal involved
 Lens clearly present in anterior chamber
can be very instructive This condition often
 Lens clearly eccentric in position with an
occurs in middle-aged terrier breeds and
 aphakic crescent visible
sudden ocular pain or discomfort in such a
Lens
less
obviously
displaced
but
dog should focus one's attention on lens
iridodonesis occurring
luxation as a likely diagnosis. The ocular
signs can be immediately diagnostic. There is
Another complication in the presentation of a
a red eye with raised pressure and an aphakic
dog with lens luxation is that the condition
crescent where the lens is obviously displaced
 ae r r s  rde s
from its normal central position, leaving an
in which it is a clearly inherited trait. And
area where an uninterrupted tapetal reflex
even more confusingly, while glaucoma can,
76
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
Signs of subluxation:
●Aphakic crescent
● Possible vitreal tag in anterior
chamber
(a)
Signs of primary luxation
●Lens obvious in anterior chamber
· Pupil block glaucoma
● Breeds-terrier and border collie
Note: reflected light often outlines the
lens in the anterior chamber
(b)
Signs of secondaryluxation
● Glaucoma with enlarged globe
● Descemet's fracture
● Breeds predisposed to glaucoma
(c)
Figure 8.1 Subluxation of lens
and often does, occur secondary to lens
What  is the primary ocular defect
luxation,
,lens 
luxation
1itself
fcanoccur
zonular breakdown or globe enlargement
secondary to glaucoma. Thus the manage-
following glaucoma?
ment of a luxated lens is not always lentect-
omy. When the luxation occurs as a result of
This calls, as do all ophthalmological
globe enlargement removal of the lens will do
questions, for a close examination of the
nothing to ameliorate ocular signs.
The
globe. Look in particular for
glaucoma which has caused buphthalmos
must originate elsewhere. This may be at the
?
the position of the lens - use a slit beam if
iridocorneal angle, a primary goniodysgene-
possible
d r s   s
 a possible area of corneal oedema in the
anterior synechiae following uveitis. The
central cornea suggestive of current or
differentiation of whether glaucoma follows
 previous anterior lens luxation
lens luxation, or lens luxation follows
vitreal strands protruding into the aqueous
glaucoma, relies on two questions.
+
 any signs of subluxation in the other eye
+
the size of the globe - visual inspection
 Is there a reason for glaucoma other than
and the
presence of Haab's striae or
the lens luxation?
Descemet's fractures. These are caused by
Lens
77
the posterior influx of aqueous humour
irreversible
opacification.  Management of
into the stroma at the sites of rupture in
this situation is lentectomy by extracapsular
Descemet's membrane. An enlarged globe
extraction, or more frequently today phaco-
with an acute lens luxation suggests that
emulsification. The important factor here is
the lens luxation is secondary
recognition that the cataract is secondary to
any other signs of disease producing
glaucoma - inflammation or neoplasia.
a full haematological and serum biochem-
istry profile as a key part of the work up
 In the cat, lens luxation is almost always
before surgical treatment.
seen following glaucoma, uveitis or rarely
trauma (Olivero et al 1991). The mechanism
of zonule breakdown subsequent to uveitis is
8.3 Lens capsule rupture and
phacoanaphylactic uveitis?
malities shows, yet again, the importance of
assessing the whole eye and not just focusing
In circumstances
where lenticular
trauma
on the obvious abnormality. The link with
liberates lens proteins, severe, almost anaphy-
uveitis is noteworthy, both because it shows
lactic changes in the eye are seen, termed
the importance of assessing the underlying
phacoanaphylactic or phacoclastic uveitis. In
s n    n
the majority of these instances rupture of the
cases (see Chapter 6) and also because the
lens capsule by a penetrating foreign body is
anterior segment in such cases is already in a
responsible for release of lens material. A
state of inflammatory activity. Entry into the
typical setting is a thorn or cat-claw injury to
globe in such circumstances shouid not be
the globe, typically through the cornea. Thus
attempted without considerable local (topical)
 in any case of corneal damage it is important
and systemic anti-inflammatory medication
to assess
 the anterior surface of the lens
before surgery.
capsule. If a means of magnification is not to
hand, fluorescence such as a Wood's lamp in
a dark room will help detect any damage: the
8.2 Diabetic cataract?
lens will autofluoresce to some degree, aiding
observation of capsular rupture or perfora-
As noted above, it might seem surprising to
tion.
o inq Aualiaa ue se prn Aue sse
 In one interesting situation trauma from
time to time owners fail to recognise early
within
the
lens
itself
causes
capsular
signs of  lenticular  opacification 
in
their
rupture.
This is the case of lens-induced
animal and see a complete cataract as
a
uveitis in the rabbit where the protozoan
sudden change. The animal's visual distur-
parasite Encephalitozoon cuniculi, transmitted
bance is the first sign they notice and the
vertically from mother to offspring in utero,
white
cataract
the second.
With
such
is found
in the lens of the young adult
unobservant owners the cataract may be the
rabbit.
. In some circumstances these proto-
first sign they notice of f
their
animal's
 zoan larvae rupture the capsule and a lens-
diabetes, polyuria and
Apolydipsiahaving
induced
uveitis follows. This does not
been missed or ignored. Cataract can occur
 appear to be a phacoanaphylactic uveitis as
veryrapidly
yin an uncontrolled diabetic
such, rather a phacoclastic inflammation
with a white inflammatory focus occurring
levels in the lens swamp the classir Ebden
in the anterior chamber. This must be differ-
Myerhoff metabolic pathway. This allows
entiated from a Pasteurella multocida uveitis
excess glucose to be metabolized by the
which could give a similar white purulent
enzyme aldose reductase which is normally
inflammatory
7 deposit. Discussion of such
not able to act on the sugar at low concen-
cases is beyond the remit of this volume,
trations,
given its lower affinity for the
since
these
animals
 arenot
generally
substrate. Aldose reductase converts glucose
presented
as emergencies but rather as
into sorbitol and this insoluble sugar creates
chronic problems.
an osmotic gradient across the cell membrane
In cases of lens rupture aggressive anti-
and leads to lens fibre swelling, and then
inflammatory treatment is advised, such as
78Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
topical   dexamethasone    or  prednisolone
sufficient in mild cases. In many cases a
acetate 3-4 times daily. Removal of the lens
severe uveitis with secondary ‘glaucoma
at this stage by phaco-emulsification is proba-
supervenes and the removal of the lens by
bly the best treatment option while medical
phaco-emulsification is probably the thera-
treatment with anti-inflammatories may be
peutic route to be recommended.
Chapter 9
Retina and vitreous
9.1 Retinal detachment
of full diagnostic work up in retinal detach-
ment is thus the investigation of whether and
 Retinal detachment presents as an emergency
which of these diseases is the cause of the
when it occurs bilaterally with sudden visual
detachment. On the other hand, there are
impairment and often complete blindness.
retinal detachments which are the result of
Several systemic or ocular conditions may be
intra-ocular abnormalities such as anomalies
the cause of a retinal detachment. A key aim
of the vitreous, retina, optic disc or choroid.
For this reason a full ocular examination is
mandatory, this including scleral indentation,
 Emergency management of retinal
in order to visualize the peripheral retina
detachment
where many tears leading to detachment
 1. Perform full ophthalmic examination
occur. Sometimes it may be difficult to see
2. Define whether detachment is
what is actually happening in the eye, as
rhegmatogenous (with retinal tear) or
extensive haemorrhages after the detachment
non-rhegmatogenous
may impair visual diagnosis. Ocular ultra-
3. Determine whether systemic disease
(hypertension, inflammatory focus etc.)
information in such 
 circumstances.
The
is present
typical features of a retinal detachment are
4. Manage hypertension with amlodipine
shown in Figure 9.1 and Table 9.1.
per os
 5. Manage posterior uveitis with
One systemic disease which may be an
prednisolone per os
underlying cause is hypertension,
either
alone or associated with chronic renal failure
Prognostic indicators in retinal detachment
or hyperthyroidism, more so in the cat than
1. Prolonged detachment before diagnosis
the ‘dog. An ocular condition leading to
a poor prognostic sign, as retinal
 e      
atrophy often occurs with time
disease is posterior uveitis. While this can
2. Rhegmatogenous detachment more
occur on its own, it can be part of a systemic
difficult to treat than non-
auto-immune condition such as uveoderma-
rhegmatoge no us
tological syndrome (VKH or Vogt-Koyanagi-
 3. Association with hypertension a good
Harada-like disease) in which peri-ocular
prognostic sign, as medical treatment
loss of pigmentation (poliosis and vitiligo) is
often resolves detachment in such cases
 seen. Retinal detachment can occur as part of
4. Association with posterior uveitis a
a recognized ocular syndrome in a specific
poorer sign, as complete resolution is
less common
breed such as retinal dysplasia i
in
the
Bedlington or Sealyham terrier, or Collie eye
08
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
Total funnel detachment
Through pupil with
pen torch
Total
(ophthalmoscope
detachment
may not be
visible
through
required) or on
+10-
pupil
+15D
(a)
Detachment with disinsertion
Fundus view with
ophthalmoscope
Hyper-reflective
tapetum (since retina
not present to
absorb light)
Disinsertion
at ora
(b)
Retina folded
ciliaris
retina
Local detachment
Peripapillary
with retinal
detachment with
dysplasia
coloboma
(c)
(d)
Figure 9.1 (a) Total funnel detachment visible through pupil; (b) detachment with disinsertion; (c) partial
detachment with retinal dysplasia; (d) partial detachment with optic nerve coloboma
Table 9.1 Differential diagnosis of retinal detachment
Pathogenesis of detachment
Exudative detachment
inflammatory Or exudative fluid between neuroretina and RPE
Rhegmatogenous detachment
retinal tear causes detachment
Traction detachment
vitrealbandspullneuroretinaaway
Differential diagnosis
Exudative detachment:
Uveitis
Hype rtension
Rhegmatogenous detachment
Trauma
Detachment associated with hypermature cataract
Traction detachment
Trauma
 Post-inflammatory
Retina and vitreous
81
anomaly in the Collie breeds. It can occur
retinopathy. Hypertensive cats are often in
following a space-occupying lesion such as a
early to moderate or severe renal failure or
tumour in the retrobulbar space or can follow
may
 be typical of feline hyperthyroidism,
trauma. With regard to the globe itself
with signs such as weight loss and tachycar-
detachments can occur at the rim of 
a
dia. Amlodipine in the cat (0.625 mg daily)
often results in retinal re-attachment and
related to anatomical abnormalities of retinal
restored vision, 
 but management of  the
adhesion at the edge of the optic disc.
underlying cause is vital.
The relationship between the vitreous and
Other
causes
of
 retinal
detachments
the retina are important in maintaining the
presenting as emergencies can be rapid fluid
retina correctly positioned. Vitreal degenera-
overload in renally compromised animals in
tion, which occurs in many older animals, can
which case bullous retinal detachments can
lead to vitreal cavitation with liquefaction
be seen (Martin 1999).
(synchysis scintillans). This condition should
be differentiated from asteroid hyalosis and
posterior vitreal detachment. Here the attach-
9.1.1 Examination of the animal with a
retinal detachment
ment of the vitreous to the inner retina fails.
 In the majority of animals this goes unnoticed
The fundus is readily examined by ophthal-
and causes no visual disturbance. It may,
moscopy
using
either(
direct or
indirect
however,
cause
peripheral
l retinal tears,
methods. With direct fundoscopy the retina
which can extend centrally to give significant
can be seen in focus only with the direct
visual disturbance. Rhegmatogenous retinal
ophthalmoscope on a setting of over O D,
detachments, i.e. those associated with retinal
indicating that the retina is placed anterior to
tears,
most
often
occur
between
the
its normal position at the most posterior
neuroretina and the retinal pigment epithe-
aspect of the globe. With binocular indirect
lium as the connection between these two
ophthalmoscopy a three-dimensional view of
structures is tenuous. Non-rhegmatogenous
the retina is obtained showing clearly that it
detachments occurring after serous exuidation
is detached. When the retina balloons to the
    s o
front of the vitreous is readily visible even
rather
 confusingly termed the
subretinal
withoutan
1 ophthamoscope, t
through the
space) also manifest at this weak point of the
    sd  n
 retina. Cataracts and lens luxations may cause
visual stimulus. If usually looks like a very
retinal tears; retinal detachment may
bea
fine silk veil floating behind the lens. As
 complication of cataract surgery in animals.
noted above scleral indentation allows
a
Some
detachments
associated
with
a
complete view of the peripheral retina. Local
systemir problem such as hypertension orcur
anaesthetic should be applied to the eye and
almost simultaneously in both eyes. Alterna-
a scleral indentor used gently to push the
tively it may be that one detachment has
globe inwards behind the limbus. Using the
preceded the other by some considerable
head-mounted binocular indirect ophthalmo-
period, and that the visual deficit is
not
scope and full mydriasis, the portion of the
noticed until the second eye is affected and
peripheral retina indented can be visualized
the animal becomes completely blind. By that
and checked
for retinal degeneration or
stage treatment is difficult and often
not
retinal tears.
particularly effective for the eye with the
The eye with a retinal detachment devel-
long-standing detachment, but certainly still
 oping as a consequence of hypertension may
worth attempting for that eye and also for the
often have several tell-tale signs before
eye with the recent detachment.
complete detachment occurs. Retinal vessels
Ideally,
blood
pressure
measurement
may be tortuous and appear like a chain of
so se aa sn  aq ps
sausages with lengths of vessel constriction
and dilation. Retinal haemorrhages and/or
unit which, being relatively cheap, should be
vascular exudates may be seen with small
available in every larger practice for monitor-
areas of flat detachment occurring before
ing blood pressure during anaesthesia as well
bullous exudative detachments lead on to
as the less for diagnosis of hypertensive
complete detachment.
82
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
When unilateral detachment is seen, useful
tablet of amlodipine) in the evening is suffi-
diagnostic information can be gained from
cient to give a significant reduction in blood
examination of the fellow eye. Often this has
pressure (Henik et al. 1997). It is sometimes
disease at an earlier stage, in a progressive
impractical to prescribe % of a tablet and
disease such as hypertension. Alternatively it
1.25 mg (% tablet) has yielded no side effects
may be that the other eye shows signs of
a
in our experience. The frequency of sponta-
condition with multiple ocular features one of
neous retinal re-attachment after normaliza-
which can lead to retinal detachment, such as
tion of blood pressure is difficult to assess,
occurs in retinal dysplasia or Collie eye
but is high enough to convince that the treat-
anomaly. In the former the apparenfly
 ment is worth pursuing. In many cases while
unaffected eye may have retinal folds or
one retina is 
chronically
detached, the
multifocal areas of dysplasia; in the latter
second eye has a recent detachment giving
there may be a coloboma or chorioretinal
rise to the total blindness which alerts the
dysplasia.
owner and
A  leads to presentation of t
the
 In animals, particularly cats, in which a
animal.
hypertensive
aetiology
is likely,
indirect
 The authors have seen amlopidine therapy
blood pressure measurement is essential for a
used to good effect in cats with hypertensive
full diagnostic work up. Doppler sphygmo-
retinopathy and renal disease. Lowering the
manometry has been reported in dogs and
blood pressure will have beneficial effects on
cats as being successful, although the more
the chronic renal failure as well. The chroni-
reliable (and more costly) method of oscillo-
cally detached retina may not be functional
metric measurement reported recently gives
even if re-attachment occurs, but the acutely
more reproducible results (Bodey and Michell
detached retina often regains useful function
1996). Certainly direct measurement requir-
after antihypertensive
treatment hasbeen
ing an arterial line is not necessary
to
successfully implemented.
measure blood pressure in cats and dogs
now， and
measurement of mean blood
A jo ds an m aa pnns ass
9.1.3 Treatment of retinal detachment in
posterior uveitis
interested veterinarian. Time is required to
ensure that several reproducible results from
Retinal detachment in a case such as a Vogt-
a calm animal are obtained. The normal
Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome in the dog is
measurements reported in the literature can
related
 to  inflammatory changes causing
be found in Bodey et al. 1994, Bodey and
effusion into the subretinal space. The breeds
Michell 1996. The differences
 in normal
found to be affected with VKH-syndrome
values between
different
breeds(
of
dog
include Akika, Siberian husky, Chow chow,
should be noted. A consistently high reading
Golden
1 retriever,
Samoyed,
Irish
setter,
in a dog or cat should alert one to the likeli-
Shetland
sheepdog.
Saint
Bernard,
Old
hood of a hypertensive detachment, although
English
1 sheepdog and Australian shepherd
such a finding in an animal with a detach-
(Martin 1999).
.The main presenting signs
ment does not necessarily prove a causative
include 
 sudden blindness, bullous retinal
relationship. Essential hypertension, although
detachments and secondary glaucoma.1
In
common in people, is not seen frequently in
such
cases
aggressive
anti-inflammatory
dogs and cats. Animals with a finding
of
treatment  with  systemic  prednisolone 
at
hypertension should be investigated for renal
1.5 mg/kg or with azathioprine at 2 mg/kg
disease and, in the case of cats, also for hyper-
s.i.d.reducing
to0.5 mg/kg.Forty-eight
thyroidism.
azathioprine requires a longer period to gain
efficacy.
9.1.2 Treatment of retinal detachment
Fungal disease can be a cause of retinal
secondary to hypertension
 detachment following granulomatous retini-
 In the absence of renal disease or hyperthy-
tis or choroiditis associated with systemic
roidism, hypertension may be treated with a
infection with organisms such as Crypotococ-
calcium channel blocker such as amlodipine
cus neoformans or Neosporum canis. Diagnosis
(Istin). For cats 0.625 mg s.i.d. (% of a 5 mg
can be by visualization of organisms on a
Retina and vitreous
83
vitreous tap or by serum antigen detection.
electroretinogram (ERG) in such cases might
Treatment is with agents such as itraconazole
seem academic as there is no treatment for
(Carlton et al. 1976, Jacobs et al. 1997).
SARD. The test is, however, essential to
differentiate from problems where the ERG
does show retinal activity and a central
9.1.4 Treatment of idiopathic retinal
cause for the blindness must be sought.
detachment
While the history of sudden visual loss
Retinal detachment which has occurred
might seem a clear one, investigation of a
without an obvious predisposing cause may
number of cases in our clinics and
l the
findings of several others show that what is
be rhegmatogenous or non-rhegmatogenous,
termed sudden visual loss can cover quite a
see section 1.9.1. The treatment of these two
forms differs in some important respects.
range of circumstances. Some animals are
Rhegmatogenous   detachments
are best
visual one minute and then blind a moment
or
two
afterwards, this state remaining
treated surgically with one of three techniques.
Scleral contour can be altered to bring the
permanently.
This
severe
 manifestation
A e p a n   t
remains however quite rare. The majority of
scleral buckling.  Alternatively re-attachment
dogs finally diagnosed as having SARD have
can be achieved by production of a chorioreti-
-n pou iq sssaoid Apiden e panans
nal scar though cryosurgery, diathermy
rapid deterioration in sight, perhaps over a
or
transpupillary
matter of a few days. If is the ERG which
photocoagulation.
Thirdly
 subretinal fluid can be drained trans-sclerally.
determines the diagnosis in these cases.
Recently
 complex vitreoretinal
 surgerical
No mechanism is understood for this
techniques used in human ophthalmology
sudden visual deprivation and no identical
condition is seen in man, or apparently in
have been performed in the dog. All of these
techniques clearly should be attempted only at
animals, other than the dog. A similar condi-
 a specialist referral clinic. The reader is thus
tion in man known as cancer-associated
directed to more comprehensive texts and
retinopathy occurs, particularly with small
cell carcinoma of the lung. These patients can
suffer with sudden loss of vision and there is
(Smith 1999, Vainisi and Packo 1995).
an associated finding of circulating antibodies
to recoverin, a molecule in the visual pathway
which has antigenic similarities to a molecule
found in small cell carcinoma cells. No associ-
9.2 Sudden acquired retinal
ation with a neoplastic
C process has been
degeneration
reported in dogs with SARD, but many have
hypothalamopituitary axis defects such as
The diagnosis of sudden acquired retinal
Cushing's syndrome or at least abnormal
degeneration (SARD) is based on a history
ACTH stimulation tests (Van der Woerdt et
of sudden unexplained visual deterioration
al. 1991, Mattson et al. 1992). Dogs presenting
and a complete absence of retinal response
with SARD should thus be evaluated for such
uo
electroretinography.]
Performing
an
endocrine abnormalities.
Chapter 10
ptic nerve
10.1 Optic neuritis@
Generally, however, the difference is that
optic neuritis produces visual dysfunction,
Optic neuritis generally presents as sudden
whereas
 papilloedema does not unless
blindness and as such the differential
resulting from an intracranial lesion which
diagnosis includes sudden acquired retinal
concurrently causes blindness. Optir nerve
degeneration and central blindness. Here the
head swelling is characterized by a domed
clinical feature allowing a diagnosis to be
enlargement of the optic papilla with a fuzzy
made is optic nerve swelling. The problem is
indistinct border to the disc and surface
that the appearance of optic nerve head
haemorrhages. It is the authors' experience
swelling is very difficult, if not impossible,
that optic neuritis is more likely to present
 to differentiate from the papilloedema which
with haemorrhage at the optic disc than is
can be seen with a space-occupying lesion
 papilloedema, although vessels of the optic
disc are engorged in both. To date, however,
we have no definitive evidence that this is
the case.
The big
g question centres around what
Emergency management of optic neuritis
 other neurological inflammatory foci may be
present. A full neurological examination is
1. Perform full ophthalmic examination
 2. Specifically evaluate pupillary light
mandatory and the use of computerized
reflexes and swinging light test
tomography (CT) or magnetic 
resonance
 3. Evaluate other neurological parameters
imaging (MRl) is invaluable to show if other
with suspicion of diseases such as GME
inflammatory lesions are occurring intra-
 4. Give systemic steroid at 1-2 mg/kg
cranially. Optic neuritis occurs in humans as
part of multiple sclerosis and in dogs as a
Prognostic indicators in optic neuritis
1. Duration of blindness an important
encephalitis (GME). It is thus essential that
prognostic sign, more than five days
other manifestations of GME be investigated.
poor
Whether other neurological
lesions are
 2. Degree of optic nerve swelling and
found or not, the treatment is systemic
haemorrhage potentially a poor sign
steroid at an anti-inflammatory dose and
 although can resolve on aggressive
this may need to continue for a significant
treatment
time if recurrence of blindness on cessation
3. Degree of optic disc pallor an important
sign as this suggests the onset of optic
of treatment is to be avoided. If the patient
   q   
atrophy
ogist for electroretinography, or referral for
Optic nerve
85
CT/MRl, the veterinary surgeon has the
associated with intracranial mass lesions.
vision of the animal to gain and nothing to
These may have effects on vision predomin-
lose by using anti inflammatory agents.
antly through two mechanisms. One is a rise
Retrobulbar optic neuritis has the same
in intracranial pressure while the other is
effects on vision without the fundus changes
direct effect on the visual pathways. The most
seen where the optic nerve head is involved;
common lesion producing an acute decrease
high resolution retrobulbar ultrasound can be
in vision is a tumour at the level of the optic
useful in defining it. The incidence of this
chiasm causing chiasmal compression. Most
condition is not clear, but apparently low.
often these are pituitary macro-adenomas
which may, or may not be associated with
hormonal  imbalances and such obvious
10.2 Central blindness?
changes as polydipsia and polyuria. All these
intracranial lesions require a neurological as
Blindness not associated with disease of the
well as an ophthalmological, and quite possi-
globe or the extracranial optic nerve can be
bly also an oncological referral.
Appendix A (compiled by T. Evans)
Diagnostic methods used in veterinary
ophthalmology
1. Performing the Schirmer tear
be applied. Small mammals have, under-
test
standably, lower tear production and in some
species such as the rabbit the little research
The pack is opened and the little snip is bent
carried out demonstrates substantial differ-
inside the plastic pack. With one hand the
ence in STT values between different breeds.
lower eyelid is everted and the snip is placed
like a hook over the eyelid margin. The eyelid
is returned to rest on the eye. Care must be
2. Measurement of the intra-ocular
taken to avoid the test strip falling out once
pressure (lOP) with Schiotz
placed, and if the animal is agitated the
tonometer
eyelids may be held slightly closed to prevent
loss of the strip.
While the optimal tonometer for small animal
After one minute the STT-strip is removed
use is considered to be the Tonopen applana-
and the reading noted. The STT-strip may
tion tonometer, the much cheaper Schiotz
have
a
colour
indicator
(Schering-
indentation tonometer can, with practice, be
 Plough/Eagle Vision). If no markings are on
used
 accurately
toassessintra-ocular
the STT-strip the length of wetted paper must
pressure.
 be measured againsf the STT-strip pack or a
An anaesthetic is instilled topically onto the
ruler.
cornea. The nose of the animal is held in an
With a little practice the clinician will be
upright position so the cornea is horizontal.
able to place two strips in each eye at the
Then the Schiotz tonometer is applied to the
same time and thus perform the Schirmer tear
cornea and the reading is noted. it is import-
test in both eyes simultaneously.
ant that the foot of the tonometer is on the
While a’number
of
freportshave
central cornea as the identation of the sclera
documented different ranges  of normal
will cause a faulty reading of the intra-ocular
values in various species, it can be said that a
pressure.
Schirmer tear test over 15 mm/min demon-
The Schiotz tonometer is an indentation
strates a normal tear production in the cat or
tonometer, where hardness of the eye is
dog In the dog a value under 5 mm/min is
 inversely proportional to the indentation (i.e.
indicative of keratoconjunctivitis sicca and a
a higher reading indicates a lower intra-
value between 5 and '10 mm/min suggests
ocular pressure and a low reading indicates
early   or  mild  changes in f
theaqueous
high intra-ocular pressure). The reading on
component of tears. In the cat some animals
the scale is correlated to the intra-ocular
with a healthy ocular surface have very low
pressure by using a table. Friedenwald's
readings but in general the same figures can
research in the 1950s resulted in a table for
88
Veterinary Ocuiar Emergencies
human values. (Friedenwald 1957). Since then
Friedenwald's Normogram 1955
papers have been published proposing the
use of different tabies for Schiotz tonometry
06
on the canine eye (Peiffer et al. 1977a, Peiffer
et al. 1977b), but the latest conclusions are
B
that the original Friedenwald table revised in
1955 (Friedenwald 1957) is the most accurate
and applicable to the dog (Miller and Pickett
5.5g
1992a). The Friedenwald Table from 1955 is
shown below for weights 5.5 g, 7.5 g and
10.0 g, and may also be used in the cat (Miller
and Pickett 1992b), although Schiotz tonome-
8
40
7.5g
try is more easily performed in the dog.
The optimal method of using the Schiotz
tonometer takes several measurements with
3
dlifferent weights which make possible a more
10.0g
accurate
estimation
of
the
intra-ocular
pressure. Separate readings with the 5.5 g.
7.5 g and 10 g weights can be used with the
10
graph depicted below using data from the
 original Friedenwald table. The best estimate
daa six A al si ainssd eno  jo
10
15
20
SchiotzTonometerScale
reading
Appendix B (compiled by T. Evans)
Ocular dictionary
Acuity: the ability to see the details of an object
Distichiasis: hairs growing from the meibomian
separately and unblurred
glands
Aphakic: without lens - as in aphakic crescent in
Ectopic cilia: hairs growing from areas that
lens luxation
should be devoid of hair. Lisually on the palpebral
Asteroid
hyalosis:
deposition
of
conjunctiza,and with origins in the meibomian
chlolesterol/calcium deposits in vitreous humour.
glands as these evolutionarily were hair follicles
See Synchysis scillitans
Ectropion: eversion of the eyelid margin. Most
Blepharospasm: excessive blinking, tonic
or
often seen in giantdog breeds such as Saint
clonic spasm of the m.orbicularis oculi. Associ-
Bernard, Chow Chow etc.Often the patients have
ated with irritation or pain of the eye, most often
Q chronic exposure conjunctivitis
corneal pain
Enophthalmos:recession of the eyeball into the
Buphthalmos: enlargement of the globe due to
orbit
chronic glaucoma
Entropion: thurning inward (inversion) of the
CAI (carbonic anhydrase inhibitor): drug that
eyelid.Most commonly thelower eyelid,and often
reduces aqueous humour formation in the treat-
associated with trichiasis
ment ofglaucoma
Enucleation: surgical remozal of the globe
Cataract: an opacity within the lens. Must be
ERG (electroretinography): an electrophysio-
differentiated from nuclear sclerosis (q.v.)
logical method ofmeasuring theretinal response
Chalazion:chronicinflammatory granuloma
to light
resulting from retention of secretion from a meibo-
Evisceration: surgical remozal of the contents of
miangland
the globe followed in most cases by implantation
Chemosis: oedema of the conjunctiva
of a silicone sphere as α prosthesis
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus): super-
Exenteration: surgical removal of the globe and
ficial predominantly lymphocytic inflammation of
extra-ocular structures.Indication for extentera-
the cornea seen as a distinct entity in dog breeds
tion is infection of the eye and orbital tissues
such as the German Shepherd and Collie
andjormetastatic neoplasia
Ciliary flush: a diffuse, rose-red coloration
Exophthalmos: an abnormal protrusion of the
surrounding the cornea as a result of congestion
eyeball from the orbit.Physiological in brachy-
of the branches of the anterior ciliary arteries,in
cephalic breeds
cyclitis,iridocyclitis or deep keratitis
Facet: depression in the cornea covered by corneal
Cornea: the transparent front part of the eye
epitheliumand seen after cornealulceration with
joining thesclera atthe limbus
loss of corneal stromal tissue
Descemetocoele: a forward building of Descemet's
Flare (aqueous flare, Tyndall's effect): the
membrane through aweakened or absent corneal
scattering of a thin beam of light as it transverses
stroma as a result of trauma or a deep corneal ulcer
the anterior chamber, caused by an increase in the
90
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
protein content of the aqueous humour.A sign of
Limbus: the junction of the cornea and sclera
uveitis. May be graded 1 to 4
Lymphocytic/plasmacytic conjunctivitis: con-
Follicular
conjunctivitis
(plasmoma):
junctivitis often seen with pannus in which
conjunctizitis often seen1
in conjunction with
lymphoid follicles give a nodular appearance or, in
pannus, in which lymphoid follicles givea nodular
less severecases,a generalizedredconjunctiva
appearance
Meibomianitis: inflammation of the meibomian
Fornix (of the conjunctiva): the part of the
glands resulting in qualitative tear film disease
conjunctiza that joins the palpebral and the bulbar
and increased evaporation oftears
coniunctiva,and which is unattached to the eyelid
Miosis: decrease in pupil size. Seen in uveitis and
or the eyeball. Much deeper in the dog than in the
in Horner's syndrome (q.0.)
human,it may be difficuit to obtain cells from the
Mydriasis: increase in pupil size. Often seen in
fornixfor exfoliative cytology
glaucoma or in nervous animals, particularly cats
Glaucoma::
increased
intra-ocular
pressure.
Nuclear sclerosis: the natural ageing of the lens
Often manifests with dilated pupil, negative PLR,
causes impactionjhardening of the nucleus of the
corneal
oedemaand
potentially
breaks
lens,as
the growth of lens fibres continues
descemets membranes (Haab's striae)
throughout life
Gonioscopy: optical examination of the irido-
Pannus: see Chronic superficial keratitis
corneal angie using a goniolens and a means of
Paracentesis: sampling aqueous humour from
magnification
the anterior chamberbymeans ofa hypodermic
Haab's striae: Breaks in descemets membrane
needle inserted at the limbus
causing aqueous humour
to impede into the
Photophobic: an abnormal intolerance or fear of
corneal stroma.The breaks are caused by globe
light. Often associated with uveitis
stretching. See Glaucoma
Plasmoma: see Follicular conjunctizitis
Hordeolum: external hordeolum is a purulent
PRA (progressive retinal atrophy): a congeni-
infectionofasebaceousglandalongtheeyelid
tal progressive blindness found in a number of
margin. Internal is an acute purulent infection of
canine breeds and the Abyssinian cat.Diagnosis
a meibomian gland
is by ERG (q.v.). Ophthaimoscopically retinal
Horner's syndrome: sympathetic denervation to
vesseis are attenuated’ and the retina is hyper-
the eye resuiting in miosis, ptosis and enophthal-
reflective
mos
Proptosis: protrusion of the globe beyond the
Hyphaema: accumulation of red blood celis/blood
eyelids (see Exophthalmos)
in the anterior chamber. Lisually associated with
Ptosis: drooping of the eyelid. Usually a sign of
coagulopathy, uveitis, feline hypertension or
neurological deficit as seen in Horner's syndrome
ocuiar trauma
or facial nerve paralysis. May aiso be seen in
Hypopyon: accumulation of pus in the anterior
enophthalmos
chamber. The pus usually sinks to the bottom
SARD (sudden acquired retinal degenera-
filling the lower angle of the anterior chamber
tion): blindness characterized by rapid onset and
Iridodonesis: trembling of the iris when the eye
flat electroretinogram-ofunknown cause
is moved (by examiner).Associated with lens
Staphyloma: a bulging or protrusion of the
luxation
cornea or the sclera usually containing adherent
Keratic precipitates (KPs): cellular deposits on
uveal tissue
the posterior surface of the cornea, usually in
Synchysis scillitans: liquefaction of the vitreous,
association withiritis or iridocyclitis
to be differentiated from asteroid hyalosis.If the
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS): decreased
head of the animal is shaken synchysis scillitans
quantitative tear production resuiting in patho-
will show an appearance of bright dots falling
logical changes of the cornea and conjunctiza
Lagophthalmos: the eyelids do not meet when
ties arefixed within the corpus vitreous and only
supposed to be closed. Test by applying touch to
vibrate after a shaking
lateral canthus. If lagophthaimos is present the
Synnechae: anterior, posterior. Adhesion of the
central cornea may be exposed during sleep, thus
iris to the cornea or to the capsule of the
dehydrating. Often a central corneal uicer is
crystalline lens
concurrentwithlagophthalmos
Tarsorraphy: tying the eyelid margins together
Lens-induced uveitis (LIU): vveitis induced by
with sutures, mostly applying horizontal mattress
leakage of lensprotein
sutures or a horizontal Lembert suture pattern
AppendixB91
Trichiasis: inversion of eyelashes thus touching
VKH (Vogt-Koyonagi-Harada syndrome): an
the eyeball and causing irritaion，most often
inherited auto-immune disease,where melanin is
associated with normal hair in an abnormal
thought to be the antigen.It is phagocytosed,
position,such as in entropion
resuiting in posterior uveitis, poliuosis and
Uvea: iris, ciliary body and choroid. Anterior
vitiligo with depigmentation of peri-ocular and
wvea: iris and ciliary body.Posterior vvea:choroid
other structures
Appendix C (compiled by T. Evans)
International ocular d
Trade
Generic
Formulation
Company
Action
Acular
Ketorolac
sdop %'0
Allergan
NSAID
AK-CONTM
Naphazoline HCI
0.1% drops
Akorn
Anti-H
AK-NaCI
Sodium Chloride
5%ointment
Akorn
Osmotic
AK-TAINE?
Proparacaine HCI
0.5%
Akorn
Anaesthetic
AK-TROL
Dexamethasone 0.1%,
Akorn
Steroid A-pos/neg
Neomycin sulphate,
Polymixin B
Albalon 0.1%
Naphazoline HCI
0.1% drops
Allergan
Anti-H
Alcaine
Proparacaine HCI
0.5% drops
Alcon
Anaesthetic
Alomide
Lodoxamide
0.1% drops
Alcon
 Anti-H
Amethocaine
Amethocaine
0.5% drops
generic
Anaesthetic
Atropine
Atropine
0.5-1% drops
generic
Antimuscarinic
Aureomycin
Chlortetracycline
1%ointment
Lederle
A-pos/neg Chla
Azopt
Brinzolamide
1%drops
Alcon
CAI
Bacitracin
Bacitracin
500-1000 units/ml
Upjohn
A-pos (Staph)
Betnesol
Betamethasone
0.1% drops
Medeva
Steroid
Betnesol-N
Betamethasone and
Medeva
Steroid + A
neomycin
Cepravin
Cephalonium
8%ointment
Schering-Plough
A-pos/neg
Animal Health
Chloromycetin
Chloramphenicol
1%ointment
Goldshield
A-pos/neg
Ciloxan
Ciprofloxacin
0.3% drops
Alcon
A-pos/neg
Ciproxin
Ciprofloxacin
2mg/ml 50 ml bottle
Bayfarm
A-pos/neg
Daranide
Dichlorphenamide
50 mg tabs
Merck&Co
CAI
Diamox
Acetazolamide
125/250/500 mg tabs
Wyeth Lederle
CAI
Exocin
Ofloxacin
0.3% drops
Allergan
A-pos/neg
Finadyne
Flunixine meglumine
Inject/granules
Schering-Plough
NSAID
Animal Health
Fluorescein
Fluorescein
1 or 2% minim drops
Chauvin
Dye
FML
Fluorometholone
0.1% drops
Allergan
Steroid
Fucithalmic Vet
Fusidic acid
1%ointment
LEO
A-pos (Staph)
Garamycin
Gentamicin
3%
Schering
A-neg
Genticin
Gentamicin
0.3%
Roche
A-neg
Glauctabs
Methazolamide
tabs
Akorn
CAI
Glaupax
Acetazolamide
125/250 mg tabs
Orion Pharma
CAI
Herplex
Idoxuridine
0.1% drops
Allergan
V-H
Humorsol
Demecarium bromide
0.25% drops
Merck & Co
Parasympatho-
mimetics
Intron-A
Inte rferon alpha-2b
5x10E6 IU/ml
Schering-Plough
V-H
Appendix C
26
Trade
Generic
Formulation
Company
Action
Istin
Amlodipine
5 mg, 10 mg tab
Pfizer
Ca-channel
blocker
Ketofen
Ketoprofen
5 mg tabs, inj
Fort Dodge
NSAID
Animal Health
Lacri-lube
White petrolatum,
Allergan
Artificial
mineral oil, lanolin
tears/ocular
derivatives
lubricant
Lissamine green
Lissamine green
Dry powder
Sigma-Aldrich
Dye
Livosten
Levocabastine
0.05% drops
Ciba-vision
Antihistamine
Lysine
L-lysine
250 mg tabs
generic
V-H
Mannitol
Mannitol
Fluid for i.v.
generic
Osmotic
Maxidex
Dexamethasone
Drops
Alcon
Ste roid
Maxitrol
Dexamethasone 0.1%,
Drops
Alcon
Steroid A-pos/neg
Neomycin Sulphate,
Polymixin B Sulphate
Methazol-amide USP
Methazolamide
25 mg and 50 mg
Lederle
CAI
Muro-128
 Sodium chloride
5%ointment
Bauch & Lomb
Osmotic
Mydriacyl
Tropicamide
0.5%
Alcon
Antimuscarinic
Nebcin (a)
Tobramycin
40 mg/ml inj
Lilly
A-neg
Neptazane
Methazolamide
Tabs
Stortz Ophthalmics CAl
Norvasc
Amlodipine
2.5mg.5mg.
Pfizer
Ca-channel
10 mg tabs
blocker
Ocufen
Flubiprofen
0.03% drops
Allergan
NSAID
Ophthaine
Proparacaine HCI
0.5% drops
Bristol-Myers
Anaesthetic
Optimmune
Cyclosporine
0.2% ointment
Schering-Plough
T-cell inhib
Oralcon
Dichlorphenamide
50 mg tab
Alcon
CAI
Phenylephrine
Phenylephrine
10%drops
generic
Sympathomi-
metic
Pilocarpine
Pilocarpine
0.5-3% drops
generic
Miotic
Pred forte
Prednisolone acetate
1%drops
Allergan
Steroid
Rimadyl
Carprofen
Tab/inj
Pfizer
NSAID
Rose Bengal
Rose Bengal
1% minim vials
Chauvin
Dye
Sandimune
Cyclosporine
50 mg/ml
Novartis
T-cell inhibitor
1ml/5 ml amps
Stroxil
Idoxuridine
0.1% drops
Smith Kline &
V-H
French
Tobrex
Tobramycin
0.3% drops
Alcon
A-neg
Dorzolamide
2%drops
MSD
CAI
Vira A
Vidarabine
3%ointment
Parke Davis
V-H
Viroptic
Trifluridine
1%drops
Borroughs
V-H
Wellcome
Vistamethasone
Betamethasone
0.1% drops
Martindale
Steroid
Voltarol/Voltaren
Diclofenac
0.1% drops
Ciba-Vision
NSAID
Xalatan
Latanoprost
Iw/6r 09
Pharmacia&
Prostaglandin
Upjohn
analogue
Zinacef
Cefuroxime
250/750 mg amp
Glaxo Wellcome
A-p0s
Zovirax
Acyclovir
3% eye ointment
Glaxo-Wellcome
V-H
200 mg, 400 mg and
800 mg tabs
Abbreviations
Varieties of the same drug sold under different nanmies are included in
NSAID: Non steroid anti-inflamimatory drug
the above table. Most of these (generic) drugs are fromi Akorn, as
Amp: ampoules
this is the largest generic eye drug company in the Us. In other parts
A: antibiotic
of the world miost of the products miay be miade up in local
A-neg: antibiotic for Gram-negative infection
pharmacies or hospital pharmacies if the original product is not used.
A-pos: antibiotic for Gram-positive infection
CAl: carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
Chla: Chlamydia
Dye: ocular diagnostic dye
Staph: staphylococcus
jo uogeinwgs fupnou) sna-saday asuiee eajaue :H-A
immune response)
94
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
General instructions for eye medication
A good fortified topical antibiotic solution for
Only apply one drop to each eye. Always
use in the horse may be made as follows:
wait a minimum of five minutes between
topical applications in the same eye, or reflex
Nebcina (tobramycin) 4 vials of 40 mg in 1 ml:
tearing may wash out the first application. If
160 mg/4 ml
Zinacef (cefuroxime) 250 mg disolved in 3 ml
possible hold the head of the animal flexed
sterile water: 250 mg/3 ml
back for up to one minute after application so
Serum (from centrifuge-spun blood taken from
that more drug is absorbed by ocular tissues
the horse) 5 ml
This will constitute a solution of
before  draining  through the nasolacrimal
1.3% tobramycin + 2.1% cefuroxime +
duct (to be absorbed systemically).
collagenase-inhibitors from the serum.
If the serum is spun in an EDTA-tube, EDTA's
Dosages for intra-vitral injection of antibi-
anti-collagenase action will be included in the
solution.
otics in treatment of enophthalmitis. If
This solution should be refrigerated and be
performing  intra-vitral  i
injections it is of
discarded after 48 hrs and a new batch
utmost importance not to damage the lens as
made up.
this will lead to lens-induced inflammation
Drugs that are difficult to obtain in
your
country
may
be
supplied
by
IDIS
(www.idis.co.uk)
Drug
Dosage (up to)
Species
Ciprofloxacin
100-250 μgram
Rabbit
Gentamicin
100 μgram
Cefazolin
2.25mg
Ceftriaxone
5mg
Rabbit
Vancomycin
1mg
95
Name
i.d.
species
age/sex
history
adnexa
cornea
lens /anterior chamber
retina
(compiled by T. Evans)
ACVO (1996). Ocular disorders presumed to be
Dolowy, W.C. (1987). A safe, simple treat-
inherited in purebred dogs, Genetics Commit-
ment for follicular conjunctivitis. Vet Med,
tee of the American College of Veterinary
790-792.
Ophthalmologists.
Eisner, G.
(1990). Eye Surgery. Springer-
Barnett, A. (1990). Color atlas of veterinary
Verlag, New York.
ophthalmology.Wolfe.
Feenstra, R.P.G. and Tseng, S.C.G. (1992).
Barnett, K.C., Crispin, S.M., Matthews, A. and
What is actually stained by Rose Bengal?
Lavach, D. (1995). Color atlas and text of
Arch Ophthalmol, 110, 984-993.
equine ophthalmology.Mosby-Wolfe.
Fischer,
C.A.
(1995).
Ocular
Feline
Bodey, A.R. and
Michell,
A.R.
(1996)
 Herpesvirus. A ten step approach to client
 Epidemiological study of blood pressure in
communications. Veterinary Forum, 48-50.
domestic dogs. J Small Anim Pract, 37,
Friedenwald, JS. (1957). Tonometer calibra-
116-125.
tion. Trans Am Acad Ophthal Otol, 61,
Bodey, A.R., Young, L.E., Barthram, D.H. et
108-123.
al."(1994). A comparison of direct and
Frihauf, B.,
 Ohnesorge, B., Deegen E. and
indirect (oscillometric) measurements
of
 Boeve, M. (1998). Surgical management of
arterial blood pressure in anaesthetised
equine recurrent uveitis with single port
dogs, using tail and limb cuffs. Res Vet Sci,
pars plana vitrectomy, Vet Ophthalmol, 2,
57,265-269.
137-152.
Brooks, D.E., Andrew, S.E., Biros, D.J. et al.
Gaiddon, K., Kaswan, R.L., Hirsh, S.G. (1996)
(2000). Ulcerative Keratitis caused by beta-
Radial keratotomy and third eyelid flap:
hemolytic Streptococcus equi in 11 horses.
 Results of a novel approach to treatment of
Veterinary Ophthalmology 3, 121-126.
nonprogressive stromal ulcers and defects
Chambers, E.D. and Slatter, D.H. (1984).
among
dogs and cats. Veterinary
and
Cryotherapy (NO) of canine distichiasis
Comparative Ophthalmology 6, 218-219.
and
1trichiasis:an
experimental
 and
Gelatt, K.N. (1978). Veterinary ophthaimic
clinical report. J Small "Anim Pract, 25,
pharmacology and therapeutics.VM Publish-
647-659.
ing Inc, Bonner Springs, Kansas.
Chauvkin, M.J., Lappin, M.R., Powell, C.C. et
Gelatt, K.N. (1979). A modified subpalpebral
al.
(1994)
)Toxoplasma
gondii
ispecific
system for the horse. J Eq Med Surg. 3,
antibodies in serum and aqueous humour
141-143.
of cats with experimental toxoplasmosis.
Gelatt, K.N. (1999). Veterinary ophthalmology.
Am J Vet Res 55, 1244-1249.
 3rd edn. Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins.
Crispin, S.M. and Barnett, K.C. (1997). Feline
Gerding, P.A. and Kakoma, I. (1990). Micro-
ophthalmology. Saunders.
biology
y of the canine and feline eye.
86
Veterinary Ocular Emergencies
Veterinary Clinics of North
1 America.
Nasisse, M.P., Guy, J.S., Stevens, JB. et al.
I Small Anim Pract, 20, no. 3, May. Saunders.
(1993). Clinical and laboratory findings in
Grant, R.L. and Acosta, D. (1994). Compara-
chronic conjunctivitis in cats: 91 cases
tive toxicity of tetracaine, proparacaine and
(1983-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc, 203(6),
cocaine evaluated with primary cultures of
834-837.
rabbit corneal epitheliaf cells. Exp Eye Res,
Neer, T.M.
(1984). Horner's syndrome:
58(4), 469-478.
anatomy,
diagnosis
 and
causes.
Helper, L.C. and Magrane, W.G. (1970).
Compendium of Continuing Education, 6 (6),
Ectopic cilia of the canine eyelid. J Small
740-746.
Anim Pract, 11, 185-189.
Olivero, D.K., Riis, R.C., Dutton, R.G. et al.
Henik, R.A., Snyder, P.S.
.and Volk, L.M.
(1991). Feline lens displacement. A retro-
(1997). Treatment of systemic hypertension
spective analysis of 345 cases. Prog Vet
in cats with amlodipine besylate. J Am
Comp Ophthal, 1, 239-244.
Anim Hosp Assoc 33(3), 226-234.
Peiffer, R.L.,
Gelatt, K.N. and Gwin, R.M.
Kleinfeld, J. and Ellis, P.P. (1966). Effects of
(1977a). Schiotz calibration table for the
topical anesthetics on growth of microor-
canine eye. Canine Practice, 49-51.
ganisms. Arch Ophthalmol, 76, 712-715.
Peiffer, R.L., Gelatt, K.N., Jessen, C.R. et al.
Lavach, J.D. (1990). Large animal ophthaimol-
(1977b). Calibration of the Schiotz tonome-
ogy. Mosby.
ter for the normal canine eye. J Am Vet Med
Lavach, JD., Thrall, M.A., Benjamin, M.M.
Assoc, 38(110),1881-1889.
and Severin, G.A. (1977). Cytology of the
Prince, JH., Diesem, C.D., Eglitis, I and
normal and inflamed conjunctiva in dogs
Ruskell, G.L. (1960). Anatomy and histology
and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 170(7),
of
the eye and orbit in domestic animais.
722-727.
Charles C Thomas.
Lawson, D.D. (1973). Canine distichiasis. J
Quinn, A. (200o). Corneal diseases in felines:
Small Anim Pract, 14, 469-478.
treatments and comments. Proc ASVO, April
Martin, C.L. (1999). Ocular manifestations of
2000, p. 17. Toronto.
systemic disease. The dog. In: Gelatt, K.N.
Ramsey, D.T. and Fox, D.B. (1997). Surgery of
(ed.). Veterinary ophthalmology, 1401-1448.
the orbit. In: Nasisse, M.P. (ed.). Surgical
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins.
management of ocular disease. Veterinary
Mattson, A., Roberts, S.M. and Isherwood,
Clinics of North America. 27(5), 1215-1264.
J.M.E. (1992). Clinical features suggesting
Ramsey, D.T., Hamor, R.E. and Gerding, P.A.
hyperadrenocorticism
associated
with
(1995). Clinical and histological manifesta-
sudden
acquired
retinal
 degeneration
tions of extraocular polymyositis of dogs.
syndrome in a dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc,
Trans Am Coll Vet Ophthalmol, 26, 37.
28, 199-202.
Schmidt,
G.M.
(1977).
 Problem oriented
Miller, P.E. and Pickett, J.P. (1992a). Compar-
ophthalmology part 4: Corneal ulceration.
ison of the human and canine Schiotz
Mod Vet Pract, 25-28.
tonometry conversion tables in clinically
Severin, G.A. and Thrall, M.A. (1981). Orular
normal dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 201(7),
exfoliative
cytology. Proc 5th Kan Kal,
1021-1025.
11-15.
Miller, P.E. and Pickett, JI.P. (1992b). Compar-
 Smith, P.J. (1999). Surgery of the canine poste-
ison of the human and canine Schiotz
rior segment. In Veterinary Ophthalmology.
tonometry conversion tables in clinically
ed by Gelatt, K.N., Lippencott, Williams
normal cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 201(1),
and Wilkins, London 935-980.
1017-1020.
Speiss, B.M., Wallin-Haakanson, N. (1999).
Miller, W.W. and Albert, R.A. (1988). Canine
Diseases of the Canine Orbit. In Veterinary
entropion. Compendium of Continuing Educa-
Ophthalmology, ed by Gelatt, K.N., Lippen-
tion. 10(4), 431-438.
cott,
Williams and Wilkins, London,
Nasisse, M.P., Guy, JS. and Davidson, M.G.
511-534.
(1989). In vitro susceptibility
 of feline
Spreull,
J.S.A.(1966).
. Symposium: The
herpesvirus-l to vidarabine, idoxyuridine,
 Corneal Ulcer I. Anatomy and physiology
trifluridine,
acyclovir
or
bromovinyl-
of the cornea of the dog. J Small Anim Pract,
deoxyuridine. Am J Vet Res, 50, 158-160.
7,253-255.
Bibliography
66
Ugomori, S., Hayasaka, S. and Setogawa, T.
among_ purebred dogs. Vet Med, 90,
(1991). Polymorphonuclear leukocytes and
574-592.
bacterial growth of the normal and mildly
Wilkie, D.A and Whittaker, C. (1997). Surgery
inflamed conjunctiva. Ophthaimic Res, 23,
of the cornea. Vet Clin North Am: Small
40-44.
Anim Pract, 27(5), 1067-1107
Vainisi, S.J., Packo, K.H. (1995). Management
Williams, D.L. (1994). Feline iridal disease
of giant retinal tears in dogs. Journal of the
local and systemic implications. Feline
American Veterinary Medical Association 15,
Practice,22,22-30.
491-495.
Wills, M., Bounous, D.1. and Hirsch, S. (1997).
Van der Woerdt,
A.,
Nasisse,
M.P. and
 Conjunctival brush cytology: evaluation of
Davidson, M.G. (1991). Sudden acquired
a new cytological collection technique in
retinal degeneration in the dog: Clinical
dogs  and 
 cats with a comparison
to
 and laboratory findings in 36 cases. Prog
conjunctival scraping. Vet Comp Ophthaimol,
Vet Comp Ophthal, 1(1), 1-18.
7: 74-81.
Walde,1. (1990).Atlas of opthlmology
Wolfley, D. (1987). Excision of individual
and cats. B.C Decker Inc.
follicles for the management of congenital
Whitley, R.D., McLaughlin, S.A. and Gilger,
distichiasis and localized trichiasis. I Pediatr
B.C. (1995). Update
oneye disorders
Ophthalmol Strabismus, 24(1), 22-26.
Abscess:
Atropine, 8, 56, 67, 68, 95
retrobulbar, 29
Azathioprine, 31, 68, 82
stromal, 6
Acetazolamide, 73, 95
Bacitracin, 95
Acetylcysteine, 53
Beta agonists, 74
Arid burns, 53
Betamethasone, 95, 96
Acuity, 92
Blepharospasm, 92
Acyclovir, 28, 96
Blindness:
Adrenaline, 36, 58, 60
central, 20, 85
Alkaline burns, 53
glaucoma and, 71
Alpha agonists, 73
 optic neuritis, 84
Amethocaine, 8, 67, 95
retinal detachment and, 79
Amlodipine, 82, 96
sudden acquired retinal degeneration
Anaemia, 22
(SARD), 83
Analgesia, 7-8
sudden blindness, 19-20
corneal emergencies, 63
Bovine virus diarrhoea (BVD), 21
iritis, 68
Brinzolamide, 95
Antibiotic treatment, 6, 97
Bullous keratopathy, 47
cellulitis, 30
Buphthalmos, 92
conjunctivitis, 26-7
Butorphenol, 8
corneal emergencies, 64
corneoscleral laceration, 54
Calor, 65
foreign body, 60
Canine adenoviral hepatitis, 22
ulceration, 43, 51-3
Canine distemper, 21, 22
dacryocystitis, 28
Carbachol, 58
drug delivery, 9
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (CAl), 73,
lid laceration, 24
92
 penetrating globe injury, 36
Carprofen, 8, 96
resistance, 6, 53
Cataract, 18, 56, 81, 92
Antiviral treatment, conjunctivitis, 27, 28
diabetic, 18, 20, 75, 77
Apraclonidine, 73
Cats:
Aqueous humour:
antibiotic treatment, 6
Flare, 18
conjunctivitis, 27
lipid laden, 18, 20
feline dysautonomia, 22
Asteroid hyalosis, 81, 92
feline herpes virus infection, 21, 22, 27-8, 40
102
index
Cats: (Contd)
 near-penetrating/penetrating ulcers and
corneal ulceration and, 43
descemetocoeles, 48-51
feline infectious peritonitis, 21
partial thickness stromal ulceration, 47-8
iris melanoma, 68
 recurrent or persistent non-healing
lens luxation, 77
superficial ulcer, 44-7
retinal detachment, 81, 82
simple healing superficial ulcer, 44
See also Specific conditions
ulceration secondary to bullous
Cefuroxime, 96
keratopathy, 47
Cellular infiltration:
melting ulcer, 51-3
aqueous humour, 18
ophthalmic stains, 37-40
cornea, 17
pain and, 16, 37
Cellulitis, 6
prognostic indicators, 37
orbital, 29-30
ulcer depth, 40
Central blindness, 20, 85
ulcer healing, 42
Cephalonium, 95
Corneoscleral Iaceration, 35, 54-60
Cephalosporin, 30
involvement of other ocular structures, 56
Chalazion, 92
penetrating corneal foreign body, 62-3
Chemical injury, 53
prognostic indicators, 54
Chemosis, 92
repair, 56-60
Chlamydiosis, 21, 22
corneal laceration complicated by iris
Chloramphenicol, 6, 56, 95
inclusion, 57-60
Chlortetracycline, 6, 44, 95
simple non-penetrating corneal laceration,
Ciliary flush, 92
56
Ciprofloxacin, 53, 95
simple penetrating corneal laceration, 56-7
Clindamycin, 67
Cyclosporine, 43, 96
Collie eye anomaly, 19, 79-81, 82
Cytology brushes, 5
Conjunctiva:
assessment, 1
Dacryocystitis, 28
foreign body, 28
Demecarium bromide, 73, 95
fornix, 93
Descemetocoele, 37, 40, 42, 92
Conjunctivitis, 6, 25-8
management, 48-51
follicular, 93
Descemet's fractures, 76, 77
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 28-9
Dexamethasone, 35, 95, 96
lymphocytic/plasmacytic, 93
Diabetes mellitus, 21, 22
redness and, i2-14
Diabetic cataract, 18, 20, 75, 77
Cornea, 37-63, 92
Dichlorphenamide, 73, 95, 96
cellular infiltration, 18
Diclofenac, 47, 62, 96
erosion, 37,40,42
Diff Quik (Giesma) stain, 6, 63
foreign body, 60-6
Dipivalyl epinephrine, 74
management of non-perforating foreign
Dirofilariasis, 22
body, 60
Distichiasis, 12, 16, 25, 92
management of penetrating foreign body
corneal ulceration and, 42
62-3
treatment, 16
recognition of, 60
Dogs:
laceration, See Corneoscleral laceration
antibiotic treatment, 6
lipid deposition, 17
canine adenoviral hepatitis, 22
oedema, 17-18, 42, 60, 62
canine distemper, 21, 22
scar tissue, 17, 18
corneal ulceration, 44-5
Corneal glue, 48
glaucoma, 70-3
Corneal ulceration, 29, 37-53
globe prolapse, 33
causes of, 42-3
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 28
management, 44-53
lens luxation, 75-8
chemical injury ulcers, 53
retinal detachment, 79-81, 82
melting ulcers, 51-3
See also Specific conditions
index
103
Dorzolamide, 73, 96
 management of non-perforating foreign
Drug delivery systems, 9-11
body, 60
nasolacrimal lavage, 9-10
 management of penetrating foreign body,
spray medication, 11
62-3
subconjunctival delivery, 9
recognition of, 60
 transpalpebral delivery, 10-11
 pain and, 16
Dry eye, 28-9
Fundoscopy, 66, 81
corneal ulceration and, 43
Fusidic acid, 6, 44, 95
Ectopic cilia, 12, 17, 25, 92
Gaiddon radial keratotomy, 48, 51
 corneal ulceration and, 42
Gentamicin, 52, 53, 95
treatment, 17
resistance, 6, 53
Ectropion, 92
Glaucoma,2,16,66, 70-4,77,93
EDTA,51-53
clinical signs, 71
Electroretinography (ERG), 83, 92
diagnostic tests, 71
Enophthalmos, 92
pain and, 15-16
Entropion, 12, 25,92
prognostic indicators, 72
corneal ulceration and, 42
redness and, 13, 14
Enucleation, 92
sudden blindness and, 20
Epinephrine, 74
treatment, 72
Episcleritis, 15
 long-term reduction of intra-ocular
Equine herpes virus, 21, 43
pressure, 72-4
Equine viral arteritis, 21
neuroprotection, 74
Equipment, 4-5
systemic hypotensive treatment, 72
Erlichiosis, 21
Globe, 32-6
Evisceration, 92
blunt trauma, 32-3
Examination, See Ocular examination
 penetrating injury, 35-6
Exenteration, 92
prolapse, 33-5
Exophthalmos,29-31,92
Glue, 49
orbital cellulitis, 29-30
Glycerol, 72
orbital space occupying lesions, 30-1
Goniolens, 4
retrobulbar infections, 29-30
Gonioscopy, 93
Exotic species, 11
Gram's stain, 6, 63
exophthalmos, 30
Granulomatous meningio-encephalitis
lens-induced uveitis, 78
(GME), 20, 21, 84
Eyelid laceration, 23-5, 56
Grid keratotomy, 46, 47
Facet, 92
Haab's striae, 14, 77, 93
 Feline dysautonomia, 22
Harada's syndrome, 79
Feline herpes virus infection, 21, 22, 27-8, 40
Herpes virus:
corneal ulceration and, 43
equine, 21, 43
 Feline infectious peritonitis, 21
feline, 21, 22, 27-8, 43
Fibrin, 18, 56, 65
 corneal ulceration and, 43
Flare, 65,92-3
Hordeolum, 93
Flubiprofen, 96
Horner's syndrome, 14, 93
Flunixine meglumine, 8, 95
Horses, 8-11
Fluorescein dye, 5, 54, 95
drug delivery systems, 9-11
corneal ulceration and, 37-40
nasolacrimal lavage, 9-10
Fluorometholone, 95
spray medication, 11
Flurbiprofen, 47, 62
subconjunctival delivery, 9
Follicular conjunctivitis, 93
transpalpebral delivery, 10-11
Foreign bodies, 28
equine herpes virus, 21, 43
conjunctival, 28
equine viral arteritis, 21
corneal, 60-3
melting ulcer, 51-3
104
index
Horses, (Contd)
Keratoconjunctivitis (KCS), 93
 orular examination, 8-9
corneal ulceration and, 43
ulcerative keratitis, 9
feline, 27
uveitis, 9, 66-7
infectious bovine (IBK), 9
See also Specific conditions
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 28-9, 43
Hyperadrenocorticism, 21, 22
Keratotomy, 46, 47, 51
Hyperlipidaemia, 22
Ketoprofen, 8, 96
Hypertension, 22
Ketorolac, 62, 95
retinal detachment and, 20, 79, 81, 82
Kimura spatula, 5
treatment, 82
Hyperthyroidism, 21, 79, 81
L-lysine treatment, 27, 96
Hyperviscosity syndrome, 22
Laceration, See Corneoscleral laceration;
Hyphaema, 12, 93
Eyelid laceration
emergency management, 57, 66
Lactophenol cotton blue stain, 6, 63
prognostic indicators, 66
Lagophthalmos, 93
Hypocalcaemia, 22
Large animals, ocular examination, 8-9
Hypopyon, 93
See also Horses; Ruminants
Hypothyroidism, 22
Latanoprost, 96
Leishmaniasis, 22
Idoxuridine, 27, 95, 96
Lens, 75-8
Infections, 18, 22, 27, 62, 67
 capsule rupture and phakoanaphylactic
 corneal ulceration and, 43
uveitis, 77-8
retrobulbar, 29-30
 damage by corneoscleral laceration, 56,
See also Specific infections
60
 Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
lens-induced uveitis (LIU), 93
(IBK), 9
luxation, 75-7, 81
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis (IBR), 21
See also Cataract
Inflammation, iritis, 64-6
Lentectomy, 60
treatment, 67
Leptospirosis, 21
Interferon treatment, 95
Levocabastine, 96
conjunctivitis, 27
Lid laceration, 23-5, 54
 Intra-ocular pressure (IOP), 70-1
Lipid deposition:
long-term reduction, 72-3
aqueous humour, 18, 20
measurement, 71, 90-1
cornea, 17
uveitis, 66
Lissamine green, 96
See also Glaucoma; Tonometer
Listeriosis, 21
Iridodonesis, 75, 93
Liver disease, 21
Iris, 64-9
Local anaesthetic, 5
benign pigmentary naevus, 69
Lodoxamide, 95
changes in appearance, 68
Luxation, lens, 75-7, 81
corneoscleral faceration and, 56-60
Lymphocytic conjunctivitis, 93
melanoma, 68
Lymphosarcoma, 21, 22
prolapse, 35
Lysozomal storage diseases, 22
Iritis, 64-8
clinical signs, 64-6
Mannitol, 35, 72, 73, 96
diagnostic tests, 66-7
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), 53
treatment, 67
Meibomian glands, 16
Itraconazole, 82
Meibomianitis, 93
Melanoma, iris, 68
Keratectomy, 47, 53
Melting ulcer, 51-3
Keratic precipitates (KCs), 93
diagnosis, 51
Keratitis, 12
treatment, 51
 chronic superficial, 92
Methadone, 8
ulcerative, 9
Methazolamide, 72-3, 95, 96
index
105
Miosis, 60, 63, 66,93
Retina:
reduction, 67
dysplasia, 19, 79, 82
Mucocoeles, 31
haemorrhage, 19, 81
Mydriasis, 93
progressive atrophy (PRA), 93
Myositis, extra-ocular, 31
sudden acquired retinal degeneration
(SARD),19, 20,83,93
Naphazoline HCl, 95
Retinal detachment, 19, 20, 66, 79-83
Nasolacrimal lavage, 9-10
examination, 81-2
Neomycin sulphate, 95, 96
prognostic indicators, 79
New Forest Eye, 9
treatment, 82-3
Nuclear sclerosis, 93
idiopathic retinal detachment, 83
in posterior uveitis, 82
Ocular examination, 1-2
secondary to hypertension, 82
large animals, 8-9
Retrobulbar infections,
,29-30
recording observations, 2-4
Rose bengal dye, 5, 96
Ocular infections, 6-7
corneal ulceration and, 40
Oedema:
Ruminants, 8
corneal, 17-18,42, 60, 62
ocular examination, 8-9
stromal, 40-2,53, 54
subconjunctival drug delivery, 9
Ofloxacin, 53, 95
Optic nerve tumours, 19, 31
Salivary retention cysts, 31
Optic neuritis, 19, 84-5
Scar tissue, 18
sudden blindness and, 20
Schiotz tonometer, 2, 71, 90-1
Orbital cellulitis, 29-30
See also Intra-ocular pressure
 Orbital space occupying lesions, 30-1
Schirmer tear test, 2, 5, 28, 29, 39, 90
Scleral laceration, See Corneoscleral
Painful eye, 15-17
laceration
Pannus, i2, 93
Scleritis, 15
Panophthalmitis, 35
Seidel manoeuvre, 54, 62
Papilloedema, 84
Sodium chloride, 95, 96
Paracentesis, 93
Spray medication, 11
Phacoanaphylactic reaction, 56, 60, 77-8
Staphyloma, 54, 56,93
Phenylephrine, 67, 96
Steroid treatment:
 Photophobia, 93
conjunctivitis, 26-7
Pilocarpine, 73, 96
corneal ulceration, 46
Pituitary tumours, 19, 85
drug delivery, 9
Plasmacytic conjunctivitis, 93
extra-orular myositis, 31
Plasmoma, 12,93
Strabismus, 35
Polymixin B, 95
Stromal abscess, 6
Prednisolone, 67, 82, 96
Stromal oedema, 40-2, 54
Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA), 93
Subconjunctival drug delivery, 9
Prolapse:
Subconjunctival haemorrhage, 12
globe, 33-5
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration
iris, 35, 59
(SARD), 19, 20, 83, 93
 Proparacaine, 10, 95, 96
Sudden blindness, 18-20
Proptosis, 93
Synchysis scintillans, 81, 93-4
Proxymetacaine, 8, 10, 67
Synechiae, 67, 77,94
Ptosis, 93
prevention, 67
Systemic diseases, 20-2
Quinolones, 51, 53, 54
Tarsorraphy, 94
Recording observations at examination, 2-4
Taurine deficiency, 21
Red eye, 12-14
Tear deficiency, 28-9
Renal failure, 21, 79
corneal ulceration and, 43
106
Index
Tear test, 2, 5,28, 29, 39, 90
Tumours:
Tetracyclines, 6, 27
iris melanoma, 68
Thermal keratoplasty, 47
lymphosarcoma, 21, 22
Thiamine deficiency, 21
optic nerve,19, 31
Thromborytopaenia, 22
pituitary, 19, 85
Timolol, 74
Tobramycin, 6, 53, 96
Ulceration, corneal, See Corneal ulceration
Tonometer, 2, 4, 70-1, 90-1
 Ulcerative keratitis, equine, 9
 See also Intra-ocular pressure
Uveitis, 65, 66, 67, 69
Toxocariasis, 22
corneal foreign body and, 60, 61
Toxoplasmosis, 21, 22
equine,9,67
 Transpalpebral drug delivery, 10-11
lens-induced (LIU), 93
Trauma:
pain and, 15-16
corneal ulceration and, 43
phacoanaphylactic, 77-8
corneoscleral laceration, 35, 54-60
prognostic indicators, 66
globe, 32-6
redness and, 13, 14
blunt trauma, 32-3
retinal detachment and, 20, 79, 82
penetrating injury, 35-6
See also Iritis
prolapse, 33-5
lid laceration, 23-5
pain and, 16
Verapamil, 73, 74
retinal detachment and, 20
Vidarabine, 96
subconjunctival haemorrhage, 12
Vitamin A deficiency, 21
Vitreal cavitation with liquefaction, 81
Trichiasis, 16, 24, 25, 94
Vitreal detachment, 81
 corneal ulceration and, 42
Vitreal haemorrhage, 20
Trifluorothymidine, 27
Trifluridine, 96
Vogt-Koyanani-Harada syndrome, 22, 79,
Trometamol, 51
82,94
Tropicamide, 67, 96
Tumor, 65
White eye, 17-18