SMALLANIMAL
RADIOGRAPHIC
TECHNIQUESAND
POSITIONING
Susie Ayers
Illustrationsby L.AshleyMarlowe
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Small Animal
Radiographic Techniques
and Positioning
Companion website
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/ayers
The website includes:
 More than 100 Multiple-Choice Questions
· Powerpoints of all figures from the book for downloading
Small Animal
Radiographic Techniques
and Positioning
Mary H. (Susie) Ayers BBA, RT(R)
lllustrations by L. Ashley Marlowe
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
This edition first published 2012 @ 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, forrmed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific,
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered offce: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ,
UK
Editorial ofces:
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for inforrmation about how to apply for
perrmission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/
wiley-blackwell.
clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted
a photocopy license by CCC, a separate systerm of payrments has been arranged. The fee codes for users of the
Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-1152-9/2012.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as tradermarks. All brand
narmes and product narmes used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned
in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the
subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
 professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Catatoging-in-Publication Data
Ayers, Mary H.
Small animal radiographic techniques and positioning / Mary H. (Susie) Ayers ; illustrations by L. Ashley
Marlowe.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-1152-9 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Radiography-veterinary. 2. Animal Diseases-diagnosis. 3. Diagnostic Imaging-
 methods. 4. Patient Positioning-veterinary. 5. Technology, Radiologic-veterinary. SF 757.8]
632'.9-dc23
2011035810
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 10/12 pt Sabon by Toppan Best-set Prermedia Limited
Disclaimer
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation
warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales or
This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or
other professional services. If professional assistance is required, the services of a competent professional
person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom.
The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of
further inforrmation does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the inforrmation the organization
or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet
Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when
it is read.
12012
To my husband, Gene,
for all of his love and support, today and every day.
Contents
Foreword
xi
Preface
!!!X!
Acknowledgments
XV
Section 1. Theory and Equipment
3
1. Introduction to Digital Imaging
5
Definition and Principles of Digital Imaging
5
Digital Radiography
6
Digital Imaging Communications in Medicine
6
Picture Archiving and Communication System
6
Workstation Monitors
7
Computed Radiography
10
Direct and Indirect Conversion Radiography
11
Digital Image Processing
12
Principles of Film-Screen Radiography
17
X-ray Film Construction
17
Intensifying Screens
18
Common Principles of Film-Screen and Digital Radiography
20
3.
The Radiographic System
21
Basic Component Overview
21
X-ray Tube
21
Fluoroscopy
24
 Secondary or Scatter Radiation
25
Grids
27
 Milliamperage and Kilovoltage
28
Technique Chart 
28
 Overexposure vs. Underexposure
32
Patient Log
33
4.
 Darkroom Maintenance and Film Processing
37
Darkroom Setup
37
Manual Film Processing
38
Automatic Film Processing
39
Automatic Film Processor Maintenance
41
Silver Recovery Cartridges
42
Safelights
42
vii
vili   Contents
Film Storage and Handling
43
 Patient Identification Labeling 
44
Care and Maintenance of Film Cassettes
45
5.
Film-Screen and Digital Imaging Artifacts
49
Exposure Artifacts
49
Darkroom Processing Artifacts
52
Film Storage Artifacts
54
Digital Imaging Artifacts
54
6.
 Positioning Aids and Alternative Restraint
57
Safe Use of Restraint Devices
57
Sedated Patient Restraint
59
7.
Radiation Safety
61
Health Physics
61
Radiologic Units
61
ALARA Concept
65
Section 2.  Radiographic Positioning
69
 General Principles and Terminology
71
Positioning Terminology
72
Room Setup
74
 Patient Preparation
74
Horizontal Beam Views
76
9.
Small Animal Positioning—Forelimb
6
Scapula
79
Shoulder
82
Bicipital Groove
85
Humerus
87
Elbow
90
Radius and Ulna
94
Carpus
95
Metacarpus, Digits
100
10.
 Small Animal Positioning—Pelvis and Hind Limb
103
Pelvis
103
OFA Imaging
109
PennHIP information
111
Femur
114
Stifle
117
Tibial Plateau Leveling Osteotomy (TPLO)
123
Tibial TuberosityAdvancement (TTA)
127
Tibia and Fibula
129
Tarsus
133
 Metatarsus and Digits
138
 Small Animal Positioning—Spine
143
Cervical Spine
144
Thoracic Spine and Thoraco-Lumbar Spine
149
Lumbar Spine
152
Contents ix
LS Spine
155
Sacrum
159
Caudal Spine
160
12.
Small Animal Positioning-Thorax, Soft Tissue Neck, and Abdomen
163
Thorax
163
Soft Tissue Neck
166
Abdomen
167
13.
Small Animal Positioning Skull
171
Cranium
171
Nasal
174
Maxilla
179
 Mandible
183
Temporomandibular Joints
187
Tympanic Bullae
191
14.
Exotic Pet Imaging
197
Avian
197
Small Mammals
200
Reptile
202
Section 3.
Contrast Media and Special Procedures
207
15.
 Radiopaque Contrast Media
209
Types of Radiopaque Contrast Media
209
 lonic and Nonionic Contrast Agents
209
Barium Sulfate
213
16.
Special Imaging Procedures
215
Special Procedure—Esophagram (Static)
215
Esophagram—Fluoroscopic/Dynamic
216
Special Procedure—Upper Gl
217
Special Procedure—Gastrogram
219
Special Procedure—Lower Gl—Barium Enema
221
Special Procedure——Excretory Urogram
222
225
Special Procedure—Urethrography
230
Special Procedure—Vaginography
231
233
Special Procedure—Myelography-
-Avian
236
-Rabbit
237
Special Procedure—Fistulography
238
Special Procedure—Arthrography
239
References
241
Webliography
242
Index
243
Companion website
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/ayers
Foreword
Susie Ayers has been teaching veterinary students the science and art of veterinary radiog-
raphy for many, many years. She has witnessed a remarkable evolution in how veterinar-
ians and veterinary technicians practice our profession, especially in the imaging sciences.
Her experiences and, perhaps more importantly, her passion for her career have brought
us an enjoyably readable handbook, Small Animal Radiographic Techniques and
Positioning. It blends the new with the old, provides helpful tips and words of caution,
 supported with color photography, illustrative line drawings, and excellent quality radio-
John S. Mattoon, DVM, Dipl ACVR
 Professor and Chief of Radiology
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Washington State University
Pullman,Washington
Preface
It has been such a privilege to work in veterinary imaging for 23 years with veterinary
students and veterinary technicians. The veterinary technician's role has grown as technol-
 ogy and advancements in medicine have progressed over the years. Today, the veterinary
technician scope of practice includes not only nursing care but also anesthesia, laboratory,
and diagnostic imaging responsibilities. Small animal practices are growing and purchasing
become proficient in operating the equipment. When veterinary technicians graduate and
enter the workplace, they may work in a practice still manually processing flm or be
expected to know how to operate digital imaging equipment. This handbook is written
for both the veterinary technician and the small animal practitioner to assist them with
the varied imaging challenges they may encounter in today's working environment.
The book is divided into three sections, covering an overview of radiographic technique,
darkroom maintenance, digital and film-screen imaging in the first section; small animal
positioning, including some exotic species positioning techniques, in the second section;
and contrast media and special contrast enhanced procedures in the last section. The intent
of the text is to provide a one-stop handbook to quickly find needed imaging information,
whether it is the correct contrast media dose for a special procedure or a quick lookup
forpositioning.
x1l
Acknowledgments
I would like to acknowledge some very special people at the Virginia-Maryland Regional
College of Veterinary Medicine and Veterinary Teaching Hospital at Virginia Tech for their
support and contributions over the past year. Many thanks go to my friend Carolyn Sink,
who suggested I should write this text. I would also like to thank Dr. F. William Pierson,
the VTH Hospital Director, for access to our digital image fles. I also appreciate the advice,
suggestions, and support given by our radiologists, Dr. Gregory Daniel, Dr. Martha Larson,
and Dr. Reid Tyson. Special thanks to Dr. Reid Tyson and his family pet, Kona, for the
 alternative restraint demonstration pictures. I would also like to thank three other special
radiologists for their contributions, Dr Donald L. Barber Dr. Jeryl Jones, and Dr. Colin
Carrig. Also, I appreciate the imaging cases contributed by department staff technologists
Valerie and Becki.
I want to especially thank Dr. Richard Bryant, owner of Salem Animal Hospital and
VT alumni, for generously allowing me access to his practice to take darkroom and
radiographic room pictures. I would like to thank my illustrator, Ashley Marlowe,
for doing such a terrific job on this project. She juggled her studies while doing my illus-
trations, using her dog, Charley, as her model. I am truly blessed to have met her years
ago in church and have watched her grow to become such a talented artist. I would also
like to thank my sister, Erma Chambers, for her assistance and advice in helping me navi-
 gate the publishing unknowns. Another very important person to acknowledge is my
husband, Gene. He has continuously provided encouragement and suppor throughout the
process.
 Lastly, I cannot leave out my pets, feathered and furry, for their contributions to this
book. Some of them were adopted from the vet school and have been cared for by some
terrific clinicians, senior veterinary students, and veterinary technicians while being patients
X?
xviAcknowledgments
at the VTH. They have never complained when taken to work with me to allow students
 to practice handling and imaging. Special thanks to Valerie's Reuben, who unknowingly
contributed some great images for the text. Also, I must acknowledge my beloved pet and
companion of 13 years, Charley, who passed away in 2011. His image file provided mate-
 rial for the text and he faithfully sat next to me while I was writing. You will always be
in my heart.
Small Animal
Radiographic Techniques
and Positioning
Section
Theory and Equipment
Introduction to Digital Imaging
Small animal radiography has changed dramatically in the past decade with the appearance
of digital radiography in veterinary medicine. Many small animal practices that were hand
developing x-ray film have taken the next step to automatic x-ray flm processing due to
the availability of affordable used and new tabletop x-ray film processors and faster x-ray
flm-screen cassette combinations. Switching to 400 speed rare earth film-screen combina-
tions has decreased radiation exposure to technical staff and the patient, as well as
improved the quality of the images due to shorter x-ray exposure times.
As digital radiography (DR) has become more affordable, an increasing number of
small animal practices have switched from film-screen imaging to digital radiography.
The list of vendors marketing veterinary digital radiographic systems is growing, so
a variety of options are available from an economic perspective. Some vendors have
products utilizing older digital technology; therefore it is important for small animal prac-
titioners and their technical staff to have a basic understanding of digital radiography to
assist in choosing the right digital radiographic system for their practices and also to have
the needed knowledge to improve the quality of the digital radiographic images being
taken.6
Definition and Principles of Digital Imaging
Digital imaging is simply an imaging acquisition process that generates an electronic image
to be viewed and manipulated on a computer. All types of medical images are produced
in a digital format including computed tomography (CT), ultrasound, magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), nuclear medicine, digital fluoroscopy, computed radiography (CR), and
digital radiography direct and indirect capture.4,$
5
6Chapter 1
Digital Radiography
Digital radiography is a term used to reference the two main systems used in both human
and veterinary medicine, computed radiography and digital (direct capture or indirect
capture) radiography. 14.,s Digital radiography is constantly changing as improvements to
CHAPTER
this technology are being made through both software and hardware.
Digital Imaging Communications in Medicine
Digital imaging communications in medicine (DICOM) is the image file format that stan-
dardizes medical digital images from all imaging modalities and picture archiving and
communication systems from different manufacturers. If different vendors used proprietary
formats, images could not be sent to other facilities using different software to view the
images. When purchasing a digital radiographic system, it is important to make sure the
ment describes exactly how the software or device conforms to the DICOM standard. The
statement follows a standard format to allow a user or vendor to determine if two devices
will communicate and are compatible by comparing conformance statements.
Picture Archiving and Communication System
A picture archiving and communication system (PACS) provides image capture, display,
annotation, archival, and communication functions allowing the images to be viewed at
multiple computer workstations in a practice. Long-term storage of digital images is
important because the data is part of the patient's medical record. Veterinary practices can
purchase affordable small PACS to permit viewing in exams rooms and surgery. Since the
image format is DICOM, there will be no problem sending the images to another practi-
tioner or a referral facility.
There is a rather wide selection of storage device options to choose from, each differing
storage, some practices just choose to use hard disk drives with a backup and invest in a
web-based PACS service. Using a web-based PACS provides the small animal practitioner
with the capability to permit a referral practice to view the DICOM images taken on a
patient from anywhere in the world. An email can be sent to the specialty veterinary
practice with the link to download the DICOM images for review, thereby allowing the
specialist quick access to DICOM images. It should be noted it may take up to 24 hours
before images are available for viewing on some web-based PACS services. This isn't a
common problem in recent years, but it is an important question to ask when planning
to purchase a contract with a web-based PACS service. Emailing images is not recom-
mended if it is necessary to convert the DICOM image to a jpeg or tiff due to loss of detail
in the image. Sending DICOM images via CD or DVD is the secondary preferred method
when it is necessary to send images to a specialty practice that is not set up to accept
tmailed DICOM links.
Introduction to Digital Imaging
Workstation Monitors
To adequately review images taken, it has been recommended to have a medical grade
grayscale monitor as part of the primary display workstation, particularly in a specialty
practice. This thought has been changing over the past 5 years because the newer high-end
HAPTER
consumer grade color monitors are just as bright as their medical grade counterparts and
they also have an acceptable resolution. At the 2006 Radiological Society of North
America (RSNA) conference, Dr. David Hirshorn MD stated in a presentation that the
display and a medical grade grayscale display were not statistically significant.19 Top-
quality color monitors are brighter than the normal grade consumer monitor and have a
brightness greater than 400-500cd/m2 and a contrast ratio of at least 800:1-1000:1.19
The advantage of the medical grade grayscale monitor over the consumer grade high-
quality display monitor is greater monitor stability. Thus a consumer grade monitor may
be suffcient for the basic small animal practice. The choice depends upon the type of
 practice and the financial investment the practice can afford.
 For a practitioner to visualize a digital image of similar quality to a film image neces-
sitates the display monitor to have high spatial resolution (recorded detail).3 For the
primary display workstation utilizing a medical grade monitor, the small animal practitio-
 ner should ideally use a 2K (2MP) resolution portrait monitor. The common screen resolu-
tions for medical display monitors are 1280 x 1024 (1K/1MP), 1600 × 1200 (2K/2MP),
2048 × 1536 (3K/3MP), and 2048 x 2560 (SK/5MP).,3 CR and DR images are generally
best viewed on at least a 2K/2MP monitor, whereas cross-sectional images can be viewed
on a 1K/1MP monitor. Radiologists generally use at least a 3K/3MP or above for reading
digital images. Viewing on a 3MP monitor eliminates the need to zoom or pan the images
to review all of the details in the image (Figs. 1.1a and 1.1b).
There are some basic terms that need to be defined to allow a better understanding of
how these monitors work. A basic picture element is called a pixel. Each pixel is a set of
dot triads. A dot triad is a grouping of one red dot, one green dot, and one blue dot. Bit
depth is used to describe the number of bits used to store information about each pixel of
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.1  a. DR workstation with medical grade monitors. b. Mac workstation.
8Chapter1
an image.19 The bit depth of an image will determine how many levels of gray or color
        i     q 
radiographic systems have only 10-16 bits of grayscale. So a 24-bit color system will have
one-third of that for each color or 8 bits (256 shades) of each color that can be combined
to produce millions of colors. To produce a shade of gray the intensity of each of the three
CHAPTER
colors must be exactly equal, which means a 24-bit color camera can only produce 256
shades (8 bits) of gray.9 Pixels are arranged in a matrix, a rectangular or square table of
numbers that represents the pixel intensity to be displayed on the monitor.' Examples are
2048 × 1536 and 2048 x 2560, the most common matrices for image viewing by a veteri-
nary radiologist. Dot pitch is the measurement of how close the dots are located to one
 another within a pixel. The number of pixels on a monitor's display is known as its resolu-
tion. As the dot pitch of a display becomes smaller, resolution improves. The greater the
number of pixels in an image, the higher the resolution, which means more information
 can be displayed. Brightness or luminance refers to how bright the image appears on a
display.19 The brighter the display, the greater dynamic range produced in the image. A
greater dynamic range will allow you to resolve more shades of gray in the image and is
necessary to provide a full 8-bit grayscale image or 256 distinct shades of gray. If the
maximum brightness of a display is inadequate, adjacent shades of gray will not be dis-
tinguishable and subtle lesions may be missed. A monitor used for primary diagnosis should
be at least 400-500 cd/m? brightness.19 Contrast ratio describes the difference between the
blacks and the whites that a monitor can display. Any monitor used for primary diagnosis
should have a contrast ratio of at least 1000:1, which means the black on the display is
1,000 times darker than the white on the display.'9 Another important measurement to
use in choosing a monitor is its refresh rate. The refresh rate is the number of times an
image is rewritten on the monitor each second. The refresh rate controls the flicker seen
by the viewer so a high refresh rate is preferable when selecting a monitor. The most
common refresh rates set on computer monitors are between 60 and 75 Hz, which means
the image is refreshed 60-75 times per second. When searching for a monitor, aspect ratio
and viewable area are two other terms you need to know. The aspect ratio is simply the
ratio of the width to the height of the monitor. The viewable area of a monitor is deter-
mined by measuring the front of the display diagonally from one corner to the other.
Viewing digital images in a proper reading environment is as important as choosing the
display monitor. Digital images should be viewed in a room with a low level of ambient
light. As ambient light increases, the contrast ratio decreases, which means the ability of
the eye to distinguish between gray levels is best when the ambient light level of the room
 is close to the amount of light coming from the screen. Also, the viewer should be viewing
the monitor at eye level and not looking down or up at the monitor to avoid image
degradation.19
Monitor stability should also be considered when choosing whether to purchase a con-
sumer grade color monitor or a medical grade grayscale display monitor. Stabilizing the
luminance of the backlight(s) is essential in the monitor's ability to be calibrated and to
hold the calibration. The LCD backlight will vary in luminance over time and temperature.
It takes time for an LCD monitor to warm up and stabilize after being turned on. A con-
sumer grade monitor can take over an hour to reach maximum luminance versus the
medical grade monitor, which is designed to bring the backlight to its calibrated luminance
very quickly, often less than a minute. A medical grade monitor set to deliver 400 cd/m?
will reliably do so for approximately 5 years. The high brightness consumer monitors will
generally have an output of 450cd/m?, initially, but will gradually decay to about 375
Introduction to Digital Imaging9
cd/m? in about 18 months.19 What does this mean? The consumer grade monitor, due to
its lack of stability, will only be diagnostically useful for about a third of the time of a
medical grade display. But the consumer grade monitor only costs a fraction of the cost
of a medical grade monitor. So if a high-quality consumer grade color display will suit the
needs of the practice, it may be the best choice from an economic perspective, understand-
ing the monitor will need to be replaced on a more frequent basis.
HAPTER
Regardless of the display chosen, the monitor must be regularly calibrated. It is neces-
sary to do so because LCD monitors degrade over time. The LCD screen is illuminated
by a backlight that is constantly on at full intensity. As stated earlier, the luminance of this
backlight will decrease over time, due to the phosphors in the lamp wearing out. Some
monitor vendors may supply test patterns, software, and sensors to perform visual tests.
External hardware and sensors can also be purchased. Information for the practitioner
regarding medical display acceptance testing and quality control can be found on the
American Association of Physicists in Medicine (AAPM), Task Group 18's website, http://
deckard.mc.duke.edu/-samei/tg18. Task Group 18 consists of medical imaging experts and
organizational affiliates who produced the document Assessment of Display Performance
for Medical Imaging Systems. An excellent quick resource for information regarding DR
systems for veterinary medicine, including monitor calibration, can also be found at
www.animalinsides.com/htm. 19
Cathode ray tube (CRT) and liquid crystal display (LCD) are the most common types
of monitors currently used in a medical setting, though plasma monitors are increasing in
 popularity. LCD and plasma monitors should be familiar because most of the TVs on the
market today are either LCD or plasma.
CRT monitors have a cathode and an anode located within a vacuum tube that works
in a similar fashion to an x-ray tube. The advantages of the CRT monitor are they are
less expensive, more durable than the LCD or plasma monitors, and have better color
representation and superior resolution. The aspect ratio of a CRT monitor is 4:3. The
disadvantages of the CRT monitors are they take up a lot of space, are heavy, are not
easily adjustable for viewing at different heights and angles, and emit heat.
LCD monitors are used more and more as they have decreased in cost and increased in
quality in recent years. The advantages of the LCD monitor are they take up less space,
use less power than a CRT monitor, are lighter weight, produce less heat, and the surface
 produces little glare. The aspect ratio of an LCD monitor is 16:9. The disadvantages are
they cost more than a CRT monitor and have less of a viewing angle, the display is not
as bright as the CRT, and each display is only capable of working with a single physical
resolution.
Plasma displays contain many small fluorescent lights that are illuminated to form the
color of the image. The plasma display varies the intensities of the various light combina-
tions to produce a full range of color. The advantages are they require a smaller frame
around the display, have a wide screen with thin depth, are brighter than the LCD, can
 be viewed at varying angles, and are light weight. The disadvantages are the high cost and
low availability.
Of the three monitors, LCD monitors are used more in the PACS display market due
to their size, resolution, and lack of heat production. The workstation receives images
from the archive and/or from the digital radiographic system. The workstation has PACS
application software that allows the practitioner to view and manipulate the image. It
would depend upon the type of small animal practice, caseload, and specialty to determine
if more than one primary display workstation would be needed. One primary workstation
10Chapter1
with either a 24 inch, 2K/2MP medical grade grayscale monitor or a high-quality consumer
grade color monitor with a brightness of at least 450 cd/m² with a contrast ratio of 1,000:1
 placed in a low-level ambient lit viewing area of the practice may suffice the needs of the
practice. Monitors used for secondary viewing in surgery or in the exam room, after the
diagnosis has been made, can be consumer grade 19 or 21 inch LCD panels of lesser
CHAPTER
s r  q e sd p  a ed a u a
Computed Radiography
Computed radiography was first introduced in the early 1980s by Fuji Medical Systems. CR
is a cassette-based system containing an imaging plate instead of the conventional flm-
screen combination. Some advantages of CR are the cassette can be used in a similar fashion
to the conventional x-ray film cassette and no major alteration to the existing x-ray system
is required. The CR cassette can be placed on either the tabletop or in the cassette Bucky
with a grid. When used tabletop, lead strips or strict collimation can allow two separate
sette is taken to a darkroom, the film is removed, stamped with the patient's name, and then
sent through an x-ray film processor, the CR cassette is placed in a machine called a reader.
When the CR cassette is placed in a reader, the reader removes the imaging plate from
the cassette and scans it with a red laser in a zigzag pattern called a raster to release the
stored electrons. As the plate travels through the reader, the laser scans across the imaging
plate multiple times in a process called translation. This scanning process produces lines
of light intensity information that are detected by a photomultiplier/charge-coupled device
(CCD) that connects the light to an electronic signal. The signal is digitized by an analog-
to-digital converter (ADC). The ADC assigns each picture element or pixel a numerical
value that corresponds to its level of brightness and position. The entire image is divided
into a matrix of pixels based on the brightness of each pixel. As the number of pixels in
a matrix increases for the same field of view, the smaller the pixels have to fit into the
Spatial resolution is defined as the amount of detail in any image. Just as the crystal size
and thickness of the phosphor layer determine the resolution in film-screen radiography,
the phosphor layer and pixel size determine the resolution in a CR image. The thinner the
phosphor layer, the higher the resolution. The unit of measuring spatial resolution is line
separated by equal-size interspaces, is imaged. The higher the number of line pairs visual-
ized, the greater the spatial resolution, and the smaller the detail that can be detected in
an image. Film-screen images have excellent spatial resolution, measuring 10 lp/mm.3 CR
typically has 2.55-5 lp/mm resolution, which results in less detail than a film-screen image.
The loss of spatial resolution is compensated for by the increase in contrast resolution,
which refers to the proficiency of an imaging system to distinguish between small objects
or tissues having similar tissue density, like liver and spleen. Many more densities or shades
After the reading process is complete, most of the electrons return to a lower energy
state, which basically removes the image from the plate. The imaging plate still should be
cleared at least every 48 hours by the CR reader erasure mode to prevent a buildup of
background signal. CR plates are very sensitive to background and scatter radiation. After
Introduction to Digital Imaging11
the CR plate has been read, the signal is sent to the computer, where it is preprocessed.
The data appears on the monitor for review and is then sent to a PACS.
Direct and Indirect Conversion Radiography
HAPTER
Digital radiography can be a confusing term because it includes both computed and direct
and indirect methods of digital image capture. The more accurate term is direct digital
radiography (DDR), which is now commonly abbreviated as DR. The DR panel is typi-
   s   ssd     
Carestream Health and Fuji Medical Systems have each released to market a wireless DR
panel that can be used in conventional film-screen x-ray systems.
sensors are permanently enclosed in a protective housing and referred to as a flat-panel detec-
tor. The flat-panel detector is comprised of a photoconductor such as amorphous selenium
(a-Se), which changes the x-ray photons directly into an electronic signal. Silicon and CCD
detectors are also included in this category, though they are older technology'4 (Fig. 1.2).
With the direct conversion process x-ray 1
 photons are absorbed by a photo-conducting
material, such as a-SE, and converted to electrons, which are stored in thin-film transistor
(TFT) detectors. The TFT detector is an array or grouping of small pixels with each pixel
containing a photodiode. A photodiode is a photoelectric semiconductor device that
absorbs the electrons and generates electrical charges. A field-effect transistor (FET),
which is a nonrectifying transistor, or silicon TFT, isolates each pixel element and works
like a switch to send the electrical charges to the image processor. The information is sent
onto the data columns and read out with dedicated electronics. Silicon integrated circuits
are connected to the edges of the detector matrix. Integrated circuits control the line scan-
ning sequence on one side and low noise, high sensitivity amplifiers carry out the readout,
Indirect conversion detectors are comparable to direct detectors in that they use TFT
detectors but dissimilar to direct conversion because they require a two-step process
to convert to electrons and send to the image processor. With both direct and indirect
Figure 1.2. Canon DR panel tethered to be used tabletop or under table.
12Chapter1
 conversion over one million pixels can be read and converted to a composite digital image
in less than 1 second.
 It is recommended to avoid purchasing DR systems utilizing older technology. This older
technology information is being included to assist the practitioner in identifying older
systems that may still be offered by some vendors. The older indirect conversion DR system
is based on CCDs. A charge-coupled device is basically a semiconductor device used as an
CHAPTER
optical sensor that stores a charge and then sequentially transfers it. In this case, the x-ray
photons strike a scintillation material, such as a photostimulable phosphor or a CsI scintil-
lator, and this signal is coupled by lenses that work like cameras. These cameras reduce
the size of the projected visible light image and transfer the image to one or more small
CCDs that convert the light into an electrical charge. The charge is stored in a sequential
 Complementary metal oxide silicon (CMOS) systems use specialized pixel sensors. When
these sensors are struck with x-ray photons, they convert the x-rays to light photons and
store them in capacitors. Each pixel has its own amplifier, which is turned off and on by
circuitry within the pixel converting the light photons into electrical charges. Voltage from
the amplifer is converted by an analog-to-digital converter, also located within the pixel.
The system was developed by NASA and is both extremely effcient and takes up less fill
space than CCDs.1,3
When choosing a digital radiographic system it is important to ask about the detective
quantum efficiency of the detector. Detective quantum effciency (DQE) is basically how
efficiently a system converts the x-ray input signal into a useful output image. DQE looks
at the effects of noise and contrast on the digital image. Electronic and quantum noise are
always present in digital imaging. The effect of noise is usually referred to as signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR). A higher-quality image consists of more signal and less noise. So high
 SNR captures the most useful image information and provides a higher-quality image.
 In DR, contrast refers to the system's ability to accurately reproduce an object's actual
  e o  i os   im e ay sr pi i
of intensities. Their ability to produce high contrast resolution means they can display
thousands of shades of gray that can be enhanced with automatic contrast enhancement
and window/leveling parameters. The ultimate goal of a system is to have a high DQE,
Direct and indirect DR detectors have an increased DQE over CR systems. In comparing
 direct and indirect DR, direct DR typically has the higher DQE. Indirect DR systems using
the newer CMOS instead of CCDs in their panels are more comparable to the direct DR
systems. Keep in mind the DQE of detectors changes with kilovoltage peak (kVp), but
normally the DQE of selenium and phosphor-based systems is higher than for CR, CCD
and CMOS systems. Another factor that increases the DQE is the size of the area of the
TFT photodiode array. The greater the size of the TFT array the greater the DQE because
the more radiation detected increases the amount of signal generated.1,3,4
Digital Image Processing
The basic digital imaging principles and equipment have been reviewed and the veterinar-
ian has chosen and purchased the equipment. During installation, the vendor will set up
the computer software to meet the needs of the veterinary practice (Fig. 1.3).
Introduction to Digital Imaging13
SYSTATION
09.18
CHAPTER 
CLEARADMIN LEVEL
AHICE
Figure 1.3. DR system administrator setup window.
The vendor will need to know which direction the patient is typically placed on the
radiographic table so the orientation can be set up in the computer. This will allow the
Right (R) and Left (L) anatomic notation to appear correctly on the image, if the patient
is placed correctly on the table. The vendor will put the name of the practice on the image
and the view taken (example: VD Thorax, Oblique Mandible, or CrCD Stifle). If the
 practice is a specialty practice, there may be specialized views that the vendor will need
to set up in the menu or additional information to be added to each displayed image.
 It is important to provide an overview of the digital imaging process once the patient
is positioned on the radiographic table. Digital imaging will greatly reduce the amount of
time normally needed to image a patient. For the technician, learning to use the equipment
m ( oi)   o e  ds  a si !
decrease the errors frequently caused by entering patient information directly into the DR
system at the time the patient is to be imaged. A DICOM MWL is a bridge to the practice
management software that eliminates the need for technicians to enter patient information
into the DR system. If not using a DICOM worklist, it starts with entering the patient's
information into the computer and selecting the correct anatomic region of interest prior
to taking the exposure. It is imperative to enter complete patient identification information
correctly. When a large referral practice receives images on "Charley" with no last name
associated, particularly jpeg or tiff fles on a CD, sent to their PACS administrator to load
images onto their PACS system, it is often difficult to trace the last name, which delays
the specialists' ability to view the images on their workstations. The accession number
assigned to the patient when the images were taken helps the original practice to find the
patient but is not helpful for the referring practice unless complete information is present.
If the practice uses a DICOM modality worklist and the images are sent via an email with
a DICOM link or DICOM images are sent via CD, it greatly expedites the transfer of
images to the specialty practice's PACS for viewing.
 Each anatomic region has a processing algorithm specific to that region for reconstruct-
ing the image prior to it being displayed on the computer screen. A processing algorithm
is simply a mathematical formula that makes adjustments to the image data so the result-
ing image has been properly reconstructed.' If doing abdominal imaging, with or without
using contrast media, you must choose the abdominal algorithm and not the thorax algo-
rithm or the image data will not be properly processed (Fig. 1.4).
14Chapter 1
Sex
吉
Buckymsee
REX
CHAPTER
CERVIC
LSPINELAI
SPINEVD
LSPINELAT
SPINE
BULY
PELVISVO
PELVISLAT
AB
Figure 1.4. Example of anatomic region and patient data entry page in a DR system.
01.01.200
Figure 1.5. DR image review and QA adjustment page.
 Prior to the image being displayed, a histogram or graph showing the distribution of
pixel values for that particular image is constructed. If the histogram indicates a high or
low exposure, the image brightness will automatically be adjusted to correct the error.
After the histogram evaluation, a lookup table (LUT) can be used to further alter the
digital image to change the image density and shades of gray to manipulate how the ana-
 tomic region of interest appears. Of course this will also alter the image's brightness and
contrast. The lookup table, which is a graph, will appear as a straight line if the image is
not changed. If it is changed, it will have a curve similar to that of a film-screen image.
This feature is mentioned because the ability to use this function is available. Please
remember any change to the digital image prior to accepting the image and sending it to
the primary workstation may decrease the veterinarian's ability to manipulate the image
 once it goes to the workstation. It is very rare that the image should be altered in any way
 other than possibly changing the orientation of the image on the screen before transferring
it to the primary workstation (Fig. 1.5).
IntroductiontoDigital Imaging15
-  si  a   a yo o a h si a r
rectly, it will be necessary to flip or rotate the image horizontally or vertically so it appears 
correctly before sending the image to the primary workstation for the veterinarian to
review. There will be a function menu or tab named Position or Image Orientation on the
Quality Assurance (QA) page or on a toolbar that will allow the patient orientation to be
changed. Also under QA, there should also be a Zoom function to allow you to review
HAPTER
the image prior to sending. There may be a Shuttering function that will allow post-
exposure collimating. If the area of interest was not collimated well using the collimator
on the x-ray tube, you will have the ability to correct this to a degree on the computer.
To avoid excessive backscatter radiation and to improve the quality of the image, there is
NO substitution for collimating to the area of interest with the collimator on the x-ray
tube, but this feature in the QA function on the computer will help. A Region of Interest
(ROI) tab is generally available, also. If on the small computer screen it appears that the
anatomic part is not well visualized or too dark, using the ROI function will adjust the
image to a viewable brightness level. Again this tends to happen when the milliampere
seconds (mAs) and kVp are too high and the histogram could not adjust appropriately.
Also using the ROI function will affect what the veterinarian can adjust once the image
is sent to the primary workstation for review. Using a technique chart to choose the correct
technical factors and collimating to the anatomic part appropriately should prevent the
necessity of using the Shutter and ROI functions. Once all the changes are complete, send
the image to the primary workstation.
Principles of Film-Screen
Radiography
TER
X-ray Film Construction
 Conventional film-screen radiography is still the most widely used method of imaging in
small animal practices. The x-ray beam exits the x-ray tube, passes through the patient,
and strikes the film-screen cassette (Fig. 2.1).
 Double emulsion x-ray film is placed in a cassette containing two radiographic intensify-
ing screens. Double emulsion radiographic film has emulsion coated on both sides of the
base, and a layer of supercoat or overcoat tops off each emulsion (Fig. 2.2).
The frst coat is a supercoat, overcoat, or abrasion layer, which is an outside layer pro-
tecting the emulsion from scratches, pressure, and contamination during handling, process-
ing, and storage. The next layer is the emulsion layer, which is the radiation- and
light-sensitive layer of the film. It consists of silver halide crystals suspended in gelatin.
Silver halide is the material that is sensitive to radiation and light. The formulations of
silver halide used by film manufacturers are proprietary but basically silver bromide (AgBr)
and silver iodide (Agl) make up the emulsion layer, with approximately 90-99% consti-
tuted by silver bromide and 1-10% by silver iodide. Companies manufacturing flm are
using tabular grain (T-grain) technology. Instead of using randomly shaped silver halide
crystals, T-grain films use flat silver halide crystals that can be more evenly dispersed in
the emulsion layer gelatin to increase the recorded detail in the radiograph. The final layer
is the base layer, which is a polyester/plastic layer that gives the film physical stability.
Because the emulsion layer is fairly fragile, it needs the plastic base so the film can be
handled and processed, yet remain physically strong after processing. Between the emul-
sion and base layer is an adhesive that simply adheres one layer of the film to another.
General radiographic imaging uses double emulsion flm with two intensifying screens.
The two primary factors affecting speed or sensitivity of radiographic film are the size of
silver halide crystals in the emulsion and the number of silver halide crystals. Film manu-
facturers manipulate film speed by manipulating these two factors. When the number or
size of the silver halide crystals increases, the film sensitivity or speed increases.
17
18Chapter 2
CHAPTER 2
Figure 2.1. X-ray rare earth film cassette
Overcoat
Emulsion
￥
Adhesive Layer
Base
Figure 2.2.Diagram of x-ray film layers.
 Film contrast is the ability of radiographic film to provide a certain level of image con-
trast. High contrast flm demonstrates more black and white areas, whereas low contrast
film shows shades of gray. Exposure latitude is closely related to film contrast. Film speed,
contrast, and latitude are graphically demonstrated in a flm's characteristic or sensitomet-
ric curve. Sensitiometry is the study of the relationship between radiation exposure and
the amount of density produced. Every film has a different curve.
Intensifying Screens
A radiographic intensifying screen is a device that changes the energy of the x-ray beam
into a visible light (Fig. 2.3).
This process is called luminescence. Intensifying screens show a particular kind of lumi-
nescence called fuorescence, which means the phosphor is stimulated to emit light only
when struck by x-rays. The use of an intensifying screen greatly reduces radiation exposure
to technical staff and to the patient. Radiographic intensifying screens generally consist of
four basic layers: the protective coating, the phosphor, the reflective or absorbing layer,
Principles of Film-Screen Radiography19
CHAPTER
Figure 2.3.
Opened film cassette displaying intensifying screens.
and the base. Today the most common phosphor material is composed of some element
from the rare earth group of elements. Rare earth elements are those that range in atomic
number from 57 to 71 on the periodic table of the elements.3 They are called rare earth
elements because they are rather difficult and expensive to extract from the earth. Rare
earth elements absorb more x-rays, change the x-rays to visible light more efficiently, and
result in improved recorded detail when compared to calcium tungstate, the old mainstay
phosphor used in intensifying screens until the early 1970s.2
The layer of the intensifying screen closest to the film is the protective coating. The
 active layer of the intensifying screen is the phosphor, which emits light during stimulation
by x-rays. The next layer is either the reflective layer or the absorbing layer and is located
between the phosphor and the base. Manufacturers will use one or the other but not both.
The reflective layer is made of a shiny substance that is either magnesium oxide or titanium
dioxide. The phosphor layer emits light with equal intensity in all directions when struck
by radiation, and the reflective layer reflects all light toward the film. If the absorbing layer
is used, it consists of a light absorbing dye that absorbs the light emitted by the phosphor.3
The base layer serves as a mechanical support for the active phosphor layer and is made
of polyester or high-grade cardboard because it is flexible and chemically inert. The emitted
light interacts with the x-ray film to form a latent image. The latent image cannot be seen
or detected until it becomes visible by chemical processing. Approximately 30% of the
x-rays striking a radiographic intensifying screen interact with the screen.
Spectral emission refers to the color of light produced by a particular intensifying screen
The spectral emission of rare earth intensifying screen phosphors is either a visible blue
or green light. Lanthanum oxybromide (LaOBr) emits blue light and gadolinium oxysulfide
(GdO,S) emits green light.
 X-ray film emulsion is developed to be sensitive to a specific
color of light so the light emitted by the intensifying screen should match the film. Spectral
sensitivity refers to the color of light to which a particular flm is most sensitive. It is very
important to choose and match the spectral sensitivity of the film with the spectral emis-
sion of the intensifying screen. This is called spectral matching. Mismatching of film and
screens based on spectral emission and sensitivity sharply reduces the speed of the system.
 The three most important characteristics of radiographic intensifying screens not affected
by the operator of the radiographic system are screen speed, image noise, and spatial reso-
lution. Screen speed is a relative number used to describe the efficiency of conversion of
x-rays into usable light. The properties that control speed are phosphor thickness, dye,
crystal size, and the concentration of phosphor crystal. A thicker phosphor layer, larger
phosphor crystals, and higher crystal concentration results in higher screen speed. Light
20Chapter 2
absorbing dyes are added to some phosphors to control the spread of light, which improves
spatial resolution. Remember spatial resolution is simply the amount of detail in an image.
The conditions that affect the intensifying screen speed that the operator of the radio-
 graphic system can control are radiation quality, image processing, and temperature.2
Image noise occurs more often with high-speed rare earth intensifying screens and high
image contrast. Detective quantum effciency (DQE) and conversion effciency (CE) are
higher with rare earth radiographic intensifying screens. DQE is the percentage of x-rays
CHAPTER
absorbed by the screen and CE is the amount of light emitted for each x-ray absorbed.
The higher CE causes the image noise in the higher-speed screens.
Rare earth intensifying screens can be combined with different films to provide varying
relative speeds. Relative screen speeds of 200-1200 are available, but if the 1,200 speed
system is used, the image may be degraded due to quantum mottle, a principal component
of image noise, which appears as a grainy, salt-and-pepper-appearing image. A relative
speed of 400 is recommended for general radiography to provide a good-quality image.
Film-screen and digital imaging artifacts are covered in detail in chapter 5.
Common Principles of Film-Screen and Digital Radiography
 There are many similarities and differences between digital radiographic imaging and film-
screen radiography. The DR panel, the CR cassette, and the film-screen cassette are image
receptors. CR, indirect DR, and flm-screen use phosphors to capture the incident x-ray
 energy and convert to light. The rare earth intensifying screens are made with rare earth
elements and some of the older indirect conversion detectors use photodiodes coated with
 a rare earth scintillator DQE is an important factor for film-screen, CR, and DR imaging.
Image noise is a concern for both digital and film-screen methods of imaging. The spatial
resolution for film-screen imaging is superior to digital imaging but contrast resolution
with digital imaging systems is better than film-screen.
 For both film-screen and digital, the image quality is greatly affected by geometric
factors. Source to image distance (SM), object image distance (OD), and focal spot size
affect the sharpness of both the film-screen image and the digital image. Improper align-
ment of the x-ray tube, the anatomic region to be imaged, and the film-screen cassette or
digital detector distorts the shape of the image for both film-screen and digital. The basic
radiographic principles learned for film-screen still apply to digital imaging.
Using a technique chart to set the appropriate technical factors (kVp and mAs) for the
console is equally critical for digital imaging to ensure the appropriate computer algorithm
for the area of interest is chosen. A grid is equally important to both flm-screen and digital
imaging in absorbing backscatter radiation to improve the quality of the image.
 Digital imaging is faster and there are fewer retakes due to technique settings because
it has wider exposure latitude than film-screen imaging. This means the ability to window/
level a digital image to adjust the brightness and contrast reduces retakes. There are fewer
images taken to display bone and soft tissue with digital because the digital image can be
manipulated on the computer to visualize both. Digital is the wave of the future and film-
screen imaging will become more obsolete as time passes. But for now, film-screen imaging
is still a major part of veterinary imaging.
The Radiographic System
IEF
Basic Component Overview
The basic components of a radiographic system are a dual focus rotating anode x-ray tube,
table, generator, and method of capturing the image. The primary factors involved in
producing an image, whether it is with a film-screen or digital system, are source-image
distance (SID), milliamperage (mA), exposure time, and kilovoltage (kVp). With a short
SID, there will be more distorion of the appearance of the anatomic region of interest
 and conversely, with a longer SID, there is less distortion. The typical SID is 40-44 inches
for most small animal radiographic units (Fig. 3.1).
X-ray Tube
Some dental and portable x-ray units use a single focus stationary or fixed anode x-ray
tube because high tube current and power are not necessary (Fig. 3.2).
A general-purpose radiographic system requires a dual focus rotating anode x-ray tube
to produce high-intensity x-ray beams in a short time.? The dual focus rotating anode
x-ray tube consists of a glass or metal electronic vacuum tube containing two electrodes,
the negatively charged tungsten cathode or filament and the positively charged rotating
anode or target (Fig. 3.3).
 In a dual focus x-ray tube, the cathode consists of two tungsten filaments, one filament
for small focus and one for the large focus, both embedded in a negatively charged focus-
ing cup (Fig. 3.4).
The focusing cup is made of nickel.3 Only one filament can be energized during a single
 r pa si s ps q  s si  ls a asoaa
smaller parts like the bones of the head or smaller extremities. The large filament is used
21
CHAPTER 3
Figure 3.1. X-ray tube head and X-ray table. Image courtesy of D. L. Barber, DVM.
Anode
Cathode
Figure 3.3. Dual focus rotating anode x-ray tube in a glass envelope. Image courtesy of D. L. Barber, DVM.
22
The Radiographic System 23
Figure 3.4. Dual focus rotating anode x-ray tube. A, large focus; B, small focus. Image courtesy of D. L. Barber, DVM.
for imaging larger parts like the thorax, abdomen, spine, pelvis, or extremities measuring
over 10 cm in thickness.
HAPTER
Prior to developing the rotating anode, manufacturers initiated a design to allow a larger
target area to be heated while maintaining a small focal spot by angling the target.
Diagnostic x-ray tubes have target angles varying from 5 to 15 degrees. This design is
known as the line-focus principle. By angling the target, the effective area of the target is
much smaller than the actual area of electron interaction. Due to this design, the radiation
intensity on the cathode side of the x-ray field is higher than on the anode side. The x-rays
making up the useful beam are emitted from a depth in the target toward the anode side
and must travel through a greater thickness of target material than the x-rays emitted in
the cathode direction. Because they are emitted through the heel of the target, there is
 more absorption. This is called the anode heel effect.29is The smaller the focal spot, the
larger the heel effect. The difference in the intensity of the beam can vary as much as 45%.
 It is important to keep this fact in mind when imaging patients where there is a significant
difference in tissue thickness, like in the abdomen. The cranial abdomen should be posi-
tioned on the cathode side of the x-ray tube and the caudal abdomen on the anode side.
You can determine which side is the cathode or anode by looking on the protective housing
where the cables connect to the x-ray tube. Sometimes it will state anode and cathode but
most of the time there will be a + (positive-anode) and - (negative-cathode) marked on
the connectors.
When the technician presses the prep or rotor button on the console, the selected fla-
 ment current will heat the flament and the anode target will start rotating. The outer-shell
electrons of the flament atoms are boiled off and ejected from the filament in a process
called thermionic emission. The outer-shell electrons form into an electron cloud called a
 s dy a ssd si  asdxa e  d so a   dss
     os a i    a ssr pe
repels the negatively charged electrons away from the cathode as the highly positively
a  i ro as  re ae i sa ae sie ao 
trons is called the tube current and is measured in milliamperes (mA).
 ae  s t s ae ar  sa a a ass
atoms. As the electrons strike the anode target, they transfer their kinetic energy to the
target atoms and are converted to heat. Interestingly, 99% of the electrons are converted
to heat and only 1% are converted to x-rays? (Fig. 3.5).
The first interaction occurs when projected electrons interact with the target's outer-shell
electrons, causing them to rise to an excited higher energy level, but do not transfer enough
energy to ionize or remove an orbital electron from an atom. The continuous excitation
and return of outer-shell electrons produces most of the heat generated in an x-ray tube
 anode. The anode disperses the heat to the glass or metal envelope and to the insulating
oil surrounding the x-ray tube.
24Chapter 3
Rotating AnodeGlass Envelope
Rotor
+
Positive
Negative
CHAPTER 3
ocusing Cup
Anode
Filament
Window
Target
Cathode
Figure 3.5.F
Rotating anode x-ray tube diagram.
is produced if the negative electron interacts strongly enough with a target atom's inner-
shell electron to remove it from the atom. An outer-shell electron automatically replaces
the void created by the removal of the inner-shell electron and emits x-rays in the process.
The first two interactions between negatively charged electrons and the x-ray tube's
target atoms produce heat and characteristic radiation. A third type of interaction,
Bremsstrahlung interaction, occurs when the negatively charged electron loses it kinetic
energy as it passes through a target atom close enough to the nucleus to come under the
influence of its electrical field. This electrical field is very strong because the nucleus con-
tains many protons and the distance between the nucleus and the negatively charged
electrons is small. Bremmsstrahlung interactions are also referred to as braking radiation,
because as the electron goes by the nucleus, it slows and changes direction. The loss of
kinetic energy creates an x-ray emission. Bremmsstrahlung interactions produce most x-ray
Lastly, there is a window in the glass or metal envelope of the x-ray tube that allows
the emitted useful x-ray beam to exit the tube head, then enter and exit the patient, strik-
ing the film-screen cassette located in the Bucky tray or DR flat panel.
Fluoroscopy
Fluoroscopy is a special radiographic technique used in specialty practices where an x-ray
e ue pao in pads e ym padnoo pue aqe aei-x ue yeauq pauo si aq
intensifer to produce dynamic or real-time imaging of body functions (Fig. 3.6).
Thomas Edison invented the fluoroscope in 1896
The Radiographic System25
APTER
Figure 3.6. Fluoroscopic image intensifier
An image intensifier is the electronic unit that contains an x-ray image-intensifier tube
The tube components are contained in either a glass or metal envelope that will maintain
dui ue e ed e yor pssed se i ie eaq A-x a sida  ' b
phosphor made of cesium iodide (CsI), which converts the x-ray beam into a high-intensity
intensifying unit also has the ability to record imaging. If a clinician observes something
 of interest, a permanent image can be taken during the study either via spot film or digital
a yo so aun u os e aq Ae anau 'uadmba au jo ae aun uodn suuada ae
image intensifier to contain a film-screen cassette, a function button to initiate video
recording possibly by VCR or some other means of image capture, or the unit may have
the capability to record by taking digital images, singularly, or numerous frames per
second. Fluoroscopic imaging is invaluable when used for gastric studies or checking for
a collapsing trachea. It is also used for myelography, cystourethrography, and vascular
studies. Care must be taken when using this modality because the radiation exposure is
ue  a jo s  r a q aq ax a oi ap 
choosing the correct exposure parameters are imperative when operating fluoroscopic
equipment. When the equipment is installed, the service engineer will preprogram the
parameters incorporating the type of study with patient size. It is the responsibility of the
operator to choose the correct selection and to collimate as closely as possible to the area
of interest during the study to reduce exposure to the patient and personnel as well as
improve the quality of the image by reducing scatter radiation.
Secondary or Scatter Radiation
The primary beam and secondary or scatter radiation are the two types of radiation
responsible for exposing flm or a DR panel. The primary beam exits the x-ray tube and
26Chapter 3
passes through the patient unchanged and is recorded on the film or DR panel below. The
secondary or scatter radiation is the result of a redirection of part of the primary x-ray
beam so the film or DR array is exposed unrelated to the body part. It causes a generalized
fog that degrades the quality of the image recorded on film or DR.
To reduce the effects of scatter radiation, collimators and grids are the primary options.
A collimator is located immediately below the x-ray tube window and consists of a set of
shutters to limit the primary beam as it exits the tube. It also contains a light source that
is reflected off of a mirror in the unit and projected onto the table below (Fig. 3.7).
The light source allows the user to see the area being exposed so the shutters can be
adjusted as close to the body part to be imaged as possible. Collimation will regulate the
CHAPTER
size of the area exposed by the primary beam, which results in decreased patient exposure,
quality image (Fig. 3.8).
Figure 3.7. Collimator reflecting light onto tabletop.
Figure 3.8. Collimator light centered on left radius ulna. Image courtesy of A. Reid Tyson, DVM.
The Radiographic System27
Grids
A grid is a device constructed with a series of thin linear strips of alternating lead and
aluminum designed to absorb scatter radiation before it hits either film or DR array. The
grid ratio is the ratio of the height of a grid's lead strips to the distance between them. The
higher the ratio, the more efficient the grid is in removing scatter radiation. Typical grid
ratios are 5:1, 8:1, 10:1, 12:1, and 16:1. The grid ratio will be imprinted on the grid (Fig.
3.9).
A 300mA and above machine would typically have a 12:1 grid though some older
veterinary units use an 8:1 grid. A grid will absorb 20-30% of the primary beam and
HAPTER
 80-90% of scatter radiation so it is necessary to increase technique to compensate when
 using grid compared to a nongrid technique. It is also imperative the x-ray tube be centered
to the grid to prevent grid lines from appearing on the radiographic image or create an
artifact called grid cutoff if using film-screen imaging (Fig. 3.10).
 Some DR vendors do not support purchasing a grid with their systems, but remember
DR arrays are more sensitive to scatter radiation than film-screen systems. Some DR
systems have removable grids to allow imaging with and without a grid.
The practitioner should consider purchasing a grid, particularly if the practice is a
specialty practice where the imaging caseload is higher and more specialized imaging
8:1103
Figure 3.9. Grid ratio imprint from grid surface.
Figure 3.10. Grid on tabletop demonstrating collimation and centering. Image courtesy Jeryl C. Jones, DVM.
28Chapter 3
 procedures are performed, like myelography. If the imaging caseload is low and the typical
small animal patient weighs less than 50lbs, it may not be practical to purchase a system
with a grid. This perspective would also apply to a practice using a film-screen system;
many small animal practices choose not to use a grid.
Milliamperage and Kilovoltage
When making an x-ray exposure, milliampere seconds (mAs) and kilovolt peak (kVp) are the
CHAPTER
Y
two exposure factors that determine quantity and quality, respectively, of the x-ray beam.
Kilovolt peak controls beam quality and penetrability. A higher-quality x-ray beam is one
with higher energy. Kilovolt peak also controls contrast. Lower kVp ranges produce a short
scale or high contrast image, which is appropriate for extremity, headwork, abdominal, spine,
and pelvic imaging. The higher kVp ranges produce a long scale or low contrast image used
mostly for imaging the thorax. With high kVp there is more potential for scatter radiation
The milliampere station selected determines not only the number of x-rays produced but
also the focal spot used. The small focal spot should be used for imaging of the head and
extremities if the measurement of the anatomic region is 10cm or below. For older x-ray
generators, 50, 100, 150, and 200mA stations will generally utilize the small focal spot.
The 200mA station will also utilize the large focal spot on most generators. For thicker
anatomic regions like the thorax, abdomen, spine, and pelvis, use a higher mA station and
 the large focal spot to increase quantity and decrease exposure time. Remember mA X expo-
sure time = mAs; mAs controls radiation quantity, optical density, and patient dose.
Technique Chart
A technique chart is a table with predetermined settings that allow the technician to select the
best exposure factors based on the thickness of tissue of the anatomic part being imaged. The
two main types of technique charts are variable kVp/fixed mAs and fixed kVp/variable mAs.
 For imaging the small animal patient, the author favors a form of the variable kVp/fixed
mAs technique chart. With this chart, the baseline kVp is increased by 2kVp for every
1 cm increase in thickness for patients weighing below 80lbs; increase 3kVp per cm for
patients weighing 80-100 Ibs; and 4kVp for every cm for patients weighing greater than
100 lbs. The mAs remains the same for the anatomic region of interest's (Fig. 3.11).
It is important to use a baseline kVp for each anatomic region that will best visualize
the tissue. For example, for extremities, headwork, spine, and abdominal imaging, the kVp
settings should be in the 50-80kVp range. If you have a larger canine patient abdomen,
you may have to go to 8.5 or 90kVp and/or adjust your mAs in the higher measurement
settings to help compensate for the thicker tissue. If using DR or rare earth speed film-
screen, it is particularly important to use an adequate mAs setting to prevent quantum
mottle, an artifact caused by using too little mAs. A fixed kVp/variable mAs technique
chart does not work well in veterinary medicine due to motion caused by too long of an
exposure. In veterinary medicine technique chart formulation, Santes' Rule is very popular
+  + (ssa ass x h = di  s  a e a o s o
Grid Factor10,15,21 (Table 3.1).]
Technique Chart
Feline, Canine Thorax
Feline, Canine Abdomen
Measurement
kVp
kVp
mA
Time
mAS
mAs
Measurement
kVp
kV
mA
Time
mAS
mAS
cm.
3-4
48
300
1/60
5.0
3-4
44
300
1/30
10.0
5-6
50
300
1/60
5.0
5-6
46
300
1/30
10.0
7-8
52
300
1/60
5.0
7-8
48
OOE
1/30
10.0
9-10
54
300
1/60
5.0
9-10
50
300
1/30
10.0
11
56
300
1/60
5.0
11-12
52
300
1/30
10.0
12
58
300
1/60
5.0
13
55
300
1/30
10.0
14
57
300
1/30
10.0
CHAPTER
13
58
300
1/60
5.0
14
1/60
5.0
15
57
60
300
300
1/30
10.0
16
60
OOE
1/30
10.0
15
62
300
1/60
5.0
17
63
300
1/30
64
300
1/60
10.0
16-17
5.0
18
66
300
1/30
10.0
17-18
68
300
1/60
5.0
300
19
68
300
1/30
10.0
19-20
70
1/60
5.0
20
70
300
1/30
10.0
21
72
300
1/60
5.0
21
73
300
1/30
10.0
22
74
300
1/60
5.0
22
75
300
1/30
10.0
23
76
300
1/60
5.0
23
77
300
1/30
10.0
24
78
300
1/60
5.0
24
78
300
1/30
10.0
25
80
300
1/60
5.0
25
81
300
1/30
10.0
27-28
82
300
1/60
5.0
26
85
300
1/30
10.0
29-30
84
300
1/60
5.0
27-28
88
300
1/30
10.0
Feline and CanineExtremity and Headwork
Feline.Canine-Spine and Pelvis
Measurement
kVp
kVp
mA
Time
mAS
mAS
Measurement
kVp
kVp
mA
Time
mAS
mAS
cm.
2-3
42
100
1/30
3.3
3-4
50
300
1/3010.0
4
44
100
1/30
3.3
5-6
52
300
1/3010.0
5
46
100
1/20
5.0
7-8
54
300
1/30
10.0
6
48
100
1/20
5.0
9-10
56
300
1/30
10.0
7
48
100
1/20
5.0
11
58
300
1/30
10.0
8
50
100
1/20
5.0
12
60
300
1/30
10.0
9
52
100
1/20
5.0
13
64
300
1/30
10.0
10
54
100
1/12
8.3
14
66
300
1/30
10.0
11
56
200
1/20
10.0
200
15
66
300
1/30
10.0
12
58
1/20
10.0
16
68
300
1/30
10.0
13
60
200
1/20
10.0
14
62
200
17-18
70
1/20
10.0
300
1/30
10.0
15
64
200
1/20
10.0
19-20
72
300
1/30
10.0
16
66
200
1/20
10.0
21
74
300
1/30
10.0
17
70
200
1/20
10.0
22
74
300
1/30
10.0
18
72
200
1/20
10.0
23
76
300
1/30
10.0
19
76
200
1/20
10.0
24
76
300
1/30
10.0
20
77
200
1/20
10.0
25
78
300
1/30
10.0
21
78
200
1/20
10.0
26
80
300
1/30
10.0
22
80
2001/20
10.0
27-28
82
3001/30
10.0
Figure 3.11.
Sample Technique Chart.
29
Table 3.1. Variable kvp technique chart formulation guide.10,15s.21
Step 1.
If using a film-screen imaging system, have your darkroom processor serviced so image quality won't
be affected by film-processing errors and issues.
Make sure the x-ray film matches the intensifying screens in your film cassettes. Remember
spectral emission refers to the color of light produced by a particular intensifying screen. X-ray
film emulsion is developed to be sensitive to a specific color of light, so the light emitted by the
3
intensifying screen should match the film. Spectral sensitivity refers to the color of light to which
CHAPTER
a particular film is most sensitive. It is very important to choose and match the spectral sensitivity
of the film with the spectral emission of the intensifying screen. This is called spectral matching.
Mismatching of film and screens based on spectral emission and sensitivity sharply reduces the
speed of the system.
 Choose a mature dog weighing approximately 40-50 pounds that is not overweight or underweight. It
is preferable for the dog to be under anesthesia.
Step 2. Choose your mAs settings.
Remember most of your patients are awake or sedated, so motion can be a primary cause of blurred
images. If your x-ray machine has more than one mA station, choose a lower mA station (100 or
1 50mA) for tabletop extremity and headwork to take advantage of using a small focal spot. For table
Bucky extremities (over 1 0am thickness), thorax, abdomen, pelvis, and spine, use the highest mA
station (300 mA) to allow choosing shorter exposure times.
Remember mA × time = mAs. Example: 300 mA × 1/120 = 2.5mAs or 100mA × 1/40 = 2.5 mAs.
Tabletop (no grid) extremity or headwork: 2.5 mAs.
Thorax: 5mAs.
Abdomen: 7.5mAs.
Spine/Pelvis: 10mAs.
Step 3. Choose your initial kVp: Use Santes' Rule to find the initial kVp to go along with the suggested
mAs setting.
 Santes' Rule: kVp = (2 x tissue thickness) + FFD (focal film distance) + grid factor.
Focal film distance is usually set to 40 inches in veterinary medicine. Grids require more radiation
to achieve the same exposure, so if you are using a grid, extra kvp will have to be added. 8:1 ratio
p ay loy (oiaz) 0 asn 'pis e asn jou op noA jl aumipaw Aieunaaa ui pasn Ajuowwo jsow aie spis
factor.
5:1 grid-add 6-8kVp.
8:1 grid—add 8-10kVp.
12:1 grid—add 10-15 kVp.
 Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position. Measure the patient's cranial abdomen over the
thickest point, using a caliper. For example, the patient measured 14 cm. The FFD is 40 inches and the
table Bucky has an 8:1 ratio grid. Using Santes' Rule, the initial kVp would be
78kVp = (2 × 14) + 40 + 10.
30
The Radiographic System 31
Table 3.1. (Continued)
Step 4. Make the exposure.
Using our example, the technical factors used were 78kVp and 7.5 mAs. If the radiograph is good
quality, you have the starting point for a technique chart for the abdomen. If not, then the technique
will need to be adjusted by the kVp 15% rule.
 If the radiograph is too dark, decrease the kVp by 15%. If the radiograph is too light, increase the kVp
by 15%.
 If the technique is still off, keep increasing or decreasing the kVp in 5% increments until you are
CHAPTER
satisfied with the result.
Step 5. Make the technique chart. Start with the adjusted technique and interpolate to find the values
of kVp for other measurements following the rules below:
Subtract 2 kVp from the original kVp for each cm decrease from the original measurement.
Add 2kVp to the original kVp for each cm increase from the original measurement up to 80 kVp.
Add 3kVp for each cm increase that places the kVp above &0 up to 100.
Add 4kVp for each cm increase that places the kVp above 1 00.
Step 6. Repeat the above process to make a technique chart for each different study (abdomen,
thorax, extremity, pelvis/spine).
Figure 3.12. Caliper measuring instrument.
distance), beam filtration, and grid/nongrid. A technique chart is a necessity for both film-
screen radiography and DR to prevent overexposure to the patient and holders and to
prevent DR artifacts like quantum mottle and fogging. Please remember technique charts
will only work if you use them.
It is necessary to use a caliper to measure for each view. A caliper is an L-shaped mea-
suring instrument with centimeter markings, used to measure the thickness of the anatomic
region of interest (Fig. 3.12).
32Chapter 3
CHAPTER 3
Figure 3.13. Caliper measurement of canine carpus. Image courtesy of A. Reid Tyson, DVM.
Always measure the patient over the thickest part of the area of interest after the patient
has been positioned (Fig. 3.13).
 Recording technical factors for each view of a radiographic exam on every patient is a
good practice to evaluate the technique chart so changes can be made, as needed. Recording
exams (Fig. 3.14).
 For example, the veterinarian will be able to monitor changes in the patient's condition
by noting minute changes in lung patterns or heart size or follow-up thorax imaging. The
practice will also reduce radiation exposure to the patient, holders, and to the DR array,
if using a digital system, by reducing retakes. If using a film-screen system, the technique
sheet can be inserted into the film jacket for storage. If using DR, the technical factors can
be recorded on a patient log. It is very easy to either insert this information into a computer
log or a handwritten log.
Overexposure vs. Underexposure
Similar principles apply to both flm-screen systems and DR systems when addressing
overexposure and underexposure issues. The technique chart plays a critical role to both
systems. If the patient is emaciated or has a lot of gas in the stomach and intestines, the
kVp may need to be decreased; conversely, if the patient is an obese or muscular animal,
both kVp and mAs may need to be increased to produce a quality image. Quantum mottle
or noise is caused by underexposure, that is, too little mAs with either system. With DR,
window and leveling can improve the image some but with film-screen systems, the best
option is to retake the film with an adjusted technique. The veterinary technician may
have to investigate why the image on the film appears underexposed. It may not be the
technique chart. If the darkroom chemistry is becoming exhausted, the image on the flm
may appear underexposed (Table 3.2).
The Radiographic System 33
RADIOLOGYTECHNIQUESPAD
CASE#:
TECHINITIALS
X-RAY
GRID
NOTES
MACHINE
(±)
CHAPTER 3
SFMENS
MADZU
LUOROSCOPIO
ELECTROMED
ARGEANIMA
MINX.RAY
SIEMENS
WEIGHT:
CONTRAST:Procedure
Medium
Dilution
Amount
Figure 3.1 4.  Example of radiographic technique recording sheet.
Patient Log
Every practice should maintain a daily patient imaging log, either hardcopy or electroni-
cally. The log should consist of a listing of the date, client/animal's name, species, breed,
patient exam, and possibly the views or number of views taken. Some patient logs will
include the technical factors used if this information is not recorded elsewhere in the
patient's radiographic flm jacket or patient medical record. A radiology patient daily log
is required in some states as a license requirement (Fig. 3.15).
Table 3.2.E
Evaluating the Improperly Exposed Radiograph. Table Courtesy of Matt Wright, DVM, DACVR Animal
Insides
Evaluating the Improperly Exposed Radiograph
Evaluate the image blackening
 Image looks good
 Image Too White
 Image too Black
CHAPTER 3
iqor poop
 Check peripheral blackening
See Table 2
 Periphery is Grey
 Periphery is Black
See Table l
Increase kVp 15%
Table 1: Film is too light
Table 2: Film is too black
Common Causes 
Common Causes
Insufficient Technique: Double the mAs
Excessive Technique
 Used the wrong technique chart
Decrease mAs by 50%
Measured Incorrectly
Decrease kVp by 15%
X-ray tube height is too high
Double Exposure
X-ray tube not aligned with grid
X-ray tube height is too low
Less Common Causes: Processor Problems
Less Common Causes: Processor Problems
Developer Exhausted
Developer too strong
Developer Diluted
Developer temperature too high
Inadequate developer replenishment
Processor timer malfunction
Developer Temperature too low
Less Common Causes; Darkroom Problems
Processor Timer Malfunction
Light Fog
Rare Causes:
Safety Light Malfunction
X-ray machine miscalibration
Rare Causes
X-ray tube failure
X-ray machine timer malfunction 
X-ray machine timer malfunction 
X-ray machine miscalibration
ANIMAL
INSIDES
www.animalinsides.com
TheRadiographicSystem35
X-RAYLOG
NUMBERPATIENTNAMEBREED
DATE
VIEW[S)AREA OFINTEREST
CM.KVPMASEC.MASRESULT
CHAPTER
小
Figure 3.1 5. Example of imaging log.
 It is also a very helpful tool with many applications. For example, if a practice is
using film-screen imaging, the log can help track how many patients have been imaged
between darkroom processor cleanings. Technique charts do not work as efficiently
when the darkroom chemistry becomes exhausted. If searching for a particular patient
imaging exam to use the same technical factors as the last time because it is a recheck
exam for pneumonia, the information can be found quickly, particularly if the practice is
using an electronic daily patient log. The log can be set up as a simple Excel spreadsheet
workbook.
Darkroom Maintenance
and Film Processing
CHAPTER
Darkroom Setup
The darkroom is an integral part of any veterinary practice using a flm-screen system.
 Film processing is as important as technique and positioning in making a quality radio-
graph. Processing the invisible latent image creates the visible manifest image. Processing
converts the light-exposed silver ions in the silver halide crystal to microscopic black grains
of silver. Following good darkroom maintenance practices is necessary to producing good-
quality images. Darkrooms must be free from all outside white-light exposure. The color
of the interior walls should be light to reflect the small amount of light available from
safelights. The paint should be semi-gloss or flat in texture. Floors should be made of a
material that makes them nonslippery when wet in the event of chemical or water spills
or leaks inside the darkroom.
 The darkroom should be wiped clean daily to minimize artifacts on flm by maintaining
the cleanest possible conditions in the room. The floor should be mopped with a damp
mop. All unnecessary items should be removed from countertops and work surfaces. A
 clean damp towel should be used to wipe off the processor feed tray and all countertops
and work surfaces. If a cassette pass box is present, it should be cleaned daily as well.
Hands should be kept clean to minimize fingerprints and handling artifacts. Overhead air
 vents and safelights should be wiped or vacuumed weekly before other cleaning procedures
are performed. The ceiling tiles should be cleaned to prevent flaking on a monthly basis.
Eating and drinking in the darkroom should be prohibited. Nothing should be on the
countertop except for items used for loading and unloading cassettes because they will
collect dust. There should be no shelves above the countertops in the darkroom since these
too serve as a site for dust collection.
37
38Chapter 4
Manual Film Processing
The manual processing darkroom should have designated dry and wet areas to facilitate
keeping the room as clean and clutter-free as possible. The dry area is used to store unde-
veloped flm and flm hangers, for loading and unloading flm from cassettes, and for
placing films on hangers for processing. The wet area will contain the processing tanks
and space for drying film post-processing. The processing tank system will consist of a
up spills. Use a timer when manual processing to avoid overdeveloping or underfixing a
film.
 Film developing is a chemical process, therefore the developer, rinse, fixer, rinse, and
wash temperatures should be the same. The optimal developer temperature is 20*C or
CHAPTER
68°F for most film types. At 68°F, the developing time should be 5 minutes. Use a ther-
mometer to check the chemistry temperature prior to processing film. Check the manu-
 r  r n s s r s rs
temperatures followed by placing the film in too cool fixer will make the film's emulsion
swell and thicken unevenly, causing it to slip or fall off the film base, creating a wrinkled
 or corrugated appearance called reticulation (Fig. 4.1).
Care must be taken when placing a film in or removing a film from the developer tank
to prevent scratching the film. Always gently agitate the film when first immersed to remove
any air bubbles so the developer solution can reach the film surface.
The next tank is the rinse bath or stop bath. When the film is removed from developer
and placed in the rinse bath, gently agitate the film for 30 seconds to remove the develop-
ing chemistry to minimize contamination before placing the film in the fixing solution
tank. Circulating water works well or a stop bath solution, which is 1.5% acetic acid, can
be used. The stop bath solution will quickly stop the action of the developer as well as
neutralize the alkali of the developing solution and protect the acidity of the fixing
solution.1s
 The fixing solution consists of a fixing agent, an acidifer, a hardener, a preservative, and
a solvent. The fixer will clear undeveloped silver crystals from the film, neutralize the
developer solution, and shrink and harden the film emulsion. Gently agitate the film for
about 15 seconds to avoid streaks and stains on the film when first immersed in the fixing
Figure 4.1. Reticulated x-ray film. Image courtesy
of Jeryl C. Jones, DVM.
Darkroom Maintenance and Film Processing39
tank. The fixing time can be determined by the clearing time. The clearing time is the
length of time it takes for the film appearance to change from cloudy to clear. This is
dependent upon the age and strength of the fixing solution. The fixing solution is exhausted
and should be replaced when clearing time exceeds 3 minutes. After the film as cleared,
n s s i    a se  se a s x a  aa
film to clear, the total fixing time should be 6 minutes. If the film is not left in the fixing
solution long enough or if the fixing solution is too weak, the image on the film will fade
and discolor with age.
The next step is to place the film in the wash tank. Some manual darkrooms may have
a post-fixer rinse bath set up prior to placing film in the wash tank. If so, gently agitate
the film for 30 seconds in the second rinse and then place in the final rinse or wash tank
The wash tank contains circulating water, which will wash away remaining chemicals from
the film. The length of time film is left in the wash bath is dependent upon the number of
HAPT
water changes per hour. Typically, flms should be washed for about 20 minutes in circu-
lating water in which the flow is 10 times the volume of the tank per hour If films are left
ER
in the wash tank too long, the emulsion will swell and fall off the film base. One reference
stated films could be left in the wash tank overnight without permanent damage, but this
practice is not recommended. Algae in the wash tank can be controlled by filtering incom-
ing water. Draining and cleaning the water tanks weekly will provide additional protection
from algae.
The last step is drying the processed flm. After being removed from the wash, films
should be hung in a dry place where water can drain off of them either into a sink or tray.
It takes approximately 2 hours for film to dry. Film will dry more efficiently in a film dryer,
a cabinet that blows warm air over flm placed on a rack. It is not recommended to just
use a fan to blow air onto the drying film due to the possibility of blowing dust onto the
flm. A wetting agent bath can be used just after removing the film from the wash to
decrease drying time. The film is briefly immersed into a tank containing a commercial
wetting agent before being placed in a dryer. After the film has dried, cut off the corners
of the film where the hanger attached with scissors or a film corner cutter, and place in
the patient's film jacket (Fig. 4.2).
Darkroom chemistry solutions lose strength and volume during use. Replenisher solu-
tions can be added in quantities to restore to proper levels and the product instructions
solutions and repeated use and time will eventually exhaust darkroom chemistry solutions,
even when replenishers are added. Darkroom chemistry solutions should be changed
monthly and earlier if the developer solution turns green or brown and/or the clearing
time in the fixing bath takes as long as 2-3 minutes. Make sure to clean the chemistry
tanks before refilling with fresh chemistry solutions. Water tanks should be drained and
cleaned at least weekly to prevent algae from growing. Placing a filter on incoming water
will also help eliminate algae. If algae appear, clean the water tanks and the water lines
to the tanks with an algaecide or diluted laundry bleach solution.9,1s
Automatic Film Processing
With automatic x-ray film processing, the sequence consists of developing, where the emul-
sion swells and the developing chemical changes the silver ions of the exposed crystals into
Step 1. Check temperature
Step 6. Place film in fixer
CHAPTER 4
Step 2. Film clip
Step 7. Rinse after fixer
Step 3. Attach film to hanger
Step 8. Final rinse
Step
4.Place
filmindeveloper
Step 9.Drying cabinet
Step 5. Rinse after developer
Step 10. Place in drying rack
Figure 4.2. Manual x-ray film processing instructional diagram. Adapted from images from William R. Brawner,
DVM.
40
Darkroom Maintenance and Fim Processing 41
metallic silver. The next step is fixing, where the silver halide that was not exposed to
radiation is dissolved and removed from the emulsion and the gelatin portion of the emul-
sion is hardened at the same time to make it structurally more sound. The next step is
washing any remaining chemicals from the film. Last, the film is transported through the
dryer to remove the water used to wash it and to make the film acceptable for handling
and viewing (Fig. 4.3).
Automatic Film Processor Maintenance
The x-ray film processor should be cleaned monthly, replacing all of the chemistry, mixing
CHAPT
fresh chemistry, and cleaning the water tank and lines. Any worn transport rollers should
be replaced during the monthly maintenance. The crossover rollers should be wiped off
daily. An automatic processor should be turned on daily (preferably at least five times
TER
weekly) and cleanup film processed to replenish the chemistry and keep water flowing
through the wash tank and water line. Draining and flling the water tank daily will help
 prevent the development of algae in the wash tank (Fig. 4.4).
Figure4.3. Tabletopautomatic x-rayf
film
processor.
Figure 4.4. Automatic tabletop x-ray film proces-
sor crossover rollers.
42Chapter 4
After the processor warms up to optimal temperature, processing approximately six
cleanup films daily will replenish the developer and fixer chemistry, extending its life. If
available, you can use out-of-date flm for this process. Take three flms from your out-
of-date film box, expose to white light, and then process. Take another three flms from
your out-of-date film box and process without exposing to white light. The exposed film
should come out black and the unexposed flm should be fairly clear, though it may have
some fog due to age. You are primarily making sure the developer is turning the background
density black and not brown or streaking, signs that the developer needs to be replaced.
The film should also be dry, not brittle or sticky, signs of fixer, wash, or dryer issues.
Silver Recovery Cartridges
CHAPTER
A silver recovery cartridge should be connected to the processor to filter the used fixer
from the processor because the fixer solution contains a high concentration of accumulated
silver. Silver is considered a heavy metal, and disposing of it is regulated by local and state
agencies. The company that repairs or maintains your processor should check, pick up the
silver cartridge when it has reached capacity, and replace with a new silver recovery car-
tridge (Fig. 4.5).
Safelights
The safelight filters should be checked daily for cracks that may allow white light exposure
to film. The spectral sensitivity of flm, discussed earlier, also relates to the color of light
produced with safelight filters. In the darkroom, safelight filters are placed in safelights to
produce a particular color of light for illumination. It is important to use the correct safe-
light filter in all darkroom safelights based on the spectral sensitivity of the film being
processed in the darkroom. The GBX filter is safe for both blue- and green-sensitive films
Figure 4.5. Silver recovery cartridge.
Darkroom Maintenance and Film Processing43
GBX simply stands for green/blue x-ray. The Wratten 1A safelight filter is safe for green-
sensitive films only and the Wratten 6B safelight filter is safe for blue-sensitive film only.
An incorrect match between the type of safelight filter and the spectral sensitivity of film
results in a high incidence of safelight fogging on the film. This fogging appears radio-
graphically as a film with increased density and decreased contrast. Exposed radiographic
films are eight times more sensitive to fog than unexposed film. The effect on x-ray film
of exposure to the illumination from safelight lamps is referred to post-exposure. The
quality of a radiograph may be impaired by unnecessary exposure to safelight illumination,
which is the reason for variations in density encountered in routine radiographs and for
the lack of brilliancy that is frequently attributed to scattered radiation. If it appears this
is a problem in your practice, reduce the intensity of the safelight illumination by using
lower wattage bulbs, increase the distance between the safelight lamps and the top of the
CHAPT
flm-loading counter, or reduce the number safelight lamps in the darkroom.
TER
Film Storage and Handling
上
Improper storage and handling of x-ray film result in poor radiographs with artifacts that
can interfere with patient care. Improper handling or processing can also cause artifacts on
 the processed radiograph. X-ray film is pressure-sensitive, so rough handling or the imprint
of a fingernail is reproduced as an artifact. Creasing the film before processing produces a
line artifact. If there is dirt on hands or on the intensifying screens, the result is an artifact
 that is speckled in appearance. In a dry environment, static electricity can cause character-
istic artifacts. During automatic processing, wear or dirt on the transport system causes 
artifacts. X-ray flm is sensitive to the effects of elevated temperature and humidity, espe-
cially for long periods of time. Heat reduces contrast and increases fog on the radiograph.
Film should be stored away from heat sources, ionizing radiation, and darkroom chemistry
storage. Film not in a flm bin ideally should be refrigerated. Storage for a year or longer
is acceptable if the flm is maintained at 50°F. Film should be stored in its original container
box and oriented vertically to prevent pressure artifacts on the film (Fig. 4.6).
DONOTCPEAYNLIGHT
Figure 4.6.  Film bin.
44Chapter 4
Other potential hazards to film in the darkroom include heat and chemical exposure.
Film stored within the darkroom should not be close to any heat source. Like flm stored
 in a refrigerated area, flm boxes should be stored vertically, not horizontally, to prevent
 pressure artifacts on the film. The proper room temperature for storing flm is 50-70°F
with a relative humidity of 40-60%. Use out-of-date film as clean up film to maintain
your processor chemistry replenishment. Processing chemicals must be kept away from
film and film-handling areas to prevent exposure and contamination of these areas. Film
fogging will occur with age so it is a good practice to use older film first.
Post-processed radiographs should be stored between 60*F and 80*F and between 30%
and 50% relative humidity. Radiographs are legally part of the patient's medical record,
giving ownership and responsibility for those records to the practice that produced them.
Though x-ray film has a safety designation as technically nonflammable, the jackets they
CHAPTER
are stored in are flammable so films should be stored in a nonsmoking area and on metal
shelving to further decrease the fire hazard.
Patient Identification Labeling
 Patient information should be imprinted on film prior to processing to provide permanent
patient identification. The most prevalent way to imprint the information is to use a photo
imprinting device, sometimes referred to as a film ID printer (Fig. 4.7).
Film cassettes can be ordered with a patient ID blocker manufactured. You can also
order a regular cassette with intensifying screens and cover a corner on both the front and
back intensifying screen with special tape that does not allow the screen crystals to be
affected by x-rays. Patient information is printed on a card and the card is placed in a slot
on the printer with a corner of the film overlying the card. The printer is closed and a
light flashes under the card and imprints the patient information on the film prior to being
placed on the entry tray to the processor.
 Removable lead letters and numbers that fit into a holder is another method of identify-
ing a patient. The holder is placed on the cassette and exposed to x-rays with the patient
during imaging.
Figure 4.7. Film ID printer and darkroom counter space.
Darkroom Maintenance and Fim Processing 45
 A less expensive method of permanently imprinting patient information on the flm is
to use lead impregnated tape. This method is also used prior to exposing the film. The
technician writes the identifying information on the tape and then the tape is placed on
the cassette prior to the exposure.
Care and Maintenance of Film Cassettes
As discussed earlier, an intensifying screen is a device found in radiographic cassettes that
contain phosphors that convert x-ray energy into light, which then exposes the radio-
graphic flm. The purpose of intensifying screens is to decrease the radiation dose needed
to expose the radiographic film. The screen mounted in the tube side of the cassette is
called the front screen and the screen mounted on the opposite side of the cassette is called
the back screen.
ER
The care and maintenance of intensifying screens is extremely important because radio-
graphic quality depends in large part on how well the screens are continuously maintained.
Dust, hair, or other foreign material is transferred to the screens when the cassette is
opened. If left on the screen, it can eventually penetrate the screen surface, leaving a per-
manent artifact. Regularly clean the intensifying screens with a commercially available
antistatic intensifying screen cleaner with gauze pads. Cleaning intensifying screens twice
a month is a good practice and will prolong the life of the screen (Fig. 4.8).
Check the cassettes for film-screen contact. Poor film-screen contact degrades recorded
detail and is usually seen as a localized area of unsharpness somewhere on the radiographic
image. Common causes of poor screen-film contact are worn contact felt; loose, bent, or
 broken hinges or latches; warped screens resulting from excessive moisture; warped cassette
front; sprung or cracked cassette frame; and foreign matter under the screen (Fig. 4.9).
Figure 4.8. Dirty intensifying screen.
Figure 4.9. Broken Cassette hinges.
46Chapter 4
A good practical tip is to number your cassettes by writing the cassette number using a
permanent black marker on the surface of one of the screens in a corner out of the way.
The same number needs to be written on the outside of the cassette. The screen number
will show up on images produced with that cassette and will make it easier to test the
cassette in question.
The test to check flm-screen contact requires a special wire mesh test tool. The wire
mesh tool is simply placed on the cassette in question and radiographed using the technical
factors 50kVp at 5 mAs and a SID of 40 inches. The resulting radiograph is then viewed
 at a distance of about 6 feet to determine whether there are any areas of unsharpness.
Areas of poor contact will appear darker, cloudy, or blurred when compared to areas of
 good contact because of the increased spreading out of the light photons (Fig. 4.10).
Cassettes should be checked frequently to make sure the screens are adhered securely
CHAPTER
to the cassette; the felt is not worn, allowing light leaks; and the latches and hinges are in
good condition (Fig. 4.11).
 In an earlier chapter, luminescence was defined as the emission of light from the screen
when stimulated by radiation. Intensifying screens may luminesce in two ways, fluores-
cence or phosphorescence. Fluorescence refers to the ability of phosphors to emit visible
light only while exposed to x-rays. Phosphorescence occurs when screen phosphors con-
tinue to emit light after the x-ray exposure has stopped. This is also referred to as screen
Figure 4.10.Radiographic image depicting poor
screen contact. Image courtesy of Jeryl C. Jones,
DVM.
Figure 4.11. Loose intensifying screens.
Darkroom Maintenance and Film Processing47
lag and will cause general overall fogging of the radiographic image and degrading of the
scale of contrast in the radiographic image. Screen lag is generally due to old, worn-out
 screens. To test for lag, make a normal exposure of an object with the cassette empty of 
any film. Immediately take the cassette to the darkroom and place a film in it, close the
cassette, and allow the film to remain in the cassette for 5 minutes. Develop the film in
the same manner as a normally exposed radiograph. If the image of the object is transmit-
ted onto the film, then the screens have lag and need to be replaced.
CHAPTER 4
Film-Screen and Digital
Imaging Artifacts
CHAPTER
An artifact is any unwanted optical density on an image that does not properly show the
anatomic area of interest being examined. Artifacts can interfere with visualization of the
 anatomic region of interest and can lead to misdiagnosis. Artifacts can be controlled when
their cause is properly identified.
For x-ray film, the cause can be narrowed down to when an artifact was created.
Primarily artifacts can occur when the flm is being exposed; when the flm is being
processed; and when the film is being handled and stored, either before or after
processing.
Exposure Artifacts
Common exposure artifacts are unexpected foreign objects (such as dog collars); double
exposure; motion; grid cutoff; and quantum mottle. The cause and solution for each arti-
fact is listed in Table 5.1 (see also Figs. 5.1 through 5.4).
49
Table 5.1. Common exposure artifacts.
Appearance on Radiographic Film
Cause
Unexpected foreign objects
Improper patient preparation—remove collars and leashes
Double exposure
Reuse of cassettes already exposed
Motion
 Improper patient movement/restraint
Grid cutoff and grid lines
Improper alignment of x-ray tube to grid. The x-ray tube
should be centered to the grid
Quantum mottle
Insufficient mAS. Increase mAs by using a higher mA
selection and/or increase length of the exposure. May be 
necessary to adjust kVp if using a 300 mA generator
CHAPTER 5
Figure 5.1.   Foreign object on patient.
50
Figure 5.2. Double exposed film.
CHAPTER 5
Figure 5.3. Grid cutoff.
Figure 5.4. Grid lines.
51
52 Chapter 5
Darkroom Processing Artifacts
Common processing artifacts are guide-shoe marks; pi lines; uniform dull, gray fog;
dichroic stain or “curtain" effect; yellow-brown drops on flm; milky appearance; greasy
appearance; and wrinkled or corrugated appearance when manual processing, called
reticulation (Table 5.2; Figs. 5.5 through 5.8).
Table 5.2. Common processing artifacts.
Appearance on Radiographic Film
Cause
S
Guide-shoe marks
Improper position or springing of guide shoes in
CHAPTER
turn-around assembly
Pi lines
Dirt or chemical stains on rollers
Sharp increase or decrease in optical density
Dirty or warped rollers, which can leave sludge
deposits on film
 Uniform dull, gray fog
Improper or inadequate processing chemistry
Dichroic stain or "curtain" effect
Improper squeezing of processing chemicals from film
Small circular patterns of increased optical
Pressure caused by irregular or dirty rollers
density
Yellow-brown drops on film
Oxidized developer
Milky appearance
Unreplenished fixer 
Greasy appearance
 Inadequate washing
Reticulation (manual processing)—wrinkled 
Excessive temperature difference between developer
or corrugated appearance
and fixer or developer and clearing agent. Check
chemistry temperature prior to processing
Figure 5.5. Depicts how crescent or kink marks are made. Image courtesy of Jeryl C. Jones, DVM
Figure 5.6. Post-processed image with crescent mark.
CHAPTER 5
Figure 5.7. White light leak. Image courtesy of Jeryl C. Jones, DVM.
Figure 5.8.Static artifact.
53
54Chapter 5
Film Storage Artifacts
Common handling and storage artifacts are fog; pressure or kink marks; streaks of
increased optical density; crown, tree, and smudge static; and yellow-brown stains (Table
5.3; Figs. 5.9 through 5.12).
Digital Imaging Artifacts
Computed radiography and direct radiography systems have unique artifact patterns as a
result of errors in the systems and inadequate technique, collimation, etc. Some of the
Table 5.3. Common handling and storage artifacts.
CHAPTER
Appearance on Radiographic Film
Cause
Fog
The temperature or humidity is too high
The film bin is inadequately shielded from radiation
The safelight is too bright, or too close to the processing tray.
or has an improper filter
Expired film
Loaded film cassette left in radiographic room
 Pressure or kink marks (half-moon
The film is improperly or roughly handled
marks)
The film is stacked too high in storage and not stored vertically
Streaks of increased optical density
There are white-light leaks in the darkroom or cassette
Crown, tree, and smudge static
The temperature or humidity is too low
Yellow-brown stains
Thiosulfate is let on the film due to inadequate washing
Unidentifiable objects on image
Hair, dirt, flakes of foreign material on intensifying screen
Figure 5.9. Foreign object in cassette.
Figure 5.10.
 Guide-shoe marks.
CHAPTER 5
Figure 5.11. Dirty entrance rollers.
Figure 5.12. Dichroic stain. Image courtesy of Jeryl C. Jones, DVM.
55
56Chapter 5
CHAPTER
Figure 5.13. Quantum mottle in pelvic and acetabular area.
more commonly seen artifacts are fogging, quantum mottle or noise, and nonparallel
collimation.
Scatter radiation is one of the principal factors contributing to decreased flm quality,
causing a generalized fog that covers film and decreases contrast. In DR, fogging is due
 to imaging detectors being much more sensitive than film to scatter and background radia-
tion. Factors contributing to fogging are high kVp, no grid or inadequate grid efficiency,
inadequate collimation, and increased part size or tissue density. Fogging has an overall
 gray grainy appearance. Correct by using the technique chart, adding a grid when neces-
sary and collimating. Fogging can be caused by faulty cassette light leak, placing a loaded
film cassette in the radiographic room where it may be exposed, or a darkroom light leak.
Quantum mottle or quantum noise is caused by inadequate exposure. This artifact
occurs both with flm-screen and digital imaging and a similar appearance is produced.
When mAs is deficient, the phrase “starving the detector" is frequently used to describe
 the lack of sufficient phosphor stimulation in DR. Correct by increasing mAs (and some-
times adjusting the kVp). Use a technique chart, collimate, but also remember to take into
consideration the patient's physical condition. The same principle applies to flm-screen
systems. Quantum mottle is still due to inadequate mAS and it is more critical to adjust
kVp as well as increase mAs (Fig. 5.13).
Nonparallel collimation is an artifact caused by not centering the anatomic region of
interest to the middle of the DR panel. In DR, collimation edges must be parallel to the
sides of the imaging plate or array or there is a noticeable loss of resolution. It occurs
most frequently if the x-ray tube isn't centered to the DR panel or if the anatomic region
of interest is offset on the panel. Correct by checking to ensure the tube is centered to the
array and the anatomic part of interest is also centered on the DR panel/array, and
collimate.
Positioning Aids and
Alternative Restraint
HAPTER
Use of positioning aids and devices such as Head Ends, sandbags, foam wedges and blocks,
head cradle positioning foam, compression restraint bands, masking tape, gauze rolls, and
radiolucent gauze sponges is useful because they decrease the need for manual restraint,
 reduce repeat exposures to correct poor positioning, and reduce radiation exposure to the
patient and holders (Fig. 6.1).
Safe Use of Restraint Devices
Caution must be used when utilizing these devices because they can harm the patient if
not used properly. Never leave a sedated restrained animal unattended. Never place a
sandbag over an animal's neck without dividing the sand to each side of the animal's neck
(Fig. 6.2).
The full weight should ne ver be on sensitive areas like an airway. Using foam positioning
wedges will allow a patient to be easily placed in a true lateral position, keeping the gloved
hands of the holders farther away from the area being imaged, and also will allow a quicker
transition between anatomic regions. If imaging the thorax and abdomen on a large canine,
the operator will be able to take the lateral thorax and the lateral cranial and caudal
abdomen as quickly as it takes to change the film cassette, adjust technique, or choose the
correct algorithm on the digital system. The whole patient is positioned, which makes it
d o  sd u si d a  ad d an o pss s 
does a lot of orthopedic imaging, investing in a radiolucent table pad should be a consid-
eration. Patients are more comfortable and easier to restrain as well as less sensitive to the
noise from placing cassettes in the Bucky tray (Fig. 6.3).
57
Figure 6.1. Positioning aids. Clockwise from feft,
sandbag, radiolucent positioning foam blocks,
compression band, foam head cradle, Head End
patient immobilization device, and foam wedge.
CHAPTER 6
Figure 6.2. "Kona" is being restrained with a compression band over
the abdomen. A Head End patient immobilization device is holding
the right foreleg caudally so the left carpus can be imaged. A sandbag
is placed over the neck with the sand divided so there is no heavy
pressure on the neck. The positioning wedge is supporting the head,
keeping it out of the field of view. A second positioning wedge is being
 used to hold the left carpus in position with another sandbag providing
the weight needed to keep the wedge in place. Image courtesy of A.
Reid Tyson, DVM.
Figure 6.3. "Kona" is being restrained with the compression band
 over the shoulders. A Head End patient immobilization device is
placed cranially to the left stifle with the right hind leg pulled cranially
and propped on the immobilization device. Image courtesy of A. Reid
Tyson,DVM.
58
Positioning Aids and Alternative Restraint59
Sedated Patient Restraint
Some restraint techniques are the result of technician ingenuity. For example, a large sedated
dog is placed in a left lateral recumbent position and restrained with a compression band
 Over the abdomen. A Head End patient immobilization device is holding the right foreleg
caudally so left metacarpus and phalanges can be imaged. A sandbag is placed over the
neck with the sand divided so there is no heavy pressure on the neck. The positioning
wedge is supporting the head, keeping it out of the field of view. A second positioning
wedge is being used to hold the left carpus in position, with another sandbag providing
the weight needed to keep the wedge in place. The foot is oblique to separate the toes with
 uado peads saot aui day oi ioy aui rao paoeid sem aipped suanei e pue adei
the image. This whole process was accomplished in just a few minutes (Fig. 6.4).
The technician then finalizes positioning and makes the exposure.
 For the most secure restraint and to not affect respirations, a compression or restraint
band should be applied across the shoulders if imaging the abdomen, pelvis, or a hind
limb (Fig. 6.5).
CHAPTER
Figure 6.4. "Kona" is being restrained with a compression band over
the abdomen. A Head End patient immobilization device is holding
the right foreleg caudally so the left carpus can be imaged. A sandbag
is placed over the neck with the sand divided so there is no heavy
pressure on the neck. The positioning wedge is supporting the head,
keeping it out of the field of view. A second positioning wedge is being
used to hold the left forelimb in position, with another sandbag provid-
ing the weight needed to keep the wedge in place. A radiolucent 
paddle is placed over the foot to keep the toes spread open. Image
courtesy of A. Reid Tyson, DVM.
Figure 6.5. "Kona" is being restrained with the compression band
over the shoulders. A Head End patient immobilization device is
placed cranially to the left stifle with the right hind leg pulled cranially
and propped on the immobilization device. The left tarsus is positioned
for a lateral projection with gauze placed beneath the tarsal joint, and
the second Head End patient immobilization device is used to keep
the left hind limb in position. Image courtesy of A. Reid Tyson, DVM.
60Chapter 6
Figure 6.6. A head cradle sponge is placed beneath the patient's head and the affected forelimb is pulled crani-
CHAPTER :
ally and taped to the table. A compression band has been placed across the abdomen to keep "Kona" from
moving. Image courtesy of A. Reid Tyson, DVM.
 If imaging the shoulder or scapula, the compression band is placed over the pelvic area
and the patient's head placed in a foam head cradle designed for positioning the head and
neck. Depending upon the area of interest, one or both forelimbs can be pulled cranially
and taped to the end of the table. Positioning the patient in an oblique position is safe and
efficient (Fig.6.6).
The first step is the tech or clinician must learn how each positioning aid should be
used. There is a slight learning curve, but after practice, the process is more efficient and
the positioning is much improved, creating a more diagnostic image to allow the veterinar-
ian to interpret the images to provide better care for the patient and fewer retakes, thereby
less radiation exposure to the holders and the patient. The cost to purchase a couple of
positioning foam wedges, head cradle, and Head Ends or similar patient immobilization
devices is minimal. The more expensive items, like the Head Ends and compression band,
will last for many years if properly maintained and stored.
Radiation Safety
HAPTER
Health Physics
Following Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen's discovery of x-rays in 1895, Clarence Dally, an
electrical engineer, and his brother, Charles, worked on the development of Thomas
 Edison's x-ray focus tube, or fluoroscope. Clarence was Mr. Edison's chief assistant during
the experimental work. The Edison fluoroscope produced sharper images than Roentgen's
fluoroscope, but Mr. Edison noted how “the x-ray had affected poisonously my assistant,
Mr. Dally."22 Clarence Dally started experiencing health issues shortly after first experi-
menting with x-rays. He eventually had both arms amputated due to carcinoma and was
diagnosed with mediastinal cancer. He died a painful and horrific death at age 39 in 1904.
He was the first American fatality from radiation exposure. Mr. Edison halted further
x-ray tube development at his facilities and refused to be x-rayed for the rest of his 84
years. In 1903, as Mr. Dally was battling for his life, Mr. Edison was quoted as saying,
*"Don't talk to me about x-rays, I am afraid of them.*22
 In 1931, the first dose-limiting recommendations were made to protect radiation workers
and the public. The practice of health physics is to provide radiation protection for workers
and the public. Now, the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements
(NCRP) reviews and revises recommended dose limits (DL). It is important to remember
 dose limits are for occupational exposure and do not include personal medical imaging
procedures223 (Table 7.1).
Radiologic Units
In 1981, the International Commission on Radiologic Units (ICRU) issued standards that
were initially adopted everywhere except by the United States. The International System
61
62Chapter 7
Table 7.1.National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements
(NCRP) dose limit recommendations.2.23
Occupational Exposures
Effective dose: Annual 50 mSv (5,000mrem)
Cumulative: 10mSv × age (1,000 mrem X age)
Equivalent annual dose for tissues & organs
Lens of eye: 150mSv (15 rem)
Skin, hands, feet: 500 mSv (50rem)
Annual Public Exposures
Effective dose for frequent exposure: 1 mSv (100 mrem)
Effective dose for infrequent exposure: 5 mSv (500 mrem)
Equivalent dose for tissues and organs
Lens of eye: 15mSv (1,500 mrem)
Skin, hands, feet: 50mSv (5,000 mrem)
CHAPTER 7
Annual Exposures Children under 18 Years of Age
Effective dose: 1 mSv (100 mrem)
Equivalent dose for tissues & organs
Lens of eye: 15mSv (1,500 mrem)
Skin, hands, feet: 50mSv (5,000 mrem)
Embryo-Fetus Exposures
Total effective dose: 5 mSv (500mrem)
Effective monthly dose: 0.5 mSv (50mrem)
Annual Negligible lndividual Dose: 0.01 mSv (10mrem)
of Units (Sl) is now used in the United States, but older terms are also still seen?,23 (Tables
7.2 and 7.3).
 Consistently adhering to established radiation safety practices is extremely important
when using either film-screen or DR imaging systems. With DR imaging, it takes 10-30%
more radiation exposure to produce a single DR image than a conventional radiographic
exposure. The up side for DR is repeat exposures due to technique error or the need to
see both bone and soft tissue is eliminated.
Safe operating procedures for a veterinary facility should include a good technique chart,
positioning aids, protective lead apparel, and personnel monitoring dosimetry devices
(Figs. 7.1 through 7.3).
All radiographic equipment must meet state regulation requirements. There should be
at least two pairs of flexible lead gloves and aprons in good condition available for use in
restraining a patient for imaging (Fig. 7.4).
 Thyroid shields are not required but are recommended, particularly if the practice has
a fluoroscopic unit in use. If using DR, though it may be easier to overexpose and correct
with the workstation, it will affect image quality and violate the ALARA concept.
Table 7.2. Radiologic units and definition of terms.223
Absorbed dose: The energy imparted to matter by ionizing radiation per unit mass of irradiated material
at the place of interest. The unit is the gray (Gy), defined to be an energy absorption of 1 J/kg. The older
term used was the rad, defined to be energy absorption of 100 ergs per gram.23
 Activity: Radioactivity. The becquerel (Bq) is the unit of activity. 1 Gbq = 3.7 × 10l0Bq = 1 Ci. 23
Becquerel (Bq): Special name for the Sl units of radioactivity. One becquerel is equal to disintegration
per second.223
Dose equivalent: Radiation quantity used in radiation protection that expresses the dose on a common
scale for all radiations. The unit of equivalent dose is the sievert (Sv) or rem.2.23
jo Aluenb ay.l 'shej-x jo shei ewwe Ag je u! paonpoid uojezjuo! aul jo ainseaw ay.l saunsodxg
radiation intensity is expressed in air kerma (Gy), roentgen (R), or Coulombs per kilogram (C/kg.)2
Gray (Gy): Special name for the Sl unit of absorbed dose and air kerma. 1 Gy = 1 J/kg = 100 rad.23
Negligible individual dose: Level of effective dose that is considered insignificant so further efforts to
improve radiation protection aren't justified. The recommended negligible individual dose is
0.01 mSv/y.23
rad (radiation absorbed dose): Old term for special unit for absorbed dose, kerma, and specific energy
'wei jad sie ool se pauyap osje s! ll lejajew Aue jo weisol!y ad paqiosge I to'o s! pel 1 'pajedw!
0
The term has been replaced by gray. 1 rad = 0.01 Gy.?
HAPTER
rem (radiation equivalent man): The special unit for dose equivalent and effective dose. It has been
replaced by the sievert (Sv) in the Sl system. 1 rem = 0.01 Sv.?
sievert (Sv): The unit of equivalent dose or effective dose in the Sl system. 1 Sv = 1 J/kg-' = 100rem.?
Table 7.3. Radiologic unit and SIl unit conversion table.223
Customary Unit
SI Unit
Quantity
Name
Symbol
Name
Symbol
Exposure
roentgen
R
air kerma 
Gya
Absorbed dose
rad
rad
gray
GyI
Effective dose
rem
rem
sievert
Sv
Radioactivity
curie
Ci
 Becquerel 
Bq
Multiply
R
by
0.01
to obtain
Gya
Multiply
rad 
by
0.01
to obtain
Gy+
Multiply
rem
by
0.01
to obtain
Sv
Multiply
Ci
by
3.7 × 10l0 
to obtain 
Bq
Multiply
R
by
2.58 x 10-4
to obtain
C/kg
63
Figure 7.1.  Positioning and restraint aids.
CHAPTER 7
Figure 7.2. Wide belt lead apron with thyroid shield and radiation
dosimetry badge on collar of lead apron.
MARY
AYERS
VCC
Pulse
P2
Figure 7.3.
.Radiation dosimetrybadge.
64
Radiation Safety65
Figure 7.4. Imaging of a nonsedated patient. The
personnel restraining the patient are wearing
appropriate lead apparel. The person who is posi-
tioning does not need to wear lead apparel. Foam
wedge is being used to position the patient in
lateral recumbency.
HAPTER
Figure 7.5. Alternative restraint technique being
used on a lightly sedated patient.
ALARA Concept
The ALARA concept simply means radiation exposure in the workplace should be As Low
 As Reasonably Achievable. To practice the ALARA concept, you should develop and use
a technique chart; become proficient in patient positioning; wear appropriate lead apparel;
use chemical restraint when possible; and consistently use positioning aids like restraint
bands, sandbags, tape, foam wedges and blocks, and Head End patient immobilization
devices (Fig. 7.5).
 Each small animal practice should have lead aprons and gloves or mittens that are
0.5 mm thick lead equivalent, and the apparel should fit well and be used (Figs. 7.6 and
7.7).
 Thyroid shields are also recommended, particularly if a limited number of staff provide
manual restraint of patients during imaging.
 In most states, manual restraint of patients is a common practice, so there is concern
about the results of long-term cumulative exposure to radiation. It is the responsibility of
the veterinary practitioner and staff to do everything possible to keep radiation exposure
66Chapter 7
Figure 7.6. Pair of flexible lead gloves.
CHAPTER 7
Figure 7.7.Lead vest and apron.
in the practice as low as reasonably possible. The same person should not consistently
 hold every patient for imaging. Minimize personnel in the radiographic room during
imaging and rotate personnel if possible to decrease occupational radiation exposure. Wear
a radiation dosimetry badge outside of the lead apron on a collar to keep an accurate
record of exposure. Change the radiation dosimetry badges at least quarterly. Inspect lead
gloves at least monthly for cracks or tears in the lead (Fig. 7.8).
RadiationSafety67
HAPTER 7
Figure 7.8. Lead glove with tear on palmar side of glove.
 Maximize shielding between personnel and the x-ray tube by making exposures from
 outside of the room or behind a protective lead equivalent barrier. Pregnant workers should
declare their pregnancy to their supervisor as soon as possible so special considerations
can be applied. Pregnant staff should not restrain patients for imaging. They should not
be in the radiographic room at all during the first trimester, when an exposure is being
 made. A second radiation dosimetry badge should be ordered for the pregnant staff worker
 and be worn at waist level. The most hazardous period for the fetus in regard to radiation
exposure is from week 2 through week 10. During this time, the fetus's major organ
systems are developing. The dose limit for the fetus for the entire pregnancy is 5mSv/9
months (500 mrem/9 months).
An example of poor radiation safety practices is visiting a small animal practice and
finding lead gloves so old and stiff that the holder could not possibly hold a patient or get
his or her hands inside the gloves. At least one lead apron is present but radiation dosim-
etry badges are often not worn, just stored outside of the radiographic room, sometimes
in a desk drawer. The badge reports will look great for an official state inspection since
they are minimal and there is no way an inspector would know unless it is a surprise
inspection and a patient is being imaged when the inspector walks in. Since a pair of lead
gloves and a lead apron are hung in the room, and the practice has the state-required
postings and x-ray tube inspection report, the state regulations have been met. Rarely are
positioning aids seen in the radiographic room. The techs will state something was men-
tioned about positioning aids in school but they have found it is easier to just hold the
patient, not realizing the image quality is deficient because their positioning skills are
deficient. When flms are sent to a referral practice and the veterinary radiologist reviews
68Chapter 7
Figure 7.9. Holder's hands and head in the primary beam
CHAPTER
the images, the radiologist can also evaluate the joints in the holder's fingers because
sometimes the holder's hands and wrists will be seen holding. What is that unusual artifact?
It is the rims of the holder's glasses in the primary beam because the view was not colli-
 mated and the holder did not wear appropriate lead apparel. Does this scenario seem
outrageous? It shouldn't, because all of the incidents mentioned in this scenario are real.
The author combined the different incidents to form one scenario, but all have occurred
Remember certain cells and organs within the body are more sensitive to radiation, includ-
ing gonads, lenses of the eyes, GI tract, and thyroid gland (Fig. 7.9).
Section
2
Radiographic Positioning
General Principles
and Terminology
HAPTER
Pets are such an integral part of the family that when they become ill or injured, the vet-
erinary client expects the best quality care be given, particularly due to the advancements
in technology and medicine. Part of providing quality care is accurately diagnosing and
treating the patient using diagnostic tools such as radiographic imaging. The veterinary
technician's role in this process has grown from providing wide-range nursing care, anes-
thesia support duties, and laboratory tasks to performing basic to more advanced radio-
graphic imaging. It is important for the technician to understand the positional terminology,
learn how to position the patient for a variety of imaging studies, and incorporate the use
of positioning aids to accurately and efficiently attain the images while following radiation
safety practices. Technicians must also learn to review their images to evaluate for posi-
tioning technique and technical quality and to be able to correct errors. The first steps to
becoming proficient in radiography are learning basic positioning views, correct positional
terminology, required patient preparation, and methods of restraint. Good positioning
skills are mandatory to become a successful radiographer.
71
72Chapter 8
Positioning Terminology
The direction the x-ray beam travels through the body of the patient designates the view
taken. Ventrodorsal (VD) indicates the patient is lying in a dorsal recumbent position
and the x-ray beam is entering the patient ventrally and is exiting through the back of
the patient. If the patient is lying in a sternal recumbent position, the x-ray beam is enter-
ing the body through the back and exits ventrally. Dorsopalmar and dorsoplantar are
 p q a o sxa e o a sa aq ax a m p sn a
d n rg sn moq pe st pesn pe pdno an jo ud p
extremities, craniocaudal is the term used when the x-ray beam enters the front and exits
the back of an extremity. Caudocranial is used when the x-ray beam enters through the
back of an extremity and exits through the front's (Table 8.1).
Right and left anatomic lead equivalent markers should be used to designate the right
or left side of the body or to identify an extremity. For a lateral view of the pelvis or
spine the lead marker should be placed dorsal to the spine or pelvis within the collimated
area but not in the anatomy and not ventrally. For a lateral view of the thorax or
abdomen, the right or left marker should be placed ventrally, within the collimated field
but not in the anatomy and not dorsally. An example is to place the left marker in the
HAPTER 8
Table 8.1.
Positioning terminology.
C
Term
Definition
Caudal
Refers to parts of the head, neck, or trunk facing toward the hind part of the
body from any set point. Also refers to those aspects of the limbs above the
carpal and tarsal joints facing in the direction of the hind part of the body
Cranial
Refers to parts of the neck, trunk, and tail facing the direction of the head from
any set point. Also refers to superior or anterior aspect of a body part or limb
above the carpal and tarsal joints
Distal
Refers to any part away from the center of the body
Dorsal
Refers to the back or posterior part of the body; opposite of ventral
Lateral
X-ray beam enters either the right or let side of the body and exits on the
opposite side
Mediolateral
X-ray beam enters the limb medially and exits laterally
Palmar
Refers to the posterior or inferior aspect of the forelimb from the carpus, distally
 Plantar
Refers to the posterior or inferior aspect of the hind limb from the tarsus, distally
Proximal
Refers to the end of a limb or other part closest to the point of attachment
Recumbent
Refers to the animal lying down
Rostral
Toward the head or nares
Superior and inferior 
Refers to the upper and lower dental arcades, respectively
Ventral
Refers to the abdominal or sternal surface of the body
General Principles and Terminology  73
axillary region when doing a lateral thorax. The marker is in the collimated field but
not in the anatomy. For ventrodorsal or dorsoventral views, the left or right is placed
lateral to the body within the collimated feld but not in the anatomy. When doing a
dorsopalmar view of the carpus, the right or left marker should be placed lateral to the
joint (Fig. 8.1)
When doing a lateral or lateral oblique view of an extremity, the marker should be
placed cranially within the collimated field but not in the anatomic region being imaged
(Fig. 8.2 and Table 8.2).
CHAPTER
Figure 8.1. Correct anatomic marker placement for
Figure 8.2. Correct anatomic marker placement for
dorsopalmar projection of the left metacarpus.
lateral oblique projection of the left metacarpus.
Table 8.2.
 Positioning term abbreviations.
Term
Abbreviation
Left
(L)
Right
(R)
Dorsal
(D)
Ventral
(V)
Oblique
(0)
Fore
(F)
Hind 
(H}
Cranial
(Cr)
Caudal
(p3)
Palmar
(Pa)
Plantar
(PI)
Ventrodorsal
(VD)
Dorsoventral
(DV)
74Chapter 8
Room Setup
Before the patient is brought into the room, the technician will need to prepare the room
for the study. The supplies needed are the anatomic markers, caliper for measuring the
patient, technique chart on the correct page, and the correct size film- screen cassettes; the
darkroom needs to be prepared to process the image and properly label the flm with
patient information or enter information into the computer for digital imaging, a technique
sheet to record kVp and mAs with the routine views normally requested for the exam
needs to be prepared, and the positioning aids to use need to be chosen. Remember to
center the part of interest to the center of the flm cassette or DR panel and collimate. For
extremity work and headwork, use the small focal spot for anatomic parts measuring 10
cm or less to improve the quality of the image. Measure the patient after placement in the
recumbent position, not standing on the table. If assistance is needed in imaging the
patient, ask for help before the patient is on the table.
Align the x-ray tube to the Bucky tray containing the film cassette or the DR panel. The
source-image distance (SID) should be minimally 40 inches for a 300 mA generator. If the
x-ray generator is more powerful, like a 400-600 mA generator, the SID can be increased
 t0 44 inches if recommended by the equipment manufacturer. Being consistent is important
because there is a difference in heart size when imaging a thorax at 40 inches versus 44
inches.
PTER
Patient Preparation
The patient's coat should be dry and debris-free. Wet hair and debris create artifacts on
the radiographic image and may hinder the veterinarian in interpreting the image. Iodine-
based skin medications are radiopaque and should be removed, if possible, as well as
bandages and splints. Depending upon the anatomic region being imaged, collars and
harnesses should be removed. If the abdomen is the area of interest, enemas or fasting
may be called for.
It is preferred to use chemical restraint with positioning aids to image the small animal
patient. In some states, manually restraining a patient is against state regulations. The goal
is to minimize radiation exposure and attain quality imaging. If it is necessary to manually
restrain a patient because chemical restraint is contraindicated, strictly adhere to radiation
safety practices. The holder(s) should wear lead aprons and gloves while restraining the
patient and also use positioning aids to minimize the number of people in the room.
Collimate to the anatomic region of interest, and stand as far away from the primary beam
 as possible. Lead aprons and gloves are designed to protect the holder from scatter radia-
tion so do not place gloved hands in the primary beam. A compression band is an excellent
positioning aid to use to securely hold one end of the patient on the table when imaging
an anatomic region cranially or caudally to the band.
Remember that animals not sedated for imaging studies are not very tolerant and need
the technician to speak softly and consolingly to them, position well and quickly, and be
d i aa  d a   q sd a i   po 
General Principles and Terminology75
and anxious, thereby unpredictable in regard to behavior. Loud noises and hurried move-
ments can be alarming to a pet. This is particularly important if the animal is seriously
injured. The ideal image may not be attainable, but diagnostic images are generally pos-
sible. It may be necessary to take horizontal beam projections if the patient cannot be
turned due to a suspected fractured spine. This is the type of imaging challenge where the
technician has to be innovative (Figs. 8.3 through 8.6).
Figure 8.3. Canine patient impaled by an arrow.
CHAPTER 8
R
Figure 8.4. Lateral view of thorax showing the arrow's path.
76Chapter 8
R
Figure 8.5.
Lateral view of the abdomen with arrow's tip
CHAPTER 8
Figure 8.6.  VD abdomen with arrow's tip.
Horizontal Beam Views
Horizontal beam views are views taken with the patient in lateral, dorsal, or ventral
recumbent positions or with the patient standing in lateral, dorsal, or ventral standing
 positions. Horizontal beam views called lateral decubitus views can be used for visualiza-
tion of free air in the abdomen and pleural effusion in the thorax. Horizontal beam views
for mediastinal masses are taken with the patient held upright in a VD position. They are
also used for imaging trauma patients when spinal fractures are suspected or even fractures
General Principles and Terminology77
of the extremities. If a practice has a permanently mounted DR panel in the table, hori-
 zontal beam imaging is not possible. If the DR panel is tethered so it can be removed from 
the table, it is important to remember the area of interest must be centered to the DR
panel and not offset to one side or the other. When a horizontal beam view is requested,
it is important to have the clinician clarify the projection needed (Figs. 8.7 through 8.10).
CHAPTER 8
Figure 8.7. Horizontal beam standing lateral projection.
Figure 8.8. Horizontal beam recumbent lateral projection.
Figure 8.9. Horizontal beam recumbent lateral position for VD view.
CHAPTER 8
Figure 8.10.
Positioning diagram illustrating a patient in a true lateral projection.
7B
Small Animal
Positioning—Forelimb
Scapula
CHAPTER 9
The routine views of the scapula are lateral and caudocranial views. Please note two
lateral views may need to be taken to completely visualize the scapula, one for the
body of the scapula and a second view for the neck of the scapula.
Sedation: Recommended.
80Chapter 9
View: Lateral View to Visualize the Body of the Scapula
Center and Measurement Point: Mid-body of the scapula.
Manual restraint required for this view. Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position,
affected side down. Grasp the down leg below the elbow, extending the elbow joint so it
cannot bend, and push dorsally, forcing the body of the scapula dorsally so it is seen
bulging above the dorsal spinous processes of the thoracic vertebra. At the same time,
 grasp the up leg and pull ventrally and caudally, which will rotate the thorax slightly, and
further isolate the scapular body (Figs. 9.1 and 9.2).
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.1.
Lateral view scapular body illustration.
Figure 9.2. Lateral view scapular body.
Smalf Animal Positioning-Forelimb 81
View: Lateral View to Visualize the Scapular Neck
Center and Measurement Point: Scapular neck.
Manual restraint required for this view. Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position,
affected side down. Pull affected limb cranially and ventrally while pulling the unaffected
leg caudally to visualize the scapular neck (Figs. 9.3 and 9.4).
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.3.Lateral view of scapular neck illustration.
R
Figure 9.4. Lateral view of scapular neck.
82Chapter 9
View: Caudocranial View
Center and Measurement Point: Mid-body of the scapula.
Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the forelegs extended cranially. Rotate
the patient's sternum away from the affected side, approximately 10 degrees, to remove
the ribs from the proximity of the body of the scapula (Figs. 9.5 and 9.6).
CHAPTER
Figure 9.5.  CdCr view of scapular body illustration.
Figure 9.6.CdCr view of scapular body.
Shoulder
The routine views of the shoulder are lateral and craniocaudal views. The lateral
shoulder view is frequently used to confirm the presence of osteochondrosis lesions,
normally located on the caudal aspect of the humeral head near midline. The trachea
 and the manubrium of the sternum must be moved away from the joint to properly
visualize the shoulder joint. An additional view to visualize the bicipital groove is
helpful in evaluating the supraspinatus tendon for calcifications.
Sedation: Recommended.
Small Animal Positioning-ForelimbB3
View: Lateral View
Center and Measurement Point: Shoulder joint.
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position, affected side down. Pull affected limb
cranially and ventrally while pulling the unaffected leg caudally. Slightly extend the patients
head and neck dorsally to remove the trachea from over the joint. The joint can be palpated
by running fingers up the cranial surface of the humerus to the joint (Figs. 9.7 and 9.8).
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.7.
Lateral view illustration.
R
Figure 9.8.Lateral view.
84Chapter 9
View: Caudocranial View
Center and Measurement Point: Shoulder joint.
Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the forelegs extended cranially. To
avoid an oblique projection of the shoulder joint, do not rotate the humerus (Figs. 9.9
through 9.11).
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.9.CdCr view illustration.
Figure 9.11. CdCr view.
Figure 9.10. CdCr view, side projection illustration.
Small AnimalPositioning-Forelimb85
Bicipital Groove
Center and Measurement Point: Head of the humerus.
 Film-Screen Cassette: Place the patient in a sternal recumbent position with the head
turned slightly a way from the affected shoulder without rotating the thorax. The thorax
must remain upright. The elbow joint of the affected leg should be flexed so the shoulder
 joint is projected over the proximal third ofthe radius and ulna. The film-screen cassette
 is placed in the crook ofelbow joint. Palpate the head ofthe humerus to find the bicipital
 groove and center the collimator light over that point. Collimate tightly to the area of
interest; the x-ray beam is projected through the bicipital groove (Figs. 9.12 and 9.13).
HAPTER
Figure 9.12.   Bicipital groove top view projection illustration
with film cassette.
Fgure 9.13.  Bicipital groove side view projection illustration with film cassette.
Continued
B6Chapter9
DR Panel: Place the patient in a sternal recumbent position with the head turned
slightly away from the affected shoulder without rotating the thorax. The thorax
must remain upright. The elbow joint of the affected leg should be flexed so the
shoulder joint is projected over the proximal third of the radius and ulna. Palpate
the head of the humerus to find the bicipital groove and center the collimator light
over that point. Collimate tightly to the area of interest. Without moving the shoul-
der, humerus, or elbow, gently move the radius and ulna slightly lateral to allow the
bicipital groove to be projected onto the DR panel (Figs. 9.14 through 9.16)
CHAPTER
Figure 9.14. Bicipital groove top view projection illustration with DR panel.
Figure 9.15.
Bicipital groove side view projection illustration with DR panel.
Small Animal Positioning- Forelimb87
Figure 9.16.
Bicipital groove ima ge.
CHAPTER
Humerus
The routine views of the humerus are lateral, caudocranial, or craniocaudal views.
9
The craniocaudal view is generally used when the patient is unable to extend forelimb
cranially due to pain or fracture.
Sedation: Recommended.
Centering Point: Mid-shaft of the humerus.
Measurement Point: Shoulder joint.
B8Chapter 9
View: Lateral View
 Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position, affected side down. Pull affected limb
cranially and ventrally while pulling the unaffected leg caudally, out of the field of view.
Slightly extend the patient's head and neck dorsally to remove the trachea from over the
head of the humerus (Figs. 9.17 and 9.18).
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.17. Lateral view illustration.
Figure 9.18.Lateral view.
Small Animal Positioning-Forelimb89
View: Caudocraniaf View
 Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the forelegs extended cranially. The
affected leg should remain as parallel to the tabletop as possible to reduce distortion.
Collimate to include the elbow and shoulder joints in the view (Figs. 9.19 and 9.20).
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.19.CdCr view illustration.
Figure 9.20.CdCr view.
90  Chapter 9
View: Craniocaudal View
 Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the affected limb extended caudally
and the plane of the humerus parallel to the tabletop. The forelimb should be abducted
slightly away from the thorax to prevent superimposition of the ribs over the humerus
(Figs. 9.21 and 9.22).
CHAPTER
Figure 9.21.
CrCd view illustration.
Figure 9.22.
CrCd view.
Elbow
The routine views of the elbow are either a 45-degree or 90-degree flexed lateral
view (clinician preference) and a craniocaudal view. Supplementary views are hyper-
flexed lateral for evaluation of an ununited anconeal process and oblique views. OFA
evaluation of the elbow joint only requires the hyperflexed lateral view.
Sedation: Recommended
Center and Measurement Point: Humeroulnar joint.
Small Animal Positioning-Forelimb
View: Lateral View
 Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position, affected side down. Position the affected
field of view limb cranially and ventrally while pulling the unaffected leg caudally, out of
the field of view. The degree of flexion is 45 degrees or 90 degrees, clinician preference
(Figs. 9.23 and 9.24).
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.23.Lateral view illustration 90 degrees.
R
Figure 9.24.
Lateral view.
92Chapter 9
View: Craniocaudaf View
 Place the patient in a sternal recumbent position with the affected forelimb fully extended.
The patient's head should be elevated and turned away from the affected side and the
thorax should remain upright. The humerus, elbow joint, and radius and ulna should
remain aligned to ensure a true CrCd view. If the elbow joint cannot be fully extended,
the x-ray beam should be angled 10 to 20 degrees to open the joint to evaluate the radial
joint surface's (Figs. 9.25 and 9.26).
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.25. CrCd view illustration.
Figure 9.26. CrCd view.
Small AnimalPositioning-Forelimb93
View: Supplementary Hyperflexed Lateral View
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position, affected side down. Position the affected
field of view limb cranially and ventrally while pulling the unaffected leg caudally, out of the
field of view. Keeping the carpus in a true lateral position, move the carpus toward the neck
to hyperflex the elbow joint. This will also keep the elbow joint in a true lateral position.
The hyperflexed lateral view is the only view required for an OFA evaluation (Figs. 9.27
and 9.28).
57
游
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.27. Hyperflexed lateral view illustration.
R
Figure 9.28.Hyperflexed lateral view.
94Chapter 9
Radius and Ulna
 The routine views of the radius and ulna are lateral and craniocaudal views.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Midpoint of the radius and ulna.
Measurement Point: Elbow joint.
View: Lateraf View
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position, affected side down. Slightly flex the elbow
and pull the radius and ulna cranially away from the body and move the unaffected leg
caudally, out of the field of view. The radius and ulna should be centered on the flm cas-
sette or DR panel. Collimate to include the elbow and carpal joints (Figs. 9.29 and 9.30).
CHAPTER 9
R
Figure 9.29.Lateral view illustration.
Figure 9.30.Lateral view.
Small AnimalPositioning-Forelimb95
View: Craniocaudaf View
 Place the patient in a sternal recumbent position with the affected forelimb fully extended.
The patient's head should be elevated and turned away from the affected side and the
thorax should remain upright. Center the radius and ulna to the film cassette or DR panel.
Collimate to include the elbow and carpal joints (Figs. 9.31 and 9.32).
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.31.CrCd view illustration.
Figure 9.32. CrCd view.
Carpus
 The routine views for the carpus are dorsopalmar (DPa) and lateral views.
Supplemental views are flexion, extension, and oblique views.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Carpal joint.
Measurement Point: Carpal joint.
96Chapter 9
View: Lateraf View
 Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position, affected side down. Slightly flex the elbow
and pull the radius and ulna cranially away from the body and move the unaffected leg
caudally, out of the field of view. The carpal joint should be centered on the flm cassette
or DR panel. Collimate to include the distal third of the radius and ulna and the metacarpal
bones. Supplemental views are flexion, extension, and 45-degree oblique dorsopalmar-
mediolateral and dorsopalmar-lateromedial views off the dorsopalmar view (Figs. 9.33
and 9.34).
CHAPTER
Figure 9.33.Lateral view illustration.
Figure 9.34. Lateral view.
Small Animal Positioning-Forelimb
97
View: Dorsopalmar View
Place the patient in a sternal recumbent position with the affected forelimb fully extended.
 The patient's head should be elevated and turned away from the affected side and the
thorax should remain upright. Center the carpal joint to the film cassette or DR panel.
Collimate to include the distal third of the radius and ulna and the metacarpal bones (Figs.
9.35 and 9.36).
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.35. DPa view illustration.
Figure 9.36. DPa view.
98Chapter 9
Supplemental Views: Flexion, Extension, Oblique, and Stress Views
For flexion and extension views, care should be taken to keep the joint in a true lateral
projection. For oblique views, the carpal joint is rotated 45 degrees dorsopalmar view
(Figs. 9.37 through 9.42).
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.37. Lateral flexion illustration.
Figure 9.38. Lateral flexion view.
Figure 9.39.
Lateral extension illustration.
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.40. Lateral extension view.
100Chapter 9
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.41.
DPa carpal stress view illustration.
Figure 9.42.
 DPa carpal stress view.
Metacarpus, Digits
The routine views for the metacarpus and phalanges are DPa and lateral views.
Supplemental views are lateral views of the individual digits.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Metacarpal bones.
Measurement Point: Metacarpal bones.
Small Animal Positioning—Forelimb
101
View: Lateraf View
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position, affected side down. Slightly flex the elbow
and pull the radius and ulna cranially away from the body and move the unaffected leg
caudally, out of the feld of view. The metacarpal bones and phalanges should be centered
on the film cassette or DR panel. Collimate to include the carpal joint and the tips of the
digits. Supplemental lateral view of the digits: Separating and taping the toes apart in a
slightly oblique lateral view will separate the digits (Figs. 9.43 and 9.44).
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.43. Lateral view illustration.
Fgure 9.44.  Lateral view.
102Chapter 9
Dorsopaimar View
 Place the patient in a sternal recumbent position with the affected forelimb fully extended.
 The patient's head should be elevated and turned away from the affected side and the
thorax should remain upright. Center the metacarpal bones to the film cassette or DR
panel. Collimate to include the distal third of the carpal joint and the tips of the digits.
Sometimes it may be necessary to tape the foot flat to achieve a true DPa view of these
bones (Figs. 9.45 and 9.46).
CHAPTER
Figure 9.45.DPa view illustration.
Figure 9.46. DPa view.
Small Animal PositioningPelvis
and Hind Limb
Pelvis
The routine views for pelvic imaging are extended leg ventrodorsal (VD) and lateral.
Other views often requested are the VD frog-leg view and the acetabular rim view.
CHAPTER 10
Sedation: Heavy sedation or general anesthesia.
Center Point: Greater trochanter.
Measurement Point: Greater trochanter.
103
104Chapter 10
View: Lateral View
 For the lateral view of the pelvis, place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with
the affected side down. Make sure the chest and abdomen are in a true lateral position,
using positioning wedges beneath the sternum or cranial abdomen, as needed. The bottom
femur should be in a neutral position, which means it is slightly pulled cranial with the
stifle flexed, as if the patient were standing. The upper leg should be pulled caudally and
either manually restrained or taped to the table. The tuber ischi should be superimposed.
 Sometimes a positioning wedge is needed between the hind legs for larger breed dogs
(Figs. 10.1 and 10.2).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.1. Lateral view illustration.
Figure 10.2. Lateral view.
Small Animal Positioning-Pelvis and Hind Limb105
View: Ventrodorsal View Legs Extended
 Place the patient in dorsal recumbent position with the head in a head cradle positioning
sponge with the Head End against the shoulders. Make sure the sternum and spine are
superimposed as you extend the hind legs. Grasp the tarsi, flex the stifles, and pull the
tarsi toward you, making sure the patient's midline is centered to the table, and apply
equal traction to each leg. The cranial border of the image is the crest of the ilium and
the caudal border should include the stifle joints. The patellae are centered between the
femoral condyles. For no sedation or lightly sedated patients, it may be necessary to have
a holder at both ends of the patient to use traction to efficiently extend the lower legs to
 attain a properly positioned VD pelvis. If the patient is under heavy sedation, the techni-
cian can use a compression band with Head End and head cradle positioning foam to
restrain the upper body so one holder can extend the lower legs. Depending upon the
flexibility of the patient and the level of sedation, no holders may be necessary. Positioning
may be possible by adding roll gauze or tape to keep the legs parallel and extended with
a sandbag to hold the feet in place (Figs. 10.3 and 10.4).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 1 0.3.VD extended leg illustration.
Figure 10.4.VD extended leg.
106Chapter10
View:Ventrodorsal Frog-Leg
 Place the patient in dorsal recumbent position with the head in a head cradle positioning
sponge with the Head End against the shoulders. Make sure the sternum and spine are
superimposed as the hind legs are left in the normal flexed position. The femur should be
at an approximately 45-degree angle to the spine. Sandbags or masking tape over the tarsal
 joints will hold the legs in position (Figs. 10.5 through 10.7).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.5.VD frog-leg illustration.
Figure 10.6.
VD frog-leg illustration side view.
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.7.
VD frog-leg view.
107
108Chapter 10
View: Acetabufar Rim View
Center Point: Acetabulum.
 Place patient in a frog-leg ventrodorsal recumbent position. Tilt the pelvis slightly toward
the affected side to visualize the acetabulum and femoral head. Use foam positioning
wedges beneath the sternum to support the body and tape or sandbag the unaffected leg
out of the feld of view to hold the patient in place (Figs. 10.8 and 10.9).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.8. Acetabular rim
illustration.
Figure 10.9. Acetabular rim view.
Small Animal Positioning-Pelvis and Hind Limb
109
OFA Imaging
Information regarding OFA imaging and submission instructions was retrieved from the
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals’ website (http://www.offa.org/hd_procedures.html).
Radiographs submitted to the OFA should follow the American Veterinary Medical
Association recommendations for positioning. This view is accepted worldwide for detec-
tion and assessment of hip joint irregularities and secondary arthritic hip joint changes.
To obtain this view, the animal must be placed on its back in a dorsal recumbent position
with the rear limbs extended and parallel to each other. The stifles are rotated internally
and the pelvis is symmetric. Chemical restraint (anesthesia) to the point of relaxation is
recommended but not required. With chemical restraint, optimum patient positioning
is easier with minimal repeat radiographs and a truer representation of the hip status is
 obtained. For elbows, the animal is placed on its side and the respective elbow is placed
in an extreme flexed position (Figs. 10.10 and 10.11).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.10. OFA pelvis extended leg.
110Chapter 10
Figure 10.11. OFA hyperflexed elbow.
The radiograph film must be permanently identified with the animal's registration
number or name, date the radiograph was taken, and the veterinarian's name or hospital
name. If this required information is illegible or missing, the OFA cannot accept the flm
important to record on the OFA application the animal's tattoo or microchip number in
order for the OFA to submit results to the AKC. Sire and dam information should also
CHAPTER
be present.
 Radiography of pregnant or estrus females should be avoided due to possible increased
joint laxity (subluxation) from hormonal variations. OFA recommends radiographs be
taken 1 month after weaning pups and 1 month before or after a heat cycle. Physical
inactivity because of illness, weather, or the owner's management practices may also result
 in some degree of joint laxity. The OFA recommends evaluation when the dog is in good
physical condition.
 For large and giant breed dogs, 14" x 17" film size is recommended. Small film sizes can
be used for smaller breeds if the area between the sacrum and the stifles can be included.
If a copy is necessary ask your veterinarian to insert two films in the cassette prior to
making the exposure. This will require about a 15% increase in the kVp to make an exact
duplicate of the radiograph sent to OFA. Films may be returned if a $5.00 fee and request
for return are both included at time of submission.
 Good contrast is desirable (high mAs, low kVp). Grid techniques are recommended for
all large dogs.
Radiation Safety
 Proper collimation and protection of attendants is the responsibility of the veterinarian.
Gonadal shielding is recommended for male dogs.
Small Animal Positioning- Pelvis and Hind Limb111
Mailing Recommendations
The radiograph, application, and fees should be enclosed in a mailing envelope. These may
be paper clipped together. Use the mail service of your choice. Obtain large envelopes from
an office supply store, veterinary hospital, or other radiology department. The envelope
should be sealed with tape. Light cardboard may be included to stiffen the package but is
not required. Avoid using boxes, tubes, padded envelopes, stapling check and application,
bending/folding radiographs, or taping application or check to envelope.
OFA's Handing Procedures
When a radiograph arrives at the OFA, the information on the radiograph is checked
 against information on the application. The age of the dog is calculated, and the submitted
fee is recorded. The board-certified veterinary radiologist on staff at the OFA screens
the radiograph for diagnostic quality. If it is not suitable for diagnostic quality (poor
positioning, too light, too dark, or image blurring from motion), it is returned to the refer-
assigned.
PennHiP Information
 PennHIP is the most accurate hip screening method available and can be safely performed
on dogs as young as 16 weeks of age. Veterinarians must attend a training seminar to
learn how to position the PennHIP projections. They must personally position for these
ER
studies, though one of their staff can also be trained to perform the studies if the staff
member accompanies the veterinarian to the training seminar to also be trained. When
cians, if applicable) will each have to submit three sets of PennHIP radiographs to the
University of Pennsylvania before they can officially become certified to perform this study
at their practice. An early estimate of a dog's hip integrity is invaluable, whether the dog's
intended purpose is for breeding, for working, or as a family pet. For breeders, informa-
tion compiled in PennHIP's international database permits informed selection of breeding
stock based on hip tightness relative to other members of the same breed. Breeders can
reduce the incidence and severity of canine hip dysplasia (CHD) in future generations of
dogs by applying selection pressure toward tighter hips. Among current hip screening
methods, PennHIP has the highest heritability value to bring about these genetic changes.
Service and working dog organizations use PennHIP as the principal method for hip screen-
ing. The investment in training service/working dogs is enormous. The ability to prescreen
the dog's genetic predisposition to CHD is an invaluable tool when evaluating a future
service/working dog's hip integrity. For companion dog owners, if the dog is identified to
be at risk for CHD, the PennHIP veterinarian can recommend, at an early age, appropriate
strategies (diet, medication, and/or activities) to delay or diminish the ultimate course of
the disease.
112Chapter 10
The PennHIP veterinarian will submit the three PennHIP radiographs to the University
of Pennsylvania for specialized evaluation (for examples, see Figs. 10.12 through 10.14).
A confidential report will be sent to the owner and the PennHIP veterinarian: The
distraction index (Dl) is a measure of hip laxity—the inherent distance the ball can be
displaced (distracted) from the hip socket—and is expressed as a number between 0
and 1. A DI near zero indicates little joint laxity (very tight hips). A DI closer to 1.0
indicates a high degree of laxity (very loose hips). Dogs with tighter hips are less likely
to develop hip dysplasia than dogs with looser hips. A threshold level of 0.30 has been
identifed, below which hip dysplasia is very unlikely to occur. The PennHIP report also
 includes an evaluation of the hip-extended radiograph for evidence of arthritis, confirm-
ing a diagnosis of hip dysplasia. Based on the Dl, the dog is ranked within its breed.
For the dog breeder this ranking helps in the selection of breeding candidates—dogs in
the tighter half of the population are recommended for breeding. By selecting breeding
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.12. PennHIP VD extended leg pelvis.
Small Animal Positioning- Pelvis and Hind Limb113
Figure 10.13. PennHlP compression view.
CHAPTER 10
Figure 1 0.14.PennHIP distraction view.
within a few generations. For more detailed information, visit the PennHIP website at
www.pennhip.org.
PennHIP
The University of Pennsylvania
School of Veterinary Medicine
3800 Spruce Street
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104
114
Chapter 10
Femur
The routine views of the femur are CrCd and lateral views.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Mid-shaft of the femur.
Measurement Point: Mid-shaft of the femur.
CHAPTER 10
Smalf Animal Positioning— Pelvis and Hind Limb115
View: Lateral View
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position, affected side down. Flex and move the
unaffected leg out of the field of view. Use tape and/or a sandbag to secure the unaffected
leg. Placing gauze or a thin foam pad beneath the proximal tibia will prevent rotation of
the femur. Include the hip and stifle joint in the field of view (Figs. 10.15 and 10.16).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.15.Lateral femur illustration.
Figure 10.16.Lateral femur.
116Chapter 10
View: Craniocaudal View
 Place the patient in dorsal recumbent position with the patient's head in a head cradle
positioning sponge with the Head End immobilization device or two sandbags against the
shoulders. Extend the affected leg caudally and abduct slightly to remove superimposition
of the tuber ischium. The femur should be as parallel as possible to the tabletop with the
patella positioned between the femoral condyles. The field of view should include both
the hip and stifle joints. The unaffected leg should be flexed and rotated laterally out of
the field of view and secured with a sandbag placed over the tarsal joint (Figs. 10.17 and
10.18).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.17. CrCd femur illustration.
Figure 10.18. CrCd femur.
Small Animal Positioning-Pelvis and Hind Limb117
Stifle
The routine views for the stifle joint are caudocranial and lateral views. For the
lateral view of the stifle, some veterinarians prefer a 90-degree flexed lateral over the
 more natural slightly flexed lateral, particularly in specialty practices. Supplemental
            
 ates the depth of the trochlear groove and demonstrates the femoropatellar joint
space.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Stifle joint.
Measurement Point: Distal femur.
CHAPTER 10
118Chapter 10
View: Lateraf View
 The patient is placed in a lateral recumbent position with the unaffected leg moved later-
ally and secured outside the field of view with tape or sandbag. Alternate positioning
technique has the unaffected leg pulled cranially, ventral to the abdomen, and secured with
sandbag, tape, or Head End immobilization device. Smaller dogs, cats, or dogs with short
legs are more easily positioned for the lateral view if the unaffected leg is flexed, moved
laterally, and secured outside the field of view. The affected stifle joint is flexed either 90
degrees or a more natural slightly flexed angle, usually 60 degrees, clinician preference.
 Place gauze or small thin positioning foam beneath the calcaneous to ensure the tibia is
through 10.21).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.19.Lateral view illustration.
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.20. Lateral view alternate illustration.
Figure 10.21. Lateral view.
119
120Chapter 10
View: Caudocranial View
The patient should be placed in a sternal recumbent position, with the affected leg extended
caudally. The unaffected leg should be flexed and foam positioning wedge or sandbag
should be placed beneath the femoral area of the unaffected leg to aid in controlling rota-
tion of the stifle being imaged. The patella should be centered between the two femoral
condyles. It should be noted that if the femur, stifle, and tibia are in alignment and the
calcaneous is positioned perfectly vertical, the patella will be centered between the femoral
condyles. Palpating the femoral condyles and tibial tuberosity may also aid in checking
symmetry (Figs. 10.22 and 10.23).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.22.CdCr view illustration.
Figure 10.23. CdCr view.
CHAPTER 10
121
122Chapter 10
View: Skyline View
Center Point: Patella.
Measurement Point: Patella.
Place the patient in a sternal recumbent position with the affected joint fully flexed with
the distal extremity pulled caudally. X-ray beam should be centered on the patella and the
field of view collimated to include the femoral condyles (Figs. 10.24 and 10.25).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.24.Sunrise view of patella illustration.
Figure 10.25. Sunrise view of patella.
Small Animal Positioning-Pelvis and Hind Limb123
Tibial Plateau Leveling Osteotomy (TPLO)
The TPLO is a surgical technique developed to treat cranial cruciate ligament tears
 in dogs. The routine views are CdCr and lateral views of the tibia. The lateral view
requires both the stifle and tarsal joints to be flexed 90 degrees.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Middle of tibia.
Measurement Point: Stifle.
CHAPTER 10
124Chapter 10
View: Lateraf View
 The patient is placed in a lateral recumbent position with the unaffected leg moved later-
ally and secured outside the field of view with tape or sandbag. Alternate positioning
technique has the unaffected leg pulled cranially, ventral to the abdomen, and secured with
sandbag, tape, or Head End immobilization device. The stifle and tarsal joints are flexed
 90 degrees. Place gauze or small thin positioning foam beneath the calcaneous to ensure
the tibia is parallel to the tabletop or cassette and the femoral condyles are superimposed.
Both the stifle and tarsal joints should be in the field of view (Figs. 10.26 through 10.28).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.26.Lateral TPLO view illustration.
Figure 10.27. Lateral TPLO view alternate illustration.
CHAPTER 10
R
Figure 10.28. Lateral TPLO view.
125
126Chapter 10
View: Caudocranial View
The patient should be placed in a sternal recumbent position, with the affected leg extended
caudally. The unaffected leg should be flexed and foam positioning wedge or sandbag
should be placed beneath the femoral area of the unaffected leg to aid in controlling rota-
tion of the stifle being imaged. The patella should be centered between the two femoral
condyles. It should be noted that if the femur, stifle, and tibia are in alignment and the
calcaneous is positioned perfectly vertical, the patella will be centered between the femoral
condyles. Palpating the femoral condyles and tibial tuberosity may also aid in checking
symmetry. Both the stifle and tarsal joints should be in the field of view (Figs. 10.29 and
10.30).
CHAPTER
R
Figure 10.29.CdCr TPLO view illustration.
Fgure 10.30.CdCr TPLO view.
Small Animal Positioning-Pelvis and Hind Limb127
Tibial Tuberosity Advancement (TTA)
The TTA is a surgical technique developed to correct a rupture of the cranial cruciate
ligament (CCL), also referred to as the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL). The routine
views taken are lateral and CdCr views of the stifle.
Center Point: Stifle joint.
Measurement Point: Distal femur.
CHAPTER 10
128 Chapter 10
View: Lateral View
 The patient is placed in a lateral recumbent position with the unaffected leg moved later-
ally and secured outside the feld of view with tape or sandbag. Center the beam on the
 stifle joint space. The tibia should be positioned in true lateral, as parallel and close to the
tabletop as possible to decrease magnification (< 5%). Place gauze or thin positioning foam
beneath the calcaneous to help ensure the femoral condyles are superimposed. The femoro-
tibial angle should be 135 degrees, to mimic the normal canine standing stance. The col-
limated field of view should include the mid diaphyses of the femur and tibia. For post-op
images, the field of view should include the total implant (Figs. 10.31 and 10.32).
0t
Figure 10.31.Lateral TTA view
CHAPTER
illustr ation.
Figure 10.32.
Lateral TTA view.
Small Animal Positioning-Pelvis and Hind Limb129
View: Caudocranial View
The patient is placed in a sternal recumbent position, with the affected leg extended cau-
dally. The unaffected leg should be flexed and foam positioning wedge or sandbag should
be placed beneath the femoral area of the unaffected leg to aid in controlling rotation of
the stifle being imaged. The patella should be centered between the two femoral condyles.
It should be noted that if the femur, stifle, and tibia are in alignment and the calcaneous
is positioned perfectly vertical, the patella will be centered between the femoral condyles
 Palpating the femoral condyles and tibial tuberosity may also aid in checking symmetry.
The collimated field of view includes the mid-diaphyses of the femur and tibia. For post-
operative images, the field of view should include the entire implant (Figs. 10.33 and
10.34).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.33. CdCr TTA view illustration.
Figure 10.34.
CdCr TTA view.
Tibia and Fibula
The routine views for tibia and fibula are CdCr and lateral views.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Middle of tibia.
Measurement Point: Stifle.
130 Chapter 10
View: Lateral View
 The patient is placed in a lateral recumbent position with the unaffected leg moved later-
ally and secured outside the feld of view with tape or sandbag. Alternate positioning
technique has the unaffected leg pulled cranially, ventral to the abdomen, and secured with
sandbag, tape, or Head End immobilization device. The stifle and tarsal joints are flexed
 90 degrees. Place gauze or small thin positioning foam beneath the calcaneous to ensure
 the tibia is parallel to the tabletop or cassette and the femoral condyles are superimposed.
Both the stifle and tarsal joints should be in the feld of view (Figs. 10.35a and b and
10.36).
10
CHAPTER
(a)
(q)
Figure 10.35a and b. Lateral tibia view illustrations.
R
Figure 10.36. Lateral tibia.
CHAPTER 10
131
132Chapter 10
View: Caudocranial View
The patient should be placed in a sternal recumbent position, with the affected leg extended
caudally. The unaffected leg should be flexed and foam positioning wedge or sandbag
should be placed beneath the femoral area of the unaffected leg to aid in controlling rota-
tion of the stifle being imaged. The patella should be centered between the two femoral
condyles. It should be noted that if the femur, stifle, and tibia are in alignment and the
calcaneous is positioned perfectly vertical, the patella will be centered between the femoral
condyles. Palpating the femoral condyles and tibial tuberosity may also aid in checking
symmetry. Both the stifle and tarsal joints should be in the field of view (Figs. 10.37 and
10.38).
10
CHAPTER
R
Figure 10.37.CdCr tibia illustration.
Fgure 10.38.  CdCr tibia.
Small Animal Positioning- Pelvis and Hind Limb 133
Tarsus
 Routine views of the tarsus are dorsoplantar and lateral views. Supplemental views
are flexion, extension, oblique, and stress views.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Tarsal joint.
Measurement Point: Tarsal joint.
CHAPTER 10
134Chapter 10
View: Lateral View
 The patient is placed in a lateral recumbent position with the unaffected leg moved later-
ally and secured outside the field of view with tape or sandbag. Alternate positioning
technique has the unaffected leg pulled cranially, ventral to the abdomen, and secured
with sandbag, tape, or Head End immobilization device. The tarsal joint can be flexed
90 degrees or left in a natural flexed position, clinician's preference. Place gauze or
small thin positioning foam beneath the calcaneous to ensure the tibia is parallel to the
tabletop. Collimate so the distal tibia and fbula and metatarsal bones are in the field of
view (Figs. 10.39 and 10.40).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.39.Lateral tarsal view illustration.
Figure 10.40. Lateral tarsal view.
CHAPTER 10
135
136Chapter10
View: Plantardorsaf or Dorsopfantar Views
The patient should be placed in a sternal recumbent position, with the affected leg extended
caudally. The unaffected leg should be flexed and foam positioning wedge or sandbag
should be placed beneath the femoral area of the unaffected leg to aid in controlling rota-
tion of the tarsal joint. It should be noted that if the femur, stifle, and tibia are in alignment
and the calcaneous is positioned perfectly vertical, the tarsus should be in a true plantar
dorsal position. Collimate so the distal tibia and fbula and the metatarsal bones should
be in the field of view (Figs. 10.41 and 10.42).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.41. Plantardorsal tarsal view illustration.
Figure 10.42. Plantardorsal tarsus.
CHAPTER 10
137
138Chapter 10
Supplemental Views: Oblique and Stress Views (Figs. 10.43 and 10.44)
Metatarsus and Digits
Routine views of the metatarsus and phalanges are dorsoplantar and lateral views.
Supplemental views are oblique views and lateral views to offset the individual digits.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Metatarsal bones.
Measurement Point: Metatarsal bones.
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.43. Stress view illustration.
Figure 10.44. Tarsal stress view.
Small Animal Positioning-Pelvis and Hind Limb139
View: Laferaf View
The patient is placed in a lateral recumbent position with the unaffected leg moved later-
ally and secured outside the field of view with tape or sandbag. Alternate positioning
technique has the unaffected leg pulled cranially, ventral to the abdomen, and secured with
sandbag, tape, or Head End immobilization device. The metatarsal bones are left in a
natural flexed position. Place gauze or small thin positioning foam beneath the calcaneous
to ensure the foot is parallel to the tabletop. Collimate so the distal tibia and fibula and
the tips of the digits are in the field of view (Figs. 10.45 and 10.46).
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.45.  Lateral metatarsal view illustration.
R
Figure 10.46.Lateral metatarsus with digits.
140Chapter 10
View: Plantardorsaf or Dorsopfantar Views
The patient should be placed in a sternal recumbent position, with the affected leg extended
caudally. The unaffected leg should be flexed and foam positioning wedge or sandbag
should be placed beneath the femoral area of the unaffected leg to aid in controlling rota-
tion of the tarsal joint. It should be noted that if the femur, stifle, and tibia are in alignment
and the calcaneous is positioned perfectly vertical, the tarsus and metatarsus should be in
a true plantardorsal position. Collimate so the field of view should include the distal tibia
 and fibula and the tips of the digits. An alternate position is the dorsoplantar (DPl) view,
where the affected leg is extended cranially, next to the body. Center over the metatarsal
bones and collimate so the distal tibia and fibula and the tips of the digits are in the field
of view (Figs. 10.47 and 10.48).
R
CHAPTER
Figure 10.47. Plantardorsal illustration.
Figure 10.48. Plantardorsal view.
Small Animal Positioning- Pelvis and Hind Limb 141
Supplemental Views: Oblique Views (Figs. 10.49 and 10.50)
CHAPTER 10
Figure 1 0.49.  Metatarsal oblique illustration.
Figure 10.50.  Metatarsal oblique.
Small Animal Positioning—Spine
Spinal imaging requires careful positioning. The divergence of the x-ray beam and the
importance of imaging the intervertebral disc spaces require the spine to be as parallel to
the tabletop as possible. This can be achieved by using radiolucent foam positioning
wedges and imaging the spine in short segments. Centering and collimating to the spinal
area of interest will help minimize the geometric distortion and the scattered radiation 
CHAPTER
produced. A grid is recommended for imaging the spinal column. Heavy sedation or 
general anesthesia is preferred for imaging studies of the spine. Supplemental views such
as flexion, extension, and oblique views may be requested by the veterinarian. Flexion and
extension views should be done under direct supervision of the clinician, particularly when
a fracture, luxation, or other instability is suspected. Contrast studies of the spine per-
formed under general anesthesia include myelography and epidurography (Figs. 11.1 and
11.2).
143
144Chapter 11
Figure 11.1.
Spinal lateral positioning diagram.
1
CHAPTER
Figure 11.2.Spinal lateral positioning diagram 2.
Cervical Spine
The cervical spine consists of seven cervical vertebrae. C1 and C2 are referred to as
the atlas and the axis, respectively. The odontoid process is part of C2. C6 has large
transverse processes. The routine imaging views are ventrodorsal (VD) and lateral
views. Supplemental views include flexion, extension, open mouth view of the odon-
toid process, and obligue views. When looking for cervical instability, the veterinar-
ian should determine the degree of flexion to be used.
 Sedation: Recommended; general anesthesia preferred to attain best-quality images
of the spine.
Center Point: Mid-cervical.
Measurement Point: Caudal cervical over shoulder joints.
Small AnimalPositioning-Spine145
View: Lateral View
 Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the head extended. The position of
the head affects the obliquity of the spine. Place a wedge beneath the nose, and if the
mid-cervical area appears to be sagging, place a flat piece of positioning foam to keep
the spine parallel to the tabletop. The forelimbs should be extended caudally toward the
abdomen (Figs. 11.3 and 11.4).
Figure 11.3. Lateral C spine illustration.
CHAPTER 11
Figure 11.4. Lateral C spine.
146Chapter 11
View:ExtensionLaferalView
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the head extended. The forelimbs
should be extended caudally toward the abdomen. The head is gently moved dorsally and
a positioning wedge placed beneath the mandible to reduce obliquity of the skull and
reinforced by a sandbag positioned against the wedge to hold both in place. The extension
view should always be done first, evaluated by the veterinarian before positioning for the
flexion view (Fig. 11.5).
Figure 11.5. Lateral C spine extension.
CHAPTER
View: Flexion Laferaf View
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the head extended. The forelimbs
should be extended caudally toward the abdomen. The head is gently pulled caudally
toward the thorax and positioning foam placed beneath the cranial cervical spine to reduce
obliquity of the skull. The head can be pulled caudally and secured using roll gauze or
manually pulled and secured with a Head End or sandbag to hold the head and neck in
place (Fig. 11.6).
Figure 11.6. Lateral C spine flexion.
Small AnimalPositioning—Spine147
View: Ventrodorsaf View
Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the patient's nose directed slightly
upward to minimize curving the cervical spine. The forelegs are pulled caudally and
secured with tape. The patient should be in a true VD position with the sternum and spine
superimposed and the cervical spine parallel to the tabletop. The field of view should
include the base of the skull and the second thoracic vertebra (Figs. 11.7 and 11.8).
CHAPTER 11
Figure 11.7. VD cervical illustration.
Figure 11.8.VD cervical spine.
148 Chapter 11
View:Open MouthVentrodorsalView of theOdontoid
 Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the patient's nose directed upward
and the mouth opened by using either gauze or masking tape to pull the maxillary arcade
slightly cranial and the mandible caudally. The commissure of the lips should be positioned
over C2. The forelegs are pulled caudally and secured with tape. The patient should be in
a true VD position with the sternum and spine superimposed and the cervical spine parallel
to the tabletop. The endotracheal tube should be removed or tied to the mandible. Center
over C2 (Figs. 11.9a through 11.9c).
1
CHAPTER
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 11.9. (a) Open mouth odontoid. (b) Open mouth odontoid side projection illustration. (c) Open mouth
odontoid frontal projection illustration.
Small Animal Positioning—Spine149
Thoracic Spine and Thoraco-Lumbar Spine
The thoracic spine consists of 13 vertebrae, articulating with ribs. The routine views
for thoracic spine are VD and lateral views. If imaging a cat or small-to-medium dog.
the lumbar spine is included in the field of view. There are 7 lumbar vertebrae.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Thoracic Spine: Mid-thoracic spine.
Center Point: TL Spine: TL junction.
Measurement Point: Highest point of the ribs
CHAPTER 11
150Chapter 11
View: Lateral View
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the fore and hind legs moderately
extended cranially and caudally, respectively. Place a foam positioning wedge beneath the
sternum to ensure the spine is positioned in a true lateral projection. The spine and sternum
should be parallel to each other. If imaging the lumbar spine, another foam positioning
wedge may be needed beneath the abdomen to reduce obliquity of the lumbar vertebrae.
For thoracic spine, collimate the field of view to include C7 through L1. For TL spine,
collimate the feld to include C7 to S1 (Figs. 11.10 through 11.13).
Figure 11.10.Lateral TL spine illustration.
11
CHAPTER
Figure 11.11. Lateral thoracic spine large dog.
Figure 11.12.Lateral caudal TL spine large dog.
Figure 11.13. Lateral Tl spine.
Small Animal Positioning—Spine 151
View: Ventrodorsal View
 Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the forelegs extended cranially and
secured with tape and the hind legs extended slightly caudally and positioned in a frog
position to ensure the spine is parallel to the tabletop. Sandbags or a Head End patient
immobilization device may be used to support the patient's shoulders, preventing the body
from tilting side to side. Placing a sandbag on either side of the patient at the pelvis will
au 'sai pu pao aui iodns ose pue uosod aa an e u uaed aui daay diu
sternum should be superimposed over the thoracic spine. For thoracic spine, collimate the
field of view to include C7 through L1. For TL spine, collimate the field to include C7 to
S1 (Figs. 11.14 through 11.17).
CHAPTER 11
Figure 11.14.  VD TL spine illustration.
Figure 11.15. VD thoracic spine large dog.
152
Chapter 11
CHAPTER 11
Figure 11.16.VD TL caudal large dog.
Figure 11.17. VD TL spine.
Lumbar Spine
The lumbar spine consists of seven lumbar vertebrae. The routine views for imaging
the lumbar spine area are VD and lateral views.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Mid-lumbar region.
Measurement Point: Cranial lumbar region.
Small Animal Positioning—Spine 153
View: Lateral View
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the fore and hind legs moderately
extended cranially and caudally, respectively. Place a foam positioning wedge beneath the
sternum to ensure the spine is positioned in a true lateral projection. The spine and sternum
should be parallel to each other. Another foam positioning wedge may be needed beneath
the abdomen to reduce obliquity of the lumbar vertebrae. Collimate to include T13 to S1
in the field of view (Figs. 11.18 and 11.19).
Figure 11.18. Lateral L spine illustration.
CHAPTER 11
Figure 11.19. Lateral lumbar spine.
154Chapter 11
View: Ventrodorsaf View
Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the forelegs extended cranially and
secured with tape and the hind legs extended slightly caudally and positioned in a flexed
immobilization device may be used to support the patient's shoulders, preventing the body
from tilting side to side. Placing a sandbag on either side of the patient at the pelvis will
help keep the patient in a true VD position and also support the frogged hind limbs. The
sternum should be superimposed over the thoracic spine (Figs. 11.20 and 11.21).
L.L.
CHAPTER
Figure 11.20. VD lumbar spine illustration.
Figure 11.21. VD lumbar spine.
Small Animal Positioning—Spine 155
LS Spine
The routine views for imaging the lumbosacral spine are ventrodorsal, neutral, flexed,
 and extended lateral views of the lumbosacral junction. The views are typically used
to demonstrate lumbar stenosis or are taken in conjunction with myelography.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Lumbosacral junction.
Measurement Point: Lumbosacral junction.
CHAPTER 11
156Chapter 11
View: Neutral Lateral
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the fore and hind legs moderately
extended cranially and caudally, respectively. Place a foam positioning wedge beneath the
sternum to ensure the spine is positioned in a true lateral projection. The spine and sternum
should be parallel to each other. Another foam positioning wedge may be needed beneath
the abdomen to reduce obliquity of the lumbar vertebrae. Collimate to include L4 to S3
in the field of view (Figs. 11.22 and 11.23).
11
CHAPTER
Figure 11.22. Lateral LS illustration.
Figure 11.23. Lateral LS spine.
Small Animal Positioning—Spine157
View: Extended Lateraf
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the fore and hind legs moderately
extended cranially. Place a foam positioning wedge beneath the sternum to ensure the spine
is positioned in a true lateral projection. The spine and sternum should be parallel to each
other. Another foam positioning wedge may be needed beneath the abdomen to reduce
obliquity of the lumbar vertebrae. Gently move the hind legs caudodorsally, minimizing
movement of the upper body. Collimate to include L4 to S3 in the field of view (Figs.
11.24 and 11.25).
CHAPTER 11
Figure 11.24. Lateral LS extension illustration.
Figure 11.25. Lateral LS extension.
158Chapter 11
View: Flexed Lateral
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the fore and hind legs moderately
extended cranially and caudally, respectively. Place a foam positioning wedge beneath the
sternum to ensure the spine is positioned in a true lateral projection. The spine and sternum
should be parallel to each other. Gently pull the hind legs cranially, flexing the LS spine
while minimizing movement of the upper body. Collimate to include L4 to S3 in the field
of view (Figs. 11.26 and 11.27).
Figure 11.26. Lateral LS flexion illustration.
CHAPTER 11
Figure 11.27. Lateral LS flexion.
Small AnimalPositioning—Spine159
View: Ventrodorsaf View
Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the forelegs extended cranially and
secured with tape and the hind legs extended slightly caudally and positioned in a relaxed
position. Sandbags or a Head End patient immobilization device may be used to support
the patient's shoulders, preventing the body from tilting side to side. The sternum should
be superimposed over the thoracic spine. Collimate the field of view to include L4 through
S3 (Figs. 11.28 and 11.29).
CHAPTER 11
Figure 11.28. VD LS spine illustration.
Figure 11.29. VD LS spine.
Sacrum
The routine views for visualizing the sacrum are lateral and a 30-degree angle toward
the head through the sacrum.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Sacrum.
Measurement Point: Sacrum.
160 Chapter 11
View: Laferaf View
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the fore and hind legs moderately
extended cranially and caudally, respectively. Place a foam positioning wedge beneath the
sternum to ensure the spine is positioned in a true lateral projection. The spine and sternum
should be parallel to each other. Another foam positioning wedge may be needed beneath
the abdomen to reduce obliquity of the lumbar vertebrae. The tuber ischii should be
superimposed. Sometimes a positioning wedge is needed between the hind legs for larger
breed dogs. Collimate to include the pelvis in the field of view. See “LS Spine," lateral
views.
View: Ventrodorsaf View
Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the forelegs extended cranially and
secured with tape and the hind legs extended slightly caudally and positioned in a relaxed
position. Sandbags or a Head End patient immobilization device may be used to support
the patient's shoulders, preventing the body from tilting side to side. The sternum should
be superimposed over the thoracic spine. Angle the x-ray tube 30 degrees cranially through
the sacrum. Collimate the field of view to include the pelvis. See "Ventrodorsal View"
under "LS Spine.'
Caudal Spine
PTER
The routine views for caudal spine are VD and lateral views.
CHAI
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Area of interest.
Measurement Point: Proximal tail.
Small Animal Positioning—Spine 161
View: Lateraf View
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the fore and hind legs moderately
extended cranially and caudally, respectively. Place a foam positioning wedge beneath the
sternum to ensure the spine is positioned in a true lateral projection. The spine and sternum
should be parallel to each other. Another foam positioning wedge may be needed beneath
the abdomen to reduce obliquity of the lumbar vertebrae. The tuber ischii should be
superimposed. Place the tail on thin flat radiolucent foam to keep the tail in true lateral
and parallel to the tabletop. Collimate to include the area of interest (Figs. 11.30 and
11.31).
CHAPTER 11
Figure 11.30. Lateral caudal spine illustration.
Figure 11.31. Lateral caudal spine.
162Chapter 11
View: Ventrodorsaf View
Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the forelegs extended cranially and
secured with tape and the hind legs extended slightly caudally and positioned in a relaxed
position. Sandbags or a Head End patient immobilization device may be used to support
the patient's shoulders, preventing the body from tilting side to side. The sternum should
be superimposed over the thoracic spine. Collimate the field of view to include the sacrum
and caudal spine (Figs. 11.32 and 11.33).
11
CHAPTER
Figure 11.32.  VD caudal spine illustration.
Fgure 11.33. VD caudal spine.
Small Animal Positioning
Thorax, Soft Tissue Neck,
and Abdomen
Thorax
The routine views for thorax imaging are dorsoventral (DV), ventrodorsal (VD), and
lateral views. For evaluating the heart, DV and right lateral views are generally taken.
If looking for metastatic nodules, VD and both laterals are taken. Often views chosen
are clinician preference. If a patient is in respiratory distress, a DV view is taken
instead of a VD. If a diaphragmatic hernia is suspected, a lateral view is taken first
  'd a e  d a hed oi rd m oi  a 
kVp and low mAs technique is used to attain a long scale of contrast for visualizing
CHAPTER 12
structures in the thorax and neck.
Sedation: None.
Center Point: Caudal dorsal border of the scapula.
Measurement Point: Highest point of the ribs.
163
164 Chapter 12
View: Lateral View
 Place the patient in lateral recumbent position, forelegs extended cranially. Place foam
-a p ro a o d ae s pe ads n os ns yaq am
distant from the tabletop. The patient's head should be extended in a neutral position. If
the head is extended too far dorsally, the image may falsely indicate a narrowing of the
airway. Center over the caudal dorsal border of the scapula. Please note the forelegs should
be extended before centering over the caudal dorsal border of the scapula. View is taken
on inspiration (Figs. 12.1 and 12.2).
Figure 12.1.
Lateral thorax illustration.
CHAPTER 12
Figure 12.2. Lateral thorax.
Smaff Animal Positioning—Thorax, Soft Tissue Neck, and Abdomen165
View: Dorsoventral View
down on the tabletop. The sternum and spine should be superimposed and the view taken
on inspiration (Figs. 12.3 and 12.4).
CHAPTER 12
Figure 12.3. DV thorax illustration.
Figure 12.4. Dv thorax.
166  Chapter 12
View: Ventrodorsal View
Place patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the legs extended forward and the head
down on the tabletop. The sternum and spine should be superimposed and the view taken
on inspiration (Figs. 12.5 and 12.6).
R
CHAPTER 12
Figure 12.5. VD thorax illustration.
Figure 12.6. VD thorax.
Soft Tissue Neck
The routine view for imaging the soft tissue neck is a lateral view. The field of view
should include the temporomandibular joints (TMJs) through the thoracic inlet. A
higher kVp and low mAs technique is needed to provide a long scale of contrast. If
doing the soft tissue neck in conjunction with the thorax, the same technique used
for a lateral thorax can be used for the soft tissue neck.
Sedation: No.
Center Point: Mid-cervical.
Measurement Point: Shoulder area.
Smaff Animal Positioning— Thorax, Soft Tissue Neck, and Abdomen 167
View: Lateral View
 Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the head extended. The position of
the head affects the obliquity of the spine. Place a wedge beneath the nose, and if the mid-
cervical area appears to be sagging, place a flat piece of positioning foam to keep the spine
parallel to the tabletop. The forelimbs should be extended caudally toward the abdomen.
Collimate to include the area from TMJs to the thoracic inlet (Figs. 12.7 and 12.8).
Figure 12.7.Lateral ST neck
illustration.
HAPTER
Figure 12.8.Lateral ST neck.
Abdomen
The routine views of the abdomen are VD and left or right lateral abdomen. Views
chosen are often clinician preference. Supplemental views are DV, right or left lateral,
fexed leg lateral, and oblique views of the abdomen. These views are taken in con-
junction with special contrast enhanced procedures such as GI tract and urinary tract
studies. The views are taken on expiration. For abdominal imaging, a short scale of
contrast is needed to visualize abnormalities in the abdomen, so a kVp range between
50 and 90 is preferred.
Sedation: None.
Center Point: Cranial border of the abdomen should be 1 inch cranial to the tip of
the xiphoid of the sternum and the caudal border should be the greater trochanter.
Measurement Point: Lateral View: Highest point of the ribs laterally.
Measurement Point: VD View: 1 inch caudal to the tip of the xiphoid of the sternum.
168Chapter 12
View: Lateraf View
 Place patient in lateral recumbent position with the forelegs extended cranially and the
hind legs slightly extended caudally. Overextension of the hind legs can tighten the abdomi-
nal wall and compress the abdominal viscera, making interpretation more difficult. A
positioning wedge should be placed beneath the sternum and an additional foam position-
ing wedge may be needed for the abdomen to ensure the patient is in a true lateral position.
As with the thorax, the sternum and spine should be parallel to each other and equidistant
from the tabletop. Collimate to include the area 1 inch cranial to the xiphoid of the
sternum to the greater trochanter. View is taken on expiration (Figs. 12.9 and 12.10).
Figure 12.9.Lateral abdomen illustration.
CHAPTER 12
Figure 12.10. Lateral abdomen.
Small Animal Positioning—Thorax, Soft Tissue Neck, and Abdomen 169
View: Flexed Leg Lateral
Place patient in lateral recumbent position with the forelegs extended cranially and the
hind legs placed in a neutral position. A positioning wedge should be placed beneath the
sternum to ensure the patient is in a true lateral position. As with the thorax, the sternum
and spine should be parallel to each other and equidistant from the tabletop. The hind
legs are hyperextended cranially toward the abdomen to allow visualization of the urethra.
Collimate to include the caudal abdomen in the field of view. View is taken on expiration
(Figs. 12.11 and 12.12).
Figure 1 2.11. Lateral flex leg abdomen illustration.
CHAPTER 12
Figure 1 2.12. Lateral flex leg abdomen.
170Chapter 12
View: Ventrodorsal View
Place patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the legs extended forward. The sternum
and spine should be superimposed. Collimate to include the area 1 inch cranial to the
xiphoid of the sternum to the greater trochanter. View is taken on expiration (Figs. 12.13
and 12.14).
Figure 12.13. VD abdomen illustration.
Figure 12.14. VD abdomen.
CHAPTER 12
Small Animal Positioning—Skull
For imaging of the head, care must be taken to properly place the anatomic lead markers
in the field of view. The area of interest should be well collimated and if the anatomic
 part measures 10 cm or less, the small focal spot should be used to maximize the detail
in the image. Sedation or general anesthesia is preferred for most of the imaging studies
for the head.
Cranium
Routine views of the cranium are dorosoventral (DV) and lateral. Supplemental view
 is the frontoccipital view for the foramen magnum.
CHAPTER 13
Sedation: Recommend heavy sedation or general anesthesia.
 Center Point: Lateral canthus of the eye.
Measurement Point: Zygomatic arch
171
172Chapter 13
View: Dorsoventraf View
 Place the patient in a sternal recumbent position with the forelimbs moved out of the field
 of view. The collimator light crosshair should be on midline and the patient's eyes should
be parallel to each other. It may be necessary to use gauze or positioning foam to straighten
the skull so it is not rotated. Collimate the field of view to include the whole head. The
lead anatomic marker should be either on the left or right of the nose (Figs. 13.1 and 13.2).
Figure 13.1.
DV cranium illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.2. DV cranium.
Small Animal Positioning-Skul!173
View: Lateral View
 Place the patient in a lateral recumbent view with the forelegs extended caudally, out of
the field of view. Place a foam positioning wedge beneath the mandible to adjust the head
so it is in a true lateral position. Collimate the field of view to include the whole head.
The right or left lead anatomic marker should be placed in the field of view dorsal to the
maxilla or ventral to the mandible but not in the anatomy (Figs. 13.3 and 13.4).
Figure 1 3.3.  Lateral cranium illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.4.Lateral cranium.
174 Chapter 13
View: Frontoccipital View
 Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the nose pointing upward and the
forelegs pulled caudally toward the abdomen. Place sandbags or Head End patient immo-
bilization device adjacent to each shoulder to support the patient. Using masking tape,
tip the nose caudally approximately 30 degrees and secure by taping to the table or the
immobilization device used. The patient's nose will be on his chest. Center the x-ray beam
between the eyes. Collimate the field of view to include the cranium (Figs. 13.5 and 13.6).
Figure 13.5.
Frontoccipital view for foramen magnum illustration-
-VD
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.6.
 Frontoccipital view for foramen magnum illustration—side.
Nasal
Sedation: Mandatory heavy sedation or general anesthesia.
Center Point: Lateral canthus of the eye.
Measurement Point: Zygomatic arch.
Small Animal Positioning-Skull175
View: Open Mouth Laferaf View
 Place the patient in a lateral recumbent view with the forelegs extended caudally, out of
 the field of view. Place a foam positioning wedge beneath the mandible to adjust the head
so it is in a true lateral position. Place a radiolucent speculum or a roll of gauze between
the teeth to open the mouth. If the patient is under general anesthesia, the endotracheal
tube (ET) should be tied to the mandible. Collimate the field of view to include the whole
head. The right or left lead anatomic marker should be placed in the feld of view dorsal
to the maxilla but not in the anatomy (Figs. 13.7 and 13.8).
Figure 1 3.7.  OM lateral nasal illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.8.Lateral OM nasal.
176Chapter 13
View: VD Open Mouth View
 Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the forelegs extended caudally.
Sandbags or Head End patient immobilization device should be placed against the shoul-
  d a o pd  s e a oq sd a s n s
cassette. Tie the ET to the mandible with the tongue beneath the ET, if under general
anesthesia. Tape the maxilla to the table or cassette so it is as parallel as possible to the
10-20 degrees caudally toward the hard palate. Note: Feline patients rarely require any
x-ray tube angulation due to the range of motion when opening their mouth. Collimate
the field of view to include the entire maxilla (Figs. 13.9 through 13.11).
13
CHAPTER1
Figure 13.9.OM soft palate side view illustration.
Figure 13.10. OM soft palate cranial view illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.11. Soft palate.
177
178Chapter 13
View: VD FrontaI Sinus View
 Place the patient in a sternal recumbent position with the nose pointing upward and the
forelegs pulled caudally toward the abdomen. Place sandbags or Head End patient immo-
bilization device adjacent to each shoulder to support the patient. Turn on the collimator
light and tip the nose cranially until the nose is seen in silhouette and slowly tip the nose
caudally until it is just barely removed from silhouete. Using masking tape, secure the
nose in position by taping to the table or the immobilization device used. Center the x-ray
beam between the eyes, perpendicular to the imaging receptor, and parallel to the nose
(Figs. 13.12 through 13.14).
Figure 13.12. Frontal sinus side view illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.13. Frontal sinus illustration.
Small Animal Positioning—Skull 179
Figure 13.14.
Frontal sinus.
Maxilla
 The routine views of the maxilla are lateral, open mouth VD, and lateral obliques.
Supplemental view may be an intra-oral view of the maxilla.
Sedation: Mandatory heavy sedation or general anesthesia.
Center Point: Lateral canthus of the eye.
Measurement Point: Zygomatic arch.
CHAPTER 13
180Chapter 13
View: Open Mouth Laferaf View
 Place the patient in a lateral recumbent view with the forelegs extended caudally, out of
the field of view. Place a foam positioning wedge beneath the mandible to adjust the head
so it is in a true lateral position. Place a radiolucent speculum or a roll of gauze between
the teeth to open the mouth. If under general anesthesia, the ET should be tied to the
mandible. Collimate the field of view to include all of the maxilla. The right or left lead
anatomic marker should be placed in the field of view dorsal to the maxilla but not in the
anatomy (Figs. 13.15 and 13.16).
Figure 13.15. Lateral maxillary illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.16. Lateral maxillary.
SmallAnimalPositioning-Skull181
View: VD Open Mouth View
 Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the forelegs extended caudally.
Sandbags or Head End patient immobilization device should be placed against the shoul-
ders to support the patient's body. The maxilla should be parallel to the tabletop or film
cassette. Tie the ET to the mandible with the tongue beneath the ET, if under general
anesthesia. Tape the maxilla to the table or cassette so it is as parallel as possible to the
tabletop or cassette. Tape the mandible to the positioning device. Angle the x-ray tube
10-20 degrees caudally toward the hard palate. Note: Feline patients rarely require any
x-ray tube angulation due to the range of motion when opening their mouth. Collimate
the field of view to include the entire maxilla (Figs. 13.17 and 13.18).
Figure 13.17.  Soft palate illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.18.   Soft palate.
182Chapter13
View: Open Mouth Oblique View- Upper Dental Arcade
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the forelegs extended caudally. If the
 patient is under general anesthesia, tie the ET to the mandible. Place a radiolucent specu-
lum in the patient's mouth. Rotate the body halfway dorsally and place a foam positioning
wedge beneath the mandible. Rotate the head approximately 45 degrees from lateral so
there is not superimposition from the opposite maxillary arcade. The arcade visualized is 
the one closest to the cassette or tabletop. The right and left anatomic lead markers should
be placed dorsal and ventral to the maxilla. Note: It is helpful to collimate out part of the
mandibular arcade so there is no confusion regarding which arcade is being imaged. Do
not place the right and left markers dorsal to the maxilla and ventral to the mandible
(Figs. 13.19 and 13.20).
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.19.  Maxillary oblique illustration.
Figure 13.20.Maxillary oblique.
Smaffl Animal Positioning—Skull183
Mandible
The routine views of the mandible are lateral, DV, and lateral oblique views. An
intraoral view may be requested for rostral mandibular fractures or disease. With
DR, a conventional intraoral view may not be possible. An open mouth angled
 projection will show the mandibular symphysis, though not as well as the intra-
oral view.
Sedation: Mandatory heavy sedation or general anesthesia.
Center Point: Lateral canthus of the eye.
Measurement Point: Zygomatic arch.
CHAPTER 13
184Chapter 13
View: Lateral Open Mouth
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent view with the forelegs extended caudally, out of
the field of view. Place a foam positioning wedge beneath the mandible to adjust the head
so it is in a true lateral position. Place a radiolucent speculum or a roll of gauze between
the teeth to open the mouth. If under general anesthesia, the ET should be tied to the
maxilla. Collimate the field of view to include all of the mandible. The right or left lead
anatomic marker should be placed in the field of view ventral to the mandible but not in
the anatomy (Figs. 13.21 and 13.22).
Figure 13.21. Lateral mandible illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.22. Lateral mandible.
Small Animal Positioning-Skull185
View: Dorsoventraf View
 Place the patient in a sternal recumbent position with the forelimbs moved out of the field
of view. The collimator light crosshair should be on midline and the patient's eyes should
be parallel to each other. It may be necessary to use gauze or positioning foam to straighten
the skull so it is not rotated. Collimate the field of view to include the mandible. The lead
anatomic marker should be either on the left or right of the nose (Figs. 13.23 and 13.24).
Figure 13.23.DV mandible illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.24.DV mandible.
186Chapter 13
View: Laferal Oblique Open Mouth
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the forelegs extended caudally. If the
patient is under general anesthesia, tie the ET to the maxilla. Place a radiolucent speculum
in the patient's mouth. Place a foam positioning wedge behind the skull so the head is
rotated approximately 20-30 degrees. The angle chosen is dependent upon the shape of
the dog's head. A brachycephalic breed may only need 20 degrees obliquity, whereas a
 dolichocephalic or mesaticephalic breed may need 30 degrees. The goal is to minimize any
superimposition from the opposite mandibular arcade. The arcade visualized is the one
closest to the cassette or tabletop. The right and left anatomic lead markers should be
placed ventral and dorsal to mandible. Note: It is helpful to collimate out part of the
maxillary arcade so there is no confusion regarding which arcade is being imaged. Do not
place the right and left markers dorsal to the maxilla and ventral to the mandible because
h  h s P q     o a 
2.
CHAPTER 1
Figure 13.25. Mandibular oblique illustration.
Figure 13.26. Mandibular oblique.
Smalfl AnimalPositioning—Skull187
View: Modiffied Mandibular Symphysis Projection for DR
Place the patient in a sternal recumbent position with the forelimbs moved out of the field of
view. The patient's rostral mandible should be placed on a small foam positioning block or
on a stack of gauze to ensure the mandible is parallel to the tabletop. Roll gauze should be
placed in the patient's mouth as caudal as possible to open the mouth as wide as possible.
The collimator light crosshair should be on midline and angled approximately 15 degrees
caudally to be centered on the mandibular symphysis. The patient's eyes should be parallel
to each other. It may be necessary to use gauze or positioning foam to straighten the skull so
it is not rotated. Collimate to include as much of the rostral mandible as possible. The lead
 anatomic marker should be either on the left or right ofthe mandible (Figs. 13.27 and 13.28).
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.27. OM view mandibular symphysis illustration—DR; Figure 13.28. OM view mandibular
arrow demonstrates x-ray tube angle.
symphysis—DR.
Temporomandibular Joints
 The routine views for imaging temporomandibular joints (TMJs) are DV closed
mouth, lateral craniocaudal oblique mouth and open and closed with the nose tipped
up 20 degrees, and an open mouth basilar view.
Sedation: Heavy sedation or general anesthesia.
Center Point: TMJ.
Measurement Point: TMJ.
188Chapter13
View: Dorsoventral Closed Mouth View
 Place the patient in a sternal recumbent position with the forelimbs moved out of the field
 of view. The collimator light crosshair should be on midline and the patient's eyes should
be parallel to each other. It may be necessary to use gauze or positioning foam to straighten
the skull so it is not rotated. Collimate the field of view to include the mandible. The lead
anatomic marker should be either on the left or right of the nose (Figs. 13.29 and 13.30).
Figure 13.29.DV TMj illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.30.DV TMJ.
Smalfl Animal Positioning—Skull189
View: Basilar or Venfrodorsaf Open Mouth View
Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the patient's nose directed upward
and the mouth opened by using either gauze or masking tape to pull the maxillary arcade
slightly cranial and the mandible caudally. The corners of the mouth should be positioned
over C2. The forelegs are pulled caudally and secured with tape. The patient should be in
a true VD position with the sternum and spine superimposed and the cervical spine parallel
to the tabletop. The ET should be removed or tied to the mandible. Center over the com-
missure of the lips (Figs. 13.31 and 13.32).
Figure 13.31. OM TMJ illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.32.OM VD TMJ.
190Chapter 13
View: Lateral Craniocaudal Oblique of the Mouth, Open and Closed
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the affected side down. Tip the nose
up and place a 20-degree wedge beneath the rostral mandible to elevate the mandible and
rotate the cranium slightly toward the tabletop. The degree of angulation is contingent
upon the shape of the patient's head. Make exposures with the mouth closed and open
bilaterally. The anatomic lead marker should denote the TMJ being visualized and should
be placed ventral to the TMJ (Figs. 13.33 and 13.34).
 If the mouth cannot be opened or the ET is overlying the TM joint, place patient in a
true lateral position and tip the nose up 20 degrees so the down TMJ is projected forward
(Figs. 13.35 and 13.36).
Figure 13.33. Lateral oblique illustration TMJ.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.34. Lateral oblique TMJ.
Smafl Animal Positioning-Skul!191
Figure 13.35. Lateral 20-degree nose up illustration.
Figure 13.36.Straight lateral 20-degree nose up.
CHAPTER 13
Tympanic Bullae
 The routine views for imaging canine tympanic bullae are lateral, DV with the mouth
closed, lateral craniocaudal oblique with the mouth closed, and basilar or ventro-
 dorsal open mouth views. The routine views for imaging feline tympanic bullae are
lateral, DV with the mouth closed, lateral craniocaudal oblique with the mouth
closed, and basilar or ventrodorsal open mouth or ventrodorsal closed mouth views.
Sedation: Heavy sedation or general anesthesia.
Center Point: Bullae.
Measurement Point: Bullae.
192Chapter 13
View: Lateraf View
 Place the patient in a lateral recumbent view with the forelegs extended caudally, out of
the field of view. Place a foam positioning wedge beneath the mandible to adjust the head
so it is in a true lateral position. Collimate the field of view to include from the lateral
canthus of the eye to C2. The right or left lead anatomic marker should be placed in the
field of view ventral to the bullae but not in the anatomy. There is no change when imaging
the feline patient (Figs. 13.37 and 13.38).
Figure 13.37. Lateral bullae illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.38. Lateral bullae.
Smafl Animal Positioning—Skul!193
View: Dorsoventraf View
 Place the patient in a sternal recumbent position with the forelimbs moved out of the field
of view. The collimator light crosshair should be on midline and the patient's eyes should
be parallel to each other. It may be necessary to use gauze or positioning foam to straighten
the skull so it is not rotated. Center over the bullae and collimate the field of view to
include the lateral canthus to C2. The lead anatomic marker should be either on the left
or right of the cranium. There is no change when imaging the feline patient (Figs. 13.39
and 13.40).
Figure 13.39.  DV bullae illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.40.DV bullae.
194Chapter 13
View: Basilar or Venfrodorsaf Open Mouth View
Place the patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the patient's nose directed upward
and the mouth opened by using either gauze or masking tape to pull the maxillary arcade
slightly cranial and the mandible caudally. The commissure of the lips should be positioned
over the bullae. The forelegs are pulled caudally and secured with tape. The patient should
be in a true VD position with the sternum and spine superimposed and the cervical spine
parallel to the tabletop. The ET should be removed or tied to the mandible. Center over
the commissure of the lips. There is no change when imaging the feline patient (Figs. 13.41
and13.42).
Figure 13.41. OM canine bullae illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.42.OM canine bullae.
Smalfl Animal Positioning—Skull195
View: Lateral Craniocaudal Oblique View with Mouth Closed
Place the patient in a lateral recumbent position with the forelegs extended caudally. The
unaffected tympanic bullae should be toward the tabletop. Place a foam positioning wedge
behind the skull so the head is rotated approximately 20 degrees to separate the bullae.
The nose should be tipped cranially to prevent TMJ superimposition. The right and left
anatomic lead markers should be placed ventral and dorsal to cranium near the bullae.
The feline patient does not require a foam positioning wedge to be placed behind the
 e  u     s    
degrees, which will separate the tympanic bullae. The nose should be tipped cranially to
prevent TMJ superimposition as with the canine patient (Figs. 13.43 and 13.44).
Figure 13.43.   Oblique canine bullae illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.44. Oblique canine bullae.
196Chapter 13
View: Feline Ventrodorsal Closed Mouth View
Place the feline patient in a dorsal recumbent position with the patient's nose directed
upward and the mouth closed. Tilt the nose cranially approximately 20 degrees and center
over the bullae. The forelegs are pulled caudally and secured with tape. The patient should
be in a true VD position with the sternum and spine superimposed and the cervical spine
parallel to the tabletop. Due to the location of the feline bullae, the bullae and often the
odontoid process can be visualized with this view (Figs. 13.45 and 13.46).
Figure 13.45.Feline VD closed mouth illustration.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.46. Feline VD closed mouth.
Exotic Pet Imaging
Avian and exotic pets have increased in popularity, particularly within the last decade
Imaging this type of patient can be a challenge to both the patient and the radiographer.
Most small exotic pets, like hamsters, guinea pigs, and rabbits, can be imaged in a similar
fashion to the regular small animal patient. Imaging birds and reptiles is a little different
due to the restraint needed to protect the patient as well as the radiographer. Birds, domestic
or wild, are easily stressed and do not tolerate long procedures well. Reptiles, depending
upon species, require special handling. The restraint method for birds is dependent upon
the type and size of the patient and the imaging exam being performed. A bird board is a
plexiglass positioning aid useful for both avian and some reptile patients. It is particularly
helpful if the patient is a raptor, psittacine, or poisonous or more aggressive reptile. Simple
supplies like masking tape, gauze rolls, leather gloves, and terrycloth towels are necessary
when imaging the exotic pet. This chapter will cover basic positioning for small mammals,
reptiles, and birds. In the special procedures chapter, there is additional information
included for performing contrast enhanced special procedures on small mammals and birds
Avian
 The routine views for whole body views of the avian patient are ventrodorsal (VD)
上上
 and lateral views. The restraint method for birds is dependent upon the type and
size of the patient. Leather gloves should be worn when handling parrots and raptors.
The kVp range typically used for avian imaging is 48-65kVp. The mAs needed is
dependent upon the type of image receptor being used. Film screen imaging mAs
range would be 5-10 mAs. With digital imaging, 5 mAs would suffice.
Sedation: None.
Equipment: Bird board restraint device, leather gloves, masking tape, gauze rolls,
and towel.
197
198Chapter 14
View: Ventrodorsaf View
Before positioning the avian patient, the room should be set up so the patient is handled
and restrained for a minimal amount of time. If imaging a parrot or raptor, leather gloves
 should be worn when placing the patient on the bird board. Masking tape is the best tape
to use when taping the wings down on a bird. When the tape is removed, always remove
 e id d n rdei e   ad are saea a u an u 1!
 roll for each foot so the bird can grasp it will help prevent having fingers or clothes grasped
by the bird. The room should be quiet and the lights slightly dimmed to reduce stress for
parrots and raptors. It will take a minimum of two staff to image the avian patient, one
to place and restrain the bird while the other tapes the bird to the board. Tape should be
cut and ready to be placed prior to placing the bird on a commercial bird board or a piece
of plexiglass. If using a commercial bird board, place the patient on the board and place
the neck restraint first to secure the head. Next, secure each leg while the holder continues
 to protect the wings and separate the legs. With the head and legs restrained, stretch the
wings out laterally and tape the wings down midway bilaterally. Lastly, place another strip
of tape on the distal portion of the wings bilaterally. Place the bird board on the tabletop
 on a film cassette or DR panel, anatomically mark the image, and make the exposure (Figs.
14.1 through 14.3).
一
Figure 14.1. VD dove on bird board.
CHAPTER
Figure 14.2.
Avian VD illustration parrot.
Figure 14.3. Avian VD parrot image.
CHAPTER 14
199
200Chapter 14
View: Lateral View
To take the lateral view, release and hold the up leg, have the assisting tech untape the
wings, and gently turn the patient laterally, while the tech wearing the leather gloves
readjusts the head as the patient is turned. Retape and secure the leg. Extend the wings
 dorsally and place a thin radiolucent positioning foam pad between the wings before taping
them securely back to the bird board. Take the lateral exposure. When the imaging is
complete, untape the wings and move them back against the body of the bird. Untape the
legs/feet and hold them in one hand gloved hand. Grasp the bird's head with the other
gloved hand and have the assisting tech release the head restraint. Place the bird in its
carrier and cover with a towel (Figs. 14.4 through 14.6).
Figure 14.4. Lateral projection dove on board.
Figure 1 4.5.  Avian lateral illustration parrot.
CHAPTER
Figure 14.6. Lateral whole body parrot.
Small Mammals
 Routine views for small mammals are the same as for the canine and feline patient.
 Restraint techniques may vary and include physical and chemical restraint.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Same guidelines as canine and feline patients.
Measurement Point: Same guidelines as canine and feline patients.
Exotic Pet Imaging 201
View: Lateraf View
 Depending upon the imaging exam requested, it may be necessary to take a horizontal
beam image to attain the lateral projection, particularly if the patient is not sedated. Using
gauze rolls to extend extremities is a frequently used restraint method, as well as using
tape. If using tape, adding a strip of tape to the adhesive side of a previously cut strip of
tape, leaving only the ends of the tape uncovered, is also a technique used to tape down
some small mammals (or budgies) so they do not lose hair or feathers (Figs. 14.7 and
14.8).
E
Figure 1 4.7. Lateral view guinea pig illustration.
CHAPTER 14
Figure 14.8.Lateral view guinea pig spine.
202Chapter 14
View: Ventrodorsal versus Dorsoventraf Views
Dorsoventral (DV) views of the thorax and abdomen are usually easier on the exotic
patient than placing the animal in a dorsal recumbent position. Restraining an unsedated
small mammal, like a hamster or gerbil, can be attained by placing it in a plexiglass box
or a toilet paper roll with the ends covered. Rabbits are susceptible to spinal injuries, so
care should be taken if imaging an unsedated rabbit (Figs. 14.9 and 14.10).
tL
Figure 14.9.
VD guinea pig illustration.
Figure 14.10.VD guinea pig spine.
CHAPTER
Reptile
Routine views for reptiles are the same as for the canine and feline patient. Restraint
techniques may vary and include physical and chemical restraint.
Sedation: Recommended.
Center Point: Same guidelines as canine and feline patients.
Measurement Point: Same guidelines as canine and feline patients.
Exotic Pet Imaging 203
View: Lateral View
 Depending upon the imaging exam requested, it may be necessary to take a horizontal
14.11 through 14.13).
Fgure 14.11. X table lateral
view turtle illustration.
CHAPTER
Figure 14.12.X table lateral turtle image.
Figure 1 4.13.X table gila monster on board.
204Chapter 14
View: Ventrodorsal versus Dorsoventraf Views
 DV views of the thorax and abdomen are usually easier on the exotic patient than placing
it in a dorsal recumbent position. Restraining an unsedated reptile can be attained by
placing the reptile in a plexiglass box, or if imaging a snake, place it in a bag. Some reptiles
can be restrained using the bird board, particularly if they are poisonous and/or aggressive
(Figs. 14.14 through 14.18).
Figure 14.14.  DV turtle illustration.
Figure 14.15.DV whole body turtle.
CHAPTER 14
Figure 14.16.  Snake in bag illustration.
CHAPTER 14
Figure 14.17. Snake in bag image.
Fgure 14.18. DV gila monster image.
205
Section
3
Contrast Media and
Special Procedures
Radiopaque Contrast Media
Special contrast enhanced imaging procedures are performed to better visualize soft tissue
structures or organs when survey imaging does not give the practitioner the needed infor-
mation for diagnosis. The most common contrast imaging exams performed in a small
animal practice are for imaging vasculature, Gl tract, genitourinary tract, spinal canal
(myelography), fistulae, and joints.
 The basic two types of contrast enhancement used are positive and negative. Positive
contrast enhancement requires the use of two common radiopaque contrast media, iodine
and barium. Negative contrast enhancement requires the use of gases that have a low
specific gravity (carbon dioxide or oxygen). 10 To assist the small animal practitioner and
the veterinary technician, it is important to review the radiopaque contrast media (ROCM)
types and dosage information most commonly used for the veterinary patient.
Types of Radiopaque Contrast Media
Radiopaque contrast media are high-density pharmacologic agents use to opacify low
contrast tissues in the body.13,1s Iodine and barium are the most commonly used contrast
agents. They have a higher atomic number and mass density than the low contrast tissues
PTER
of the body and absorb more x-rays than soft tissue or bone'? (Fig. 15.1).
lonic and Nonionic Contrast Agents
Water-soluble iodine agents are either ionic or nonionic. The first organic iodine-
based contrast agent was produced in the 1930s, and tri-iodinated compounds became
available in the 1950s. Diatrizoate, metrizoate, and iothalmate are three of the most
209
210Chapter 15
E-Z-PASTE
LIQUIDE-Z-PAQUE
770
BARLMSLAEATESUSPENSID
-Z-PAQUE
750
Figure 15.1. Contrast media types.
common tri-iodinated compounds. Tri-iodinated compounds contain three atoms of iodine
per molecule. In the 1960s, it was determined that many of the adverse effects of iodinated
contrast media were due to their hypertonicity. Basically, ionic contrast agents have an
 osmolality between 1,900 and 2,100mOsm/kg water while blood has osmolality of 290
 and 900 mOsm/kg water, depending upon the contrast agent. Osmolality is the number of
milliosmoles per kilogram of water or the concentration of molecules per weight of water.
When highly osmotic substances, such as ionic radiopaque contrast media, are placed in
the bloodstream, fluid from outside of the bloodstream (extravascular space) will be drawn
 into the bloodstream (intravascular space). This dilutes the osmotic particles until osmotic
pressures balance between the intravascular and extravascular spaces, increasing the intra-
vascular hydrostatic (fluid) pressures. Ionic contrast media is hypertonic to plasma at the
concentrations needed for imaging.
Nonionic contrast agents have an osmolality closer to blood in a range between 290
 and 900mOsm/kg water, depending upon the contrast agent used. The nonionic low-
osmolar monomer compounds have an estimated one-third the osmolality of conventional
ionic iodine salts at the same iodine
concentration. Fewer side effects permit more con-
centrated and greater volumes of contrast to be used when needed to improve visualization
increased patient comfort.Also.
the nonionic contrast media agents are diluted more
slowly and to a lesser extent than ionic contrast, resulting in sharper contrast borders for
an increased length of time. Lastly, nonionic contrast media agents are estimated to be six
times safer than ionic contrast media due to nonionicity and the reduction in hypertonicity,
decreased in cost in recent years. Care must be taken when preparing the contrast media
dose for some special imaging procedures like myelography. If myelographic exams are
performed in the practice rarely or routinely, it may be useful to have a myelographic dose
table available for quick reference due to the dose variation for cisternal tap versus lumbar
tap when administering the contrast (Table 15.1).
Table 15.1.
 Myelographic Dose Table - Omnipaque 240.
BV
TL Spine C Spine C Spine
BW
 TL Spine C Spine C Spine 
BV
TL Spine C Spine C Spine
kg
0.3 ml/
0.5 ml/
&Tap
kg
0.3 ml/
0.5 ml/
&Tap
kg
/|W E'O
0.5 ml/
&Tap
K%
kg
0.2 ml/kg
kg
kg
0.2 ml/kg
kg
kg
0.2 ml/kg
0.5
0.2
0.3
0.1
20.9
6.3
10.5
4.2
41.4
12.4
20.7
6'8
0.9
0.3
0.5
0.2
21.4
6.4
10.7
4.3
41.8
12.5
20.9
8.4
1.4
0.4
0.7
0.3
21.8
6.5
10.9
4.4
42.3
12.7
21.2
8.5
1.8
0.5
0.9
0.4
22.3
6.7
11.2
4.5
42.7
12.8
21.4
8.5
2.3
0.7
1.2
0.5
22.7
6.8
11.4
4.5
43.2
13.0
21.6
8.6
2.7
0.8
1.4
0.5
23.2
7.0
11.6
4.6
43.6
13.1
21.8
8.7
3.2
1.0
1.6
0.6
23.6
7.1
11.8
4.7
44.1
13.2
22.1
8'8
3.6
1.1
1.8
0.7
24.1
7.2
1 2.1
4.8
44.5
13.4
22.3
8.9
4.1
1.2
2.1
0.8
24.5
7.4
12.3
4.9
45.0
13.5
22.5
0'6
4.5
1.4
2.3
0.9
25.0
7.5
12.5
5.0
45.5
13.7
22.8
9.1
5.0
1.5
2.5
1.0
25.5
7.7
12.8
5.1
45.9
13.8
23.0
9.2
5.5
1.7
2.8
1.1
25.9
7.8
13.0
5.2
46.4
13.9
23.2
'6
5.9
1.8
3.0
1.2
26.4
7.9
13.2
5.3
46.8
14.0
23.4
9.4
6.4
1.9
3.2
1.3
26.8
8.0
13.4
5.4
47.3
14.2
23.7
9.5
6.8
2.0
3.4
1.4
27.3
8.2
13.7
5.5
47.4
14.2
23.7
9.5
7.3
2.2
3.7
1.5
27.7
6'8
13.9
5.5
48.2
14.5
24.1
9.6
7.7
2.3
1.5
28.2
8.5
14.1
5.6
48.6
14.6
24.3
2'6
8.2
2.5
4.1
1.6
28.6
8.6
14.3
5.7
49.1
14.7
24.6
9.8
8.6
2.6
4.3
1.7
29.1
8.7
14.6
5.8
49.5
14.9
24.8
6'6
9.1
2.7
4.6
1.8
29.5
8.9
14.8
5.9
50.0
15.0
25.0
10.0
9.5
2.9
4.8
1.9
30.0
9.0
15.0
6.0
50.5
15.2
25.3
10.1
10.0
3.0
5.0
2.0
30.5
9.2
15.3
6.1
50.9
15.3
25.5
10.2
10.5
3.2
5.3
2.1
6'06
6'6
15.5
6.2
51.4
15.4
25.7
10.3
10.9
5.5
2.2
31.4
9.4
15.7
6.3
51.8
15.5
25.9
10.4
11.4
3.4
5.7
2.3
31.8
9.5
15.9
6.4
52.3
15.7
26.2
10.5
11.8
3.5
5.9
2.4
32.2
2'6
16.2
6.5
52.7
15.8
26.4
10.5
12.3
3.7
6.2
2.5
32.7
86
16.4
6.5
53.2
16.0
26.6
10.6
12.7
8'6
6.4
2.5
33.2
10.0
16.6
6.6
53.6
16.1
26.8
10.7
13.2
4.0
6.6
2.6
9'69
10.1
16.8
6.7
54.1
16.2
27.1
10.8
13.6
4.1
6.8
2.7
34.1
10.2
17.1
6.8
54.5
16.4
27.3
10.9
14.1
4.2
7.0
2.8
34.5
10.4
17.3
6.9
55.0
16.5
27.5
11.0
14.5
4.4
7.3
2.9
35.0
10.5
17.5
7.0
55.5
16.7
27.8
11.1
15.0
4.5
7.5
3.0
35.5
10.7
17.8
7.1
55.9
16.8
28.0
11.2
15.5
4.7
7.8
3.1
35.9
10.8
18.0
7.2
56.4
16.9
28.2
11.3
15.9
4.8
8.0
3.2
36.4
10.9
18.2
7.2
56.8
17.0
28.4
11.4
16.4
4.9
8.2
E'5
36.8
11.0
18.4
7.4
57.1
17.1
28.6
11.4
CHAPTER 15
16.8
5.0
8.4
3.4
37.3
11.2
18.7
7.5
57.7
17.3
28.9
11.5
17.3
5.2
8.7
3.5
37.7
11.3
18.9
7.5
58.2
17.5
29.1
11.6
17.7
5.3
8.9
3.5
38.2
11.5
19.1
7.6
58.6
17.6
29.3
11.7
18.2
5.5
9.1
3.6
38.6
11.6
19.3
7.7
59.1
17.7
29.6
11.8
18.6
5.6
6'6
3.7
39.1
11.7
19.6
7.8
59.5
17.9
29.8
11.9
19.1
5.7
9.6
3.8
39.5
11.9
19.8
6
60.0
18.0
30.0
12.0
19.5
5.9
9.8
3.9
40.0
12.0
20.0
8.0
60.5
18.2
30.3
12.1
20.0
6.0
10.0
4.0
40.5
12.2
20.3
8.1
60.9
18.3
30.5
12.2
20.5
6.2
10.3
4.1
40.9
12.3
20.5
8.2
61.4
18.4
30.7
12.3
211
212
Chapter 15
Table 15.2.
Body Weight Conversion Table.
Ib
kg
16
kg
Ib
kg
kg
0.5
66
17.7
77
35.0
115
52.3
0.9
40
18.2
78
2
35.5
116
52.7
E
1.4
41
18.6
79
35.9
117
53.2
1.8
42
19.1
80
36.4
118
53.6
5
2.3
43
19.5
81
36.8
119
54.1
6
2.7
44
20.0
82
120
54.5
7
3.2
45
20.5
68
37.7
121
55.0
8
3.6
46
20.9
84
38.2
122
55.5
6
4.1
47
21.4
85
38.6
123
55.9
10
4.5
48
21.8
86
39.1
124
56.4
11
5.0
49
22.3
87
39.5
125
56.8
12
5.5
50
22.7
88
40.0
126
59.1
13
5.9
51
23.2
68
40.5
127
57.7
14
6.4
52
23.6
90
40.9
128
58.2
15
6.8
53
24.1
91
41.4
129
58.6
16
7.3
54
24.5
92
41.8
130
59.1
17
7.7
55
25.0
6
42.3
131
59.5
18
8.2
56
25.5
94
42.7
132
60.0
19
8.6
57
25.9
95
43.2
EEL
60.5
20
9.1
58
26.4
96
43.6
134
60.9
21
9.5
59
26.8
26
44.1
135
61.4
22
10.0
60
27.3
86
44.5
136
61.8
23
10.5
61
27.7
66
45.0
137
62.3
24
10.9
62
28.2
100
45.5
138
62.7
25
11.4
E9
28.6
101
45.9
139
63.2
26
11.8
64
29.1
102
46.4
140
63.6
27
12.3
65
29.5
103
46.8
141
64.1
28
12.7
66
30.0
104
47.3
142
64.5
29
13.2
67
30.5
105
47.4
143
65.0
0E
13.6
68
6'06
106
48.2
144
65.5
31
14.1
69
31.4
107
48.6
145
65.9
32
14.5
70
31.8
108
49.1
146
66.4
EE
15.0
71
32.2
109
49.5
147
66.8
34
15.5
72
32.7
110
50.0
148
67.3
35
15.9
73
33.2
111
50.5
149
67.7
96
16.4
74
9'59
112
50.9
150
68.2
37
16.8
75
34.1
113
51.4
15
86
17.3
76
34.5
114
51.8
CHAPTER:
Another handy reference table to have available when preparing contrast media doses
is a body weight conversion table (Table 15.2).
Allergic reactions and side effects to contrast agents are not as common in the veterinary
 patient as in humans, but they do happen. It is extremely important to make sure a patient
 is well hydrated before performing any contrast procedure. When using ionic contrast
media agents, systemic reactions can occur acutely or be delayed. Most reactions occur
Radiopaque Contrast Media  213
within the first 5-10 minutes post-administration and range from mild to fatal. There is
no way to determine how severe a reaction will be. Ionic contrast media agents are more
anti-coagulant than nonionic media and are less likely to develop clot formation in the
catheter or syringe. The types of side effects and reactions can range from but are not
limited to acute renal failure (which can be dose-dependent), ECG changes, respiratory
arrest, peripheral vasodilatation, nausea, and vomiting. The increased osmolality of ionic
 contrast agents can result in osmotic hypervolemia and worsening congestive heart failure.
An emergency kit consisting of endotracheal tubes, Ambu bag, and emergency drugs
including antihistamines, steroids, and IV fluids should be in the room when imaging
exams requiring administration of ionic or nonionic contrast agents are performed. It is
also recommended to have oxygen available and an intravenous catheter in place just in
case an emergency arises.
Most of the contrast agents available on the market are intended for human use, but
some are specifically approved by the U.s. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for vet-
erinary use. Many of the other products are used in veterinary medicine, though not
specifically approved to do so. Never use out-of-date contrast media. Follow directions on
the box insert to provide proper storage. Discard out-of-date contrast media just as you
would any other out-of-date pharmaceutical.
Barium Sulfate
Barium sulfate, which is a water-insoluble salt of the metallic element barium, is the con-
trast medium used in examinations of the digestive tract if no perforation is suspected. It
comes packaged as a powder or a liquid. A weight to volume measurement is generally
the easiest way to mix barium to the desired density. Powdered barium cups have a line
for several different densities, so adding water and mixing well is all that is necessary to
prepare the barium sulfate for administration. 30-60% weight/volume barium sulfate
suspension is typically used for stomach and small intestinal tract studies. 100% weight/
volume is often used for large intestinal tract studies. Barium paste is often used for
esophagrams, particularly if looking for a foreign body.
Oral ionic or nonionic contrast media should be used if a perforation is suspected in
the GI tract. Oral ionic contrast media agents Gastrografin and MD-Gastroview and non-
ionic contrast media agent Omnipaque 180, 240, and 300 can be used orally or rectally.
Omnipaque is currently the only nonionic low osmolar contrast media available with an
oral indication in the United States for humans. It is water soluble, relatively nonabsorb.
able, and of low viscosity, which allows even coverage. It is also easily titrated to create
the required density.
C
Special Imaging Procedures
Special ProcedureEsophagram (Static)
An esophagram is most useful to evaluate for esophageal motility, strictures, foreign
bodies, perforations, or diverticuli $,10,14
Contrast Agent: 45-8.5% barium sulfate suspension;14 60% weight/volume barium
sulfate suspension is generally used.
Barium paste/esophageal cream.
Dosage: Canine: 15-30 ml, depending upon patient size.
Feline: 5-7ml.14
Ferret: 3-4ml w/curved tip dosing syringe.14
Precautions: Barium paste/esophageal cream should be used if foreign body is suspected.
Ionic or nonionic contrast should be used if esophageal perforation is suspected. If oral
ionic contrast media (Gastrografin or MD-Gastroview) is aspirated, pulmonary edema can 
result.'s Oral nonionic contrast agent is safer and less toxic. Omnipaque 180, 240, or 300
(iohexol) can be used orally if diluted. Ionic or nonionic contrast media should be diluted
50:50 with water.l4
Supplies: Canned and/or dry food in bowl mixed with liquid barium sulfate; canned food
should be chunky in consistency.
Patient Prep: None.
16
General Procedural Instructions:
1.  Take survey imaging views. Clinician preference. Thorax 2v and a lateral soft tissue
neck are the more common views taken for imaging the esophagus.
215
216Chapter 16
2.
 Place patient in right lateral recumbent position.
3.
 Slowly administer liquid barium into lip fold.
 4. Take lateral neck, lateral and VD or DV thorax immediately following the patient
swallowing. Repeat views as needed to visualize the entire esophagus.
5. Place patient in right lateral recumbent position and administer barium paste/
esophageal cream. Take lateral neck and lateral view of the thorax while the patient
is swallowing.$,10,14
 6.  Feed the patient the barium/food mixture and immediately repeat radiographs. A 15-
to 30-degree VD oblique view is recommended to assist in visualizing esophageal
lesions.l4 Due to the possibility of aspiration, VD views may be contraindicated if the
esophagus is dilated.10
Esophagram--Fluoroscopic/Dynamic
An esophagram is most useful to evaluate for esophageal motility, strictures, foreign
bodies, perforations, or diverticuli. Fluoroscopic/dynamic imaging of the esophagus is most
(7'9l pue I'ii 'sh) trorsuoouny ieeydosa pue paureydou ueneaa ug idi
Figure  16.1. Fluoro esophagram  with liquid
barium.
Figure 16.2.Fluoro esoph-
agram with food mixture.
Special Imaging Procedures217
Contrast Agent: 45-85% barium sulfate suspension;s,14 60% weight/volume barium
sulfate suspension is generally used.
Barium paste/esophageal cream.
Dosage: Canine: 15-30 mls, depending upon patient size.
Feline: 5-7mls.14
 Ferret: 3-4mls w/curved tip dosing syringe.14
Precautions: Barium paste/esophageal cream should be used if foreign body is suspected
Ionic or nonionic contrast should be used if esophageal perforation is suspected. If oral
ionic contrast media (Gastrografin or MD-Gastroview) is aspirated, pulmonary edema can
result.1 An oral nonionic contrast agent is safer and less toxic than Gastrografin or MD-
Gastroview. Omnipaque 180 and 240 (iohexol) can be used orally if diluted. Ionic or
nonionic contrast media should be diluted 50:50 with water.14
Supplies: Canned and/or dry food in bowl mixed with liquid barium sulfate; canned food
should be chunky in consistency.
Patient Prep: None.
General Procedural Instructions:
1. Take survey imaging views. Clinician preference. Thorax 2v ± a lateral soft tissue neck
are the more common views taken for evaluation of the esophagus.
2.
 Place patient in right lateral recumbent position.
3.
 Slowly administer liquid barium into lip fold.
4.
 Fluoroscopically monitor and record the administration of liquid barium, ± barium
paste, ± barium mixed with food. It may take numerous swallows to evaluate esopha-
geal motility and lower esophageal sphincter function.14
Special Procedure—Upper Gl
An upper gastrointestinal study (UGI) is used to evaluate GI transit time, intestinal obstruc-
tion or masses, or possible foreign bodies. Normal gastric emptying time is 30-120
minutes. The normal small intestinal transit time is 30-120 minutes and emptying time is
180-300 minutes (Figs. 16.3 and 16.4).
CHAPTER
16
Fgure 16.3. UGl lateral view.
218 Chapter 16
Figure 16.4.UGlI VD view.
Contrast Agent: 30%(feline)-60%(canine) barium sulphate.
 Ionic or nonionic contrast media—diluted.
Dosage:
Barium Sulpbate:
Canine: <20kg: 8-12 ml/kg; >20 kg: 5-7ml/kg.
Feline: 12-20 ml/kg.
Ionic or Nonionic Contrast Media:
Canine: ionic—Gastrografin or MD-Gastroview  3-5ml/kg. Nonionic—Omnipaque
240(iohexol) 700-875 mgI/kg, diluted w/water for whole volume of 10 ml/kg.14 10 ml/kg
1:2 dilution.
Feline: ionic—Gastrografin or MD-Gastroview 3-5 ml/kg. Nonionic—Omnipaque 240
(iohexol) 600-800mgl/kg, diluted w/water for whole volume of 10 ml/kg.14 10 ml/kg 1:2
dilution.'
Precautions: Barium sulfate is contraindicated if a gastrointestinal perforation is sus-
PTER
 pected. An ionic or preferably a nonionic contrast media should be used.
Supplies:
Orogastric tube.
60 ml catheter tip syringes.
Patient Prep: Withhold food 12-24 hours; withhold water for 1-2 hours; enema, if neces-
sary, 2-4 hours prior to study.
Special lImaging Procedures  219
General Procedural Instructions:
1. Take VD and left lateral abdominal survey imaging views.
2. Slowly administer liquid barium orally or via orogastric tube.
3. Take right lateral, left lateral, DV, and VD views at O minutes.
 4. Take right lateral and VD views at 15, 30, and 60 minutes after administering contrast
media.
 5. Continue taking images every 30 minutes until barium reaches the colon.5,10,14
Special Procedure—Gastrogram
A gastrogram is used to evaluate mucosal abnormalities of the stomach and rate of gastric
emptying. Double contrast gastrography further evaluates the stomach wall for ulcers,
 masses, or foreign bodies. Negative contrast gastrography is used to evaluate the stomach
walls and contents. If a GI perforation is suspected, do not use barium. Iodinated contrast
(240-300 mgI/ml) should be diluted 50:50 with water (Fig. 16.5).
Contrast Agent:
High-density barium of 100% weight/volume preferred for double contrast study, though
not mandatory.14
Dosage:
Positive Contrast Gastrogram:
Canine/feline: barium sulfate 30% weight/volume 4-8 ml/kg
CHAPTER 16
Fgure 16.5.  Gastrogram fluoro image.
220  Chapter 16
Double Contrast Gastrogram:
Canine: barium sulfate 100% weight/volume.
 Feline: 6 ml/kg using barium sulfate 100% weight/volume.
 Ferret: 8-15ml/kg via curved-tip dosing syringe using barium sulfate 30-60% weight/
volume; 45 ml/kg air via orogastric tube 35 minutes post-contrast administration.14
Negative Contrast Gastrogram:
Canine/feline: 5-8 ml/kg of air; or carbonated soda (Mountain Dew or 7-Up); or efferves-
cent granules or tablet.
Precautions: If perforation is suspected, do not use barium sulfate. If the stomach contains
food, postpone the study.
Supplies:
Orogastric tube.
60ml catheter tip syringes.
Curved-tip dosing syringe—ferret.
Air or carbon dioxide.
Patient Prep: Canine/feline: fast for 12 hours; patient should have water
 Ferret: fast for 4 hours; patient should have water.
General Procedural Instructions:
1. Take VD and left lateral abdominal survey imaging views.
2. Administer liquid barium via orogastric tube.
 3. Administer 20 ml/kg of air to distend the stomach. Effervescent granules or tablet may
be used instead of air.
 4. Remove tube and rotate patient 360 degrees along the long axis multiple times to coat
the stomach.
5. Take DV, VD, right lateral, and left lateral views. If barium coating is inadequate, add
 an additional 1 ml/kg of barium.
6. Air should be removed via tube when the study is complete
Special Instructions for Ferret:
TER
1. Survey views should be VD and right lateral abdominal views.
2. Administer 8-15 ml/kg of barium via curved-tip dosing syringe.
 3. Take right lateral and VD views of the abdomen at 0, 15, 30, and every 30 minutes
until the barium reaches the colon.
 4. Administer 45 ml/kg of air via the orogastric tube 35 minutes post-barium.
 5. Take right and left lateral, DV, and VD views of the abdomen following air adminis-
tration.14
Special lImaging Procedures  221
Special Procedure—Lower Gl—Barium Enema
Lower gastrointestinal studies are used to examine the colon for intussusceptions, stric-
tures, or masses. The patient should be anesthetized for this study. Barium enemas can
either be done as a positive contrast or double contrast imaging exam. Double contrast
studies will further examine the bowel mucosa and wall thickness or identify strictures
and masses (Figs. 16.6 and 16.7).
Figure 16.6. Lower Gl
lateral view.
CHAPTER 16
B
Figure 16.7. Lower Gl VD view.
222Chapter 16
Contrast Agent:
Canine/feline: 20-30% weight/volume barium sulfate or iodinated contrast.
Dosage:
Positive Barium Enema: Canine: 10-30 ml/kg rectally.
Feline: 7-11 ml/kg rectally.
Double Contrast Barium Enema: If no positive BE performed, administer 4-6 ml/kg of
20-25% weight/volume barium sulfate for canine and feline and then administer air.
Canine: 11 ml/kg of air is administered rectally.
Feline: 7-11 ml/kg of air is administered rectally.
Precautions: An air embolism can happen during any imaging exam using negative con-
trast. If the patient is suspected to have a portosystemic shunt, place the patient in a left
lateral recumbent position to limit the chance of an air embolism. If an air embolism is
seen, the patient should remain in a left lateral recumbent position for 60 minutes and
immediate medical care should be initiated.14
Supplies:
 Foley balloon-tip catheter.
60ml syringes.
Exam gloves.
Lubricant.
Hemostat.
Patient Prep: Canine/feline: fast patient for 24 hours. Patient should be given water to
keep well hydrated. If fecal material still in bowel when survey images are taken, give a
warm-water enema
General Procedural Instructions:
1. Take VD and right lateral survey abdominal images to ensure the colon is clean.
2. Anesthetize patient.
 3. Place patient in right lateral recumbent position and elevate pelvis 10-15 degrees with
a foam wedge.
4. Insert lubricated Foley catheter into rectum and inflate the bulb.
 5. Place the syringe above the patient and, using gravity, administer barium.
6. Clamp tube.
7.
Take right lateral abdominal view to verify barium has adequately filled the colon. If
not, administer more barium. If so, take left lateral, VD, and oblique views of the
 abdomen.
Special Procedure-Excretory Urogram
The excretory urogram is also called an intravenous urogram or intravenous pyelogram
The study consists of two main phases, the nephrogram and the pyelogram. When the
Special Imaging Procedures223
contrast agent is first injected, it should uniformly opacify the renal parenchyma within
 seconds as it is distributed in the renal vasculature. This is called the nephrogram phase.
The contrast agent is then filtered into the renal collecting system with the urine and
the renal pelvis and diverticula are opacified. This is called the pyelogram phase. The
 contrast agent then delineates the ureters and bladder, as it is excreted from the kidneys.
If looking for ectopic ureters, no abdominal compression should be used during this
study to allow a negative contrast cystogram to be performed post-excretory urogram.
The excretory urogram will not provide quantitative data regarding renal function. If
the patient's BUN or creatinine are highly elevated, the maximum dose of contrast media
 asod e  s pe aisd se  se  aq o
16.8 and 16.9).
Contrast Agent: Ionic contrast agents: Conray, Conray 400, or Renografin 60.
Nonionic contrast agents: Ultravist 370, Isovue 370, Optiray 350, Omnipaque 240, or
Visipaque 320.
R
Figure 16.8.IVU VD view.
CHAPTER 16
Figure 16.9. IVU lateral view.
224Chapter 16
states the feline dose of 1 ml/kg is sufficient.1s
Precautions: The study should not be performed on a dehydrated patient or one where
renal function is seriously compromised. The intravenous catheter used for the injection
should remain in place for at least 20 minutes post-contrast injection due to the incidence
of adverse reactions. Vomiting is a frequent side effect of post-contrast injection. Caution
should be used if planning to use a compression band for the pyelogram phase. Two refer
ences suggest using the compression band or abdominal pressure wrap to enhance the
pyelogram phase, another reference stated compression is not recommended because it
could cause worsen renal function temporarily, and a fourth reference does not mention
using the compression band but also states a temporary decrease in renal function can
Supplies:
 Intravenous catheter w/injection cap.
Syringe w/needle.
Emergency drug kit.
Oxygen.
 Patient Prep: Canine/feline: the patient should be fasted 24 hours prior to the study but
can have water. A cleansing enema should be given at least 2 hours prior to the study. The
patient should be assessed for dehydration; proceed only if well hydrated. An intravenous
u  sd a uooau ss rn s o nd is ad aq s aui
sedation if uncooperative.
Rabbit, guinea pig, ferret: a warm-water enema should be given after taking VD and
right lateral survey images if fecal material in the colon. Recheck the colon in 1 hour.l4
The patient should be assessed for dehydration; proceed only if well hydrated. An intra-
venous catheter should be placed just prior to study for contrast injection. The patient
may require sedation if uncooperative.
General Procedural Instructions:
necessary, give another warm-water enema and recheck the colon in an hour. If clean,
proceed.
2.
 Place the patient in a VD recumbent position.
 3.  Inject contrast media as a rapid bolus.
4. Take VD and right lateral views immediately post-injection. Oblique views may be
taken 3-5 minutes post-injection.
ER
5. Take VD and right lateral views at 5, 10 or 15, 20, and 30 minutes. Additional views
C
may need to be taken at 45, 60, or 90 minutes if there is a delay in contrast enhance-
ment of the renal system.
6. If using a compression band is desired due to poor filling of the renal pelvis, place it
after the 5-minute views are taken and remove it just before taking the 10- or 15-
minute views.
7. To help visualize ectopic ureters, a negative contrast cystogram can be done if no
compression band was used during the study.
Special Imaging Procedures225
Special ProcedureCystography
Cystography is performed to evaluate the urinary bladder using positive contrast, negative
contrast, or a combination of both. Positive contrast cystography is used to visualize
bladder position and the integrity of the bladder wall. A double contrast cystogram is best
to provide mucosal detail and to visualize calculi and wall masses.l6 Negative contrast or 
 pneumocystography is not often used due to the posibility of developing an air embolism,
and it provides limited information. (Figs. 16.10 through 16.13).
Positive Contrast Cystography
Contrast Agent: Water-soluble ionic or nonionic contrast agents.
Canine: 5-10 ml/kg.
Feline: 2-5 ml/kg.
Figure 16.10.  Cystogram lateral
illustr ation.
CHAPTER 16
Figure 16.11. Cystogram lateral view.
Figure 16.12.
 Cystogram oblique view
illustration.
CHAPTER 16
Figure
16.13. Cystogram
oblique
view.
226
Special Imaging Procedures227
Precautions: Palpate the bladder while administering the contrast agent to prevent rupture
 or overdistention of the bladder.
Supplies:
Sterile red rubber or polypropylene catheter, 3 1/2-5 French.
Sterile Christmas tree adapter.
3-way stopcock.
Syringes.
Sterile lubricant.
 Germicidal soap and water prep.
Gauze.
2% lidocaine.
Sterile gloves.
 Otoscope speculum.
Patient Prep: Patient should be fasted 12-24 hours and have cleansing enema(s) at least 4
hours prior to exam. Abdominal images should be taken prior to sedating or anesthetizing
the patient to see if there is still fecal material over the bladder area. If so, a warm-water
enema should be given and a second set of images should be taken in an hour to see if the
colon is clean. The patient should be sedated or anesthetized for this procedure
General Procedural Instructions:
1.  Take right lateral and VD survey views of the abdomen.
 2. The external area surrounding the urethra should be cleaned with a germicidal soap
solution.
3. Using the sterile lubricant, aseptically catheterize and empty as much urine as possible
from the bladder. It may be necessary to flush out any seen blood clots with sterile saline.
4. Administer 3-5 ml of 2% lidocaine into the bladder to reduce bladder straining due
to distention for canine patients. 2-3ml of 2% lidocaine should be used for feline
patients.
 5. The bladder should be held as the 25% diluted contrast agent is slowly administered
to prevent overdistention.
6.
 Take right lateral, VD, and obligue views of the bladder. More contrast may have to
 be administered if there is leakage of contrast between views.
7. If following the positive cystogram with a double contrast cystogram, remove as much
contrast agent as possible.
8.
 Turn patient onto the left side and re-inflate the bladder while palpating to prevent
overdistention. An initial 5 ml/kg dosage is typical for canine patients and 2-3 ml/kg
for feline patients.
9.
Take lateral, VD, and oblique views of the bladder. More contrast may have to be
administered if there is leakage of contrast between views.
Double Contrast Cystography
Contrast Agent: Air or soluble gas such as carbon dioxide.
Water-soluble ionic or nonionic contrast agents.
228Chapter 16
Dosage:
Air or Soluble Gas: 50-300ml for larger dogs; 35 ml for small dogs and cats.
Ionic or Nonionic Contrast: Dilute contrast to 25% (1 part contrast to 3 parts sterile
water or saline). 15,16
1-2 ml for small dogs and cats.
2-10ml for larger dogs.
 Precautions: Palpate the bladder while administering the gas to prevent rupture or over-
distention of the bladder. Place the patient in a left lateral recumbent position to administer
gas to reduce the risk of an air embolism.4
Supplies:
Sterile red rubber or polypropylene catheter, 3 1/2-5 French.
Sterile Christmas tree adapter.
3-way stopcock.
Syringes.
Sterile lubricant.
Skin prep solution.
Gauze.
2% lidocaine.
Sterile gloves.
Patient Prep: Patient should be fasted 12-24 hours and have cleansing enema(s) at
least 4 hours prior to exam. Abdominal images should be taken prior to sedating or anes-
thetizing the patient to see if there is still fecal material over the bladder area. If so, a
warm-water enema should be given and a second set of images should be taken in an hour
to see if the colon is clean. The patient should be sedated or anesthetized for this
procedure.
General Procedural Instructions:
1.  Take right lateral and VD survey views of the abdomen.
 2. The external area surrounding the urethra should be cleaned with a germicidal soap
solution.
3. Using the sterile lubricant, aseptically catheterize and empty as much urine as possible
from the bladder It may be necessary to flush out any seen blood clots with sterile
saline.
4. Administer 3-5 ml of 2% lidocaine into the bladder to reduce bladder straining due
C
to distention for canine patients. 2-3ml of 2% lidocaine should be used for feline
patients.
 5.  Place the patient in left lateral recumbent position to administer contrast agents.14
 6.  The bladder should be held as the air or soluble gas is slowly administered to prevent
 overdistention.
7. Slowly administer the ionic or nonionic contrast dosage and roll the patient 360
degrees to coat the mucosa with contrast.
Special Imaging Procedures 229
8. Take left lateral, VD, and oblique views of the bladder. More contrast may have to
be administered if there is leakage of contrast between views.
Pneumocystography
Air or soluble gas such as carbon dioxide.
Dosage: Air or Soluble Gas: 50-300ml for larger dogs; 35ml for small dogs and cats.
Precautions: Palpate the bladder while administering the gas to prevent rupture or over-
distention of the bladder. Place the patient in a left lateral recumbent position to administer
gas to reduce the risk of an air embolism.14
Supplies:
Sterile red rubber or polypropylene catheter, 3 1/2-5 French.
Sterile Christmas tree adapter.
3-way stopcock.
Syringes.
Sterile lubricant.
Germicidal soap and water prep.
Gauze.
2% lidocaine.
Sterile gloves.
Otoscope speculum.
Patient Prep: Patient should be fasted 12-24 hours and have cleansing enema(s) at least 4
hours prior to exam. Abdominal images should be taken prior to sedating or anesthetizing
the patient to see if there is still fecal material over the bladder area. If so, a warm-water
enema should be given and a second set of images should be taken in an hour to see if the
colon is clean. The patient should be sedated or anesthetized for this procedure.
General Procedural Instructions:
1. Take right lateral and VD survey views of the abdomen.
 2. The external area surrounding the urethra should be cleaned with a germicidal soap
solution.
3. Using the sterile lubricant, aseptically catheterize and empty as much urine as possible
from the bladder. It may be necessary to flush out any seen blood clots with sterile
saline.
4. Administer 3-5ml of 2% lidocaine into the bladder to reduce bladder straining due
to distention for canine patients. 2-3ml of 2% lidocaine should be used for feline
patients.
5. Place the patient in left lateral recumbent position to administer air or soluble gas.14
 6. The bladder should be held as the air or soluble gas is slowly administered to prevent
overdistention.
7. Take left lateral, VD, and oblique views of the bladder. More contrast may have to
be administered if there is leakage of gas between views.
230  Chapter 16
Special Procedure-Urethrography
Urethrography is performed to opacify the urethra to look for strictures, tears, and block-
ages due to calculi or masses. It can be performed as a supplemental study to cystography
before or after the cystogram.
Visualizing the urethra, using ionic or nonionic contrast agents, can be done by retro-
grade or antegrade filling of the urethra. The antegrade or voiding cystourethrogram is
performed post-positive contrast cystography. A radiolucent paddle is placed over the
bladder to apply moderate pressure and a lateral view is taken when urine is seen at the
urethral orifice. Air or soluble gas is rarely used for this study (Figs. 16.14 and 16.15).
Contrast Agent: Ionic or nonionic contrast agent: undiluted.
Dosage:
Ionic or Nonionic Contrast: Feline: 5 ml.
Small canine: 10ml.
Fgure 16.14.Cystourethrogram flexed-
leg illustration.
Figure 16.15. Cystourethrogram flexed-leg view.
Special Imaging Procedures  231
Medium canine: 20ml.
Large canine: 30ml.
 Precautions: Excessive pressure should not be used for a voiding study, and it is contra-
indicated to perform a voiding study if the bladder is severely diseased due to the increased
likelihood of rupturing the bladder. Avoid producing air bubbles that may be mistaken for
calculi when administered by prefilling the Foley catheter.
Supplies:
2% lidocaine.
Sterile lubricant.
3-way stopcock.
Syringes.
 Skin prep solution.
Gauze.
 Foley or Swan-Ganz balloon tip catheter.
Syringes.
Sterile gloves.
Patient Prep: Patient should be fasted 12-24 hours and have cleansing enema(s) at least
 4 hours prior to exam. Abdominal images should be taken prior to sedating or anesthetiz-
ing the patient to see if there is still fecal material in the distal colon and rectum. The
 patient should be sedated for this exam.
General Procedural Instructions:
1. Take right lateral (regular and flexed-leg) and VD survey views of the abdomen.
2. The external area surrounding the urethra should be cleaned with a germicidal soap
solution.
 s e   a   rd n      
and aseptically placing it just beyond the urethral papilla in females or within the
penile urethra in males. This will prevent the injection of air bubbles.
4.
Inject 2 ml of 2% lidocaine into the urethra.
 5. Position the patient for the flexed lateral view.
 6. Inject 50% of the contrast dosage and make the exposure near the end of the injection.
 7. Inject contrast again, taking another flexed-leg lateral to evaluate if previous filling
defects are still present.
8.
 Proceed in taking regular right lateral, VD, and/or oblique views of the bladder, as
necessary, administering more contrast for each view.
Special Procedure- Vaginography
A vaginogram or retrograde vaginourethrogram is a contrast study performed to examine
the vagina, cervix, and urethra to look for ectopic ureters, vaginal strictures or masses,
and vaginal or urethral tears (Figs. 16.16 through 16.18).
Figure 16.16. Vaginogram VD view.
Figure 16.17.
Vaginogram oblique view.
CHAPTER 16
Figure 16.18. Vaginogram lateral view.
232
Special Imaging Procedures 233
Contrast Agent: Ionic or nonionic contrast agent: undiluted.
Dosage:
Ionic or Nonionic Contrast:
Feline: 5 ml.
Small canine: 10 ml.
Medium canine: 20 ml.
Large canine: 30ml.
Precautions: Avoid producing air bubbles that may be mistaken for calculi when admin-
istered by prefilling the Foley catheter.
Supplies:
Sterile lubricant.
Syringes.
 Germicidal soap and water prep.
Gauze.
 Foley or Swan-Ganz balloon tip catheter.
Sterile gloves.
Patient Prep: Patient should be fasted 12-24 hours and have cleansing enema(s) at least
4 hours prior to exam. Abdominal images should be taken prior to sedating or anesthetiz-
ing the patient to see if there is still fecal material in the distal colon and rectum. The
 patient should be anesthetized for this procedure.
General Procedural Instructions:
1.Take right lateral and VD survey views of the abdomen.
2. The external area surrounding the urethra should be cleaned with a germicidal soap
solution.
3. Aseptically catheterize the bladder to remove as much urine as possible and then
remove catheter.14
 4. Prefill the Foley catheter with contrast prior to placing it in the vulva. Inflate the cuff
just inside the vestibule.
5. Inject the undiluted contrast dose to adequately fill the vagina.
6.  Proceed in taking a right lateral view of the caudal abdomen near the end of the injec-
Special Procedure—Myelography
ER
Myelography is a contrast study used to examine the spinal cord by injecting nonionic
contrast media into the subarachnoid space. This study is used to identify sites of cord
compression due to spinal cord swelling, protruding disk material, vertebral abnormality,
or mass. A myelogram should only be performed by an experienced clinician intending to
take the patient to surgery if a surgical lesion is identified.
234Chapter 16
R
Figure 16.19.Myelogram
T'L lateral view.
The contrast agent is injected either at a cisternal or lumbar site. For injections at the
cisternal site, which is located between the external occipital protuberance and the arch
of C1, the patient is in a lateral recumbent position with the head hyperflexed. For injec-
tions at the lumbar site, which is located between L5 and 6, the patient is placed in either
a sternal recumbent position or a lateral recumbent position with the lumbar spine flexed
with the hind legs extended cranially to open the interarcuate space. The lumbar site is
preferred over the cisternal site (Figs. 16.19 through 16.21).
Contrast Agent: Iohexol (Omnipaque 240 mgI/ml) or iopamidol (Isovue 200 mgI/ml). Only
nonionic iodinated contrast agents with an iodine concentration of 200-300 mgl/kg and
approved for intrathecal use.
Dosage: Canine and feline: cisternal injection--cervical spine, 0.3 ml/kg; TL spine, 0.45 ml/
kg. Lumbar injection—cervical spine, 0.45 ml/kg; TL spine, 0.3 ml/kg.
Precautions: Procedure should only be performed by an experience clinician. Seizures may
Make sure nonionic contrast agent chosen is approved for intrathecal use.
Supplies:
Spinal needle 20-22g.
Clippers.
Surgical scrub.
Sterile gloves.
Venotube for CsF collection.
Patient Prep: Patient must be anesthetized. Either a cisternal or lumbar injection site
should be clipped and aseptically prepared. For a cisternal injection, the area between the
cranial edge of the ears to a point halfway down the neck should be clipped and asepti-
cally prepped. For a lumbar injection, the dorsal midline from the midlumbar area to the
caudal end of the sacrum should be clipped and aseptically prepped.
TER
General Procedural Instructions:
1. Anesthetize the patient.
 2. Take VD and right lateral survey views of the spine.
 3. Clip and aseptically prep the injection site.
 4. Clinician will aseptically place the spinal needle in the subarachnoid space and may
collect CSF for cytology analysis.
to confirm proper placement of the needle. A lateral view of the spine centered at the
Special Imaging Procedures235
CHAPTER 16
Figure 16.20. Myelogram TL VD view.
Figure 16.21.
 Myelogram T'L oblique view.
injection site will confirm the needle is in the subarachnoid space. If not, the needle
will be repositioned by the clinician and another image is taken to confirm the needle
is properly placed. The contrast agent is injected slowly, taking approximately 1
and while the spinal needle is still placed.
236Chapter 16
6. A lateral view is taken at the end of the injection to confirm adequate filling of the
subarachnoid space. After the needle has been removed, it may be necessary to tilt the
body to facilitate better filling of the subarachnoid space at a particular site.
7. For cervical spine, VD, lateral, oblique, flexion, extension, and traction, lateral views
may be requested. For TL spine, the typical views taken are VD, lateral, and oblique
views; for lumbar spine, VD, lateral, and oblique views. If a spinal fracture is suspected,
the lateral view and horizontal beam view to attain a VD projection may be requested.
Myelography is a contrast study used to examine the spinal cord by injecting nonionic
contrast media into the subarachnoid space. This study is used to identify sites of cord
compression due to spinal cord swelling, protruding disk material, vertebral abnormality,
or mass. A myelogram on an avian patient should only be performed by a vastly experi-
enced clinician. Myelography should not be performed on ducks, geese, or swans due to
the bone plates overlapping, thereby limiting access to the injection site.14
Contrast Agent: Iohexol (Omnipaque 240 mgl/ml) should be used for this procedure
Dosage: 190-280mgl/kg.
Precautions: Procedure should only be performed by a vastly experienced clinician.
Supplies:
Spinal needle 25 gauge, 1.5 inch.
Surgical scrub.
Sterile gloves.
Patient Prep: Patient must be anesthetized.
General Procedural Instructions:
1. Anesthetize the patient.
2.
 Take DV and right lateral survey views of the spine.
3.
 Place the patient in ventral recumbent position and restrain the patient in this position
4.F
 Pluck and aseptically prep the 3 cm injection site located over the junction between
the notarium and the synsacrum. The injection site is found by palpating the ilial crests
and finding the first indentation cranial to the synsacrum.
TER
5. Clinician will aseptically place the spinal needle in indentation. CSF within the spinal
C
needle should be confirmed prior to injection.
 6. The clinician will inject a small amount of contrast agent and request a DV view of
the injection site be taken to confirm proper placement of the needle. The contrast
agent is injected slowly, and the bird is not to be moved during injection while the
spinal needle is still in place. Additional DV views may be requested during the process.
7. The spinal needle is removed once the injection is complete.
 8. Take a DV and lateral views of the spine post-injection.
Special Imaging Procedures237
Special Procedure-Myelography-Rabbit
Myelography is a contrast study used to examine the spinal cord by injecting nonionic con-
trast media into the subarachnoid space. This study is used to identify sites of cord compres-
sion due to spinal cord swelling, protruding disk material, vertebral abnormality, or mass.
A myelogram should only be performed on a rabbit by a vastly experienced clinician.
The contrast agent is injected either at a cisternal or lumbar site. For injections at the
cisternal site, which is located between the external occipital protuberance and the arch
of C1, the patient is in a lateral recumbent position with the head hyperflexed. For rabbits,
injections at the lumbar site, which is located between L5 and 6, is preferred.
Contrast Agent: Iohexol (Omnipaque 240 mgl/ml) or iopamidol (Isovue 200 mgI/ml). Only
nonionic iodinated contrast agents with an iodine concentration of 200-300 mgl/kg and
approved for intrathecal use.
Dosage: 0.2ml/kg.
Precautions: Procedure should only be performed on a rabbit by a vastly experienced
clinician. Seizures may occasionally occur during recovery, particularly if the contrast agent
entered the skull. Make sure nonionic contrast agent chosen is approved for intrathecal use.
Supplies:
 Spinal needle 20-22g.
Clippers.
Surgical scrub.
Sterile gloves.
Venotube for CSF collection.
Patient Prep: Patient must be anesthetized. The lumbar injection site should be clipped
and aseptically prepared. For a lumbar injection, the dorsal midline from the midlumbar
area to the caudal end of the sacrum should be clipped and aseptically prepped.
General Procedural Instructions:
1.  Anesthetize the patient.
Take VD and right lateral survey views of the spine.
3.
 Clip and aseptically prep the injection site.
4.
 Clinician will aseptically place the spinal needle in the subarachnoid space and may
collect CsF for cytology analysis.
5.
 If performing a static study, the clinician will inject 0.2-0.5 ml of the contrast agent
to confirm proper placement of the needle. A lateral view of the spine centered at the
injection site will confirm the needle is in the subarachnoid space. If not, the needle
will be repositioned by the clinician and another image is taken to confirm the needle
minute to complete the injection.1s.i6 The patient cannot be moved during injection
and while the spinal needle is still placed.
238Chapter 16
A lateral view is taken at the end of the injection to confirm adequate filling of the
subarachnoid space. After the needle has been removed, it may be necessary to tilt the
body to facilitate better flling of the subarachnoid space at a particular site.
7. For cervical, TL, and lumbar spines, VD, lateral, and oblique views may be requested.
If a spinal fracture is suspected, the lateral view and horizontal beam view to attain
a VD projection may be requested.
Special Procedure-Fistulography
A fistula is deep sinuous passage or draining tract exiting at the skin's surface from an
abscess or hollow organ. Sometimes a fistula will be a congenital pathway between two
organs. Radiolucent foreign bodies or sequestra associated with osteomyelitis can fre-
 otu si su iso e sy a o uo an ug  'rsy e as a
the tract to opacify the tract and find the source (Figs. 16.22 and 16.23).
Contrast Agent: Water-soluble ionic or nonionic iodinated contrast agent.
Dosage: Dependent upon size of tract.
Precautions: NA.
Supplies:
Syringes.
Foley catheter.
R
ER
H
Figure 16.22. Fistulogram DV view.
Special Imaging Procedures239
D
Figure 16.23. Fistulogram
lateral view.
Clippers.
Skin prep solution.
Metallic marker.
the draining tract and cleanse the site. Place a metallic marker, like a BB, at the opening
of the tract.
General Procedural Instructions:
1.  Take VD or craniocaudal and lateral views of the anatomic region to determine the
size of the tract and cavity.
2.
Insert a flexible balloon tip catheter, like a Foley, into the tract and advance it in as
far as it will go. Inflate the balloon to help prevent leakage of the contrast agent.
3.
n ae  e o aa  iso ym ioen an ia
4.
 Immediately take post-contrast views to include a lateral and VD or craniocaudal
views. After removing the catheter, repeat the views.
5.
Air or soluble gas can be injected after the contrast if a double contrast exam is needed.
The volume of air/gas will be the same as the iodinated contrast agent.
Special ProcedureArthrography
CHAPTER
Arthrography is a contrast study of a joint cavity using positive or negative contrast media
to outline the joint capsule, to identify the articular surfaces, and to visualize free bodies
within the joint. The shoulder and stifle joints are the most common joints studied.
Arthrograms are not performed as frequently as in the past due to the availability of MRI
and CT.
Contrast Agent: Diluted nonionic contrast.
240Chapter 16
 Dosage: 1-4ml of a nonionic contrast agent diluted to 140mgI/ml for shoulder joint and
0.4ml/kg of 100 mgl/ml for the bicipital groove. The nonionic contrast agent should be
diluted 1 part contrast agent to 2 parts isotonic sterile saline.
Precautions: Contrast agent must be diluted to prevent damage to intracapsular ligaments
or damaged cartilage.
Supplies:
22 gauge spinal needle.
 Surgical scrub supplies.
Clippers.
Syringes.
Patient Prep: Patient should be anesthetized.
General Procedural Instructions:
Shoulder:
1. The patient is anesthetized.
 2. Lateral and caudocranial survey images are taken of the shoulder.
 3. The lateral aspect of the shoulder is aseptically prepared as the injection site.
 4. The clinician will aseptically place the 22 gauge spinal needle in the joint at the point
 of interest. Withdrawing joint fluid or taking an image after injecting a small amount
of contrast will confirm proper needle placement.
5. Remove the needle and manipulate the joint to uniformly fill the joint space with the
contrast agent.
6. Take lateral, caudocranial, and oblique views of the joint.
Stifle:
1. The patient is anesthetized.
 2. Lateral and caudocranial survey images are taken of the stifle.
 3. Aseptically prepare the injection site.
4.  The clinician will aseptically place the 20 or 22 gauge, 1 inch needle midway between
the cranial point of the patella and the tibial tuberosity, just medial to the patellar
ligament.
 5.  Withdrawing joint fluid or taking an image after injecting a small amount of contrast
will confirm proper needle placement.
6.7
The clinician will inject 1.4-1.8 ml/joint of nonionic iodinated contrast media 280 mgI/
ml over 10-20 seconds.14,15
ER
 7. The clinician will remove the needle and manipulate the joint to uniformly fill the
C
joint space with the contrast agent.
H
References
1. Carter, Christi E., and Beth L. Veale. 2010. Digital Radiograpby and PACS. St. Louis:
Mosby.
 2. Bushong, Stewart C. 2001. Radiologic Science for Technologists: Physics, Biology, and
Protection, 7th ed. St. Louis: Mosby.
3. Fauber, Terri L. 2009. Radiographic Imaging C Exposure, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby.
4. Korner, Markus, Christof H. Weber, Stefan Wirth, Klaus-Jurgen Pfeifer, Maximilian
Reiser, and Marcus Treitl. RSNA 2007. Advances in Digital Radiography; Physical
Principles and System Overview. RadioGraphics 27:675-686.
5. Thrall, Donald E. 2007. Textbook of Veterinary Diagnostic Radiology, Sth ed. St.
Louis: Saunders.
          9
Equipment Options. Veterinary Medicine Supplement. http://veterinarymedicine.
dvm360.com.
7. Shiroma, Jonathan T. December 1, 2006. An Introduction to DICOM. Veterinary
Medicine Supplement. http://veterinarymedicine.dvm360.com.
 8. Wallack, Seth T. December 1, 2006. How to Store Digital Images and Comply with
 Medical Recordkeeping Standards. Veterinary Medicine Supplement. http://veterinary
medicine.dvm360.com.
9. Cahoon, John B. 1974. Formulating X-ray Techniques, 8th ed. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.
10. Lavin, Lisa M. 2003. Radiography in Veterinary Technology, 3rd ed. St. Louis:
Saunders.
11. Artifact image fle courtesy of Dr. Jeryl Jones, DVM, PhD, DACVR; Professor of
Veterinary Radiology; West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV.
12. Artifact image file courtesy of Mary H. Ayers, R.T. (R); Veterinary Teaching Hospital.
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Blacksburg, VA.
13. Jensen, Steven C., and Michael P. Peppers. 1998. Pharmacology and Drug
Administration for Imaging Technologists. St. Louis:Mosby.
14. Wallack, Seth T. 2003. The Handbook of Veterinary Contrast Radiograpby. San Diego
Veterinary Imaging, Inc.
15. Morgan, J.P., and Sam Silverman. 1987. Techniques of Veterinary Radiograpby, 4th
ed. Ames: Iowa State University Press
16. Owens, Jerry M., and Darryl N. Biery. 1999. Radiographic Interpretation for the
Small Animal Clinician, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
17. Rubel, G.A., E. Isenbugel, and P. Wolvekamp. 1991. Atlas of Diagnostic Radiology
of Exotic Pets. St. Louis: Saunders.
241
242References andWebliography
18. Harr, K.E., G.V. Kollias, V. Rendano, and A. DeLahunta. 1997. Myelographic
Technique for Avian Species. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 38(3):187-192.
19. Wright, Matt, and William J. Hornof. 2010. Purchasing Digital Radiograpby without
Getting Your Head Handed to You. San Diego: Animal Insides Press.
20. Wright, Matt. 2010. Digital Radiography for the Veterinary Technician. San Diego:
Animal Insides Press.
21.Wright, Matt. 2008.Radiation Safety and Non-Manual Patient Restraint in Veterinary
Radiograp by. San Diego: Animal Insides Press.
  3     e      . 
 Duke University Rare Book, Manuscript, and Special Collections Library, Durham,
NC.
 23. Hall, Eric J. 2000. Radiobiology for the Radiologist, Sth ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.
Webliography
www.offa.org/hd_procedures.html. Orthopedic Foundation for Animals.
www.PennHIP.org. PennHIP, the University of Pennsylvania, School of Veterinary Medicine.
Abbreviations, for positioning terms, 73t
TMJs, 187
Abdomen, 167-70
tympanic bullae, 191
Abrasion layer, 17
urethrography, 231
Absorbed dose, 63t
vaginography,233
Absorbing layer, 18, 19
Anodes
Acetabular rim view, 103, 108
CRT monitors, 9
ACL {anterior cruciate ligament) tears, 123, 127
dual focus rotating anode x-ray tube, 21, 22f, 23f, 24f
Activity, 63t
fxed anode x-ray tube, 21, 22f
Acute renal failure, 213
rotating,21,24f
ADC (analog-to-digital converter), 10
stationary, 21
Adhesive layer, 17, 18f
Anode heel effect, 23
Ajr embolism, 222,22S, 228,229
Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tears, 123, 127
ALARA concept, 62, 6S-68
Antistatic intensifying screen cleaner, 4S
Algorithm, processing, 13
Aprons, lead, 62, 64f, 65, 65f, 66, 66f, 67, 68, 74
Allergic reactions, 210, 212-13
Archiving, PACS and, 6, 9, 11, 13
American Association of Physicists in Medicine, 9
Arrow, in patient, 7Sf, 76f
Amorphous selenium, 11
Arthrography,239-40
Analog-to-digital converter (ADC), 10
Artifacts, 49-56
Anatomic directional terms, 72
darkroom processing, S2, 52t, 53f
Anatomic markers, 72-73,73f, 74,172, 173, 175, 180,
defined, 49
184, 185, 187,188, 192, 193, 198
digital imaging, S4, S6
Anesthesia. See also Sedaticn
exposure,49,S0f, S0t, S1f
arthrography,240
flm storage, $4, $4t, SSf
barium enema,221,222
static, 4S，S3f, S4,S4t
cervical spine, 144
e s
chemical restraint, 65, 74, 109, 200, 202
Aspect ratio, 8, 9
cystography,227,228
Atlas, 144
endotracheal tube and, 148,175, 176, 180, 181, 182
Atomic number, 19, 209
mandible, 183,184,186
Automatic flm processing, S, 39, 4142
maxilla,179
Automatic flm processor maintenance, 41-42, 41f
myelography, 234
Avians
myelography, avian, 236
bird board, 197,198, 200, 204
myelography, rabbit, 237
imaging, 197-202
nasal, 174
myelography,236
OFA imaging and, 109
Axis, 144
pelvis, 103
pneumocystography, 229
Backlight, 8,9
skull, 171
Backscatter, 15, 20
spine, 143
Balloon-tip catheter, 222, 231, 233, 239
243
244Index
Barium,209
CdCr. See Caudocranial
Barium enemas, 221-22
Cervical spine, 144-48
Barium paste, 213, 215, 216, 217
Cesium iodide, 12, 25
Barium sulfate, 213,215,217,218,219, 220, 222
Characteristic radiation, 24
Base, 17, 18f, 19
Charge-coupled devices (CCDs), 10, 11, 12
Basilarview,187,189,191,194
Chemica1 restraint, 6S,74,109, 200,202
Beam direction, 72
Chemistry solutions, darkroom, 39
Becquerel (Bq), 63t
Christmas tree adapter, sterile, 227, 228, 229
Bicipital groove, 82, 85-87, 240
Cisternal tap, 210, 211t
Birds
Clearing time, 39
bird board, 197, 198, 200, 204
Closed mouth view, 187, 188, 191, 196
imaging,197-202
 CMOs (complementary metal oxide silicon)
myelography, 236
systems, 12
Bit depth,7-8
Collimation, 15, 25-26, S6, 74
Blood clots, 227, 228, 229
Callimator, 15, 26, 26f
Blood osmolality, 210
Colon, 219,220,221,222,224,227,228,229,231,
Blue dot, 7
233
Blue light, 19
Complementary metal oxide silicon (CMOS)
Blue sensitive flms, 42-43
systems,12
Body weight conversion table, 212t
Compression band, 58f, 59, 59f, 60, 60f, 74,
Bowel, 221, 222
10S, 224
Bq (becquerel), 63t
Computed radiography (CR), 6, 10-11
Brachycephalic breed, 186
Computed tomography (CT), S, 239
Bremsstrahlung interactions, 24
Conformance statement, DICOM, 6
Brightness (luminance), 8
Conray 400, 223
Brown developer solution,39
Consumer grade monitors, 7-10
Brown-yellow stains, S2, S2t, S4, S4t
Contrast, 12, 18, 20
Bucky tray,10, 24,30, $7,74
Contrast agents
Bullae, tympanic, 191-96
allergic reactions, 210, 212-13
BUN, 223
barium sulfate, 213, 215, 217, 218, 219, 220, 222
body weight conversion table, 212t
C1,144,234,237
Gastrografn,213,215,217,218
C2, 144, 148, 189, 192, 193
jonic, 209-10, 212-13
C6, 144
Isovue, 223, 234,237
C7,150, 151
MD-Gastroview, 213, 215, 217, 218
Calcium tungstate, 19
nonionic, 209-10,213
Calculi,22S,230,231,233
Omnipaque (Iohexol), 211t, 213, 215, 217,218, 223,
Calibration, monitor, 7, 8, 9
234,236,237
Caliper, 30, 31, 31f, 32f, 74
side effects, 210, 212-13, 224
Canon DR panel, 11f
water-soluble, 209-10
Canthus, lateral, 171, 174, 179, 183, 192, 193
Contrast media, radiopaque, 209-13
Carbon dioxide, 209, 220, 227, 229
Contrast ratio, 8
Carestream Health, 11
Contrast resolution, 10, 12, 20
Carpus, 95-100
Contrast studies, 21s-40
Cassettes. See Film cassettes
arthrography,239-40
Catheters
cystography,22s-29
balloon-tip,222,231,233,239
doubie contrast studies
Foley, 222, 231, 233, 238
cystogram,22s,227-28
polypropene,227,228,229
fistulography,239
Swan-Ganz balloon tip, 231, 233
gastrogram,219,220
Cathode, 9, 21, 23
lower GI, 221, 222
Cathode ray tube (CRT) monitors, 9
esophagram (fluroscopic/dynamic), 216-17
Caudal, 72t, 73t
esophagram (static), 215-16
Caudal dorsal border, of scapula, 163, 164
excretory urogram,222-24
Caudal spine, 160-62
fstulography, 238-39
Caudocranial (CdCr), 72
gastrogram,219-20
Caudocranial view
lower GI, barium enema, 221-22
fbula, 129, 130-31
myelography, 233-36
humerus,87,89
myelography, avian, 236
scapula,79,82
myelography, rabbit, 237-38
shoulder, 82,84
UGI, 217-19
stifle, 117, 120-21
urethrography, 230-31
tibia, 129,132
vaginography,231-33
TPLO,123,126
Conversion effciency, 20
TTA, 127,129
Conversion table
CCDs (charge-coupled devices), 10, 11, 12
body weight, 212t
CCL (cranial cruciate ligament) tears, 123, 127
radiologic unit/SI unit, 63t
Index245
CR (computed radiography), 6, 10-11
Display monitors, 7-10
Cranial, 72t, 73t
Display workstation, 7
Cranial cruciate ligament (CCL) tears, 123, 127
Distal, 72t
Craniccaudal (CrCd), 72
Diverticuli, 215, 216, 223
Craniccaudal view
Dolichccephalic breed, 186
elbow, 92
Dorsal, 72t
femur, 114,116
Dorsolateral-palmaromedial cblique, 72
humerus, 87, 90
Dorsopalmar (DPa), 72
radius, 94, 95
Dorsopalmar view
TMJs, 190
carpus, 9S, 97
tympanic bullae, 195
metacarpus/digits, 100, 102
ulna, 94, 95
Dorsoplantar, 72
Cranium, 171-74
Dorsoplantar view
CrCd. See Craniocaudal
metatarsus/digits, 138, 140
Creatinine, 223
tarsus, 133,136
Crescent marks,2f,3f
Dorsoventral (DV), 73t
Cricopharyngeal function, 216
Dorsoventral view
CRT (cathode ray tube) monitors, 9
cranium,172
Crystal size, 10
mandible, 185
CSF collection, 234, 236, 237
small mammals, 202, 204S
CT (computed tomography), S, 239
torax,16s
Curie, 63t
TMJs (closed mouth), 188
Curtain effect, S2, S2t
tympanic bullae, 193
Cystography, 22$-29
Dose equivalent, 63t
Cystourethrogram,230,230f
Dose limits, 61, 62t
Cystourethrography, 2S
Dosimeters, 64
Dosimetry badge, 64f, 66, 67
Dally, Clarence, 61
Dot pitch, 8
Darkroom
Dot triads, 7
chemistry solutions, 39
Double contrast studies
hazards, 4.3-44
cystogram,225,227-28
processing artifacts, S2, S2t, S3f
fistulography,239
setup, 37
gastrogram,219,220
wet side of, 37-38
lower GI, 221, 222
DDR (direct digital radiography), 11
Double emulsion x-ray flm, 17
Debris/wet hair, 74
Double exposure, 34t, 49, 50t, $1f
Density, 10
Dove, 198f, 200f
Dental arcades, 72t, 182
DPa. See Dorsopalmar
Detail, 10
DQE (detective quantum effciency), 12, 20
Detective quantum effciency (DQE), 12, 20
DR. See Digital radiography
Detectors, 11-12, 20-21, S6
DR systems
Developer solution, 38, 39
administrator setup window, 13f
Diaphragmatic hernia, 163
DICOM modality worklist, 13
Diatrizoate, 209
digital image processing, 12-15
Dichroic stain, S2, S2t, SSf
direct/indirect, 11-12
DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications in
resources for, 9
Medicine),6
software setup, 12-13
DICOM conformance statement, 6
Drying rack, 39
DICOM modality worklist, 13
Dry side, 3738
Digital imaging
Dual focus rotating anode x-ray tube, 21, 22f, 23f, 24f
artifacts, S4, S6
Ducks, 236
defined, S
DV. See Dorsoventral
processing, 12-15
 Dynamic/fluroscopic esophagram, 216-17
Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine. See
DICOM
Edema, pulmonary, 21s, 217
Digital radiography (DR, direct digital radiography,
Edison,Thomas, 24,61
DDR). See also DR systems
Effective dose, 62, 63t
CR and,6
Elbow, 90-93, 110
DDR , 11
Electrons,10,11,23
defined, 6
Embolism, air, 222, 225, 228, 229
flm-screen radiography u, 20
Emergency kit, 213, 224
Digits (phalanges)
Emulsion
metacarpus and, 100-102
flm, 38, 39, 41
metatarsus and, 13841
Jayer, 17, 18f
Direct capture, S, 6
x-ray flm, 17, 19, 30
Direct conversion radiography 1112
Endotracheal tube (ET), 148, 175, 176, 180, 181,
Direct digital radiography (DDR), 11
213
246 Index
Enemas
Fixed anode x-ray tube, 21, 22f
barium, 221-22
Fixer, 38, 41-42
cystography, 227,228,229
Fixing agents, 38, 41
excretory urogram,224
Fixing time, 39
 patient preparation and, 74
Flat panel detector, 11, 24
UGI, 218
Flexed-leg projection,169
urethrography, 231
Flexion view
yaginography,233
carpus,98
Epidurography, 143
cervical spine, 146
Esophageal cream,213,215,216,217
Fluorescence, 18, 46
Esophageal function, 216
Fluorescent lights, plasma displays, 9
Esophageal motility, 215, 216,217
Fluoroscopic mage intensifer, 24-2S, 2Sf
Esophagram
Fluoroscopy, S, 24-2s
fluroscopic/dynamic, 216-17
Fluroscopic/dynamic esophagram, 216-17
static, 21S-16
Foam positioning blocks, radiclucent, S8f, 143, 161,
ET (endotracheal tube), 148, 175, 176, 180, 181, 213
200
Excretory urogram,222-24
Foam wedges, S7, 58f, 60, 65, 6Sf, 164, 222
Exotic pet imaging, 197-20$
Focal-flm distance, 21, 31
avians,197-202
Focal spot, 20, 21, 23, 28, 30, 74, 171
reptiles, 197, 202S
Focusing cup,21,23
small mammals, 197, 200-202
Fog,26,34t,42,43,52,52t,54,6
Exposure
Foley catheter, 222, 231, 233,238
artifacts,49,S0f, S0t, S1f
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 213
double, 34t, 49, S0t, S1f
Foramen magnum, 171, 174
factors, 28
Foreign objects
image, 32-34
barium paste and, 213
overexposure/underexposure, 32, 34t
in cassette, 45, S4f
radiation,63t
esophagram and, 215, 216, 217
times, ,21,28,30t
exposure artifacts, 49, S0t
white-light, 37, 42
fistula and, 238
Extension view
gastrogram and, 219
carpus, 98
on intensifying screen, S4t
cervical spine,146
UGI and, 217
Extravascular space,210
Forelimb, 79-102
Extremities, 80-102, 114-41
bicipital groove, 82, 85-87, 240
Eye, lateral canthus, 171,174,179,183, 192,193
carpus,9s-100
digits, 100-102
FDA (Food and Drug Administration), 213
elbow, 90-93, 110
Femur, 114-16
humerus, 87-90
Ferret, 215, 217,220, 224
metacarpus, 100-102
FET (feld-effect transistor), 11
radius, 94-95
Fibula, 129-32
scapula,79-82
Field-effect transistor (FET), 11
shoulder, 82-84
Filament, 23
ulnus, 94-9S
Film. See also X-ray f1m
Frog-leg projection, 103, 106-7
bin, 43, 43f, S4t
Frontal sinus, 178-79
contrast,12,18,20
Frontocciptial view, 171, 174
handling, 38, 43-44
Fuji Medical Systems, 10, 11
hangers, 38, 40f
Jabeling, 44-45
Gadolinium oxysulfde, 19
storage, 4344
Gastrografn, 213,215,217,218
Film cassettes
Gastrogram, 219-20
care/maintenance, 4547
Gastrointestinal tract (GI), 217
foreign objects in, 45, S4f
lower gastrointestinal study, 221-22
rare earth，17,18f
UGI, 217-19
Film ID printer,44, 44f
Gauze sponges, radiolucent, S7
Film processing, 37-47. See also Darkroom
GBX f1ter, 42-43
automatic, S, 39, 41-42
Geese, 236
darkroom setup,37
Gerbil, 202
manual, 38-39, 40f
GI. See Gastrointestinal tract
Film-screen contact test, 46
Gila monster, 203f, 20Sf
Film-screen radiography, 17-20. See also Digital
Glass envelope, 17
radiography
Gonadal shielding, 68, 110
Film speed, i7-18
Gray (Gy), 63t
Film storage artifacts,4,4tf
Grayscale monitors, medical grade, 7-10, 7f
Final rinse, optional, 39-40
Greasy appearance, S2, S2t
Fistula, 238
Greater trochanter, 103, 167, 168, 170
Fistulography, 238-39
Green/blue sensitive f1m, 42-43
Index247
Green developer soluticn, SS
International Commission cn Radiologic Units (ICRU),
Green dot, 7
61-62
Green light, 19
International system of units (SI),
Grid, 20, 27-28, 27f, 30
62,63t
Grid cutoff, 27,49, S0t, S1f
Intestinal cbstruction, 217
Grid lines, 27, S0t, S1f
Intravascular space, 210
Grid ration, 27
Intravenous pyelogram, 222-24
Guide-shoe marks, S2, S2t, SSf
Intravenous urogram, 222-24
Guinea pig, 197, 201, 202f, 224
Intussusceptions, 221
Gy (gray), 63t
Iodinated contrast media, 209-10
Iodine, 209-10
Hamsters, 197, 202
Iohexol (Omnipaque), 211, 211t, 213, 215, 217, 218,
Hand developing, 38-40
223,234,236,237
Hangers, flm, 38, 40f
Ionic contrast agents, 209-10, 212-13
Hard palate, 176, 181
Ionic radiopaque contrast media, 210
Hazards
Isovue, 223, 234, 237
darkroom, 43-44
radiation safety, 61-68, 110
Kidneys, 213, 222-23, 224
Head cradle, 57, 58f, 60, 60f, 105, 106, 116
Kilovoltage,12,21,23
Head End patient immobilization device, S7, S8f, S9,
Kilovoltage peak (kVp), 12, 21, 23, 24, 28
59f,60,6S
Kink marks, S2f, S3f, 54, S4t
Headwork, 171-96
kVp (Kilovoltage peak), 12, 21, 23, 24, 28
Health physics, 61
kVp technique chart, variable, 30t-31t
Heavy sedation
mandible, 183
Lanthanum cxybromide, 19
maxilla, 179
Larynx, 167
nasal, 174
Latent image, 19, 37
pelvis, 103, 105
Lateral, 72t
skull, 171
Lateral canthus, 171, 174, 179, 183, 192,
spine, 143
193
TMJs, 187
Lateral view
tympanic bullae, 191
abdomen, 168
Hemostat,222
abdomen, flexed leg, 169
Hernia, diaphragmatic, 163
avian, 200
Hind limb, 103-41
carpus, 9S, 96
femur, 11416
caudal spine, 161
fbia, 129-32
cervical spine, 14§
stifle, 117-21
cranium, 173
tarsus, 13337
digits/metacarpus, 100, 101
tibia, 129-32
digits/metatarsus, 138, 139
Hip dysplasia, 104-13
elbow, 90, 91
Hirshorn, David, 7
femur 114,11S
Histogram, 14, 15
fbula, 129, 130-31
Horizontal beam views, 76-77, 77f, 78f
humerus, 87, 88
Humerus, 87-90
Jumbar spine, 153
Hyperflexed view, elbow, 90, 93, 110
lumbosacral spine, 1S6-58
metacarpus/digits, 100, 101
ICRU (International Commission on Radiclogic Units),
metatarsus/digits, 138, 139
61-62
pelvis, 103, 104
Images
radius, 94
exposure, 32-34
reptiles, 203
fluoroscopic image intensifer, 242S, 2Sf
sacrum,160
image intensifier, 24-25, 2Sf
scapula,79, 80-81
Jatent, 19, 37
shoulder, 82, 83
noise, 19, 20, 32
small mammals, 201
receptors, 20-21
soft tissue neck, 167
source-to-jmage distance, 20, 21, 31, 46, 74
spine, 144
storage, 6
stifle, 117,118-19
Imaging. See aiso Digital imaging; Exotic pet imaging;
tarsus, 133, 13435
Special imaging procedures
thoracic spine, 150
jmaging plate, 10, 11, S6
thoracolumbar spine, 150
MRI, 5, 239
horax, 164
patient imaging log, 33,3S, 3Sf
tibia, 129, 130-31
Indirect capture,S,6,11
TPLO,123,124-2S
Indirect conversion DR system, 11-12, 20
TTA,127,128
Inferior/superior, 72t
tympanic bullae, 192
Intensifying screens, radiographic, 18-20, 19f, 4547,
ulna, 94
54t
Latitude, 18, 20
248Index
LCDs (liquid crystal displays), 8, 9, 10
Myelography, 233-38
Lead, 62
avian, 236
Lead anatomic markers, 72-73, 73f, 74, 172, 173, 175,
fluoroscopy and, 25
180, 184, 185, 187, 188, 192, 193, 198
grids and, 28
Lead aprons, 62, 64f, 65, 65f, 66, 66f, 67, 68, 74
rabbit,237-38
Lead gloves, 62, 66, 66f, 67, 67f
spine and, 143, 15s
Left/right anatomic markers. See Lead anatomic
markers
NASA, 12
Leveling/window, 20, 32
Nasal cavity imaging, 174-79
Lidocaine, 227,228,229, 231
 National Committee on Radiation Protection and
Light
Measurements (NCRP), 61, 62t
backlight, 8, 9
Neck, soft tissue, 166-67
blue, 19
Negative contrast arthrography, 239
fluorescent, plasma displays, 9
Negative contrast cystogram, 223, 224
green, 19
Negative contrast cystography, 225
safelights, 37, 42-43
Negative contrast enhancement, 209, 222
white-light exposure, 37,42
Negative contrast gastrography, 219, 220
white-light leaks, S3f, S4t
Negligible individual dose, 63t
Linear grid, 27
Nephrogram, 222-23
Line-focus principle, 23
Nickel, 21
Line pairs per millimeter (Ip/mm), 10
Noise, image, 19, 20, 32. See also Quantum mottle
Liquid crystal displays (LCDs), 8, 9, 10
Non-iodinated contrast media, 209-10
Log,patient imaging,33,3S,3Sf
Nonionic contrast agents, 209-10, 213
Lock-up-table (LUT), 14
 Nonparallel collimation, S6
Lower gastrointestinal study, 221-22
Low-osmolar contrast media, 210
Object image distance, 20
Ip/mm (line pairs per millimeter), 10
Oblique,73t
LS (Lumbosacral) spine, 15S-59
Oblique view
Lumbar spine, 152-$4
carpus, 98
Lumbar tap, 210, 211t
mandible (open mouth), 186
Lumbosacral junction, 15S
maxilla (open mouth), 182
Lumbosacral (LS) spine, 1SS-S9
metatarsus/digits, 141
Luminance,8
tarsus, 138
Luminescence, 18, 46
TMJs, 190
LUT (look-up-table), 14
Odontoid process, 144, 148, 196
OFA (Orthopedic Foundation for Animals), 109-11
mA (Milliamperage), 21, 23, 28, 30
OFA imaging, 109-11
Magnesium oxide, 19
Omnipaque (Iohexol), 211t, 213, 215, 217, 218, 223,
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), S, 239
234,236,237
Mailing recommendations, OFA and, 111
Open mouth view
Mandib1e, 183-87, 190
mandible,184,186
Mandibular symphysis, 183, 187
maxilla,180-82
Manual flm processing, 38-39, 40f
nasal, 175-77
Markers. See Lead anatomic markers
odontoid, 148
mAs (milliampere seconds), 21, 23, 28, 30
tympanic bullae, 194-95
mAs technique chart, variable, 28
Optica1 density, 28, 49, $2t, S4, $4t
Matrix,8
Optional fnal rinse, 39-40
Maxilla, 179-82
Optiray, 223
MD-Gastroview, 213, 215, 217, 218
Oral contrast media, 213
Measurement, 31, 61, 62t, 74
Orogastric tube, 218, 219, 220
Medial, 72
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals (OFA),
Medical grade grayscale monitors, 7-10, 7f
109-11
Mediolateral, 72t
Osmolality, 210, 213
Mesaticephalic breed, 186
Osteomyelitis, 238
Metacarpus, phalanges and, 100-102
Overcoat, 17, 18f
Metastatic nodules, 163
Overexposure, underexposure v, 32, 34t
Metatarsus, phalanges and, 138-41
Oxygen,209,213,224
Metrizoate, 209
Microchip number, 110
PACS (picture archiving and communication system), 6,
Milky appearance, $2, $2t
9, 11, 13
Milliamperage (mA), 21, 23, 28,30
Paddle, radiclucent, 59, 230
Milliamperage selector,28
Palate, 176,177, 181
Milliampere seconds (mAs), 21, 23, 28, 30
Palmar, 72t, 73t
Modality worklist, DICOM, 13
Palmarodorsal, 72-73
Monitors, 710
Palmarolateral-dorsomedial oblique, 72-73
Motion, 49, S0t
Palmaromedial-dorsolateral oblique,7273
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), S,239
Parrots, 197, 198, 199f, 200f
Myelographic dose table, 210, 211t
Patella, sunrise view, 117, 122
Index249
Patient
Radiography. See also DR systems
arrow in, 7sf, 76f
digital,6, 11, 20
Head End patient immobilization device, S7, S8f, S9,
direct digital,11
59f, 60, 65
flm-screen, 17-20
identifcation information, 13, 44-45
Radiclogical Society of North America (RSNA)
imaging log,33,3S, 3Sf
conference, 7
positioning,71-78
Radiclogic units, 61-63, 62t, 63t
preparation, 74
Radiclucent
Pelvis, 103-8
foreign bodies, 238
PennHIT information, 111-13
gauze sponges, S7
Perforations, 213, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220
paddle,S9,230
Phalanges (digits)
positioning foam blocks, S8f, 143,161,200
metacarpus and, 100-102
speculum,175,180,182,184,186
metatarsus and, 13841
table pad, 57
Phosphors, 9, 10, 12, 18, 19-20, 25, 45, 46, $6
Radiclucent paddle, 7S,7Sf
Photodiodes, 11, 12, 20
 Radiopaque contrast media (ROCM), 209-13. See also
Photo imprinting device, 44, 44f
Contrast agents
Photomultiplier/CCDs, 10, 11, 12
Radius/ulna, 94-95
Picture archiving and communication system (PACS), 6,
Raptors, 197, 198
9,11, 13
Rare earth elements, 19, 20
Pig,guinea,197,201,202f,224
Rare earth flm cassette, 17, 18f
Pi lines,S2,S2t
Rare earth speed filmscreen, S, 20, 28
Pixel, 7
Raster, 10
Plantar, 72t, 73t
Recorded detail, 7, 17, 19, 45
Plantardorsal view
Recording technicalfactors323f
metatarsus/digits, 140
Rectum, 222,231,233
tarsus, 136-37
Recumbent, 72, 72t
Plasma monitors, 9
Red dot, 7
Pneumocystography, 225, 229
Red laser, 10
Poisonous reptiles, 197, 204
Red rubber, sterile, 227, 228, 229
Polyester, 17, 19
Reflective layer, 18,19
Polypropene catheter, 227, 228, 229
Refresh rate, 8
Portosystemic shunt, 222
Rem, 63t
Positioning
Renal failure, 213
aids, S7, S8f, 64f
Renal function, 223, 224
patient, 71-78
Renografin,223
terminology,71-78,72t,73t
Reptiles, 197, 202-$
Positioning foam blocks, radiolucent, S8f, 143, 161, 200
Resolution
Positioning term abbreviations, 73t
contrast, 10, 12, 20
Positive contrast cystography, 225
monitor screen,7, 8
Pregnancy, 67, 110
spatial,7,10,19,20,21
Processing algorithm, 13
Resolution portrait monitor, 7
Processing artifacts, darkroom,S2, S2t, S3f
Restraint
Protective coating, radiographic intensifying screens, 18,
chemical, 65, 74, 109, 200, 202
19
devices, $7-60,S8f, S9f, 60f, 64f
Proximal, 72t
sedation and, S9-60
Psittacine, 197. See aiso Parrots
Reticulation, 38,38f, 52, $2t
Pulmonary edema, 215, 217
Retrograde cystourethrography, 230-31
Pyelogram, intravenous, 222-24
Retrograde urethrography, 230-31
Retrograde vaginourethrogram,231
Quantum mottle, 20, 28, 31,32, 49, S0t, S6, S6f
Right/left anatomic markers. See Lead anatomic markers
Rinse bath,38-39
Rabbits, 197,202, 224,237-38
Rinsing flm, 38-39
Rad,63t
ROCM (radiopaque contrast media), 209-13. See also
Radiation
Contrast agents
characteristic, 24
Roentgen, Wilhelm Conrad, 61
safety, 61-68, 110
Room setup, 74
scatter/secondary, 10, 25-27
Rostral, 72t
Radiation absorbed dose, 63t
Rostral mandible, 183, 187, 190
Radiation equivalent man, 63t
Rotating anode, 21, 24f
Radiographic intensifying screens, 18-20, 19f, 4547,
Rotating anode x-ray tube, dual focus, 21, 22f, 23f, 24f
S4t
 RSNA (Radiclogical Society of North America)
Radiographic positioning. See Positioning
conference, 7
Radiographic system,21-3S
basic components, 21
Sacrum, 159-60
dual focus rotating anode x-ray tube and, 21, 22f,
Safelights, 37, 4243
23f, 24f
Safety, radiation, 61-68, 110
technique chart and, 20, 28-32, 29f, 30t-31t
Sandbags, 65, 73, 74f, 75, 75f
250 Index
Santes' rule, 28, 30
gastrogram,219-20
Scapula,79-82,163,164
lower Gl, barium enema, 221-22
Scatter radiation,10,2S-27
myelography, 233-36
Scratched emulsion, 38
myelography, avian,236
Screen resolutions, 7, 8
myelography, rabbit, 237-38
Screen speed, 19-20
UGI, 217-19
Secondary radiation, 10, 2S-27
urethrography, 230-31
Sedation. See also Anesthesia
yaginography,231-33
heavy sedation
Spectral emission, 19, 30
mandible, 183
Spectral matching, 19, 30
maxilla, 179
Spectral sensitivity, 19, 43
nasal, 174
Speculum
pelvis,103,10S
radiolucent, 175, 180, 182, 184, 186
skull, 171
Spinal needle, 234, 235, 236, 237, 240
spine,143
Spine, 143-62
TMJs, 187
caudal, 160-62
tympanic bullae, 191
cervical, 144-48
restraint techniques and, S9-60
Jumbar, 152-S4
Selenium, 11, 12
lumbosacral, 155-59
Sensitometry, 18
sacrum,159-60
Sequestra,238
horacic, 149-52
Shoulder, 82-84
thoracolumbar, 149-52
Shunt, portosystemic,222
Spot f1m, 25
SI (international system of units), 62, 63t
Static artifacts, 4S, S3f, S4, S4t
SID(source-to-image distance),20,21,31,46,74
Static electricity, 43, 4$
Side effects, contrast agents, 210, 212-13, 224
Static esophagram, 215-16
Sievert (Sv), 63t
Stationary anode, 21
Signal-to-noise ratio,12
Sterile Christmas tree adapter, 227, 228, 229
Silicon detector, 11
Sterile red rubber, 227, 228, 229
Silver bromide crystals, 17
Stifle, 117-21
Silver halide, 17, 37, 41
Stop bath, 38-39
Silver iodide, 17
Stopcock, three-way, 227,228,229,231
Silver recovery cartridges, 42, 42f
Storage
Single focus, 21
of digital images, 6
Sinus, frontal, 178, 179
x-ray f1m, 4344
Skull, 171-96
Stress view
cranium,171-74
carpus, 98
mandible, 183-87, 190
tarsus, 138
maxilla, 179-82
Strictures, 215,216,221,230,231
nasal cavity imaging, 174-79
Subarachnoid space, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238
TMJs, 166, 187-91, 195
Sunrise view (patella), 117, 122
tympanic bullae, 191-96
Supercoat, 17
Skyline view (patella), 117, 122
Superior/inferior, 72t
Small intestinal tract studies, 213
Sv (sievert), 63t
Small intestinal transit time, 217
Swan-Ganz balloon tip catheter, 231, 233
Small mammals, 197, 200-202
Snakes, 204,20sf
Table pad, radiolucent, $7
Soft palate, 176, 177, 181
Tabular grain (T-grain) technology, 17
Soft tissue, 163-70
Tap, cisternal/umbar, 210, 211t
Soft tissue neck, 166-67
Target, 21, 23
Software
Tarsus, 133-37
DICOM, 6, 13
Task Group 18, 9
DR system, set up, 12-13
Tattoo, 110
PACS, 6, 9, 11, 13
Technique chart, 20, 28-32, 29f, 30t-31t
Source-to-image distance (SID), 20, 21, 31, 46, 74
Technique recording sheet, 32, 33f
Spatial reslution,7,10,19,20,21
Teeth,182,186
Special imaging procedures, 215-40
Temperomandibular joints (TMJs), 166, 187-91, 195
arthrography,239-40
Terminelogy positioning, 71-78, 72t, 73t
cystography,22S-29
TFT (thin-flm transistor) detectors, 11, 12
double contrast studies
T-grain (tabular grain) technology, 17
cystogram,22s,227-28
Thermionic emission, 23
fistulography,239
Thin-flm transistor (TFT) detectors, 11, 12
gastrogram,219,220
Thoracic inlet, 166, 167
lower GI,221,222
Thoracic spine, 149-52
esophagram (fluroscopic/dynamic), 216-17
Thoracolumbar (TL) spine, 149-52
esophagram (static), 21s-16
Thorax, 163-66
excretory urogram,222-24
Three-way stopcock, 227, 228, 229, 231
fstulography, 238-39
Thyroid gland, 68
Index 251
Thyroid shields, 62, 64f, 65
frontal sinus, 178-79
Tibia, 129-32
Jumbar spine, 154
Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO), 123-26
lumbosacral spine,159
Tibial tuberosity advancement (TTA), 127-29
maxilla (open mouth), 181
Titanium dioxide, 19
pelvis
TL (thoracolumbar) spine,149-52
frog-leg,106-7
TMJs (temperomandibular joints), 166,
legs extended, 103, 10S
187-91, 195
sacrum,160
TPLO (tibial plateau leveling csteotomy), 123-26
small mammals, 202, 204-5
Tri-iodinated compounds, 209-10
horacic spine, 1S1-52
Trochanter, greater, 103,167,168,170
thoracolumbar spine, 151
TTA (tibial tuberosity advancement), 127-29
horax, 166
Tube current, 21, 23
TMJs, 189
Tuber ischii, 104, 116, 160, 161
tympanic bullae, 194, 196
Tungsten, 21
Vewable area, 8
Turtle,203f, 204f
Visipaque, 223
Tympanic bullae, 191-96
Vomiting, 213, 224
Wash bath, 38-39
Ulna/radius, 94-95
Water-soluble contrast agents, 209-10
Ultravist, 223
Wet hair/debris, 74
Underexposure, overexposure u, 32, 34t
Wet side, of darkroom, 37-38
Upper dental arcade,72t,182
e 
Upper gastrointestinal study (UGI), 217-19
White-light exposure, 37, 42
Upper GI, 217-19
White-light leaks, S3f, S4t
Urethra,18S,227,228,229,230,231,233
Window/leveling, 20, 32
Urethrography, 230-31
Wireless DR panel, 11
Urinary bladder, 230-31
Workstaticn monitors, 7-10
Urogram, excretory, 222-24
Wratten safelight filters, 43
Vacuum, 21
Xiphoid, 167,168,170
Vaginography, 231-33
X-ray beam, 17
Vaginourethrogram, retrograde, 231
X-ray flm. See also Film
Variable kVp technique chart, 30t-31t
construction, 17-18, 18f
Variable mAs technique chart,28
storage/handling, 43-44
VD. See Ventrodorsal
X-ray machine, 21-25
Ventral, 73t
X-ray rare earth flm cassette, 17, 18f
Ventrodorsal (VD), 72, 73t
X-ray table, 22f
Ventrodorsal view
X-ray tube, 17, 21, 22f, 2324
abdomen, 170
avian,198-99
Yellow-brown stains, S2, 52t, S4, 54t
caudal spine, 162
cervical spine, 147
Zygomatic arch, 171, 174,179,183