TeachYourself
VISUALLY
Dog
Training
Visual
by Sarah Hodgson
WILEY
Wilcy Publishing, Inc
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
TeachYourself
VISUALLY
Dog
Training
Visual
by Sarah Hodgson
WILEY
Wilcy Publishing, Inc
TenchYourselfVISUALLYTmDogTraining
Copyright @ 2006 by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey. All rights reserved
Published by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600,
or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Legal Department, Wiley
Publishing, Inc., 10475 Crosspoint Blvd., Indianapolis, IN 46256, (317) 572-3447, fax (317) 572-4355, or online at http://www.
wiley.com/go/permissions
Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo, Teach Yourself VISUALLY, and related trademarks are trademarks or registered trademarks of John
Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affliates. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Wiley Publishing, Inc. is not
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this
be created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situa
tion. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional ser-
vices. If professional assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor
the author shall be liable for damages arising here from. The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation
and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the organiza-
tion or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this
work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was wtitten and when it is read.
For general information on our other products and services or to obtain technical support please contact our Customer Care Department
within the U.S. at (800) 762-2974, outside the U.S. at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic
books. For more information about Wiley products, please visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2005939 197
ISBN-13: 978-0-471-74989-9
ISBN-10: 0-471-74989-3
Printed in the United States of America
10987654321
Book production by Wiley Publishing, Inc. Composition Services
Praise for the Teach Yourself VlsUALLY Series
I just had to let you and your company know how great I think your books are. I just pur-
chased my third visual book (my first two are dog-eared now!) and, once again, your prod-
uct has surpassed my expectations. The expertise, thought, and effort that go into each
book are obvious, and I sincerely appreciate your efforts. Keep up the wonderful work!
Tracey Moore (Memphis, TN)
I have several books from the Visual series and have always found them to be valuable
resources.
Stephen P Miller (Boliston Spo, Ny)
Thank you for the wonderful books you produce. It wasn't until I was an adult that I dis-
covered how I learn-visually. Although a few publishers out there claim to present the
material visually, nothing compares to Visual books. I love the simple layout. Everything is
easy to follow. And I understand the material! You really know the way I think and learn.
Thanks so much!
-Stocey Hon (Avondole, AZ)
Like a lot of other people, I understand things best when I see them visually. Your books
really make learning easy and life more fun.
John T. Frey (Cadilliac, MI)
I am an avid fan of your Visual books. If I need to learn anything. I just buy one of your
books and learn the topic in no time. Wonders! I have even trained my friends to give me
Visual books as gifts.
Hllong Bergstrom (Aventura, FL)
I write to extend my thanks and appreciation for your books. They are clear, easy to fol-
low, and straight to the point. Keep up the good work! I bought several of your books and
they are just right! No regrets! I will always buy your books because they are the best.
SewordKollie (Dokor, Senegol)
Credits
Acquisitions Editor
Pam Mourouzis
Project Editor
Jennifer Connolly
Copy Editor
Ruth Strother
Editorial Manager
Christina Stambaugh
Publisher
Cindy Kitchel
Vice President and Executive Publisher
Kathy Nebenhaus
Interior Design
Kathie Rickard
Elizabeth Brooks
Cover Design
Jose Almaguer
Interior Photography
Jodi Buren
About the Author
Sarah Hodgson has been a trainer of dogs and their people
for over 20 years. She has had many famous clients, includ-
ing TV personality Katie Couric; actors Richard Gere, Glenn
Close, Chazz Palminteri, Chevy Chase, and Lucie Arnez;
business moguls George Soros, Tommy Hilfiger, Tommy
Mottola, and Michael Fuchs; and sports greats Bobby
Valentine and Alan Houston. She is the author of eight
dog-training books, including Puppies For Dummies,
DogPerfect, and PuppyPerfect, and has two additional titles
soon to be released: Miss Sarah's Guide to Etiquette for Dogs
Wnd Their People (2006) and Dog Psycbology For Dummies?
(2007). Sarah lives in Katonah, New York, with her daughter, Lindsay, and her black Lab,
Whoopsie Daisy. For more information, you can visit her website: www.dogperfect.com.
Acknowledgments
As always, there are so many people to thank—from the
head of the dog to the tail that wags it. Pam Mourouzis, you
are an inspiration to write for. Handing me off to Jenn
Connolly was a great move-thank you. I don't know if it
was more enjoyable to haggle over text or what to do about
our children's teething and tantrums. Jennyou are a joy to
work with.
Jodi and Laurie—-my photographers: although not one
of these photos will hang in a gallery, each is indispensable for the people who are learning
from them. That's the great accomplishment. Thank you for your tireless efforts! The week-
long shoot is another in our memory bank.
On the home team, friends and family are the fur that warm and surround me. I could
not have juggled the demands of this year and gotten this book out without all of you.
Rosiemarie, Nancy, Sheila, Roma, Glen, Aunt Carolyn and Uncle John, Nona, LB and Dan,
my entire church communityyour support and love is all I really need in this world.
A GREAT big thanks to all my clients (both people and dogs) who hung out at the
photo shoots day after day to bring the body of this work together. It was fun to have you
all surrounding me while the stress of each shot was pending. My memories are great.
And finally to the tail that wags this dog-my Lindsay and the Whoops. You warm my
heart and keep it beating. Love to all!
Table of Contents
chapter.
Your Dog's Worldview
Dogs Have Personality, Too
Test Your Dog's Personality
Get a Proper Education
.8
chapter.
Learning to Speak Doglish
10
Understand Pack Theory
12
Understand Your Dog's Motivation . .. .
13
Play on the Same Team
14
Encourage More Than You Discourage
15
Learn to Interpret Doglish 
16
Read Your Dog's Postures
20
Develop Sensory Awareness
22
Understand Cause and Effect
24
chapter
Training Tools
 26
Creative Confinements
28
Mats and Beds
29
Toys and Chews
30
Measure Your Dog for a Collar or Harness
31
Training Collars
32
Leashes
35
Containment Leads
37
Teaching Lead
38
Housetraining Aids
41
Irreplaceable Extras
42
ClickerTraining
44
chapter
Proofing and Prevention
46
Everyday Handling
48
Teaching Food-Bowl and Toy Acceptance
50
Interrupting Sleep
53
Being Around Children 
54
Adapting to Environmental Sounds
58
Coping with Household Noises
60
chapter
Puppy Kindergarten: Early Conditioning
62
Meeting Your Puppy's Needs
.64
Say YES More Than NO and Say It Often .. .
.65
Structure Spaces
.66
Condition Your Puppy to Wear a Collar and Leash .
68
Introduce Stairs
.70
Teach Early Manners
71
Discourage with EP, EP
Distract Your Puppy ....
7
Puppy Point
chapter
Grade-School Lessons
76
The Magic Five
78
Leading .
82
The Concept of NO
.83
Discourage Chewing with NO
.84
Other Uses for NO
.85
Point Training
.86
HEEL
.88
DOWN
93
COME
97
STAND
101
SIT-STAY
103
DOWN-STAY
106
Fun Medleys
107
chapter.
The Invisible Leash
108
Practice Paying Attention . :
110
Hands-Free Control with a Short Lead
112
An Off-Lead Concept of NO 
113
When Your Dog Breaks
114
Reinforce the Three Steps of COME
115
Know When to Trust Your Dog to COME
116
 Avoid Overusing COME
117
Deal with Less-Than-Perfect Reactions to COME
118
Work Around Distractions
120
Train with a Retractable Leash
122
Work on a Ten-Foot Security Line
123
Use a Long Line
124
Emergency DOWN
Default Behavior
2
chapter
Socialization Plus
128
People
130
Places
134
Other Dogs
136
 Other Animals
138
Things
140
Surfaces
142
Stimulation
143
chapter
Games and Tricks
144
Runaway Come
146
Two-Ball Toss
147
Treat Cup Name Game
.148
Toy Along, Tag Along
149
Swing Toss
.150
Soda Bottle Soccer
.151
If You're Happy and You Know It.
.152
BOW
.153
CRAWL
.154
PAW
.155
OVER
157
THROUGH
158
BRING
159
GIVE
160
SPEAK and SHHH
.161
PLAY DEAD
162
Roll Over
163
10
chapter.
The Civilized Companion
164
Doorway Etiquette
166
Digging (If You Must) .
169
Greeting
170
Housetraining.
172
Mouthing
174
Chewing
176
Staying Off the Furniture (Or Not)
Visiting ..
175
11
chapter.
Crisis Management
180
Chasing
.182
Destructive Chewing
186
Grab-and-Go
.187
Leash Pulling 
.188
Housetraining Difficulties
.189
Marking
192
Nipping ...
193
Jumping
194
Mounting
196
Separation Anxiety
198
Stool Swallowing
199
Stimulated Peeing
200
.201
appendix
Choosing the Right Breed
202
Choosing a Breed if You're Dogless
.204
Selecting a Puppy
.205
Selecting an Older Dog 
.208
Finding a Dog or a Puppy
209
B
appendix
Finding the Right Professionals
 210
Choosing a Veterinarian
.212
Finding Additional Help
213
appendix
Everyday Care and Concerns
216
Brush Your Dog
.218
Nail Clipping and Bathing 
219
Teeth, Eyes, and Ears .
220
 Other Important Healthcare Checks and Techniques ..
221
Have Your Dog Spayed or Neutered
223
Dietary Decisions .
224
Different Forms of Dog Food
25
Kids and Dogs-from Coming Home
appendix
to Everyday Living
226
Preparing for a New Baby
.228
Kids and Dogs
.230
Model Credits
Index
chapter
Your Dog'sWorldview
Before you jump into training your dog and strengthening your relation-
ship, it is important to understand exactly what motivates your dog's
happiness. Understanding how your dog thinks, views your home, and
communicates with you is possible once you look at the world from
your dog's perspective. The impulses that relate him to a breed (or a
mix of breeds), his personality, and his energy level are all aspects of
your dog that will shape his worldview and his association to you.
Your first step is to develop a game plan, a roadmap to help you
organize each day and deal with frustrations that arise. A consistent
plan that combines training exercises and daily structure will make the
most sense to your dog. lf your technique is inconsistent, your schedule
fluctuates, you're absent for long periods, or your reactions to your dog
are harsh and overwhelming. your dog's behavior will suffer. A dog does
not misbehave when he feels safe, understood, and directed. Learning
about your dog from the paws up is the first step in creating a lifelong
bohd.
Dogs Have Personality, To0
Test Your Dog's Personality
Get a Proper Education
Dogs Have
Personality, Too
Every dog is unique, regardless of breed. Like a child, your dog needs to be loved for who he is,
and you need to keep this in mind as you train him. You can't train every dog or puppy the same
way—-each one learns differently based on identifiable personality traits as well as breed characteris-
tics. Here are six different personality descriptions. Consider where your dog fits in.
BOSSY
These dogs take themselves very seriously.
Strong-willed and determined, they simply
ignore anyone they don't respect. A dog with
this personality requires a strong, consistent
training program and is happiest when
 everyone involved takes the same approach.
COMEDIAN
These jokesters are always dancing on the
edge of good behavior and will reveal any
inconsistency within your approach or
within the family. Engaging, they thrive on
interaction and may be naughty simply to
get attention. A comedian needs clear
direction, consistent follow-through, and a
calm approach. Being too stern can backfire
as this dog will get hyper when a lesson
becomes too rigid.
JOE COOL
This easygoing lot takes life in stride and
energy, or disapproval. These dogs often
prefer to nap during lessons and can be
challenging to motivate. Be persistent
with your lessons; left undirected they
can easily get distracted and find them-
selves in harm's way.
EAGER TO PLEASE
Dogs with this personality put your approval high on their priority list. The drive for attention is so great that these dogs may
indirectly learn such routines as jumping up when greeting to get attention that don't meet with everyone's approval. Training
need only be presented and reinforced in a consistent manner for this dog to cooperate.
SWEET PEA
and can sometimes appear overwhelmed if lessons are too strict. Adoring and sweet,they can be needy if ignored. A calm,
TIMID
Dogs in this group do not tolerate new situations, dogs, or people well. Calm familiarity is reassuring to them. To an outsider
a timid dog may appear abused, as he cowers and hides at the slightest distraction. Consistent, affirmative lessons will help
this dog establish a stronger sense of himself.
4
Test Your Dog's
Personality
Your Dog's Worldview
chapter.
To determine a dog's or puppy's personality, you can do a series of exercises. Test A is best done on
a puppy under 5 months; Test B is for dogs over 5 months.
Test A: Puppies Under 5 Months
1. Watch your puppy interact with other puppies.
 4. Gently grasp the scruff of your puppy's neck,
Is he
just behind his ears. Does he
a. Bossy, biting and climbing on the others' backs?
a. Turn to defend himself?
b. Playful, responding to the others' interactions or
b. Lay his ears back and reach up to playfully interact?
carrying toys?
C.
 Quickly lower himself to the floor and roll to one
<. More interested in you?
side playfully or lick your hand?
d. Laid-back and relaxed?
d. Relax?
e. Content to sit alone?
e. Roll submissively to one side, and possibly pee?
f. Fearful?
f.
 Look frightened--roll to one side, tail tucked under
2. Cradle your puppy in your arms (if you can).
belly, ears pinned back?
Does he
 5. Fall to the floor and pretend to grasp your knee
a. Squirm and bite to be freed?
in pain. Does he
b. Mouth playfully, then relax?
a. Pounce and bite you?
b. Playfully run to you with his tail wagging?
C. Relax immediately and lick your hand?
C.Run to you, putting his head under your body?
d. Relax and look content?
e. Look submissive, licking your hand with his ears
d. Not respond?
back?
e. Act confused?
f. Look afraid?
f.  Run to a corner, tail and ears down?
3. Shake a set of keys above your puppy's head
without his knowing it. Does he
a. Respond assertively, jumping up to bite the keys?
b. Iry to play with the keys?
c.Look to you?
d. React calmly?
e. Look confused?
f.  Act fearful--tail tucked, ears back, hunched down?
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Test Your Dog's
Personality (continued)
Test B: Puppies Over 5 Months and Adult Dogs
1. Call your dog in an enclosed space. Does he
4. Take a box of cereal to your dog's level and give
him one treat at a time. Does he
a. Completely ignore you?
b. Look and consider, perhaps staying just out of
a. Demand the box?
reach?
b.  Jake the treat and playfully try to stick his nose in
 Race right over or make a game out of keep-away?
the box?
c.1
C.  Jake one treat at a time, following your hand as
S'P
 Slowly come or allow you to approach?
you reach in for the next treat?
Come quickly with a lowered posture signaling
submission (if he left your side in the first place)?
d. Take the treat or, if hungry, nose the box?
f. Get skittish?
e.
. Jake the treats one at a time?
2. Approach your dog while he is chewing or playing
 Take the treat quickly or take it and go to the box
with a toy. Does he
for more with a look of panic?
5. Fall to the floor and pretend to grasp your knee
a. Protect the toy with a stiffened body?
in pain. Does he
b. Flayfully move his head so the object is just out of
a. Approach you and snift?
reach or tug to keep the toy?
 Welcome your approach or play a familiar game of
b. Playfully run to you with his tail wagging?
C.
keep away or tug?
<.Run to you, putting his head under your body?
d.  Lay his head over the toy or give the toy up without
d. Not respond?
a struggle?
e. Act confused?
e.（
Give the toy up while licking your hand or wagging
f.
Approach you momentarily and then pace the
his tail submissively?
room?
f.
 Look as if you're about to hit him or race away with
the object fearfully and stay just out of reach?
 3. Wake your dog from a nap (clap your hands above
his head). Does he
a. Jump up aggressively?
b. Wake quickly and prepare to play or look for a toy?
<. Get up and come to you?
d. Only partially get up?
e.
 Look confused and either come to you or move to
a safe place away from the noise?
f. Jump up and look frightened?
Your Dog's Worldview
chapter.
Interpret the Results
The answers to these questions will help
you assess the puppy's or dog's personality.
+
 Mostly A's: Bossy. A dog who tries
to control or dominate situations,
is headstrong and self-assured, may
challenge directions, and submits
only to a consistent approach
+ Mostly B's: Comedian. A playful dog
who puts fun above obedience
+ Mostly C's: Eager to Please. A dog
who seeks your approval and is
dependent on your interactions
●Mostly D's: Joe Cool. A laid-back dog
who always approaches life in that
manner. Although it sounds dreamy,
it can be frustrating if you crave inter-
action or involvement.
+ Mostly E's: Sweet Pea. A reserved
dog who is cautious and depends on
direction
● Mostly F's: Timid. A timid dog who
may let his fears override his trust if
not worked with consistently
Few dogs get straight scores. Like human
beings, they are a mix of traits.
Get a Proper
Education
If you find that you need training help beyond the scope
of this book, finding a training school or private trainer
can be one of the best investments you'll make. Look for an
individual who shows compassion for both you and your
dog-someone who responds openly to your questions on
everything from potty training to leash walking.
Find Additional Training Help
PRIVATE INSTRUCTION
It is important to like and agree with
the person you choose to help you han-
dle your dog. There are many good dog
trainers, but finding an individual who
can teach yov is just as important. Here
are a few questions to help you pin-
pointyour search:
● How long have you been in this
business?
● May I speak to someone regarding
your techniques?
● What books or websites do you
recommend?
● How do you discipline a dog?
 What is your experience with my
breed (or with shelter dogs or
mixed breeds)?
It's best to find someone who is willing
to answer these questions openly. A
good trainer is usually busy helping
dogs, so be respectful of her time: wait
to ask for specific advice about your
dog until you meet her face to face.
8
Your Dog's Worldview
chapter.
GROUP CLASS
Look for a class with six to eight dogs that
groups dogs by age and ability. If you have
a puppy, enroll him in a puppy kinder-
garten class. It is good for socialization. Ask
if the class allows for off-leash playtime,
and if you have a smaller breed, ask if there 
is a separate room or area for your dog to
play in.
If your older dog is afraid or aggressive
toward other dogs or has an extreme issue
such as excessive barking, ask how the
instructor deals with that situation. Also
inquire if the instructor uses a specific train-
ing collar. In my classes, I offer a choice of
five collars, since each dog is unique and
needs specific equipment to help him
learn. Finally, ask about the instructive phi-
losophy for discipline--does the teacher dis-
dpline dogs in class?
When asking these questions, ask yourself
if you are comfortable with this person and 
her answers. If you're not, look for other
groups; you have choices.
2
chapter
Learning to SpeakDoglish
When training your dog, it's important to look at the world from her
perspective. She simply can't understand your world or your interac.
tions as another human being would. In fact, your dog thinks of you and
your family as other dogs in her pack. Understanding her way of com-
municating and how she learns and views your interactions is the topic
of this chapter.
Understand Pack Theory
Understand Your Dog's Motivation
Play on the Same Team
Encourage More Than You Discourage
Learn to Interpret Doglish
16
Read Your Dog's Postures
20
Develop Sensory Awareness
7
Understand Cause and Effect
Understand
Pack Theory
Before you can train your dog to
listen to you, you need to understand
just what makes her tick. Although
you may not look like a dog, your dog
responds and respects you as though
you were. Straight down the canine
ancestral line, dogs habituate behavior
that is reflective of pack theory: where
 one is the leader and the others respect
the leader's direction. Training is
based on this instinct.
Who's in charge
Long ago, dogs were domesticated from the wolf, and many of their social instincts remain the same. Wolves ive in packs
everyone.Thisisa bigjob that canfall to either a male or a female.That leader and hisorher partner together makeup
what is called the aipha pair.
When you bring a dog into your home, she is primarily interested in establishing who is in charge. This is why training your
Dogs who are in charge typically exhibit a few to all of the following behaviors:
·  Bark or paw at you for attention or a treat.
o Aes noA uaym Aeme uu do no alousl
●Are unruly with company.
●+Go to the bathroom in forbidden spots.
● Pull you on the leash.
These behaviors are not signs of a "bad" dog: they simply show a dog who thinks she is supposed to make decisions and be
the leader.
12
Understand Your
Dog's Motivation
Learning to Speak Doglish
chapter.
Your dog's behavior is chiefly motivated by your attention. Relating to you is the highlight of her
day, and she will do anything to get you to notice her, even if it's acting up.
Attention Is Everything
ceived as confrontational play or, worse, instills fear. For example, it you yell loudly enough at anyone, they will look afraid.
The same is true of your dog. You may be yelling at your dog, telling her that she's bad and thinking that she understands
that you're mad at her. In reality, your dog may be misinterpreting your frustration and not making the connection. Your dog
Consider what I call the Attention Scale, a scale ranging from 1 to 10, with 1 representing sleep and 10 representing totally
the manic zone in which your dog literally can't control herself. As puppies, all dogs have this range; however, as they mature,
most learn how to contain their impulses.
8③
10
A lot of people focus on behaviors that fall in the 8-to-10 zone, manic impulsive activities, in an anxious attempt to gain quick
calm, these reactions excite her, and the behavior gets worse or happens more frequently. Remember, the behavior that gets
the most attention is the behavior that your dog will repeat over and over. Your goal is to help your dog understand how to
control her own impulses and to live in the 1-to-8 zone: civilized and polite.
13
Play on the
Same Team
Whether you're starting this book
with pre-established habits, think of
this training adventure as a team
effort. Your dog is the newest member
of your team. She will learn your rules
and expectations, provided that you
can communicate them in a way she
can understand.
Being a Captain You'd Respect
You must be the captain of your team. As the captain, you need to organize your dog's space and acivities. She needs to
know what she is supposed to do with herselfin every situation, from where to go to the bathroom and what to chew
to how to compose herself during the dinner hour and while you're entertaining company. Take a minute to think back to a
team captain or coach that you admired. Now be that sort of leader for you dog. Come to your dog with a plan, communi-
cate it consistently (i.e. where to go and what to do in all situations), and have patience for times when your dog is confused
Or acting up. Nobody's perfect: You're the captain so it's your job to teach and stay cool!
TP
There are times you'llfeel frustrated and maybe even angry at your
dog. The hardest thing to control in fact, won't be your dog -- it will
be your temper. Outbursts, however, do more harm than good: they
either frighten or excite a dog, with little or no long-term learning.
Use the problem solving techniques listed throughout the book,
consider leaving your dog on-leash when supervised to give you
something to hold, or consider calmly placing her in a quiet area
with a bone until you both cool off.
14
Encourage More
Than You Discourage
Learning to Speak Doglish
chapter.
been involved with. Did you like your
instructor or team leader? Did this
 person criticize you or make you feel
good about your efforts? As your
dog's team captain, always be the kind
of leader you would want to follow.
Use the 5:1 Ratio
Consider your life from your dog's perspective, and be patient as you train her. She doesn't understand the difference
between a stick and a wooden chair leg. She may think that it is her job to protect against intruders, even when the
"intruder is a visiting relative. She may be genuinely excited when she sees another dog approaching, although she's pulling
you off your feet. Think about how she might be seeing things and use the exercises in this book to train her toward a better
way of reacting.
A good team leader encourages more than discourages. Aim for a 5:1 ratio--say GOOD DOG five times for each NO you say.
book's lessons, you will use food and toys to motivate your dog early on, but never let these rewards take the place of praise,
both verbal and physical!
TIP
It is important to say your commands once, not repeti-
tively: Repeating a command to your dog is confusing
and delays understanding. Repeating a direction like
COME or SIT would be like hearing someone ask you,
"PLEASE PASS THE KETCHUP, KETCHUP, KETCHUP:
15
Learn to Interpret
Doglish
Your dog's language--let's call it
Doglish—does not consist of
thoughts, statements, reasoning, or
contemplation. Doglish consists of
momentary choices and quick inter-
pretations. Your dog relies on three
vehicles for communication: eye con-
tact, body language, and tone.
Eye Contact
Similar to human beings, dogs naturally look to their leaders for direction.
The leader of the group is always kept within sight.
The first question to ask yourself is: are you looking to your dog more
than she is looking to you? If so, your dog may be interpreting your atten-
tion as a need for leadership. During the next 24 hours, write down all the
times you catch yourself looking at your dog.
Your dog is focused on your face most of the time. She knows when
you look at her and will remember how to get your attention. If you look
 at her when she is behaving well, she's likely to repeat those positive
behaviors.
Remember the phrase "You get what you look at" Focus on your dog
when she is behaving well.
16
Learning to Speak Doglish
chapter.
Body Language
Your dog responds to body language a lot like you do. A calm, confident
posture reflects confidence and demands respect. A bent, lowered posture
conveys either fear or insecurity. Frantic flailing conveys chaos or play.
your intentions. If you are training or trying to control her, stand tall and
relaxed. Your dog will respect you if you maintain your dignity.
Note: ff you have children, teach them to stand tall when giving the dog directions.
Upright positions are confident poses; bending over is often perceived as playful.
Refer to this posture as the PeacockPosition for easy reference.
If you're playing with your dog or snuggling affectionately, you may get
down to your dog's level. If she gets too excited or starts to mouth you in
play, however, stand upright to remind your dog of your size and presence.
In addition to your posture, your dog is aware of where you stand in rela-
tion to her. If you're in front, you're the leader. If you are standing behind,
you are seen as the follower. Take notice of this when your dog is excited
or you're walking her in an unfamiliar area. If you are ahead of her, she
will be calmer: you're in the position of leader, guardian, and protector. If 
not, she will naturally assume that role and may become aggressive or
hyper.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Learn to Interpret
Doglish
(continued)
Tone
Dogs use the sound of their voices to communicate. A high-pitched whine
signals intimacy or fear, a flat bark is directional, and a loud growl or bark
 is often a warning or an invitation to play.
Similarly, your dog responds to the tone of your voice. Confident direc-
tional sounds will get her attention and get her in the habit of looking to
you for direction. Think of your commands as short, quick, directional
barks.
Soft, loving tones and high-pitched squeals are best used to reward your
dog rather than direct her. Dogs translate high-pitched or excited tones as
play tones or fearful whimpers. Save these tones for play periods or loving
attention.
Yelling is like barking to a dog. It is uncommon for one dog to charge
another and bark repetitively in her face unless the dog is psychotic. It is
sop non uosad au ane no aouis s! op no uaum suisnguon Aleiadsa
wants to turn to when she feels threatened. Don't yell at your dog. It will
not help in training her or strengthening your relationship. Many dogs
look afraid when shouted at, but this is not understanding; it is fear.
Your dog responds to the tone of your voice, not to the actual words. Once
you repeat a command many times, she will respond to the sound of the
word and understand how to react when she hears it.
The direction of your voice is also important. If you stare at your dog and
give her commands repetitively, she may feel overwhelmed. when your
dog is exercising or playing, she won't be watching you so closely. when
you give commands, either turn your body in the opposite direction or tilt
your head upward. This will pique her curiosity, and she will look to you
faster.
18
Learning to Speak Doglish
chapter.
Dog-to-Dog Interactions
For a quick lesson in Doglish, watch two
dogs together, preferably around the same
age. If they are already friends, they will
have a preestablished pattern of play and
interaction. If they have not met, introduce
them in neutral territory.
First, watch their eyes. who is looking to
whom? One should look to the other and
follow her lead.
Next, check out their body language.
Relaxed poses say that all is well. if the
dogs are tense, it is because they are trying
to determine who should be in charge. The
one who rolls over or crouches is saying.
"You can be the leader" This is known as a
submissive posture. Notice that the leader
dog often puts her head or paws on top of
the other's back.
Some dogs are more vocal than others.
Assertive growls and barks are another way
to convey leadership, whereas playful yelps
call out submission. Short, quick barks are
often directional.
19
Read Your
Dog's Postures
Learning to read your dog's postures may be easier than controlling your own. When trying to
understand what your dog is experiencing, look to her ears, tail, mouth, body posture, and eyes.
EARS
Ears up, forward
Tail arched high
● Rigid forward pitch = assertive,
above the back
assertive and dominant posture
● Fat back = extreme fear
● Moving back to front = aware of
surrounding sounds
● Angled back = submission, invitation
to play
●Hanging loosely = relaxed
TAIL
● Arched high above the back = high
alert, dominance
● Jucked under belly = fear, submission
● Just above rear end = alert but open
and friendly
● Low carriage = cautious, submissive
● Fast wag above back = stimulated,
dominant, preparing for a challenge
● Low wag between legs = Extreme
fear, submission
● Sweeping wag just above rear end =
 open and friendly, curious and
accepting
The dog's ears show her assertive and dominant posture, while her tail posi-
tion illustrotes her dominance ond indicotes thot she's on high olert.
20
Learning to Speak Doglish
chapter.
MOUTH
● Set jaw = snarl or sneer
+
Lips pulled back = submission or fear
+
Open face pant = welcoming, laugh-
ter, play
Toothy grin = smile
EYES
Eyes staring
● Direct stare = challenge, dominance
● Averted glance = submission or cold
shoulder
● Downward glance = submission
BODY POSTURES
● Stretch = relaxed
● Play bow = submissive and playful
● Weight shifted forward = dominant
Teeth bared,
●  Weight shifted back = submissive
snarling
● Lifted hair on neck (called hackles) =
aggressive or threatened
Weight
shifted forward
● A still, curled posture = passive
submission
● Low, quickly wagging tail, lowered
body = active submission
The dog's jow is set in a snari, ond her eyes are issuing a store,
indicoting she's reody to challenge.Also note how her weight
● Mounting = dominance
is shifted forward, showing a dominant posture.
● Lifted paw = submission or an
invitation to play
21
Develop Sensory
Awareness
Your dog depends on her five senses to understand what's going on around her. Understand this
and you'll understand your dog a lot better. As you read, keep reminding yourself that no matter
how much you love your dog—and no matter how much she loves you—she is not human. Her
worldview is different. Understanding how she discovers and explores things will help you be a
better teacher.
SMELL
Smell is your dog's strongest sense. It is many thousand times stronger
than your own sense of smell. She depends on her nose to "see" what is
around her. If you let your dog sniff a new object (like a brush, medicine,
or a towel), she will be more comfortable with it. Also, let her sniff a new
location, like your veterinarian's office or friend's home, before expecting
her total attention.
SIGHT
Sight is not a dog's strongest sense. Dogs in general are nearsighted, see-
ing shapes and movements without distinction. However, your dog can
see at night with nearly the same detail as her day vision.
Your dog will use her sense of smell to identify objects. when your dog
sees an unfamiliar object, she may bark at it and seem cautious--she
needs to smell it to feel comfortable with it.
Dogs are however, dependent on sight to interpret your interactions. Your
dog willook to you for direction and focus on you when you give her a
command.
Kneel down and look into your dog's eyes once a day with a warm stare.
Wait until your dog looks away. If you meet a strange dog, don't look at it:
doing so may signal a challenge, and she may attack you.
22
Learning to Speak Doglish
chapter.
HEARING
Your dog hears much better than you do and can hear sounds that you
can't. Her sense of hearing helps your dog keep a tab on what's happen-
ing around her. It may be quiet in your home, and then suddenly your
dog barks furiously. She has heard something and is alerting to the intru-
sion. Although you can teach your dog not to bark at every sound or to
quiet down, barking is a normal response to unusual sounds.
Your dog will rely on her ears to learn directions from you, too. Never
Aew noA 'iaA op noA y supueq se paaiauad s!h! se 'op e ze weaios
notice your dog barking back at you or looking frightened. It's like you're
a stereo on full blast.
TOUCH
When you touch a dog, it is understood in one of three ways.
●As loving and nurturing
●As playful
●As an attack
Soft, loving pats will help calm your dog and put her at ease. Scratching
or roughing her up will invite her to play, as she may think you're
nipping her.
A dog's neck and throat are sensitive areas that can signal attack if
grabbed suddenly or with force. If you pet a strange dog in either of
these areas, she may think that you're challenging or going to attack
her. Be careful.
TASTE
Your dog's sense of taste is very bland. She doesn't chew food; she tears
and gulps it. She also doesn't digest food as well as we do. Keep her diet
consistent. Don't leave chocolate out where your dog might get into it:
it is a toxic poison that could kill her.
Your dog cannot taste or digest the many foods that humans can. Keep
her diet consistent and avoid foods that contain sugar.
23
Understand
Cause and Effect
Your dog will learn what behaviors to repeat based on what happens when she does them. If, for
example, you push your dog off of you when she jumps, she wili jump again, as dogs consider push-
 ing to be rough play. On the other hand, if you hold a treat above her head, and when she jumps
you lift the treat up and wait patiently until she sits before you reward her, she will learn to sit
when she wants things. The same holds true for many other behaviors.
Control Your Dog's Reactions
If your dog is frantic at the door and
is allowed to race outside, that is how
she will act at all doors. You must
learn to have her WAlT calmly at the
door until she is released with an
OKAY. She will have better door man-
ners in the future.
Wrong behavior
Right behovior
Does your dog get hyper when she sees another dog? If you allow her
to pull you over to the new dog and to greet her wildly, you will have no
more control when your dog is off-leash. Instead, you must teach your
dog to follow at your heel (HEEL) and to play when you give the release
GO PLAY!
Rightbehavior
24
Learning to Speak Doglish
chapter.
Can your children rile your dog into a
frenzy of nipping and biting? The kids'
fast motion and high-pitched squeals
 are very exciting. If you get angry, your
dog will see you as just another par-
ticipant in the fun. Instead, you need
teyn (ts ased aas) sdmas eadau 0
willteach your dog how to contain
her enthusiasm.
Wrong behavior
Right behovior
Does your dog steal objects to bait
you into a game of catch? This is
an age-old favorite. Your guaranteed
 participation is addictive. Instead,
you must teach a release word like
SHARE, and get your dog to bring.
you the object or to stand still while
you retrieve them.
Wrong behavior
Right behovior
If you look at her when she's barking, jumping, has a shoe
in her mouth, or is cruising the counter, she will repeat those
 negative behaviors to get your attention over and over again.
1uo saop asneag 1ay ze jag non Asue moy lamew iuom a
understand human frustration. Either they become defensive
and aggressive over time, or they interpret the interaction
 as confrontational play or prize envy.
25
3
chapter
TrainingTools
Every dog is different, and so is every home. what you and your dog
will need depends a lot on your situation, the dog's age, and what
works to help both of you learn best. In this chapter, you'll find descrip-
tions of the safest equipment for training your dog. Remember, if one
item is not working to simplify your situation, look for another option.
Dogs were put on the earth to reduce stress, not elevate it!
Creative Confinements
28
Mats and Beds
Toys and Chews
310
Measure Your Dog for a Collar or Harness
31
Training Collars
32
Leashes
35
Containment Leads
37
Teaching Lead
38
Housetraining Aids
Irreplaceable Extras
Clicker Training
Creative
Confinements
Some dogs get restless when left alone or have trouble containing their bladder. A confined space
can eliminate a lot of anxiety and limit their options to chewing or sleep. Eventually these habits
will become ingrained, confined or not.
CRATE
PLAYPEN
GATES
A crate is a small pen for your dog to
 A dog's playpen is a segmented fold.-
Gates are a perfect way to enclose
rest or sleep in--it is not big enough
out fence that provides an area large
areas and still allow free play. There
to play in or move around in.
enough for your dog to move, play,
 are many gates on the market, so
Athough it looks and sounds confin-
and stretch in. It may be purchased
consider the options as they relate to
ing, a crate is like a den for your dog.
in either plastic or wire. Its size varies
your dog. Pressure gates prop
t helps him learn to rest when
depending on how many panels you
between two walls, and other gates
you're away or sleeping and aids in
attach together. A playpen is an ideal
can be secured into the wall with
housetraining, as most dogs do not
option if you are gone for long hours
screws. These gates have doors that
go to the bathroom where they
or for periods when you can't super-
make it easier for you to move
sleep.
vise your puppy's freedom.
through them. Fortunately, there are
If you do work long hours, place toys
wide gates and tall gates that accom-
Crates come in many varieties, but
modate any situation.
your dog won't care what type of
and bones in the pen, as well as a
crate you use as long as you put his
water dish. If you have a young
crate in a familiar spot. Always leave
 puppy or a dog who you are paper
him a toy to play with or a bone to
training, you may also leave papers
chew.
in one section of the pen.
If you're going to crate your dog at
When you return to your dog, do not
night, consider putting the crate by
pet or greet him until he is calm and
your bedside. Your dog will be happi-
either standing or sitting with all four
est and calmest when sleeping near
paws on the floor. If you excite him,
you.
he may learn to tip the pen over.
28
Mats and
2
Beds
Training Tools
chapter
Dogs like to feel welcome and directed
 in each room and when they travel.
A mat or bed can serve to direct them
in your home and will be comforting
when you visit or travel.
Mats/Beds
u awn puads noA asnoy aup jo eane ypea ui aneid peipads e sop inoA aai
s0 when he enters a room, he'll know where to go. Pick a location that is
close to where you'll be in that room
siy uo smaup pue sAon s!y le supeld Aq pazjueaho zas sop anoA dia
mat/bed. when you want him to settle down on the mat, instruct him to
SETTLE DOwN and chew his BONE. Pet him when he cooperates; secure
him to his bed area with a leash if he won't settle down.
Jo decide which bed is best for your dog, consider what makes him feel
comfortable; many dogs are happy with a flat mat, which is easy to wash
and transport.
Help your dog with car travel by bringing along a favorite mat, or keep a
special travel one in the car. This mat will help him identify his space. If
you're going on an overnight trip, bring the bedding with you to help your
dog behave. When going to the veterinarian, bring the mat to put on the
table. Doing so will make it a more pleasant experience for everyone.
29
Toys and
Chews
Dogs enjoy activities, especially
when they're young and restless. Skip
the crayons and handheld computers;
however, purchase a few toys and
bones instead. Not only do they enter-
tain, but they also soothe the teething
stage.
TOYS
There are many toys on the market for dogs. Some your dog will really
enjoy; others he may rip to shreds or ignore completely. There are stuffed
aoaey e puy nos aouo 'sho, suoy 'shon yeanbs 'sadou 'shog laqgnu 'sho
type of toy, buy several and spread them around your home. Consistent
toys will help your dog identify what is his.
If your dog rips a toy, throw it out immediately.
CHEWS
There are a wide variety of chew toys on the market as well. Some are
made of animal parts that have been twisted and basted. Pet stores carry
everything from pig ears to horse hooves. Many of these chews are odor-
ous, so be sure to give them a sniff before you buy. There are also chews
made of pulverized cornstarch, vegetable matter, and pig hide. Your dog
will know what satisfies his urge to chew. Once you identify which object
this is, buy it in bulk. Dried, hollowed-out bones are ideal for tucking
peanut butter in, but some of them splinter, so supervise your dog's
dhewing until you're sure that the chews you have purchased are of good
quality.
30
Measure Your Dog
tor
a Collar or Harness
Training Tools
chapter
When training your dog it is helpful to
have a collar or harness that he will wear
when you're practicing. Depending on
your choice the collar will either help
you manage him without resistance, or
SZ
issue a discouraging correction when he
ignores your direction.
Your dog must wear identification
tags whenever you leave the house.
These tags should be placed on a buckle
collar or harness. Do not place them on
a training collar; not only would they
weigh it down, but they could get
caught and cause discomfort or choking.
Fit a Collar or Harness
To measure your dog for a neck collar, take a
tape measure and wrap it around his neck
behind his ears (a).
 Jo measure for a harness, measure across his
chest and around his rib cage (b).
A properly fitted collar allows you to comfortably slide two fingers
between your dog's neck and the collar. A snug but not tight fit is best.
Note: ff you purchase a leather collar or harness, watch for stretching over time,
ad secure it increasingly tightly if necessary to prevent slippage. ff you purchase
a collar or harness made of a nylon web material, the dye may bleed when wet.
To prevent this problem, soak it in the sink overnight.
31
Training
Collars
You use a training collar when teaching your dog a new skill, such as walking on a leash or coming
when called. Each type of training collar works differently; there is not one that is ideal for all dogs.
The following descriptions will help you choose the one that is best suited for you and your dog.
To fit your dog for a training collar, measure the circumference of his neck, just behind the ears.
Add two inches and purchase that length.
Types of Collars
TRADITIONAL CHAIN COLLAR
When used properly, a chain collar is very effective, although it takes some
coordination and timing to make it work. It is the sound of the chain near
your dog's ear that will teach him to avoid pulling, not his being choked. If
you find yourself choking your dog when walking him on this collar, make
another selection.
There is a right and a wrong way to put on a chain collar. If you put it on
backwards, it can catch and hurt your dog. To put the collar on, first slide
one end of the chain through the other loop. Next, make the letter P with
the chain and slide it over your dog's head. The top ring should slide
through, not bend over the other ring.
MARTINGALE OR CHECK CHAIN
This collar is three-quarters flat nylon
mesh and one-quarter slip collar. The dif.
ference between a martingale and a check
chain is that the martingale slip is made
of nylon fabric and the check chain is one-
quarter chain. The martingale and check
chain collars are perfectly suited for long-
necked breeds, like Greyhounds and 
Whippets, or calm dogs who simply need
a gentle reminder to behave.
32
?
Training Tools
chapter
GOOD DOG COLLAR
This collar is a plastic, blunter version of the original prong collar. You can
 Aue uaaaq piog Aidwis su au jo Aue suiddeusun Aq ede h! a
links in an L shape and slide it out of the indented spaces. Position the
collar so that the cord falls between your dog's ears. when the collar is
attached to a leash, simply pull back on it to create a "scruff shake" feel-
ing. A scruff shake is what dogs do to each other to clarify who is in
charge. This collar can be used to discourage pulling, jumping, crotch
sniffing, nipping, and more.
Jo fit your dog for a good dog collar, attach the collar around his neck and
 add or remove links until it's snug, but not tight.
NO-PULL HARNESS
This harness controls the leg muscles associated with pulling. It actually
prevents your dog from pulling you. Although it sounds like an ideal
option, it rarely teaches your dog to walk with you unless the harness
is on.
Jo fit your dog, take measurements of his chest (across) and around his
rib cage (diameter). Bring these measurements to a local pet store and
ask for help choosing the no-pull harness that's best for you.
HEAD COLLAR
A head collar has a mellowing influence, as it lies atop your dog's nose
and is secured on his neck behind his ears. These are twvo spots that dogs
has value in calming dogs. Although a head collar looks like a muzzle, it
works more like a halter on a horse. Without interfering with a dog's
mouth, it enables a person who is less powerful than the dog to handle
him with ease. It is a good choice when you're starting to train your dog,
as it conditions good behavior almost immediately.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
33
Training
Collars (continued)
Putting on a Head Collar
With the collar in hand, clip the neck section directly behind your dog's ear
and slide it so that it fits snugly. It should be watchband tight. Although it may
seem too tight at first, when positioned, the strap will lie on your dog's jaw-
bone and will not disrupt his breathing.
2 Unclip the neck strap and slide the nose loop over your dog's nose into
place, bringing the clip up until the loop is positioned just behind the dog's
lips. When the neck section is secured, the two together should make a
V shape, not an L.
3 Let your dog get accustomed to wearing the head collar a few times a day for
twenty minutes each time. He may scratch or rub his nose initially, like a
child with new braces. Give him one to three days to get used to wearing the
collar before clipping a leash to the ring located under his nose.
34
Leashes
Training Tools
chapter
A leash, or lead, gives you the ability to direct your dog without grabbing for him. It is a calm way
to teach him and its use will give friends and family a way to be consistent without physically han-
dling him. Many leashes are available to you. The following descriptions tell you which leash is best
to use in a given situation.
INDOOR DRAG LEAD
There are two drag leads that will help you teach your dog good manners and
to your dog's buckle/tag collar or his Gentle Leader. You use it when advised to
dun o aseup on suy wog no suaaid a Aue loauaq walgod adna
at your dog in order to catch him.
OUTDOOR DRAG LEAD
An outdoor drag lead is a twenty-five- to fifty-foot rope that attaches to your dog's
buckle or tag collar. It enables distant corrections to problem behavior and aids
you in teaching off-lead obedience. Purchase or make the lightest possible line
so that it won't interfere with your dog's activities. A light cotton-nylon mesh is
ideal: twenty-five feet for dogs under thirty pounds and fifty feet for large and
fast-moving breeds.
This long line is an ideal tool for working on distance control, especially with the
WAIT-OK, DOWN, and COME commands.
HAND LEAD
When secured to your dog's buckle collar, this short eight to twelve-inch leash
reminds him that somebody is watching, while still giving him freedom to move
about. A gentle reminder, the short attachment gives you the capacity to guide
him subtly when his thoughts go astray. It can also be used for off-leash training
exercises or secured to a seatbelt as a security system in the car.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
35
Leashes
(continued)
FINGER LEAD
Like a hand lead, this short two-inch loop attached to your dog's tag collar gives
 you easy access and quick control, especially for problem nipping and jumping.
RETRACTABLELEASH
This leash is an ideal complement to working toward off-leash control and focus
(see chapter 7). Once you accustom your dog to the pull of the retractable lead,
it is ideal for reinforcing long-distance STAY and COME commands.
STATION LINE
This six- to ten-foot lead has a clip attached to either end. To use it outside, secure
it to a tree or post and work on controlling your dog at a distance or helping him
Overcome separation anxiety.
36
Containment
Leads
Training Tools
chapter
Teaching your dog good containment skills is the first step in helping him learn to stay. This lesson
does not come from correcting hyperactivity, but from rewarding and encouraging calm behavior.
Although your dog may have trouble calming down initially, a few repetitions of being secured and
praised for civil behavior is all he needs to understand what you want.
STATION LEAD
A two- to three-foot leash attached to the base of a piece of furniture or
other immovable object will secure your dog in one area of a room
and improve his understanding of the word STAY.
CARGO LEAD
A station lead can also be used to secure your dog in your car's back
cargo area. It should provide just enough room for your dog to stand
comfortably and lie down, but not enough room for him to climb
over the seat.
37
Teaching
Lead
A teaching lead is more than a leash.
It's a leash-belt combination that has
five uses: it allows you to *"wear your
dog," providing a hands-free system of
walking him; it enables you to hold
your dog with a hand loop, providing
him six feet of freedom; and it works
as a short-station, a long-station, and
a cargo-containment lead. Once you
learn how to use a teaching lead, it
will help you communicate with your
dog all day long.
Introduce the Teaching Lead
Jo use the hands-free teaching lead system, put the training collar on your
dog and then secure the leash around your waist as if it were a belt.
1 Begin walking in an open room, yard, or driveway.
2 If your dog walks ahead of you, simply turn away from him, say LET'S GO,
and walk in the opposite direction. Do this several times until he is choosing
to follow you.
Now you can teach your dog how to behave in the house without fearing
that he'll bolt or get into mischief. You can also supervise his chewing.
bathroom, and stealing habits. (See chapter 6 for more problem-solving
ideas.)
3 As you walk through your home, give the leash a tug every once in a while
to remind your dog to pay attention to you. If he's not cooperating, go back
to step 1.
38
Training Tools
chapter
 Use the Teaching Lead to Teach Station Stays
By stationing your dog to an object, you can teach him how to stay still. It's
best to start doing this when you are in the room or nearby.
1
Select a spot at which to secure the leash, and put a bed there with toys on it
for your dog to play with.
2
Take your dog to the bed, instruct him to SETTLE DOwN, and secure him
with the leash.
Secure the end clip into the base hole to make the lead the shortest possible
length.
If your dog can't sit still, stay close to him until he is more comfortable with
being confined.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
39
Teaching
Lead (continued)
Use the Teaching Lead in Different Situations
TRADITIONAL LEASH
There's a D ring on the teaching lead that you can use to secure one end
clip to create a traditional six-foot leash. Once it's connected, there is no
difference between a teaching lead and another kind of leash. This is ideal
when it's time to let your dog go to the bathroom.
CAR CONTAINMENT
You can use the teaching lead to secure your dog to the head rest. Simply
attach the clip to the end loop on the base ring and secure it around
either object.
QUICK STATION
When you're out and about with your dog, you have a traveling station
lead to allow you to secure him to a tree or table in a pinch.
Note: Never leave your dog unattended in pubfic. Ask someone to watch him if
you are alone, and never fose sight of him.
40
Housetraining
?
Aids
Training Tools
chapter
The project of housetraining your dog is straightforward once you decide on the location. A bell to
alert you, material to highlight your dog's potty, and a solution to mask the scent of an accident are
all extras that enhance both his understanding and communication.
BELLS
 oq a o o o aino o  a u iq e  o sop  
a set of bells by the door at your dog's nose level. Each time you take him out,
say OUTSIDE, stop at the door, and tap the bell with your fingertips. If after one
week your dog is still not making the connection, lace the bell with a litle peanut
dons toop au oi dn sop ino suuq no uaum pue awn jo peaue unol io lanng
and see if he licks it. If not, show it to him. The moment he does lick it, open the
door and take him outside.
You can also use a bell to teach your dog to signal to come in.
WEE-WEE PADS
If your goal is paper training, you'll need to designate specific areas in the main
rooms you share with your dog. Eventually, you can phase down to one place, as
outlined in chapter 10, but initially, you'll just need to help your dog understand
that he must eliminate on a specified absorbent surface.
To this end, I recommend using white wee-wee pads and rolling up carpet
until this habit is formed. You can purchase wee-wee pads through pet stores or
catalogs, or in bulk at a pharmacy, where they are marketed as human inconti-
nence pads.
NATURE'S MIRACLE
There are products on the market that can be used to mask the odor of a dog's
housetraining accidents. It's important to eliminate this scent indoors, as dogs
like to go to the bathroom in the same area repeatedly. Nature's Miracle is the
products. A 50-percent mixture of vinegar and water also works well.
It
Irreplaceable
Extras
Several extras make the task of training your dog a fun and rewarding experience for both of you.
These items will help you bridge the gap from confusion and chaos to understanding.
TREAT CUPS
There are several uses for a treat cup, all of which will increase your dog's enthu-
siasm for being with you. To make a treat cup, simply cut a hole in the lid of a
container and fill the container halfway with your dog's food, dried cereal, or a
wy diay o mou e ui sawg uag sop noa gean pue dno au aus yeus aoy
connect the sound of the cup shaking with getting a treat.
SNACK PACKS
You can use any generic fanny pack for this purpose. It is simply a hip bag filled
with your dog's favorite treats/dry food. Wearing it gives you instant access to
food rewards, and makes you your dog's focal point. Your dog will return to you
and do whatever behavior gets you to open that pouch! In turn, this lets you
select the behavior you want your dog to repeat, while eliminating the rest by
simply ignoring him. For example, if your goal is to have your dog sit when he
wants a treat or attention, ignore every other behavior he might offer you such
as pawing, whining, jumping, or barking. Simply pretend he's not there until
he sits politely. Then treat!
SPRAY-AWAY SHOOTERS
seen as coming from you. They are useful in correcting nipping, jumping, barking.
stealing, and chewing habits. It is important not to spray your dog in the face
angrily. Instead, hide the sprayer in your hand so that your dog won't see it, and
spray his legs or torso from behind him so he won't know it's coming from you.
The three top rated shooters are:
42
Training Tools
chapter
BITTER APPLE
 This distasteful solution can be sprayed on objects and clothing to deter nipping
calmly as your dog is chewing/biting them. He will choose to stop chewing these
objects/people on his own. In this instance it is not necessary to hide the bottle
from your dog, but avoid getting involved. It is simply a cause-and-effect correc-
tion that he will learn from on his own.
BREATH SPRAY
A small canister of breath spray fits neatly into a pocket or fanny pack and can be
sprayed to deter mouthing or jumping. Never spray your dog in the face or eyes.
'pemo suidn, o 'gunddu 'sug s! ay zeym Aeids Aidwis
DIRECT STOP
This canister of citronella is more powerful than breath spray and can serve to
startle your dog when he is barking or jumping on company, furniture, or coun-
ters. You do not want him to see you spraying him. Do it from behind as detailed
in the section, "Spray-away Shooters:"
43
Clicker
Training
A clicker is a hand-held object that
makes a sharp sound when you
depress its metal strip. The distinct
 sound captures your dog's attention.
The objective is to pair the sound of
the clicker with a food reward. If your
dog is not food-motivated, you can
use a toy or a quick burst of attention
to help him learn that the click is a
positive sound. Food rewards are ideal
so make the incentive strong. If your
dog will work harder for a piece of
meat than cereal, use it.
Introduce the Clicker
When doing the following exercise, do not
speak. Let your dog focus on the noise of
the clicker alone.
1 Line up ten bits of food. Your dog should
be able to swallow each bit within two
seconds.
2 Place the clicker behind your back or in
your pocket, as the noise can be startling
initially. Hold the treat in your other hand.
Click and treat in that order.
 Finish the ten treats and end the interaction with attention or play.
5
 Repeat the session until you can clearly see by your dog's enthusiasm and
his expectation of the food after the clicker sounds that he has made the
connection.
?
Training Tools
chapter
Think of your clicker as a camera photographing moments you want to see again. Use it to mark good behavior, such as
when your dog goes to the bathroom in the right place, comes when he is called, or releases a toy when asked.
The clicker should not be used to encourage cooperation. If you want your dog to CovE to you, for example, you use your
dicker when he is at your side, not to get his attention.
Throughout the book, I will suggest ways to use a clicker or a word marker like YES to mark cooperative behavior. The word
YES should be said sharply, like the sound of the clicker, and can help your dog understand exactly what is expected of him.
Here are three other ways that you may use the clicker or a word marker to help your dog understand what you're teaching
him.
SIT
tion. Reward him instantly with food. Good dog!
STAND STILL FOR GREETINGS OR ATTENTION
Many dogs jump when greeting family or company. It is a normal impulse to want to get close to a person's face. with a
(ll landeup aas) nos ye suidun! s! sop anos y! swe paploy ypm aney anoA laaos pue ls pueis 'puey u! poog pue aypi
When he stops and is calm, lower your arms, and then click and reward.
COME
Your first goal in chapter 6 will be to teach CovE as a command of closeness. with your clicker and food in hand, say CovE
when your dog is near you. Encourage him to look up by sweeping your hands up to your eyes. Click and reward. Gradually
extend the distance. Click and reward the instant your dog comes back to your side.
45
chapter
Proofing and Prevention
Because your dog really doesn't know what it is to be human, you might
notice some extreme reactions when introducing her to your world.
Although you may love your neighbor and every squeal of a young child,
your dog may not agree until she's properly conditioned to them.
Many everyday sights and sounds can overwhelm a dog's senses.
Your dog has more acute hearing than humans and can hear high-
pitched sounds we can't register. Your dog also experiences sights far
differently than you do. Our world is interpreted through vision--it is our
strongest sense. Your dog, on the other hand, cannot distinguish color,
relying on her vision only to interpret motion and posture. This is why
many dogs react unfavorably to bikers, joggers, cars, and so on.
in this chapter, you will discover many creative ways to condition
your dog to these and other distractions.
Everyday Handling
48
Teaching Food-Bowl and Toy Acceptance
50
Interrupting Sleep
53
Being Around Children
54
Adapting to Environmental Sounds
58
Coping with Household Noises
60
Everyday
Handling
During her lifetime, your dog will
experience many strange physical
sensations, from her yearly checkups,
with the veterinarian's prodding to
determine illness or incident, to the
unpredictable touch of a child. Since
your dog can't verbalize pain, human
handling is the only way to determine
the source of her discomfort.
Conditioning your dog to being han-
dlled is in everyone's best interests.
Handle Your Dog Daily
PAWS
Each day, touch your dog's paws and toes. Feed her treats or let her lick
butter of your hand as you touch each paw individually, running your fin-
gers through along each toe. Doing this will help her accept examination
and toenail clipping when necessity demands it.
If your dog resists, use treats, a creamy spread, or a favorite toy to
distract her positively.If she bares her teeth, please call for professional
assistance.
FACE
Soothingly caressing your dog's face is
probably not something you need to be
instructed to do, but there will be times--
especially during your dog's yearly checkup
or if she's agitated--when you or your vet-
erinarian may need to handle her mouth,
ears, or eyes. To prepare her, gendy touch
and probe her face in ways that her veteri-
narian handles her during an examination.
Make this a part of your daily interactions
s0 that your dog conditions to this handling
as normal and loving.
48
Proofing and Prevention
chapter
BELLY
Sometimes your dog's belly will need a little more than a scratch to deter.
mine if it's upset. Your veterinarian will probe your dog's belly as a matter
of examination, so to prepare your dog for this unusual sensation, touch
her underbelly gently with your index finger and thumb from time to time.
If your dog is particularly sensitive, treat her generously while you touch
her tummy.
TAIL AND TUSH
Some breeds, commonly the Oriental breeds like Chow Chows and Lhasa
Apsos, do not like being touched below the waist. whether or not you
experience this resistance, make tail and rear end pats a part of your daily
around her tail as you praise and treat her will ensure that she's comfort-
able being handled all over.
 Many dogs are uncomfortable being
medicated. To help your dog accept
this reality of life, pretend to place
drops in her ears, eyes, mouth, and 
so on without actually doing so. Give
her treats as you're playacting. When
the time comes, she'll be more com-
fortable with the procedure.
49
Teaching Food-Bow
and Toy Acceptance
Dogs are not born with an innate concept of
sharing. Without specific conditioning and
training, they will never acquire it. Although
some dogs will submit to a person's interfer-
ence while they're eating or chewing a toy,
most consider the intervention a nuisance;
some dogs even become aggressive.
It's important to teach your dog to share
at as young an age as possible. Let your dog
know that your arrival is not an attack and
that you're there to congratulate her, not
steal her prize.
Teaching Techniques
RECOGNIZE SPATIAL AGGRESSION
 Dogs have five levels of aggression. The first two levels are
● Coveting--laying her head over the object;
● A short warning growl emanating from her throat.
By demonstrating aggression at these levels, your dog is letting you know
that she does not want to be bothered and would prefer privacy when
eating, chewing, or playing with an object--this is known as spatial aggres-
sion. She must learn to share if she is to live happily with people.
DISCOVER YOUR DOG'S RED ZONE
If your dog is showing any aggression, you need to determine her Red
Zone: the closest distance you can stand to her before she gets uncom-
fortable. Let's say that when you're closer than three feet, she growls, but
at three and a half feet she's comfortable. Less than three and a half feet
is your dog's Red Zone.
Repeat the sequences described on the next page with the treat cup but
stop, shake, treat, and reward just outside the zone. As your dog trusts
your presence, slowly move closer.
50
Proofing and Prevention
chapter
TEACH YOUR DOG TO SHARE
If your dog hesitates or seems unsettled by your
As described on page 42, make treat cups and place
approach, walk toward her sideways. Dogs view side
postures as less threatening. If your dog shows more
them around your home. At any opportunity, approach
aggressive tendencies, see the previous page. Consult a
your dog when she's with an object or food, shaking the
cup. Offer her a handful of treats, praise her, and then
professional if you are fearful or her reaction doesn't
walk away. Do not speak to, or interfere with, the object.
improve.
As your dog grows more familiar with your approach,
Only when absolutely necessary should you remove
she'll begin to lift her head and/or drop the food or
your dog's prize or food. when you do, offer her a jack-
object. At this point, you can begin to kneel down and
potreward.
touch the object before you withdraw, but let your dog
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
adding to her catch, not taking away from it.
51
Teaching Food-Bowl and
Toy Acceptance (continued)
HAND-FEED YOUR DOG
Hand-feeding a dog can be an effective way to bond and overcome dominance issues, including spa-
tial aggression. For guarding and protective breeds, hand-feeding at a young age can help develop
devotion and focus.
At your dog's regularly scheduled feeding time, place 50 percent to 100 percent of a meal's kib.
ble in a treat cup or snack pack and direct your dog with basic commands. Here are a few different
ways you can try to hand-feed your dog.
Three Methods
METHOD 1: HAND-FEEDING WITH SIT
1. Take one kibble at a time and hold it above your dog's eyes.
2. Bring the kibble back above his ears as you instruct SlT.
3. Guide her into position if necessary using pressure points discussed
on page 79.
4. Repeat this sequence five times in a row.
METHOD 2: HAND-FEEDING WITH DOWN
1. From a sit position bring a kibble from your dog's nose to the floor
between her paws.
2. Move the treat slowly if your dog is uncooperative.
3. Use the pressure points discussed on page 93 to guide her into posi-
tion if she needs help.
4. Reward her with praise and a kibble.
5. Repeat this sequence five times in a row before moving onto a differ-
ent exercise.
METHOD 3: HAND-FEEDING WITH COME
1. Shake your Treat Cup as you call your dog's name and run a few steps away from her.
2. Turn and face your dog and say CovE as you pop a kibble in her mouth.
3. Start at varying distances from your dog, gradually extending into another room or by hiding behind the couch or
outside behind a bush, tree or building.
52
Interrupting
Sleep
Proofing and Prevention
chapter
Just as you might be agitated
when awakened from a deep sleep
or a delightful nap, your dog may be
equally aggravated. Although it is
best to follow the adage *Let sleeping
dogs lie," do the following exercises
to ensure that your dog does not react
unfavorably when waked suddenly.
Wake your dog from sleep only once
a day.
Approach a Sleeping Pup
 Approach your dog when she's just fallen into a light snooze. Shake your
treat cup as you call her name. The instant she lifts her head, stop, give her a
treat, and then walk away.
Progress to waking her from different levels of rest.
 2 If you find that your dog startles easily, determine her Red Zone-the closest
you can get to her before she gets uncomfortable. Shake your cup, clap,
 and/or call her name calmly from this distance.
③If your dog looks confused, kneel down and soothe her with your loving
touch and words.
Practice these techniques with your dog in various locations, such as
indoors, in the crate, on the furniture, or outside.
53
Being
 Around
Children
They're impulsive. They're loud.
They're a whirl of constant motion.
They're kids, and although you may
not live with them, your dog is likely
to encounter a few in her lifetime, so
it is best to condition your dog to
accept their differences.
Teach Your Dog to Enjoy Children
MAKE FACE-TO-FACE ENCOUNTERS OKAY
Because of their size, kids are more capable of face-to-face encounters
with dogs. Kids also love to stare--it's a sign of normal development. If
your dog isn't used to such direct attention, it can be overwhelming. To
condition your dog, hold her face in your hands often and stare at her. If
your dog is uncomfortable and resistant, place butter or another creamy
spread on your hands or arm as you interact in this way.
Kids are also impulsive and are known to climb, trip, and run a lot. This
behavior can cause a predatory reaction, and a dog might run, pounce, or
mount the child. Start to mimic a child's behavior before introducing your
dog so that these activities will seem more commonplace.
When introducing your dog to children, take along treats and butter or
 oot sn lap e yma neiuey si sop anos ji peaids Aea lauroue
work in your favor, too. Using treats will help your dog form positive asso-
diations with being around children. Provided your dog is not showing any
signs of aggression, let the kids be involved with handing out the treats
interactions and call a professional immediately. Don't let your dog
become another "dog bites child" statistic.
54
Proofing and Prevention
chapter
STEM COMPETiTION FOR TOYS
Kids, especially those under age twelve, don't understand object owner-
ship and often march right up and take food or toys away from an other.
wise content dog. Further, what one has, the other wants. It makes for a
lot of screaming and chasing. If you can teach your dog to share (see the
earlier section "Teach Your Dog to Share"), it will lower your stress level
immeasurably.
ACCLIMATE YOUR DOG tO
IMPULSIVITY
They run. They jump. They squeal. All this
normal kid impulsiveness can bring out the
hunter in even the calmest of dogs. To help
your dog learn that children are not prey.
practice these exercises:
1  when your dog is relaxed, secure her to a
station lead as described on page 39.
2 Tell her to STAY, and then race by. Do not
look at her while you go, and don't interact.
Repeat STAY if necessary.
③ Wait to praise her until she watches you
calmly.
Ask your kids to help, or borrow some chil.
dren for this setup:
 With your dog on a leash, stand to the side
as the children dart back and forth in front
of you.
2 If your dog lurches to chase, tug her back
 as described on page 110 and remind her to
STAY.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
55
Being Around
Children (continued)
Teach to Adapt to Children's Voices and Touches
Children have a unique pitch to their voices and a more varied array of
intonations. Their touch is also different, used to explore and interact with
their environment, not to soothe.
VOICES
Sweet, loud, and sometimes scary, a child often uses her voice to get a
reaction from those in her environment, be it a dog or a person, it doesn't 
seem to matter. Dogs, however, when being "attacked" by a child's inner
monster, may interpret this behavior as less than funny. To ensure that
your dog is prepared for everything, use different voices and approaches
to ready your dog for whatever a child might do.
TOUCH
With children, a bear hug stranglehold is not out of the question. To
condition your dog to their often unpredictable expressions of love and
sometimes anger, practice hugging, squeezing, prodding, and poking
her, treating her and praising her all the while.
TIP
The purpose of handling your dog in preparation for interacting with
children is to get her to accept their unpredictability as normal.
When the final introductions to the real kids are made, have plenty
of treats, toys, and spreadable goodies on hand to further this
pleasurable association.
56
Proofing and Prevention
chapter
Other Considerations
As you're conditioning your dog to feel more comfortable with children, do not overwhelm her. Do the setups on the previ-
ous pages a little at a time. If she is showing signs of stress, such as licking her lips, ducking behind you, nipping, darting at or
barking at the children, be more intense with your dramatizations, and ask the children who are helping you to be calmer
when they're interacting.
You want your dog to see children as an invitation to play and relax and to get extra rewards and loving. To emphasize this,
remember the folliowing:
● Let your dog drag a leash when children are around. This will give you a calm way to interfere if she gets overstimulated
or frightened.
● Have treats and toys on hand whenever your dog is around children. If you are using a clicker, this is the time to take it
out. Praise and interact with your dog more often.
 Teach the children how to communicate with your dog. Simple
directions like SlT, games found in chapter 9, and fun tricks--all
rewarded with praise, treats, and/or toys--are ways to ensure
that everyone has fun.
● If your dog is truly overexcited or withdrawn, use a Gentle
Leader to help calm her. (See page 188.)
57
Adapting to
EnvironmentaI Sounds
Many sights and sounds are so commonplace that we humans don't even notice them. But dogs,
especially puppies, are often overwhelmed by these nuisances. How you react when your dog
responds to her environment will make the difference between a dog who acts appropriately and
one who falls apart or becomes aggressive.
When working to help your dog overcome
her fears, look at things from her perspec-
tive. Your dog hears much beter than you
do, and her nose is considerably more reli-
able. She depends on these senses to inter-
pret her surroundings. She relies on her
vision only to decipher movement and pos-
turing. Can you imagine what a helmeted
human wielding a jackhammer must seem
like?
OUTDOOR MAINTENANCE
The fact that lawn mowers, hedge trim-
mers, and similar machines are often oper-
ated around your dog's home environment
is a clear indication of why they are so dis-
liked by your dog. "Big, loud beasts" is what
they may seem like to your dog. Start han-
ding her at a distance from the offending
machine, giving her commands and
rewarding her cooperation.
With your dog on leash, move progressively
closer to the work that is setting her off. If
she becomes aggressive, call for profes-
sional help. No one likes to be bitten. Keep
your dog at your side and behind you to
communicate your role as her guardian and
protector.
THUNDER
Many dogs harbor a distinct fear of thunder. Whether the fear stems from changes in barometric pressure or the sheer inten-
enclosures are all signs of anxiety of differing intensities.
When helping your dog overcome her fear of thunder, stay calm, cool, and collected. Keep her on a leash, or a head collar to
avoid choking, and act like it's a sunny day. Be the example of serenity; your dog will be impressed.
58
Proofing and Prevention
chapter
CONSTRUCTION
The loud, erratic sounds and strange machinery found on construction sites combine to create a scene that can put the hair
tion. As she gains confidence, move toward these sites. Continue to direct and reward her. If your dog becomes suddenly
timid, move away from the site, and then work your way back.
SIRENS
pue quawuoaua suisnguo e h! ayew ueo Ai e jo spunos peuw au oey ul uauis e jo punos ayn Aq paeis aie ssop Aun
hands. Introduce your dog to urban sounds in a controlled fashion. Train or play with her near a fire station at noon, for
example: you'll both hear the noon whistle blow!
Although it's tempting to soothe a dog at the sound of a siren, that reaction often has the reverse effect-your soft tones and
bent posture convey fear, not reassurance, to your dog.
TRAIN WHISTLES
 The same rules apply here as with sirens. If you live near a train track, you'll also want to train your dog to run from the train
(and not chase it) when she sees one coming. For tips on how to approach that task, flip to page 185 and follow the instruc-
tions for car chasing.
If train stations are to be a part of your life, it will be helpful to do several training sessions there to ensure your dog's focus
 and her confidence in your direction regardless of the distractions.
FIREWORKS
Athough fireworks are likely to light up the night sky only once a year, that single day claims the sanity of many dogs, who
run off or claw the house in utter terror. Start by introducing light fireworks in the daylight, mingling with your dog at a dis-
tance at which she feels comfortable, and using treats to develop a positive association. Gradually increase your dog's acces-
sibility to fireworks. Do not, however, shoot them at your dog. As she gets more confident, you can try an evening display.
Note: Vhen moving closer to a distraction, use the direction HEEL and keep your dog behind you. Your forward position communicates that
you—and not she-will be the protector.
FAQ
Why does my dog seem to get even more
nervous when I tell her, "it's okay?
Your dog interprets the high pitch of your voice as a
whine, your focus as a sign of confusion, and your
body posture as submissive. Stand tall, be positive
and relaxed, and your confidence will surely rub off
on her.
59
Coping with
Household Noises
There is a specific period in a young
puppy's development when everyday
household distractions are integrated
normally. This is known as the social-
ization period, and it falls between
eight and fourteen weeks of age. If
your dog did not have this experience
 as a pup, she may have exaggerated
responses to objects you use daily.
Common Noises
VACUUMS AND OTHER APPLIANCES
Many dogs are either cautious or hyper with vacuums. The noise factor
and the shape of the object are difficult for them to translate. The worst
thing you can do is to chase or tease your dog with the vacuum. whether
it is the vacuum, the coffee maker, or some other appliance that leaves
your dog perplexed and frightened, introduce it to her this way:
 Let her see the object unplugged. Place it in the middle of the floor and lace
its border with yummy treats.
 Manipulate the object without turning it on. Do not look at or interact with
your dog as you do so.
 Ask a helper to turn on the object in the next room as you practice lessons
or play games with your dog.
 Gradually move closer to the object until you can work the appliance your-
self without your dog overreacting to it.
60
1
Proofing and Prevention
chapter
POTS AND PANS
The sound of metal against metal or flooring can send dogs into a jag of
barking from which it is hard to recover. In this case, work or play with
your dog at decreasing distances, using rewards and praise until she is
more comfortable with the sound.
DOORBELL
un pue 'sioisia 'asueyp :op e log ugpxa Aaa s! llaqoop e yo punos au
potential for attention do a lot to spark a dog's interest. And wild behavior
is generally reinforced immediately: although you wouldn't let me knock
you out of the way to greet your company, you might be more permissive
'uny Aue on peaodes ieap peusis sausnd pue snous sop anoa y
but to a dog they're perceived as hyper, physical play.
The first step in teaching appropriate greeting manners is to reclaim your
door. Practice the waiting skill taught on page 80, and enforce contain-
ment each time you leave or reenter your home. Also, create a station
near the door to allow your dog to interact but not interfere.
SHOUTING
Athough a shouting match can be a cathartic experience for humans, it 
can frighten a dog. To help your dog cope, designate a safe area, such as
a crate or a corner, to send her to, and take heated discussions out of the
room.
61
5
chapter
Puppy k
Kindergarten:
Early
y Conditioning
The neat thing about puppies is that they haven't experienced anything
yet. Their minds are free from worries. They think they are perfect just
the way they are, and if you approach training with the same outlook-
that your puppy is perfect just the way he is-you both will have a much
more pleasant experience.
That said, puppies can be really frustrating. They have a lot of
energy. Their curiosity is constant, and they explore everything-with
their mouths. In fact, it would be unusual if a puppy didn't make house-
training mistakes, chew, nip, run wild circles around the floor, and jump
to say hello. These misbehaviors, as you might call them, are all actually
wonderful signs of a puppy who is developing and bonding normally.
The goal of this chapter, aimed at puppies who are two to six
months old, is to help you understand your puppy's motivations,
impulses, and needs in order to better prepare you for the months
ahead. Knowing what to expect, and knowing that your frustrations are
shared and are normal, will help you separate your feelings from the
daily realities that may overwhelm you sometimes. In addition, you can
use the many exercises in this chapter to condition your young pup to
commands and routines that will shape your lives together.
Meeting Your Puppy's Needs
64
Say YES More Than NO and Say It Often
65
Structure Spaces
.66
Condition Your Puppy to Wear a Collar and Leash . : 
- ..68
Introduce Stairs
.70
Teach Early Manners
Discourage with EP, EP
Distract Your Puppy
Puppy Point
Meeting
 Your
Puppy's Needs
Puppies under twelve weeks are a lot like human babies. Their daily existence is motivated by five basic needs: to eat, drink,
sleep, go to the bathroom, and play. The degree to which they bond with you is directly determined by your capacity to meet
each need and provide an environment as stress free as possible.
jo asuas e si aeann nos ii ssel e laao suouy log Ageq e e suian se As se s Addnd e audiosip o sun no ze suia
fear and confusion. In fact, the bond you are trying to form--a bond of trust and direction--will be broken because the very
interpret that cry and take care of the need. The parent doing so forms trust. Puppies, on the other hand, don't cry--they nip
-uoo zey o uorea ui pue 'wy asnuoo m suaay rey 'aidwexa loy pa s! no dood on spaau Addnd anos g aspy as pue
fusion, he will nip whomever he is attached to: namely you. Interestingly, this is a good sign: if your puppy is nipping you, it
'un y suiddu au o sueai jo peaui ass siy ano suunsg ui diay no sum pue no saaol ay zeui sous
think about which of his needs might be pressing. Try to meet that need by taking him out or putting him in his crate or quiet
area to nap.
As babies grow, they are taught words so that they can communicate each need: "I have to go potty," "I'm hungry," even just
"water" These words are all primitive, yet recognizable, ways a developing child can get her needs met without crying.
Athough your dog can't talk, you can teach him the meaning of short words or phrases to correspond to specific routines.
-wy and io pmoq lazem aup Aq pueis 1o 'apisno o8 on liq e Suy pue loop aun og os Aldwis m Addnd anoA ypuow e ujum
self to rest, instead of nipping you.
noa yeu os Auasisuo molloy o aunou e nos saail pye aun pue piom ygiads e saguap! puoas aun 'paau ypea saiads
puppy will know how to signal his needs as they arise. Show your chart to everyone in your household--consistency and rep.
etition create understanding and cooperation.
Needs Chart
Need
Word
Routine
Eat
HUNGRY
Schedule feeding times. Place the bowl in the
same spot and encourage SIT before feeding
Drink
WATER
Keep the bowl in the same spot. Encourage SIT.
Bathroom
OUTSIDE/PAPERS
Follow the same route to the same spot. Use a
and GET BUSY
bell to encourage a signal. Restrict attention until
he goes.
Rest
ON YOUR MAT or
Designate one spot in each shared room. Take
TIME FOR BED
puppy to a mat/bed, provide a chew, and secure
him if necessary.
Play
BONE, BALL, Or TOY
Establish a play area inside and out. Make sure
and GO PLAY!
that all four paws are on the floor before you toss
a toy or give a treat.
64
Say YES More Than
L5
NO and Say It often
chapter
You'll need to exercise a lot of self-control
when your puppy is active, defiant, or testing
Auppe Aew no Asue ja no y no
 encourage mischief, as your puppy will do
anything to get your attention, regardless of
whether it's negative or positive.
Your goal is to highlight the times your
puppy is doing the right things and cooper.
ating rather than wait to interfere when
he's naughty. Simple logic tells you that
he'll repeat the behaviors you reward
because they satisfy his need for attention
and his craving to fulfill his needs.
If you're sharing your puppy with family
and friends, it's important that they follow
 the same logic. One happy solution is to
select one word--for example, YES or
COOD--to highlight all the moments your
puppy is cooperating. One strong happy
bark-sounding word is actually better than
a string of "good puppy good puppy, good 
puppy," which may by mistake end on a
badbehavior.
Use your encouragement word for every-
thing your puppy is doing right, which is to
say everything he is not doing wrong! when you focus on good behavior, from licking, to chewing on a bone, to interacting
calmly with the kids, you'll be surprised by what your puppy comes up with! Pair this word with an upbeat hand signal, and
your puppy will not only be listening to you he'll be looking for your direction as well!
65
Structure
Spaces
A chaotic, cluttered household will really con-
fuse your puppy. He's so new, everything war-
rants a thorough investigation. Not an issue
when the floor's clear, but when it's cluttered
it's hard for a puppy to mind his manners.
Consider a neat environment versus a messy
 one: which makes you feel more settled?
When organizing your home, think of every.
thing from your puppy's perspective. Put your-
self in his paws, getting right down to his level.
Remember, everything looks different when
you're looking up from the floor.
Your Puppy's Spaces
FOOD AND WATER
Designate a place for your puppy's food and water dishes. Each time you
feed him or give him water, put the bowl down in this spot. Place all
dishes out of heavily trafficked areas.
If you have a large home or yard, place multiple water dishes so that they
are accessible.
POTTY AREA
Whether you are training your puppy to go outside or on papers, select a
specific area for him to potty, and be consistent. Consider toilet training a
dhild: you don't place potties in the middle of the floor or send your child
to the neighbor's house to use the bathroom.
66
L5
Puppy Kindergarten: Early Conditioning
chapter
QUIET PLACES FOR REST AND SLEEP
As you introduce your puppy to different areas of the house, consider
where you want him to go. Just as you would direct a person to sit in a
chair, you need to direct your puppy to a bed or mat on which to rest, and
help him organize his toys there. Remember that puppies are very social,
 and your puppy will be happiest being near you. Use a specific direction
like SETTLE DOwN when leading him to his area.
Select areas to send your puppy when you're eating, watching TV, reading.
or working. See "Displacement Activities" on page 73, and provide your
Anq auno aym padno uy day o salgo aoy aos m and
Be mindful of a restless puppy. Restlessness indicates that other needs,
perhaps exercise or play, are pressing. It is your responsibility as his
"parent" to take care of his needs.
FREE PLAY AREA
Having your puppy bound wildly around your home can be very disrup-
tive. He will also have to go to the bathroom during and following a play
bout, which is reason enough to put some parameters on his freedom.
Create play areas and decide on games the whole family can play to give
him a sense of structure as well as a sense of fun!
TIP
You must decide if you want your adult dog on the furniture. If you
don't want a dog who shares the furniture with you, don't confuse
-ads e Addnd anon aaip yonoo ayp oquo wiy supiaui Aq Addnd anoa
dfic place to lie--such as at one end of the furniture or on the
floor--and be consistent with that direction.
67
Condition Your Puppy to
Wear a Collar and Leash
a collar and a leash can be like getting
a child to accept lace or wool for the
first time. Some acclimate without
complaint, others who are more sensi-
tive protest wildly. Your reactions
should be non-eventful. Place each on
for twenty-minute increments, follow-
ing the below instructions until your
puppy fully accepts each.
Collars and Leashes
COLLAR
The first time you put a collar on your puppy, he may not like it. He may
stop, sit, and scratch or twist in the air in an attempt to free himself of the
encumbrance. Don't worry. Leave the collar on for twenty-minute periods
throughout the day. Soon it will feel like part of his skin.
Your puppy is going to grow fast, so check his collar frequently to prevent
tightness. Make sure you're able to slip two fingers comfortably between
his neck and collar. If you select a harness for your puppy, the same rules
apply. Harnesses can be harder to fit, so take your puppy to the pet store,
and ask a professional for assistance in finding one suited for your partic-
ular puppy.
LEASH
Your puppy's first leash should be light-
weight and flexible. Let him drag it initially
until he's used to the weight behind him.
Don't worry if he picks up the leash and
chews it; this is normal behavior. If he's
destroying the leash, provide a suitable
alternative for him to chew, and spray the
leash with Bitter Apple. Once your puppy
is comfortable with its weight, condition
him to walk with you.
1 Pick up the lead and follow him.
 When he looks back at you, praise him, YEs, and/or offer him a treat or toy. Continue to use rewards to encourage his focus when
you hold the leash.
68
5
Puppy Kindergarten: Early Conditioning
chapter
 Gradually put pressure on the leash as you follow him.
4
 Using a treat cup (see page 42) and enthusiastic movements and praise,
begin to step away and encourage him to follow you. Use consistent words
to teach your puppy to follow your lead, such as LET's GO!
Note:Remember fhe voicerule.Yourpuppy willwant fi follow your voice wheni is moving woy
from him. Don't yellat your puppy fo follow you.
Once your puppy is confident on the leash inside, try it in increasingly
more distracting environments, such as outside or with family or visitors.
Follow the same cycle as above--initially walk your puppy on a loose lead,
highlighting each time he looks to you, using food or toy rewards;
progress slowly to greater pressure. As you encourage your puppy to fol-
low you, use rewards and toys to sustain his interest in your direction.
Encourage him to follow you by throwing.
your voice in the opposite direction. Act like
you've found a really neat treasure that you
want to share. Reward his cooperation.
Utimately, insist that your puppy follow you.
Use food and toys to lead him initially.
69
Introduce
Stairs
Many puppies are thrown off by stairs:
their eyes can't make sense of the
depth and angle. Although it is tempt-
ing to soothe and carry your puppy,.
resist this habit. It will only teach him
to be helpless. Instead, encourage a
can-do mentality.
Stairs
With ahelper and some treats,approach
the stairs with your puppy in your arms.
Carry him to the third step from the top or
bottom. Place him down gently.
Without talking, support your puppy's rib
cage to alleviate his fear of falling.
31
Have your helper stand at the top or bottom of the stairs and excite your
On spuey no asn'eay y uazo si Adnd unoa ji saot no poo ym Addnd
 guide him through the motion of walking the steps.
 Repeat this process again and again, gradually increasing the number of
 steps your puppy must tackle. Look at him, talk to him, and praise him when
he accomplishes this task, not when he avoids it!
70
Teach Early
5
Manners
Puppy Kindergarten: Early Conditioning
chapter
equivalent, but a very civilized behavior nonetheless. He will learn to sit whenever he wants some-
thing he considers positive, direct him to SIT. Position him immediately if he is too excited or
distracted to mind you.
Leave a leash on your puppy if he's a wild jumper. Step
j0 2no sAo4 qei8 pue dn duni Addnd anoA zal 2ou o0
 on the leash so that he has only enough room to get
your hand. If you're holding a toy and your puppy jumps
a few inches off the ground before feeling tugged. If the
jumping occurs at mealtimes, put his food and water 
 and release or toss it only after your puppy is sitting.
dishes down only after he is calm and is sitting.
Repeat the same sequence with treats. Offer your puppy
When your dog approaches you for a pat or a belly rub,
a treat by holding it above his head. If he jumps, lift it
ask him to SIT first. Pawing, staring, or whining is an
up. Reintroduce it, offering the snack only after your dog
uncivilized way to get attention. when your dog sits, it
is sitting calmly.
is the canine equivalent of saying please.
71
Discourage
with EP, EP
A puppy under six months of age cannot
understand the concept of NO. As a
puppy, he lacks the impulse control to
forget about whatever is distracting him.
Avoid using NO when addressing
your puppy. You will end up saying it too
frequently and it will lose both its mes-
sage and its power. A simple EP, EP gen-
understand right from wrong (five to six
months of age), you can begin to use the
direction NO.
EP, EP
When you catch your puppy's curiosity leading him astray, say EP, EP in a
gently discouraging tone. For example, if you see him heading toward a
tissue basket or starting to jump on the couch, interfere by saying EP, EP.
The words are best reinforced with a short directional tug of the collar.
Se paaiaoad si yno Aue se 'os op non uaym Addnd anon suyonon piot
interactive. If grasping your puppy's collar is difficult, attach a short drag
lead (see page 35) for easier intervention.
FAQ
My puppy knows what No means-he cowers every time
I shout at him-but at the same time, he's not too bright.
He goes right back to the behavior, and I have to yell at
him again. Help!
Your puppy is not dumb. He's repeating the behavior because he
knows it will result in interaction--negative or positive just doesn't
matter. And although he may look like he understands you,
what you are seeing is pure fear. Fear is a completely ineffective
 training tool.
On susypet go uogeueidxa ysnooyi ao e 1og 5o-tg sased o d
72
Distract
L5
Your Puppy
Puppy Kindergarten: Early Conditioning
chapter
To ensure cooperation, when you visit
the vet, go into town and resting
while you eat, provide your dog with a
displacement activity, such as a bone
 or a toy. It is like providing a young
child with a coloring book or a video
game.
Displacement Activities
If your hope is that your puppy will stay with you while you relax with a
good book, give him a comfortable place to sit and a good bone to chew.
Have one special chew bone or object that your puppy only sees at din-
nertime or when company visits. Stuffing a little peanut butter into his
regular chew can be exciting. Use this object for those times when you
really need your dog to calm down.
If suddenly your puppy starts to fidget, ask yourself if he needs to go out
 Or wants some water. Pet him when he's calm.
Take your displacement activities on the road, too. Theyll help your puppy
relax at his doctor's or while you're at the café.
For every behavior that frustrates you, think of something you'd like
 your dog to be doing instead--that is a displacement activity. Your
puppy can displace his need for oral interaction by licking instead of
nipping. He can displace his instinct for chasing a cat, by running
after a ball or swing toy. He can displace his impulse to jump on vis-
itors by racing around with a toy or ball.
73
Puppy
Point
The puppy point is a magical hand sig-
nal that teaches your puppy to look, as
well as listen, to you for direction.
Give Direction by Pointing
Extend your index finger in a pronounced point.
Hold your index finger out one inch from your puppy's nose.
When he touches your finger with his nose, mark the moment with praise,
 or a click, and a reward.
 Repeat this process ten times.
5
Take a step backward and point between your legs.
6
 React happily when he races over.
74
L5
Puppy Kindergarten: Early Conditioning
chapter
 Play with your new skill:
Move your point above his head and guide him into a sitting position.
Point between his front paws and guide him into a down position.
When you want him near you, call his name and point to the exact spot
you want him to be.
75
chapter
Grade-School Lessons
As your puppy ages or your dog ventures past adolescence, you'll notice
some changes in her behavior-many of them not fun or pretty. She may
take matters into her own hands and disregard any direction from you.
In fact, there may be times when she looks at you as though you've
never met before. Don't be offended. These are signs of a naturally
maturing or as-yet-untrained dog. Things don't have to go on like this
forever. Although you may feel as though your dog is stupid, these dis-
plays of independence are often signs of high intelligence that has been
misdirected. Don't despair-the solution to your frustration is just
ahead.
The best way to introduce and enforce the basic commands intro-
duced in this chapter is to integrate them into your daily routine with
your dog. Highlight a word a week, and share the plan with your family
and friends. Ask everyone to use the word before your dog receives
anything positive. For example, everyone can use the word Slt before
giving treats, food, water, petting, or freedom.
The Magic Five
Leading
82
The Concept of NO
83
Discourage Chewing with NO
84
Other Uses for NO
85
Point Training
86
HEEL
88
DOWVN
93
COME
97
STAND
101
SIT-STAY
103
DOWN-STAY
106
Fun Medleys
107
The Magic
Five
As you establish your position as
leader and train your dog how to
behave in all situations, teach her the
Magic Five: foundation commands
that will form the basis for your life
together.
LET'S GO
This direction says follow me. It is not an
option, but you don't have to be harsh
about driving that point home.
1
 Secure your dog's leash to your waist, or
hold half the leash in your relaxed arms.
 Walk forward, saying LET'S GO.
③ If your dog races ahead, calmly turn away from her-to the right if she is on
your left side-and repeat NAME, LET'S GO. Turn as often as necessary until
your dog realizes that she'd better watch you for direction. When she does,
reward her enthusiastically with food and praise.
78
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
SIT
Give this nonoptional direction only when you're able to follow through by
positioning your dog. If she doesn't listen, don't repeat yourself; simply
position her immediately, as shown.
se Auag dn yl lellon lay no uyp s,top anoa apun puey utu anoa aoeld 1
you coordinate this motion with the next step.
Brace her by placing your thumb and index finger on your dog's waist mus-
cle and squeeze gently as you lift under her chin.
3
 Repeat SIT as your dog relaxes into this position.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Avoid pressing on your dog's backbone. Aside from being discom-
forting, it will cause her to resist and challenge your direction.
Instead, squeeze the waist muscle, which is located just behind
your dog's ribcage.
79
The Magic
Five (continued)
WAIT and OKAY
These two directions, when used together, tell your dog to look to you for
permission and assurance before crossing thresholds and streets.
Place your dog on a leash and position her at your side. Hold her back,
repeating WAIT until she relaxes. (f this process takes more time than you
have, consider buying a training collar.)
2
When she does relax, say OKAY and proceed.
TIP
The direction to WAlT is about impulse control
and focus. when practicing this command, try it
in various situations, from food control to stairs,
doors, and curbs.
80
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
EXCUSE ME
Teach your dog to respect your space: use a polite but crisply stated
EXCUSE ME anytime she blocks your path or leans against you. If you
wouldn't let a family member crowd you, don't let your dog. If she resists
moving genty move her aside with your knee or foot.
Note:The directions LET'S GO and EXCUSE MEpassively communicateyour team
captain status. Each command demands recognition and respect, but do it in a
subtle,nonconfrontationa! manner.
SETTLE and BONE
Use these two directions together to teach your dog to go to her play
stationon cue.
1 As you lead your dog to the play station, point and say SETTLE.
When you get there, say BONE and offer her something to chew.
81
Leading
Teach your dog to walk on a leash (or lead) throughout your home, holding her leash loosely in
your left hand or securing it around your waist. Think of the leash as giving you the capacity to
hold your dog's hand and guide her. These same techniques work beautifully outdoors.
Lead Your Dog
Secure the leash around your waist like a
belt or hold it in your left hand with your
arms relaxed at your sides.
2 Bring your dog to your left side.
Walk forward calmly, calling out your dog's
name and LET'S GO.
4 If your dog races ahead, turn away from
her (to the right) and walk in the opposite
direction. Repeat as often as necessary to
catch your dog's attention. Look at her and
praise her when she's walking next to you
 on a loose leash.
 Walk throughout your home, practicing the
foundation commands listed on the previ-
 ous pages.
FAQ
Why do trainers always
My dog is unmanageable in
recommend walking dogs
certain areas of my home.
on the left side?
What should I do?
As most people are right-
Do not let her into those areas
handed, convenience demands
unsupervised. Take her into the
that dogs walk on the opposite
rooms by leading her, showing
 side so as not to interfere.
 her how to contain her
impulses.
82
The Concept
of NO
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
Most people teach NO as an interactive direction-shouting NO while a dog is in the middle of
misbehaving. Instead of teaching anything constructive, it is often perceived as interactive play or,
worse, as an overwhelming threat. Neither perception provides any long-term learning value. When
a dog is in the middle of destroying, stealing, chasing, or going potty, the thought to do these
things has already passed: your reaction is seen as interactive, not instructional. NO in these
instances sets up a vicious cycle that often increases misbehavior.
Teach NO
the behavior may get more frequent or intense.
Before you set up situations (see pages 84-85) to teach your dog the meaning of NO, decide what a good displacement
activity will be. For example, if you don't want her to nip you, KIssES might be a better alternative. If you don't want your dog
to chew a slipper, have a suitable toy on hand to replace it. Design a table of behaviors and substitutes, and share it with all
parties involved in your dog's training.
Behavior
Resp onse with NO
Dispfacement Activity
Chewing
Pull back on the leash;
Direct to area SETTLE and BONE
correct the object
Nipping
Pull away
KISSES or to specific need
Going potty in an
 Clap/interrupt thought
OUTSIDE/PAPERS
inappropriate place
Jumping
Use leash to head off
GETTOYor SITor BELLY UP
Chasing
Leash correction
TOY or other focusing commands (SIT, DowN)
83
Discourage
Chewing with No
Make a list of your dog's favorite
things to chew or steal. Now, make a
list of suitable alternatives--bones or
toys that she adores playing with. If
she has none, find at least three things
immediately.
Teach the Concept of No
To encourage chewing on appropriate things,
start playing with her toys throughout the
day. Steal a toy, shake it in front of her face,
and run away and hide.
Set up the following situation to teach your
dog to avoid her unsuitable favorites (your
things).
1
 Place an object, such as a paper towel or a
shoe, in the middle of the floor.
 Walk your dog into the room on a leash.
3
 The moment she shows interest in the object
pull back on the leash and say NO.
Shout at the object. That's right-at the object,
not at your dog. Don't even look at your
dog-you are communicating that the object 
is bad and that your dog should avoid it.
Walk your dog by the object until she avoids
even looking at it.
 Redirect your dog to her BONE or TOY.
Good job!
84
Other Uses
for No
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
You can apply the same techniques to other household objects, such as wastepaper baskets and dish-
washers. The same rule applies: set up the situation and correct the thought process. Once your dog
 is in the midst of misbehaving, you're too late to make an impression-if that's the case, calmly sep-
 arate her and let it go.
Once your dog begins to understand that
NO means to curb her impulse, you can
use it in other situations, such as keping
her from chasing a cat or a child: no cor-
recting the object required!
If your dog is a cat-chasing addict, take the
two animals into a small bathroom with
your dog on a leash and training collar. The
moment she looks to your cat, pull back on
 the leash and say NO and give another
direction, like SIT or DOwN. Continue this
process until the two of them can sit com-
fortably together in a small room. Gradually
enlarge the space until your dog is able to
contain her impulses indoors and out.
Set up other situations in a similar way. If
she can't keep her tongue off the plates in
the dishwasher, bring her into the kitchen
on her leash and training collar. Open the
dishwasher, and the moment she's temped
to check it out, pull back and say NO.
Without further hesitation, correct the
dishes. Bang a wooden spoon to a pot:
BAD DISH. Ignore your dog as you do this
and redirect him to a bone and bed when your point has been made.
If you catch your dog about to have an accident, interfere with a NO and hurry her to her potty area.
85
Point
Training
Point training is a valuable lesson in
communicating with your dog. I
introduced a playful point in chapter
5, but if you're starting with an older
dog, you can teach this skill at any
time. It will train your dog to look to
you and follow the point of your fin-
ger for all directions, from SIT to
greeting company civilly to perform-
ing tricks.
Follow the Point
ing the lure, and directing with the lure. All of them involve helping your
dog follow the point of your finger. Ensure that your signal is crisp by
using your index finger.
Teach point training as a game, using treats and toys in the initial stages.
Although you will fade off lures in a couple of weeks, continue to praise
·3opunoA
INSTANT REWARD
Sandwich a goody between your middle finger and your thumb. Prepare
your point signal with the same hand. Initially point no more than a
few inches from your dog. When she reaches out to your finger, mark
the moment (say YES or click) and reward her with what you're holding.
your dog is catching on. Gradually increase the distance she must move
to your finger as well as the number of successful touches she must
make to get the treat.
86
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
DELAYED RESPONSE
 Pace some goodies in a snack pack or
pocket. Point at close range. when your
dog goes to your finger, mark the moment
and reward her by pulling a treat from the
secondary location. Increase the distance
slowly, no longer rewarding her the instant
she cooperates, but making sure to mark
 the second she reaches the point, and then
treat a few seconds later. Slowly increase
the delay between the point and the treat.
Gradually phase off treating your dog for
every successful point, but always mark
the moment with an enthusiastic YES!
j8op pooy
In real life, use the point to signal your
dog to move in a certain direction or into
a certain position. The point will also help
her feel calmer with unfamiliar settings or
people.
As you extend the pause between a successful point and the treat
you'll notice your dog's focus sharpening. Look to your dog when
87
HEEL
This direction tells your dog to follow
along at your heel. If you could con-
verse with her in English, you'd be
saying, “I'm the leader-follow me."
Since leaders lead, you will need to
teach your dog to walk behind you.
Teach Your Dog HEEL
Three ingredients will simplify your lessons:
●Relax with the idea. You are simply teaching your dog to walk
behind you.
● Find a suitable, effective training collar (see page 32). The collar can
make or break a dog's understanding. It needs to convey comfort
and praise when the dog is near you and discomfort and disapproval
when she surges ahead.
Choose the right leash. Make sure that the leash you select is made
of a comfortable material, is the right weight for your dog, and is
between four and six feet long. Retractable leashes are not appropri-
ate for training.
Teach the command HEEL in an undistracting environment, such as a liv-
ing room or a backyard. Practice twice a day for ten minutes. Continue
this routine for five days or until your dog is familiar and cooperative with
this direction.
88
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
DIRECTED HEEL
1 Walk your dog in a large counterclockwise circle to start.
2 Bring your dog to your left side, using treats to lure her.
③ Sit her down next to your left heel, position-
ing her if necessary.
4 Say NAME, HEEL as you walk forward.
Maintain a balanced rhythm as you walk,
using a quick tug on the leash to position
your dog at your heel if she pulls.
5 As you complete your circle, grasp the leash with your right hand and use
your left hand to position your dog into a sitting posture. You are teaching
her to stop and sit when you stop. HEEL is a command of position as well as
of walking control.
Your dog may start out rambunctious. This is normal, especially if leash
walks have been chaotic in the past. Stay calm and repeat your circles
again and again. Time and repetition are good teaching tools.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
89
HEEL
(continued)
OVERCOME OBJECTIONS
If your dog is overpowering you, slide the
leash behind your back and hold it with two
straight arms. when she pulls forward, push
back on the leash with your bottom. Use the
trunk of your body to manage and control her.
If your dog stops in her tracks, determine whether she is afraid or offering
passive resistance. If it's passive resistance, continue walking. If she's truly
Overwhelmed, go back to a familiar room, review the leash-training tech-
niques outlined earlier in this chapter, and/or use food or toys to lure her
forward. Avoid retracing your steps, as this will reinforce her behavior. Lure
her forward to you.
When you stop, your dog may try to shufle about. Don't let her. There's
only one way to sit or stand at a heel, and it is right next to you. Use the
pressure points discussed on page 93 and a gentle reminder to HEEL as
you position her.
90
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
INCREASE DISTRACTIONS
Gradually increase distractions to meet your dog's increasing attention
span. For example, have a member of your family nearby, eating or playing
games. Ask them not to interrupt the lesson, however. Give your dog a
confident HEEL and begin to walk in straight lines--you may notice that
your dog is suddenly more distractible. Don't stop or look at her, as these
dhanges in pace indicate insecurity on your part. walk with a self-assured
posture and maintain the same rhythm. If your dog hesitates or lunges,
give her a quick tug back to your heel. Praise all cooperation.
Introduce HEEL on your walks. Anytime you are off your property, one of
you must lead and the other must follow. If you've been the follower, it's
time to switch roles. A dog who leads does not train well or mind reliably.
Use HEEL to communicate the change in status.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
P
What if my dog has to go potty during her walk?
Your dog should be going potty close to your home, which will
help you avoid assertive encounters with other people and dogs
along the walk. If she must go, take her to a specified area and
release her to go potty. Once through (give her no more than three
minutes), call her back to HEEL and finish your walk. Let her go
potty near your home once more before you go inside.
91
HEEL
(continued)
HANDS-FREE HEELING
If you're feeling relaxed with your dog, you can start to direct her hands-
free. Either attach or tie the leash around your waist or lay it over your
 shoulder.
1 Go back and practice small circles.
If your dog moves out of place, quickly grasp the leash (as though it were
a hot wire) and tug back to your side.
3 Gradually increase the distractions as suggested above.
TIP
If your dog is working well in low-distraction environments but can't
stay focused when others are around, do not push her. Think of the
leash as holding her hand, and gently guide her when she can't
concentrate.
92
DOWN
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
DOWN is one of the most important
directions that you will teach your
dog. That said, it can be challenging
to learn and may take time to perfect.
Your goal is to have your dog calmly
lie down when you point to the floor
and/or say DOWN.
After you teach your dog the
DOWN, she'll respect your judgment,
trust your direction, and calm down
on cue. There are three phases to
teaching this command: tell and show,
straight back, and standing down.
Tell and show
Introduce the DowN command in a cheerful
manner. Use it throughout the day when
feeding your dog or when playing with toys.
There are two ways to encourage your dog's
cooperation at this stage in training:
Use treats/toys to lure her into position,
saying DowN as she relaxes into the
position. when using a lure, lower the
object from her nose to the space
between her paws.
● Locate the pressure point between your
dog's shoulder blades and apply gentle
pressure with a flat thumb to position
her. If she still resists, lift a paw gently to
create a tripod effect.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
TIP
Does your dog want nothing to do with this command? You can
play-train her by sitting on the floor with a knee bent, and baiting
your dog under your leg. when she is forced to lie down to follow
the treat, say DowN and reward her lovingly.
93
DOWN
(continued)
Straight Back
Once your dog is cooperating enthusiastically, you're ready to teach her a
more formal response to the direction. Your goal is to be able to point and
say DowN without lowering yourself into the position.
1 Sit in a chair with your back straight, or kneel on the floor, remaining upright.
2
 Instruct DowN by pointing with your right hand. (If you are using treats/toys,
keep them on the counter or in a snack pack.)
人
 If your dog hesitates, put steady pressure between her shoulders and guide
her into position. Pause, praise, release her with an OKAY, and reward her.
Vary the duration of the pause before you release her so that she learns to
concentrate on your direction rather than preempt you.
t6
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
Standing DowN
For the final phase, remember your goal: to be able to calmly direct your
dog DowN regardless of the environment or its distractions. To do so, you
must be able to stand upright; if you always bend and point, your dog will
need you to do so 100 percent of the time. If you've mastered the straight-
back DowN, you're ready for the final phase--DOwN from a standing
position.
Put your dog on her leash and take her to a quiet room.
2
Slide the leash under your foot discreetly, stand tall, and say/signal DowN.
3 As you say it, you may bend at the knees, but
 not at the back. If your dog needs a hint, slide
the leash up to remind her. (Do not use the
leash to choke your dog into position. Apply
only slight pressure.)
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
TIP
Use hand signals to increase your dog's visual focus:
 DOwN: Point straight down from your dog's nose to the floor
between her paws.
s,sop anoA woy lasuy pauiod e y piemdn daams :iis
 nose to your eyes.
 STAY: Flash a flat palm in front of your dog's nose and remove
it quickly.
 OKAY: Sweep out from your dog's nose with a pointed finger
as you step forward.
95
DOWN
(continued)
 If she still resists, position her gently. Pause and praise. Good dog! Practice
three to ten downs per lesson, mixed in with other directions like HEEL
and STAY.
5
Once your dog goes down willingly, pivot directly in front of her and follow
the same pattern, progressively moving away from her one foot at a time.
TIP
Once your dog is cooperating, use the word DowN when-
ever it applies: when you're waiting at the veterinarian's
during quiet times at home with friends and family, and
to remind her to calm down when she acts impulsively.
If your dog ignores you, position her calmly. Like SlT and
COME, DowN is not a word to be repeated.
96
COME
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
The human equivalent to COME is
the word buddle. It should be taught
as an upbeat bonding exercise that
 reinforces your togetherness, not your
separation.
There are three phases to the
COME exercise: name association,
reconnection, and come from a dis-
tance. Practice each phase individually
before linking them together.
Teach Name Association
Help your dog make a positive association with her name.
1 Call her name and mark the moment she looks to you with praise or other
rewards.
Note: You can aso use αcdickerorafargef word fo mark fhe momenf your dog comes fo yours
your side.
2
 Shake a treat cup, calling your dog's name as you run away from her. Throw
 your voice away from your dog when calling her. Praise her attention.
Note: Ise a sfrong directional fone when calfing fo your dog, similar fo fhe one a foorball quarier-
back would use fo give directions in a hudle. Sound confident and enthusisi.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
97
COME
(continued)
Reconnection
Before calling your dog from a distance, teach her that the direction CovE
is a command to be together, not apart. It's about connection, interaction,
and warmth, not separation and hostility. Eventually, when she hears
COvE across a field or yard, she will race over to be near you.
When your dog approaches you for attention, say CoME and point from
her eyes to yours to get her attention. Praise her warmly. You can also
 approach her with treats in your pocket to reinforce the idea.
When playing with a favorite toy, say CovE and bring your dog's attention
to your eyes. Toss the toy enthusiastically.
98
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
COME from a Distance
When introducing CovE from a distance, begin with small separations.
Step back from a six-foot leash and call vour dog: NAME, CoME.
2
If you're able, step or run backward.
3
Gather the leash as your dog moves toward you.
 Physically interact with, praise, and reward her when she is close.
CONTINUED ON NEXTPAGE
66
COME
(continued)
As you increase the separation, use other leashes, such as a retractable
leash or a long line. Try the following exercises to highlight this direction:
● As you call to your dog, throw your voice in the opposite direction.
●Callto your dog as you play with sticks or one of her favorite toys.
● Hide behind a building or a tree and call to your dog. Shake a treat
cup if your dog gets confused.
●Play the Runaway Come game (see page 146).
FAQ
These exercises work great on-leash, but off-leash my dog
ignores me. What should I do?
Don't expect the same focus from your dog off-leash at this point.
We'll concentrate more on that in the next chapter. If you're in a sit-
uation where you need to get your dog but she's off-leash, simply
use her name and run from her, or get some treats and pretend to
eat them by yourself. Do not look at or call to her-wait until she's
near and grasp her collar gently.
100
STAND
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
This direction is good for many
things, from grooming and wiping
muddy paws to standing still for
petting.
Teach Your Dog STAND
Kneel down on the floor next to your dog and place your right hand, palm
 out, on your dog's buckle collar.
2
Slide your left hand under your dog's belly.
3
 Say STAND as you gently prop your dog into a standing position.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
101
STAND
(continued)
 Relax your right hand on your dog's collar, and slide your left hand to rest on
your dog's thigh.
 5 Say STAY and slide your hand off your dog's thigh, and then off her collar.
Note: The SI-STAY and fhe DOWN-STAY are iniroduced in fhe nexi fwo lessons.
 Stand up and step away from your dog gradually, repeating STAY to remind
her to be still.
Note: Once your dog undersfands fhis direcfion, you con use if whie brushing her. lnifially, hold your
left hand on her thigh/belly as you remind her fo STAND and STAY.
102
SIT-STAY
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
SIT-STAY is not a complicated direc-
tion provided you progress through
the lessons slowly. Nothing is more
confusing or frustrating to a dog than
to be taught to SIT-STAY one day in
the quiet of your home and then
immediately be expected to perform
with company or in public. Instead,
practice the following exercises in a
low-distraction space, twice a day for
 ten minutes per session. Work inside
for one to two weeks, depending on
your dog's progress.
Teach Your Dog to Stay Sitting
 Slide your dog's collar up between her ears
or hold the chin ring of the head collar to the
side of her face.
2
 Instruct your dog to SIT and stand with your
heel at your dog's paws. Hold the lead above
her head, hip level, taut not tight. Keep your
body upright and calm.
 Give the STAY direction with a flat palm.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
103
SIT-STAY
(continued)
 Pivot in front of your dog and pause for three
seconds. Repeat twice.
5
 Introduce motion distractions: march in place,
hop up and down, swirl your arm. Repeat
the sequence three times for ten seconds
each time.
 Return to her side (with your feet in front of her paws) and release her with
OKAY!
Introduce sound distractions. Moo like a cow, bark like a dog, meow like a
kitten. Repeat twice.
Note: Do not stare at your dog while you're in front of her-she'll perceive it as an
invitation toplay or as a threat.fnstead, look at her ears.
TIP
Can I remind my dog to STAY more than
Once?
Absolutely! There are two commands that you can
repeat to remind your dog to continue on: STAY
and HEEL.
104
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
 Increase the Distractions
After pracicing this direction in your home, you can gradually introduce STAY in more distracting environments. Go at a pace
at which your dog feels comfortable: If she breaks consistently, you're going too quickly.
Use the 3-D guideline to increase distractions:
D
Element
fdeas
 Duration
Time
Vary the time to pique interest.
 Distraction
Motion and various sounds
Start with your movement, and then progress from controlled distractions to
real-life situations.
Distance
Length from your dog's side
Move out a couple of feet at a time. Vary your angle, too. If your dog breaks
repeatedly, go back a step to rebuild her success rate.
If your dog breaks, calmly reposition her by
gently lifting up on her leash and squeezing
her waist pressure point. Get as close to the
original space in which you left her as pos-
sible. Remind her to STAY, and move closer
if she fidgets.
If your dog breaks and moves away from
the place you left her, calmly go to her and
lead her back. Reposition her and reinstruct
STAY. Remain close to reestablish her suc-
cess rate.
Stay calm while teaching this
lesson. Human frustration often
creates tension for dogs and 
makes it even harder for them
to stay still.
105
DOWN-STAY
To teach your dog a DOWN-STAY,
she must be comfortable going into a
DOWN position. If she's not, refer to
page 93 and work on that lesson first.
Teach DOwWN-STAY
Command STAY and stand very tall at your
dog's side, with your toes in line with her
toes. If she jumps right up, plant your left foot
on her leash so that she feels tension when
she tries to stand. If necessary, use the pres-
sure point located between her shoulder
blades to reposition her.
 Make movements and sounds while standing
at her side, and then pivot in front of her and
 repeat the sequence listed in the SIT-STAY
section.
106
Fun
Medleys
Grade-School Lessons
chapter
Once your dog has mastered the commands in this chapter, use them throughout the day to com-
municate with her. Practice a ten- to fifteen-minute lesson in which you fit each direction into an
unpredictable routine. Introduce other distractions to make it lively, challenging, and interesting
for both of you.
Make Medleys Fun and Effective
 Play music or be goofy to make it
 more fun.
 Involve friends and family members.
Teach someone else how to direct
your dog.
●Practice around increasingly greater
distractions.
Use your directional commands to commu-
ricate with your dog throughout the day.
+
+Use SIT-STAY before dinner or pats.
● Use HEEL when walking through
town.
●Use DOwN-STAY to urge your dog to
relax with visitors.
107
7
chapter
The Invisible Leash
If your dog can control himself while he's off-leash, you have even more
freedom and more opportunities to have fun together. Off-leash training
gives you a companion who will choose to respond to your direction
over distractions, one who will listen to you reliably and choose to fol.
low your direction.
The transition from on-leash to off-leash control takes patience and
time, and it means constantly reading your dog and being aware that
your dog is also reading you. Because you have relied on the leash to
communicate and reinforce your direction, its removal can be disorient.
ing for both of you. For this reason alone, your off-leash goal will be a
gradual progression, incorporating different types of leashes, and a
blend of on-leash and off-leash exercises, until you are both confident
in each other's responses. To have control, you must look like a leader,
a team captain-confident, self-assured, and with a plan in mind. Only
then will your dog trust your judgment.
Be sure to master the leash-training technigues in chapter 6 before
you begin the exercises in this chapter. Of course, while this chapter is
about the goal of off-leash training. you should continue to use some
sort of containment during the process, especially when you are near a
road or community. Throughout this chapter I will refer to leashes and
other tools that can help you in your off-lead aspirations, and I will
touch upon exactly when you can trust your direction without a leash.
Find out how to get there in the pages ahead.
Practice Paying Attention
110
Hands-Free Control with a Short Lead
.112
An Off-Lead Concept of NO
.113
When Your Dog Breaks . -.
.114
Reinforce the Three Steps of CoME
.115
Know When to Trust Your Dog to CoME
.116
Avoid Overusing CoME . : :
.117
Deal with Less-Than-Perfect Reactions to CoME
..118
Work Around Distractions
.120
Train with a Retractable Leash
.122
Work on a Ten-Foot Security Line
.123
Use a Long Line
.124
Emergency DOwN
125
Default Behavior
27
Practice Paying
Attention
One of the most important qualities of
an off-leash dog is that he focuses on
you above all other distractions. If a
bike, a rabbit, or another dog whizzes
by and you call, your direction comes
first.
If you were on a team, you wouldn't
look to anyone but your team captain
for instruction. That same devotion
from your dog is within your grasp.
The first step is to confirm his focus by
practicing attention exercises on-leash.
Attention, Please
Ask someone to help you with this exercise.
 Instruct your dog to HEEL and stand calmly. Have your helper approach you
from the side clapping her hands, but not looking to or calling your dog.
The moment you see that your dog is more focused on the distraction than
 on you, call his name and step quickly in the opposite direction.
Your dog will either follow vou or he won't. If he doesn't, give his leash a
quick tug as you move away from him.
 Repeat the process until your dog is more focused on you than on the
distraction.
 Now, ask the person to approach with a more alluring distraction, like a
sandwich. Repeat steps 1-3.
 Continue to up the distractions, gradually increasing the level of the difficulty
 as you go: noise makers, other pets, etc.
TIP
 Initially practice your lessons in an enclosed area or on a long line.
When you start off-leash training, your dog may turn into a come-
dian and bound away from you just for fun, so keep it safe until
he's reliable.
110
The Invisible Leash
chapter,
Heading Out into the Real World
Now you're ready to take this exercise into the real world. List
your dog's top three distractions: things you may run into day to
day. Here's a sample list:
鲁 Other dogs
●Bicyclists or joggers
● Birds or squirrels
Now go out and find these things.
1
Line your dog up so that you are standing perpendicular to him.
The temptations will be to your dog's left.
When he is clearly more focused on the distraction than on you,
call his name and take a giant side step to the right.
Did he follow? YEs! If he did not, register your existence by issu-
ing a quick tug; then go back and present the choice again.
Continue to expose him to distractions until he learns to check in
with you upon their sighting.
Repeating this exercise will help you establish a pattern of noting
your dog's focus, which is especially important for off-lead work.
Your dog must trust and follow your directions above all else that
is going on around him. If you catch his attention wandering at
 any time, do a quick side-step reminder to get him back on track!
111
Hands-Free Control
with a Short Lead
Using a short lead is an ideal way to make a smooth and nonconfrontational transition from on-
leash to off-leash. Simply unclipping your leash one day may leave you feeling out of control, while
at the same time giving your dog too much freedom too fast.
Letting Go of the Leash, Almost
The simple addition of a short lead weighs on your dog's collar,.
sition to hands-free exercises without having to ditch the leash
at your dog's collar'to redirect him--especially if he's in danger.
This is not good form. Impulsive movements on your part will
frighten your dog and ensure a lack of off-leash trust.
Use the short lead around your home, directing your dog with
simple cues like SIT, DOWN, STAY, and COME. If he responds,
congratulations--if not, don't despair. Pick up your hand lead
and guide him through it so he has faith in your direction. Avoid
rushing outside or into the public domain with only a short lead,
as your lack of full control will cause you to wory and be more
reactive. Work on all your commands first, gaining confidence
before you use your short lead in an open field or park. You can
leave a short hand lead or an even smaller finger lead on your
the ability to reach out and grasp your dog's hand when he gets
confused or impulsive. If you want to do a spontaneous com-
mand medley (see page i07) or you need to direct your dog
when someone comes into your home, you'll be able to do so
without having to find a leash.
The other good thing about working on a short lead is that you
can start an exercise while you're holding the leash and then
drop it as your dog's focus improves. The slight weight on your
dog's collar will be a reassuring reminder to him of your
guidance.
TIP
It's so frustrating when my dog ignores me. I know [
shouldn't, but I really feel' like hitting him. What should
cop1
Feeling like hitting is fine. Hitting isn't. Doing so would erode your
relationship with your dog and diminish his off-lead trust. If you're
really angry with him, walk away calmly. Remember, a graceful
retreat is never disrespected.
112
An off-Lead
Concept of No
The Invisible Leash
chapter,
In chapter 6, you learned that once your dog knows his commands, you can introduce the concept
Redirect an Incorrect Response
Command
Wrong Response
Correction
SIT
Ignores
Tug the lead and say NO. wait two seconds for him to find the right response; if he
doesn't, position him quickly. Praise him warmly if he cooperates.
DOWN
Ignores
Tug the lead and say NO. Wait two seconds for him to find the right response; if he
doesn't, position him quickly. Praise him warmly if he cooperates.
HEEL
Lunges or veers
Quickly tug the leash and say NO. Redirect him with HEEL, and praise him for fol
lowing along.
WAIT
Ignores
Tug him back behind you with a NO and reissue the direction WAIT. Repeat until
he cooperates.
COME
Doesn't look to you when called
Say NO and tug the leash. When he does come, say YES and cheer him on.
COME
Veers away or races by
Cheer him on as he's coming toward you. If he races by, tug the leash and say NO!
Repeat CoME and praise him when he cooperates.
COME
Doesn't stop for the reconnection
Say NO and tug the leash. When he nears you, praise him.
TIP
Follow the two-second rule: wait two seconds for your dog to
respond before you say NO.
113
When Your
Dog Breaks
When your dog breaks a STAY command or bolts from you, stop for a minute to consider the moti-
vation for his behavior. There are times when a correction is not appropriate-if, for example, he
broke a SIT-sTAY because he was moving to get out of the way of a cyclist or a car.
Your dog will break a direction for one of five reasons. The following table outlines those reasons, what each one looks like,
and what your ideal response to each should be.
Reason for Break
Body Language
Your Response
Comments
Confusion/fear
Lowered posture, not
No eye contact, gently
When a dog breaks because he's confused, he often
moving or slinking away;
reposition, do not interact,
stands there waiting for another direction from you.
stands there waiting
stay close; simplify the
Don't look at your dog or correct him. Calmly command
for another direction
exercise
him from a distance or, if necessary, go to him and
fromyou
reposition him.
Startled
Quick jumps,
Instruct back into position;
People get startled, dogs get startled. Stay calm as you
body oriented toward
approach calmly and
reposition your dog to show him that allis okay with
sound/stimulus
reposition only if necessary
the world.
Separation anxiety
Tail and head lowered,
Don't touch, avoid eye 
This dog is overwhelmed. He wants to be near you for
moving toward you
contact, gently reposition,
reassurance. Do not shout at or correct him, as this will
remain at dog's side,
increase his level of anxiety. Calmly return him to his
decrease difficulty of
place and stay nearby. Gradually increase your distance
exercise
while he's on-leash.
Defiance
Racing away, a quick
Lower your head, walk
This dog has no interest in following your direction.
stare over his shoulder
calmly and quickly to your
Strong-minded and self-assured, he just leaves, most 
dog's side, lift the leash or
likely when a new element is introduced: either a
hook your finger under his
high-level distraction like a person or a dog, or a new
collar, tug firmly, say NO,
location.
and return to position. Use
a training collar to reinforce
the concept of NO.
Testing
Walking away,
Lower your head; go to dog
This response is often accompanied with a play bow;
continually checking
Calmly, and step on his leash.
 it is a sign of your dog's tension at your expectation.
in with you visually
Return him to the original
Simplify your request and correct your dog's mischief
position without interaction.
with a NO and a leash tug.
Instruct STAY and make the
exercise simpler.
When a dog breaks a command, it is often because you've increased
the difficulty of the exercise before he's ready to take on the chal-
lenge. Look at everything from your dog's perspective; if you're in a
new location, decrease your expectation and distance initially.
114
Reinforce the Three
Steps of coME
The Invisible Leash
chapter 
If you haven't worked through the exercises in chapter 6, where the command COME is intro-
duced, flip there now and make sure your dog understands that COME means together and happy.
not apart and stressed.
 Before working on your off-leash goals, review the three steps of COME, gradually introducing
 greater distances between you and your dog.
NAME ASSOCIATION
During the day, call out your dog's name. Do so when you're standing apart from
your dog, and praise him for looking to you. If he ignores you, call out his name
au sy pasn aa,no asneaq no suouai aq Aew ah dno ean e aeys noa se
in discouragement or repeated it often with a negative consequence (such as
medication or isolation). It's not too late to reverse this trend. Your goal is to
excite your dog, so say his name cheerfully and with plenty of enthusiasm.
RECONNECTION
When your dog hears the word CovE, you want him to think immediately of
being near you. when he isn't near you and he hears this command, he should
immediately want to run over to you to reconnect. To establish this sense of
o ypeq dais uayn pue 3oy Aes 'wiy on leo noA uaym dn pe 'uny pue Auasun
run away from him or even run and hide. Do this exercise in the house where
there are few distractions. Praise him a lot when he gets to your side and reward
O ea mu laaau lay os semau u dn x Ao e do sea s y 
expect.
COMING FROM A DISTANCE
Outside also stress that your reconnection is the most important part of this
direction. As your dog comes to you from a distance, encourage him to slow
down and stop when he nears you, and then reward and touch him. This way
he'll know that the COME is complete when you're physically reconnecting with
him.
115
Know When to Trust
Your Dog to CoME
The hardest part of COME is knowing when you can trust your dog-you should feel it. It's never
a smooth road in the beginning; some days you will get a quick and happy response, others will feel
more like your first day of training. Just remember that frustration is a sign of weakness and you'll
lose your dog's respect. When you're first testing your level of control, bring your dog to an
enclosed area. Be calm and relaxed, and don't be afraid to back track to an early phase of training.
If you're at all unsure, use the long line exercise described on page 99.
When letting your dog romp off-leash for
the first time, you're nerves will be the
hardest thing to control. Before you begin:
● Place treats in your pocket or snack
 pack, and bring a clicker if you're
using one in your dog's training.
● Bring several of your dog's favorite
toys, such as Frisbees or balls.
●Bring your long line just in case your
dog is not cooperative.
Walk your dog or exercise him with
another dog to take the edge off his
excitability.
● Read over the sections on the
off-leash COME.
● Relax. The more confident you seem,
the more your dog will want to stay
around you.
TIP
My dog comes well but often runs right by, crashes into
me, or plays keep away. What should I do?
Mr. Funny. You need to work on the reconnection exercises on
page 98 to teach him that the COME command means that you're
together: the equivalent of a human huddle, with the team coming
 together to establish a sense of unity.
116
Avoid
Overusing coME
The Invisible Leash
chapter,
Do not get in the habit of calling your dog every thirty seconds. That's one way to ensure that he'll
ignore you. Use other directions to get his attention, like NAME, LET'S GO, INsIDE, or BALL.
For example, when you need to turn around or head back to the house call out INsIDE or LET'S
GO to highlight your movement, rather than saying COME. Call him to you no more than twice
when you're walking. Initially end each exercise with a release so that your dog doesn't see COME
as the end to your fun.
Alternative to coME
Iry this routine while out on a walk or playing
with your dog.
1 Call out your dog's name as you turn in the
opposite direction.
 Run a few paces away from him. f he's fol-
lowing, cheer him on!
Turn to face him and kneel down
 Hug him into you, reward him, and release
him with OKAY, GO PLAY!
FAQ
What if he doesn't come?
Don't get upset--you'll only teach him to avoid you off-leash.
Instead, take out the treat cup or a toy and begin to play all by
yourself or pretend to eat his treats. Do not look at or talk with him
until you've re-leashed him. when he comes to investigate, gently
take his collar and secure his long line. Review the above exercise,
holding his long line as you run back.
117
Deal with Less-Than-Perfect
Reactions to CoME
A perfect response to COME doesn't
happen overnight. Two reactions are
common to many dogs when they're
adjusting to off-leash freedom. Some
go through one or the other; others
go through both phases. Thinking of
each reaction in human terms makes it
more understandable.
Have We Met?
Your dog may give you a blank stare like he has no idea who you are.
He's just showing signs of stress at having no leash to guide him and is
testing his freedom. Follow these steps:
1 Lower your head to break the eye contact immediately.
o 1! y Aeid on usag pue 'dno jean no Aot aoay e pno ayen 'uop s 
pretend to eat the treats yourself. Sometimes this works perfectly: if it does,
gently take your dog's collar, say NO, and place him back on his leash.
3 If the above fails to impress your dog, try run-
ning away from him as you shake his cup or
swing a stick playfully.
4 If all else fails, lower your head and walk side-
ways or backward toward your dog. Moving
head-on is seen as confrontational.
 Kneel down as you get close. Gently reach
for his collar-do not be angry. Leave him on
his long line and practice the exercise on the 
following page.
118
The Invisible Leash
chapter,
 In a Minute
Think back to when you were seven years old and were called in for lunch.
You really didn't hear your name being called the first ten times. Your dog
will do the same thing. Be sympathetic to his reaction, but teach him that
COME is not a choice.
1 When you get this look, your dog's tail will be wagging, and his expression
will be playful. Then he'll turn back to whatever he was doing. When he
does, say NO firmly.
 If he looks back, throw your arms up in a cheer and call out his name. Then
 run in the opposite direction and/or play with a favorite toy or treat cup.
3 If you must, approach him calmly, and secure him to the leash.
Leave his long line on for one week. Each time he gives you the "look," tug
the leash and say No. Praise his cooperation.
119
Work Around
Distractions
It's common for your dog to be more distracted when you're practicing commands in public. Don't
be discouraged or get frustrated. Your dog will sense this and will be less likely to cooperate.
Instead, set up situations to teach him to focus on you even more. Practice these exercises on a short
leash; if you anticipate his impulses will triumph, let him drag his leash so you're able to interfere if
he gets too distracted. Repeat the exercises below until your dog focuses on you above all else.
Distraction Exercises
Lay distractions on the floor in your living room. Try an open potato chip bag, a
used wrapper, or a paper towel. Bring your dog into the room on his leash and
training collar. Tug the leash (if necessary) and say No if he focuses more on the
object than on you (review the exercise on page 84).
Next, increase the level of floor distractions. Add some bits of food or another pet.
Work through the commands SIT, DOwN, HEEL, and COME, correcting any lack of
focus with the command No. Redirect your dog if necessary, and praise him for
his attention.
Now take these same distractions outside. Work in a familiar environment initially
gradually increasing the level of distractions as you did inside. Eventually work in
environments that are unfamiliar, continuing to lay down an obstacle course of
temptations for your dog. Each time he focuses intensely on an object, say NO
and redirect him. Praise all cooperation.
120
The Invisible Leash
chapter
Now you're ready to take on the world. Think of every distraction as you did when you set up distractions in chapter 6 and
tion is rooted on the distraction. If they're flickering back, he's aware of the distraction but also attuned to you. If you wonder
where his focus is, side step to the right--does his head follow you, or is his focus elsewhere?
If you're walking your dog at HEEL and he's suddenly distracted by a jogger or
bicyclist, take a giant step to the right and remind HEEL. If he follows you, praise
him; if not, tug his collar or the leash. (Please always leave a leash attached if
you're near a roadway.)
Is your dog enchanted by a scent? Is he dying to mark every tree? Unless you'd
like to mark along with him, set the rhythm of the walk, leaving all marking
opportunities for closer to your home. Let his leash go slack and step away from
him. Does he follow? If not, say NO as you tug the leash, then remind HEEL and
continue walking, or remind STAY if you're standing still.
Gity streets are littered with tasty bits of garbage. The smells will intoxicate your
dog. If he's more enticed by the smells than by your direction, tug the collar/leash
quickly and say NO. Reissue your original direction and praise his cooperation.
121
Train with a
Retractable Leash
Another option in your march toward off-leash cooperation is a retractable leash; however, it
should never be used in a crowd or near a road. When used in an open environment, it allows your
dog the freedom to explore, while still allowing you to reinforce your direction. As a training tool,
you can use it informally during walks to reinforce the following commands.
Commnd
Response
NAME
Call out your dog's name enthusiastically. If he looks at you, praise him. That's all that is required-just a glance. If he
ignores you, tug his leash, say NO, and then praise him once you have his attention.
WAIT
Use WAlT to teach your dog to stop at a distance. Command your dog to stop when he is three feet in front of you. If
your dog continues forward, snap the leash and say NO, WAlT. Praise his focus immediately. Increase your distance to
six feet, eight feet, twelve feet, sixteen feet, and twenty-six feet.
SIT-STAY
Use a retractable leash to increase your distance control. Increase your distance slowly.
HEEL
Use this command to call your dog back to your side. Call out his name and then command HEEL as you slap your leg.
Praise your dog as he responds, and then walk a short distance before you stop to release him.
NO
Whenever your dog is focusing on something he shouldn't be, call his name and run in the other direction, if possible.
If he ignores you, snap the leash and say No. lmmediately refocus his attention with a toy, a stick, or a command
122
Work on a Ten-Foot
Security Line
The Invisible Leash
chapter,
You can use your security line to vary the
flow of your exercises and strengthen your
dog's reliability with the STAY command.
This exercise flows from a short lead series
and will sharpen your dog's focus as he
will initially consider his freedom once the
short lead is removed. An impulse to
break will be self-corrected as he hits the
end of the lead. By letting this lead system
correct your dog and weighing in only to
reinforce cooperation, your dog will learn
to focus on your direction over the weight
of the leash.
Distance Control
Tie a ten-foot line to a tree or post and secure all knots. Leave the line on
the ground and follow this sequence:
1 Warm up with five minutes of regular on-leash practice.
2 Stop your dog next to the tree line and discreetly attach it to his buckle col-
lar. Remove his regular leash and place it on the ground in front of him.
Keep your hands free.
3
 Command STAY and walk ten feet away. Extend your distance as your dog
gains control. Run your fingers through your hair and swing your arms gen-
ty back and forth to emphasize that he is off-leash.
4As your dog improves, practice an out-of-sight SIT-STAY. Practice DOWN
from a SIT-STAY. You can also practice the command cOME, but never call it 
from a distance greater than the line will reach.
Note: ff your dog darts for a quick getaway, wait until he is about to hit the end of
the line before you shout NO.Return him to the original position and repeat the
exercise at a closer range.
123
Use a
Long Line
You can use your long line outside as a training tool when you're supervising your dog's freedom.
stick or a ball, and investigate your surroundings together. Avoid overcommanding; just hang out
and enjoy some free time together. Every five minutes, position yourself near the line and issue a
command enthusiastically.
WAIT
Command your dog to stop in his tracks, varying the distance between you. All he
must do when he hears this command is stop. If he chooses to sit or come back
to you, do not discourage him, but it is not a requirement.
the line and say NO. when he is forced to stop, say WAIT and praise his forced
cooperation.
NAME
This command directs your dog to stop, turn around, and make eye contact with
you. He does not need to come or stay; he simply needs to check in. If he does,
throw your arms up in praise. If he ignores you, step on the leash and say NO.
Say his name again as you run a short distance in the opposite direction or toss
your head.
COME
COME is the canine equivalent of huddle. It is the ultimate command of recon-
nection. Make sure that you've mastered WAlT and NAME before putting it all
together with this one. Initially, call out your dog's name while standing near the
long line. If he doesn't listen, step on the line and say NO. when he looks at you,
direction. Kneel and open your arms to welcome him and enforce the actual
reconnection. If he keeps running, step on the line and say NO as he reaches the
end. Say COME again and reel or welcome him in when he gets to you.
124
Emergency
DOWN
The Invisible Leash
chapter,
This exercise can be a real lifesaver-it
gets your dog to drop like a shot. The
reaction is ancestral-the leader of a
wolf pack makes a sound that sends
the whole pack to the den for cover.
Your dog must DOWN comfortably
(see page 93) before you can start
practicing this exercise. In the begin-
ning, it can be a little confusing, so be
patient and positive throughout the
training process.
Out-of-the-Blue DovN
While standing next to your unsuspecting dog, suddenly command DowN in
a life-threatening tone (the type of tone you would use if a loved one were
about to walk off a cliff. Point toward the ground as you do so.
 Kneel down quickly and help your dog down if he looks confused. To rein-
force the point, act like you're being bombed, too.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
125
Emergency
DOWN
(continued)
3 When your dog begins to catch on and act independently, extend your dis-
tance from him. Someday, this exercise could halt a treacherous situation or
save your dog's life-for instance, if you were ever separated by a road and
his safety were threatened by an oncoming vehicle.
Note: This is a very stressful exercise.Practice only two emergency DOWNs a day.
It's all a mind game at this stage. You must be positive, structured,
and mentally tough. You're the leader--now's the time to show it.
Your dog's anticipating your behavior as you try to anticipate his.
Stand tall, command confidently, and don't be afraid to be goofy
 and have a little fun.
126
Default
Behavior
The Invisible Leash
chapter
Eventually you will come to a place with your dog where you'll notice that his cooperation is a given,
no commands required. This is a wonderful sign of a dog who has internalized your direction to
the point that he hears it automatically and in your absence. You need to be very consistent to get
to this level. If your dog is at all uncertain about what he should do, he is not ready for this step.
Recognize Default Behavior
Here are some telltale default behaviors:
● He stops automatically at the door
and waits for your permission to go.
●He walks next to you without being
told to HEEL
● He lies down automatically at
mealtimes.
●He knows to lie down under your
chair or at your side when out in
public.
●He circles back and checks in with
you while you're hiking, no COME
necessary.
 Don't forget to praise his cooperation at
these times!
In some instances, you can encourage
default behavior. when you approach a
door, pause; if your dog doesn't stop with
you, tug the leash gently and say NO. If he
knows the direction, you will notice that he
steps back in an effort to contain himself.
If he continues, he doesn't know the direc-
tion well enough to respond without a ver-
bal cue. Keep practicing!
Has your dog internalized walking near
you? Take him out on his leash and begin
your normal routine without commanding
HEEL. Does he pull ahead or sniff around?
If so, tug the leash and say No. Does he step back to your side? If so, praise and reward him. If not, you'll need to continue
with your verbal commands for a bit longer.
When you sit down with company or when you're in town, does your dog sit or lie down under you without being told? If so.
praise him. If not, tug the leash, say NO, and remind him of your expectations.
127
8
chapter
Socialization Plus
One of the most valuable things you can do with your dog is to socialize
her α lot! The more exposure she has to different people, places, sur-
faces, and settings, the more comfortable she will be in your world. And
the earlier you start, the more easily she will adapt to a wide variety of
experiences. At around four months of age, a puppy develops a sense of
"stimulus memory," which greatly limits her openness to new experi-
ences. Whenever possible expose your puppy to new stimulus, inocu-
lated dogs, and safe, controlled situations. This is not to say that an older
dog won't tolerate new stimuli; it's just that she may be more wary or
defensive in unfamiliar situations. These reactions are not bad or
abnormal-fear/defensiveness is nothing more than a lack of exposure
and trust in your direction. In the previous chapters we discuss commu-
nication and training as steps to help you organize your dog's experi.
ence. As you venture out use any and all familiar commands in order to
help your dog/puppy feel safe and to normalize new experiences.
People
130
Places
134
Other Dogs
136
Other Animals
.138
Things
.140
Surfaces
142
Stimulation
143
People
Your dog will pick up many cues from you when meeting new people. If you're uncomfortable with
children, your dog will be, too. If men in uniform make you tense, you'll send that message right
down the leash. Be mindful of this: your dog will convey her emotions differently. Whereas you
probably wouldn't bite a small child who was crowding you, your dog might.
A better plan is to contain your concerns and expose your dog to new people in a controlled set-
ting to ensure that she will be accepting and remain calm.
Exercise and feed your dog before venturing out. Place her in a training collar (see pages 32-34) and leash, and use familiar
words to guide her and make her feel safe. HEEL, WAIl, and STAY are three top favorites:
● HEEL reminds your dog to pause and await further instruction.
●  WAlT instructs your dog to stand behind you, not in front.
· STAY lets your dog know that you're in control and that the best action is to be still.
Your dog's first reactions to strangers will be pronounced. Excitement is the norm. Calm handling sets the best example, and
your dog will relax the more she is exposed. if her reaction is stressed use the table below to determine if she is being domi-
 nant aggressive or is fearful. watch for these signs:
Body
Fearfu!
Dominant/Aggressive
Eye contact
Eyes dart back and forth; constantly avoiding focus
 Stares at the stranger; lacks trust in their intent
Body language
Body pulled way back in fear
Leaned forward in a protective stance; her focus is not
on your reaction
Tail
Down low under the belly or arched high on alert;
Arched above rump; still or short and rapid wags
she is distressed
Lips
Pulled back, facial and body tension
Pursed/growling
If you can't lessen the intensity of your dog's reactions within a few outings, call a professional trainer for guidance.
130
Socialization Plus
chapter
CHILDREN
If your dog is leery of children, introduce her to their activities and noise
! Allepadsa noA ypeoidde o uapyp molle zou oa punoisheid e ieau
you don't know them! Gradually walk closer and sit quietly with your dog
until she is more familiar. Use a Gentle Leader if the fear does not go
peyp susis ane Aeme sund pue suyp! d!l--sjeugis s,sop anoA peay Aeme
she's had enough.
THE ELDERLY
Older people may present a concern for your dog. Our odor changes
as we age, and we have less voluntary muscle control. Teach your dog
to stay at your heel (using the directions HEEL and wAIT) and introduce
older people by taking their hands in yours and letting your dog sniff
them together.
GENDER
If your dog is unaccustomed to men, she may grow up leery of them,
especially if her only exposure to them has been brief and noninteractive
(such as with mailmen and landscapers). To prevent this, bring her out 
 as often as possible and introduce her to men of all ages. Encourage a
 DOWN-STAY and ask that the man feed her a favorite treat that you've
brought along.
The same can be said for a dog raised in a home where women are
absent. Once your dog is comfortable greeting members of the opposite
sex, teach her GO SAY HELLO by pointing (page 143) to the new person
and let her approach them on her own.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
131
People
(continued)
SIZES
 People come in many sizes and shapes. Often a trip to the city or a busy
town will help condition your dog to the variety.
RACES
Dogs are not racist, but they do note changes in skin coloration and odor.
If your community is not integrated, bring your dog into environments
where she will have ample exposure to people of every race. Use a SIT-STAY
and treats to help her make the link that everyone is a friend. lf you get a
home delivery from a person of a different race, use that as a time to
improve your dog's greeting skills as well as to socialize her to people of
different ethnicities.
PEOPLE WITH SPORTING EQUIPMENT
Athough you might know a family member geared up for sporting play.
your dog may not. where vision is our strongest sense, it is a dog's weakest.
be extreme. Iry to resist soothing your dog when she's agitated as doing s0
conveys concern, not confidence. Use the direction HEEL and walk around
the outside perimeter of a sporting event with her. If sporting gear is to be
worn around your home, lay each piece of it on the floor and spend time
exploring it with your dog, showing her how to "view it' with her nose.
132
+
Socialization Plus
chapter
UNIFORMS
From police officers to mail carriers, many dogs have an innate dislike of
Aem aneudoidde ue si aiau 'auoz joguo ssop no puoaq Ao on no dn
to react to ensure that your dog views these people just like anyone else.
First, pass these people by, or practice a lesson when the mail carrier makes
until your dog is less reactive. Next, use the command HEEL to walk over
to help you offer your dog treats, holding that person's hand in yours to
convey your mutual respect.
COSTUMES
Costumes and large human-form decorations, especially around Halloween
daaid o, Aem sag ay1 dop e o sunuausug Aaa aq ueo 'sapeied ze pu
your dog's fear is to lay the object or outfit on the floor and investigate it
with her: act like another dog and sniff it together. when you meet a person
in disguise, use HEEL if you're moving and STAY if you're not. Ignore your
dog's reactions, holding the leash comfortably until she calms down.
PEOPLE HOLDING/CARRYING EQUIPMENT
OR OTHER OBJECTS
When a person is carrying an object, she can suddenly look monstrous to a
dog-even if that person is you. If the object is motorized, it can add another
dimension of caution. If your dog is caught off guard, her impulse to protect
ay daay 'ay aiedaid oi 'suoeai snopiezey o peal Aew eag ui unu o
on-leash when people are working near your home; use SIT-STAY to help
her contain her initial reaction and focus on you. If you have purchased or
plan to use an object that might be alarming, lay it on the floor in advance
and investigate it together.
133
Places
Going on new adventures can do a world of good for your relationship with your dog if you struc-
ture them well. Your dog will put a lot of pride in your worldliness and your ability to lead her safely
 into new, uncharted territories. You look big and bold, while she's still a bit unsure. Bring your dog
with you as often as possible, and expose her to many enriching environments, remembering that she
 sees new places with her nose. Whenever possible, let her sniff for a few moments to help calm her.
BUSY PARKING LOT
A good place to expose your dog to increasingly greater distractions is a super-
market parking lot. Start at the periphery, away from much of the distraction.
Work through some of your early SiT-STAY and HEEL lessons. Gradually move
closer to the market as your dog's focus improves.
CITY VS. COUNTRY
Whether you live in the city or the country, the opposite location can be shocking.
It's ideal if you can expose your dog to the different setting at a young age.
Keep a city dog on a long leash and let her sniff the country to her heart's con-
tent, but keep a country dog at your side on leash, as the city noises will easily
overwhelm her.
OFFICE
If you have control over your work environment, set up a corner in it for your dog
with a mat, toys, chews, and a secured leash if she can't sit still initially. Give her 
attention for being calm, and work through her initial anxieties when the office is
free of people or the store is closed.
134
Socialization Plus
chapter
OTHER PEOPLE'S HOMES
Many dogs pee shortly after being brought into someone else's home. Often sur.
prising to humans, it makes complete sense from a dog's perspective: new situa.
tions make her uneasy, and urinating spreads her scent, making her feel more at
home. Guide your dog into new homes, encouraging WAlT and OKAY through all
doorways, and give her a familiar mat and bone to occupy her by your side.
TOWN
up all day or is undersocialized. Letting her have the leash and pull you left and
right is wrong. It's disruptive to other people, overwhelming to your dog, and not
enjoyable for you. Using your commands (from previous chapters) and structuring
the experience from the beginning can make the difference between a positive
town adventure and chaotic one.
If, while strolling, you'd like to stop at a cafe or outdoor deli, fold
the leash up neatly and sit on it, giving your dog just enough
freedom to lie comfortably. If you are able, lead your dog under
your legs or table, combining a new direction with an old one:
UNDER-DOWN.
135
Other
Dogs
Socializing your dog with other dogs can be an exciting experience. The key is to understand how
much your dog depends on your body language to communicate to her and make her feel safe. In
return, you'll need to understand hers. When first meeting each other, dogs must determine a few
establish a social hierarchy. Here's a guideline of introductions, what to expect, and when to interfere.
Allow Them to Introduce Themselves
The best introductions are made either on
a loose lead, such as a long line, or off-.
leash: dogs need space to check each other
out and communicate in their own private
language. Human tensions and interference
will confuse them and may skew their reac-
tions. Consider taking the dogs to a field or
a park to meet. Although tensions may
arise initially, when left to their own devices
they will work it out.
When dogs greet
● They approach one another from the
side;
● They often circle, sometimes with the
hair on their backs raised, to deter-
mine who will be in charge;
They may flash their teeth, snarl, or
jump on each other; all signs of nor.
 mal interactions in their attempts to
 get along.
When they've finished with the initial intro-
duction, you may notice that they lower
themselves into a submissive posture to
play, grab a stick or a toy, or begin sniffing
and marking the surrounding location.
Puppies are a special case. Puppies up to six months of age don't act like other dogs and are nurtured and forgiven for many
"bad" behaviors for which an older dog would be corrected, such as stealing a toy or biting. They often approach straight on,
in a lowered, submissive posture. Piddling is a sign of respect. If a dog has not been socialized well with puppies, she may
consider their chaotic behavior threatening and attack or avoid them.
136
Socialization Plus
chapter
Know when to Interfere
If both dogs are trying to dominate one another and their vocalizations are
escalating to the point of concern, you may separate them calmly. Do not
shout or get physical, as your involvement will be seen as confrontational
and will fuel their aggression. Instead, spray them with water or a blaster.
You may also, with another person to handle the second dog, pull them
Pull them up and away from each other.
FAQ
My dog is comfortable meeting new dogs off-leash, but
on-leash, it's a different story: she gets vicious, and [
literally have to drag her away. How do I keep this from
happening?
This is a common reaction. Off-leash, your dog can body posture
freely with other dogs in their mutual efforts to get to know one
other. On-leash, your efforts to "hold" her throw her body into an
unnaturally defensive stance. If the other dog is on-leash, too,
expect confusion all around.
137
Other
Animals
Consider other animals your dog may see on your walks or visits together. Make a master list,
decide on your plans of action for eachon-leash or offand share your ideas with everyone
involved in your dog's care. If you are caught unaware, your reaction may be impulsive and may
actually encourage a more exaggerated response from your dog the next time around.
First, make a list of all the animals you
might encounter: cats, squirrels, rabbits,
ducks, geese, farm animals, guinea pigs,
and so on. Include indoor pets as well as
wild critters your dog might see outdoors.
The goal when you and your dog see these
animals together is for your dog to pay
more attention to you than to the animal.
When you tell your dog WAIT, HEEL, or
COME, she will heed your direction above
her impulse to chase the creature. Reaching
this level of focus takes a high level of
maturity and training, but the foundations
of such respect should start today. Each
time your dog is more focused on the ani-
mal than on you, step away from her and
call her name. Does she follow you? If not,
tug her leash and say NO. Repeat this
process as often as necessary to get her
attention.
FAQ
e pou s! yo dop A sias jeya payeoidde aie am uaym pnoqe peim
sive and pulls on the leash, when otherwise she's playful.
The leash is putting her body in a compromised pose, which is aggravating to
say the least. A dog running at you is also an overwhelming sight. Combining
these creates a fight-or-flight reaction, and since flight is out of the question,
your dog must hunker down. Teach her a strong heel and review the attention
h on sop inoA pujwal saupeoidde sop lauo ayp uaun la ased uo asiiaxa
and move quickly out of what this dog perceives as his territory. The other dog
will refrain from attack, saving his energies for a more formidable foe.
138
Socialization Plus
chapter
Other directions that are useful to condition your dog toward a greater tolerance for other animals are outlined in the follow-
ing table:
Command
Response
HEEL
Your dog must walk a step behind you when you're passing or surrounded by
live distractions.
WAIT
This command tells your dog to stop, on-leash or off, and contain her impulses
until you release her with OkAy.
SIT-STAY
This second-level containment skill encourages focus and can be paired with
bracing (see page 79) to help your dog ground herself when she's overexcited.
DOWN
This is a difficult containment exercise, but once your dog respects it, it's a mar-
velous way to help her relax when stimulated. An ideal time to practice this skill
would be when you're visiting a home where animals abound.
COME
Although full off-leash focus on this direction is not expected before social
maturity (a year to two years), it's a skill to continue working on. If your dog is
not reliable, keep her on a long line, and if she's entranced by another animal,
call her name as you move quickly in the opposite direction.
It's very hard for your dog to contain her chasing impulse--it's like
asking a person not to chase a one hundred dollar bill floating by in
the wind. Give your dog some suitable "game" alternatives (see
chapter 9), and take her to an enclosed area where you can let her
chase and play without interference.
139
Things
Condition your dog to household
objects that she doesn't see every
day--balloons, strollers, grocery carts,
umbrellas, garden hoses, and so on.
Although a floating balloon heralds a
celebration to you, your dog may be
caught off guard by the strange sight.
Dogs in this state of alert are known
to bark, look fearful, or displace their
confusion onto a person or object by
snapping or jumping.
Set-Up Situations
If your dog is spooked, find her Red Zone--the distance from the object at
which she feels comfortable--and work with her there. To condition your
dog to new objects, follow these steps:
1 At an unstressful time, place the foreign object in the middle of the floor.
 Walk your dog by it without seeming to pay attention to it or to her reaction.
If it makes her nervous, increase your distance from the object
3 Walk by repeatedly until she is less reactive.
 Let her leash drop, and go up to the
object and investigate it as if you were
another dog.
Do not force your dog to follow you-just
let her observe you.
 When she approaches the object, stay
very calm. Pet her after she relaxes. Feed
her food rewards if she will take them.
140
Socialization Plus
chapter
Objects that move, like grocery carts and wheelchairs, can be particularly
startling to a dog. Remind HEEL and walk your dog at a gradually dimin-
ishing distance from the moving object until she feels more comfortable.
Investigate the object together while it's still.
Objects that have unfamiliar shapes or that suddenly change from one
shape to another can generate a strong startle response in a dog. The best
way to integrate the object into your dog's world is to leave it out for sev-
eral days. Leave treats on or by it, and investigate the object yourself to
showbothcomfortand confidence.
Many dogs are uncomfortable walking on or near grates. They are wary of
both the grate's crossed pattern and its dark spaces; dogs do not have
depth perception like humans do. If you soothe or drag your dog over to a
grate, you may create a lifelong phobia.Instead, slow it down. Stand on or
look at her calmly and reward her.
141
Surfaces
Dogs are sensitive to surfaces like gravel, ice, pavement, and tile to varying degrees until they are
conditioned to them. Your dog depends on her equilibrium and balance in interpreting her sur-
roundings. Pair that with her inability to reason a surface change, and the result is often a startle
reaction when her ground surface changes suddenly. Be mindful of this when you're navigating
with your dog, and take time to acclimate her to new surfaces using food, toys, patience, and praise.
Many dogs do not adjust well to hard, unforgiving surfaces--they offer nothing for
-id peald o uag sey sop Aem ano o uoean ised anos yi dsis o sed ia
cate, or drag her across such a surface, your attention has reinforced her fear. Be
patient. Spread towels across the floor to provide a magic carpet; then down-
be near you.
Tubs and sinks feel very unsafe to many dogs--especially those who don't like
feeling when they try to move. when you have to bathe your dog, lay a towel
down or use a tub mat to help your dog feel more secure.
If your dog is surface sensitive, wooden stairs will undo her. Stairs throw off a
dog's balance, and although she can readjust, the added loss of sure footing will
duce your dog to walking up and down wooden ones as described on page 70.
142
Stimulation
Socialization Plus
chapter
Take a moment to look at stimulating environments from your dog's perspective: fast movements,
human activity that is far more elevated than she's used to experiencing, and a sense of disconnec-
tion from youespecially when you're one of the participants. If bringing your dog with you to
activities is new, don't expect a smooth transition. Your dog will need your help to maintain her
sense of stability as you go from place to place.
Dogs are territorial by nature: if they lived in
the wild, they would not travel outside a
given zone, known as their territory. Within
their zone, they'd know each tree, rock, and
field intimately. Adapting to sudden
dhanges in the world does not come natu-
rally to them. And yet exposure and social-
ization is something they tolerate and
enjoy; in turn, you can look courageous and
brave since you'll be leading your dog into
these situations. Make a list of stimulating
activities or places that you are likely to
experience with your dog--after-school
games, parades, picnics, parks, train sta-
tions, etc.--and think about how you can
prepare your dog for each of them.
● When you bring your dog to social
activities, use WAlT at the car, and
SIT-STAY and HEEL to teach her to stay
by your side. If the opportunity arises
to greet another person or dog, do s0
in a civilized manner: have your dog WAlT and then release her with GO SAY HELLO. When time is up, call her to HEEL.
 If you live near a train station, socialize your dog to the experience and teach her to stay clear of the tracks. Work with
her at increasingly close distances to the platform, using HEEL and STAY to help organize her focus and contain her anxi-
lun zeaday 'os suiop al!ym sop anoA ze yool sou oa saljnq e Aq t!y uaaq aa,noA ysnoyn se sugnous ujen ayn wouj Aeme
your dog knows to run from the tracks.
●A veterinarian's office can be a super-stimulating place. The smells are familiar but often repellent. There are often multi-
ple species to be found. And most dogs learn early on that they don't want to be there. Bring a familiar blanket and toys
so that your dog has a more positive association. Have your dog wAlT at the door until she calms down. Spread her
blanket underneath you in the waiting room and instruct your dog UNDER. Use STAY if she fidgets. when you go to the
exam room, spread the blanket on the examination table, and use your words for familiarity and focus.
143
9
chapter
Games and Tricks
The best part of sharing life with a dog is the fun you'll have together.
Although training and hard work seem to make up a large part of the
early stages in your relationship, the real goal is mutual respect so that
you can-at every golden opportunity from here on out-play.
There's no better way to bond with your dog than to integrate les-
sons into your day through play training. The right games and tricks will
teach your dog that focusing on you is fun!
Runaway Come
146
Two-Ball Toss
.147
Treat Cup Name Game
.148
Toy Along. Tag Along
.149
Swing Toss
.150
Soda Bottle Soccer
.151
If You're Happy and You Know It .
.152
BOW .
153
CRAWWL
.154
PAW
.155
OVER
.157
THROUGH
158
BRING
.159
GIVE
160
SPEAK and SHHH
161
PLAY DEAD
162
Roll Over
163
Runaway
Come
You can use a treat cup or a clicker and treats to encourage your dog's
motivation in the Runaway Come game. This game encourages a positive
association to coming when called.
Stand five to ten feet from your dog; keep him on a long line if the space is
not enclosed or if he's unfocused.
 Call his name as you run away from him, shaking the treat cup if you're car-
rying one.
3 Turn to face your dog, treat, and hug him as you say CoME! GOOD cOME!
Add a twist: Call your dog's name as you duck out of sight. He'll learn to look for
you when he can't see you.
146
Two-Ball
Toss
Games and Tricks
chapter
This game will teach your dog many things: retrieving skills, focus, and,
most important, that you're the one to watch. Start with two similar
objects, such as two balls.
 Get your dog excited about one object, and then toss it.
2
 Praise his enthusiasm for chasing, and run back from him if he moves 
toward you.
Stop focusing on him right away.
Bring out the other object and play with it like it's the most important thing in
the world, ignoring your dog. He'll want what you have. Continue to ignore
him for ten seconds.
 Suddenly notice him and encourage him to SIT or WAIT. Throw your object
and praise him again.
6.
 Pick up the first ball that he's dropped and start over again from the top!
147
Treat Cup
Name Game
To make a treat cup, simply fill a cup that has a lid with a hole in it halfway
with broken bits of your dog's favorite treats or cereal. Strategically place
several of these cups around the house and shake them throughout the
day as you call your dog's name. Once he associates the sound with pleas-
ure, teach him the names of everyone in your home.
1 Start with two people (in this example, Robin and Sarah-their dog's name is
Daisy) standing six feet apart.
②SayDAISY.
3
 When Daisy arrives, have Robin instruct her to SIT before giving her a treat.
4
Have Robin send Daisy back: DAISY, GO TO SARAH.
 Sarah now repeats the calling sequence and, after treating, sends Daisy back
to Robin.
6
 Repeat this process five times.
As your dog catches onto the game, you may include other people and/or
extend your distance or hide in between callings. This game is a great way
to encourage enthusiastic CovES outdoors.
148
Toy Along.
Tag
Along
Games and Tricks
chapter
 This game encourages following skills in young puppies and smaller
breeds.
1 Tie a small toy/bone to one end of a leash
Clip or tie the other end of the leash to your ankle.
 Walk around. If your dog begins to tug hard at the toy/bone, simply unclip
the lead from your ankle and secure it to an immovable object.
149
Swing
Toss
This game is a great way to burn up your dog's excess energy. It can be
played indoors or out.
Tie an empty bottle or hollow toy onto a five- to fifteen-foot rope.
2 Lace the opening of the bottle/toy with a creamy spread.
Swing the toy around you.
 Run with the toy dragging behind you.
 Toss the toy into the brush and wiggle it like a small animal.
Note: f your dog tugs on it, tie the toy around a secure object and tug with him-
notagainsthim.
150
Soda Bottle
Soccer
Games and Tricks
chapter
 This game is great for athletic dogs who've developed a habit of chasing
interactively. Play it with one or more soda bottles or balls.
Kick one bottle or ball playfully near your dog.
 When he alerts to you, kick the object for him to chase.
 Immediately divert your attention to the other bottle or ball and repeat the
pattern.
FAQ
What about tug of war and all-out wrestling?
These games convey the wrong message, teaching your dog to chal.
lenge and defend himself in opposition to you. Avoid these games
in light of the many other options you have. If your dog loves to tug.
tie a toy onto an immovable object, like a tree or a banister, and tug
with him.
151
If You're Happy and
You Know It
Sometimes the best tricks are the ones that your dog does spontaneously
Work with friends and family to come up with fun phrases to elicit natural
responses.
1 IF YOU'RE HAPPY AND YOU KNOW IT WAG YOUR TAIL! Said in a fun, happy
tone, this is a surefire winner.
7
 SAD PUPPY! When your dog lays a sleepy head on the floor or on your lap,
it is quite endearing.
3
 PUSH IT! When your dog noses an object or a toy, you can quickly expand it
to a rolling game of ball, or even to closing an open cupboard.
ties, he'll make the association between the word and the action, and you'll be able
to direct him to repeat them anytime.
152
BOW
Games and Tricks
chapter
The easiest way to introduce this trick is
simply to catch your dog in the act of
stretching and say BOw. For a snappy sig-
nal, you can bow to your dog as he's
stretching out. After five to ten stretch-BOW
sequences, practice this routine to tie it all
together:
1. Take your dog into a nondistracting
environment. Bring irresistible treats.
2. Instruct STAND, holding your hand or
finger under his belly.
3. Now lower the treat from your dog's
nose to the ground as though you
were luring him into a down position.
4. As your dog lowers himself onto his
elbows say Bow and treat and praise
him!
5. After several repetitions you'll notice
his enthusiasm. Slowly remove your
hand from his belly.
6. Next, stand in front of him and do a
BOw-gesture as you move your hand
to the floor with a treat.
 7. Phase off the treats intermittently
within two weeks.
Now be creative--think of all the phrases that will be complimented by your dog's new gesture. By teaching a signal with the
word you'll soon be able to prompt the reaction with a flicker of your hand while you say phrases, such as the following:
● "I am sooo tired.." (the bowing motion looks like a tired stretch too)
+ "Time for bed .. . take a bow!"
"May I have this dance?"
iopnoA op MOH，
● "Say hello to Grandma!
Add more phrases to the list and teach your dog the response by signaling a bow.
TIP
Many dogs also bow down when they are excited or playful into what is
known as a play bow. Practice monkey see, monkey do. Get down on
your hands and knees and lean forward on your elbows. Excite your dog
with a toy or by moving around in a mock play bow position until he gets
excited, too. Say Bow if he copies your posture.
153
CRAWL
Dogs love to do this action whether you're asking them to or not. It pro.
vides a perfect opportunity for a belly-to-floor scratch and a good stretch.
1 Sit on the floor with your knees bent to form a tunnel. (You can also practice
under objects like chairs and tables.)
2 Instruct DowN in front of your knees.
3
 With a treat, lure your dog under your legs as you say CRAWL.
 Praise and give him a treat, adjusting your legs so that he can't stand under-
neath them.
5
 Once your dog is catching on and crawling with delight, lure him forward on
 an open floor.
 Hold your hand just above his shoulder blades and push on his pressure
point if he attempts to stand.
 Gradually introduce distance, praising and rewarding all cooperation.
154
PAW
Games and Tricks
chapter
iu sem Aaup se Aeeu se uoguane log noa sued ,'anissaidxa-med,
tails. If your dog fits this description, you only need to pair the word with
the behavior for your dog to make the association. If not, you can teach it
easily.
1 Take your dog aside, holding a treat in your left hand. Instruct him to SIT.
With your right hand, tap his wrist joint gently.
When he lifts his paw, slide your hand underneath and say PAW as you give
him the treat.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
155
PAW
(continued)
Soon your dog will be a willing cooperator. Now you can practice some
variations on the theme.
HIGH-FIVE
Gradually rotate your hand until your fingers are pointed up and your dog
is slapping your open palm!
WAVE
When your dog is hitting the mark consistently, hold your hand back a few
inches, and as he lifts his paw, say WAvE as you wave at him.
TIP
FAQ
Want to teach wave at a distance?
 e rof yse i ia piioxa os sas sop ay
First, practice in a quiet area using STAY to gain
five, he paws me with both feet! what am I
distance one foot at a time. Say WAvE as you ges-
doing wrong?
ture, initially praising your dog for the slightest
Nothing, perhaps. Say HIGH FIVE in a normal tone, as
lift of a paw. Treat and praise generously when start-
he'll pick up on your excitement, and hold a hand in
ing out.
front of one leg to block it. Also consider a HiGH TEN!
156
OVER
Games and Tricks
chapter
There's no debating that dogs love to jump. To give your dog an appropri-
ate outlet, teach him OvER and all its variations.
1
 Set a broomstick over two low obstacles.
2
 Take your dog to it and let him sniff it.
 Walk back five paces and say OvER as you run with your dog on-leash and
Over the hurdle.
Continue until your dog feels safe enough to run and jump by himself.
Toss toys to encourage him to go over the jump alone.
6
Gradually increase the height of the jump, but do not raise it above his elbow
until he is more than one year old.
157
THROUGH
Teach your dog to jump through a hoop, your arms, or a tire swing.
 Ask a helper to hold a hoop against the broom obstacle from the OvER trick.
Toss the toy through the hoop and say THROUGH instead of OVER.
 Repeat this step until your dog feels comfortable jumping through the circle.
3
 Gradually lower the broom until it lies on the floor.
 Begin taking the hoop to various locations and saying THROUGH to direct
your dog through any loop.
158
BRING
Games and Tricks
chapter
To teach your dog to bring things to you, do not take things away from
him when he does. He will lose interest. Instead, make a big deal of prais-
ing your dog for coming back to you with the object. If you need to take
the object away, give him a handful of treats or show him a more tempt-
ing substitute. For now, follow these techniques:
1
Take your dog into a smallroom or hallway. Toss an object and let him inter-
act with it. Sit on the floor and cheer him on. If he comes to you, scratch his
he is by your side.
Once your dog is enjoying this game and is interacting with you with the toy
in his mouth, take him to a larger room or a long hallway. Toss the object
and wait for him to grasp it in his mouth. Now call his name as you run away
 from him clapping your hands. Say BRING as he joins you, and praise him 
enthusiastically.
 Begin to use the same runaway technique in larger areas, saying BRING the
moment your dog grasps the object. Remember to give him a treat or
exchange the object with another if you must remove it from his mouth.
159
GIVE
Teach your dog the command GlvE. when your dog hears this command,
he will spit out whatever is in his mouth. Fill a cup with treats, use a clicker
 to emphasize this routine when possible, and follow these steps:
3aio Aes pooy sly Bugea no Aol e uo Bumayp s! ay allm Sop anon ypeoiddy 1
offer a treat after each click. Soon, your dog wilook up as you approach.
Also use this technique if your dog has one of your possessions in his mouth.
(See page 186 for suggestions on inappropriate chewing.)
 Toss a toy for your dog. Approach him as he plays with it, shaking the cup or
Bup
Now join the directions BRING and GIVE. Start in a small room and progress
to an open area. Toss a toy and run from your dog as you say BRING. When
he reaches you, say GIvE as you click/treat. Phase off treating intermittently,
but always praise your dog's cooperation enthusiastically.
160
SPEAK
and .
SHHH
Games and Tricks
chapter
Is your dog vocal? Teach him to do two things on cue: bark and stop
barking.
1 Prompt your dog to bark. Bait him with an object, bark at him, ring the
doorbell-whatever works.
As he barks, say SPEAK and flash a snazzy hand signal.
3
After one to three barks, say YES and offer him a treat.
 Continue this exercise until he learns the signal.
Teach him SHHH! As you feed him the treat, say SHHH-GOOD.
6
Practice SPEAK and SHHH together, varving the numbers of barks between
the two.
161
PLAY
DEAD
Teaching your dog to sit sill may seem like an impossible task, but once
he learns the commands DowN and STAY, you're only a few lessons away
from this clever trick.
1 Instruct DowN and pat your dog gently until he's calm.
 Scratch his ribs to get him to relax to one side.
3
 Gently scratch under his ears and guide his head to the floor.
When he is in the "dead dog" position, instruct STAY-PLAY DEAD.
5
 Gradually increase the duration your dog must lie still before releasing him
with OKAY and a reward and praise.
162
Roll
Over
Games and Tricks
chapter
This trick is fun for everyone--dogs who are agile enjoy flipping over. It's
fun to teach, and it's a great crowd-pleaser!
Note: Before teaching this trick to your dog, ask yourself: Does my dog enjoy
rolling onto his back? ff so, proceed. f not, choose another trick to perform.
1
 Instruct DowN and pat your dog until he rolls to one side.
Take a treat and guide his head over his back by drawing an invisible line
 from under his chin to behind his ear.
Help his legs over and praise him wildly for
achieving the goal.
Continue to spot him like a gymnast until he's
eagerly participating.
5
Gradually move him into a standing position,
waving your arms in a motivational, sweeping
signal.
163
10
chapter
The Civilized Companion
There's nothing like a well-mannered dog-fun to share and show off
she is a true pleasure to have around. children are delighted to see and
pet your dog. Doors open for you everywhere, and people learn your
dog's name before they even shake your hand.
On the flip side, a poorly mannered dog is overwhelming and sad.
These dogs have little impulse control and often act fike bratty children
desperate for attention. Although you may learn to tolerate and love
your dog regardless of her bad habits, other people won't.
The potential to be a well-mannered dog lies within your dog: any
dog can learn impulse control and good behavior. Her ability to succeed
depends on your consistency in teaching her. If you are committed and
diligent in your teaching. both you and your dog will benefit, and you'll
have a lifetime of enjoyment together.
Doorway Etiquette
.166
Digging (lf You Must)
169
Greeting
170
Housetraining
.172
Mouthing
.174
Chewing
.176
Staying Off the Furniture (Or Not)
.178
Visiting
179
Doorway
Etiquette
The doorway is where it all starts. If
you let your dog barge in and out in
front of you, you're communicating
that she needs to be in charge. Instead,
you must have your dog wait for you to
lead her in and out. She will be calmer
and more centered throughout the day
if you do so consistently, and especially
more responsive when company arrives.
When your dog is free in your home,
attach a short finger lead to her collar
and reinforce these exercises whenever
anyone goes in or out.
Teach Your Dog WAlT-OKAY
 Bring your dog on her training collar and leash to the threshold of a door-
way. As you approach the doorway, say WAIT
 If she stops, praise her. If she doesn't, say NO and tug her back to your side.
3
 Reinstruct WAIT, saying OKAY and leading her forward only after she has
complied.
4 Go to your front door and repeat steps 1-3, both going in and coming out.
Note: f you have a fenced-in environment, there may be times when you don't
reed to accompany your dog out the door. in that case, instruct WAft, pause for
two to fifteen seconds, and then release her to exit on her own with OKAy.
166
10
The Civilized Companion
chapter.
Teach Your Dog PLACE
Your ultimate goal is for your dog to stay in your house even if the door is
left wide open. This is not a hard concept for her to learn if you enforce it
consistently with the following exercise:
 Establish a "greeting station," a location five to ten feet from a door to which
you can send your dog when company comes to call. You will need to secure
a short leash to something immovable in this area, such as a banister, door-
knob, or piece of furniture. (If there is nothing else to secure a leash to, you
can always screw a metal hook to the baseboard.)
2 At a quiet time, send your dog to her selected spot, saying PLACE.
3 Secure her to the greeting station and tell her to STAY.
Go to the door and open it. Stand there and do not respond to any commo-
tion. When your dog is calm, return to her and praise her quietly.
5
Repeat this process until your dog is comfortable with this exercise.
6
Progress to gradual departures. Leave the door open and go out for a
minute, then two. You may stand out of sight or do a task nearby.
Do not focus on your dog when she is anxious.If you come in and she is still
restless, simply stand nearby and ignore her until she calms down.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
167
Doorway Etiquette
(continued)
Welcome Visitors Calmly
When visitors knock or ring your bell and regardless of your dog's
reaction:
Instruct your dog PLACE and lead her there with a short finger lead.
2
 Secure her to her greeting station and tell her to STAY. Do not let her interact
with or greet anyone until she has calmed down.
TIP
 Is your dog voicing her protest, barking
If your visitors are willing, ask them to
wildly when secured away from the
close shop--fold their arms across their
excitement? Secure him within six to ten
face--and ignore your dog until you give
feet and ignore the barking. If it persists,
the green light. This body signal will
consider a head collar or a discreet spray
transfer, and your dog will learn quickly
correction.
that to get attention, she must sit.
168
Digging
10
(If You Must)
The Civilized Companion
chapter
Most dogs like to dig. Some dogs
must dig: it's in their genetic blue-
print. If they're not given an outlet,
they will settle for houseplants or gar-
den beds.
Dogs also dig when they want to
hide something or when they're over-
heated and need to cool off. On hot
days, make sure that you give your
dog plenty of water, access to a house
 or garage, and a cool spot in which
to lie.
Digging Etiquette
ESTABLISH AN ACCEPTABLE DIGGING SPOT
Before you discourage your dog from digging, select an area in which it is
okay for your dog to dig. It may be on your property or in a nearby field or
wooded area. Go there with your dog, say GO DIG, and dig with her. Hide
treats and bones just below the surface to reinforce the lesson that dig?
ging in this spot is okay.
DISCOURAGE DIGGING
ui dood s,sop anoA areld suissip aseinosp ot sypa leaaas An ueo nok
holes and cover them up. You can sprinkle in some red pepper for good
measure, too. If that doesn't work, try filling the hole and securing wire
mesh over the top.
Avoid gardening in front of your dog. The monkey see, monkey do maxim
applies to dogs, too.
169
Greeting
There's a civil way to greet people.
Some dogs sit calmly, others do a
funny trick or bring a toy, and still
others roll onto their backs for a
cheerful scratch. Though the delivery
varies, each of these greetings has one
thing in common: nobody's jumping!
Teach Civil Greetings
Dogs jump in greeting to get closer to your
face. Teach your dog that sitting has the same
effect. If your dog jumps when greeting you,
fold your arms over your face and look up.
When she calms down, brace her by looping
your thumb over her collar. Pet her lovingly
and teach her the meaning of SAY HELLO (to
sit calmly for greeting).
When company visits, ignore your dog until
she's calm. At this point, bring her to the visi-
tors and brace her (see above) if she's
excited or overwhelmed. Encourage her to sit 
 and stay by saying SAY HELLO.
When you're out and about, many people will want to pet your dog.
Decide ahead of time if your dog is comfortable greeting strangers. If so,
ask the person to wait until you position your dog into a SlT and brace
dun! 1w ays zeyn oadsns nos j! (ez ased) au
170
10
The Civilized Companion
chapter
There are also etiquette rules for greeting
other animals, from dogs and other small
pets to horses. Having your dog lunge and
drag you to a strange animal is not good
form.It sets the stage for impulsivity,which,
minus the leash, could put your dog in
harm's way.
If you see another person approaching with a
dog, tell your dog to HEEL and enforce it. If
they are approaching to visit, stop, put your
dog in a SiT-STAY, and wait until they are
close to release her to GO PLAY. If your dog is
unfriendly with other dogs, tell the person
 immediately to avoid any conflict.
If you are introducing your dog to another pet, determine if she will be
friendly ahead of time. Small animals can trigger a dog's prey drive (an
instinct to chase/kill), especially if she has not been socialized with that
type of animal. Use the same HEEL, SIT-STAY combo mentioned above.
TIP
If you're approached by an off-leash dog, it's best to avoid contact.
Don't look at the dog, and discourage your dog from doing so as
well. Unless the dog is friendly, she may attack if she thinks you are
in her territory. But by focusing on the ground and quickly moving
out of her perceived area, she will save her energy for a more
threatening foe.
171
Housetraining
Although I cover specific housetrain-
ing issues in chapter 1l, I will go over
basic etiquette here. Your dog can
learn at a young age to take herself to
a specific spot to eliminate when she
has to go. You use the same philoso-
phies as you would when potty train-
ing a child.
Go Outside to Potty
To train your dog to potty outdoors, pick an area (three feet by three feet
for small dogs, five feet by five feet for larger breeds) close to your door
So that your dog won't get distracted on the way to eliminate. Bring or
send her to that area consistently.
1 Specify which door your dog should use to go outside, and designate a path-
way to that door that everyone follows.
2 Teach your dog to indicate that she's at the door so that you'll know when
she has to go. Use a bell, hung at nose level, or encourage her to bark.
 Each time you go to the door to let her out, say OUTSIDE clearly. When your
dog gets to the door, encourage SPEAK (see page 161) or tap the bell.
Repeat OUTSIDE as you open the door.
 Take your dog to the designated spot. Do not walk or interact with her: She
must learn to take care of business first.
 Stand with your dog at the area for no more than five minutes.
 When she pees or poops, say GET BUSY once as she's eliminating, and then
praise her lovingly.
 If she doesn't go within five minutes and you're sure she has to go, bring
her back inside and keep her with you on a leash, carry, or isolate her in a
crate or room for fifteen minutes. Then take her out again, following the
same routine.
Note: Your dog will need to go out after a bout of play, any period of isolation,
a nap, or a feeding. How long after these activities varies based on her age and
bladder control. Routine will telfl.
172
10
The Civilized Companion
chapter
Paper Training
Paper training (or wee-wee pad training) follows much the same logic as
teaching a dog to eliminate outdoors. You'll need to pick one central loca-
tion in a private corner near your main living space, although if you live in
a large house and allow your dog to roam freely, you may need to place a
few auxiliary pads in faraway rooms until she is fully trained to go in the
one area.
1 Place four wee-wee pads in the designated area. Although you will eventually
reduce the number to one or two pads (after two weeks, remove one pad a
week until you're using only one or two), having four to start with prevents
 many initial mistakes and highlights the area visually.
2 If you have a large home, neatly place a couple of pads in frequented floors
 or wings, and use them if your dog needs to eliminate urgently.
③Take your dog to the papers, saying PAPERS, after she comes out of her crate,
she wakes from a nap, or any other time you suspect she might have to go.
Do not look at, talk to, or interact with her while she sniffs the papers.
4 If she won't focus on the papers, have her wear a drag leash and stand there
with her until she cooperates. If she still can't orient to the task, place the
papers in a bathroom or mudroom and keep her gated until she goes.
 As she's going to the bathroom, say GET BUSY. Praise her when she finishes.
6
 If she doesn't go and you're sure that she must, isolate her or keep her with
you on a leash. Take her back to her papers after fiften minutes.
Note: Do not interact with your dog when you wake up in the morming or return
home after a period of absence until after she's gone to the bathroom. Use warm,
loving, caim praise to let her know how pleased you are.
173
Mouthing
Dogs are oral by nature. They play
and interact primarily with their
mouths. Watch two dogs together and
you'll notice how much of their com-
munication centers around facial and
mouthing interactions.
You need to teach your dog that,
despite these tendencies, she may not
 mouth human skin, period. This les-
son is not hard to learn or to teach; it
just takes consistency.
Discourage Nipping
First, teach your dog an appropriate alternative to mouthing, such as
or another creamy spread on your hand and say KIsSES as your dog licks
it off.
Puppies under twelve weeks are very mouthy. Do not correct soft nipping
until they are older. Teach them to inhibit their bite by shouting OUCH
when they bite down too hard. Remember, too, that young dogs nip to
communicate needs, similar to an infant's cry. Immediately consider their
needs. Puppies nip the hardest when they need to sleep, play, or poop.
Address the need, not the nipping.
174
10
The Civilized Companion
chapter.
Also, consider the games that might be encouraging your dog to nip. Are
you playing tug of war? This game encourages confrontational interaction,
as does rough wrestling. Reconsider your game options; refer to chapter 9.
When your dog is mouthing you, avoid pulling your body away and/or
physically correcting her. Please don't trap her mouth shut or shove your
fingers down her throat, either. Doing so is both cruel and generally inef-.
fective; when it works, it's the result of fear, not understanding.
The goal is to teach your dog spatial and body respect. Practice ExCUSE
ME (see page 81) throughout the day, and leave a short lead attached to
your dog's collar at all times. when she nips you, grasp the lead to pull
her away from you. Then instruct SIl, and then KISSES.
If pulling her off sharply is ineffective, try the spray-away correction.
Without looking at or speaking to your dog, using either product listed on
Siaus eu os suiddu si sop ano ed apog au Aeids Apaansp 'st aed
unsure where the reaction came from. After she pulls away, encourage
her to give KISSES.
175
Chewing
Dogs really enjoy chewing on objects,
especially when they're young. If you
don't give your dog a suitable item to
satisfy this need, she will inevitably
chew your belongings. This will make
you frustrated, understandably, but
when you convey this frustration to
her, your dog won't understand you
and will get even more stressed out.
Dogs relieve their stress by chewing,
and so the vicious cycle begins.
Encourage Appropriate Chewing
Buy several types of chew toys and see which items your dog likes the
most. Although many veterinarians discourage "white" rawhide, as it can
break offin chunks and expand in the belly, causing gas and indigestion,
there are many other choices on the market (see page 30 for sugges-
tions).
If your dog enjoys pressed rawhide, for example, buy multiples and place
one at each play station. If one gets carried away, buried, or lost, physi-
cally tie it to an immovable object nearby. It will be reassuring to your dog
to know that she can always find her chew in the same location.
Teach your dog a cue word like BONE. whenever you see her acting rest-
less or staring at you, suggest BONE, take her to her play station, and
show her the bone.
176
10
The Civilized Companion
chapter.
If you catch your dog chewing on something that you'd rather she didn't
chew, don't make a big issue about it initially. If you do, your dog will
think you're challenging her for the object and may react defensively or
simplylearn to steal the object when you're out of sight.Many young
dogs take this reaction and turn it into a game--grab-and-go!
If your dog gets aggressive, don't interact with her. Call your veterinarian
and ask for a referral to a professional who can help you. Don't risk get-
ting bitten: once a dog bites, she's far more likely to bite again.
If your dog is grabbing things when you're out of sight, you need to keep
her in your sight for two weeks. Use the leading and stationing exercises
described in chapter 6, and remember to yell at the tempting objects, not
at your dog. In addition, spray a deterrent (see page 43) on her favorite
objects and reteach the concept of NO, as outlined on pages 84-85.
If you're playing grab-and-go, you need to learn a new game: grab-and-
show. Make treat cups as outlined on page 42 and spread them around
your home. Place your dog on a drag lead so that you have something to
step on if she darts away from you. when she takes something in her
'saypeoidde aus Jl tand noA aia Ithm Aes pue dno ayn axeys 'yanou
exchange the object for treats and say THANKS FOR SHARING. Do
the same thing even if you have to corner her and step on the leash to
catch her.
177
Staying off the
Furniture (Or Not)
Decide now whether you want your
dog to be on the furniture. A puppy is
ch so cuddly, but do you really want
your adult dog on your lap, leaving a
wake of hair and dirt? Some people
don't mind it, while others do.
Neither is wrong. What do you want?
Even if your dog is already on the
furniture, you can still lay down a few
simple guidelines to your cushion cud-
dlles. Although retraining your dog
will take some effort, most dogs prefer
regulation to chaos.
Set Rules Regarding Furniture
You may choose a no-furniture rule, select
one piece of furniture specifically for your
dog, or allow her to be everywhere. If you
select the last option, I recommend teaching
your dog to come up only when you give her
permission.
If you don't want your dog on the furniture,
designate a play station (see page 39) nearby,
and send her there when you're together. If
she tests you by jumping up, leave her on a
drag lead when she is free in the house. If
she jumps on the couch, calmly approach,
say NO, and send her to her station.
CHAIR, for example, as you lead her to the chair. Make sure that the chair
is in a central location, or she may choose you over the chair. If your dog
jumps on other furniture, either instruct her to her chair or to a play sta-
tion nearby.
If you plan to allow your dog on all the furniture, teach her to ask permis-
sion first. Leave her on a short leash, and when she approaches a piece of
furniture, instruct SlT and wAll. Vary the time you make her sit still before
inviting her UP UP. Sometimes, deny her permission and instruct her to
who won't be as thrilled as you are to share the space.
178
Visiting
10
The Civilized Companion
chapter
Before you go visiting or vacationing,
consider your dog. If she's coming
with you, she'll need her own bag
filled with her essentials. *Travel" is
not an idea that occurs to your dog,
although she would certainly rather
follow you anywhere than be left at
home without you.
Make Travel Fun
Pack familiar items so that your dog will feel at home in the new environ-
ment. Most importantly, take along her bedding, toys, and food.
When you arrive at your destination, set up one or more play stations for
her, and sit with her there for a few minutes. Make sure that the station is
in a central location so she doesn't feel left out.
While you're away from home, try to keep to your dog's regular schedule
of walks and feding. If you're going to go out without her, consider crat-
ing or isolating her in a small room while you're gone to reduce her sepa-
ration anxiety.
179
11
chapter
Crisis Management
If you're experiencing frustration with your dog, you're not alone. No
relationship is perfect; however, you can address a lot of problem
behavior by looking at the situation as your dog would and adjusting
your communication style so that your dog can better understand you.
In addition, before you discourage a behavior like mouthing. you need
to decide what you'd like the replacement behavior to be. If, for exam-
ple, your puppy is mouthing to communicate a need to eliminate, you
can teach him to ring a bell instead.
Problems are never too difficult to resolve once you look at life, and
your reactions, from your dog's perspective.
Chasing
.182
Destructive Chewing
.186
Grab-and-Go
187
Leash Pulling
.188
Housetraining Difficulties
.189
Marking
192
Nipping
.193
Jumping
.194
Mounting
.196
Separation Anxiety
.198
Stool Swallowing
.199
Stimulated Peeing
200
Timidity
201
Chasing
Dogs enjoy chasing things--it's
instinctive and fun for them. Their
early predecessor, the wolf, did it for
survival.
Your dog can learn to contain his
impulse to chase people, cars, and
 other animals, but he will need your
help. Organized setups and well-
defined displacement games, as
described in chapter 9, will help you
channel your dog's impulsiveness.
Kids
They scream, fall when pushed, and pull back when grabbed; what's not
up and decide what games they might play to help redirect your dog's
enthusiasm. Surefire hits include Soda Bottle Soccer (see page 151) and
Swing Toss (see page 150).
Next, practice the following exercise, with the dog on a six-foot lead and
then on a retractable leash or a long line.
115
 Stand just behind your dog and ask the children to enter the room and run
back and forth in front of him (not around in a circle).
The instant your dog looks as though he's ready to chase, pull back on the
leash and say NO firmly.
182
Crisis Management
chapter.
3
When the kids hear NO, they should freeze for three seconds. As they do,
instruct your dog BACK behind your heel and praise him for complying.
4 Repeat the sequence until your dog learns to contain his impulse to chase.
5
Take the exercise outside. Practice on your six-foot lead to start, quickly pro-
 gressing to standing at further distances (with a retractable leash or a long
line) from him as he catches on.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
TIP
When you're working outside, you can teach your dog to play with
aup wiy lago nos se Aes oi aseiyd e suisooup Aq peaisun palgo ue
object--GET YOUR BALL, for example.
183
Chasing
(continued)
Cats
If your dog is chasing your cat, you must first determine whether his aim is
to play with or kill the cat. If it's the latter, or you can't figure it out, call a
professional: you don't want to be mistaken. The telltale signs of predatory
intensity include a riveted focus, ears pitched forward, a stiffened body
posture, and/or an intense whine when held. Play can look similar but is
usually accompanied by a playful pant and more random body postures.
If your dog is supercharged or interested in the neighbor's kitty, teach him
the concept of NO (see page 83). If the cat lives with you, follow these
steps:
 Exercise your dog to near exhaustion.
Place him in his training leash and collar.
③ Take the cat into a small room (for example, a bathroom) and let him get
acclimated to the space with a bowl of milk, perhaps, for half an hour.
4E
Enter the room with your dog and watch closely for signs of elevated excite-
ment. If you see those signs, tug the leash and tell him NO.
If the tug has litle effect, try a spray-away correction. Be very discreet: he
must see the correction as coming from the environment, not from you.
Redirect your dog with training commands and toys.
Note: You may need to sit with the two animais in the same room for a week
before you begin to notice their mutual acceptance. Gradually introduce the pair
to one another in larger rooms.
TIP
When the dog is in a main room in which the cat has previously
enjoyed freedom, place the dog in an oversized playpen. In full view
of the dog, shower the cat with a lot of calming attention. Over a
one- to two-week period, these exercises will teach your dog to
respect your cat's personal space as well as condition your cat to
accept your dog's presence.
184
1
Crisis Management
chapter.
Vehicles
If your dog's chasing instinct is focused on
moving targets (cars, bikes, even joggers),
you need to teach him the term No in
three very defined steps:
● Inside using food and other tempta-
tions (see page 84).
峰
Outside using these same temptations
and more irresistible lures, such as
other animals, saying NO to discour-
age his focus and YEs to praise his
attention.
● In a situation in which he will face,
say, a jogger, use the sidestep correc-
tion explained on page 111: note the
moment your dog focuses on the
jogger, step to the side, and say NO
simultaneously. Encourage HEEL and
praise any attention to you, however
brief.
Repeat this sequence, gradually working
into environments where the distractions
 are more prevalent.
Wild Things
Chasing other creatures is the most common form of chasing behavior: nature is banging on the door. Although you can't
Follow the same system listed for vehicles, inserting animals in the appropriate places.
TIP
If your dog is in an enclosed environment and sets out to chase a
critter, let him. It will help him learn that the behavior itself is not
wrong, but that there is a time and a place for everything.
185
Destructive
Chewing
If your dog is chewing destructively, you need to examine the three Ws.
WHY
WHEN
WHAT
Dogs are a purposeful species. The
 When does your dog chew? when
What is your dog's focus? If it is your
fact that most of their breed-specific
you're at home but busy? Keep your
objects or clothes, separation anxiety
tendencies are no longer needed,
dog with you using the Teaching Lead
is at work; see page i98. if it is a
combined with the fact that our
methodology (see page 38) and start
table leg or other furniture, your dog
world is much faster paced than it
lessons to help create an internal
enjoys returning to the same spot;
used to be, ensures that our dogs
sense of organization and control.
find a bone he enjoys and tie it to
will experience increased isolation
 Does your dog chew in front of you
the furniture for the same reliability.
and decreased exercise, which spells
 or out of sight? Is it happening when
Just remember: everything's chew-
boredom. Dogs don't have the out-
you're out of the house? You'll need
able. You'll need to keep the house
lets that humans do to occupy their
to increase your dog's isolation in a
picked up for a while as you condi-
minds. Many of them chew their
tion your dog to a new chewing
small room, fold-out pen, or crate
frustration and boredom away.
(left with some favorite chews) in
program.
To help prevent restless chewing.
order to teach him how to relax and
increase the amount of exercise your
to give him a proper displacement
dog gets and practice daily lessons.
activity. Crating or securing your dog
when you can't watch him does
more than prevent the problem--it
helps your dog learn how to be still
by himself. A well-chosen bone or
chew toy serves as a good displace-
ment object.
186
1
Grab-and-Go
Crisis Management
chapter.
If your dog has a hint of the comedian
 in him (see page 7 for a personality
description), I'm sure he's tested out
this game. With a surefire attention-
grabber in his mouth, he presents
himself to you for a good game of
chase. It's time to turn this game on
its head.
If he likes to pick things up in his
mouth, he'll continue to do so. You
can either allow him to run, covet, and
destroy, or teach him to bring over and
share the objects he picks up.
Cure the Instinct to Grab-and-Go
 Make treat cups (see page 42) and place
them around your home. In addition, let your
dog drag a lead when you're supervising him.
 When your dog prances by, object in mouth,
1
fnd a treat cup and shake it as you call to
him in a positive, directive voice: BRING IT.
He may look suspicious. If so, sidestep
toward him and step on the lead.
③ With your foot on the lead, coax him in and treat him, while thanking him
for sharing his treasure.
4 If your dog is a seasoned addict, set up a few practice situations in a small
room or hallway to help earn his trust and teach him your new rules quickly.
187
Leash
Pulling
A dog pulling on a leash is not having a good time. He's not associating going on a walk with being
near you, and this could spell disaster if his leash were to break. To teach your dog to walk near you
think of the leash as holding your dog's hand and find a collar that either eliminates the pulling or
manages it.
USE A GENTLE LEADER
BE A TEAM CAPTAIN
PRACTICE THE HEEL
If your dog is a chronic leash-puller,
Next, take your dog (in training leash
COMMAND
review your choice of training collar
and collar) to an open room or quiet
Now practice the HEEL command
immediately. If you notice a nagging
area outside. Hold half the slack of
(see page 88). Before each practice
cough, it's because your dog is chok.
the leash or tie it around your waist.
session, do a few quick turns to get
ing, and the only thing he's learning
Think of yourself as a team captain 
your dog's attention.
 is that being near you is asphyxiating.
leading a player downfield. Call out
In this case, a "correction collar" is
your dog's name in a positive tone
 not the appropriate choice. Consider
and say LET'S GO. If he lurches
the Gentle Leader (see photo), which
ahead, call his name and pivot away
dramatically reduces your dog's
from him. Repeat this process over
resistance and can condition him
 over time to stop pulling you. The
from dizziness or he starts to pay
other options are a Good Dog collar,
attention.
which gives your dog the sensation
Once your dog is watching you,
of a scruff shake with little effort of
praise/click/treat him and work to
resistance from you, or a no-pull har-
increase the distances you can walk
ness, which restricts his muscles'
before turning.
ability to lurch.
188
Housetraining
Difficulties
Crisis Management
Housetraining difficulties top the human frustration chart. Dogs get confused for many reasons,
and human responses add to their bafflement. Yelling at a dog or a puppy or rubbing his nose in
the mess often makes matters worse. There are better ways to communicate your message.
Find the Cause
First, decide what is prompting your dog's accidents. It could be
● Illness
+
 Too much isolation
● Joo much freedom
● Joo much water
●A dominance struggle that has led to marking
● A maturity issue
●A reaction to stimuli or kenneling
Then follow this hit list:
● Jake a sample of your dog's urine and stool to the veterinarian to rule out parasites or illness. If your dog seems out of
sorts, take him in for a checkup.
● Measure your dog's age against the following table. If you're unable to be home and your dog needs to go out, either
hire a dog walker or ask a friend to help out in your absence. If neither is available, leave your puppy in a playpen with a
papered corner (see page 28).
● Restrict water to daytime hours, removing the bowl after 7:30 pm. If your dog looks thirsty at night, give him a couple of
ice cubes.
● Isolate your dog in a small room or a crate when you can't be watching or leading him. Given too much freedom, he
may potty on the carpet or by the door.
Potty Time
Puppy's Age
Number of Potty Breaks a Day
6 to 14 weeks
eight to ten
14 to 20 weeks
 six to eight
20 to 30 weeks
four to six
30 weeks to adult
three to four
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
189
Housetraining
Difficulties (continued)
Housetraining Schedule for Work-at-Home Owners
Time of Day
Potty Time
 Early morning wake up
Go outside
Breakfast
Go outside after breakfast
Mid-morning
Go outside
 Afternoon feeding
 Go outside after eating
Mid-afternoon
Go outside
Dinnertime (4:00 to 6:00 pm)
Go outside after dinner
7:30 pm
Remove water
Mid-evening
Go outside
Before bed
Go outside
 Middle of the night
Go outside if necessary
Housebreaking Schedule for Owners Who Work Outside the Home
Time of Day
Potty Time
 Early morning wake up
Go outside
Breakfast
Go outside after breakfast
Lunch break feeding & walk
Go outside
 Mid-afternoon
 Young puppies must go out
 Arrival Home
Go outside
Dinnertime (4:00 to 6:00 pm)
Go outside after dinner
7:30 pm
Remove water
Mid-evening
Go outside
Before bed
Go outside
 Middle of the night
Go outside if necessary
190
11
Crisis Management
chapter.
Restrict a Small Dog's Space
Putting a small dog in any room large enough to fit a few pieces of furniture
is equivalent to putting a child in a football field and asking him to hold his
bladder until he makes his way across it. Small dogs need more supervision
and structure initially.
Raising a Puppy?
Nothing is more exciting or frustrating at times than raising a puppy. Use the
tables on the previous pages to adjust your puppy's feeding, walking, and
playtimes to a structured schedule. Be gentle with your puppy; it's confusing
for him, too.
Puppies experience many changes and fluctuations in their hormone levels.
Your puppy may be accident-free for weeks, and then suddenly have several
in a row. Don't lose faith--simply go back to the structure you had in place
when you were housetraining him initially.
If your puppy has an accident, do not clean it up in front of him.
Use paper towels and a neutral solution to mask the odor of his
urine, which can be a trigger for another accident. For urine, step
 on paper towels placed over the accident until they come up clean.
191
Marking
If you have a dog who is marking, the issue at hand is bigger than simple confusion. Your dog
believes that your home is his domain, and it is his duty to mark and protect his territory. Included
in his repertoire may be protective barking, an approach-avoid display for company, or an occa-
sional growl when he feels you're out of line. If the situation has advanced this far, ask your veteri-
narian to help you find a professional who can assist you in breaking this habit.
If marking is truly your only issue, try these
tips:
● Isolate your dog in your home. Use
a crate or the leading techniques
outlined on page 82.
● Do not let your dog mark your
neighborhood--he's bringing the
same habit indoors. Teach him to
mark outside your home, and then
walk him at a HEEL around the
neighborhood.
● Work on wAlT at all doors, elevators,
etc. leading into and out of your
home. See page 80.
Training your dog to wait at all doors will aid in your fight against marking.
FAQ
My dog is marking. all right, but he is also very nervous when away from
the house and when people visit. why is this?
Your dog is on a head trip, and you can help him. The lack of direction and structure
in your home has prompted him, very much by default, to consider himself your
leader. He neither looks to your direction when the environment changes nor relaxes
with new people because he is not mentally equipped for this role. Marking is just
another behavior that reinforces his position, though he has no interest in leading. To
resolve the issue, you need to train him to watch you for direction and to listen to you
when you're away from the home. Containment and supervision are necessary to
curb the marking, but structure and training are a must to give him the overall sense
that he can follow, not lead.
192
Nipping
Crisis Management
How you handle your nipping dog depends on his age. Young puppies nip to convey their needs
(see page 64) and because they're curious and interactive. Older pups and dogs continue to nip in
order to boss or convey rank, or because they think of their owner as more of a playmate than a
leader. Techniques that encourage shoving a hand down a dog's throat or clamping the mouth shut
 are cruel and most dogs retaliate by becoming more aggressive or assertive in play.
Resolve Nipping
If your dog is under 12 weeks he's simply
testing waters and his nips are more an
indication that he's feeling needy than con-
frontational. Similar to a child who cries
when a need is not met, a puppy will nip.
His needs include hunger, thirst, play, sleep,
and elimination. If you have an older
puppy, he has learned that nipping is inter.
active and may be doing this to get atten-
tion and promote his sense of control. Try
these techniques to resolve nipping:
● Teach KISSES with butter.
●Ask yourselfif your puppy or dog is
communicating a need.
+
 Stop all challenging games.
Use the spray-away correction
described on page 42 to discreetly dis-
courage your dog from chewing on
your body.
● Give yourself something to grasp by
placing a drag or short lead on your
dog's collar.
● Keep your hand still when your puppy
or dog nips you.
● Ignore light nipping with puppies under 16 weeks of age.
● Address hard nips immediately. Let your hand go limp in his mouth, say OUCH, tug him away from you sharply, and
glare into his eyes for two seconds: short and stern.
FAQ
I read that I'm suppose to hold my dog's mouth shut when he nips, but it
only seems to make matters worse. What can I do?
 Squeezing your dog's mouth shut is not nice. It is confrontational which would
from your hand and redirect him to another activity. If he will not relent, give him
some alone time in a crate or on a station; he may be over-tired.
193
Jumping
If you try walking around on all fours for one day, you will have a greater appreciation for why
your dog jumps up. To teach your dog not to jump, consider his motivation and meet him halfway.
To correct jumping, follow this plan:
● Be certain that your dog is getting enough exercise. See
dogs jump less.
●Avoid confrontational games. They encourage pushing or
pawing and other physical behavior.
● If your dog is jumping for attention or in greeting, close
shop initially. Teach familiar company to do the same.
Encourage SIT for a greeting, or the fetching of a toy. If this
is ineffective, try the other corrections explained above, one
at a time to determine which is most effective.
● If your dog is jumping on counters, refer to page 84 and
practice the NO exercise: catch your dog when he's just
thinking about the counter and then yell at the counter, not
your dog.
+ If your dog is jumping on furniture: see page 178.
Type
Reason
Afternatives
Greeting/
For face-to-face interaction
SIT for attention/say
 attention
hello
Counters
To see what you're focused
 SIT on mat/play with
on and to find the source
toy
of odors
Furniture
To mimic or join you; to be
 Permission to join
comfortable
you; soft bed nearby
TIP
Instead of thinking of your dog as "bad" when he jumps, consider
how interactive and connected to you he is. He watches you
throughout the day: You are his hero. When you're focused on the
counter or sitting on the couch, he wants to be there too!
194
Crisis Management
chapter.
To teach your dog the alternative behaviors, be consistent. Use one of the following corrections to
convey your disapproval:
CLOSE SHOP
SIDE SWIPE
Fold your arms in front of your face to block eye contact.
Leave a leash on your dog that you can grasp. Grasp the
Do not relax until your dog is standing calmly on all four
leash and tug your dog off to the side. The goal is to
paws.
give him a feeling that's similar to slipping on ice.
REVERSE YO-YO
SPRAY-AWAY CORRECTION
Let your dog drag a four-foot lead with a knot tied just
Use a spray corrector to spray a vapor boundary
beyond your dog's paws. Step on the knot when jump-
between his body and you/object (see page 42).
 ing is expected. Your dog will be able to get only a
couple of inches off the ground before being brought
back down.
195
Mounting
Mounting humans is not acceptable. Ever. Mounting a toy or cushion is tolerable during a puppy's
adolescence, but you shouldn't allow it to become a habit.
Stop the Mounting
Your dog/puppy is mounting for one of two
reasons:
● He or she is vying for dominance
in your relationship or family.
● He or she feels small and out of
control.
Many times, mounting is focused on inani-.
mate objects; it often occurs during times
when the energy level in your household is
escalating. If your dog mounts a pillow,
either ignore it as a stage that will pass or
calmly separate the two and give him a sta-
 tionary command, such as SIT or DOwN
and STAY.
If your dog is mounting humans, begin a
training regime immediately, and involve
family members and friends. Have him SIT
for attention, make him WAlT at doors and
for food, and teach him HEEL when you're
outside and with company. If the mounting
escalates to aggression, call your veterinar-
ian for a professional referral.
Recognize that mounting is a symptom of another issue: control and dominance. You (and your family) must emphasize that
you possess both: you are in control of every situation and are fully capable of being the dominant leader of your dog's family
FAQ
My 5-month-old collie mounts our older dog constantly-a
5-year-old male collie! Is this sexual? what's he trying to
communicate?
It has nothing to do with either dog's sexuality. Your puppy is rest-
less and energetic and smart. He's also bossy. It is a passing phase,
which should be ignored or gently interrupted. Assertive interrup-
tion may cause tension between the two dogs.
196
1
Crisis Management
chapter.
immediately, tug it as you say NO, and redirect your dog to DOwN and STAY.
1 'apis 4noA o, wiy suuq pue yseal e uo wiy and 'umop wjes tues sop anok j
do 'wiy ypeoidde Awe 'uosiad e sugunow jo pe ay ui sop ano ypeo no
grasp the leash if he's mounting you, and tug down firmly.
Next, calmly lead him to a quiet area and leave him alone for fifteen minutes.
Iftugging the leash escalates the interaction, try the spray-away correction:
discreetly spray down toward his feet without eyeing or shouting at him.
TIP
If a particular time or prop (a dangling leg, kids on the floor) sets
the mounting in motion, be prepared. Leave a leash on your dog's
training collar and correct him immediately. Corrections should be
 swift and firm.
197
Separation
Anxiety
          s a s n ns   ss
left alone. A dog who suffers true separation anxiety goes through physical withdrawal when you
leave. His body temperature changes, his pulse increases, and his blood pressure rises. He acts out,
not out of disrespect or spite, but out of anxiety. House soiling, destructive chewing, clawing and
scratching, and barking are common reactions.
Cure Separation Anxiety
Jo resolve the separation anxiety issue, fol-
low this regime:
●Irain your dog twice a day. Lessons
teach your dog that you're in charge
and he's not. when you leave, he'll be
less stressed about where you're
going and why he can't come along.
●Exercise. A tired dog sleeps more.
● Isolate your dog in a small room or a
crate. Pacing in a large area creates
more anxiety.
●Leave him a favorite bone and toys,
dim the lights, and leave on classical
music.
●Exit and enter calmly. This is very
important.
● Do not correct your dog after the fact,
regardless of the damage. Corrections
will intensify his anxiety and make
matters worse.
● If you're leaving for more than six
hours at a time on a regular basis, find a dog walker who can break up the day. Dogs are a social species and cannot
adjust to long separations, especially when they're young.
● Do trial-run departures. Go through the motions of leaving, isolate your dog, and leave the radio on, but go out for short
fifteen times in a day.
● When you're home with your dog, avoid giving him constant or unsolicited attention. Although it may relieve your guilty
feelings, it is too sharp a contrast from the isolation. Instead, ask him to SIT or tell him to GET YOUR BONE.
198
Stool
Swallowing
Crisis Management
Try not to visualize this behavior. Stool swallowers come in two varieties: those who eat their own
stool and those who eat the stool of other animals. This section addresses both problems.
OWN STOOL
If your dog's eating his own stool, it's likely
a compulsive behavior resulting from early
puppyhood, when his mother would ingest
her puppies' stool to keep the whelping
box clean. Though this is probably the most
grotesque thing you can imagine, in dog
land it's quite normal. when your dog was
a puppy,he watched his mom do it,and if
and when he sees you scoop it up, he
thinks, why not? To resolve this problem:
● Start a training regime immediately to
help your dog focus on you and your
direction, and not on his internal
anxieties.
● Never clean up accidents in front of
your dog.
 Do not react to your dog if he shows
interest in his stool. He'll see your
behavior as competition and gulp it
downfaster.
● If your dog's showing interest, refocus him on a favorite game: GET YOUR BALL.
● Ask your veterinarian to give you a food additive that will make his feces distasteful
●After your dog has finished eliminating, spray the stool with something distasteful (see page 43).
OTHER CREATURES' FECES
If your dog is eating other animals' feces, it's a delicacy that borders on a human's obsession with chocolate. Unfortunately,
your interference will make matters worse: your dog will see your reaction as competition and seek more and gulp faster.
Most dogs outgrow this behavior if you feed them twice a day and ignore their stool fetish. Teach your dog a strong CoME
suius wiy annou no uaum awe uny e uo wiy snoau pue Aaaisod no o w li ze aed uo paunno se auodsa
about.
199
Stimulated
Peeing
If your dog tinkles during greetings,
either excitedly or because he is over-
whelmed, you're not alone. Certain
breeds, such as Poodles and Soft-
Coated Wheaten Terriers, are prone to
this behavior, but there are exceptions.
It will subside in time if you do the
following exercises to get your dog's
mind off his own tension when people
arrive.
Keep Your Pup from Tinkling
● Keep your departures and arrivals low-key. Do not get excited when
you arrive.
● Make treat cups and place one by the door. When you get home-
and after your dog calms down--shake the cup and encourage him
to do a trick (see chapter 9) or play with a toy, and then offer him a
treat.
● Play a come-and-go game: Go in and out the door fifteen times in a
row. Each time you return ignore your dog's hyperactivity, only recon-
necting once he's calm; then use your treat cup as described above.
● Secure a greeting station as described on page 167 and place your
dog there when company arrives. Ask everyone to ignore him until
he calms down, and then leash him and bring him to GO SAY HELLO
with a treat cup and a toy.
●If your dog is timid, ignore him. Let him relax to the situation without
being approached. when your dog does approach company, have
them shake a treat cup and/or kneel to pet his chest. Ask them not
to make direct eye contact.
Note: ff your dog does tinkle during a greeting, do not correct him. This behavior is
invofuntary and should be addressed as outined here.
200
Timidity
Crisis Management
When your dog looks timid, your first impulse is to soothe him. Instead of reassuring him, how-
dog's anxiety.
To help your dog overcome his fear, stand tall in front of him. Use the commands BACK and
STAY to communicate authority.
Here are some tips for approaching things
that might make your dog feel shy or fearful:
OBJECTS
● Approach the object confidently.
Let your dog hang back until he
feels comfortable mimickingyour
confidence.
PEOPLE
● Ask the person to avoid eye contact
with your dog until the dog is more
comfortable with the situation.
● Be friendly and calm.
●When your dog approaches, take the
person's hand in yours and let your
dog smell them together.
 Offer your dog a treat. (A fearful dog
may or may not take it)
GROUPS OF PEOPLE
● Let everyone know that your dog's overwhelmed.
● Instruct your dog BACK and STAY or HEEL. Communicate with him frequently, using commands to direct him and help
him feel safe.
OTHER ANIMALS
+Do not force your dog to socialize.
+ Tell your dog BACK and STAY or HEEL.
like everyone you meet; don't expect it of your dog.
TIP
Correction
Environmentaf Correction
Tools
Leash tug
Unpleasant shift and tug
Leash, training collar when
If you are experiencing a level of aggression
supervised
that you're unable to contain, ask your vet-
erinarian for a referral to a reputable trainer
Spray-away
 Mysterious vapor
Spray mister, Bianca, Direct
or behaviorist in your area. Aggression is a
Stop, or Bitter Apple
 serious signal that your dog is frustrated,
Noise
Alarming sound/effect
Sharp NO, penny can
and it is beyond the scope of this book.
201
A
appendix
Choosing the Right Breed
This section is ideal for those readers who have not gotten a puppy or
dog and who are still considering different breeds. Although a certain
breed's "look" may appeal, their personality and characteristics may not
be the right match. The time spent discovering the nature of each breed,
thinking long and hard about personal characteristics gives everyone
involved the best chance at a harmonious future!
Choosing a Breed if You're Dogless
204
Selecting a Puppy - . - .
205
Selecting an Older Dog
208
Finding a Dog or a Puppy
209
Choosing a Breed
if You're Dogless
If you're thinking about adding a dog to your family, consider a suitable breed. The American
Kennel Club (AKC) assigns dogs to seven breed groups: Sporting, Working, Hound, Herding,
Terrier, Non-Sporting, and Toy. The groups have commonalities, yet each breed has distinct per-
sonality traits that directly reflect what the breed was originally bred to do.
SPORTING
The dogs in this group were bred to help men hunt waterfowl. Conditioned by nature to retrieve, these dogs can be trained
to gather birds from the field or water, or they can simply stay at home and make excellent companions, fetching tennis balls,
slippers, and the morning paper.
WORKING
Each dog in this group was bred to do a specific task,like guarding, pulling, protecting, or hunting. Serious and loyal, this
group is one that needs direction and exercise to feel most content.
HOUND
keen noses or sharp eyesight, their easygoing and, at times, stoical personality has endeared them as family pets.
HERDING
These dogs like to herd livestock, either sheep or cattle. They are hardworking, mindful, and make wonderful companions if
or shepherds to be respected?
TERRIER
Zesty, playful, and impulsive, terriers are a determined group of dogs that was bred to hunt vermin or fight. In a home they
are equally spirited and determined.
NON-SPORTING
Unlike other breed groups, there is little consistency in the personalities of these dogs because they were originally bred for
different tasks. Many of these dogs, although bred for specific work, are now companion dogs as work has become hard to
come by.
TOY
e yn Aaa gs si aeua dnoa pue susui paaig au se paagau ag ou pnous unuien yanope so
MIXED BREED
-iuo Aeuosiad pue lenisyd yeym sno aunsy noa se Aeid uen noA aues suissan au s! paaiq paxiu e suumo jo Aot au
a larger pool of genes.
204
Selecting
a Puppy
Choosing the Right Breed
appendix
Fill out this questionnaire as you consider what breed of dog might best suit your situation. Each
question is of equal importance. Puppies are cute, but they grow up before you know it. Since many
behavior traits are formed before birth, choose a puppy with desires and an energy level to match
 your own. You'll have between ten and fifteen years to be grateful for this decision.
The Puppy Questionnaire
1. I want a dog who
 Is naturally active.
Enjoys quiet walks.
Doesn't need extensive exercise.
2. As regards grooming, I
 Look forward to grooming daily.
 Will hire a professional every three
to six weeks.
口
 Don't mind doing it a couple of
times a year.
Prefer a dog who doesn't shed.
3. My schedule
口
 Varies, but I'm home throughout
the day.
Requires me to work, but I will hire a dog walker.
 Is full of other activities, but I will include the dog.
Requires my dog to be alone for stretches of time, but he will be in my thoughts.
4. 1 live in
A big house.
A small house.
An apartment.
5. Ihave
A big yard.
A small yard.
No yard.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
205
Selecting a
Puppy (continued)
6. I am willing to commit to taking my dog to the park
Every day.
Four times a week.
wice a week.
Never.
7. My family includes
Children over seven.
Children under seven.
No children now.
No children ever.
Only adults.
8. My temperament is
Exacting.
Light-hearted.
口
 Laid-back.
Concerned.
Reserved.
9. Id like a dog who is
Accepting of strangers.
Naturally protective around strangers.
Aloof toward strangers.
10. When I go away, the dog will be
In a kennel.
 Left at home with supervision.
Jaken along.
206
Choosing the Right Breed
appendix
Interpreting the Results
1. Take a good hard look at how much time you will devote to exercising your dog. Although retrievers are an acclaimed
family dog, they require a lot of exercise--pent-up energy can result in household destruction and impulsivity. If the
breed you're considering cannot meet your predetermined exercise plan, pass it by!
 2. Does the thought of brushing your dog's hair appeal to you? Or can you afford to hire a professional to groom your
dog's coat one or more times a month? Like our hair, a dog's coat continues to grow throughout her life. If you cringe at
the commitment, consider short-coated breeds, but remember--even they will need a slicking down from time to time.
3. Dogs enjoy predictability, some more than others. Consider whether the breed is companionable or dependent on
directed may be more content under those circumstances.
human-size lump in the middle of your kitchen floor. All puppies start out small. . .
5. The measure of yard size reflects how committed you are to daily exercise. A small yard and a high-energy dog are only
suitable if daily exercise is a commitment.
6. Although all dogs love adventures, some require a good run to calm down, especially during the first few years.
7. Family dynamics are as important a qualifier for breed choice as is energy level. Dogs bred to herd can get career stress
in a home full of active children. Dogs with a propensity toward guarding their "catch" and food sources (terriers and
hounds for example) can get nervous around young, impulsive children. when you're deciding on a breed, talk to as
many knowledgeable people as you can find. (See reference section.)
8. How do you measure up? If you're an exacting personality type, having a dog who isn't concerned with human direction
might be frustrating. If you're light-hearted, a dog who is very dependent on your input may be a nuisance.
9. If your house is like Grand Central Station, a protective breed won't be the right choice.If, however, the thought of hav-
ing a dog who warns visitors of her presence is important to you, that would be a breed to consider.
10. Some breeds kennel well, others go on a starvation diet when taken out of their home environment. Speak to a profes.
sional about your choice ahead of time, and condition your puppy between the ages of 4 and 6 months by leaving her
in this situation for a day or two.
207
Selecting an
Older Dog
Adopting an older dog can be a lot easier than taking in a puppy. The cute factor isn't a distraction.
You usually test one dog at a time, not ten. But if you have a bleeding heart, a dog's story can draw
you in, even though her temperament may not be suited for your lifestyle. Nothing is sadder than
rescuing an older dog and then having to return her because she doesn't mesh with your lifestyle.
Here are some things to consider ahead of time:
● Do you have children? Make sure you introduce them before bringing the dog home. Any caution or unease should
immediately eliminate the dog from consideration.
not good signs.
jo ao suq pue suosnb yse soup au ym ado u sop aup ans aye 'ay ge aauu pee ue ay no n 
your furry pets along to test her reaction.
● Either lift the dog or ask the owner/staff member to pick her up. What happens?
● Offer her a bone or a bowl of food. Can you approach her? Any aggression is a clear warning sign.
h! y! Aieiadsa 'o ypeg 'aanxa suiyiue aas nos y! anq 'asuens e ae noA se noA jo Aem Apua!s ag Aew sop aun 'asanos jo
aggression. Look for a dog who is accepting and shows patience with children and other animals if they are a factor.
When selecting an older dog, remember that you will probably have to deal with a few bad habits. You'll need to be under-
standing: bad habits are the result of not knowing what was expected of her in her last home.
208
Finding a Dog
or a Puppy
Choosing the Right Breed
appendix
You can find a dog or puppy at many places. If want a pure-bred, your best bet is getting one from
a reputable breeder. Although you can find a wide range of pure-bred puppies at a pet store, their
behavior may be affected for the worse. If you can resist the impulse to buy, try to wait and
research a breeder with similar ethics to your own.
Mixed-breed puppies can be found at the shelter or through an ad in the paper. Here are some
things to keep in mind.
AT THE BREEDER
The best breeders interact with you and ask you a lot of questions. Though it may feel like you're being interviewed, it shows
that they care about the puppies. Answer honestly. Good breeders also let their puppies meet people of all ages and hear
has temperament-tested her litter, and if she would mind if you met more than one puppy to determine which would be the
best candidate for you.
AT THE PET STORE
If you're deliberating over getting your puppy from a pet store, here are some basic facts that are good to know:
u suas oua sapaaiq au o yeads on ys op Auw ang s Addnd oy saiddnd iaup a see ou op saois iad o
puppy to the store. willingness is a good sign.
●Miost puppies are shipped to pet stores by bus or plane at 8 weeks and may be fearful of loud noises and big men.
non pawoop sou aie non 'aions tad e woi Addnd e asoouo nos y 'salois iad oi saiddnd isaq aun puas sou op siapaaig 
ues do piege no snoau se Appis syool oum Addnd e sunanq pione pies ieui aaolloy Apede aes aun sey dnd
calm down after half an hour of interaction.
AT THE SHELTER
Getting a dog from a shelter is a noble act, but prepare yourself for what can be a sad experience. Decide ahead of time the
age range you're looking for and call to see if the shelter has a dog to fit that description. when you go to the shelter, speak
to the staff and let them know what physical and personality traits you're looking for--they often know each dog well and can
guide you to a dog who fits your description. Here are some other things to do:
1. Find out your candidate's history. If the dog has been abused or neglected, he'll have behavior problems that you'll need
to be prepared to work with.
2. If you have or plan to have children or other pets, determine if the dog likes them before bringing him home.
3. Ask about the dog's health. Are there any conditions you should know about?
4. Walk the dog. Try to brush her. Feed her treats. Give her a toy: can you take it from her or does she protect it?If she
worse without professional help.
FAQ
What is the best age to bring a dog home?
The best age to bring a dog home depends on one thing: whether
you're getting a dog or a puppy. A puppy should come home
between 8 and12 weeks. If you're getting a dog, you may have
a few behavior problems to correct; younger is better.
209
B
appendix
Finding the Right
professionais
From your dog's doctor to dog walkers, it will take an experienced
strong staff of professionals to meet your dog's needs and to put your
mind to rest. Take some time now to line up the right group. looking
into stores, kennels, interviewing dog walkers and veterinarians to
ensure you've got a team that you feel comfortable with.
Choosing a Veterinarian
.212
Finding Additional Help
213
Choosing a
Veterinarian
Find a veterinarian you feel comfort-
able with—someone who will discuss
all your concerns and questions. You
can start looking for a veterinarian
before you bring your dog home, or if
you are not satisfied with your current
choice, interview others.
Jalk to other dog owners or friends about their experiences. Call and ask if you can stop in to see each facility. Veterinarians
are busy, so they may or may not have time to meet you, but you can talk to the staff. Here are some good questions to ask:
1. How many doctors are on staff?
2. Is someone on call after hours, or do they recommend a twenty-four-hour clinic? (Keep this number by your phone in
caseofemergency.)
3. Do they have any handouts or reading that they suggest in preparation for your dog's/puppy's arrival?
4. Can you bring the dog in before his appointment to give him a positive experience?
ao ang op lapo ue uun addnd e ym sanbay aou aa im al apaus uonua papuauora niun si reua 's
dogs also need visits to test for heartworm and get vaccine boosters.
Once you are happy with your selection, try to stick to one doctor. Not only will this person get to know your dog, but your
dog will form a relationship with him or her as well!
212
Finding
B
Additional Help
Finding the Right Professionals
appendix
There are times you will need to ask other people for advice and help. Of course, there is as much
advice about how to raise a dog or a puppy as there is on raising children. Avoid testing out differ-
ent theories on your dog, you will only confuse him. It's best to seek out professional advice when
you need help with your dog, and to find other people who may help you with your dog's everyday
needs, from feeding to exercise.
PET STORE PROFESSIONALS
Locate a reputable pet store with staff that are aware of their inventory. Ask them if they know your breed or describe your
collars, and leashes. Iry to develop a relationship with the staff so that you can speak with them about important issues. and
ask for advice throughout your dog's life.
DOG WALKERS
Having someone to step in and play with or walk your dog when
you can't is invaluable, especially if you are housetraining your
dog/puppy. If you are working during the day, you may rely on
this person a lot. Find several names if you can and interview
each. These are people who will be in your house and who will
be handling your dog when you are not there to watch. Here's a
check list:
● Does he have a rapport with your dog?
●Are you comfortable with this person in your home?
+Get references and check them.
+H
How long has he been in business? How long has he lived in
the area?
● How long will he spend with your dog each visit?
A good, reliable dog walker can get very busy, especially around
the holidays. Does the individual have backup when he gets busy?
If so, meet and check the credentials of that person, too.
Set up a system that allows you to check the activities of each
visit. A simple check-off sheet allows you to know that he did
come and what happened during his visit.
● Did my dog eat his food?
● Pee-pee? Poops?
●How long did you walk/play?
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
213
Finding Additional
Help (continued)
HOUSESITTERS
 aup pue aaoge pas suosanb awes au yse 'suaaui uaua uapie pue aoy noa se iam se Adnd/op ano
references. If you are working on a specific training program or using commands, write them down so that this person can
follow the same routine and plan.
GROOMERS
Put some thought into just "who" and "where" you will take your dog to be groomed. You'll be relieved when you have to
leave him behind for the day.
Most dogs are less than thrilled at spending a day at the beauty parlor: find somewhere welcoming and clean, with handlers
who care for your dog as much as you do. Here's a quick check list.
after bathing.
● Speak to the front staff and the groomers with your dog at your side. Do they make you feel welcome? How do they
respond to him?
● Ask to see photo options for a particular cut: buzz, puppy cut, or show style. Your dog can come out looking very different.
● What are their policies for pick up, drop off and payment?
KENNEL
Another option if you travel is to kennel your dog. Kennels have limited space and can get crowded around the holidays s0
plan ahead. Visit the various kennels in your area to determine which you feel most comfortable with. Here are questions to
ask and things to watch out for:
+ Is the environment clean?
● Are the staff people and those who will care for your dog friendly?
● Will they show you the runs?
● Can you leave your dog with familiar toys or bedding? (lf so, label the bedding with your dog's name/run number.)
●  What do you have to pay extra for? Things that incur extra expense may include bringing your own food rather than
using theirs, extra walks and personal interaction, grooming activities, and administering medication. These items can
add up, so check ahead of time.
Some dogs enjoy a kennel environment while others get stressed. If you can, leave your dog/puppy for a few short stays to
get him more comfortable with this chaotic environment.
214
B
Finding the Right Professionals
appendix
DOGGY DAY CARE
You can also take your dog/puppy to a day care facility that is
specifically suited to stimulate, nurture, and exercise your dog
during the day. It is a great option if you are gone from home for
long hours or if you feel that your dog will benefit from the
socialization and exercise. To see if there is a facility in your area,
call your veterinarian or speak to the people at a local pet store.
Use the same list mentioned in the "Kennel" section to deter-
 mine if it is a healthy environment in which to leave your dog.
FAQ
Day care sounds too good to be true. Do the
dogs ever fight? what are the downsides?
These are important questions. Ask each facility what
policies it has in place, how it prevents confronta-
tions, and how it separates dogs (for example,
 according to size and age).
A downside to day care is that your dog may come
back exhausted. Some dogs also get a bit sassy and
may ignore your direction, whereas before they
looked to you for direction in new situations. It's not
a huge problem, and it's one that an extra dose of
training can overcome. If your dog is too tired to
 interact with you, limit the number of days you take
him to day care or consider a dog walker instead.
215
C
appendix
Everyday Care
and concerns
Your dog is neither image conscious nor able to take care of her per.
sonal hygiene. She needs your help in those departments. From clipping
her nails to checking her skin, it's all up to you.
Brush Your Dog
.218
Nail clipping and Bathing
219
Teeth, Eyes, and Ears
.220
Other Important Healthcare Checks and Techniques .. . .. . . . .221
Have Your Dog Spayed or Neutered 
223
Dietary Decisions
224
Different Forms of Dog Food
225
Brush
Your Dog
The time commitment required for brushing depends on the type of dog you have and how often
she sheds. Dogs shed year-round, twice a year, or not at all. Here we describe the types of brushes
available, and their functions.
Make every effort to make brushing a positive experience-use treats or a creamy spread like peanut butter to encourage
cooperation. Brush your dog as she enjoys her treats. Make it a special time-go into a quiet room to help her feel calm and
relaxed.
p aeai pue uny 'saiddnd suno uo asn uaus Aeiadsa 'sagsg as uoeapisuo e osie si asn no ysg jo ad a
negative association with being brushed. A common scenario is a puppy who mouths the brush or hand because she feels
dscomfort, only to be disciplined. Needless to say, she will hate being brushed in the future. Work hard to create a positive
experience. Here's a list of different types of brushes and what types of coats each is best used for:
WIRE-BRISTLE BRUSH
A wire-bristle brush that removes hair and dirt.
SOFT-BRISTLED BRUSH
A soft brush that is especially good for puppies.
GROOMING RAKE
A short-toothed comb that is ideal for breeds with short or double coats, such as Siberian Huskies and Newfoundlands.
STRIPPING COMB
A comb that strips both undercoat and dead hair as well as smooths and flattens a dog's coat. It is frequently used with wire.
haired breeds.
DEMATTING COMB
This comb prevents mating and losing coat length. It is ideal for non-shedding dogs with "hair," and dogs with a feather coat.
SHED BLADE
Good for short-coated breeds, especially when they are shedding.
FLEA COMB
A comb with small teeth that removes fleas and ticks. It can be used on all coats, provided the coat is mat-free.
218
Nail clipping
and Bathing
Everyday Care and Concerns
appendix
Nail clipping and bathing are important to your dog's overall health and hygiene.
Clip Your Dog's Nails
take your dog to a groomer or veterinarian to have them clipped.
If you plan to do this job yourself, learn to do it properly so that you avoid clipping into your dog's nail bed. Clipping this
fleshy area is similar to clipping offthe tip of your finger. Bleeding will be profuse, and the wound willhurt.
To clip your dog's nails, buy a quality clipper at your local pet store. It looks like a miniature hand-held guillotine. (This is not a
child's toy. Do not let children handle the nail clipper.) Ask the pet store professional for instructions if she seems competent.
It's best to clip your dog's nails before they become long and irritating. One way to tell whether it's time to trim is to listen to
your dog walk across an uncarpeted floor. Can you hear her nails clicking? They're too long. Time for a trim.
dipping your dog's nails regularly will help make the task repetitive and simple. You'll need to clip off only the tip of the nail,
at the point where it starts to curl. Your job will be easier if your dog has light-colored nails, as you can easily see where the
nail bed begins.
Choose a quiet time to do this task, when your dog is restful and calm. Let your dog sniff the clipper, and open and shut it
several times as you give her treats to get her accustomed to the sound. Use a creamy spread or a favorite bone to keep your
dog distracted as you cut her nails.
Front nails grow faster than back ones, so start there. Only do as many at one time as you can calmly. If your dog is fussy.
handle her paws throughout the day as you give treats and praise her.
Purchase styptic powder from the pharmacy to use if you clip into your dog's toe by accident. It helps stop the bleeding.
Bathe Your Dog
To bathe your dog, gather her toys and a creamy spread to rub onto the side of the bathtub. Also put a towel on the bottom
of the basin so that she feels comfortable standing. The calmer she feels, the easier it will be to bathe her.
Brush your dog before you bathe her: Doing so prevents knots and excessive shedding. After you're done, cheerfully lead her
to the bathing area on-leash to prevent any chaos. Although she may be reluctant initially, be as positive and calm as possi-
ble. If you get upset, you'll only make matters worse.
The best soap to use is gentle baby soap or a shampoo made for dogs. Speak to a local pet store professional or a groomer.
TIP
Think ahead! Use a command like BATH TIME and get your dog
used to being led to the area when she hears this phrase. Do not
put her into the water until she follows you cheerfully. when you
first put her in the basin, just wet her legs--don't use soap. After she
O sot pue siean asn saeme yrea ly e An ues no 'sre sidae
boost her enthusiasm.
219
Teeth, Eyes,
and Ears
Clean your dog's teeth regularly and monitor her eyes and ears for signs of illness or infection.
Clean Your Dog's Teeth
Dogs can get plaque buildup and gum disease just like humans. One way to prevent this problem is to brush your dog's
1. Introduce the toothbrush. Rub it in some meat juice to make the first association pleasant.
2. when your dog accepts this new activity, put just a little of the paste on the brush. Most dogs enjoy the flavor. Brush
front to back and then up and down.
Note: As your dog ages, watch for signs of gum disease or tooth decay. The most teling sign is bad breath. Other signs include plaque
buildup and swollen orred gums.
Check Your Dog's Eyes
Your dog does not see as sharply as you do and cannot distinguish color. She does, however, have night vision that can help
she is well. There should be no discharge, and they should be bright and clear.
Your dog has a third eyelid to protect her eyeball from dust and dirt. This lid is susceptible to infections like conjunctivitis; if
you notice excessive tearing or wincing, take her to the doctor immediately. Eye infections can be highly contagious, so keep
herhome until theveterinarian says it's okay.
Note:Chronic tearing that leadstohair discoloration is common in many toy and hairy breeds.Ask your groomer's advice and feed your
dog curly parsley with her mea! to limit the discoloration.
Clean Your Dog's Ears
A dog's hearing is very good--far better than a human's. Your dog relies heavily on her sense of hearing, and you must check
their ear cavities are closed off. wipe your dog's ears out monthly, or ask a specialist to help you. if there is excessive wax
IIPE YOUR DOG'S EARS
2. Swab the ear thoroughly.
3. Continue with fresh pads until one comes out clean.
4. Clean the skin on the inside flap.
Ifthere is a lot of brown waxy goop, bring your dog to the veterinarian: it is likely that she has an ear infection. If she does,
you'll be given eardrops to give your dog daily. Use a treat or peanut butter to distract and please her while you are giving the
drops.
220
Other Important Healthcare
Checks and Technigues
appendix
In addition to regular grooming, you should check your dog for lumps and bumps that may not be
readily visible to the naked eye. You should also know how to take your dog's temperature and how
to administer medicine to your dog. These important healthcare checks and techniques are
described below.
Examine Lumps and Bumps
Give your dog a full body petting each day. It will allow you to notice any unusual lumps, bumps, or skin irritations. There are
conditions that are temporary such as a scrape from a branch, a bite, or a fatty tumor; and other irritations that may get worse
such as cancer or hematomas. Keep an eye on the area and call your veterinarian if it gets worse or does not go away. Here
are a list of common skin irritations and swelling:
1. Fatty tumors
2. Cysts
3. Warts
4. Bug bites
5. Hematomas
6. Tender knots (following injections)
7. Tumors (cancerous formations that may be benign or malignant)
a. Skin cancer
b. Bone tumor
c. Mast cell tumor
d.  Cell carcinoma
e. Melanoma
f.   Reproductive tract tumors
Always be on the lookout for growths and skin irritations that do not heal within a week. Speak with your veterinarian and
follow her recommendations.
Take Your Dog's Temperature
There are no sweat glands on the nose, so it is a good predictor of body temperature. Ideally, the nose should be cool and
wet. If it is warm or hot, your dog may have a fever. The fever is her body's way of trying to rid itself of an infection. You can
hot too. If they don't become cooler within twelve hours, you can take your dog's temperature with a rectal or underarm ther.
mometer. The normal body temperature for a dog is 101.5 degrees (plus or minus a half of a degree). Call your veterinarian if
there is no improvement or if you suspect another illness, such as Lyme disease or parvovirus.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
221
Other Important Healthcare
Checks and Technigues (continued)
Medicate Your Dog
1. Let your dog smell the bottle before
attempting to use it.
2. Give your dog a treat or peanut butter
to pleasantly distract her.
3. Kneel down behind your dog and cra-
dle her between your legs, petting her
and giving her treats until she is calm.
4. Slowly lift your arms from the floor to
the area you're medicating. Again, give
her treats or peanut butter to ensure
cooperation.
5. Medicate her as you tell her she's a
8op poos
 6. Never discipline your dog for being
afraid. This may cause a fear-based
aggressive reaction.
FAQ
When should I call the veterinarian?
If there is any change in your dog's behavior, including exhaustion;
a persistent hot nose; swelling: whining, limping, or wincing in pain;
sudden aggression toward you; a growth or an irritation that does 
not go away or that increases; a persistent odor; eye, mouth, or
nose discharge; recurring vomiting; bleeding from the mouth or the
bottom; or bleeding that is excessive, call your veterinarian
 In the case of an emergency, call your veterinarian immediately, and
ue jo asen ui puey uo jaqwnu penidsoy pwjue buashawa ue aay
off-hours need.
222
Have Your Dog
Spayed or Neutered
appendix
If you have a female dog, you will have the choice to spay her to prevent her from having puppies.
This surgical procedure removes her ovaries. It requires that your dog be anesthetized; recovery
takes five to ten days.
A male dog is neutered. This procedure also requires anesthesia, although it is a much simpler
operation as the testicles are removed once they have descended from the dog's body.
Things to Consider
WHY YOU SHOULD CONSIDER SPAYING OR NEUTERING YOUR PET
I strongly advocate these procedures if you do not intended to breed your dog. Breeding is a serious commitment and can
lead to fatal complications. Dogs who remain sexually viable fight; roam more; mark often (pee inside in several areas); and
are far more susceptible to health risks, including breast, ovarian, uterine, and cervical cancer for female dogs and testicular
cancer and prostate infection for males.
WHEN SHOULD YOU SPAY OR NEUTER?
Opinion varies. Speak to your veterinarian. Standard philosophy recommends between 6 and 8 months. For a female, it is
best to spay before she goes into her first heat cycle. A heat cycle indicates that the dog is receptive to mating and can get
pregnant. This can occur between 7 and 12 months.
223
Dietary
Decisions
What you feed your dog can affect her behavior; the size, smell, and volume of her stools; and the
speed of her growth. All foods have a balance of protein, carbohydrates, fats, vitamins, and miner-
als, and you should consider the percentage and ingredients used in each category. If you need fur-
ther help deciphering dog food labels, ask your veterinarian or pet store professional to help you
make sense of them.
Dog Food Examined
Ask a knowledgeable person, either in a pet store or at a vet
dinic, to help you decipher the list of ingredients. Protein sources
can vary--it is best to choose a food that uses meat or animal
protein over vegetable or grain proteins, which can cause large,
odorous stools.
● Protein (21-26 percent): Protein gives your dog energy. It
also helps regulate her temperature and stress. If your dog
exercises a lot, she'll use more protein.
 Carbohydrates (42 percent): Carbohydrates provide your
dog with a complex source of energy. Find out which carbo-
hydrate is used to meet this requirement. Corn is cheap, but
it can also cause indigestion and allergic reactions. Choose a
brand that mixes other vegetables and grains into the diet.
● Fats (15-20 percent): Fats provide your dog with a shiny
coat and make digestion run smoothly. Fats are the most
 costly ingredient in pet food as they don't store well at nor-
mal temperature. Cheap fats include the same ingredients
that go into making candles, but these fats cannot be
digested and don't help your dog look or feel her best.
Poor-quality fats also can lead to gas. Positive fats include
chicken fat, safflower oil, and canola oil.
 Vitamins (1 percent): Vitamins are necessary to unlock the
 nutrients in food. Supplementation may be recommended:
speak to your veterinarian. Vitamins A, B, C D, E, and K are 
daily essentials.
●Minerals (1 percent): Minerals also help your dog with daily functoning, including circulation and energy production. Do
not supplement your dog's diet unless instructed by your veterinarian: having too many minerals can be harmful.
224
Different Forms
of Dog Food
Everyday Care and Concerns
appendix
The chief difference between dry and wet food is the water weight and shipping cost. No study has
 proven that one is better than the other. Some veterinarians recommend mixing the two.
CANNED FOOD
Most commercial canned food is filled with 75 percent water, so if you choose this diet, follow instructions or ask your veteri.
narian how much you should feed your dog. Grocery store canned food is often filled with strong-smelling meatlike contents
that in actuality may not be a healthy choice. Chemicals are used to create both the coloring and the smell of the food. A bet-
ter alternative is to visit a reputable pet store and select a higher-quality canned food made with natural ingredients.
SEMIMOIST FOOD
Most semimoist foods are filled with a lot of chemicals to give them the appearance and the color of meat. Although this
food is enjoyed by dogs, it is not a good-quality diet. Smelly, loose stools are often the result.
DRY KIBBLE
Dry kibble is a lot like cereal. Each one looks similar, so let the ingredients and the percentage of various nutrients be your
guide. with few exceptions, you get what you pay for: a high-quality dry food has human grade ingredients, and in the end,
e Aew seq aun pue peq o ot aeas Aew susa ayn suoi oot punoe ais a! aal nos yi aseios (nyaie sauinbau poog Aa
mold. Store dry dog food in a sealed container.
TIP
If you want to change your dog's diet, do it gradually. A fast change
can cause serious stomach upset. Follow this schedule over a six-
day period.
Days one and two
V%4 new, % old
Days three and four
% new, % old
Days five and six
% new, % old
If your dog continues to have trouble assimilating to her new diet,
speak with your veterinarian.
225
D
appendix
Kids and Dogs-from
Coming Home to
Everyday Living
Whether you're expecting your first child or you're trying to balance the
activities and schedules of many, this section covers how to organize
and arrange your schedule so that everyone-from your smallest child to
your dog, feels included.
Preparing for a New Baby
.228
Kids and Dogs
230
Preparing
 tor
a New Baby
Expecting a baby? You've got a lot to look forward to-and a lot to get ready for. Don't leave your
dog out of the loop. He'll have his own interpretation of the new bundle, and there is plenty you
can do now to ensure a favorable first impression.
BEFORE BRINGING BABY HOME
There are a few secrets to helping your dog adjust to sharing your love with a baby. Start carrying a baby doll around with you
2 yse io s!ias o s Ageg e jo suoai ade e pug ue noA ji 'anbau m Ageq mau ayn zeya sieuassa Aep aua le op pue
friend to make one for you. Work hard on your containment skills, STAY and wAll, and teach your dog to stay off the furniture
ay hiem no y llam se awn jo peaye zeu o pawogsnoe wiy aas dop inoA loy uogelos! pasaioui sugedipgue au,no y mou
may see the baby as limiting his freedom.
SET STRUCTURE IN ADVANCE
Think ahead to places you will sit to feed your baby. Your baby will be fragile and small: teach your dog to lie on the floor
next to you, not in your lap.
Your dog will want to be a part of all the new activities--yes, even the dirtiest diaper change. Organizing this event in advance
will make the transition smoother.
Going down the stairs with a newborn can be scary. Don't let your dog vie for stair space. Teach him to wAlT at both the top
and the bottom of the stairs to avoid mishaps.
If your kitchen wasn't the hub of your existence before, it will be now. Teach your dog to lie in one corner or just outside the
door.
HOSPITAL SEPARATION
be confused by the sudden change in energy and schedules. Have someone bring a hospital rag home with your and your
baby's scent on it to help him recognize the new addition when you come home for the first time.
TIP
Teach your dog hand signals to go with your commands as directed
on page 95. You'll rely on them more than you can imagine.
228
Kids and Dogs-from Coming Home to Everyday Living
appendix
ARRIVING WITH YOUR BABY
when you arrive so that you may use the leash to control his enthusiasm. Leave your baby in the car seat and wait until your
dog calms down completely before introducing them to one another.
If your dog is rowdy, secure his leash to an immovable object, or stand on the leash to prevent a jumping incident.
Use treats to focus your dog. Each time he approaches the baby, instruct a SIT or DowN and reward him.
Place leashes around the house for easy access when you need to quickly control your dog's activity.
HANDLE VISITORS
child, your dog will be confused by the lack of attention.
Buy some special toys/bones to give your dog when people arrive. Teach your dog to SIT and wAII, and secure him to a
nearby station lead if he can't control his excitement.
HELP YOUR DOG ADAPT TO A NEW SCHEDULE
Untilyou have a child, you can't imagine how much your schedule will change. And if you are not setled with just one child
the demands on your time to increase exponentially as you increase your brood.
Your dog's biological clock won't change, and his daily needs will remain very much intact. He willstill get hungry, have to
eliminate, and need to play. Although it is understandable that you willforget even your own hygiene, your dog may act out if
you forget about him.
If possible, ask a neighbor, a friend, or a family member to step in and take over any or all of your dog-parenting roles, and to
fll in as playmate, nurturer, and dog walker. Your dog will be less mystified by the new addition and may take the extra atten.
tion to mean that the baby is a magical, not a threatening presence.
229
Kids and
Dogs
To have the most fun raising children and dogs together, you need to stay positive. Children like to
be involved with fun projects. To make raising and training your dog fun, use interactive charts and
motivational incentives, such as TV, chocolate, or money, to encourage your children's participation.
Flip Negatives to Positives
It is easy to get frustrated or angry at a dog or a child, and sometimes a mix of the two can be overwhelming. Plan ahead of
time and make a list of activities you can use as an alternative to yelling at either one of them.
● Close shop (cross your arms over your face and look up) instead of saying, "Don't push the dog when he jumps:"
●Teach KisSES with butter instead of geting angry at perpetual nipping.
●Use treat cups and games to motivate your children's participation in lessons versus pinning them down to a fixed
Schedule.
● Also, have them help create play stations, with mats and toys, and fun charts that include special incentives.
230
Kids and Dogs-from Coming Home to Everyday Living
appendix
Daily Doggie Activity Chart
Time
Activity
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
7:00 am
Out
7:15
Feed and water
7:30
 Out and play
8:00-11:30
Lead, station or crate,
 and supervised freedom
11:30
Out and play
12:00 pm
Feed and water
12:15
 Out and play
12:30-3:30
Lead, station or crate,
and/or supervised freedom
3:30
Out and play, explore
4:00
Feed and water
4:15
mo
4:30-7:00
Lead, station or crate,
and supervised freedom
7:00-9:00
 Family interaction
231
Model Credits
We offer our heartfelt thanks to all the dogs and their humans who served as models for the
photos in this book. Special thanks to Janet Spina, owner of Diva and Jasper, who are not
pictured here. Other contributors include the following:
Thomas ond Lily Arnell withRocket, Liberty,
Julianne, Melisso, Gront, ond Allison Beck
ond Rudy
With Chorfie
Doreen Blonco with Chloe
Ross Burbank with Rocky
232
Sorah ond Joke Chintz with Monroe
Sonya Cruz with Dallas
Terri Goidsmith with Skyler
Hons Hollundboek with Foith
Kimmarie Hornbeck with Bayli
Jessica Kappus with Kody
233
Lydio Londesberg with Ace
Rosemory Lee with Eugene, Chorfie.
ondLucy
DenisLioydwithDuffy
Conor McSpedon with Monty ond Marto
Sheila McSpedon with Monty ond Morto
Melissa Miller withBenny
234
JenngRose,Devon,andBrettNovick
Rebecca Reid with Willie
With Nikki
Pomelo Smith with Bello
Sondra Sterling with Bob
Ben ond Jored Torres with Maizy
Christina Zocharia with Finnegon
235
Index
A
brushes, 218
soppe
bumps, hea thcare check, 221
furniture privileges, 67
locating. 209
C
personality testing,6-7
canned foods, dietary guidelines, 225
point training. 86-87
cargo leads, automobile travel, 37
selection considerations, 208
catch me behavior, object retrieval, 25
ages, puppy/new home introduction guidelines, 209
cats, chasing behavior discouragement, 184
aggression,50-53
chain collars, training guidelines, 32
alpha pair, pack theory, 12
chasing behavior, control techniques, 139, 182-185
American Kennel Club (AKC), breed groups, 204
check chains, training collar, 32
animals (other). See oiso wildlife
chewing behavior
greeting etiquette, 171
appropriate object encouragement, 176-178
socia lization introduction, 138-139
control techniques, 186
timidity controls, 201
NO command concepts, 84
animal shelters, puppy/dog source, 209
spray-away shooters, 42-43
appliances,household sound conditioning.60
chew toys.30,73
attention. See aiso focus 
children
behavior motivation, 13
activity schedules, 230-231
clicker training. 44-45
behavior tra ining, 54-57
off leash walking importance, 110-111
chasing behavior discouragement, 182-183
polite puppy requests, 71
conditioning guidelines, 57
Attention Scale, behaviors, 13
fare-to-face encounters, 54
attentive (eager to please), personality type, 4
impukivity reaction training, 55
automobiles, 35, 37, 40
new baby preparation, 228-229
play activity reaction, 25
B
positive attitude, 230
baby gates,28
posture guidelines, 17
BACK command,183,201
predatory reaction behavior, 54
barking behavior, 19, 42-43
socialization training, 131
baths, grooming element, 219
touch reactions, 56
BATH TIME command, baths, 219
toy competition, 55
beds, home/travel guidelines, 29
vocal tone reactions, 56
behaviors
Chow Chows, tail/rear touching. 49
Attention Scale, 13
citronella, undesirable behavior adjustments, 43
cause/effect guidelines, 24-25
classes, training. 9
children's interaction,54-57
clicker training 44-45
default recognition, 127
close shop correction, jumping behavior, 195
distra ction/displacement techniques, 73
coats, grooming. 218
EP, EP command discouragement, 72
collars
motivation fa ctors, 13
fit measurements, 31, 32
identification tags,31
NO command response concepts, 83-85
polite puppy requests, 71
puppy introduction, 68-69
puppy encouragement vocalizations, 65
tra ining types, 32-33
sleep interruption rea ctions, 53
combs,218
behavior traits, pack leader, 12
COME command
belk, housetraining uses, 41
alternative cues, 117
belly, leadership exercises, 49
bonding reconnection, 98
clicker training.44
biting behavior, 25, 35
Bitter Apple, undesirable behavior adjustments, 43
hand-feeding techniques, 52
boarding kennek, desirable traits, 214
name associations, 97, 115
off leash walking, 115-119
body language, 19-2l. See oiso communications; postures
body language (yours), communication element, 17
outdoor drag leads, 35
bonding, 52, 98, 115
overuse, 117
BONE command, 8l, 176
reconnection,115
bossy (strong-willed), persona lity type, 4
response rea ctions, 118-119
bows, trick training, 153
separation distance,99-100,115
breath spray, undesirable behavior adjustments, 43
teaching techniques, 97-100
trust building, 116
breeders, puppy/adult dog source, 209
breeds, AKC (American Kennel Club) groups, 204
vocal tones, 97
BRING command, object retrieval, 159
comedian, 4, 187
236
commands
dematting comb, coat care, 218
BACK, 183, 201
destructive chewing, control techniques, 186
BATH TIME, 219
determined, personality type, 4
BONE, 81, 176
devotion, hand-feeding, 52
BRING,159
digging behavior, 169
COME, 35, 44, 52, 97-100, 115-119
Direct Stop,undesirable behavior adjustments, 43
directional breaks/responses, 114
displacement
DOWN, 35, 52, 93-96
NO command concepts, 84
DOWN (emergency), 125- 126
puppy behavior correction, 73
DOWN-STAY, 106
distance controls,35
EP, EP, 72
distractions
EXCUSE ME, 81, 175
HEEL command, 91
GET BUSY, 172-173
off leash walking, 120-121
GIVE,160
puppy behavior correction, 73
GOOD,65
SIT-STAY command, 104-105
HEEL, 88-92, 110, 185, 188, 192
doggy day care, desirable traits, 215
HIGH FIVE, 156
dogs (other), 136-137, 171
HIGH TEN, 156
dog walkers, desirable traits, 213
KISSES, 174-175, 193
doorbels, household sound conditioning. 61
LET'S GO,69,78,82
doorways, 41, 166-168
medley session, 107
DOwN command
NO, 65, 83-85, 113, 182-185, 194
baiting. 93
OKAY, 80
 emergency situations, 125-126
OUCH, 174
everyday situation uses, 96
OUTSIDE, 41, 172
hand-feeding techniques, 52
OVER, 157
outdoor drag leads, 35
PLACE, 167, 168
pressure points,93
repetition, avoiding. 15
tea ching techniques, 93-96
SAY HELLO, 170
DOWN-STAY command, teaching techniques, 106
SETTLE, 81
dry foods, dietary guidelines, 225
SETTLE DOWN, 39, 67
SHH, 161
E
SIT, 44, 52, 57, 71, 79, 194
SIT-STAY, 103-105
eager to please (attentive), personality type,4
ears, 20, 23, 26
SPEAK, 161
easygoing (Joe cool), personality type, 4
STAND, 44, 101-102
elderly people, socialization training, 131
STAY, 36, 37, 201
THROUGH,158
emergency DowwN command, off leash walking. 125-126
enclosures, off leash walking introduction, 110 
UP UP, 178
environmental locations, socialization training. 134- 135
vocal tones, 18
environmental sounds, conditioning techniques, 58-61
WAIT,80,192
environmental stimulations, socia lization controls, 143
WAIT-0KAY, 35, 166
EP, EP command, puppy behavior discouragement, 72
WAVE, 156
equipment. See individuot items
YES,44, 65, 68
communications. See also body language
etiquette See oiso manners
chewing behavior, 176-177
dog-to-dog interactions, 19
digging behavior, 169
eye contact,16
doorways, 166-168
leadership development, 14
furniture,178
vocal tones, 18
greeting people, 170-171
confinement, equipment, 28
housetraining, 172-173
 construction sounds, conditioning techniques, 59
mouthing behavior, 174-175
corrections, jumping behavior alternatives, 195
paper training, 173
costumed people, socialization training, 133
visitations, 179
coveting. spatial aggression level, 50 
EXCUSE ME command, 81, 175
crates, 28
eye contact
crawling, trick training, 154
communication element, 16
 cues. See vocal cues
dog-to-dog interactions, 19, 171
face-to-face encounters, 54
D
eyes, 21-22, 220
daily handling. See leadership exercises
dead dog. trick training. 162
237
hedge trimmers, sound conditioning. 58
?
fare, lea dership exercises, 48
HEEL command
face-to-face encounters, children/dogs. 54
chasing behavior discouragement, 185
family/friend greeting, clicker training. 44
directed heel, 89
feet (paws), 48, 219
distractions, 91
female gender (humans), socialization training, 131
hands-free, 92
females, spay benefits, 223
leash pulling control, 188
finger leads, training uses, 36
marking behavior control, 192
fireworks, sound conditioning. 59
off leash walking introduction, 110
flea comb, coat care,218
overcom ing objections, 90
focus. See ciso attention
teaching techniques, 88-92
high-five, trick training, 156
COME command, 100
HIGH FIVE command, trick training. 156
hand-feeding. 52
retractable leash uses, 36
HIGH TEN command, trick training. 156
WAIT command, 80
hoops, trick training, 158
food bowk,50-52,66
household objects 
food rewards, 44-45. See oiso rewards; treats
grab-and-gobehavior discouragement,187
foods, 52, 71, 224-225
introduction techniques, 140-141
timidity controk,201
furniture, 67, 178
households
G
leading techniques, 82
new baby preparation, 228-229
智mes
new puppy age guidelines, 209
Runaway Come, 146
NO command concepts, 83-85
Soda Bottle Soccer, 151, 182
play areas, 67
Swing Toss, 150
sleeping areas, 67
Toy Along, Tag Along, 149
socialization training, 135
Treat Cup Name, 148
household sounds, conditioning techniques, 60-61
Two-Ball Toss, 147
housesitters, desirable tra its, 214
gates,28
housetraining
gender (human), socialization training. 131
accident cleanup, 191
Gentle Leader, 57, 188
accident reasons, 189
GET BUSY command, housetraining. 172-173
bells, 41
GIVE command, objert retrieval, 160
equipment, 41
GOOD command, puppy behavior encouragement, 65
etiquette, 172-173
good dog collar, training use, 33
GET BUSY command, 172-173
grab-and-go behavior, control techniques, 187
marking behavior controk, 192
greetings.
odor masking products, 41
clicker training. 44
OUTSIDE command, 41, 172
etiquette training, 170-171
paper training etiquette, 173
stimulated peeing. 200
potty area etiquette, 172
Greyhounds, martingale/check chains, 32
puppies considerations, 191
 groomers, desirable traits, 214
schedules, 189- 190
grooming.218-221
small dog space restrictions, 191
grooming rake,coat care,218
wee-wee pads, 41
group classes, questions for, 9
growling. 19, 50
guard breeds, hand-feeding. 52
identification tags, collar guidelines, 31
H
impukivity reaction, children/dog interaction, 55
 hand-feeding. bonding aid, 52
indoor drag lead, training uses, 35
hand leads, 35, 112
handlers, 14-18
hand signals
Joe cool (easygoing), personality type, 4
DOwN command, 93-96 
jokesters, personality type, 4
point training. 86-87
jumping behavior, 35,42-43, 194-195
jumps, 157-158
puppy point, 74-75
harnesses, 33, 68
head collar, tra ining use, 33-34
K
hea thcare, 221-224
kennek, desirable traits, 214
hearing, sensory element, 23
KISSES command, nipping behavior a lternative, 174-175, 193
238
no-pull harness, training use, 33
lawn mowers, sound conditioning. 58
nose, smell sense, 22
leadership. 12, 14-15. 188
nutrition, dietary guidelines, 224
lea dership exercises, 48-52
0
lea ding, tea ching techniques, 82
ea ds, 37-40
object chewing, appropriate object encouragement, 176-178
leashes
object retrieval, commands, 159-160
child/dog conditioning aid, 57
objects, timidity controk, 201
containment leads, 37
obstacles, 157-158
leading techniques, 82
 odor masking products, housetraining uses, 41
lunging behavior, 24
off-leash control, retra ctable leash uses, 36
off leash wa Iking introduction, 110-112
off leash walking
puppy introduction,68-69
attention importance, 110-111
teaching leads, 38-40
COME command, 115-119
training types, 35-36
COME command focus, 100
leash pulling behavior, control techniques, 188
default behavior recognition, 127
LET'S GO command,69,78,82
distra ctions, 120-121
Lhasa Apsos, tail/rear touching. 49
emergency DowN command, 125-126
locations, socialization training, 134- 135
hand lead uses, 112
long lines, off leash waIking uses, 110, 124
hands-free heel, 92
lumps, healthcare check, 221
long line uses, 124
lunging behavior, on leash wa lking. 24
NO command concepts, 113
real world situations, 111
M
retracta ble leash uses, 122
male (human) gender, socia lization training. 131
security line uses, 123
males, neuter benefits, 223
offices, socialization training. 134
OKAY command,teaching techniques.80
manners, 71, 81. See aiso etiquette
markers, clicker training, 44
on leash walking. 24, 82, 91
 OUCH command, nipping behavior discouragement, 174
marking behavior, control techniques, 192
martingale collars, training guidelines, 32
outbursts (yours), importance of controlling. 14
mats, home/travel guidelines, 29
outdoor drag lead, training uses, 35
medications, 49, 222
outdoor maintenance machines, sound conditioning. 58
OUTSIDE command,41, 172
medley sessions, commands, 107
OVER command, obstacle training. 157
mellowing influence, head collars, 33-34
mounting behavior, control techniques, 196- 197
P
mouth
body language, 21
pack theory, 12
dental care,220
paper training, etiquette, 173
squeezing to control nipping. 193
parking lots, socialization training. 134
taste sense, 23
paws (feet), 48, 155-156, 219
mouthing behavior, etiquette training. 174-175
people
greeting etiquette, 170-171
N
socialization training, 130-133
nails, trimming, 219
timidity controk, 201
name (dogs), CoME command association, 97
persona lity tra its, 4-7
Nature's Miracle, housetraining accidents, 41
pet stores, 209, 213
needs charts, puppies, 64
physical corrections, 112
negative behaviors, avoiding repetition, 25
physical interaction, daily handling guidelines, 48-49
nipping behavior
PLACE command, doorway etiquette, 167, 168
children's play reaction, 25
play areas, household guidelines, 67
control techniques, 193
playing dead, trick training, 162
discouragement techniques, 174-175
playpens (x-pens), 28
finger leads, 35
playtime, nipping/biting behavior, 25
spray-away shooters, 42-43
point training. See aiso puppy point
NO command
delayed response, 87
behavior response concepts, 83-85
DOWN command, 93-96
chasing behavior discouragement, 182-185
tea ching techniques, 86-87
jumping behavior control, 194
Poodles, stimulated peeing, 200
off leash concepts, 113
positive reinforcement, 15, 44-45
puppy behavior reaction, 65
postures, 19, 21. See aiso body language
postures (yours), communication element, 17
239
pots/pans, household sound conditioning. 61
roll over, trick training, 163
potty area, 66, 172
Runaway Come game, 146
potty breaks, on leash walking interruption, 91
rural areas, socialization training. 134
predatory reaction behavior, children's encounters, 54
private instruction, trainer questions, 8
s
prong collar. See good dog collr
sad puppy, trick training, 152
protective breeds, hand-feeding, 52
SAY HELLO command, people greeting. 170
puppies
schedules
attention requests, 71
children's activity, 230-231
behavior discouragement, 72
housetra ining, 189- 190
behavior encouragement,65
puppy needs,64
collar/leash introduction, 68-69
scruff shake, good dog collar, 33
distraction/displacement techniques,73
security line, off leash walking uses, 123
food requests, 71
semimoist foods, dietary guidelines, 225
food/water bowl location, 66
sensory elements, 22-23
furniture privileges, 67
separation anxiety, 35, 198
housetraining, 189- 191
SETTLE command, teaching techniques, 81
locating, 209
SETTLE DOWN command, 39, 67
manners, 71
shed blade, coat care, 218
needs chart, 64
shelters, puppy/dog source, 209
new home introduction age guidelines, 209
SHH command, voca lization training, 161
personality testing, 5-7
shouting, household sound conditioning. 61
play areas, 67
side swipe correction, jumping behavior, 195
potty area, 66
selection questions, 205-207
sight, sensory element, 22
sirens, sound conditioning. 59
sleeping arrangements, 67
SIT command
stair introduction, 70
backbone pressure, 79
stimulus memory development, 128
child/dog conditioning aid, 57
vocal cues, 64
clicker training. 44
puppy point, 74-75. See aiso point training
hand-feeding techniques, 52
push it, trick training, 152
jumping behavior control, 194
polite puppy requests, 71
Q
teaching techniques, 79
questions
wa ist muscle squeezing. 79
adult dog selection, 208
SIT-STAY command, teaching techniques, 103- 105
boarding kennek, 214
situational places, socialization training, 134-135
doggy day care, 215
size/shape (people), socialization tra ining. 132
dog wakers, 213
sleep areas, household guidelines, 67
groomers, 214
sleep interruption, behavior training. 53
group classes,9
small dogs, housetraining space restrictions, 191
housesitters,214
smell, sensory element, 22
pet store professionals, 213
snack packs, training aid, 42
private trainer, 8
socialization
puppy selection, 205-207
children introduction, 131
veterinarian selection, 212
city versus country, 134
costumed people, 133
R
elderly people, 131
races, socialization training, 132
environmental stimulations, 143
rears, lea dership exercises, 49
gender differences, 131
Red Zone, spatial aggression, 50
group class benefits, 9
retractable leash, training uses, 36, 122
household objects, 140-141
retrieves
new people introduction, 130-133
BRING command, 159
offices, 134
catch me behavior, 25
other animal introduction, 138-139
GIVE command, 160
other dog introductions, 136-137
reverse yo-yo correction, jumping behavior, 195
parking lots, 134
rewards. See oiso food rewards; treats
race,132
clicker training element, 44-45
situational places, 134-135
DOWwN command baiting. 93
size/shape, 132
point training. 86-87
sporting people/equipment, 132
vocal tones, 18
surface textures, 142
240
uniformed people, 133
group classes.9
workmen introduction, 133
positive reinforcement, 15
SodaBottle occer game, 151
private instruction, 8
soft-bristled brush, coat care, 218
sleep interruption, 53
Soft-Coated Wheaten Terriers, stimulated peeing, 200
toy/food bowl handling acceptance, 50-52
sounds
train whistles, sound conditioning. 59
environmental, 58-59
travel
household noises, 60-61
beds/mats, 29
spatial aggression, 50, 52
displacem ent a ctivities, 73
SPEAK command, vocalization training, 161
visitation etiquette, 179
sporting people, socialization training, 132
Treat Cup Name game, 148
spray-away correction, jumping behavior, 195
treat cups, 42, 51
spray-away shooters, undesirable behavior adjustments, 42-43
treats, 117, 187. See oiso food rewards; rewards
stairs, puppy introduction, 70
tricks
STAND command, 44, 101-102
bows, 153
station lead, indoor confinement, 37
bring. 159
station lines, training use, 36
crawl, 154
station stay, teaching lead uses, 39, 40
give,160
STAY command,35,37,201
high-five, 156
stealing behavior, spray-away shooters, 42-43
jump through, 158
stimulated urination, control techniques, 200
over, 157
 stimulus memory, puppy development stage, 128
paws, 155-156
stool swallowing, control techniques,199
play dead, 162
street crossing. WAIT and OKAY com mand, 80
push it, 152
stripping comb, coat care, 218
roll over, 163
strong-willed (bossy), personality type, 4
sad puppy, 152
submissive postures, dog-to-dog intera ctions, 19
shhh, 161
supplies. See individuaf items
speak,161
surface textures, introduction techniques, 142
tail wagging. 152
sweet pea, personality type, 4
wave, 156
Swing Toss game, 150, 182
Two-Ball Toss game, 147
T
taik, 49, 152
uniformed people, socialization training, 133
tail set, body language, 20
UP UP command, furniture privileges, 178
taste, sensory element, 23
urban areas, socialization training. 134
teaching leads, 38-40
urination (inappropriate), control techniques, 200
teeth, dental care, 220
temperature, hea thcare check, 221
V
temper (yours), controlling. 14
vacuums, household sound conditioning, 60
tests, puppy personality, 5-7
vehicles. See automobiles
THROUGH command, trick training, 158
veterinarians
thunder, sound conditioning.58
desirable traits, 212
timidity
health problem recognition, 222
control techniques, 201
visitations, etiquette tra ining, 179
personality type, 4
visitors, welcoming etiquette, 168
tongue/mouth, taste sense, 23
vocal cues
touch, sensory element, 23
encouragement/discouragement, 65
touch activity, children/dog interaction, 56
puppy needs, 64
towns, socialization tra ining. 135
vocalizations
Toy Along, Tag Along game, 149
dog-to-dog interactions, 19
toys
SPEAK command, 161
child/dog com petition, 55
vocal tones
handling acceptance, 50-52
children, 56
 purchasing guidelines, 30
COME command, 97
trainers, questions for, 8
communications element, 18
training
SHH command, 161
clickers,44-45
collars, 32-33
sound rea ction guidelines, 59
241
work-at-home owners, housetraining schedules, 190
WAIT command
work environment, socialization training. 134
focus control, 80
workmen, socialization tra ining, 133
marking behavior control, 192
X
tea ching techniques, 80
WAIT-OKAY command, doorway etiquette, 166
x-pens (playpens), 28
WAIT-OK command, outdoor drag leads, 35
water bowls, location considerations, 66
WAVE command, distance training. 156
yards
waving, trick training, 156
digging spot establishment, 169
wee-wee pads, housetraining aid, 41
potty area introduction, 66
Whippets, ma rtingale/check chains, 32
yelling, avoiding. 18
whistles (train), sound conditioning. 59
YES command
wildlife, chasing behavior discoura gement, 185
clicker training marker, 44
wire- bristle brush, coat care, 218
collar/leash introduction, 68-69
word markers, clicker training. 44
 puppy behavior encouragement, 65
words. See vocal cues
242
Want
instruction
other
topics?
11
Check out these
All designed for visual learnersjust like you!
Read Less- Learn More
Visual
Teach Yourself
VISUALLY
ead Less-Lesrn More
Knitting
TeachYourself
Teach Yourself
VISUALLY
VISUALLY
Guitar
and ELeam
Windows XP
Sharon Turner
2ndEdition
Charles Kin
0-7645-9640-3
0-7645-9642-X
0-7645-7927-4
Look for these and other Teach Yourself VisUAlly" titles wherever books are sold.
Visual
Wiley, the Wiley logo, the Visual log, Read Less-Learm Mare, and Teach Yaurself Visually are trademarks ar registered trademarks af Jahn Wiley & Sans, Inc. and/ar its
An Imprint i>f-WILEY
Now you know.